
Patterns of drug use
To map in totality the astonishingly varied patchwork
of drug use throughout the world would be a daunting
task. But the following first-hand accounts by experts
of nine different countries or regions provide us with a
vivid insight into the nature and extent of the diver¬
sities. In each instance the author shows how drug use
is only to be understood against the social and cultural
background. Often today part of that background is
people's sense of the rapidity of environmental change
and the breakdown of the old rules, attitudes and ways
of living changes which are immediately reflected in
altered patterns of drug use.
Reports
from
nine
countries
^EEEi^És¡meiaí^mmmíS0^^^mmmim^sí'0^Mmmmmmisimaiimsmmsm.
THAILAND. Dr. V. Poshyachinda
describes traditional use of opium by
the Hmong, one of the northern hill
tribes. There are well-formed attitudes
and expectations which informally con¬
trol the use of this drug.
A predominant reason for the use of
opium is for treatment of physical ailments.
Opium is also used for its tranquillizing and
euphoric effect. Reactive depression from
the death of a loved one or from loss of
livestock or crops may lead some to opium
use. Thirdly, this drug is a means of recre¬
ation. At social gatherings in the village, tea,
alcohol and tobacco are used as well as
opium. The Hmong have a rather rigid
custom of not allowing children to use
alcohol, tobacco, or opium, until they are
over ten years old. Opium use among the
young is limited to the treatment of
illnesses. Nevertheless, a small number of
young men were found to be dependent, as
a result of curiosity and companionship with
drug users.
The Hmong are well aware of the bad ef¬
fects of opium dependence. In a survey of
villagers' attitudes towards opium use,
about two-thirds stated that opium smoking
was bad. Economic loss appeared to be the
main reason. Some emphasized the
beneficial therapeutic effect and considered
opium smoking to be good if properly used.
Opium is smoked openly in front of other
members of the family, including children.
Some young females who have become
dependent are ashamed of their behaviour
and smoke in privacy or in the woods.
MALAYSIA. Drug use in transition-
fishermen traditionally used opium to
alleviate the stress of a hard life but to¬
day's young people smoke heroin at the
discos, perhaps to meet a new sort of
stress. Dr. V. Navaratnam writes:
Whereas, traditionally, opium was smok¬
ed in opium dens or opium houses as well as
during family gatherings, this is no longer
true of the younger population. Drugs are
used in homes, coffee houses, disco¬
theques, recreation grounds and back-lane
drink and food stalls. Dependent persons
use heroin, and it is smoked in cigarette
form. By tradition, opium was used for
recreation or to alleviate the stress of hard
work, e.g. by fishermen, who spent up to
fifteen hours at a time at sea and worked up
to eighteen hours a day. Nowadays, by con¬
trast, as one study has shown, younger
users begin to take drugs for various other
reasons such as curiosity (about 27 per
cent), peer influence (about 31 per cent),
and a surprisingly large proportion to
forget their problems (18 per cent).
Three possible explanations can be ad¬
vanced for the initiation of drug use by
Malaysian youth: that drug abuse provides a
means of achieving subcultural acceptance;
that it is a manifestation of delinquent-
defiant behaviour; or that it may be a form
of "self-treatment" for frustration caused by
such factors as blocked opportunities and
economic distress.
The third explanation is probably impor¬
tant in developing nations, especially those w
undergoing rapid industrialization. Late f
13

adolescence and early adulthood are even
in normal circumstances turbulent stages. In
Malaysia, these age-groups are likely to have
higher aspirations and better education than
their elders. At the same time competition
for education and work has increased con¬
siderably. Thus, these young people despite
their better education become frustrated
and look for ways of escape.
c 1
INDIA. Dr. D. Mohan writes of ebb and
flow in patterns of drug use in rural
Punjab and assesses the place of legal
controls.
The traditionally used drugs, alcohol,
opium and cannabis, seem to be still those
in common use. However, there appears to
be a change in the pattern of preferred
drugs. Cannabis use has declined; opium
use is more than the official estimates show
but still seems to have declined, while
alcohol use has certainly risen.
Psychotropics are not widely used despite
the increased health facilities. These ob¬
servations are of interest, in view of the fact
that legal sanctions against cannabis and
opium have been in operation for a fairly
long time. Though legal sanctions have con-
Below left, two members of an
International Labour Organisation
(ILO) vocational rehabilitation team
examine an intricate piece of
embroidery produced by a Thai
villager. They are taking part in a
vigorous campaign, launched by
the Government of Thailand with
the help of the United Nations,
against illegal poppy cultivation and
use of narcotic drugs in the
mountain villages of northern
Thailand. The programme, set up
by the World Health Organization
(WHO) and ILO, aims at treating
and retraining drug addicts and at
diversifying farmers' sources of
income by encouraging them to
grow other crops (top) and by the
production of handicrafts.
In traditional societies where
historically certain drugs have been
used, rapid social and economic
change may encourage the
adoption of new habits and life¬
styles accompanied by new
patterns of drug use. Studies in the
rural Punjab showed that one new
habit formed in this context was
the use of alcohol which tended to
impose unfamiliar strains and
tensions on the social fabric. Right,
traditional and modern in
Chandigarh, capital of Punjab
State, India.
14

trolled the availability of drugs, the decline in
cannabis consumption when cannabis re¬
mained freely available is inexplicable except
on social grounds. Lastly, heroin and other
synthetic opiates have not appeared.
What are the implications of these obser¬
vations, seen in the historical context of In¬
dia's experience? The first is that there is an
interplay between drugs of dependence and
that, over a period of continuing availability,
attitudes lead to a rise and decline in the use
of particular drugs. These attitudes may be
influenced by availability.
Secondly, in circumstances such as per¬
tain to India, legal action in respect of drug-
availability control should be introduced and
implemented slowly. The laws should not be
enforced for a considerable period of time
but should remain rather as statements of
intention; this is especially so when the
dependence-producing substances are plant
materials rather than synthetic drugs. Yet a
statement of legal intention is necessary,
because it tends to discourage people from
becoming involved with drugs.
Drug use is closely interwoven with the
socio-economic matrix of rural agrarian
society. A stringent legal prohibition serves
only to disrupt this tradition, and makes the
appearance of substitute drugs easier.
When laws are applied wisely, however.
they can be a means of promoting healthy
social change, by guiding the direction of
change.
. -t^.ù- ».v. f-.ar-~.;-.vm: . ..
THE ANDEAN REGION OF SOUTH
AMERICA. Coca chewing is the
custom". Dr. J.C. Negrete gives an ac¬
count of the indigenous use of cocaine
in the Peruvian uplands.
It is around 9:30 a.m. in a high valley of
the Peruvian Andes. A group of peasants
are taking their mid-morning break and have
gathered by the side of a field. They are sort¬
ing dry coca leaves from small pouches they
carry attached to their belts and gently
removing the harder stems before placing
the leaves one by one into one side of their
mouth, between cheek and gums. The
break lasts about thirty minutes. The men
return to. work and the renewed mouthful of
coca will last them from two to three hours.
This is the second time during the day
that the ritual has taken place; the first was
at dawn when the men set out for the fields.
It will be repeated three more times before
they retire to sleep in the evening. With a
few variations, this scene can be observed in
thousands of farming communities
throughout the central Andes, in sugar cane
plantations in northern Argentina, and in the
mines of the Bolivian Altiplano.
The chewing of coca leaves by men at
work is the most widespread pattern of coca
use. Coca use is so extensive and long-
established that most chewers adopt it
simply through normal socialization, with no
need for a conscious individual decision, in
much the same way as people learn to drink
coffee elsewhere. It is no wonder that in¬
quiries into the reasons for chewing may
evoke responses such as es costumbre (it is
the custom).
Further probing, however, reveals that
coca is regarded as capable of giving An¬
dean men "courage", "strength", "en¬
durance", and the "will to work". Inca tradi¬
tions regard industry as a virtue and despise
idleness and laziness. Indeed, a common
Quechua language greeting (ama Hulla, ama
sua, ama qella) includes an injunction
against laziness. Many observers believe
that chewing coca may help the poorer An¬
dean people to adjust to the very limited
food intake permitted by their meagre
resources.
Coca also has therapeutic functions.
Because of its local anaesthetic properties, it

rñ
Innocent victims
"Never before have there been so many
children flirting with drugs and their
associated hazards... Drug abuse is
depriving today's children of the right
to enter the coming century with
dignity, good health, and the chance to
make a substantial contribution to the
future of their countries and the
world." These warning words from a
United Nations dossier on children and
drugs draw attention to an issue which
is causing concern in every world
region, from the isolated hill areas
where narcotics crops are grown to the
urban centres of the industrialized
world. Drawings on this page illustrate
three aspects of a many-sided problem.
(1) For some children addiction begins
in the womb. The first they know of the
world is the severe pain of heroin
withdrawal because of their mother's
habit. (2) In highly medicated societies,
open, abundantly-stocked medicine
cabinets may pose another problem.
Combined with the example of frequent
parental use, they arouse the curiosity
of children and lead each year to many
cases of drug abuse and fatal accidental
poisoning. (3) Even more children are
the victims of neglect related to
parental drug abuse. In many cases,
notes the UN document, "children
subjected to a deficient environment
inside and/or outside the home...
search for escape, stimulation, relief or
expanded meaning through the use of
drugs."
Drawings © AIE, United Nations	
w
1
X.
UUMW4- Jffi
r
ja *
ri
a

has been used traditionally with much suc¬
cess to treat toothache. As a hot-water in¬
fusion, it is effective against gastrointestinal
disorders.
In addition to these practical functions,
Andean people have traditionally attached
magical properties to coca. Many workers
believe it protects them from dangers such
as accidents and injuries at work, and
insect- and snake-bites in the fields. Another
common practice is that people stick coca
leaves to their forehead or cheeks in the
belief that this will banish headache, worry,
insomnia, toothache and other disorders.
MEXICO. Dr. R. de la Fuente gives this
picture of glue-sniffing and solvent
abuse among the young outcasts of
Mexico City.
The children at the time of the study were
under thirteen years old, the adolescents
between thirteen and sixteen, and the
young adults between seventeen and
twenty-three. They haunted an area of Mex¬
ico City where drug-users can find places to
sleep, hide, eat and take drugs; it has a
market, small shops, vacant lots, cheap
hotels, restaurants, tenement buildings and
small squares.
The regular inhabitants are people who
generally work in the area and belong mostly
to the middle or lower socio-economic
stratum. They have almost no contacts with
the inhalers but if their paths cross the in¬
halers are ostracized since they are regarded
as depraved. The young people, however,
maintain close relations among themselves.
All of them have left homes where they were
used as providers for their parents, who sent
them out to earn money by doing jobs like
collecting garbage, selling chewing-gum or
washing windows. If they came home
without money they were ill-treated, so that,
feeling no attachment to their families, they
chose to live away.
Within a group, the adolescents use the
children to obtain food and money, and seek
the protection of the young adults, whose
business it is to obtain and distribute the in¬
halant. In their search for affection the
children maintain a very close relation with
the other young people.
For a child to be taken into a group he
undergoes a series of tests such as having
his money or some of his garments taken
away, or being beaten; he has to win fights
and show a talent for thieving; if he passes
the tests he is accepted. Upon joining he
must observe certain rules of conduct or
else be expelled. The main rules are not to
reveal the identity of the members of the
group when anyone asks, not to ask about
the members' backgrounds, and to respect
the freedom of others to take drugs or not as
they choose.
The child inhaler then seems to develop
certain characteristics. He has a practical
type of intelligence, acquired through his
day-to-day experiences. He is understanding
and does not criticize his comrades when
they cry or grieve over some recollection or
deprivation. He is a rebel, rejecting every
kind of authority.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. Chicago
schools: Dr. P. Hughes describes the
distribution system for many drugs,
which was surprisingly overt.
Drug-using students were seen to exhibit
distinctive patterns of behaviour. They were
invariably found in the smoking areas during
their free time, and there was generally a
drug-user meeting-place outside the school
but near the school grounds. They fre¬
quented certain toilets where they could
stand and keep a look-out for teachers who
might be supervising the area. In the
lunchroom they occupied certain sections of
the cafeteria where they could be contacted
each day. These behaviour patterns of the
drug-users were known to a significant
number of students and teachers but no ef¬
forts were made to disrupt them.
One must ask, then, why do not more
parents, teachers and others intervene to
prevent or interfere with drug-using group
activities? Some well-meaning individuals
do, but all too often they have to contend
with unpleasantness and even threats of
violence. Friends and authorities who try to
intervene usually find that talking to, or try¬
ing to help, a drug-user in the school or
smoking-room, on the street corner or in the
park, brings no rapid or dramatic results.
Also, people familiar with the street culture
may be reluctant to communicate their
observations to the police or other com¬
munity authorities for fear of provoking the
drug users to retaliate. Nevertheless, it is
likely that if enough professional workers in
the field of drug abuse began to interact
with drug-users in their community rather
than inside the walls of their institutions new
intervention strategies might evolve.
JAMAICA. Dr. M. Beaubrun describes
the very different meanings and conse¬
quences of cannabis use in traditional
working-class and Westernized middle-
class subcultures.
Ganja, which is the local name for can¬
nabis, has been used in Jamaica for more
than one hundred years. It is readily grown,
and its use, though illegal, is widespread
among the lower socio-economic classes,
especially the rural agricultural workers. An
anthropological field study in 1970-1972
estimated that at least 60 per cent of adult
males were smokers in a typical rural com¬
munity. The heaviest users are a religio-
political group known as Rastafarians, who
ascribe divine powers to "the herb".
The Jamaican worker uses ganja as a
tonic and as a nostrum for all illnesses. He
uses it also to give him energy for arduous
work and to relax after work. He gives it to
his children to make them brighter at school
and to sharpen their understanding. He at¬
tributes mystical powers to it, such as
warding off evil spirits. It has been sug¬
gested that this complex of beliefs, attitudes
and customs has been diffused to the Afro-
Jamaican peasants, who are now the
heaviest users of ganja.
There is a wide gap between these at¬
titudes and those of middle-class
Jamaicans. Ganja smoking is frowned upon
by most middle-class adults. Middle-class
adolescent use, though a growing
phenomenon, is still largely a defiant act of
rebellion coupled with an imitation of the
North American culture. The middle-class
adolescent uses it for curiosity, for enhanc¬
ing sexual pleasure, for listening to music,
for psychedelic effects and as a new ex¬
perience. He has no clear rules to follow and
no respectable models to imitate.
By contrast, the growing child in working-
class Jamaica is gradually socialized into the
use of ganja and has many role models. It
may be fed to him as ganja tea even in his in¬
fant bottle. He may begin smoking at the
age of seven or eight but is usually initiated
in his early teens by one of his peers or in a
group-smoking experience with many of the
features of a rite de passage.
His response to the initial smoking ex¬
perience seems to validate his role as a
smoker or non-smoker in the ganja sub¬
culture. An initial unpleasant experience
may result in his avoiding ganja thereafter
and his behaviour will have cultural support.
Anthropological studies indicate that the
culture has developed built-in controls to
minimize the ill-effects of the drug. Most im¬
portant of all is learning to "titrate" so as to
achieve just the result needed and no more.
These built-in protective mechanisms may
account for the relatively harmless picture
that emerges of chronic marijuana use
among working-class Jamaicans.
In contrast with this picture of cannabis
use among the working class are the reports
of a higher proportion of problems among
middle-class youths, even though the
number of users is much lower. School
drop-outs, transient psychotic episodes,
panic reactions and adolescent behaviour
problems have all been reported.
KENYA. Dr. W. Acuda relates changes
in drinking to the background of rapid
socio-economic development.
There is no doubt that alcohol abuse is in¬
creasing alarmingly in Kenya. A study of
alcoholism in a crowded slum area of
Nairobi fou nd that at least 46 per cent of the
males and 24 per cent of the females could
be classified as alcoholics. A similar study in
a rural area of Kenya also found a very high
prevalence of alcoholism, affecting 37 per
cent of males and 34 per cent of females.
What has caused this sudden increase in
alcohol consumption? There 'are certainly
many factors involved. That most often
mentioned is the rapid change that is taking
place in developing countries. Kenya, like
other developing countries, has undergone
many changes in recent decades. In some
places these changes are so rapid that the
people hardly have time to adjust to them.
Inevitably, this has led to stress and conflict.
Given other factors, such as easy availability
of alcohol, it is not surprising that there has i
been a sudden increase in alcohol abuse and f
17

In many countries there are established
ways of using a particular drug, which
are embedded in social custom. One
such drug is Khat (Catha edulis Forsk.),
a tree that grows in East Africa,
Democratic Yemen and Yemen, whose
leaves and shoots have a stimulant
effect. Khat is chewed in a 'colourful
and scented setting' (below), often in a
special room set aside for the purpose.
r
a change in drinking patterns all over the
country. Phrases like "rapid socio-economic
change" are used too often and too glibly
these days when talking about the develop¬
ing world, without any close understanding
of what this phrase really means in human
terms.
Cultural traditions are disintegrating very
fast in most African societies. There has
been a virtual rebellion against traditional
cultural values and influences. Family ties
have broken down. The extended family,
which sheltered so many people, has
become too expensive. Extra-tribal mar¬
riages are now common, especially among
the educated and these marriages are often
faced with many problems.
Finally, with the spread of Christianity and
the increase in knowledge, especially about
medical treatment, the influence of supersti¬
tion and fear of witchcraft are disappearing.
People no longer believe they will be
punished if they break tradition or behave
immorally.
Lack of recreation or of any fulfilling use
of leisure time is another cause of problems
for new migrants to cities and towns. Food
also can be a source of conflict.
Educated or professional people may have
to adjust to a different type of problem: that
of working to rigid schedules in competitive
situations. In the country, life was relatively
simple and unstructured, and the amount of
work done depended on the individual's
capacity and on natural conditions like rain,
the sun and darkness.
Such changes in drinking behaviour as are
taking place in Kenya, and, at a rapid pace,
in many other parts of the developing world,
cannot be understood without a close and
sympathetic understanding of the
background of cultural and social change
against which they are taking place.
E
F«WTI»BffiWjl'SWC^«iW^Wptlr-yW" ^J^fUJ^^W^ij»
YEMEN. The "colourful and scented set¬
ting" of the Khat party, described by Dr.
R.A. Baasher.
Khat is a tree that grows at high altitude.
The leaves and young shoots provide a
stimulant effect which has led to its wide
use in several countries, including
Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Ethiopia,
Somalia, Yemen and, to a lesser extent, in
limited areas of Kenya and the United
Republic of Tanzania.
Varied and complex factors underlie the
use of khat. It is commonly used for social
recreation and occasionally as a medicine.
Because of its stimulating effects it has been
used by tribal people when travelling, and in
modern times by students preparing for ex¬
aminations, and drivers of motor vehicles on
long-distance journeys. Though nowadays
khat is chewed, historically it was referred to
as Arabian or Ethiopian tea, a name that
denoted its use as an infusion.
As khat is chewed in a group setting,
many houses in Yemen have a special room
18

for the purpose. It is well furnished with the
best carpets, and is given a special name,
such as "peace room", or "mercy room". In
the centre of the room, ornamented mada'a
(hubble bubbles) are specially placed, ready
for smoking. In this colourful and scented
setting members of the party arrive,
everyone bringing his share of khat. On
entering the carpeted room, each one takes
off his shoes and sits on the mattress, lean¬
ing on the pillows. In a friendly, relaxed and
joyful atmosphere the chewer plucks the
leaves from the twig and meticulously
chews them. Meanwhile, cold water, cola
drinks or sweet menthol drinks are sipped
and tea is served. The segregation of the
sexes in khat parties is faithfully observed.
female parties being less frequent and not so
formal. Shortly after the beginning of the
session, a sense of well-being dominates the
atmosphere. The mind becomes very active,
and the stream of talk flows easily and pas¬
sionately. After about three hours the group
reaches a stage when a sense of "wisdom"
and self-content generally prevails. This,
however, does not continue long, and in
about another hour the mood changes and
personal problems and difficulties emerge.
Some men then become restless and ir¬
ritable and they may erratically and im¬
pulsively leave the party. Those who stay
behind tend to become more intimate. The
discussions may continue or be adjourned,
tobe resumed at the next party.
Dr. V. Poshyachinda is attached to the Institute
of Health Research, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
Dr. V. Navaratnam is Director of the National
Drug Dependence Research Project, Universiti
Sains, Minden, Pu/au Pinang, Penang, Malaysia.
Dr. D. Mohan is Associate Professor in the
Department of Psychiatry, All-India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi India.
Dr. J. Negrete is Associate Director of the
Department of Psychiatry, Montreal General
Hospital, Montreal, Canada.
Dr. R. de la Fuente is General Director of the Na¬
tional Mental Health Program, at the Centro Mex¬
icano de Estudios en Salud Mental, Mexico City,
Mexico.
Dr. P. H. Hughes is Senior Medical Officer in the
Division of Men tel Health, World Health
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
Dr. M.H. Beaubrun is Professor of Psychiatry at
the University of the West Indies, Port of Spain,
Trinidad and Tobago.
Dr. S.W. Acuda is Lecturer in the Department of
Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya.
Dr. T.A. Baasher is Regional Adviser in Mental
Health, WHO Regional Office for the Eastern
Mediterranean, Alexandria, Egypt.

