The mystery
of aging
The mechanisms
of growing old
are still not
fully understood
by Ana Asian
AGING is an evolutionary process of life which is link¬
ed with heredity, environment and time, but whose
precise causes have yet to be determined.
Many gerontologists regard aging as an illness, and ex¬
perimental therapeutic research carried out at Romania's
National Institute of Gerontology and Geriatry in Bucharest
over a period of some twenty-five years indicates that with
the aid of certain chemical drugs, especially hydrochloride
para-amino-benzoate diethyl-amino-ethanol, the aging pro¬
cess can be retarded. Furthermore, it has been found that
the use of cell cultures can lead to an apparent regeneration
of human cells or at least to the absence of cell modifica¬
tion or impairment with time. These findings, supported as
they are by research carried out in other countries, seem to
justify the optimism of the Romanian school of
gerontology.
One of the basic problems of gerontology is how to
distinguish between changes caused by age and changes
which are pathological in origin, for in many cases such as
arthritis and the thromboses, which develop as people
grow older, both kinds of change are associated.
ANA ASLAN is general director of the National Institute of Gerontology
and Geriatrics, Bucharest, and a member of the Academy of the Socialist
Republic of Romania. The author of over 250 papers and studies on aging,
Professor Asian is widely known for her advocacy of the use of certain
chemical drugs as a means of retarding the aging process. Among the many
distinctions she has received in recognition ofher work are the titles ofHero
of Socialist Labour (1971) and Merited Scientist (1977) of the Socialist
Republic of Romania, and the World Health Organization's Leon Bernard
Medal and Prize.
Another difficulty lies in the fact that there is no single
criterion for determining biological age. Everyone who has
done research into aging has encountered this difficulty.
Although criteria of aging feature in the first study pro¬
gramme drawn up by the Romanian National Institute of
Gerontology and Geriatry in 1952, a satisfactory solution
has still not been achieved. Today, specialists wishing to
determine biological age, which does not always coincide

with chronological age, take into account the functional
criteria of all the organs and changes occurring in all the
metabolisms.
It would be extremely useful to be able to diagnose
biological age, also known as functional age, both from the
biological and the social point of view.
Within the limits of a given species there exist wide func¬
tional variations from one individual to another, proving
that in addition to heredity the environment exercises a
preponderant influence.
It is thought that aging begins at the same time as life
itself. However, from childhood until the moment when
growth ceases, constructive phenomena predominate and
the functions of the organism are not affected. But with the
coming of maturity and old age there is a gradual functional
decline caused by the loss of active cells. In short, the aging
process, at least from the functional point of view, begins
when growth stops, and it is quite arbitrary to suppose that
old age begins at sixty.
Another difficulty stems from the fact that the question
of the mechanisms of aging has not been elucidated. In this
connexion, one of the theories supported by geneticians
envisages the possibility that aging is "programmed".
Another theory, which has won widespread support in
the world's institutes of gerontology, has been furthered by
advances in the field of immunology. Immunologists have
noted that humoral and cellular reactivity diminishes with
age, while auto-immunity phenomena are strengtnenea ana
become dominant, in other words, immune reactions begin
to attack cells of the person's own body. Another theory
Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter (left to right) by the Flemish artist
Joost de Momper (1564-1635).
stresses the gradual loss and impairment of post-mitotic
cells (neurons). This explains why the study of the central
nervous system from the morphological, biochemical and
functional point of view has acquired such importance in
research on aging. The possibility of influencing this system
has even been mooted owing to its importance in maintain¬
ing homeostasis and adaptability, two phenomena which
are affected by aging.
It is now known that the life of mitotic cells is limited. The
cellular function undergoes changes caused by the ac¬
cumulation of lipofuscin in the cytoplasm, and other fac¬
tors, the outcome of which is fatal.
Some of the factors in aging have been identified, such
as certain free radicals [groups of atoms which usually exist
in combination with other atoms, but which may exist in¬
dependently for short periods] which are responsible for
major changes in the cellular membrane and for the growth
of cross links between or within the molecules of collagen,
a fibrous protein that gives elasticity to body tissues.
Naturally the laboratories are testing the soundness of
each of these ideas. However It is possible, as we have
noted, that aging is the result of several Interconnected
mechanisms, some of which have not yet been discovered.
It should also be pointed out that the number of persons
over sixty-five who enjoy perfect health is currently very
low, and that today at least the problem of old age Is above
all a medical and social one. If current difficulties are to be
overcome, greater importance must be attached to the pro¬
phylaxis of aging; only then will the World Health Organiza¬
tion's slogan "Health for all by the year 2000" have any
meaning for the aging.
9
