THE MONKEY KING
SUN WUKONG
by Sun Youjun
WHEN I was a child I used to declare proudly, "I'm
Sun Wukong!" Now, without being taught, my nine-
year-old son does exactly the same. I've often heard
other children identify themselves in the same way, and in fact
it would be difficult to find a Chinese child who doesn't know
about Sun Wukong, the Monkey King.
Sun Wukong, also known as Monkey, is the hero of
Pilgrimage to the West, a classical novel written by the Ming-
dynasty scholar Wu Cheng'en (c. 1500 to 1582). Taking his in¬
spiration from popular folktales about a Tang-dynasty monk
(known as Tripitaka in the novel) who went to the West to seek
Buddhist scriptures, as well as from vernacular literature of the
Song and Yuan dynasties, Wu Cheng'en created a great
mythical novel.
According to historical records, a young monk named Xuan
Yang actually did go to India to fetch Buddhist sutras. But
because he went alone on a trip of several thousand kilometres
which took seventeen years, and encountered many dangers
and difficulties, this journey became invested with a strong
mythical flavour in the folk stories. Perhaps because the image
of Tripitaka was limited by the historical character, in the fan¬
tastic stories his place was gradually taken by a monkey monster
who helped him in his travels. In Pilgrimage to the West, this
monkey becomes Sun Wukong, the novel's principal character.
Children love fabulous stories, and it is through its rich and
wonderful fantasies that Pilgrimage to the West has satisfied
their curiosity and aroused their imagination, while the
'character of Monkey Sun Wukong has anchored itself firmly in
their hearts. Sun Wukong starts life as a little monkey born out
of a boulder on the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit, a special
boulder which contains the essence of Nature itself. At first, he
is carefree and plays with the other little monkeys on the moun¬
tain. Then he is elected the Monkey King because he is the first
to enter the Cave of the Waterfall. But later, aware that his life
is controlled by the King of Hell and that he will die someday,
he becomes distressed and is determined to find a way to con¬
quer death.
After crossing many mountains and seas, he at last finds an
immortal from whom he learns many magic arts. He is able to
jump 108,000 // in one somersault, visit Heaven at will and enter
the Dragon King's Palace at the bottom of the sea by chanting a
magic spell. He also learns how to pluck out hairs from his
body and transform them into hundreds of little monkeys to
help him defeat his enemies. He masters, "seventy-two transfor¬
mations" and can change into anyone at will, so convincingly
that if he turns himself into a certain demon, even the demon's
wife cannot see through his trick. He can also transform
himself into things such as a pine tree, or a temple, using his
eyes as windows, his mouth as the gate and his tongue as the
statue of a god. Unfortunately, however, he cannot find a pro¬
per place to put his tail so he changes it into a flagpole behind
the temple. But how can a flagpole be erected at the rear of a
temple? As a result, his opponent sees through this particular
transformation.
So children love this most marvellous of heroes who will
never submit to oppression and insult. No matter how strong
his enemies, he dares to fight back and defeat them with his
skills. When the court of the nether world decides that, accor¬
ding to the "Book of Life and Death", Monkey Sun Wukong's
life-span has ended and draws his soul to the nether regions, he
takes out his weapon, the "gold-hooped staff", from inside his
ear, and fights his way to the palace of the King of Hell.
SUN YOUJUN, of China, is a well-known author of books for
children.
Crossing out his name and date of death from the "Book of
Life and Death" as well as those of other monkeys, he declares,
"That settles it! We are no longer under your control!" But
when the Jade Emperor, supreme ruler of the heavens, hears of
this, he flies into a rage. After failing to cheat the Monkey King
into submission, the Jade Emperor tries to resort to force by
sending heavenly troops to the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit
on a punitive expedition against him. Monkey in turn rises in
resistance and vanquishes the heavenly generals and their troops.
In the end, the Jade Emperor has no alternative but to agree
to give him the title of Paragon of Heaven and put him in
charge of the Garden of Immortal Peaches. But one day the
Heavenly Queen plans a banquet at which the peaches of im¬
mortality will be served and all the gods and deities are invited
except the Paragon of Heaven. Unable to swallow such an in¬
sult, he changes into an immortal and arrives at the banquet
before the others, drinks the imperial wine, and eats the peach
and elixir, thus destroying the banquet and creating havoc in
Heaven.
Escorting Tripitaka to the Western Heaven to fetch Buddhist
sutras, Monkey Sun Wukong shows the true qualities of a hero.
He is accompanied by two other disciples, Pigsy and Sandy,
who protect their weak and incompetent master. Pigsy is also a
children's favourite. A rather lazy and gluttonous character, he
always wants to quit and go home whenever they meet with dif¬
ficulty and could hardly be considered a hero. Tripitaka en¬
counters "eighty-one perils" on the way, monsters of every
description representing natural calamities and evil forces, and
it is Monkey who always fights in the forefront and sweeps
away demons and ghosts.
On the way to the West, he displays not only a dauntless
spirit but also intelligence and wisdom. He is adept at discover¬
ing an enemy's weak points and reacts accordingly. When he
encounters a strong opponent, he transforms himself into a tiny
gnat. Hiding himself under the bubbles in some tea which the '
monster is going to drink, he works his way into the belly of his
foe, where he turns somersaults and handstands until the suf¬
ferer begs for mercy.
Before the Monkey escorts Tripitaka to the West,
Avalokitesvara plays a little trick on him by putting a cap with a
gold hoop on his head and teaching Tripitaka to recite the "In¬
cantation of the Gold Hoop" for fear the Monkey will disobey
his master. Monkey is deceived into putting on this headgear, so
that the hoop rests tightly on his head. All Tripitaka needs to do
then is to recite a spell and Monkey will roll on the ground
because of the pain in his head as the hoop tightens.
During their journey, Tripitaka always uses this method to
punish Monkey, sometimes for no reason whatsoever; but
though he is infinitely resourceful, Sun Wukong can find no
way to rid himself of this hoop. This punishment always evokes
immense sympathy from children who, perhaps, associate it
with the restraints forced on them by seemingly unreasonable
parents and teachers in their own lives.
Pilgrimage to the West has 100 chapters and is more than
800,000 Chinese characters in length. The original is too long
and the language too difficult for children, so in recent years
various adaptations of the novel have been published specially
for children, as well as a growing number of strip cartoons and
picture-books. Even many popular science books for children
make use of the Sun Wukong character. There can be no doubt
that the image of Monkey Sun Wukong will long continue to be
cherished by Chinese children.
H Sun Youjun
28

iffk
IIP^f \ VN^7I r< 2
,\
x\\ %.
A
Í L/^
W ^ J
s»
W
PILGRIMAGE TO THE WEST is a very long
Chinese novel of fantastic adventures
written in the 16th century under the Ming
dynasty by Wu Cheng'en. The main hero
of the story, which runs to a hundred
chapters and has over 800,000 ideograms,
is clever and unfailingly resourceful Sun
Wukong the Monkey King, who never
spurns an opportunity to outwit an
enemy. Here he is seen escorting the
feeble and clumsy pilgrim Tripitaka who
travels with two disciples one of whom,
the lazy and gluttonous Pigsy, is a
favourite children's character like the
Monkey King.
Drawing © Miao Zhen, Peking
29
