i
2
Know this, sovereign and subject,
Prince and pauper,
None shall have the right to an excess
So long as a single man is lacking
The bare necessities.
Salvador Díaz Mirón
(1853-1928)
San Francisco 1933, at the soup
kitchen. Photo Dorothea Lange © The
Museum of Modern Art, New York.

For an alternative development
Balanced economic growth will be impossible
without environmental protection
by Anil Agarwal
IF there is anything that can be said with
certainty about environmental and
development problems it is that they
worsened considerably throughout the
Third World during the 1970s.
The United Nations estimates that nearly
half a billion people go to bed seriously
literally half-starved at the
end of every day. Many millions of these
people are children. Any disease that at¬
tacks them in this condition, and there are
many diseases going around, takes a heavy
toll. During the 1970s, for example, diar¬
rhoea caused by lack of clean drinking water
and sanitation continued to kill at least
16,000 children in the Third World every
ANIL AGARWAL, Indian author and journalist
specializing in development questions, is Director
of the Centre for Science and Environment, in
New Delhi. Among his published works are
Drugs and the Third World (1978) and Mud,
Mud: The Potential of Earth-based Building
Materials for Housing Programmes in the Third
World (1981)
day. Yet diarrhoea seldom kills unless the
child also happens to be a victim of inade¬
quate nutrition.
The changing environment is also
resulting in the increased incidence of many
diseases. The rapid spread of
schistosomiasis in several North African
countries is now very well known. Lesser
known is the spread of the killer disease
Japanese encephalitis from Japan to India.
Japanese encephalitis is a brain fever that
kills almost every second person who is un¬
fortunate enough to get it. The disease has
spread slowly with the growth of surface ir¬
rigation systems which provide an excellent
breeding ground for the disease-spreading
mosquito. Provision of drinking water and
various types of construction activities
without adequate drainage have led to a
dramatic surge in filariasis in several coun¬
tries. The increase in malaria cases with the
growth in vector resistance against
pesticides is also now well documented.
As if this were not enough, many
developing countries are now acquiring a
double burden of disease: the traditional
water- and mosquito-borne diseases
together with what are generally regarded
as diseases of affluence. With uncontrolled
industrialization and increasing use of
chemicals in both agriculture and industry,
cancer is becoming an important disease in
the Third World. The World Health
Organization estimates that, of the eight
million cancer cases in the world, five
million are in the developing countries. With
cigarette consumption growing in the Third
World, a commerciogenic epidemic of
cancer can be expected well before the end
of the century. At their current expenditure
of a few dollars per head on health services,
developing countries will have neither the
manpower nor the financial resources to
provide the necessary therapeutic facilities.
The environment, too, has been slowly
worsening. Every minute 20 hectares of
tropical forest cover is destroyed about
one per cent of the total forest cover in the
23

world every year. As much land is lost to
salinity and waterlogging as comes under ir¬
rigation every year. In most countries of the
Third World, air and water pollution are
becoming increasingly worse whereas in
many developed countries, governments
with greater access to financial resources
have initiated schemes and enforced stan¬
dards that have reversed the trend.
Across the Third World today, there is
growing disenchantment with the existing
development process. This is reflected in a
growing concern about the environment
too, in marked contrast to the fears that
developing countries exhibited at the mam¬
moth Stockholm conference on the human
environment which first raised environmen¬
tal consciousness on a worldwide scale.
Experts then argued that there would be
conflicts between environmental preserva¬
tion and the process of economic develop¬
ment and that concern for the environment
would retard the latter. Today many
recognize this debate to be an entirely
fallacious one. The demand for an alter¬
native development process is growing and
experience now clearly shows that rational,
balanced, equitable economic development
will be impossible without environmental
protection. Environmental degradation in¬
evitably leads to greater inequalities in
which the poorest sections of the society
suffer most.
The rationale for this line of argument is
pretty simple and straightforward. In a Third
World society with a high population densi¬
ty and high levels of poverty, virtually every
ecological niche is utilized by some cultural
or occupational group for its sustenance.
When the more powerful forces in the
society destroy that ecological niche or
allocate its resources for some other use,
the dispossessed group obviously suffers.
All over the Third World this process is
repeating itself ad nauseam. Take a few ex¬
amples. For years, traditional marine
fishermen have sustained themselves on the
fishery resources available near the coast.
With the introduction of mechanized
vessels and trawlers, these resources are
being overfished all over Asia. The losers in
the process are the small fishermen who
have lived for centuries in harmony with
their environment.
Environmental degradation
who are the culprits, the élite
or the poor?
Third World forests are being destroyed
in a big way to meet the demand for in¬
dustrial timber, both for local urban and in¬
ternational markets. In this process, the
forest-dependent indigenous peoples of the
world are being destroyed at the rate of one
tribe a year. The destruction of the forests
completely disrupts their age-old lifestyle.
Even where afforestation is taking place, it
is useless for them. Monocultures of com¬
mercial species do not provide them with
the fruits, roots and tubers that traditionally
met their needs.
A similar process is affecting the nomadic
people of the Third World. With cultivable
land in short supply, the more powerful
sedentary peoples, supported by their
governments, have moved in and occupied
the marginal lands that were formerly the
nomad's grazing lands. Pushed out of their
traditional territories, the nomads are being
forced on to even more marginal lands,
where these exist. Otherwise they simply
crowd together into the ever-diminishing
areas of grazing land that are left. In the pro¬
cess, both the nomads and the land are suf¬
fering immensely.
The world's rivers have been used for
centuries as sources of drinking water and
for sustaining substantial populations of
riverine fishermen. But with unregulated in¬
dustrialization and urbanization, these rivers
have become cheap dumping grounds for
chemical and microbiological filth. Inland
fisheries in many parts of the Third World
have disappeared totally and those who
continue to depend on the untreated waters
of these rivers for drinking purposes suffer
high mortality rates.
This process of marginalization and grow¬
ing poverty on the one hand and greater
control over resources associated with un¬
precedented levels of material affluence on
the other, is going on all over the world. A
high consumption culture, characterized by
Western life styles, is pervading even the
Third World. But because of its high cost
and heavy resource use it remains restricted
iflf*
o v
m
6
Y '
Í > -
V
.*->

Product or process should
development be redefined?
to a small section of its population.
Almost all the Third World's environment
and development problems can be traced to
this cultural process. The current patterns
of economic development have initiated this
"multinationalization" of culture and now
that this culture has been set in motion, it
demands with increasing force the con¬
tinuation of the same pattern of economic
development. Even those who do not now
benefit from this culture keep hoping that
someday they will. Today there is no
freedom to choose. A kind of vicious circle
is operating. Multinational corporations sell
the kind of products that initiate a multi¬
national culture, and once this culture
begins to seep in and be enjoyed by the
powerful, they demand even more strongly
the products of multinational corporations.
To keep this vicious circle going everything
is attacked and degraded, nothing is ex¬
empt, from forests, rivers and whales to the
mass of human beings and human cultures.
Some naive experts and politicians have
argued that environmental problems can be
arrested if the basic needs of the poor can
somehow be met. Global environmental
problems can in almost every case be traced
to the overconsumption of the rich, not the
underconsumption of the poor. These ex¬
perts betray total lack of understanding of
the problem of poverty. Many of those who
Give me a lever long enough and a fulcrum
strong enough and single-handed I can
move the world.
Archimedes
(287-212 BC)
Gabra tribesmen building an access
road, Kenya. Photo Richard Saunders
© ICA, Washington, D.C.
Our blood must burn
We must catch fire
If we are to move the onlookers
If the world is at last to open its eyes
Not on our remains
But on the wounds of the survivors
Kateb Yacine
The breadlinewaiting for the daily
ration of bread at Dessie relief camp,
Ethiopia (1966). Photo Brian Aris ©
Parimage, Paris.
are poor today were not poor a century ago
and then lived in close harmony with nature.
Moreover, the very definition of
"development" has been completely
distorted. Instead of defining development
as a process which enables individuals,
communities and nations, in fact, all levels
of society, to become increasingly self-
reliant, with greater control over their
destinies, development is now defined
almost as if it were some kind of product
that can be obtained with economic
growth. Development cannot simply be
equated with increased consumption and
production of material goods in society, yet
this is the operational definition of develop¬
ment that prevails all over the world. It
clearly smacks of the very consumer culture
that it is creating.
If the definition of development as a
process towards greater self-reliance at
all levels of society, including individual
and community, is accepted, then the so-
called developed countries have
"underdeveloped" at a more rapid
pace their demands having far outgrown
the resources of their environment than
developing countries and they are now
spreading an economic process that is
underdeveloping the Third World too.
A remarkable facet of past cultures which
25

There are two types of poverty: that which, in certain societies affects only a minority, and that
which, in other societies, affects all but a:minority.
J.K. Galbraith
Child In the City, photo-portrait by Josef Pokorny, Czechoslovakia. International
photographic contest, UNO.
lived in harmony with their environment was
that they were totally dependent for their
daily needs on their immediate environ¬
ment. Today the so-called developed
human beings know less about their im¬
mediate environment and are more depen¬
dent on products from afar. This trend has
gone so far as to disrupt even such intimate
biological behaviour as breast-feeding and
to make the mother dependent on multi¬
national milk powder that is imported from
other nations.
As the driving force of the current culture
is a system that wants to extract the max¬
imum from the environment for a few, the
growing world crisis can only be controlled
if the current culture can be destroyed and
replaced by a new world economic environ¬
ment that allows a multiplicity of cultures to
coexist in a spirit of equality. Everything else
would be a façade, part of an effort to
postpone the real solution. Some would
even call it a deliberate trick. A culture that
does not care for human beings cannot care
for the environment or vice versa.
26
The 60-odd non-governmental groups
which met recently in Nairobi to attend the
Symposium on Environment and the Future
were remarkably unanimous in their agree¬
ment, despite their diversity of backgrounds
and experiences, that the major intellectual
challenge before the world today Is to
delineate an alternative development pro¬
cess. A new vision must emerge and with it
a way to turn it into reality.
Within the intellectual cloud that exists,
some elements of the new culture can
already be discerned. It will clearly be:
participatory and resource-sharing, frugal
when compared to the affluent sections of
the world but with a higher average stan¬
dard of living for the poor majority;
respectful of the multiplicity of lifestyles in
the world;
more self-reliant and independent;
respectful of feminist concerns; more and
more evidence now shows that women suf¬
fer more from ill health and malnutrition and
care more for the restoration of en¬
vironmental integrity than their cash-hungry
men.
As we approach the end of the twentieth
century, the urgency for finding the alter¬
native development process will increase. If
the world cannot find a better way to share
its resources, the fight between the poor
and the rich will inevitably increase, both
between and within nations. The current
crisis of the Third World is merely a symp¬
tom of the crisis in the entire world.
Nearly seven decades ago, the wise old
man of India, Mahatma Gandhi, put the
entire population, resources and develop¬
ment question into one succinct and simple
equation. When asked what he wanted
India to look like after it became in¬
dependent he wanted it to be like
Britain, the Mahatma replied with a ques¬
tion of his own. If Britain had to exploit half
the world to be what it is today, how many
worlds would India have to exploit ? This is
a question that every developed and
developing nation has to ask today. There is
enough for everybody's need in this world
but not enough for everybody's greed.
H Anil Aga rwal
