Dostoyevsky
'our great
contemporary'
by Octavio Paz
Text © Copyright.
Reproduction prohibited
OCTAVIO PAZ, Mexican poet and essayist, is
one of the most outstanding writers in the
Spanish language today. He has been Mexico's
ambassador to India and has taught at several
universities, including Cambridge (U.K. ¡where he
was Simon Bolivar Professor of Latin American
studies. He has published several volumes of
poetry, including Libertad bajo Palabra ("Liberty
on Parole"). English translations of his essays in¬
clude Claude Lévi-Strauss: An Introduction
(19721 and Alternating Current (1973). In 1981 he
was awarded the Cervantes Prize, one of the
highest distinctions in Spanish literature. The arti¬
cle published here has been abridged from a
longer study
SINCE his death a century ago,
Dostoyevsky's influence has con¬
stantly grown and spread: first in his
own country, where he had already achiev¬
ed renown during his lifetime, then in
Europe, America and Asia. This influence
has not been exclusively literary; it has af¬
fected the way people feel, think and live.
Several generations have read his novels not
as fiction but as studies on mankind, and
hundreds of thousands of readers all over
the world have taken part in silent conversa¬
tion and debate with his characters, as if
they were old acquaintances.
His work left a mark on minds as different
as Nietzsche and Gide, Faulkner and Camus.
Two modern Mexican writers, José
Vasconcelos and José Revueltas were pas¬
sionate readers of Dostoyevsky, perhaps
because they belonged to the same intellec¬
tual family and saw themselves in many of
his ideas and obsessions. I still remember
the interminable conversations I had with
my classmates when finishing my bac¬
calauréat: Ivan and Dimitri Karamazov war¬
red in every one of us.
Nothing could be more natural than this
passion, for in spite of the century that
divides us, Dostoyevsky is our great con¬
temporary. Very few writers of the past are
so much of our time; to read his novels is to
read a chronicle of the twentieth century.
But his modernity is not that of the latest in¬
tellectual or literary fashion. By virtue of his
tastes and preoccupations he is a writer of
another age; he is given to prolixity, and
were it not for his extremely modern sense
of humour many of his pages would be
tedious. His historical world is not ours. His
vision of history, .though sometimes pro¬
found, is nevertheless confused. It lacks
that quick, penetrating grasp of events
which delights us, for example, in Stendhal.
Nor did he possess the gaze of a Tocqueville
which could pierce the surface of a society
and an age. Nor was he, like Tolstoy, an an¬
nalist on an epic scale.
He does not give us a description of what
is happening, but instead forces us to "go
underground" in order to see what is really
going on; he forces us to see ourselves in
ourselves. Dostoyevsky is our contemporary
because he foretold the dramas and con¬
flicts of our age, and he did this neither
because he had the gift of second sight nor
because he was capable of foreseeing
events, but because he had the ability to
penetrate into the interior of human beings.
He was one of the first, perhaps the first,
to give an account of modern nihilism. His
descriptions of this mental state are un¬
forgettable and still compel the reader by
their penetration and mysterious accuracy.
The nihilism of Antiquity was related to
scepticism and epicureanism: its ideal was a
noble serenity, the attainment of equanimity
in face of the vicissitudes of fortune. The
nihilism of ancient India, which so impress¬
ed Alexander and his entourage, was a
philosophical position in some ways similar
to that of the Greek philosopher Pyrrho of
Elis and one which led to the contemplation
of the void. For Nagarjuna and his followers,
22

nihilism was the antechamber of religion.
But modern nihilism, although it too springs
from an intellectual conviction, leads neither
to philosophical impassibility nor to the blest
state of imperturbability. It is rather an in¬
ability to create or affirm anything, more of a
spiritual flaw than a philosophy.
Nietzsche imagined the coming of a
"complete nihilist", embodied in the Super¬
man who would play, dance and laugh in
the gyrations of the Eternal Return. The
dance of the Superman celebrates universal
insignificance, the evaporation of con¬
sciousness, and the subversion of values.
But the true nihilist, as Dostoyevsky more
realistically envisaged, neither dances nor
laughs: he moves restlessly from place to
place around his room or around the
world, it's all the same to himwithout ever
being capable of doing anything. He is con¬
demned to go round and round in circles,
talking to his fantasms. His sickness, like
that of Sade's libertines or of the medieval
monks who were afflicted with accidie, is a
constant dissatisfaction, an inability to love
anything or anyone, an aimless agitation,
self-disgust and also self-love.
The modern nihilist is a wretched Nar¬
cissus who looks in the water and sees his
¡mage shattered into fragments. The spec¬
tacle of his downfall fascinates him: he feels
sick at the sight of himself yet cannot tear
his eyes away. His situation can be grasped
from these words by the Spanish poet
Quevedo:
The waters of the abyss
in which I fell in love with myself.
Stavrogin, the hero of The Devils writes
as follows, to Darya Pavlovna, who loves
him: "I've tried my strength everywhere.
When I tried it for my own sake and for the
sake of self-display, it seemed infinite, as it
has before in my life. . . But what to apply my
strength to that's what I've never seen and
don't see now in spite of your words of ap¬
proval... I can still wish to do something
good... and that gives me a feeling of
pleasure. But the one and the other feelings
are, as before, too petty, and strong they
never are. My desires are never strong
enough. . . I tried wild debauchery. .. but I do
not like debauchery and I had no desire for
it... Perhaps you dream of giving me so
much love that you hope at least to set up
some aim for me by it? No you'd better be
careful: my love will be as petty as I am
myself... Your brother told me that he who
loses his ties with his native soil, loses his
gods that is, all his aims. One can go on
arguing about anything for ever, but from
me nothing has come but negation, with no
magnanimity and no force. Even negation
has not come from me. Everything has
a/ways been petty and life/ess. Kirilov, in his
magnanimity, could not compromise with
an idea and shot himself. I can never lose
my reason and I can never believe in an idea
to the same extent as he did. . . I can never,
never shoot myself.
What word can be used to describe this
condition? Discouragement, lifelessness.
Stavrogin: the man without a soul.
Nevertheless, after writing this letter,
Stavrogin hangs himself in his garret. As a
final paradox, the rope was made of silk and
the suicide had carefully smeared it with
soap beforehand. The grandeur of the
nihilist lies neither in his position nor in his
ideas, but in his lucidity. His clarity redeems
him from what Stavrogin called his pettiness
or mean-mindedness. Unless, far from being
an answer, suicide is yet another test. If so,
it is anïnadequate test. It is not important:
the nihilist is an intellectual hero because he
dares to penetrate into his divided soul,
knowing that he is involved in a hopeless
quest.
Nietszche would have said that Stavrogin
is an "incomplete nihilist": he is ignorant of
the Eternal Return. But perhaps it would be
nearer the truth to say that Dostoyevsky the
man, like so many of our contemporaries, is
an incomplete Christian. He has ceased to
believe, but he has not managed to replace
the old certainties by new ones, nor to live
an unsheltered life, without ideas to justify
or give meaning to his existence. It is God
that is dead, not evil. The loss of the super¬
natural frame of reference does not abolish
sin. On the contrary, it endows it with a kind
of immortality. The nihilist is closer to the
pessimism of the Gnostics than to Christian
optimism with its hope for salvation. If there
is no God there can be no remission of sins,
but neither can there be aboliton of evil. Sin
ceases to be an accident or a state, and is
transformed into the permanent condition of
men. It is Augustinianism in reverse: being is
evil. The Utopian would like to bring heaven
to earth and make us gods. The nihilist
knows that he is condemned from birth: the
earth is already hell.
Is the portrait of the nihilist a self-portrait?
Yes and no. Dostoyevsky wished to escape
from nihilism not by suicide and negation
but by affirmation and joy. The answer to
nihilism, the sickness of the intellectuals, is
the life-giving simplicity of Dimitri
Karamazov or the supernatural joy of
Alyosha. In either case the answer is to be
found not in philosophy and ideas but in life.
The innocence of simple people is the
refutation of nihilism. Dostoyevsky's world
is peopled with men, women and children
who are both ordinary and extraordinary.
Some are anxious, others are sensual; some
sing in abject poverty and others despair in
prosperity. There are saints and criminals,
idiots and geniuses, pious women and
angelic children tormented by their fathers.
(How different was Dostoyevsky's vision of
childhood from Freud's!) A world of
criminals and upright citizens: the gates of
the kingdom of heaven are open to all of
them. They .can save themselves or go to
perdition.
Although ideas have a great importance in
his work, Dostoyevsky was a novelist, not
an ideologist. As Dimitri Karamazov, one of
his heroes, observes: "We ought to love life
more than thinking about life". Dimitri is one
answer to Ivan but not the answer.
Dostoyevsky does not set one idea against
another, but one human reality against
another. Dostoyevsky is different from
Flaubert, James or Proust in the sense that
ideas are real for him, not intrinsically but as
a religious dimension of existence. The only
ideas that interested him were Ideas em¬
bodied in flesh and blood. Some come from
God, in other words from the depths of the
heart; others, and they are the most
numerous, come from the devil, in other
words the brain. Like the soul of the
medieval clergy, the conscience of the
modern intellectual is a battlefield. Seen in
this light, Dostoyevsky's novels are religious
parables and his art is closer to St. Paul, St.
Augustine and Pascal than to modern
realism. At the same time, by virtue of the
rigour of his powers of psychological
analysis, his work anticipates and in a sense
transcends that of Freud.
We owe to Dostoyevsky .the fullest and
most profound diagnosis of the modern
sickness: psychic division, divided con¬
science. He describes the phenomenon
simultaneously from a psychological and
religious point of view. Stavrogin and Ivan
suffer from visions: They see and talk with
spectres, devils. At the same time, since
they are modern men they explain these ap¬
paritions in terms of psychic disturbances.
They are projections of disturbances of the
soul. But neither of them is very sure about
this explanation. Time and again, as they
talk to their ghostly visitors they are despair¬
ingly compelled to accept that these visitors
are real, and that they are actually talking to
the devil. Awareness of the split within them
is diabolical. To be possessed is to know
that the self has been destroyed and that
someone outside us is usurping our voice.
Is this outsider the devil or is it our¬
selves? However we answer this question,
the identity is split. These passages are
hallucinatory; the conversations of Ivan and
Stavrogin with their devils are related
realistically, as if they were unexceptional
events. There are many absurd situations
and ironical reflections. At one moment fear
makes us laugh, at another it makes our
blood run cold. We experience an am¬
biguous fascination: psychological descrip¬
tion imperceptibly becomes metaphysical
speculation, which in turn becomes a
religious vision, and the vision becomes a
tale in which the supernatural and the banal,
the grotesque and the unfathomable are in¬
extricably intermixed.
Dostoyevsky's devils have an authenticity
which is unique in modern literature. Since
the eighteenth century the supernatural
creatures in our poems and novels have
ceased to be convincing. They are comic
figures, and the affectation of their language
and behaviour is simultaneously pompous
and intolerable. In Goethe and Valéry they
are plausible precisely because of their
highly intellectual and symbolic nature. They
are also acceptable when presented in a
deliberately ironical manner as fantastic
figments of the imagination, as in Gérard de
Nerval's La Main Enchantée and Cazotte's
delightful Diable Amoureux. But the modern
devils do everything in their power to make
us aware that they come from the beyond,
from the subterranean world. They are the
parvenus of the supernatural.
Although Dostoyevsky's devils are
modern too and bear no resemblance to
medieval or baroque devils lustful, astute
and a trifle stupid they are not literary. '
They possess what might be called a clinical
reality. Here lies, perhaps, Dostoyevsky's
great discovery. He saw the hidden relation¬
ship between evil and sickness, between
possession and reflection. They are rational
devils which, as if they were
psychoanalysts, obstinately try to prove that
they do not exist, that they are imaginary.
They triumph as a result of this irrefutable
reasoning. Ivan and Stavrogin, two intellec¬
tuals, have no option but to believe in them:
they are really the devil because only the
devil is capable of reasoning in this way. But
they would also be possessed by the devil if
they obstinately insisted on believing in ,
what are the mere hallucinations of a sick
mind. In either case they are possessed by
negation, the essence of the devil. Hence
the thought that terrifies Ivan: to believe in
the devil it is not necessary to believe in
God.
Octavio Paz
23
