THE GALAPAGOS ISLANDS
The origin of 'The Origin'
by Jorge Enrique Adoum
IT was in the Galapagos Islands that
Darwin became truly "Darwinian."
When he set sail on the Beagle as a
naturalist in 1831, he was only twenty-two
years old and a fervent believer. At the age
of nineteen he had entered Christ's College,
Cambridge, with the vague intention of go¬
ing into the Church. In his Autobiography
he would say of that period: "I did not then
in the least doubt the strict and literal truth
of every word in the Bible." Consequently,
there could be no doubt that the world had
been created in six days (during the year
4004 BC, according to the calculations of
Archbishop James Ussher; being com¬
pleted, if further precision is needed,
at 9 o'clock in the morning of Saturday
12 October).
He was first assailed by doubts during his
voyage to South America: he found "new"
fossils; he discovered that on either side of
the Andes different types of vegetation grew
in similar climates and on similar soils; he
also found vast coral or lava concretions of
later formation than that of the cordillera.
He noted that the Galapagos Islands, form¬
ed as a result of successive eruptions of sub¬
marine volcanoes, were geologically more
recent than Americathat is, subsequent to
the creation. Moreover they were quite
separate, without any sunken ridges that
might once have joined them to the con¬
tinental shelf. He dubbed them "Satellites
of the continent."
"Nothing could be less inviting than the
first appearance..." he wrote in his diary,
"a broken field of black basaltic lava,
thrown into the most rugged waves and
crossed by great fissures." The winds and
waves had sculpted blocks smooth as the
walls of natural fortresses, perforated cliffs
like sponges, grooved surfaces like the
fossilized tresses of a giantess on the rocks
that rose from the underwater quarries.
And, scattered on or between the islands,
JORGE ENRIQUE ADOUM, Ecuadorian poet
and writer, has published several volumes of
poetry, including an anthology. No son todos los
que están. Poemas 1949-1979 (Seix Barral,
Barcelona, 1980). His play about the Spanish
conquest of the Inca empire, published in English
as The Sun Trampled Beneath the Horses'
Hooves (The Massachusetts Review, Winter-
Spring 1974) has also been translated into
French, Swedish and Polish and performed in
several countries of Europe and Latin America.
He has taken part in Unesco's programme of
studies on Latin American cultures, and is now a
member of the editorial staff of the Unesco
Courier.
24
Marine iguana of the Galapagos Islands.

innumerable boulders lay like broken teeth,
molars with lakes of lava at the bottom of
their caries. We would call it a lunar land¬
scape; Darwin described it thus: "I scarcely
hesitate to affirm that there must be in the
whole archipelago at least 2,000 craters." A
few of these volcanoes have continued to be
active and there have been eruptions until
recently. An aerial view of the largest island,
Isabela, shows that it is formed of lava flows
from five or six volcanoes which were once
separated by the sea. And on these edges of
rugged basalt are fearsome marine iguanas
of antediluvian aspect, slow-moving land ig¬
uanas "of singularly stupid appearance",
the giant land tortoises known in Spanish as
galápagos, so sluggish as to give the impres¬
sion that they can hardly cope with their
own weight. "A shore fit for
pandemonium" was the entry Captain
Robert Fitzroy made in the logbook of the
Beagle on the day of its arrival,
15 September 1835.
The islands date back to a little over a
million years. The winds blowing from the
continent and the waves rolling to and fro
between the beaches and the offshore rocks
must have brought the particles of earth and
spores of lichen and fern that were the
basalt's first colonizers. Then came the birds
bearing seeds among their feathers, in their
stomachs or on their feet. The Humboldt
Current must also have brought other
animal species such as penguins, clinging to
driftwood, to these islands which stretch
from one degree north to two degrees south.
These must have been the earliest in¬
habitants of the archipelago, which lies just
under 1,000 kilometres off the coast of
Ecuador and has a total land area of ap¬
proximately 7,800 square kilometres. The
largest island comprises more than half the
total land area, with 4,588 square kilo¬
metres, while the smallest covers barely five.
A few pieces of pottery and Thor Heyer-
dahl's Kon Tiki expedition have led some
people to suggest that the Galapagos had
been reached by pre-Columbian inhabitants
of South America, in particular, the Incas.
However, history records that it was the
Spanish Bishop of Panama, Tomás de
Berlanga, who was sent by the Emperor
17 September 1835. "In the morning we
landed on Chatham Island [Isla San
Cristóbal]... Nothing could be less inviting
than the first appearance. A barren field of
black basaltic lava, thrown into the most
rugged waves and crossed by great
fissures..." (Darwin, The Voyage of the
Beagle).
Charles V to arbitrate in the conflict bet¬
ween the conquistadores Francisco Pizarro
and Diego de Almagra, who discovered the
archipelago in 1535. It is possible that he
was blown off-course, or that his ship was
driven towards the islands by the mighty
Humboldt Current. Berlanga and his crew
were certainly the first to call the islands the
Galapagos, and also the Islas Encantadas
(Bewitched Islands) because of the mist that
enveloped them like castles in a fairy tale.
The islands were of no interest to the con¬
quistadores, but they were an ideal lair for
pirates: there, freebooters and buccaneers
set up their bases for operations against the
galleons returning treasure-laden to
metropolitan Spain. The area was fre¬
quented by adventurers such as Knight,
Captain Morgan, Davis and Ambrose
Cawley, who drew the first navigation
charts on which the islands appear. Around
1800, Captain Collnet of the Royal Navy
suggested fishing the whales which abound¬
ed around the archipelago, since those of
the Atlantic had been virtually exter¬
minated. From then onwards, English and
North American whalers recklessly
plundered the surrounding waters, depleting
not only the stocks of cetaceans but also the
tortoises that were so prized for their flesh
and oil alike. A single boat would take up to
fourteen tons of tortoises in four days and,
according to the U.S. Navy's nineteenth-
century archives, in twenty-seven years its
whaling fleet caught over 13,000 of these
mammals which, left alone, could live for
more than two centuries. (In 1841 the
islands were also visited by a whaler, sub¬
sequently a celebrated writer, Herman
Melville, who described them in a fine work
entitled The Encantadas. Even more signifi¬
cant, however, is the fact that in the early
nineteenth century the North American
whaler Essex was attacked and sunk by a
sperm whale 30 degrees west of the
Galapagos. This was the origin of Moby
Dick, the white whale, incarnation of Evil
on Sea and Land, and the vengeful and
bloody persecution of Captain Ahab with
his wooden leg and his epic failure.
On Charles Island (now Santa Maria)
Darwin found a settlement of two or three
hundred inhabitants, "Nearly all people of
colour who have been banished for political
crimes from the Republic of the Equator".
Ecuador had taken possession of the islands
on 12 February 1832 and called them the
Archipiélago de Colón (the "Columbus Ar¬
chipelago"), and gave them Christian names
connected with the life of the illustrious Ad¬
miral: Isabela and Fernandina (after the
Catholic Kings who had sponsored the ac-K
25

The right tool
for the job
Darwin noticed that there were several species offinches on the Galapagos
Islands and that each had a different shape or size of beak. The differences
can be explained by natural selection.
Birds' beaks are like toolsdifferent ones are suited to different jobs.
Beaks of different shapes are adapted to eating different kinds offood.
The large ground
finch has a large,
strong, crushing
beak... like large
nutcrackers.
Large, hard
seeds.
This large tree finch
has a strong, sharp
beak for grabbing and
cutting... like metal
cutters.
The warbler finch has
a small pointed beak
for probing into
cracks... like
tweezers.
The small ground
finch has a small but
strong crushing
beak... like small
nutcrackers.
The cactus finch has
a long tough beak for
probing... like long-
nosed pliers.
Large insects,
such as beetles
and caterpillars.
Small insects
cracks and
crevices.
....
Cactus seeds
and nectar.
Small, hard
seeds.
Text and drawings © Courtesy of the Natural History Museum, London
cidental discovery of America), Pinta and
Santa. Maria (after two of Columbus's
caravels), Marchena (after the churchman
and theologian who had aided Columbus),
Genovesa (from Columbus's birth-place),
San Salvador (the place where he first
disembarked), Pinzón (his fellow-explorer),
Santa Fe, Española, San Cristóbal...
The convicts, who were not necessarily all
political offenders, had been taken to the
islands by General José de Villamil, along
with a handful of farmers and possibly a few
craftsmen. The boat was a Noah's Ark in
miniature, since the deportees took along
dogs, pigs, goats, asses, cats and hens,
which in turn attracted rats and fleas. On
Santa Maria, people who had obtained con¬
cessions to exploit chinchillas harassed the
settlers and convicts, so that by 1845 only
twenty-five of the latter were left, twelve in
1851, and eventually none at all.
Nowadays, a population of fewer than
5,000 persons divided among three islands
inhabit an area comprising one tenth of the
total land area (the rest has been declared a
National Park) and grow potatoes, lemons
and coffee. On the higher ground small
26
plains have formed where animal husbandry
has begun. However, the acute shortage of
water (provided only by a few springs and
the persistent drizzle) the distance, as well as
transport difficulties make both farming
and animal husbandry an unprofitable oc¬
cupation. Regular tourism is relatively new.
(As recently as thirty years ago only one
boat left the port of Guayaquil every four or
six months with water, food, ropes, candles,
matches and mail. The San Cristóbal "post
office" consisted of a barrel sheltered from
the drizzle by an improvised roof.)
Darwin encountered a veritable
laboratory of evolution in the archipelago.
And since "there is even a difference bet¬
ween the inhabitants of the different
islands", he was able to observe not only the
final product of the long evolutionary pro¬
cess, but also its different phases such as the
thickening of the finches' beaks and the
lengthening of the necks of the giant tor¬
toises. "Most of the organic productions are
aboriginal creations found nowhere else..."
Originally the tortoises on the Galapagos
all belonged to the same species, later
dividing into fifteen subspecies comprising
three groups, according to the form of their
shells. The shells of those on Española,
Pinzón, Pinta, Fernandina and part of
Isabela are shaped like a saddle, with the
front edge raised to enable them to stretch
their necks to reach the tall cacti on which
they feed. Those on Santa Cruz have round¬
ed shells and shorter necks and limbs, since
they feed on plants which do not grow high.
Between these two species there is a third
which includes numerous variants according
to size and the form of their shells.
The type of food they eat also determines
how frequently these animals, the oldest liv¬
ing creatures on the planet, move in slow
procession to the few springs of the uplands
where each "buries his head in the water
above his eyes and greedily swallows great
mouthfuls, at the rate of about ten a
minute. The inhabitants say each animal
stays three or four days in the
neighbourhood of the water and then
returns to the lower country". Darwin sup¬
posed that this was why the tortoise needed
to develop a bladder similar to the frog's
which acts as a store-house for the moisture
it needs in order to survive. Although some^


of these species seem to be extinct and in
some cases attempts at cross-breeding bet¬
ween the sole surviving specimens of dif¬
ferent groups have met with failure large
colonies still subsist, especially on Santa
Cruz and Isabela.
According to Darwin, the islanders claim¬
ed that the tortoises were deaf, because they
are indifferent to the presence of human be¬
ings. The same may be said of all the species
of the Galapagos, in particular the marine
iguana. These creatures sun themselves in
serried groups on the rocks some distance
from the water. One seemingly substan¬
tiated hypothesis has it that this crested
animal, monstrous in appearance if not in
size, with its serrated back and powerful
claws, as if to enable it to cling to the
ground, must have originally led the same
sort of existence as the land iguanas.
However, in order to escape from the land
iguana, which belonged to a more powerful
race, the marine iguana needed to acquire
aquatic skills, although Darwin himself
pointed out that once the danger is past it
shuns the water. Consequently, it had to
change its eating habits and, in order to
eliminate the large quantities of salt it ab¬
sorbs from the sea-weed on which it feeds, it
possesses massive glands which enable it to
eliminate the salt through its nose, thus sup¬
plementing the task of the kidneys. The sud¬
den temperature changes caused by plung¬
ing from hot rocks into the cool water, and
then returning back to land, have modified
the rate of its heartbeat; laboratory ex¬
periments have shown that it loses heat
about half as quickly as it regains it when
the ambient temperature is raised or
lowered. When Darwin visited San Salvador
island there were so many land iguanas that
he had difficulty in pitching his tent, the soil
was so uneven on account of their holes.
The Galapagos penguin is the only one of
its kind to have ventured so near the
equinoctial line. It is also the smallest in the
world, almost like a clumsy child, or a dwarf
in comparison with its arrogant ancestors or
its contemporaries in Antarctica. But in the
archipelago, as if obeying some collective or
ancestral memory, it seeks the deep, cold
waters between the islands of Fernandina
and Isabela, and on land it shelters in the
cool of the hollows worn in the lava by the
waves.
Of the thirteen known species of
albatross, the species found on Española
(Diomedea irrorata), is the only one in the
world that inhabits the tropics. Likewise,
the masked booby of the Galapagos is the
only member of its family that has an an¬
nual reproduction cycle, although this varies
from island to island; on Genovesa it runs
from August to November, and on
Española from November to February. Like
the blue-footed booby, it lays its eggs direct¬
ly on the ground, having lost the habit of
nest-building, probably due to the scarcity
of trees and the absence of animals and
birds of prey on the coasts where they live.
From the two eggs it lays, however, it only
succeeds in rearing one chick: the other, less
favoured, is doomed to die of hunger within
a few days.
The lava heron and the flightless cor¬
morant constitute unusual examples of
adaptation to this environment. The
former, which is only found in the
Galapagos, unlike most herons, sometimes
perches atop an overhanging bush before
diving into the water below. The flightless
cormorant, on the other hand, whose
ancestors must have flown almost 1,000
kilometres to the islands, has practically lost
its wing feathers. It was so easy to catch fish
that it forgot how to fly and learned to swim
instead. The fact that it is the only flightless
bird in the archipelago is additional proof
that the Galapagos are a young formation.
So far, only one species has had the time to
lose the use of its wings, whereas in New
Zealand, for instance, several species have
undergone this atrophy.
The case of the finch has become classic
since Darwin used it as one of the pivotal
arguments for his theory on natural selec¬
tion. Observing the difference in the
thickness of the beaks of the different
species, he concluded that in the course of
many generations the finches had to adapt
their beaks to the size of the grains, seeds,
insects and even leaves on which they
depended for food. Of the thirteen species
listed, the most interesting is the
woodpecker finch which searches for insects
and their larvae in the cracks of the bark of
the lignum vitae, called "palo santo"
because of the perfume it gives off when
cut, or in the hollows of dead trees. But, as
its beak is not sufficiently long, it uses a cac¬
tus thorn to poke into the cracks, thus being
the only known case of a bird using a tool to
obtain food.
Almost all the reptiles, half of the seden¬
tary birds, a third of the vegetation and a
large proportion of the insects of the
Galapagos exist nowhere else in the world.
Hence Darwin considered that his voyage to
South America, and especially to the
Galapagos, was by far the most important
event in his life and that in these islands lay
the origin for "all his ideas". He wrote in
his diary that here "both in space and time,
we seem to be brought somewhat near to
that great fact the mystery of mys¬
teries the first appearance of new beings
on this earth".
More than man himself, it is the domestic
animals he brought with him to the ar¬
chipelago that endanger the survival of the
aboriginal animal populations. Something
similar is also occurring with respect to the
plant species. Wild dogs devour the tortoises
and iguanas; the goats flatten' the vegeta¬
tion; eggs and baby animals are the
favourite food of the wild pigs. A 1963
report from the Charles Darwin Research
Station states that on the island of Española
"only one tortoise was found... during a
two-day search made by three men. The
island's vegetation has been severely
devastated by goats; when the tortoise was
found it was eating in the company of, and
in competition with fifteen goats". In any
event, indirectly, the most serious threat to
the preservation of these species is, as the
English playwright Tom Stoppard has put
it, that in the Galapagos "the animals are in
a state of innocence. They have no idea that
you and I are, as the biologists put it, the
most successful of the species, and that we
could choose to wipe them out if we did not
choose to cherish them; and so they are not
afraid... One walks among iguanas, herons,
doves, mocking-birds and finches as Adam
and Eve in medieval paintings walk among
antelopes and cranes".
H Jorge Enrique Adoum

