The
splendid company
of older men
and women
by Philip Wright Whitcomb
'A
N important achievement of
the World Assembly on Ag¬
ing has been a clarification
of the obligations of society to its older
members. But an equally valuable
result may prove to be an increased
understanding by all older people of
the value of their individual contribu¬
tions to the social groups of which they
are members."
This statement, made on the closing
day (6 August, 1982) of the World
Assembly on Aging, in Vienna, by its
Secretary-General William M. Ker¬
rigan, clearly indicates the new impor¬
tance of the part to be played in society
by older individuals.
In the countries of the West, the im¬
portance to society of its older
members and the nature of their role
had indeed become blurred over the
last hundred years or more. The in¬
dustrial revolution had deprived them
of their millennial role of wise
counsellors. Their relegation to a
status of a vaguely honorary citizen¬
ship became even more evident with
the technical tidal wave of the twen¬
tieth century automobiles, planes, in¬
stant communication, stereo and
video, and, most disruptive of all, bat¬
talions of computers and data banks.
Readjustment of the social position
of the elderly was slow in coming, but
by the 1960s pressure from three direc¬
tions had already begun a process of
change the meaning of which has now
become clearer.
The first of the three factors to take
effect was a long-delayed emphasis on
human rights. Simple logic and human
decency combined to add the elderly to
the others whose rights demanded re-
establishment.
A second factor was the formation
of a steadily increasing bloc of retired
voters. In the industrialized countries
new systems of retirement pensions
were introduced based on outdated
statistics of life expectancy. And the
size of this new class of voters was fre-
lL
fl,^ ^ ^^f * ÜLm
^M W*M^^ ^ 1
vA
i vi i^^^^^^^
Photo © Kansas Union, Lawrence, USA
Most of the authors of the thousands of articles published during the last few years on the
problems of the aging have been men and women in their pre-retirement years. Philip Whit¬
comb, the author of the article starting on this page is now beginning his ninety-second
year. After a sixty-four-year career as an American foreign news correspondent, he
entered the graduate school of the University of Kansas. He is seen above at the degree-
giving ceremony at which he was awarded a Ph. D. in scholastic methaphysics, thus
becoming, at eighty-nine years of age, the oldest graduate in the history of the University.

quently increased by a theory that early
retirement could help to reduce
unemployment. Simultaneously,
shorter working hours, new standards
of hygiene and a new understanding of
the nature and importance of health
combined not merely to increase life
expectancy but also to ensure that in
certain respects the new generations of
retired persons were still fully efficient.
The third factor, sharply distinct
from pity, respect or love for the elder¬
ly, and from cautious consideration of
their political power, is the growing
recognition that the world of today
and tomorrow cannot afford to neglect
the contributions of its growing com¬
pany of older men and women.
Who exactly are the members of this
steadily growing part of the world's
people the older members of society?
What is meant by saying that a certain
individual is "old" or "aging"? What
is today's meaning of retirement? How
does it change the life of the
individual?
Let us consider the latter question
first, the meaning of retirement and
the fundamental change in the in¬
dividual's life. In the final years of life
the vital difference is a freedom of
choice impossible in the first two parts
of human life as we know it today.
Throughout the prenatal period,
through childhood and through the
training and education of youth,
freedom of choice is either non¬
existent, minimal or illusory. Heredity,
the anxious guidance of the family, the
jealous tutorship of community and
school, of religion and politics, of na¬
tionality and of humanity itself, all
combine to make predestination at
least a partial reality.
In the second period of life too, with
its more or less full participation in one
or two of the multiple activities essen¬
tial to humanity for its continuing ex¬
istence, choice is again close to il¬
lusory. In the great majority of lives
choice is strongly affected, often
dominated, by the need to earn a
living.
But in the third period of a typical
life in the Western world today, some
provision, probably at least minimally
sufficient, is made by pension funds,
governmental or private, through sav¬
ings or by some family arrangement,
not only for physical needs but for an
activity to be chosen by the retired
person.
For the first time since conception,
the individual feels free to follow some
desire that necessity or common sense
had long repressed. Driven perhaps by
an accumulated hatred for early morn¬
ing alarm clocks and obnoxious
timetables, a first choice may be to
leave each day to chance and whim a
choice probably soon abandoned.
A second choice is usually travel.
Participants in organized tours include
a majority of retired persons, in all
Western countries. But costs are high
and ten days or a fortnight may be the
limit. Time spent with children or
Photo Michael Mauney © Time Inc., Chicago, USA
Above, 67 year-old retired automobile engineer Ronald Brown sits In on a chemistry class at a
Michigan high school. As part of an experiment aimed at bridging the generation gap, some fifty
older residents of Harbor Springs, Michigan, ranging In age from 55 to 90, are free to attend any
of the school's classes they wish and to join in other out-of-class activities. Said one 1 5-year-old
schoolgirl of the experiment: "At first it was weird. Now it's nice... well, sort of weird and nice
combined".
grandchildren, especially in Western
countries, except when emergency help
is needed, seems to become less and
less. Plato's insistence on the impor¬
tance for children of visits to distant
grandparents is forgotten.
Group activities occupy most of the
time of most older persons, either in
self organized groups or, especially
among the less affluent, in activities ar¬
ranged by the professionals now
engaged in the care of the elderly.
Serious scholastic effort by the
elderly has developed rapidly in the last
fifteen years. Not only are local study
groups available; university courses are
increasingly available. The university
section for the elderly in one of the
world's oldest universities, that at
Toulouse, France, is internationally
famous. .In Paris the Sorbonne has
revived, after an interval of over ninety
years, what it now calls its "inter-age"
lectures. American State universities,
and many others, make special ar¬
rangements for persons beyond retire¬
ment age.
The activities just mentioned,
leisure, travel, clubs and continuing
education, are all related to the
awakened recognition of the human
rights of the elderly. They ease the con¬
science of society rather than adding
directly to its strength. They are in¬
spired by the obligations of any group
to each of its individual members.
But obligations are reciprocal. Bet¬
ween the individual and the different
groups of which he may be a mem¬
ber family, community, religious,
political, national, global or simply
human a two-way relationship is in¬
evitable. And so it is on the older per¬
son's obligations to some of the many
groups to which he or she may have
belonged that a new emphasis is being
placed.
In many cases the individual
achieves sufficient financial success in
some disliked activity, forced upon
him by circumstances, to be able to
retire as early as forty or forty-five and
undertake something long dreamed of.
In other cases the change from an
unhappy activity may only occur at
what is regarded as a normal retire¬
ment age, but the resultant contribu¬
tion to some part of the social structure
can be important.
Even more obvious is the result
when retirement opens the way at last
for achievements in literature, music,
painting, astronomy, ornithology,
botany or any of the scores of spe¬
cialized fields in which a passion for
the subject, accumulated knowledge
and skill, combined with patience and
plenty of time, are essential.
The dictum "look to the middle-
aged for good work, to the young and
the old for masterpieces" is perhaps no
more than a clever exaggeration. But
there is no exaggeration in the
American poet Longfellow's tribute to
famous men who defied old age:
"Cato learned Greek at eighty;
Sophocles
Wrote his grand Oedipus, and
Simonides
Bore off the prize for verse from his
compeers,
When each had numbered more than
fourscore years;
Chaucer at Woodstock with the
nightingales
At sixty wrote the Canterbury Tales;
Goethe at Weimar, toiling to the
last,
Completed Faust when eighty years
were past.
Turning now to the original ques¬
tion, who is old and what is aging, two
points are obvious; first, that the
health of persons entering the period
5

of retirement is the result of the same
causes that made them healthy or
unhealthy when younger; and second,
that physical aging and mental and
spiritual aging take place at quite dif¬
ferent speeds and different times.
No one needs to be told that
statistical methods of defining old age,
essential though they are for insurance
and for governmental and institutional
planning, fail to explain individual
cases. Wide variations from a
statistical mean, or from the mental
and physical effectiveness that an in¬
dividual's record in youth and middle
age would justify, may be due not to
any profound biological factor but
merely to the same causes that ruin the
career of a football star or a prodigy of
the violin alcohol, drugs, laziness,
gross over-eating or even an explosive
temper.
On the question of physical
senescence accompanied by the
maintenance or even the improvement
of mental and spiritual faculties, the
experience of all who know a number
of older people indicates that there are
indeed two kinds of aging. Scholarly
examination of the question in many
countries confirms this conclusion. Ex¬
amples quoted at random might in¬
clude work done by Dr. Karl Menft-
inger of the Menninger Foundation in
Topeka, Kansas, by Dr. Walter
Crockett and Professor Gary Shapiro
at the University of Kansas, and by the
neurologists Professor Herbert Haug,
Professor Wolfgang Schlote and Pro¬
fessor William Meier-Ruge in the
Federal Republic of Germany and
Switzerland.
In the college of medicine at Lübeck,
Professor Herbert Haug, head of the
Department of Anatomy, has shown
that the section of the brain which con¬
verts sensory impressions into con¬
scious awareness does not change with
age, or that the changes are impercepti¬
ble. The cerebrum, where sensory in¬
formation is processed to become con¬
scious thought, does shrink with age,
but this shrinkage affects only the
frontal, and not the parietal, part. In
other words, some sections of the brain
appear to undergo no aging process,
while other sections definitely begin
aging at some point near the age of
thirty.
Some earlier assumptions are now
seen to be erroneous. For example, the
brown pigment lipofuscin, the volume
of which in some tissues of the brain
does increase with age, is now seen to
be a deterrent rather than as was
previously thought a cause of aging.
Professor Wolfgang Schlote, at Tüb¬
ingen, has found lipofuscin in the body
cells of infants, a fact which becomes
part of his proof that it has a protective
function, that of absorbing dangerous
by-products of metabolism and thus
preventing the death of the nerve cells
which it protects.
Heredity, often cited as a cause of
differences in aging, is in part absolved
by Professor William Meier-Ruge, at
Basle, insofar as failures of the
cholinergic system are concerned. It is
this system that transmits impulses
from the central brain and is therefore
involved in those familiar failures to
retrieve stored information and make
it available to the conscious mind a
discouraging phenomenon familiar to
students at examination time as well as
to older people. Though hereditary
factors do, according to Professor
Meier-Ruge, account for differences in
cholinergic systems, a chief cause for
their failure may simply be disorders of
the metabolism.
Errors and disagreements in evaluat¬
ing the problems of aging are inevi¬
table, so emotion-laden is the entire
subject of withdrawal from active life
At 80, Mabel Karelse, who
could see for most of her life,
found it difficult at first to learn
braille. But with Pattie
Gregory, 1 7, who is also blind,
coaching her for several hours
a week she is making good
progress, especially since it
was pointed out that if she
mastered braille she could
once again play cards. "You
know we both learn", says
Mabel, "Now I am going to
teach Pattie to cook."
for the future regardless of emergen¬
cies and temptations, we undertake as
your trustee to collect and invest your
obligatory and automatic contribu¬
tion, to invest it wisely and at an
agreed point in your life to begin pay¬
ing you an appropriate annuity."
Theoretically the all-wise government
invests these funds in wealth-creating
activities and uses the product in the
payment of the promised annuities.
The national economy is strengthened
and the individual protected. And the
money obligatorily contributed by
each worker, whatever his age,
becomes, theoretically, the basis of his
own future annuity... not that of
someone else.
Photo Michael Mauney,
and the approach of death. But though
some errors are made only because of
insufficient scientific data, others may
be due to prejudice.
The cry of alarm that "the world's
population is aging faster and faster"
is in fact the opposite of the truth. A
century ago, young people of twenty
could still expect to reach old age in
thirty or forty years; now it will take
them fifty or sixty years before they
will admit to being really old. Aging
has become a slower process, not a
faster one.
Political objectives seem to be in¬
volved when disaster is predicted on
the ground that the retirement pen¬
sions of the old are deducted from the
hard-earned pay of the young, creating
an impossible problem as the number
of workers diminishes while the horde
of the idle aged increases rapidly.
The problem, and it is a real prob¬
lem, cannot be solved by concealing
the theory underlying all obligatory
retirement annuity plans. An organiza¬
tion in this case a government with
the power to collect a part of all wages
and salaries declares, in effect, to the
recipients that "for two reasons, first
because the years will come when you
will no longer be paid for working but
will still need money, and second
because you, being human, would be
unable to save and invest your money
Life magazine © Time Inc., Chicago, USA
Discussion of the problem of retire¬
ment annuities and of obligatory or
voluntary withdrawal from the main
productive activities of a nation may
have obscured an enormous change in
the social structure of many countries.
The network of structured activities
linked with the first part of life is
rapidly being counterbalanced by a
startling new structure of professions
and institutions devoted to the third
and final part of life.
Suddenly a score of professions are
devoted only to the elderly; in France
a periodical magazine has been found¬
ed to meet their needs. Gerontologists
of various kinds abound and no unive¬
rsity is complete without some kind of
gerontological studies.
In the Western world there are at
least a thousand dwelling centres con¬
structed and managed solely for older
people and at least one town Sun
City in Arizona limits its citizens to
persons over a certain age.
But underlying the multiple and
diverse activities proposed for older
people, or even imposed on them, the
basic principle of human society re¬
mains determinant: obligations are
reciprocal between each individual and
the various groups of which he is a
member.
Grandparents, for example, are
members not only of a family, a com-
6

munity, a nation and a racial group,
but probably of one or more other
groups religious, political, profes¬
sional, social or nostalgic.
The obligations of each group to its
older members and former members
have been the subject of almost
neurotic attention during the last fifty
years. Today not only the obligations
of older persons to the groups to which
they may still belong, but also the
unique value of many of the contri¬
butions they can make, are more fully
understood.
The structure of human society will
suffer dangerous strain if a con¬
tinuously enlarging segment of its peo¬
ple are relieved of all obligation to the
world that nurtured them. In today's
confusion of what too often seems to
be insoluble problems, the existence of
a steadily increasing number of
, parasites must be unthinkable.
Few older people now think of
themselves as parasites. On the con¬
trary they consider themselves to be
well equipped with good health, good
judgment, some special skills and a
great deal of experience. And ready
though they may be when need arises to
care for their children's or their
neighbour's children, dogs, cats and
houses, their personal preferences go
much farther.
Many take part in group activities
such as welfare work, advisory commit¬
tees to help young business people,
teaching and counselling. Others limit
themselves to personal activities, often
those in which they had once felt a pas¬
sionate interest but with little opportuni¬
ty for participation painting, music,
creative writing, historical or family '
records, research in astronomy, natural
history or some other area linked to a
secret ambition. Archaeological digs,
reconstruction of abandoned villages or
buildings, planning or completion of
trails and roads these and other ac¬
tivities imposed- by the variegated ex¬
perience of a lifetime can serve to fulfill
the obligations that retired persons may
feel towards the society that had made
their lives possible.
Whatever activity may be chosen, the
effort will be infinitely less than it would
have been even forty or fifty years ago
because of changes that are yet scarcely
realized.
Every week, last-year pupils Kevin Gilhuly and
Jerry Jessick play the word game "Scrabble"
with 73-year-old Florence Stewart. "I was
amazed when it turned out to be fun, says
Kevin. "With Florence, I find that I am expand¬
ing my vocabulary". For Florence, "Those
boys are terrific... When they talk, they talk
about something interesting."
So fundamental has been the change
in the infrastructure of all human ac¬
tivity that a normal output in most kinds
of work could be achieved in twenty-five
or thirty hours a week, leaving almost
as much time available for some creative
or artistic activity. Ego-extensor devices,
recorders, microfilms, video tapes, data
banks with instant retrieval, satellite
transmission the fast-increasing array
cuts the time spent in the endless non¬
productive tasks that absorbed the
strength of human beings, a change of
great importance to all whose physical
strength is waning while mental and
spiritual powers are maintained or
sharpened.
The human beings of the world form
three great companies. On those three
companies the true wealth of the world
depends. The first is the company of
the young who learn. The second is
that of the middle-aged who continue
and improve the necessary
achievements of the past. The third
company are those who first learned,
then made their own particular con¬
tribution to maintaining and bettering
the achievements of the past, and are
now free to fulfill, if they so choose,
their individual obligations to some
small group or to the whole of the
society that nurtured them. So grave
are the problems of our world today
that the contributions of this third
great and splendid company, steadily
growing in numbers and in potential,
must be sought and facilitated.
Secrets of a nonagenarian
here is a tradition that persons reaching the age of one hundred
should be asked, respectfully, for the secret of their continuing ex¬
istence. Persons less than a hundred years old are not usually ex¬
pected to have any secrets at all, and I was therefore surprised when
the editors of the Unesco Courier asked for mine.
Whatever the explanation of how I am approaching the age of
ninety-two in excellent physical condition and, I hope, a fairly
reasonable mental state, it seems not to be heredity. The fact that
even ifonly the last seven generations are counted an individual must
have over two hundred ancestors makes it impossible for ordinary
people to say whether their ancestors lived long or not.
The points I think of as important are the following. I have never
used tobacco, alcohol or what are usually referred to as "drugs". I
am very suspicious ofmedicines ofall kinds but admire the skill of
today's surgeons.
When I was about twelve years old Isubscribed to a magazine called
Boy's Physical Culture, a publication which soon died. But I have
continued daily physical exercise for the entire eighty years since
then Inow do about twenty-five minutes each morning andfifteen
each afternoon. I have tried with some success to attain a sort of
medium efficiency in a considerable range ofsports: A mericanfoot¬
ball, rugby, basketball, running, rowing, heavyweight boxing.
Throughout sixty-four years of journalism I have tried never to
specialize but to write continuously about the widest possible range
ofsubjectsfrom holiday tours, children's games and archaeological
research to analyses ofeconomic reformprogrammesand interviews
with prime ministers.
As a war correspondent Iflew with a general in an air battle, rode
in a captured submarine, and was myself twice internedfor a total
of about two years.
Throughout my journalistic career I have written well over twelve
million words, but Ineverfailed to continue my study ofphilosophy
ofall kinds.
Ifirmly believe in the necessity of daily exercise, not only physical
but also mental and spiritual, and I continue them regularly as I
always have.
Philip Whitcomb
