Are we getting the
science we need?
A hard look at science
as a trigger of change
by André Danzin and Ilya Prigogine
SCIENTIFIC research reflects a very
special and fundamental need of
mankind: the need .to under¬
stand, to explain, and to know. The
search for knowledge has always been
ANDRE DANZIN, of France, is director of the
Institut National de Recherche d'Informatique et
d'Automatique IINRIA). He is president of the.
European Committee for Development and a
member of the Club of Rome.
ILYA PRIGOGINE, of Belgium, is director of the
International Institutes of Physics and Chemistry,
Brussels, and of the Ilya Prigogine Center for
Statistical Mechanics at the University of Texas,
Austin. He received the Nobel Prize for chemistry
in 1977. This article is an abridged version of a
text that will appear in a forthcoming book Scien¬
tific Research and Social Goals, edited by
Federico Mayor, to be co-published by Unesco
and Pergamon Press.
an inspiration. By its very nature,
research explores what is unknown; the
scientist is always prepared for the
unexpected, and he knows that what
he is going to discover when his work is
complete could be very different from
what he expected, could even turn out
to be the exact opposite of the
hypothesis on which he based his ex¬
periments. He is willing to accept the
most far-reaching changes in the reality
created by his mental models.
Science itself is characterized by
logical rigour, but its effects on human
society often appear irrational. What
one finds is not necessarily what one
expected, and the results are, as often
as not, much more significant than the
"expected" result which originally in¬
spired the work. If one ignores the un¬
predictable and irrational character of
research and if. one limits the freedom
of the research worker by giving him a
specific objective, one strikes a mortal
blow at the whole process of scientific
productivity.
But the popular view is rather dif¬
ferent; it sees the application of science
as a perfectly rational process. Man
lands on the moon, eliminates diseases,
transplants organs, communicates over
huge distances, travels faster than
sound, controls nuclear energy. Man
becomes all powerful, thanks to the
great god science. "If science were to
be properly directed, if it could be freed
from pressures that pervert it the arms
race, and the constant search for pro¬
fit would provide all the answers
man needs to solve his problems." This
is a view one often hears expressed by
people who have no idea how scientific
research works.
Given the obvious and acute need to
find answers to these problems, there is
something rather sad in this dilemma;

how, when one knows that the very
essence of science is its uncertainty,
can one be sure of satisfying a hope
based on a mistaken notion of what
science is?
Difficulties increase as one begins to
analyse what human needs really are.
Man's needs are in fact extraordinarily
varied, depending on where he lives
and the stage of development of the
society he lives in. The situation is so
complex that one cannot give a simple
description of what it is that mankind
really needs. Even the perception of
needs changes. Man is a creature more
of desires than of needs; and as soon as
his desires are satisfied, he tends to ask
for more. It is in his nature to do so.
Man is made for evolution, a process
which constantly turns up new ques¬
tions, some of them born from the very
answers to the previous series of
questions.
So it is not only the complexity of the
subject, and its huge regional varia¬
tions, which prevent onjî from putting
forward a few models which would
serve as ¡deal examples of develop¬
ment. The real reason is that what
seems sensible to us today may soon be
useless. How does one create a policy
for science in a climate which is so hard
to define and which is in a constant
state of change?
But this analysis may seem to offend
against common sense. Science has
demonstrated its power, most convinc¬
ingly in the development of new
technologies. During the past hundred
years it has been the most powerful
cause of change in the economy, in
morals, and in ideas. It is difficult to ad¬
mit that we cannot direct this force and
put it to the service of satisfying human
needs, some of which, like malnutri¬
tion, the energy crisis, and the con
quest of illiteracy, are clearly of the
highest priority.
Before going any further and risking
giving a false notion of things, we must
stop to think for a moment about the
nature of change. When a phenomenon
is as complex and as subject to altera¬
tion as human society undoubtedly is,
its evolutionary path consists of long
periods of continuity interrupted by
abrupt changes of direction.
When a moment of change is reach¬
ed, where many different courses are
possible, it needs only the slightest in¬
tervention, or "trigger", to send the
system one way rather than the other.
But once this change of direction has
taken place it is irreversible and the
system develops in its own way until it
reaches a new point of instability.
The last quarter of the twentieth cen¬
tury seems to be heading for a moment

of change, even if we are incapable of
guessing how things will evolve after
that change. The developed world lives
in fear of economic crisis, inflation,
unemployment and energy shortage;
the oil-producing countries have
established an illusory wealth which
they do not know how to invest and of
whose future they have no guarantee.
In China attempts are made to improve
the individual standard of living while
each year brings ten million more
mouths to feed and ten million young
workers in search of employment. The
situation in the poorest countries is
even more alarming.
Science cannot produce answers to
problems whose nature is more moral
and political than technical. But it can
have an indirect influence: first by
modifying the social environment, se¬
cond by acting as a "trigger" for
change.
From the very earliest times,
technology has always modified the
social environment. Societies of the
New Stone Age, the Bronze Age, and
the Iron Age, and the other successive
waves of human evolution were not
established simultaneously all over the
world. At different times China, Egypt,
Greece and, more recently, Europe,
have been the leaders, but technology
has spread to isolated communities (or
perhaps been rediscovered by them)
much more slowly.
Remarkably enough, social struc¬
tures have evolved in much the same
way in each region affected by the
change, just as if for every stage of
technological evolution there is for man
a corresponding social structure.
Neolithic society probably had little divi
sion into hierarchies, but the Bronze
Age brought with it a much more rigid
power structure, often based on
slavery. The Iron Age coincided with a
shift towards the feudal system, while
industrialization, with its demands for
trade and its rewards for enterprise;
produced new democratic ideas.
Of course, the social environment is
not changed by technology alone. It is
the interaction between philosophical
ideas and the applications of new
technology which produces the
change. Which comes first? This is real¬
ly no more interesting than asking
whether the chicken or the egg came
first, because what we are considering
is a continuous process of action and
reaction. The more social conditions
and the political climate favour the
emergence of new technology, the
more is produced. At the same time,
technical progress reinforces the ex¬
isting social structure, at least until a
certain threshold is reached, or success
becomes gross and contradictions
emerge.
In fact it is the growth of knowledge
which is principally responsible for
modifying the social fabric. Bit by bit,
man accumulates knowledge and infor¬
mation; from this he derives a growing
power over nature and an increased
ability for self-examination. The ascen¬
dancy over nature appears to be
limitless; it creates what one might call
a "rule by machines". And human in¬
trospection is limited by the problems of
complexity, which increase just as
rapidly as knowledge does. Because of
the growing interdependence of the dif¬
ferent parts of the economic and social
system, no part can be analysed on its
own, detached from the rest.
Our period is characterized by a new
phenomenon, created by the invasion
of science and technology into the up¬
per levels of our society. This does not
differ in kind, but in degree, from what
happened in the past. Certainly
Pythagoras, Pascal, Leibniz and
Newton played a major part in the
discussion of ideas in their own time;
and they had no hesitation in being
philosophers as well as scientists, to the
extent that it is sometimes hard to
decide which was more important in
their work, science or philosophy or the
cross-fertilization between them. But
these were exceptional individuals.
Since the end of the 1950s, those who
work in laboratories in the developed
world can be counted in hundreds of
thousands, or in millions if we include
technicians and administrators as well
as scientists. The consequence has
been an explosion of new knowledge,
with profound implications for the
social and economic system.
Curiously enough, at the very mo¬
ment scientists were acquiring de facto
their position as principal agents of
change, they were attempting to retreat
into the isolation of their specialities,
renouncing their philosophical back¬
ground. Instead of acknowledging the
global nature of knowledge, most
scientists were trying to restrict their ef¬
forts to narrow technical questions
under the pretext that only in this way
could they preserve their objectivity.
There are already signs that in the
years to come we are going to see an
end to this isolation. The transforma¬
tion of science should be marked by a
renewed ability for scientists to move
relatively easily between one speciality
and another, and by a closer involve-


"Science has demonstrated its power, most convincingly
in the development of new technologies... The discovery
of fire, the invention of language, the use of the wheel,
the moulding of shapes... the development of harness for
draft animals, the invention of gunpowder, printing and
the magnetic compass all seemed like accidents to which
very little attention was paid at first but which later turned
out to be powerful agents of change in human society. "
Alberto Giacometti's Chariot, 1950
"We are living through a
revolution in information
technology which is
transforming the way
knowledge is stored and
exchanged, touching the
very core of our culture. "
ment between science and human
values. The message of science will
then cease to be purely technical, and it
will be possible to understand man in all
his complexity, in his need for social
stability just as much as in his desire for
personal freedom.
A science policy directed along these
new avenues could act as a powerful
force for change, and most probably a
wholly beneficial one. Properly applied,
it could help man understand the full
range of problems he faces today and
will face tomorrow. It could help to
distinguish between real human needs,
and the false gods created by ideology.
The alliance between science and socie¬
ty could thus help to prepare the
ground for a new culture, and provide a
new spirit so often sought by today's
social critics. Everything possible must
be done to help reconcile the natural
sciences with what man perceives as
his human rights, and how this might
be done is beginning to emerge: human
mobility, the transfer of technology, the
rapprochement between human and
physical sciences, the growth of infor¬
mation technology and the reform of
education could all have a part to play.
But preparing the ground is not
enough. It is also necessary to envisage
a decisive event in our earlier analogy,
a "trigger"which opens the way
towards one solution among the many
which seem at present to be equally
possible.
The remote past can provide ex¬
amples of such agents of change. The
8

*
discovery of fire, the invention of
language, the use of the wheel, the
moulding of shapes, first with ceramics,
then with metals; closer to our own
time, the development of harness for
draft animals, the invention of gun¬
powder, printing and the magnetic
compass all seemed like accidents to
which very little attention was paid at
first but which later turned out to be
powerful agents of change in human
society.
Pasteur could not have guessed that
his work with micro-organisms and pro¬
tection from disease by vaccination
would lead ultimately to a new attitude
towards life and death because of its
dramatic effect on the growth of
populations. The engineers responsible
for developing the various kinds of heat
engine had no idea that they were help¬
ing bring into being a civilization which
would conquer air and space. We
ourselves are living through a revolution
in information technology which is
transforming the way knowledge is
stored and exchanged, touching the
very core of our culture.
There is not much chance that man
will ever be able to predict the long-
term consequences of such changes,
but at least he should by now be aware
that such processes do effect human
evolution. He can then attempt to con¬
trol them, either by strangling them at
birth if their effects are by general
agreement likely to be disastrous, or by
encouraging them if their results seem
likely to respond to a real need.
This process of planning by looking
out for key triggering events calls for
some thought. In the state of uncertain¬
ty we find ourselves in today, the only
certainty we have is that things cannot
go on the way they are, and we must
accept that an abrupt change lies
ahead. This being so, then everybody
must be allowed to express their point
of view. One can bring "imagination to
power" by allowing inventive ideas to
come forward, and one can also select
those specialist areas where new ideas
are likely to be most productive. For ex¬
ample, it is probable that tropical
agriculture might be transformed if one
could attach nitrogen-fixing bacteria to
the roots of cereal crops; there is thus
every reason for a special effort in this
area.
The process then becomes a ques¬
tion of political priorities, but one must
always keep an eye open for the unex¬
pected. The discovery of penicillin,
partly a lucky chance, turned out to be
much more important than all other
contemporary work on chemotherapy.
Without denying that progress could
be made if our society were better
educated in science and technology, it
would be naive to believe that the huge
questions facing humanity today could
be so simply solved. The technology we
have is relevant only in particular
places, at particular times, and under
particular political conditions.
Western society is not exportable; it
consumes too much energy and too
many primary products. High levels of
mechanization are not suited to the
growing pool of unemployed man¬
power in the developing countries.
Agricultural techniques work only in a
temperate climate where the land is
good, exposed neither to drought nor
to soil erosion. They do not produce a
high return without the use of fertilizer
and pesticides, and they consume
through the use of machines many
more fuel calories than are produced by
the food which is grown. Such a solu¬
tion cannot be applied generally in any
situation, nor is it likely to survive for
ever even in the developed countries.
One can multiply examples: if im¬
proved health standards prolong life
and reduce perinatal mortality (as they
do) and if they are not accompanied by
a reduction in birth-rates, then popula¬
tion problems sooner or later become
insoluble; which brings the matter back
into the realm of morals. To believe that
all that is necessary is to extract the
knowledge one needs from a reservoir,
like water from a well, is an enormous
error, unfortunately widely shared.
What is needed is to establish basic
research facilities and so direct them
that they follow useful paths leading to
the solution of the problems of
underdevelopment. The science of the
North has until now taken little account
of the needs of the South, and the
research workers of the South, often
excellent in quality if limited in number,
have not concentrated on problems
relevant to their own areas, absorbed as
they are in the science of the developed
world. It is time for a change.
I André Danzin and Ilya Prigogina
