National identity
and foreign domination
by Ngugi Wa Thiong 'o
THE crisis of culture in the developing
world has too often been seen in
terms of tradition and modernity,
the rural and the urban, and the conflict of
cultures consequently engendered by that
dichotomy. In this schema, the urban (in¬
dustry, technology, electronics) is identified
with modernity, the rural (subsistence
agriculture, economic backwardness) with
tradition.
But ironically, the same modernity is sup¬
posed to evoke images of fast changes, in¬
stability, and human isolation, while tradi¬
tion evokes contrary images of peace,
stability, and communal existence. Rampant
urbanization and industrialization are seen
as destroying a harmony of values embodied
in tradition whose repository is the rural
community. Thus the false glitter of the
electronic culture is seen as luring an unwary
19

«youth away from the stability of a com¬
munal life in a rural village into the chaos
and loneliness of life in the big city.
It is all there in written literature. The
peasant who follows the mirage of prosperi¬
ty and happiness in the big city only to find
the opposite is a familiar character in many
a novel from the developing world. What
often is not stated is that such a character is
actually escaping from the hell of rural
poverty and misery into the Hades of urban
poverty and misery, in both cases brought
about by ruthless exploitation. But even
where this is stated, the schema of rural ur¬
ban dichotomy as the basis of analysis of the
problems of culture in developing countries
remains, and the crisis of culture is still seen
in terms of a conflict between tradition and
modernity.
Two misleading assumptions underlie the
schema. Modern industry, science and
technology are seen as being opposed to
tradition and peasant cultures. The destruc¬
tion of tradition or aspects of tradition and
peasant culture is seen as necessarily evil.
The beauty of rural culture must rest on a
foundation of poverty and abject want. But
surely modern science and technology,
depending on their organization, ownership
and control, now make possible a total
economic transformation of the countryside
and thus the erection of a whole people's
culture on a structure of prosperity instead
of backwardness.
Moreover, far from destroying tradition,
modern technology (e.g. Video, Cinema,
Television, Radio) makes possible a
reclamation of the positive aspects of tradi¬
tion and peasant cultures. Africa for in¬
stance has a rich tradition of oral literature.
Take the tale, for instance. The oral nar¬
rative was often accompanied by mime and
song. With video, film, or television, it is
now possible to reclaim this tradition
through an integration of the visual (e.g.
animated cartoons) and the verbal (i.e. the
voice telling the tale and the accompanying
music).
The same is true in theatre. African pea¬
sant theatre relied heavily on song, dance
and mime, and these can now be permanent¬
ly captured on the screen. Thus not only is it
possible to democratize access to this
heritagemore people can be told the tale
at the same timebut even more crucial, it
is possible to integrate the national cultures
within the geographic State.
The other assumption is that the rural and
the urban are two self-contained islands and
a character who walks from one to the other
is actually journeying across two unlinked
entities. But the two are a creation of each
other. The urban is a creation of the rural as
much as the rural is a creation of the urban.1
The peasantry had to be alienated from the
soil and be driven into towns, that is, they
had to be proletarianized before the modern
city could be born. But where under feudal
and semi-feudal systems, the town was
under the sway of the countryside, the
modern city which emerged with capitalism,
the city of gold, became the master of the
rural of which it had been born and bred.
"The bourgeoisie", Marx wrote of
nineteenth-century Europe, "has sub¬
jected the country to the rule of the
towns. It has created enormous cities, has
greatly increased the urban population as
compared with the rural, and has thus
rescued a considerable part of the popula¬
tion from the idiocy of rural life. Just as it
has made the country dependent upon
20
'VINONMAB
rflNBJNSUO
IMPÍO«
teTwvnree
ifonetinn '
»PBS»
v« ^

f u ,
... u« . ^ ^'
¿ *5
/f
¡m
i
-. ?? r/ /r? /i
(Ci¿)'
au B
(* ^&*
G&ip-'i&t > f"
<£ A » -1*5-« >i'.' -..î
'. fíí in.- u-ii , '/3s
. , . 1
.
i>ii* > ¡ai ".1 v
^JL uj* > tfi ^ >liH ir£ »
. » v -O, KJ v
> .
^i^ LÜ '- >'¿
-
.11 M
1
\M¿3j¡I
|
t i ¿fctóu 59
LITERACY AND EDUCATION. ffnï/«£ A<w 6«;« M>/íAoHf í/ow&í r/re otoíí radical and
creative of man 's inventions. Not because it could be said, by itself, to be synonymous
with culturefor there exist rich oral cultures, and all written cultures are partially compos¬
ed of orally transmitted traditions, but because writing adds to culture a fundamental
dimension. This is the possibility of infinite self-enrichment and the capacity for abstrac¬
tion through which a culture can both adapt constantly to change, while preserving the
most characteristic features of its heritage, and establish, beyond the limits of time and
space, a constant flow ofcommunication with others. Whereas oral tradition is a means of
passing on a cultural heritage, only the written word can make that heritage bear fruit.
But with the introduction of machinery, the implements of work become a stronger deter¬
mining factor than manpower in the productive process because they incorporate more
and more scientific and technological elements, and this creates insuperable obstacles for ''
the illiterate population. Complex machinery remains a closed world to them. Thus
literacy must count as one of the few basic, irreducible needs of modern man simply
because it governs his access to progress.
Top left, the Corbie Psalter, a 9th-century illuminated manuscript, now in the Municipal
Library, Amiens. (Photo Belzeaux-Zodiaque © Rapho, Paris). Left, pupil at a Koranic
school at Timbo, Guinea. (Photo © Dominique Darbois, Paris). Above, Solid gold Per¬
sian plaque, 50 cm x 50 cm, dating from the 5th century BC, commemorates, in three
languages, the founding of Babylon. (Photo © Luc Joubert, Paris). Below, Students at a
school in Tokyo prepare banners for the New Year celebrations. (Photo Tamagawa
Gakuen, Unesco).
<3 7SN 1
2 1*1
&
it
"
*
i
*
M ;2
\% - "»ih*
t X ' !* I
'fkJ *
:-^-
^->
towns, so it has made barbarian and semi-
barbarian countries dependent on the
civilized ones, nations of peasants on na¬
tions of bourgeois, the East on the
West".
With the evolution of capitalism into the
higher stage of imperialism, the rural and
urban sectors of the nations of peasants
became even more subjected to the rule of
the nations of bourgeoisie, and with what
results: the subject nations the majority of
the population were now reduced to the
idiocy of the new urban and rural life.
This subjection of the nations of peasants
to the nations of bourgeoisie is the heart of
the matter when discussing problems of the
developing countrieseconomic, political
or cultural.
But by posing the problems of culture in
the developing world in terms of a conflict
between modernity and tradition, between
the rural and the urban, thus concentrating
on secondary contradictions, we are
avoiding the real issues behind the crisis.
What are the real forces behind modernity
and tradition, the urban and the rural? We
have, in other words, to see the whole
problem (modernity, tradition, rural, ur¬
ban) in a historical perspective.
This would reveal to us that the major
contradiction in the Third World is between
national identity and imperialist domina¬
tion. The developing world with its
economic, political and cultural backward¬
ness, its massive poverty, illiteracy and
disease, is a creation of imperialism in its
colonial and neo-colonial stages. The
developing world can in fact be defined as
all those countries in Asia, Africa and Latin
America which have been underdeveloped
by imperialism, those countries whose
economy, politics and culture have been and
continue to be dominated by Western im¬
perialist nations. This in essence means the
economic, political and cultural subjection
of the whole population of the dominated
countries to the ruling bourgeois classes of
the dominating nations.
i "The bourgeoisie", wrote Marx and
! Engels, "by the rapid development of all
instruments and production, by the im¬
mensely facilitated means of communica-
j tion, draws all, even the most barbarian,
nations into civilization. The cheap prices
of its commodities are the heavy artillery
with which it batters down all Chinese
walls, with which it forces the barbarian's
intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to
capitulate. It compels all nations, on pain
of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois
mode of production; it compels them to
introduce what it calls civilization into
their midst, to become bourgeois
themselves. In a word, it creates a world
after its own image".
A world after its own image: this it tried
to achieve not only through economic
exploitation and political subjugation
but more importantly, through cultural
domination.
But the process created its opposite: the
economic, political and cultural struggle for
national independence and total liberation.
In the colonies and neo-colonies, there in
fact emerged two cultures in mortal conflict:
foreign imperialist cultures and national
patriotic cultures. Thus there emerged, out
of the different nationalities often in¬
habiting one geographic State, a people's
literature, music, dance, theatre, art, in^
21

fierce struggle against foreign literature,
theatre, music, art imposed on colonies,
semi-colonies and neo-colonies.
This to me is still the real and fundamen¬
tal conflict of cultures: a national patriotic
culture in struggle against foreign imperialist
cultures. Other contradictions, between the
urban and the rural, between the different
nationalities, are secondary and can only be
properly appreciated within the context of
the larger, basic contradiction.
In this war of cultures, the people try to
find their roots in the patriotic traditions of
their culture mostly kept alive by the peasan¬
try in their songs, poems, theatre and
dances. The foreign imperialist culture tries
to find a stronghold in the cities mas¬
querading under notions of modernity and
progress.
This is not an accident. The native
bourgeoisie through which imperialism
works in the colonies and neo-colonies
dwells in the city. Very often it controls the
State instruments of copersuasion and pro¬
paganda. In their State-controlled theatres,
cinemas, T.V. stations, radio, they only
allow foreign programmes, while in the
education system they advocate the use of
foreign languages, and the study of foreign
literature only. The impoverished, exploited
peasantry dwells in the countryside. That is
why the struggle between national and
foreign cultures appears on the surface as a
conflict between the rural and the urban, or
between tradition and modernity.
But what is really modern is the new na¬
tional cultures emerging out of the struggle
for total liberation, a culture rooted in the
patriotic and heroic traditions of the people.
This is better seen in the resistance poetry
and songs and theatre among workers in the
urban areas of the developing world. It is a
fighting culture, a resistance culture, and
though fusing different elements, it is in
basic harmony with the resistance culture of
the countryside. The urban and the rural
struggles find this harmony in their opposi¬
tion to both foreign imperialist exploitation
and domination and internal exploitation
and oppression. The urban worker and the
rural peasant are the basis and creators of
truly national cultures in the developing
world.
What then is the crisis of culture in Africa
and in the developing world as a whole?
The real crisis of culture in Africa is still
the imperialist domination of our economy,
politics and culture no country can con¬
sider itself free as long as its economy and
culture are dominated by foreigners.
A pre-requisite of Africa's cultural
development is therefore a continued strug¬
gle for its economic and political liberation
from all vestiges of imperialism. This also
means a continued struggle against the com¬
prador ruling class through whom im¬
perialism continues to dominate the lives of
millions of peasants and workers of the
developing world.
A new world economic and political order
would mean a new world cultural order and
this would see the flowering of a great
modern culture in Africa and the rest of the
developing world, a culture that has roots in
the dynamic progressive aspects of a na¬
tional tradition while remaining open to the
progressive and humanist cultural element
all over the world.
H Ngugi Wa Thiong'o
22

