WAR ON WAR
Poets of the world at Unesco
by Jean-Jacques Lebel
The walls, gardens, and courtyards of Unesco's Paris Headquarters are a
showcase for a number oí artistic masterpieces which have been donated to
the Organization. Among the works which can be admired by visitors and staff
members alike are a Calder mobile, murals by Picasso and Glazunov, ceramics
by Miró, sculptures by Moore, Giacometti and Soto, and a mural by Matta. But
Unesco is also the home of many other works of art which are equally note¬
worthy. In this issue of the Unesco Courier, on pages 4 to 21, we present a
selection of these works. Above, modern figurative statue represents a human
being reflecting on the world (Peru).
Photo Unesco
IN organizing a poetry evening at
Unesco we have accepted the chal¬
lenge implicit in the incursion of
poetry into an official institution. Our
task has not been without difficulties, but
the challenge is commensurate with the
great importance poetry should have and
the role it should play in a world in per¬
manent crisis where the fight for
culture never won, and the fight for
liberty never ended, are one. The
delayed effects of this incursion may be
considerable, especially since poetry
festivals are today experiencing a
remarkable revival in some parts of the
world, perhaps because of the collapse
of so many cultural, religious and
political values which had been thought
to be sound.
The idea was simple and inspiring: that
the vision and language of the poet as
such should be presented without con¬
straint or censorship on the stage of
Unesco, which is by definition supra¬
national. We wanted to provide an op¬
portunity for poetry, with all its spirit,
rigour, passion, and complexity, to be
read aloud to an audience by its authors
in a prestigious setting.
This is the first time that so many great
poets of different cultures from all over
the world, chosen solely on the grounds
of their intellectual quality, have
gathered for an event of such importance
in such surroundings. The great literary .
voices of our time are rarely heard
beyond the narrow bounds within which
creative and Utopian thought is confin¬
ed both in the highly industrialized coun¬
tries and in the developing world. The
societies where shamans and prophets
were actually listened to have virtually
ceased to exist.
The men and women invited to take
part in this event are here in their own
right not as representatives ofnations,
ethnic groups, political parties, churches,
tribes or classes. The concerns of poetry
go far beyond the affiliations of the
citizen who is often engaged, moreover,
in a social struggle. The poet is above all
an extraordinary being, an inventor of
language who dares to think the un¬
thinkable and say the unsaid. Every
poem begins by overstepping the bounds,
the blockages and the alienations which
JEAN-JACQUES LEBEL, French writer and
theatre and film director, is the author of several
books including: La Poésie de la Beat Genera¬
tion (Poetry of the Beat Generation), Le Hap¬
pening (The Happening) and L'Amour et
l'Argent (Love and Money). He is also the
founder of the international Polyphonix festival.
On behalf of Unesco he has organized the "War
on War" manifestation of poets to be held at
Unesco headquarters, Paris.

reduce most of humanity to despair and
silence. On this occasion, the poets will
propose visionary alternatives to the pro¬
grammed massacres and planned cata¬
strophes which militaristic futurológists
and multinational arms purveyors are
seeking to impose on all peoples.
Essentially poetry ought not to raise
eyebrows in an institution which sets
itself the goal of ending the hegemony of
ignorance. The least to be expected is that
the structural crisis which permanently
convulses all the nations both in their
cultural and their economic life should
overturn some old habits. It is not those
who express themselves in poetry but
those who wield the language ofwar who
endanger the survival of mankind. It is
not going too far to say that poetry may
bring (if only for an experimental period)
"imagination to power" . If poetry is still
there, at the very heart of the questions
facing society, it is because the other
forms of expression scientific, poli¬
tical, religious, and administrative
and the other systems of belief, percep¬
tion and expression, have proved in¬
capable of comprehending the present
world crisis.
Meanwhile, poetry uses this crisis as its
raw material, drawing its legitimacy from
its rejection of idées reçues, high-flown
speeches, dogmatic lectures, the wooden
diction ofpower, the babel of the media,
and the dominance ofcultural mediocrity
universalized by the audio-visual media.
Poetry dissents from industrial norms
and customs, it opens up a royal road,
the adventure of the indomitable and
sovereign spirit. The poet's work restores
to its adepts the use of a different kind
ofword and language, and allows the in¬
dividual to accept his individuality, an in¬
dispensable role in an age of mass
phenomena and automation. In the
nuclear age it is still possible as it was in
Antiquity, both in East and West, in
Africa or the Americas, thanks to poetry
to learn or learn again how to think free¬
ly. It is here that the objectives ofmodern
poetry and those of Unesco are not
irreconcilable.
The Director-General ofUnesco, Mr.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, is to be thank¬
ed for having welcomed this initiative and
for giving a score of such diverse poets
an opportunity to declare together War
on War, to set the ethic of philosophy
against military aggression, whatever its
source and whatever its pretext. Perhaps
this will encourage those who love peace
in all countries to join forces against the
criminal logic of those who kill. Perhaps
this event will inspire the awareness and
the process of reflection which is the basis
of poetic activity.
I know thee...
/ know thee O image of terror
I discern thy endless wilderness
My fear-racked tomorrow, and on my cheeks
Stains of the murdered sky
The prints of my two hands
I spell thee out, I revive the flame of thy visage
I squeeze a cry from each reluctant letter
I embrace the lynx and the raven
I embrace the dead
Wakened they leave the sod resuscitated
As ant or book reincarnate
Willingly I wash them
With my tomorrow or my yesterday
True to myself
I outstrip
I fashion the others
Adonis
Poem © Adonis
Translated from the Arabic

Faith All people have their own space
Breathing is life pulsating
Whether for happiness or sorrow
We are always waiting, hoping for something
The desert has its camel bells
The ocean its siren blasts
A motorbike rides through the street
Each bears a different message
Where is paradise? There is no paradise
Or else it's a minority's freehold
But we the humble creatures of the earth
Have nought but the faith that yearns in our hearts
But faith itself is dynamic
Sometimes pulling us forward
Or pushing us into pursuit
Remaining ever remote
We are opposed to war
As people daily shed their blood in sacrifice
We beseech an end to hunger
As millions from hunger perish
Nation against nation
Class against class
Religion against religion
Close in battle every passing day
What obscure hand's operation
Turns us powerless and weak,
Can 't we gather up our splendid faiths
In a blazing volcanic explosion
Thrusting aloft the whole world
Like bright clouds ascending the sky
Turning fantasies into reality
Creating a genuine paradise?
Ai Qing
Poem © Ai Qing
Translated from the Chinese

The Ufe
Blessed are the children of Dimbaza,
of Welcome Valley, Limehill and Stinkwater
they die
f-v-f tTlfk GOil of sickness, malnutrition, poverty
" U-i-C ÖUJ.A for they beautify the prospect for the master's eye
for they escape the jaws of hell
for they clear the Boer's domains
the Boer and his God
the hand of God
for they are spared from living
for to be black is a political provocation
for you who are black
in the land of blood
of the passbook and the insult of the police dog,
you pollute the land of the Boers
Blessed are the children of Dimbaza
of Welcome Valley, Limehill and Stinkwater
cast down
into the pits, a feast for ants,
a black-toothed smile
for they receive toys and empty milk-bottles
to furbish their tombs,
toys and silver paper rustling in the wind,
milk-bottles dried up teatsfrom which the wind
can conjure sounds
a lure for moles
meat is rare
so that the brats forget
that they are dead
blessed are the dead of Dimbaza
of Welcome Valley, Limehill and Stinkwater
swallowed up
by the earth, for their comings and goings
pass unremarked between mouthfuls
casting no shadow in the sunlight
blessed and holy and sanctified are the moles
the worms and the ants
in the land of the sun
in the land of the Boers
in the land the Masters have given them
for they enrich and beautify the grasslands
so that man flourishes and prospers
grows the fruits of the earth and raises his cattle
waxes fine and strong and white
to the glory of his God
Breyten Breytenbach
Poem © Meulenhoff Amsterdam, 1976
Translated from the Afrikaans

The youngsters
of La Prensa
In the daily photo line-ups in La Prensa they appear
stretched out
Eyes half closed, half-parted lips
As if in laughter, as if in pleasure
The youngsters of the list of shame
Or else from stamp-sized passport snaps they stare
Serious, deadly serious,
The boys who daily swelled the roll of horror
This one went for a neighbourhood stroll
They found him cast aside on a rough patch of wasteland
This one set off to work from his home in the San Judas district
And never returned
Then there was the one who went to buy a Coke at the corner
The one who went to see his girl-friend and never came back
Others snatched from their homes
carried off in army jeeps that disappeared into the night
And later found at the morgue
Or at the roadside in the Cuesta del Plomo
Or on a rubbish dump
Arms broken
Eyes gouged out, tongue severed, genitals torn off
Or who simply were never seen again
Those kidnapped by patrols of the Macho Negro or the Cara'e León
And cast heaped up beside the lake behind the Teatro Dario
Of their faces nothing remains
But a bright-eyed glance, a smile, reduced to flat paper
Tiny pasteboard squares their mothers expose like treasure in La Prensa
(An image engraved on the heart's core, on the dear little pasteboard)
The one with the shock of hair
The one with the frightened-deer eyes
The one with the roguish smile
The girl with the melancholy gaze
One in profile or with head inclined
One pensive, one with open shirt
Ladders to the Stars, a kinetic painting by Frank Malina (United States).
Photo J.-C. Bernath-Unesco

Others with curls, with hair over face, with a beret
Another, blurred, smiling out from under curlers
In graduation garb
The lass with smiling lips and puckered brow
The girl in the photo sent to her betrothed
The posing boy in the photo given to his fiancée
20, 22, 18, 17, 15 years old
Young people killed for being young because
In Nicaragua it was illegal to be between 15 and 25
And it seemed that Nicaragua would be bereft of youth
Even after the victory I was surprised
When greeted at a gathering by a youth
to find myself asking wordlessly: "How did you escape?"
For once we were afraid of young survivors
You whom the guards seized, the "Beloved of the gods"
As the Greeks used to say, those whom the gods love die young
Others will grow old, but yet, for them, the beloved ones
Will stay forever fresh and young
Smooth-browed, hair ungraying
The fair-haired Roman girl who died, in memory stays ever fair
Yet you, I say, are not of those who do not age
simply because they stay young in the brief memory
Of others who one day will die
You will stay young because there will always be young people in Nicaragua
And because of your deaths, you the countless victims of the daily slaughter,
The young people of Nicaragua will always be revolutionaries
In them you will live again, your lives perpetually renewed
New again, as each day's dawn is new.
Ernesto Cardenal
Poem © Ernesto Cardenal
Translated from the Spanish
Prometheus Bringing Fire to Men, a painting by Tamayo (Mexico).
Photo Volta-Unesco
Executed on cowhide, this pyrograph by Lougué Kou depicts scenes
from everyday life, sacred animals and masks (Upper Volta).
Photo R. Lesage-Unesco

Stockpiling The Stockpiling offrozen trees
in the deep freeze of the earth
The stockpiling of dead animals
in the exhaust pipes of supersonic rockets
The stockpiling of desiccated plants
on the death root of an abscessed tooth
The stockpiling of defoliants
in the pine forest of the skull
The stockpiling of aerosols
in the pink smoke of a human corpse
Stockpiles
of agent orange agent blue agent white acids
burning ¡ike the hot hoof of a race horse on the tongue
Look at it
through the anti-bodies in the body
through the multiple vaccines belching in the veins
through the cross-infection of viruses stockpiled
in the mouth
through the benzine vapors shooting
into the muscles of the stars
through the gaseous bowels of military fantasies
through the white radiation of delirious dreams
Look
this stockpile marries that stockpile
to mix and release a double stockpile offissions
exploding
into the shadows of disappearing space
Global incapacitations
Zero
and boom
This is the nuclear bleach of reality
the inflated thigh of edema
the filthy dampness in the scientific pants
of a peace prize
the final stockpile offlesh dancing in
the terrible whooping cough of the wind
And even if you think you have a shelter
that can survive this stockpiling
of communal graves
tell me
Vase in form of an am¬
phora dating from the 8th
century BC (Cyprus).
Photo Unesco
The Lamb, by the
calligrapher Mashi Shunsoh
(Japan).
Photo J.-C. Bernath-Unesco
10

Where are you going
with the sucked liver of mustard flint
the split breath of hydrogen fumes
the navel pit of invisible clams
the biological lung of human fleas
the carcinogenic bladder of sponges
words made of keloid scars
poems in the numb section of the chromosomes
Just where do you think you 're going
with that stockpile of contaminated stink
Listen
When I think of the tactical missiles plunging
into the rancid goiters of the sun
The artillery shells of wiretapping snakes hissing and vomiting
into the depths of a colorless sky
The accumulation offried phosphoric pus grafflttied
on the fragile fierceness of the moon
The pestering warheads of death-wings stockpiling feathers
in the brain
And the mass media's larval of lies stockpiled
in the plasma of the ears
And the stockpiling offoreign sap in the fluxes
of the blood
And the stockpiling of shattered spines
in chromium suits
under polyurethane sheets
I look at this stockpiling
at this rotting vegetation
and I make myself understand the target
That's why I say I'm into life
preservation of life now
revolutionary change now
before the choking
before the panic
before the penetration of apathy rises up
and spits fire
into the toxic tears
of this stockpile
Jayne Cortez
Poem © Jayne Cortez
Terra-cotta tablet
dating from the reign of
Ishbi-lrra (2017-1985
BC), the founder of the
Isin dynasty (Iraq).
Photo Dominique Roger-Unesco

Torture / serve notice on all points of the circle of the day
of news which is brought to me hammering
of torturing points from as far away as can be reported
and beatings, neighbours of mine even in their danger
even in kinship with iron no longer endured
when their quadrilateral snaps at the edges
and I shall not cease from watching while they break the edges
nor from listening while near and far they shroud the day
and I shall try to bear word of what is not endured
I shall not muffle the earpiece while I hear the sound of hammering
I shall listen to all that endures domination and danger
and comes to me from the torturing points reported
from opposite points on the circle by that which is reported
I shall hear the broken messenger from the place of the broken edges
where they are scattered and cast to the winds and in danger
where night is abolished after all the points of day
where the blows can no longer be heard on her hammering
so you turn deaf ears to that which is no longer endured
here we shall wait for news of that which is no longer endured
and we shall hear and endure the details reported
letting them drill us, assail us, hammering
I shall outstretch my fingers to the bruised soft edges
head in the night yet walking on the day
in places where they are downtrodden and in danger
and if they are bound or threatened by danger
even shattered by news that cannot be endured
hear it pattering across night and day
bearing the unbearable assault of what is reported
putting the hand in the wound of the edge
where the bruise has come back wounding and hammering
I shall hear the report, I shall go to it hammering
raising before the lordship of danger
the hand at the root of the wound in the edge
and the eyes unblinking at that which can be endured
hearing them come from all points tortured and reported
the bodies that are spring and sustenance of the day
Poem © Jean-Pierre Faye
Translated from the French Jean-Pierre Faye
The Ndaanaan, a tapestry by
Modou Niang (Senegal).
Photo J.-C. Bernath-Unesco
12

Plutonian ode
(excerpt)
Radioactive Nemesis were you there at the beginning
black Dumb tongueless unsmelling blast of Disillusion?
I manifest your Baptismal Word after four billion years
I guess your birthday in Earthling Night, I salute your
dreadful presence lasting majestic as the Gods,
Sabaot, Jehova, Astapheus, Adonaeus, Elohim, Iao,
Ialdabaoth, Aeon from Aeon born ignorant in an
Abyss of Light,
Sophia's reflections glittering thoughtful galaxies,
whirlpools of starspume silver-thin as hairs of Einstein!
Father Whitman I celebrate a matter that renders Self
oblivion!
Grand Subject that annihilates inky hands & pages'
prayers, old orators' inspired Immortalities,
I begin your chant, openmouthed exhaling into spacious
sky over silent mills at Hanford, Savannah River,
Rocky Flats, Pantex, Burlington, Albuquerque
I yell thru Washington, South Carolina, Colorado,
Texas, Iowa, New Mexico,
where nuclear reactors create a new Thing under the
Sun, where Rockwell war-plants fabricate this death
stuff trigger in nitrogen baths,
Hanger-Silas Mason assembles the terrified weapon
secret by ten thousands, & where Manzano Mountain boasts to store
its dreadful decay through two hundred forty millennia
while our Galaxy spirals around its nebulous core.
I enter your secret places with my mind, I speak with
your presence, I roar your Lion Roar with mortal
mouth.
One microgram inspired to one lung, ten pounds of
heavy metal dust adrift slow motion over grey
Alps
the breadth of the planet, how long .before your radiance
speeds blight and death to sentient beings?
Enter my body or not I carol my spirit inside you,
Unapproachable Weight,
0 heavy heavy Element awakened I vocalize your consciousness to six worlds
1 chant your absolute Vanity. Yeah monster of Anger birthed in fear O most
Ignorant matter ever created unnatural to Earth! Delusion
of metal empires!
Detail of The Signs of Cadmus, a tapestry by Aref
Rayess (Lebanon).
Photo Unesco
13

Poem © Allen Ginsberg
Destroyer of lying Scientists! Devourer of covetous
Generals, Incinerator of Armies & Melter of Wars!
Judgement ofjudgements, Divine Wind over vengeful
nations, Molester of Presidents, Death-Scandal of
Capital politics! Ah civilizations stupidly industrious!
Canker-Hex on multitudes learned or illiterate!
Manufactured Spectre of human reason! O solidified
imago ofpractitioners in Black Arts
I dare your Reality, I challenge your very being!
I publish your cause and effect!
I turn the Wheel of Mind on your three hundred tons!
Your name enters mankind's ear! I embody your ultimate powers!
My oratory advances on your vaunted Mystery!
This breath dispels your braggart fears! I sing your form at last
behind your concrete & iron walls inside your fortress
of rubber & translucent silicon shields in filtered
cabinets and baths of lathe oil,
My voice resounds through robot glove boxes & ingot
cans and echoes in electric vaults inert of atmosphere,
I enter with spirit out loud into your fuel rod drums
underground on soundless thrones and beds of lead
0 density! This weightless anthem trumpets transcendent
through hidden chambers and breaks through
iron doors into the Infernal Room!
Over your dreadful vibration this measured harmony
floats audible, these jubilant tones are honey and milk and wine-sweet water
Poured on the stone block floor, these syllables are
barley groats I scatter on the Reactor's core,
1 call your name with hollow vowels, I psalm your Fate
close by, my breath near deathless ever at your side
to Spell your destiny, I set this verse prophetic on your
mausoleum walls to seal you up Eternally with
Diamond Truth! O doomed Plutonium.
Allen Ginsberg
This votive stone relief
representing a Thracian
horseman dates from the
2nd century AD (Bulgaria).
Photo J.-C. Bemaih Unesco
14

A farewell
to hormones
Poem © Sony Labou Tan'si
Translated from the French
A man of dust
With eyes of dust
Ever fixed on the sun
Teeth of dust
Wherein lurk powder-flies
A dusty sprayed-on smile
Skin of dust
Rocketed to the outworn moon
Of racism
Apollo ninety-three
Made in Madness
Made in Hatred
Made in Vanity
The dust of shame
The hollow laugh of silence
Falling on man woman and child
On your hunter's powder-horn
On your lipstick civilization
On your heart-shaming technology
On your Herculean labouring
To construct
This monstrosity of monstrosities
And then to die
Tied to the assembly-line
Death is no longer to die
And to die is not even to bid
A last farewell to hormones
Sony Labou Tan'si
Metal sculpture by Eila
Hiltunem is a monument to
the Finnish composer
Sibelius (Finland).
Photo Dominique Roger-Unesco
15

The covenant Article 1. It is decreed that henceforth truth exists,
that henceforth life exists
and that hand in hand
all shall strive for the true life.
Article 2. It is decreed that every day of the week,
even the greyest of grey Tuesdays,
shall have the right to become a Sunday morning.
Article 3. It is decreed that, from this moment on,
there shall be sunflowers at every window
and that each sunflower shall have the right
to open in the shade;
that each window shall stay day-long open
on to the green lawns where hope grows.
Article 4. It is decreed that man
never again
shall doubt his fellow-man.
That man shall put his trust in man
as the palm-tree confides in the wind,
as the wind confides in the air,
as the air confides in the blue span of the sky.
Special codicil Man shall put his trust in man
as one child puts his trust in another.
Article 5. It is decreed that man
be freed from the yoke offalsehood.
That never again will he need
the breastplate of silence
or the chain-mail of words.
He will sit at table
with unclouded eye
for truth will be served
before the meal's end.
Article 6. It is laid down that for ten centuries
shall be fulfilled Isaiah the prophet's dream:
together wolf and lamb shall graze
feeding upon the same sweet fresh of dawn.
Article 7. Established by irrevocable decree,
the endless reign ofjustice and of light
now shall begin, and joy, a generous standard,
unfurled shall float within the people's soul.
Poem © Thiago de Mello
Translated from the Portuguese
Gallo 1978, an acrylic paint¬
ing by Mariano Rodriguez
(Cuba).
Photo J.-C. Bernath-Unesco
16

Article 8. It is decreed that mankind's greatest dolour
has been and forever shall be this: to love
though powerless to give the loved one love,
to know that it is water's gift alone
to bring the plant the miracle offlower.
Article 9. It is permitted that the daily bread
shall bear for man the sweat-drop mark of toil.
Yet foremost and forever it shall keep
the bake-warm aftertaste of tenderness.
Article 10. It is accorded that no matter who,
no matter at what moment of his life,
may garb himself in white.
Article 11. It is decreed that, by definition,
man is a loving creature,
that is why he is beautiful,
surpassing in beauty the morning star.
Article 12. It is decreed that nothing shall be obligatory or prohibited
Everything shall be allowed,
especially playing with rhinoceroses
and walking in the afternoon
with a huge begonia for a buttonhole.
Special codicil One thing alone shall be forbidden:
loveless loving.
Article 13. It is decreed that money
shall no longer have the power to buy
the morning sunlight of the days to come.
Banished from the arsenal offear
it shall become the sword of brotherhood
defending the right to sing
and the right to fête the new-dawned day.
Final Article. The word "liberty" shall be proscribed,
expurgated from all dictionaries,
banned from the treacherous marshlands of speech.
From henceforth
liberty, like fire or like a stream,
or yet like seed-corn,
shall be a limpid living thing
that shall forever dwell
in the heart of man.
Thiago de Mello
Diana the Huntress, a mosaic
from the ancient Roman city
of Thysdrus (modern El Djem
in Tunisia). It dates from the
end of the 2nd century AD
(Tunisia).
Photo R. Lesage-Unesco
17

Statue of 'Fty Mhy (5th
dynasty, 2400 BC)
discovered on the site of the
pyramids at Giza (Egypt).
\jk 9> y Êêê
<fll ÜHL^^^V
i ® m
1 1
y ¡V jÊff
1 ^a ^v MK%^
4 ^£?) *;rfl
M II jfJ
W
r
Weeping Woman, a painting
by Guayasamin (Ecuador).
Photo Unesco
Khmer statue, late 12th or
early 13th century AD
(Democratic Kampuchea).
Photos Dominique Roger - Unesco

My address today i have Erased the number of my
house
the name of the street where i live,
i have changed the direction of every
road,
if you must find me now
just knock on any door in any street
in any city anywhere in the world,
this curse, this benediction:
wherever you find freedom is my home.
Amrita Pritam
Poem © Amrita Pritam
Football
player
He's a football player
Kicks a ball, everyday, he kicks a ball
One day
He kicked love up high in the sky
And it stayed there
Because it didn't come down
People thought it must be the sun
The moon or a new star
Inside me
A ball that never comes down
Hangs suspended in the sky
You can see it become flames
Become love
Becoming a star
Kazuko Shiraishi
Poem © Kazuko Shiraishi and Shichosha Publishing Co.
English translation by Ikuko Atsumi et al. © New
Directions Publishing Corporation
Goya
/ am Goya!
My eye-sockets craters pecked by the
(crow-black) enemy, flying
over the naked plain.
My name is grief.
I am the voice
Ofpocked war, charred beams of burnt cities scattered
over the snow of nineteen-forty-one
My name is hunger.
I am the scarred throat
Of the hanged peasant woman, her body swinging ringing like a bell,
over the empty square...
My name is Goya!
(O the grapes
Of revenge!) Salvoes of artillery shattered
I swept back to the. West
the ashes of the uninvited guest!
And into the commemorative sky I drove
stars
Strong as nails.
Goya is my name.
Andrei Voznesenski
Poem © Andrei Voznesenski
Translated from the Russian by Brian Featherstone
19
