No smoking, please
by Martin Raw
IN the United Kingdom, by the time
it began to be suspected that smoking
was dangerous, it was an established
habit in 65 per cent of adult males and 40 per
cent of adult females. Since 1973, there has
been a slow but steady decline in the
prevalence of smoking and in tobacco con¬
sumption; as a whole between then and
now smoking has become a minority habit
for the first time since 1945. A brief list of
anti-smoking activities can be divided into
seven main categories.
Health education: formal and informal.
These efforts have been associated with the
publication of research findings and of major
reports on smoking and health, the holding
MARTIN RAW is a psychologist at St. George's Hospital, London,
and is a specialist in research on smoking.
of world conferences, the formation in the
United Kingdom of the Health Education
Council (HEC) and of Action on Smoking
and Health (ASH), and formal education
campaigns launched by the HEC.
Legislation. The most important legisla¬
tion in the United Kingdom in this respect
was probably the banning of cigarette
advertising on television in 1965.
Non-legislative pressure on the tobacco
and advertising industries. In spite of
pressure on the British Government to in¬
troduce legislation on issues such as tobac¬
co advertising, it has consistently resisted
such pressure. However, it has attempted to
put pressure on the tobacco industry
through voluntary agreements.
Social control. The restriction of smoking
in public places has become increasingly ac¬
ceptable to the general public and is becom¬
ing commoner in an increasing number of
settings including London Transport
vehicles (1971), cinemas (1971) and
aeroplanes (1972).
Price control. It has been clearly
demonstrated that in Britain cigarette con¬
sumption responds to price, going down
when the cost of smoking goes up. This
represents one of the most powerful
available means of controlling consumption,
but the Government has not yet accepted
that it should use this means to reduce con¬
sumption.
Smoking withdrawal clinics. They do not
represent a large part of the anti-smoking ef¬
fort, though this is partly because they have
never been taken seriously by the health
authorities.
Direct anti-smoking advice from health
care professionals to their patients. The
evidence suggests that this advice could be
effective with various groups of patients,
the most important being patients of general
practitioners.
Once it was established that smoking was
dangerous, we were faced with a most dif¬
ficult problem. The health educators assum¬
ed that once they had persuaded the public
that smoking was dangerous, people would
give it up voluntarily. This assumption prov¬
ed naive, mainly because it did not take into
account and deal with, the many other fac¬
tors that affect smoking. Amongst these
were the addictive nature of the behaviour
itself and the considerable resources that
were being devoted to its promotion. It is
absurd that in the United Kingdom the
Health Education Council should be in a
position to spend only £1,000,000 (2 million
U.S. dollars) a year on anti-smoking ac¬
tivities whilst the tobacco industry spends
nearly £100,000,000 (200 million U.S.
dollars) to promote smoking. Yet the
Government has been loath to take any ac¬
tion that might reduce consumption,
because, it is presumed, of the considerable
revenue it derives from tobacco consump¬
tion. It seems all the more remarkable then
that some combination of fhe seven factors
described above has steadily reduced the
demand for tobacco over the last five years.
Although none of the approaches to the
control of smoking described here could by
itself achieve much (except for price
control), collectively and cumulatively they
are having an effect. However, they will not
solve the smoking problem until much
stronger action is taken by the Government
in those areas where it can act.
32
