In this issue of the Unesco Courier we
present long extracts from an important
new report of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations entitled "Study on
the Relationship between Disarmament
and Development". The report,
prepared by 27 governmental experts
from the different world regions,
originated in a request to the Secretary-
General by the General Assembly at its
Tenth Special Session in June 1978. It
represents a major attempt by the inter¬
national community to investigate the
proposition that a balanced and
generally accepted pattern of global
economic and social development is in¬
extricably related to disarmament. With
the present issue we complete a three-
part examination of problems related to
disarmament: our April 1979 number
drew attention to the growing momen¬
tum of the arms race, and in September
1980 we traced the emergence of
education in favour of disarmament as a
distinct field of study.



DISARMAMENT
AND DEVELOPMENT
The greatest challenge
of the century
MANKIND is at present facing the
greatest challenge of the century.
The level and speed of the arms
race are bound to increase the danger of
war. The outbreak of a nuclear war would
jeopardize the very existence of all mankind.
During this decade peoples will be con¬
fronted with new technological, economic
and social challenges that will be made far
more complex if the arms race continues
unabated. In the context of halting and
reversing this race, it is also imperative to
find solutions to the problems impeding the
technological, economic and social develop¬
ment of the developing countries. Addi¬
tional human, material and financial
resources are needed to solve the problems
in such fields as raw materials, energy, food
production and environmental protection.
The challenges of the 1980s urgently call for
real and effective disarmament measures in
the interests of mankind.
The phenomena described by the terms
disarmament and development are widely^

"Disarmament is the process of
reduction in the size of and
expenditures on armed forces, the
destruction or dismantling of weapons,
whether deployed or stockpiled, the
progressive elimination of the capacity
to produce new weapons and the
release and integration into civilian life
of military personnel. The ultimate
objective is general and complete
disarmament under effective
international control."
in general terms but'it is worth¬
while to be somewhat more specific. Disar¬
mament is the process of reduction in the
size of and expenditures on armed forces;
the destruction or dismantling of weapons,
whether deployed or stockpiled, the pro¬
gressive elimination of the capacity to pro¬
duce new weapons and the release and in¬
tegration into civilian life of military person¬
nel. The ultimate objective is general and
complete disarmament under effective inter¬
national control.
The intervening process must be
characterized by balanced reductions that
ensure undiminished security for all States
and provide for the adequate verification of
compliance with agreed-upon reductions.
There is a clear place in this process for arms
limitation agreements that genuinely restrain
the quantitative growth and qualitative
refinement of arsenals, particularly as such
agreements would be invaluable as
confidence-building measures and serve as
stepping stones to actual reductions.
Similarly, in addition to a global process
of disarmament there is scope for unilateral
initiatives at the national level and for
regional arrangements, although there will
be distinct limits beyond which initiatives gt
these lower levels could not proceed. While
it is difficult to predict the course that a
disarmament process would follow, it is
clear that, particularly in the initial stages,
the reductions agreed upon will be modest
and that ample time will be allowed to-
achieve them.
Development, in its broadest sense, refers
to social and economic changes in society
leading to improvement in the quality of life
for all. At the most fundamental level, it
means providing for every person the basic
material requirements for a productive and
dignified existence. Economic growth, that
is, the expansion of output, is a prerequisite
for sustained development but development
cannot be reduced to economic growth.
Development also means that everyone
should have the opportunity to participate

DISARMAMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
"...Everyone should have the opportunity to participate
fully in the economic and social process and to share in its
benefits."	
fully in the economic and social process and
to share in its benefits.
If the global development effort is to be
morally and politically sustainable, it must
endeavour to provide for a pattern of
economic growth that would significantly
diminish within a reasonable time the
prevailing disparities between States in the
quality of life. It should also be
demonstrably compatible with long-term
resource availabilities and environmental
constraints, insofar as it is possible to deter¬
mine these limits.
Now one of the more attractive traits of
the human character is the deep-seated
sense of unease felt by those who are pros¬
perous when confronted by those who are
not just less prosperous but quite simply
poor.
It is true that history is overwhelmingly
the record of the rich endeavouring to sus¬
tain a state of ignorance, of insulating
themselves from the fact of poverty, but
this, clearly, is an expression of the moral
dilemma posed by inequality. At the interna¬
tional level, revolutionary developments in
transportation and cbmmunication have
made the world a very small place. The gap
between rich and poor nations has become
steadily more apparent and, therefore, more
difficult to ignore or deny. In a remarkably
swift reversal of political climate, the issue
of greater equality between the peoples of
various nations has been widely proclaimed
as the principal moral imperative of our time.
To its credit, the international community
has already taken an important step toward
confronting the problem of international co¬
operation for mutual benefit and the dif¬
ficulties and potential opportunities that this
problem presents. The sixth special session
of the United Nations General Assembly in
April-May 1974 adopted the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the New Inter¬
national Economic Order.
The Programme was designed to lead to
the establishment of an international
economic order that would redress existing
injustices and thus help to correct ine¬
qualities and bring about a marked reduction
in the gap in standards of living between
developed and developing countries. Other
important steps that built on this initiative in¬
clude the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, the seventh special session
of the General Assembly devoted to
development and international economic co¬
operation and the International Develop¬
ment Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade.
There were, and remain, significant dif¬
ferences among Member States on whether
the new order would require a radical
transformation or merely the reform of the
existing one, on the policy measures needed
to bring about the described changes and on
how rapidly it would be feasible to proceed.
Nevertheless, the Declaration and the
Programme of Action were adopted by con¬
sensus, reflecting the growing awareness on
all sides that the interests of the developing
countries and developed countries could no
longer be isolated from each other. The
prosperity of the international community
as a whole depends upon the prosperity of
its constituent parts. The necessity was
recognized of eliminating the widening gap
between the developed and the developing
countries and of ensuring steadily ac¬
celerating economic and social development
in peace and justice for present and future
generations.
This challenge to inequality gathered
force as the process of decolonization swell¬
ed the ranks of independent developing
countries and as the majority of these coun¬
tries felt increasingly frustrated in their
development efforts. Sustained achieve¬
ment of growth targets set in the Interna¬
tional Development Strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decade prov¬
ed impossible for most countries. Their
terms of trade continued to move adversely,
agricultural production remained uncertain,
the trade deficits of developing countries in
manufactured goods grew rapidly, and of-;^
ficial development assistance, on the whole,
remained well below the target of 0.7 per
cent of the GNP of donor countries.
The share of developing countries in
world exports of manufactured goods was
increasing very slowly but this expansion
was distributed very unequally. Indeed, by
1977, just eight countries and territories
(Brazil, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Mexico, the
Philippines, Singapore, South Korea and
Taiwan) accounted for almost 75 per cent of
the total exports of manufactured goods by
the developing countries.
Moreover, whether a developing country
pursued industrialization through a policy of
import-substitution or export promotion, the
almost universal experience was the creation
of industrial enclaves employing a small frac¬
tion of the work-force in relative prosperity.
Large segments of the population, often the
majority, neither participated in nor bene¬
fited from economic growth.
The World Bank estimates that, for the
developing countries as a whole, the ex-

"...The interests of the developing
countries and developed countries can
no longer be isolated from each other.
The prosperity of the international
community as a whole depends upon
the prosperity of its constituent parts."
Engraving by M. C Escher
Photo © Gemcente Museum, The Hague
has been that approximately 75 per
cent of the increase in aggregate income ac¬
crues to the top 40 per cent of income reci¬
pients. The ranks of the unemployed and
the underemployed and those living in ab¬
solute poverty have swelled inexorably.
These frustrations were compounded by
the evidence that, within the existing inter¬
national economic order, no plausible pro¬
jections of the rate of economic growth in
the developing countries would have any
appreciable impact on the gap in per capita
income.
In 1975, average per'capita income in the
developing countries was just one twelfth of
that in the developed economies. The
developing countries, however, are a quite
heterogeneous group, even excluding the
oil-exporting countries. In 1975, the gap in
per capita income ranged from a massive
40:1 for the very low income countries of
Asia and Africa to a little over 5:1 for the
Latin American and Caribbean countries.
According to the World Bank, even quite
optimistic projections of economic perfor¬
mance until 1990 would not diminish the
overall gap in per capita income. A narrow¬
ing of the gap in some countries, particularly
in East Asia and the Pacific, would be offset
by widening differential in the countries of
Asia, Africa, the Middle East and Latin
America.
In the initial statement on the establish¬
ment of the new international economic
order, considerable emphasis was placed on
stabilizing and increasing the level of export
earnings in developing countries. For raw
materials and primary commodities, the
principal measures suggested were price-
stabilization funds, buffer stocks and a form
of indexation.to the prices of manufactured
goods imported from the developed coun¬
tries. For the manufactured exports of
developing countries, stress was placed on
preferential access to markets in developed
countries.
Industrialization of the developing coun¬
tries was recognized as a necessary and vital
component of the new international
economic order and developed countries
and multinational institutions were en¬
couraged to adopt policies to accelerate the
transfer of labour-intensive, raw-material
processing and export-oriented production
to the developing countries. At the Second
General Conference of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO) held in Peru in March 1975, it was
8
declared that the target should be to in¬
crease the share of the developing countries
in world industrial production to at least
25 per cent by the year 2000 from the then
prevailing figure of about 7 per cent.
The proposal for a new international
economic order also addressed the question
of the transfer of technology. Technological
developments have made and will certainly
continue to make very significant contribu¬
tions to economic growth in all countries.
However, modern industrial technology is
concentrated almost exclusively in the in¬
dustrialized and developed countries.
Developing countries have not only
become greatly dependent on the flow of
technology, capital goods and technical ser¬
vices from the developed countries, but the
gap between the two groups in indigenous
technological capability has tended to
become increasingly accentuated. This state
of affairs has tended inevitably to produce a
pattern of technological development and a
consequent industrial structure that closely
follows that of the industrialized countries.
However, there are growing misgivings in
developing countries, including those that
have been most successful in industrializing,
as to whether this pattern of development is
really suited to meet their particular socio¬
economic needs. Accordingly, the pro¬
posals in the new international economic
order on this issue stress the need for
developing countries to have continued ac¬
cess to modern technology on improved
terms, to have this technology adapted to
their specific economic, social and
ecological conditions, and for measures to
expand their research and development
capabilities, particularly by means of greater
assistance from the developed nations.
On a closely-related theme, the proposal
for a new international economic order sug¬
gested that all efforts should be made to for¬
mulate, adopt and implement an interna¬
tional code of conduct for transnational cor¬
porations to ensure that the activities of
these corporations conform to national
development plans and to encourage them
to contribute to the new international
economic order by transferring technology
and managerial skills to developing coun¬
tries on favourable terms and to reinvest
rather than repatriate profits. Also of
significance in this overall context is the
work on an international code of transfer of
technology carried out in the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD).
The developing countries sought a larger
and more effective voice in international
financial forums, particularly the Interna¬
tional Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World
Bank. Inflation in the developed countries
increased the import bill for developing
countries and eroded the real value of their
currency reserves. The general instability of
the international monetary system since
1971, particularly the uncertainty of ex¬
change rates, frequently had an adverse ef¬
fect on the value of commodity exports from
developing countries.
The developing world also felt excluded
from the decision-making circles that deter¬
mined the quantity, rate of growth and ac¬
cessibility of international liquidity. For ex¬
ample, of the $ 9,300 million created in the
form of special drawing rights in IMF bet¬
ween 1970 and 1974, only 25 per cent or
$2,300 million was granted to the develop¬
ing countries.
Finally, the developing countries argued
the need for a more conciliatory attitude in
the developed countries regarding the
repayment and servicing of external debt.
A combination of circumstances in the
1970s large increases in the price of oil,
stagnating markets in the developed coun¬
tries for exports from the Third World
and inadequate official development
assistance led to a disturbingly fast rate of
increase in the external indebtedness of
many developing countries. By 1977, nearly
12 per cent of the export earnings of theiV
"Inflation in the developed countries has increased the
import bill for developing countries and eroded the real
value of their currency reserves. The general instability of
the international monetary system has frequently had an
adverse effect on the value of commodity exports from
developing countries. The developing world has also felt
excluded from the decision-making circles."

DISARMAMENT AND DEVELOPMENT


DISARMAMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
world was absorbed in servicing
external debt.
To address these several concerns, the
developing countries demanded full and ef¬
fective participation in all phases of
decision-making for the formulation of
an equitable and durable international
monetary system. Despite a generally
austere global economic climate over the
past decade, a number of steps have been
taken in many areas. In the crucial area of in¬
ternational trade, efforts have been made to
reduce tariffs and other barriers to trade and
to extend the general system of preferences.
In 1979, agreement was reached to establish
the Common Fund.
Furthermore, developing countries have
secured increased IMF quotas and improved
arrangements for debt relief. In the field of
food and agriculture, the International Fund
for Agricultural Development was establish¬
ed in 1974 to foster the objective of greater
food security in the developing countries.
Food aid has also been expanded in the con¬
text of the Food Aid Convention and an In¬
ternational Emergency Food Reserve has
been established with a target as yet
unmet of 500,000 tons of cereals.
In 1980, an Interim Fund for Science and
Technology for Development was establish¬
ed, and the General Assembly initiated a
programme of study to investigate ap¬
propriate longer-term arrangements. Finally,
mention should be made of the negotiations
in the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea, where the principle has
been accepted that the resources of the
oceans and of the sea-bed are part of the
"common heritage" of mankind.
While these and other measures that have
not been mentioned are important begin-
ings, overall progress towards laying the
foundations of a new international
economic order has been slow. The goals
and objectives of the Second Development
Decade remain largely unfulfilled and the
necessarily ambitious targets for the Third
United Nations Development Decade are in¬
dicative of the magnitude of the task ahead.
Primary responsibility for development
rests with the developing countries
themselves, but the targets for the Third
Development Decade and the longer-range
objective of significantly reducing the gap in
standards of living are quite unfeasible
without the strong assistance and co¬
operation ,of the developed countries.
Similarly, the deepening of co-operation and
the expansion of economic relations among
developing countries, both bilaterally and
multilaterally, will play an important role in
bridging this gap.
The call for a new international economic
order was in every sense a historic initiative.
It both reflected and took advantage of the
fact of interdependence to articulate the
reforms and changes needed to permit the
developing countries to become full and
constructive participants in the global
economic system on an accelerated basis. It
was, in effect, a plan of action for the co¬
operative management of interdependence,
albeit for an extended interim period, for
the particular benefit of the developing
countries.
Since 1974, it has become progressively
more apparent that a comprehensive assault
on underdevelopment is strongly in the self-
interest of the industrialized countries. Since
the new international economic order was
couched in the context of economic rela¬
tions among all groups of States, the
phenomena of interdependence and the ex¬
pansion of economic co-operation based on
mutual interest now embrace international
economic relations as a whole.
Altogether, sustainable global develop¬
ment is heavily dependent on what has been
termed the co-operative management of in¬
terdependence in its political, economic and
physical dimensions. It only remains to ask
whether such a perspective will emerge and
endure if the arms race continues unabated.
And the answer, surely, is no. Indeed, the
political climate accompanying the arms
race would appear to be the very antithesis
of a genuine and enduring spirit of co¬
operation and mutual accommodation.
The co-operative management of in¬
terdependence may be eminently sensible,
perhaps even necessary, for the realization
of global economic and social aspirations
but such a prospect must be regarded as
rather unrealistic as long as the arms race
continues.
