
PORTRAIT
OF A GENIUS
A pictorial
biography
of Dostoyevsky
Mikhail Andreevich and Mariya Fyodorovna
Dostoyevsky, the writer's parents (from a
pastel of 1823). A graduate of the Imperial
Medical-Surgical Academy in Moscow,
Dostoyevsky's father was a "sullen, nervous,
suspicious" man, according to the writer's first
biographer. His mother was a gentle, pensive
woman with a talent for literature.
This sketch is the first known portrait of Dostoyevsky. It
was drawn by his classmate at the St. Petersburg
Academy of Engineers, Konstantin Trutovsky, who later
became a well-known artist. It shows Dostoyevsky as he
was In 1847, the year in which he wrote Poor Folk, a novel
which was acclaimed by the celebrated critic Vissarion
G. Belinsky, who wrote: "Honour and glory to the young
poet whose muse inspires love for the garret- and
basement-dwellers and cries out to those living in gilded
palaces: 'Why! They too are human beings, your brothers!'
Entrance arch and wing of the former
Mariinsky Hospital in Moscow, where
Dostoyevsky's father was a doctor. Visible
through the archway are the porch and
entrance to the apartment where
Dr. Dostoyevsky and his family lived. Today
the whole wing where the family apartment
was located is occupied by the F.M.
Dostoyevsky Museum-Apartment.
Phot« ( Sum UMnry MuMum.


-
Among the exhibits preserved in the Moscow Museum are
Dostoyevsky's desk and some of the tools of his trade including
the favourite pen with which be wrote many pages of The Brothers
Karamazov and The Diary of a. Writer.
A The writer's widow, Anna
Grigor'evna, photographed in
1916 in the Dostoyevsky
Room of the Moscow
Historical Museum with
some of the Dostoyevskyana
she had donated to the
Museum.
Many artists have found
inspiration in the works of
Dostoyevsky. This illustration
to Poor Folk was drawn by
his contemporary Boklevsky
and depicts the novel's hero,
Makar Devushkin. In this
early work the writer
expressed what he called an
"idea central to all
nineteenth century art", the
"rehabilitation of an innocent
victim crushed by the weight
of circumstances, centuries
of stagnation and social
prejudices. The idea is the
vindication of the
downtrodden and of all
outcasts of society."


PORTRAIT
OF A GENIUS
(continued)
Drawing by Mikhail Znamensky in 1888
shows the lay-out of the prison at Omsk in
Siberia where Dostoyevsky served his
sentence of hard labour. In The House of
the Dead he described the prison: "Imagine
a large courtyard, 200 paces long and 150
wide, in the form of an irregular hexagon,
all enclosed by a paling, that is, a fence of
high posts stuck deeply into the earth,
touching one another, strengthened by
crosswise planks and pointed at the top;
this was the outer fence of the prison. On
one side of the fence there is a strong gate,
always closed, always, day and night,
guarded by sentries; it is opened on
instructions, to let us out to work... And
how much youth lay uselessly buried
within those walls, what mighty powers
were wasted here in vain! After all, one
must tell the whole truth: those men were
exceptional men... But their mighty
energies were vainly wasted, wasted
abnormally, unjustly, hopelessly. And who
was to blame, whose fault was it? That's
just it, who was to blame?"
In 1849 Dostoyevsky and other members of the Petrashevsky circle of Utopian
socialists to which he belonged, were arrested. Dostoyevsky was sentenced to
death. On the morning of 22 December he and his fellow-prisoners were taken
to their place of execution, the Semenovsky parade-ground. When all the
preliminaries of the execution had been carried out, it was announced that they
had been reprieved. Dostoyevsky's sentence was commuted to forced labour in
Siberia. Engraving below, by an anonymous 19th-century artist, recreates the
execution scene. Recalling the event in his Diary of a Writer (1873), Dostoyevsky
wrote: "We... stood on the scaffold and listened to our verdict without the
slightest repentance... The deed for which we were convicted; those ideas and
conceptions which ruled our spirit, were regarded by us not only as not
requiring repentance but even as something purifying as martyrdom for which
we would be forgiven much!" In the same book he wrote: "We were infected
with the ideas of the then prevailing theoretical socialism... All these new ideas
of those days were tremendously appealing to us in Petersburg; they seemed
sublimely sacred and moral and, most important of all, common to all mankind,
the law for all humanity, without exception, in the future. Even long before the
Paris Revolution of '48, we fell under the fascinating influence of these ideas.
Already in '46, I had been initiated by Belinsky into the whole truth of that
future 'regenerated world' and into the whole sanctity of the future communist
society..."	
Aleksandr I. Ivanov, a doctor at the prison
in Omsk where Dostoyevsky served his
sentence of penal servitude from 1850 to
1854. Ivanov and his superior. Dr. I.I.
Troitsky treated the writer with great
solicitude and tried to keep him in hospital
as long as possible to enable him to write.
Whenever Dostoyevsky left the hospital he
would give his notebook to Ivanov for safe
keeping. He later used this notebook,
which contained some 500 entries popular
expressions, witticisms, scenes of everyday
lifeas material for The House of the Dead
and other novels. "How many native types,
characters, did I take with me from
prison," Dostoyevsky wrote to his brother
in February 1854 after his release. "I lived
side by side with them and therefore, it
seems, I know them pretty well. How
many tales of vagabonds, robbers and, in
general, of the whole black, wretched
existence. There is enough for entire
volumes."


Dostoyevsky (right) and the Kazakh scholar
and teacher Chokan Valikhanov whom he
met in Omsk. They later met in
Semipalatinsk, where Dostoyevsky served
as a soldier after his release from prison.
In December 1859 Dostoyevsky returned from Siberia to St.
Petersburg (now Leningrad). The Leningrad building where he
lived from 1878 until his death on 9 February 1881 today houses
the F.M. Dostoyevsky Literary and Memorial Museum. It was
here that he wrote his novel The Brothers Karamazov. The
Museum is located in the last apartment occupied by the
Dostoyevskys, and literary exhibitions dealing with his life and
works are held in rooms adjoining the apartment. Dostoyevsky's
study has been arranged to recapture the setting in which he
often workedat night, by candlelight (photo below).
Photo taken in 1881 of Dostoyevsky's house at the resort town of
Staraya Russa. "Fyodor Mikhailovich considered our Staraya
Russa villa his place of physical and emotional peace..."
{Reminiscences of Anna G. Dostoyevskaya). The house is now a
Dostoyevsky museum.


PORTRAIT
OF A GENIUS
(continued)
In 1878 Dostoyevsky paid a brief
visit to the monastery of Optina
Pustyn. While there he met the
Elder Amvrosii, the prototype of
Father Zossima, a figure who
would play a key part in his last
great novel. The Brothers
Karamazov. Photo left shows
Amvrosii's cell at Optina Pustyn.
An illustration to Book V ("Pro and
Contra") of The Brothers Karamazov
showing the famous conversation
between two of the brothers, Alyosha
and Ivan. Ivan's terrible admission ("I
do not accept this world of God's")
reflects Dostoyevsky's own tortured
doubts: "I want to tell you this about
myself: I am a child of this age, a child
of disbelief and doubt... I have been
and still am tormented by longing for
belief, which grows all the stronger the
more reasons I have not to believe...
More than that, if anyone proved to me
that Christ was outside the truth, and it
really was a fact that the truth was
outside of Christ, I would rather remain
with Christ than with the truth." Thus
wrote Dostoyevsky in a reappraisal of
his views after his release from penal
servitude.
/« V;*¿¿áar>*
- WE\\
F-HÍ
ir " 1f ^ -
wM
A
ffiL,*
L_ fei
20


Illustration by the artist
Dobuzhinsky for Dostoyevsky's
White Nights.
A still from the film of
Dostoyevsky's novel The
Idiot, directed by Ivan Pyr'ev.
The role of Prince Myshkin
(right) is played by Yuri
Yakovlev and that of
Rogozhin (centre) by
L. Parkhomenko.
