This illustration for an African folk-tale, "Children of the Forest", was drawn by the Sudanese artist Abdulahi Mohd Eltaieb. It won a prize in
the "Noma Concours for Children's Picture Book Illustrations '78", a competition organized by the Asian Cultural Centre for Unesco.



THE CHILD-HERO
IN AFRICAN FOLKTALES
by Aminata Sow Fall
AM I NATA SOW FALL, of Senegal, is director of the department of
literature and intellectual property in her country's ministry of culture. She
is the author of two published novels. Le Revenant and La Grève des Bat¬
tu, and of the forthcoming L'Appel des Armes. She is co-author of school
textbooks on grammar, French literature, and theatrical expression.
BEFORE describing the role of the child-hero in African folk¬
lore, it is well to recall briefly the place occupied by the
folktale in the African universe. Although traditionally
recounted by that multiple-part actor the story-teller, the folktale is
essentially a group production and it provides an unrivalled
medium for the transmission of African wisdom. It expresses the
deepest aspirations of the community and ensures its cohesion by
maintaining value systems and beliefs necessary for its equilibrium
and survival. Failings are exposed and the marginal members of
society are punished by man or by supernatural forces, according
to their misdeeds. The lesson that emerges from the African
One of the most popular
children's books in Tanzania tells
the story of a boy called Kiungan-
dua who fought successfully in
his tribe's war against European
invaders. Eventually he is cap¬
tured by the enemy but commits
suicide to avoid disclosing the
secrets of his group's successes.
The book written in Kiswahili by
H.A.K. Mwenegoha, is entitled
Shujaa wa Vijana ("The Youths'
Hero"). In this illustration
Kiungandua is shown in conver¬
sation with a veteran warrior of
his tribe.
23

folktale is a warning to anyone who might be tempted to stray
away from the moral principles and religious concepts of the
community.
In addition to its entertainment value, the folktale is therefore
essentially didactic. With its capacity to reach beyond everyday
reality into the realms of fantasy and the fantastic it offers wide
scope for the child's imagination. It is also a means of developing
the child's belief in supernatural phenomena and of initiating him
into the metaphysics of myth and cosmogonie legend.
Concern for ethical teaching emerges particularly strongly in
tales in which the hero is a child. According to the circumstances,
the child-hero embodies either values that strengthen society or
destructive counter-values. But he can also assume metaphysical
dimensions which make him a saviour or the embodiment of the
spirit of evil in all its absurdity.
The child-hero is thus a symbol and for this reason the same
character can be given different names according to the geographic
region concerned and the adaptations which the tale undergoes to
suit ethnic particularities. The name is less important than the sym¬
bolism; often, in fact, the hero is simply called "the child".
There are three sorts of child-hero in African folklore: the model
child, the boisterous child and the child of evil.
There are numerous versions of the tale of the model child. The
child-hero is often an orphan girl, ill-treated by a wicked step¬
mother, who bullies and punishes her mercilessly and burdens her
with painful, back-breaking tasks. Without any help from her
weak, virtually non-existent father, the little orphan obeys all her
cruel stepmother's whims and orders until the day when, ex¬
asperated by the girl's patience and forbearance, the wicked
woman demands the impossible.
In Birago Diop's tale, La Cuiller Sale (The Dirty Spoon), little
Cumba is ordered to go and wash a spoon in the "Daayaan" sea,
which she can only reach by following paths used by wild animals
and crossing a strange kingdom peopled by supernatural creatures.
Thanks to her gentle good behaviour, she eludes all the traps and
snares and returns with the washed spoon and great riches.
The stepmother, who never expected the orphan to come back
alive, is surprised and very jealous. She decides to send her own
daughter on an expedition to the "Daayaan" sea and starts prepar¬
ing a magnificent reception for her return. But the girl dies, her
body is eaten by the wild beasts of the forest and all that remains is
her heart which a vulture drops in the calabash in which her mother
is preparing couscous for the feast. A double punishment has thus
been meted out to the heartless stepmother and her insolent
daughter.
All versions of the model child tales follow the same pattern.
They provide models of behaviour and a lesson in patience, obe¬
dience, respect and discretion which enable a child to overcome the
most difficult situations. So that the lesson should be properly
understood, the model child in these tales is often opposed to his
negative counterpart, the spoilt child. Thanks to this technique, all
problems related to the child's education can be treated globally.
The model child inspires tenderness and admiration, while the
spoilt child, who is rude and disrespectful, incurs only anger and
the audience's approval for the terrible punishment which always
overtakes him, sometimes along with innocent people. The spoilt
child is shown as a social scourge and parents and the whole com¬
munity are therefore advised to teach the basic moral virtues to
their children.
In Petit Mari, one of the tales recorded by Birago Diop, a little
girl's obstinacy drives her brother to suicide and her mother to
madness, and engulfs all the other members of the family in
catastrophe in the- depths of the sea. These tales are not intended
only for children; adults are also warned of the price to be paid for
wickedness and injustice.
Frequent manifestations of providence stress the intangibility of
the borderline between the real and unreal, the visible and invisible.
In several tales the dead mother comes to the aid of her maltreated
daughter. In Le Pagne Noir (The Black Loincloth), by Bernard
Dadié, little Aiwa finally triumphs over her wicked stepmother by
bringing back the shroud which her dead mother has given her in¬
stead of the black loincloth she has been told to wash white.
African folklore abounds in tales about unruly, mischievous and
naughty children. Jabu, Ndaw and Samba-of-the-night (in Les
Nouveaux Contes d'Amadou Koumba) and the "Little Terror" (in
Le Pagne Noir) are a few examples of such children. The extraor¬
dinary circumstances surrounding the hero's birth and his extreme
precociousness are characteristic features of these tales. In his
mother's womb the child already presses her to give birth to him
and from the very day he is born he speaks, gives himself a name
and starts on his exploits. On the day of his birth the Little Terror
traps a deer after having carried a meal to his father in the fields.
On the second day he dips a panther in boiling water and on the
third he puts to flight all the kings of the jungle.
Several versions of these tales recall episodes from Tom Thumb.
The child-hero foils the witch's evil designs and saves his brothers
or uncles by substituting the witch's own daughters for them. In
this way, the witch, not realizing what she is doing, cuts her
daughters' throats. All attempts at revenge fail for the child, who
has hidden powers, always manages to outwit the sorceress.
Beliefs play an important role in these tales and strangeness is
not considered out of place, as can be seen from this reply by a
mother to her son who has just commanded his own birth: "As
you have delivered yourself, you can also give yourself a name!"
Nor does this strangeness stem merely from a taste for the super¬
natural and for extraordinary adventures fired by an imagination
that transcends terrestrial limits. Here extraordinary phenomena
Taken from a book of popular
tales and legends from Guinea,
this drawing illustrates the story
of the combat between the spider
and the wasp. The spider often
plays an important role in west
African stories of the jungle,
while the hare, seen here among
the onlookers, figures largely in
tales of the savannah.
24

Left, the cover of an edition of the 7a/es of
Amadou Koumba, by the Senegalese writer
Birago Diop, shows an African village where
animals are endowed with human qualities.
The illustration was drawn by a boy from
Cameroun, Balbo Oussoumanou.
Photo Naud ki a A A , Paris
Leuk the Hare, a character in a story by
Leopold Sédar Senghor, as depicted by
Françoise N'Thépé, a nine-year-old
Camerounian girl.
are part and parcel of life, and the child, through the mystery of his
conception and birth and his lack of speech during the first months
of life, is held, in certain African societies, to be very close to in¬
visible forces. It is not surprising therefore that the child should be
' central to such tales.
By his deeds and by the very nature of his unusual personality
the unruly child disturbs the laws of nature, but he never deviates
from the social ethic or from the community's basic beliefs. He is a
saviour. He urges caution when warning his family of the evil
designs of the witch who has disguised herself as a jujube tree laden
with fruit or as a beautiful woman seeking a husband. And he
pokes fun at the mighty by exposing their worst faultsgreed,
selfishness, and so on.
The character of the child of evil is more difficult to understand.
All his actions are blameworthy. His parents often die when he is
born or shortly afterwards, which suggests that he is the bearer of
misfortune. He neglects the advice given by his father on his death¬
bed and he squanders the family fortune. Prompted by an unquen¬
chable thirst for destruction, he returns evil for good and kills all
those, whether men or animals, who have shown him kindness.
The existence of this type of hero in African folklore is no acci¬
dent. It can be explained partly by a belief in the reincarnation of
discontented ancestors who return to earth to wreak vengeance.
The child of evil therefore "existed" long before his parents. As
Samba-of-the-night declares:
"I am Samba, born last night
Older than my mother
Older than my father
The same age as
My younger brothers and sisters
Yet to be born."
The child of evil can also be perceived as an evil spirit, the son of
the devil. According to popular belief, such children were unmask¬
ed by soothsayers, and, to ensure that they would not bring misfor¬
tune on to their family, they were deposited in the jungle at the
foot of a tree so that they could return to their true realm.
Tales with child-heroes are not merely designed to satisfy the
child's need to escape into the world of dreams and fantasy. They
embody the hopes, fears and fantasies of the entire community.
Aminata Sow Fall
