2
MILITARY
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
A hundred billion dollar
"Industrial production for
military purposes in
developing countries
(excluding China) would
amount to less than five
per cent of the world total
even though these
countries account for
nearly one half of
uniformed military
personnel and about
sixteen per cent of the
world military
expenditure."
14

MODERN military establishments
place procurement demands on a
wide range of industrial enter¬
prises. In some cases, these enterprises exist
solely to satisfy military demand forging
tank turrets or manufacturing artillery shells,
for example. In other cases, the industry
may supply both military and civilian
customers with quite similar products
although the military variant will often
reflect more stringent requirements as
regards quality, precision and reliability.
The military establishment also pur¬
chases a wide range of products that are
identical to those sold to civilian custo¬
mers vehicles and office equip¬
ment are examples here. In addition, of
course, all these suppliers of finished in¬
dustrial goods to the military place demands
on the suppliers of components down to the
suppliers of basic products such as
aluminium, steel and plastic.
To estimate the magnitude of global
military industrial production is no simple
task. A logical starting point is the budget
category "procurement" which is broken
out in the official statistics of most of the
major arms-producing countries. In the ma¬
jor Western arms-producing countries the
share of procurement in the military budget
falls in the range of 13 to 22 per cent.
These data, however, tend to refer to pur¬
chases of major equipment and considerably
understate the value of manufacturing out¬
put generated by military demand. The ma¬
jor omissions would appear to be production
to meet export orders, components and
spare parts and the wide variety of industrial
products that are used or consumed by the
military but are otherwise indistinguishable
from civil products. In the United States, for
Photomontages © Peter Kennard, London
example, the amounts for procurement in
the military budget for 1975 and 1976 were
$15,200 million and $16,000 million respec¬
tively, while shipments of defence products
by manufacturing industry in those years
amounted to $29,210 million and $34,000
million respectively.
For the years 1976-1977, it is possible to
document an estimate of $95,500 million for
military industrial production in the United
States of America, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, France, the United
Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Italy, and seven smaller Western European
countries.
It is difficult to assess by how much this
figure should be inflated to yield a global
estimate. On the one hand, many countries
with substantial local defence production
are omitted, including China, Japan,
Czechoslovakia, Israel, India and Brazil. On
the other hand, the figure cited would, on
the whole, include production for export,
and the four major Powers covered by the
estimates account for the lion's share of the
international trade in arms. In other words,
to take, say, a 20 per cent share of the com¬
bined military expenditure of the rest of the
world as an estimate of military industrial
production may imply considerable double
counting.
Nevertheless, an estimate of $105,000
million for global military industrial produc¬
tion in 1976-1977 would appear quite plausi¬
ble, indeed, conservative. If one takes the
Stockholm International Peace Research In¬
stitute (SIPRI) and the United States Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency (ACDA)
estimates of China's military expen¬
diture $35 thousand million to $40 thou¬
sand million in 1976 the military industrial
production in that country alone would
bring the global estimate close to $105,000
million. And there are many other countries
known to have a significant military in¬
dustrial capacity.
The estimate of $105,000 million
represents 30 per cent of world military ex¬
penditure in. 1976. This is plausible as a
global figure, bearing in mind that military
industrial production is a much broader ac¬
tivity than the procurement of major
weapons. However, to reflect the in¬
completeness of the data and the contradic¬
tory influences to which the estimaie is sub¬
ject, it would seem sensible to use a range of
28 to 32 per cent of world military expen¬
diture as an estimate of the value of in¬
dustrial production given over to military
use.
These estimates reflect the fact that the
overwhelming bulk of military industrial pro¬
duction is undertaken by the industrialized
countries. Industrial production for military
purposes in developing countries (excluding
China) would amount to less than 5 per cent
of the world total even though these coun¬
tries account for nearly one half of uniform¬
ed military personnel and about 16 per cent
of the world military expenditure. This ap¬
proximate share for the developing coun¬
tries is supported by ACDA, which
estimated the value of arms and military
equipment produced in these countries in
1979 at more than $5 thousand million. The
developing countries that have made the
most significant investment in defence in¬
dustries include Brazil, India, Israel, North
Korea, South Africa and South Korea.
Many other countries are making smaller but
determined efforts in this field.
15
