THE COMIC STRIP
BALLOONS AROUND THE WORLD
'B
iASICALLY, you know," Gen¬
eral de Gaulle once remarked
to André Malraux, "Tintín is
my only rival on the international scene.
This joking admission by the French
President of the comic strip hero's
universal scope and appeal gave, as it
were, "political" consecration to Tintín,
the little newspaper reporter invented in
1929 by the Belgian artist Hergé (a
pseudonym made up of the initials of his
real name, Remi, Georges) and whose
adventures cover half a century of con¬
temporary history.
Today cartoon strip heroes continue
to fascinate tens of millions of readers
throughout the world. A product of the
mass communications era, they are the
modern counterparts of the heroes of
folktales and adventure stories.
Comics, a synthesis of writing and
drawings of the most diverse kind, on
by Michel Pierre
Though the comic strip owes its
development to modern printing and
distribution methods, it is rooted in an
old tradition. In Europe, its origins can
be traced back to the images d'Epinal in
France and to the picture stories of the
German Wilhelm Busch (1832-1908)
and the Swiss Rodolphe Topffer
(1799-1846).
In Japan, the comic's early ninth cen¬
tury ancestors, the Choju-Guiga
Emakimono (stories on scrolls of paper),
were a mixture of war reporting,
philosophical legends and scenes from
everyday life. Lian huan hua (little il¬
lustrated books) existed even in ancient
China. From the 1920s onwards they
developed considerably and, after 1939,
they began to report on aspects of con¬
temporary China, as well as adapting in
picture form the most famous Chinese
novels, such as The Monkey King Sun
Wukong (see page 28) and The Three
Kingdoms, using time-honoured draw¬
ing techniques. Africa also turned to its
sources in producing picture versions of
ancient legends such as The Adventures
of Leuk the Hare, after a text written by
Leopold Sédar Senghor.
But it was in the United States at the
end of the nineteenth century that the
strip cartoon was created in its modern
form, increasingly sophisticated tech¬
niques made it possible to integrate text
and images in which the various
characters expressed themselves in
"bubbles" or "balloons".
Early comic strips like The Katzenjam¬
mer Kids, which first appeared in 1897,
met with immediate success and were
the forerunners of dozens of popular
heroes including Mickey Mouse (1929)
and Peanuts (1950) to cite some of the
most universally known.
S KB
22 R&M%uim®Jte£i&±.-&, J!A^sm¡sma*o
Ä^SÄ-itf» SIESTA. -fc#, ft-M» Wfcëifc
the border between literature and film
where text and image interpenetrate,
have given rise to an art form that holds
great appeal for the younger generation.
But while the child's imagination has
little difficulty in penetrating into the
universe of comics, adults, unused to
this medium, find it difficult to decipher.
And this difference in approach often
gives rise to misunderstanding.
MICHEL PIERRE, of France, is a staff member
of the college of education of the Essonne
(France) and a book editor with Unesco and with
the French publishing house Études Vivantes. He
is the author of La Bande Dessinée (The Comic
Strip) and a regular contributor to the French
magazines A Suivre and Magazine Littéraire.
18

Europe has given birth to a specific
style of comics, thanks in particular to
the productions of the Belgian school
with its well-constructed plots, fearless
heroes and strikingly simple drawing
techniques. Latin America has also
developed an original style, especially
Argentina where such artists as Quino
(the creator o/Mafalda, in 1964), Oski,
Mordillo, Munoz and Sampayo all pro¬
duce comics.
One must also mention the work of
artists from Indonesia, Yugoslavia,
Finland, Algeria and Angola who testify
to the vitality of the medium in all parts
of the globe.
It often happens that a character in a
cartoon created in a specific culture and
1. Drawing from The Cry that Kills <Q Atoss
Takemoto, Matsuda, Japan
2. Waterside Yarns or The Marsh Outlaws
and the Lion Inn. Drawing © Publications
Orientalistes de France, Paris
3. Mafalda's Gang. Drawing © Quino
4. Corto Maltese, The Ethiopics.^ Drawing
Hugo Pratt © Casterman, Paris
5. Leuk the Hare. Illustration G. Lorofi © Les
Nouvelles Editions Africaines, 1975, Dakar and
Abidjan
6. Nasdine Hodja. Drawing © P. Leguen, R.
Lecureux.
7. Snoopy. Drawing Schulz © 1982 United Fea¬
tures Syndicate Inc.
8. Tintin et L'Ile Noire. Drawing Hergé © Cas¬
terman, Paris
9. Mickey and the Mysterious Island.
Drawing © Walt Disney Productions. By special
permission of Waif Disney Productions (France).
designed for a certain audience takes on
a new significance in another context.
For example, Corto Maltese, created by
the Italian Hugo Pratt for Italian and
French magazines, was adopted by the
Angolan freedom fighters who saw in
the thoughts and deeds of this left-wing
adventurer a reflection of their own
struggle and preoccupations.
Comics can also provide a means of
communication between civilizations
and cultures. This was the case when
Nasrudin Hodja, the legendary hero of
Muslim humour, became the hero of a
French strip cartoon published by the
children's weekly Vaillant, in 1955.
Thanks to the immense popularity it
has acquired with young readers, the
comic strip is gradually establishing its
position among the contemporary com¬
munication media. It is sometimes laud¬
ed excessively, but more often unjustly
criticized. It now remains for it to con¬
vince the last critics and win the final
battle.
Michel Pierre
19
