Drug dependence: 'A state, psychic and sometimes also physical,
resulting from the interaction between a living organism and a drug,
characterized by behavioural and other responses that always include a
compulsion to take the drug on a continuous or periodic basis in order to
experience its psychic effects, and sometimes to avoid the discomfort of
its absence. Tolerance may or may not be present. A person may be
dependent on more than one drug. '
World Health Organization

Education
and the drug dilemma
A Unesco survey
NOT long ago, education was virtually
overlooked as an aid in preventing
drug abuse. Confidence was vested
in other means such as legal controls and
the repression of traffic. Then, in the post¬
war years, changes in the pattern of drug
abuse itself brought a belated recognition of
the need to enlist education in efforts to
grapple with the problem.
Much has happened since the first at¬
tempts to devise serious educational
responses to the drug challenge. A more
penetrating understanding of drug use in in¬
dustrially developed countries and a certain
wisdom gained through educational trial and
error have made it possible to strengthen the
bases and techniques of preventive educa¬
tion. No doubt its evolution will continue,
for while some progress has been made
many questions still remain unanswered.
As regards the central aim of preventive
education, it seems apparent that there has
been a shift of emphasis in a substantial
number of countries. This change has has
significant effects on approaches, pro¬
grammes and methods. In the past the goal
had often been to prevent or minimize all
non-medical use of drugs. At its heart was
the exhortation: don't use drugs. This is
often still the stated aim. Experience now
seems to demonstrate, however, that it is
unrealistic, especially in societies that accept
the virtually unrestricted consumption of
alcohol and tobacco.
The view that there is much to be gained
from working towards more attainable goals
now seems to prevail among specialists. The
report from Canada states, for example: "In
the long term one must examine and decide
upon reasonable objectives. It would appear
that the elimination of drug use may be im¬
possible; however, improvement in the in¬
dividual's capacity to manage his use of
drugs and to make reasonable choices based .
on factual knowledge about the effects of
drug use may be possible".
The same point is made by the author of
the report from the United Kingdom: "... on
the basis of the evidence available from
evaluations throughout the world, no
known methods of drug education can be
said to reduce drug use... demand-
reduction is not an adequate basis for drug
education. Drug education should, instead,
be concerned to minimize the negative out¬
comes of drug use, to abolish unnecessary
stigmatization and self-fulfilling prophecies:
drug education should focus on promoting
relatively safe patterns of drug use...".
Hardly any statement about preventive
education is likely to win universal assent
and the foregoing quotations are no excep¬
tion. Nevertheless, on several fundamental
matters there appears to be a large measure
of agreement.
One of these is the role of information. At
an earlier stage facts about drugs and their
effects formed the core if not the entirety of
many teaching programmes. This approach
was grounded on the assumption that such
knowledge would be sufficient to prevent
young people from experimenting with or
misusing drugs. Accordingly, attention was
focused on substances, and the conse¬
quences of using them were often presented
in a manner designed to shock, to arouse,
fear and thereby to dissuade.
The confidence once placed in this ap¬
proach has faded. "Information only for the
sake of information can potentially lead to
more harm than good"", warns the report
from Yugoslavia. A similar judgement is ex¬
pressed in the report from Spain, which
points out that the information provided
may arouse curiosity or even justify drug use
in the eyes of the young by presenting it as
anti-social and as a form of contestation
against the older generation and its values.
In Norway, a study of teachers' attitudes

Education and the drug dilemma
showed that, in their judgement, informa¬
tion alone was a weak basis for individual
choices pertaining to drug use. The report
from Australia states : "Information is con¬
sidered to play an essential part in achieving
the objectives of drug education, but is not
sufficient of itself to change attitudes and
behaviour". Similar views are expressed in
most of the other reports.
AND yet the case concerning informa¬
tion is by no means closed. "We do
not fear that giving information to
innocents will evoke curiosity and thereby
increase experimentation in youthful
groups", says the report from , Denmark.
And a research project in Canada has yield¬
ed findings concerning the effects of the in¬
formation approach which may give pause
to its critics.
However, the tactic of using information
about drugs to arouse fear is now generally
rejected, usually on the grounds that it may
make drugs attractive to the more self-
destructive elements of high-risk groups.
The information approach has to a large
extent given way to another. Taken as a
whole the reports reveal a marked trend
towards an approach which, while reserving
a place for information, treats knowledge as
only one of many components of preventive
education. The substance-focused, infor¬
mation-giving approach is more and more
subsumed in what is referred to in some of
the reports as "affective education". Such
education is directed towards the totality of
the individual personality instead of merely
the cognitive, intellectual part. The aim, like
that stated in 1963 for temperance education
in Finland, is the development of "a
physically and psychologically healthy per¬
sonality". As such it is relevant not only to
high-risk students but to all students.
The affective approach is concerned with
individuals in their specific social and
cultural setting and with the interaction of
personality and values in situations of
decision-making about drug use. "It has
been shown in our studies that it is of the ut¬
most importance that the teachers use the
situation-centred approach", says the report
from Denmark.
Although the affective approach has now
taken hold in many programmes, old-style
preventive education continues alongside it
or in combination with it. For example, the
report from the United Kingdom notes that
although national curriculum projects usual¬
ly have rationales or philosophies that favour
the affective approach, the project materials
also tend to rely on a substance-focused,
information-giving approach. The report
adds that this mixture tends, in the
classroom, to be translated into substance-
focused discussion because both teachers
and pupils are most drawn to the subject of
drugs and their effects. The newer curricula
are not being rigorously executed. "The
muddle on the policy level", the author
observes, "is being reproduced on the
classroom level."
The affective approach requires the adop¬
tion of educational methods and techniques
which will stimulate the students' interest
and inyolve them as active partners in learn¬
ing experiences. The trend towards the use
of such methods is one which education in
this field shares with education in general.
Often referred to as "active" methods, they
have proved to be especially useful in such
areas as moral and civic education, where
the formation of attitudes and patterns of
behaviour is an objective.
The need to use methods of this kind
seems now to be widely accepted. A few ex¬
amples will serve to illustrate the generaliza¬
tion. Instructions on temperance and health
education (which include preventive educa¬
tion) in Finland state: "Mere theoretical in¬
struction is not adequate... Teaching is
associated with children's everyday ex¬
periences... Pupil-centred methods of work
are applied" (report from Finland).
An example of such pupil-centred
methods comes from Sweden, where study
often takes place in small groups and is
organized largely by the pupils themselves.
A lesson plan outlined in the report begins
with discussion motivated by a film or some
other element, continues with study by all
pupils of a common syllabus combined with
individual and group project work and
concludes with students' reports and a
discussion.
The report for Flemish-speaking Belgium,
noting the role of dialogue, emphasizes the
importance of having pupils explain how
they perceive and experience the problem. A
statement from Australia on the philosophy
of its national drug education programme
refers, in a list of teaching procedures, to
debates, panel discussions, educational
games, group discussions and committee
work among other active methods.
VALUES-CLARIFICATION, role-play¬
ing, problem-solving and decision¬
making exercises are mentioned in
a number of reports or the materials
transmitted with them. These have become
staple techniques of affective education in
this field. Values-clarification, a process of
choosing among alternatives after consider¬
ing the consequences of each, assists in the
formation of attitudes concerning drugs
which will aid the individual to make deci¬
sions that are helpful to himself or herself
and others. Thus, the technique often cen
tres on situations involving a choice as to
whether or not to accept particular oppor¬
tunities for experimentation or use.
Role-playing helps students to understand
problem situations or value conflicts
through simulated experience and to em¬
pathize with people in positions that may be
very different from their own. Decision¬
making, generally focused on individual
problems and conflicts, and problem-
solving, usually dealing with group prob¬
lems, involve four essential steps: defining
the problem or conflict; listing the possible
choice or alternative ways of resolving the
problem or conflict; investigating the conse¬
quences of each of the alternative resolu¬
tions, and choosing the alternative that is
most satisfying to the individual or group.
Much of what has already been said about
objectives, approaches and methods applies
both to school education and out-of-school
education. Thus, the aim in out-of-school
education is now less commonly to stop
non-medical use of drugs than to develop
attitudes and patterns of behaviour that will
minimize damage from drug usewhat one
report calls the "casualty-reduction ap¬
proach" and active methods such as those
previously described are increasingly
employed.
As regards educational materials, the
resources of the countries surveyed here
range from comparative indigence to abun¬
dance. In virtually all of them, however,
there appears to have been a growth in the
supply of materials of good quality in recent
years.
For use in school education, in addition to
the information included in textbooks for
courses which serve as vehicles for drug
education, auxiliary teaching aids are being
produced in an increasing number of coun¬
tries: illustrated booklets, workbooks and
discussion guides for students; posters,
films, videotapes and charts for classroom
use; and guides, manuals and kits or
packets for the teacher containing all the
essentials for one or more lessons.
The flow of materials intended primarily
(though not necessarily exclusively) for use
outside the school is also increasing. Among
them are information booklets, articles and
advertisements in the press, periodicals,
posters, stickers and radio and television
programmes and "spots". While some of
these are aimed at specific target groups,
most are intended for the general public.
The wisdom of disseminating certain kinds
of drug information indiscriminately to the
population as a whole has been questioned
by some specialists on the grounds that it
may do more harm than good. What is
needed, according to the critics of this

method, is information and materials
adapted to the characteristics and re¬
quirements of particular groups and
distributed selectively.
Such targeted materials are now being
produced in many countries for a variety of
groups: children, young people, parents,
workers, the elderly, various professional
groups and others. Particularly noteworthy
is the preponderant attention given in many
countries to materials on alcohol and tobac¬
co, a reflection of the fact that these
substances are at the root of their most
serious and widespread drug-use problems.
The method adopted in Finland illustrates
not only the target-group principle but also
an interesting non-prohibitive approach. In
Finland, the State liquor monopoly, Alko,
has a large programme of information aimed
at consumers of alcohol. It distributes dif¬
ferent kinds of material through appropriate
channels (retail liquor shops, restaurants,
sports organizations, driving schools, etc.)
to specific groups. The goals are to restrain
harmful consumption and to alter attitudes
that favour over-indulgence. The position
taken in the materials rests on four proposi¬
tions: the best way to avoid problems is
abstinence; long-term heavy drinking is
always harmful; even small amounts in the
wrong situations can be dangerous; alcohol
can also have positive effects.
GENERAL guidelines for use in pre¬
paring materials have been issued
in some countries. Here again one
example, chosen because of the unusual cir¬
cumstances from which the guidelines
emerged, will serve as an illustration. In the
United States in the late 1960s a probably
unique problem of a materials glut arose. At
that time, "a major industry emerged that
revolved around one primary activity: pro¬
ducing and disseminating informational
materials that dealt with the dangers of drug
use. A conservative estimate in 1972 gauged
the extent of the drug information business
at $100 million a year. Ultimately the flood of
information and misinformation itself be¬
came a cause for alarm".
A major review of existing materials in
1971 found most of them by far to be inac¬
curate or unsuitable for other reasons. In
response to this finding the federal govern¬
ment declared a moratorium on the produc¬
tion of federally funded drug information
materials. Later the moratorium was lifted
when new guidelines had been issued.
These guidelines ensured audience iden¬
tification and pre-testing of material. They
excluded messages in which fear was the
main deterrent or the way to use drugs was
shown, and recommended general themes
to be promoted.
Provisions for preventive education in
school programmes vary considerably
among the countries covered by the Unesco
survey. At one end of the spectrum it is a
compulsory part of the offical curriculum; at
the other end, there is no specific provision
for it and initiative is left largely to individual
teachers. In some instances it is an extra
curricular activity. The range of differences
is represented by the following examples.
Finland: Instructions on temperance
education in primary and secondary cur¬
ricula have been issued by the National
Board of Schools since the early years of
this century. Since 1967 teaching has been
incorporated at the primary level (fifth to
eighth grade) into a new subject called civics
and citizenship. In the secondary school it is
a part of hygiene and biology, with some
teaching in other courses as well. The pro¬
gramme consists of two to six lessons a
year.
Sweden: Teaching about alcohol, nar¬
cotics and tobacco was made compulsory at
all levels by the curriculum adopted in 1967.
It is given in various courses according to in¬
structions drawn up by the National Board
of Education.
Denmark: It is obligatory for all schools
to offer preventive education from the sixth
to the tenth grade. It is integrated into such
courses as biology, social sciences and
physical education.
Norway: Preventive education is an
obligatory study area in curricula for
students from ten to sixteen years of age.
No specific number of hours is fixed for it.
Greece: Preventive education is in¬
tegrated into different courses in the first,
second and third years of secondary school.
Italy: Preventive education is provided in
the framework of health education, which is
considered to be part of the educational pro¬
cess as a whole and a responsibility of all
teachers. It is explicity assigned to teachers
of natural science and chemistry at the
secondary level.
Federal Republic of Germany: Preven¬
tive education is included in curricula in all
Länder, or States. Usually the subject is
taken up repeatedly from about the seventh
grade (pupils of 13 years) onward. New cur¬
ricula for all grades, now being prepared by
the Federal Centre for Health Education, will
be completed during the next few years.
Yugoslavia: Programmes of preventive
education include teaching in various com¬
pulsory and optional courses, lectures of a
social character arranged by organizations
such as the Red Cross and discussions in
school clubs. As regards teaching, an exam¬
ple is provided by Serbia, where com¬
ponents of preventive education are in¬
corporated into the subject "nature and
society" in grades I to IV and in biology in
grade VIII.
Australia: Preventive education pro¬
grammes are authorized in schools in most
States, but decisions concerning them are
usually left to principals of individual
schools.
Czechoslovakia: Teaching about al¬
cohol and related problems is found
sporadically in school programmes, and
material on the dangers of smoking is in¬
cluded at every level. Teaching about other
drugs is provided through extra-curricular
projects.
France: Preventive education is not in¬
cluded in curricula. Information is provided
to pupils at their request, notably in the
"Life and Health" clubs which are found in
many schools and which are concerned not
only with this matter but also with other
problems that preoccupy young people
(e.g., the environment, sexuality).
There is no advocacy in the reports of a
separate and identifiable course on drug-
related problems. Instead, as the foregoing
examples show, preventive education is
nested in other courses, most often health
education/hygiene with biology and social
studies/civics next in the order of frequen¬
cy. Other courses mentioned as vehicles in¬
clude natural science, chemistry, religion,
moral laïque, psychology, physical educa¬
tion, home economics, anthropology,
history, environmental studies, sex educa¬
tion and languages.
IN addition to information on drug use
and provision for preventive educa¬
tion, many of the reports comment
upon the evolution of attitudes regarding
drug use in general or the use of particular
drugs. The changes described do not fall in¬
to patterns, either within or among coun¬
tries, that permit generalizations of much
significance.
Three observations do, however, seem
justified:
In some countries the public alarm of a
decade ago over the "drug problem" seems
to have subsided. The diminished concern
probably results in part from a growing
tendency to dedramatize the issue. In the
United States, for example, the Director of
the National Institute on Drug Abuse drew
attention in 1979 to "the widespread public
opinion which is, if not supportive, at least
neutral about the harm of drug abuse".
Another official document from that country
refers to an "apparent increased tolerance of
drug use".
Acceptance of the use of certain illicit
drugs appears to have increased. This is
notably the case in some countries as
regards cannabis (e.g., Canada, Denmark,
the United States).
Resistance to the use of permitted drugs
has increased in some countries. Thus,
several reports note that adverse public at¬
titudes are putting tobacco smokers on the
defensive (in New Zealand, for example) and
others indicate development of stronger op¬
position to the use of alcohol (as in Norway,
where 15 to 20 per cent of the population
advocate total abstinence).
To what may these apparent fluctuations
in attitudes be attributed? No doubt many
factors which vary from country to country
exert an influence. Among them certainly
must be counted the content and tenor of
information reaching the public through
education and the mass media.
