MUMMERS
AND MUSIC
OF KIEV-RUS
by Sergei Vissotsky
ON the wall of the staircase leading to the organ loft of
the cathedral of St. Sophia, in Kiev, is the great
"mummers' fresco". It depicts dancers, one with a
scarf in his hand, accompanied by a group of seven musi¬
cians. One is playing the flute, another is beating cymbals.
Two others on the right are playing the trumpet, the lute
and the psaltery. In the centre is an organ to the left of
which the blowers are pressing on the bellows with all their
might in order to fill the instrument with air, while at the
right the organist himself can be seen.
Mummers had a distinct position among the professional
musicians of ancient Russia. They went from town to town
and village to village, performing at markets, fairs and
festivals. These versatile artists included in their ranks
dancers, acrobats, jugglers, bear handlers and exhibitors of
other trained animals.
Old Russia had many musical instruments: wind in¬
struments such as the zurna or suma (which resembled the
oboe), the pipes and the flute; plucked string instruments
-like the gusli (a cousin of the psaltery), the lute, and the
mandora; string instruments played with the bow, such as
the rebeck; percussion instruments such as the tambourine,
the drum, the kettledrums and the cymbals. And to judge
SERGEI ALEXANDROVICH VISSOTSKY, of the Ukrainian SSR, is a
historian and a specialist in the culture of ancient Russia. He is the doyen
of the Archaeological Institute of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences.

from the fresco of St. Sophia, the organ should be added to
their number.
The invention of the organ, which was already known to
the ancient Egyptians, is usually attributed to the Greek
engineer Ctesibius of Alexandria, who constructed a "water
organ" known as a hydraulis. The organ was a much-
admired instrument in Rome, where its devotees included
the Emperor Nero who both loved organ music and played
the instrument himself.
After the Roman Empire split into the empire of the east
and the empire of the west, the evolution of the organ and
its uses had a chequered fate. In Catholic western Europe,
organ music was introduced into the liturgy by an edict of
Pope Vitalian (d. 672), but for the Orthodox church the
organ was a pagan instrument. At Byzantium, the organ
found a place as a secular instrument, and it was used pre¬
eminently at great ceremonies of the imperial court. Two
Byzantine organs, with trumpeters and dancers are depicted
on the reliefs of the column of Theodosius the Great (the
column of Arcadius) at Constantinople.
The introduction of Christianity to Russia in 988 con¬
siderably strengthened Russia's economic and cultural links
with Byzantium, the most advanced State of the medieval
world. Some aspects of the ceremonial of the Byzantine
court gradually infused the customs of the Russian court. It
is very likely at this time that the organ appeared in Russia
and that it began to be used as an instrument of secular
music.
In addition to the depiction of the "mummers' fresco",
organ music is mentioned in the Paterikon of the Kiev-Crypt
Monastery, written in the first quarter of the thirteenth cen¬
tury, in which the resonance of organ music, accompanied
by other instruments, is described. "And thus it was", says
the author in conclusion, "for all those who played and
were joyful, as is customary before the prince."
«AWKAAAAVNffMUMni < KBÄ AfWbf t\±AiklMnaT'hi -TAAma
tÍMiVp« Hit AH ÛAÔKM /Klft'yXfcl pArAH-triw A t\(mmô
<7fL Jl
^ muH
This miniature from a 15th-century
manuscript depicts the princess Olga being
received, in 954, by Emperor Constantine
VII at Constantinople, where she was con¬
verted to Christianity. Thus well before its
official introduction by Vladimir the Great,
in 988, Christianity had already penetrated
into Kiev-Rus and the material and spiritual
development of the capital owed much to
its trade and cultural links with Byzantium.
The frescoes that adorn the walls of the two
towers of the west façade of the Cathedral
of St. Sophia (built by Yaroslav the Wise,
grandson of princess Olga) depict scenes of
court life at Constantinople. If the
chroniclers are to be believed, life at the
court of the grand princes of Kiev was very
similar. Left, detail from a fresco depicting
the hippodrome at Constantinople with the
Emperor's guests watching a chariot race.
Photos © S. Vissotsky, Kiev
17
