LATIN AMERICA:
TALL STORIES FOR SMALL READERS
by Jorge Enrique Adoum
¿rpiilHEY took the gold and left us
the words," said the Nobel
Prizewinning Chilean poet
Pablo Neruda of the Iberian conquistadors.
Since, with the exception of Paraguay, we
have never been bilingual, and since our in¬
digenous languages have not been transcrib¬
ed, we in Latin America learn to read in the
languages of those "words" even the sacred
texts of the Quiche Maya: the Popol Vuh,
the Book of Chilam-Balam, and the Annals
of the Cakchiqueles.
The language of the conquistadors thus
became the only official language, the
language of administration and justice, of
education and writing. Even today our in¬
digenous populations live in a situation
which modern Latin American sociologists
have called "internal colonialism". In order
to exercise their rights as citizens they must
learn to read and write in "the language of
the whites": universal suffrage exists in few
countries, and even there it is a recent in¬
novation. Those of our compatriots who are
the victims of such discrimination must
speak or at least understand our Spanish (or
Portuguese in Brazil) when they need to
communicate with us, while we do not make
the slightest effort to understand Quechua,
Aymara and other indigenous languages, or
those African languages which have been
transplanted to America.
The cultural colonialization initiated by
colonialization pure and simple goes on. In
some countries a newly emergent national
conscience has begun to collect and preserve
in writing indigenous traditions and legends,
the mythology and signs which abound in
the dreams and languages of our Indians
and Blacks, but so far these works possess
more anthropological than literary interest.
And so, whatever our ethnic origin or
ideology, all those of us today who practice
the terrorism of an official language and
culture originating in Europe are "col¬
onizers". In a word, all those of us who
went to school.
But it was precisely at school long
before we realized that we were becoming
the willing or unwilling accomplices of this
vast discriminatory operation that we
became aware that we were ourselves endur¬
ing the "perpetual dictatorship" of the
hydra-headed adult: parents, teachers, con¬
fessors, traffic policemen, shopkeepers,
bystanders. They knew what was right for
JORGE ENRIQUE ADOUM, Ecuadorian poet
and writer, is the author of some ten books of
poetry, a novel, two plays and many essays. He is
currently a member of the editorial staff of the
Unesco Courier.
The Black Corsair (in background at right) attacks one of "the great Spanish
galleons which brought to Europe the treasures of central America, Mexico and
the equatorial region". This illustration by G. Gamba appeared in an Italian edition,
published in 1921, of Emilio Salgari's II Corsaro Nero.
us, what we ought to say and do; they knew
what we wanted better than we did
ourselves. And at home our parents, as well
as giving us the food they liked and ordain¬
ing the bedtime that suited them, imposed
on us their favourite stories which were pro¬
bably, we suspect, the only ones they knew.
When we reached a certain age we had
had our fill of these "children's stories"(l),
perhaps because we were tired of their
message and had had no desire to be inno¬
cent, diligent, or submissive; we had lost in¬
terest in stories in which, Tom Thumb ex¬
cepted, the heroine was always a girl who
had been or would be one day, a princess
(1) See "The Sting in the Fairy Tale", Unesco
Courier, January 1979.
("girls' things" we called them, even though
later on we should feel something akin to
love for Andersen's little mermaid), nor did
we want to be the prince whose appearance,
albeit decisive, comes only at the end of the
story. We boys wanted to escape from an
authoritarian, dictatorial, restrictive reality
which did not even leave us the right to
dream. Alice (in a book which we stupidly
refused to read at that time, for the same
reason) had only to open her eyes for all to
change to reality, but in our case closing our
eyes was not enough to provide escape from
reality, from the clutches of the ubiquitous,
omnipotent adult, whose omniscience
asphyxiated us. And our first rebellion
against this other form of colonialism lay in
reading: as soon as we could read for
20

In Jules Verne's novel The Children of Captain Grant,
Mary and Robert Grant embark on the Duncan in search
of their father whom they eventually find, after many
adventures on land and sea, on an island near New
Zealand. Left, an incident from the story which with
20,000 Leagues under the Sea and The Mysterious Island
belongs to Verne's series of novels with a nautical set¬
ting. This illustration, by the French artist Edouard Riou,
appeared in the first edition, published in 1867-8.
ourselves, we read those books "for grown¬
ups" which adults had never read to us(2).
To compensate for what appeared as a
kind of immanent injustice at home, at
school, in neighbourhood and town, what
we looked for in reading was getting away
from home, as Tom Sawyer did, bringing a
little order to life, and righting wrongs
(although we would never have dared to go
to a cemetery at night as he did) like some
junior Robin Hood defending the innocent
and denouncing the guilty. But we "iden¬
tified" more with Mark Twain's other hero,
Huckleberry Finn (in order to be like him we
even tried vainly to make a corncob pipe
from the husks of the cooked maize we ate
each day at home), because of his authorita¬
rian and unjust father, because of the socie¬
ty he abandoned and which rejected him,
because of his adventure in the treasure
cave (Ali Baba on the Mississippi) and his
voyage on the raft; we also suffered with^
(2) Books came from Spain, such as the Tales
published in Spanish by the house of Calleja in a
format no bigger than a cigarette packet and
which were easy to read surreptitiously, and the
books from the publishing house of Sopeña,
which were later also published in Argentina. In
1889 José Martí created in New York the
magazine La Edad de Oro ("The Golden Age")
"A monthly publication of recreation and in¬
struction for the children of America". Four
issues were actually published which Cuban
children have been able to read in many later edi¬
tions, but they contained more instruction than
recreation. The most important Latin American
author of children's books, Monteiro Lobato,
founded in 1918 Brazil's first publishing house
(before then books came from Portugal). He
created figures well-known to all Brazilian
readers, such as Emilia, a talking rag doll obsess¬
ed with correcting the errors of Nature, Doña
Benta who accepts that children's creative im¬
agination changes reality, and Tía Nastasia (Aunt
Anastasia) who sees sin and evil in everything she
does not know, and the Viscount of Sabugos, an
adult who only believes what is written in books.
© Ll%(StS
PRÉFAI L
_
The Three Musketeers, Athos, Porthos and Aramis, as
depicted with their inseparable companion D'Artagnan
on the opening page of the 1846 edition of Alexandre
Dumas' novel.
21

"...I embraced [the little finger] in both my arms and put the tip of it with the ut¬
most respect to my lips." Drawing by the Cuban artist Daniel Garcia Rojas was
produced for a recent edition of Gulliver's Travels. It illustrates an episode in
Gulliver's second voyage, when he visits the island of Brobdingnag which is
peopled by giants.
the threat of an imminent and enforced
return to school routine after his adventures
on the great rivers of north America.
These exceptions apart, we hardly ever
found any child or adolescent figures in our
reading whose destiny we could share or ap¬
propriate for ourselves. Rudyard Kipling's
characters did not command our loyalty. As
far as Mowgli was concerned our opinions
tended to vacillate rather than diverge. On
the one hand we understood that men were
"the chosen race", and this did not fail to
reassure us when faced with the black pan¬
ther and the yellow-eyed tiger; but at the
same time we reproached him for a kind of
ingratitude towards the animals which had
saved him, fed him and welcomed him like
the real king of the jungle, a precursor of
Tarzan. And qualities which we detested
also reappeared in these books: hierarchy,
authority, the duty of obedience. Kim, on
the other hand, we judged summarily and
unconditionally as a traitor. It is not that we
were particularly precocious or perspica¬
cious; it was just that we had been studying
the independence period at school and we
knew that many descendants of Spaniards
born in America had instigated and fought
in the wars of independence, so that we
could not justify Kim's activities as a secret
agent in an army foreign to the country of
his birth, except by what our teacher called
"links of blood". As for Collodi's Pinoc¬
chio, a book we had been led to read after
seeing a film, we were already sufficiently
steeped in lying to know that your nose did
not grow if you told lies, and with the
aplomb of the guilty we were not unduly
disturbed by the "Talking Cricket" of the
22
conscience. On the other hand, we relished
the bravado with which Pinocchio lived the
life of a dissipated adult, even though this
was not our greatest ambition.
Perhaps we admired our adult "models"
adventurers, corsairs, pirates and
sailors because Adventure with a capital A
had to take place at sea. We had to put
distance oceans between us and injustice
which, because we had not travelled, seemed
to us purely local.
Our first heroes,, in both senses of the
word, were the characters of the Italian
Emilio Salgari: Sandokan (the name itself
rings like an epic) the Malay corsair who
fought against the British colonial
authorities, the Black Corsair and the Red
Corsair who braved the Spanish governors
of the Caribbean and who through a cruel
quirk of fate fell in love with the daughter or
niece of their worst enemy. From
Guatemala to Uruguay, from Puerto Rico
to Ecuador, we formed gangs not minding
which side we were on. (But we had no girls
to play Yolanda, the daughter of the Black
Corsair, who was Queen of the Caribbean).
The same thing happened when we played
The Three Musketeers only the first
episode, since we all wanted to be d'Ar-
tagnan with swords made for us by the
local carpenter from pointed pieces of wood
with cross-pieces for handles: there was
never anyone to play Milady or Constance.
For us boys, anyway, this was the least in¬
teresting side of the story.
Perhaps because of so much sea and so
many islands; because of the vision of boar¬
ding parties and hand-to-hand fighting with
pirates which kept us awake at nights;
because of our envy of Robinson Crusoe
who had managed to survive for twenty-
eight years, two months and nineteen days
on an island where no one could enforce
their wishes on him; because of Gulliver's
Travels (we did not venture further than the
first voyage which made us realize the im¬
becility of war, and thus missed the second
where the stupidities of the powerful are ex¬
posed, and the cornucopia of wonders in the
third, with its flying island where talking is
done with objects instead of words and
where food has geometric shapes); because
of the children of Captain Grant (at first
Verne had bored us, perhaps because the
journeys to the moon and to the centre of
the earth were too much for us, but later on
we came to love the enigmatic and con¬
tradictory Captain Nemo); because of the
adventures of the Count of Monte Cristo
with his hoard of treasure which would
allow him that just revenge which seemed
proportionately speaking similar to our
own... for all these reasons, some of us left
home and became, as destiny dictated,
waiters, travelling salesmen, proof-readers
and booksellers, until the day when each
one found the place earmarked for him in
society, as they say, through a kind
of fatalistic spirit rather than any social
determinism.
The thirst for justice and the great dream
of adventure had waned in most cases into a
"practical spirit", and although some still
wished to transform life and the world,
almost all became tradesmen, soldiers,
employees of one kind or another,
policemen, economists, informers, am¬
bassadors or notaries.
Nor was the fate of our sisters and girl
cousins more enviable: after dreaming of the
Prince Charming who would deliver them
from servitude, they now began to weep
with Louisa M. Alcott's Little Women and
then later for such books were forbidden
by the nuns at schoolthey thought they
had the right to the same destiny in love as
Madame Bovary or Eugénie Grandet
(without the same end, obviously)... and
ended up by making the best match their
parents had been able to find for them or by
yielding to the never very original declara¬
tions of the local Don Juan.
However, many of us had discovered, at
home or elsewhere, a fabulous and
boundless continent: that of literature. A
few made their home there and continued to
live there until today or until they died;
others made only a fleeting visit: they got to
know Walter Scott and James Fenimore
Cooper, Jack London and Paul Feval,
Eugène Sue, Charles Dickens and Victor
Hugo, and maybe Saroyan and Salinger.
And those who followed us discovered
other, recent treasures: Le Petit Prince, The
Diary of Ann Frank...
But I realize that I am writing in the past
tense. Not because of nostalgia for a distant
adolescence, nor because of the tenacious
dream of liberty and justice, but because
since then the boys have adopted an almost
exclusive diet of picture books and comic
strips and the girls read photo-novels the
kind of trivia churned out by a factory of
sub-literature, in praise of wealth and even
racism which today appear regularly in
magazines. And because, in other countries,
adolescents of both sexes, caught in a dif¬
ficult moment of their collective destiny, are
themselves heroes of history and have no
time to read stories with heroes, because,
turning up noses already used to the smell of
gunpowder, they rightly say to themselves
that literature can wait.
H Jorge Enrique Adoum
