Fifty years
of literary life
A leading Chinese writer looks back
on tumultuous times
by Ba Jin
Ba Jin at his Shanghai home in 1982, aged 77.
I have been writing for fifty years,
and yet I don't consider myself
a man of letters. People come
to literature by different ways. I was
fond of reading novels when I was still
a boy, and would sometimes even forget
to eat or sleep. I did not read for the sake
of study but out of enjoyment. I never
dreamt that I would be a novelist
myself. I began to write novels simply in
order to make sense of things.
I was born into a large bureaucrat-
landlord family in Chengdu, the capital
of Sichuan province, and passed my
childhood among twenty or thirty "up¬
per class" people and the same number
of "lower-class" people. In this well-
off family, I learned about the wretched
lives of servants and sedan bearers. I
heard the complaints of the young
generation, tyrannized by the
BA JIN, born 1904, is a celebrated modern
Chinese novelist. He is currently Vice-
chairman of the China Federation of Literary
and Art Circles, Chairman of the Chinese
Writers'Association, and Director of the China
PEN Centre. His major works include: Trilogy
of Love (The Mist, The Rain, The Lightning),
Trilogy of the Torrent (The Family, Spring,
Autumn), A New Life, Garden of Repose and
Reminiscences of My Writing Life.
hypocritical, selfish older members of
the family. I felt that something was
wrong with our society, but I could not
work out what was wrong, nor did I
know how the sickness could be cured.
When I left home at the age of nine¬
teen, I felt as if I had escaped from a
dreadful nightmare. At twenty-three I
left Shanghai for a strange land Paris,
hoping to find a way to save humanity,
to save the world and myself.
In the spring of 1927 I took a small
room reeking with the smell of gas and
onions on the fourth floor of a small
apartment building in the Rue
Tournefort, in the Latin Quarter. I was
lonely and miserable. In that small
room, which was rarely visited by the
sun, I missed my homeland, my
relatives and friends. A struggle bet¬
ween revolution and counter-revolution
was going on in my country, and the
people were suffering.
In Paris there was a campaign to save
two Italian workers, Sacco and Vanzet-
ti, who had been charged with murder
and held in prison in Boston,
Massachusetts, for six years. Posters of
protest and notices of meetings were
everywhere in the streets. I read the
autobiography of Vanzetti and came
upon such lines as, "I hope every family
has its house, every mouth has bread,
everybody gets an education and
everyone is given the chance to develop
his gifts." I was greatly moved. How
well he had expressed it! Like a key, his
words opened the lock of my heart.
I lived near the Pantheon and passed
it every day. As dusk was falling one
rainy afternoon I stopped in front of the
bronze statue of Jean-Jacques
Rousseau and confided my frustration
and misery to this "citizen of Geneva"
who had dreamed of putting an end to
tyranny and inequality. Back in my
cold, lonely room I sat down to write a
letter in which I asked advice from the
prisoner in the condemned cell. In the
reply which eventually reached me
Vanzetti wrote, "Youth is the hope of
the world . " Several months later he was
executed in the electric chair. Fifty years
later Sacco and Vanzetti were
pardoned.
It was in such circumstances and in
such a mood that I wrote the outlines of
episodes for a novel, while the bells of
Notre-Dame tolled out the passing
hours. I would turn my misery,
loneliness and enthusiasm into lines of
characters on paper. My past loves and
hates, my joys, sorrows, sympathy and
suffering all rushed to my pen. I wrote
quickly. The flame burning in my heart
began to die down and I could close my
eyes in peace. The problem preying on
my mind was solved. I was saved.
After that, whenever I had time I
would pick up my pen and pour out my
feelings on paper so that my young,
lonely heart could find consolation. The
following year I completed my first
novel and posted it from the little
French town of Château-Thierry to a
friend of mine who worked at the Kai-
ming publishing house in Shanghai. I
wanted his opinion of my work which I
wanted to have printed. When I return¬
ed to Shanghai at the end of that year,
I learned from my friend that my novel

would be serialized in the magazine Fic¬
tion Monthly. He also told me that Ye
Shengtao, the magazine's acting editor-
in-chief, had read it and decided to
publish^it.
At that time Fiction Monthly had
great prestige. It opened the door to me
and let me, a young man ignorant of
literature, enter the arena of literature
in triumph.
I learned to write fiction in France. I
shan't forget my teachers: Rousseau,
Hugo, Zola and Romain Rolland. I
learned to integrate writing and life, the
author and his characters. I believe that
the highest achievement of a writer lies
in this fusion through which he devotes
himself to his readers. My novels are the
result of my exploration of life. Each
work is my harvest. It is for my readers
to judge them. I myself adhere to one
unchanging principle: always tell the
truth.
Apart from French writers I also
learned from Russian authors such as
Herzen, Turgenev's novels Fathers and
Sons and Virgin Soil, and Gorky's early
short stories. I am currently translating
Herzen' s memoirs. Among those who
have taught me is Charles Dickens and
the Japanese writers Natsume-Soseki
and Arishima Takeo. Lu Xun is my
Chinese master. My works have been in¬
fluenced to a greater or lesser degree by
these writers. However, my principal
teacher has been life, life in Chinese
society. My feelings and experiences
enabled me to be a writer.
Readers may detect the influence of
different writers in my work, but I did
not deliberately set out to learn from
any particular writer. "I must fight
against the old society," I once said,
"and I need weapons. I would take up
any weapon to fight against the old
order."
In 1928 I returned from France and
settled down in Shanghai. I began by
writing a short story and translated
some short pieces which I sent to
newspapers and magazines. Later the
editors asked for more. I stayed in the
same building as my friend who worked
at the Kaiming publishing house; he
lived upstairs while I lived downstairs. I
was shy of meeting people and speaking
in public, and I didn't want to have
anything to do with outsiders. So those
who wanted my writings always dealt
with my friend, and I could write in
peace. Sometimes I would work
through the night to write a short story,
leaving the manuscript on the desk for
my friend to pick up the next morning.
This was how I wrote The Dog, a short
story which was published in Fiction
Monthly. The more works I published,
the more people came to me for my
writings. Gradually I got to know more
and more people in the literary world.
In 1933 I noted that "I live on friend¬
ship, that's why I'm still alive."
In July 1982, the People's Republic of
China carried out the most massive
census operation in history. The full
results will not be known in detail until
1984, but overall totals were issued in
October 1 982. They show that China's
population at the time of the survey
stood at 1,008,175,288. The urban
population numbered 206,588,000,
while over 800 million persons (about
80 per cent of the total) live in rural far¬
ming areas. Left, his silhouette gleam¬
ing in the water beneath him, a rice-
farmer ploughs with a water-buffalo.
Above, family meal in a commune near
Shanghai.
Photo © Marc Riboud, Pans

Photo René Burn © Magnum, Pans
Hewn into the face of steep cliffs overlooking the Qi
river near Luoyang in Hunan province, the Buddhist
cave-temples of Long-men are one of the artistic
wonders of the world. In the monumental Fang-hsien
temple, which dates from the 7th century AD, the
massive figures of Lokapala and Dvarapala (above)
flank an 1 1 -metre high seated Buddha.
During the first few years of this new
life I usually devoted eight or nine
months annually to writing and travel¬
led to see my friends during the rest of
the year. I lived on my royalties alone.
Because of my writing I did not marry
until I was forty. Until then my friends'
homes were my home; I travelled widely
to see my friends. I kept "travel notes".
Sometimes I shut myself up in my study
for a year at a time in order to write. I
once described myself in these words:
"Day and night an inner fire consumed
me. My hands trembled as I con¬
templated the suffering ofmany people,
including my own. I wrote constantly,
always in the same humdrum surroun¬
dings: a bare room with the sunlight
slanting in through the window; piles of
books and newspapers and writing
paper on the square table in front of me;
a worn-out armchair and two small
stools." The war reached Shanghai in
1932 and I had to move. However, I
didn't change my way of life nor did I
stop writing.
In 1934 1 visited Japan where I stayed
for a few months in Yokohama and
then spent several months in Tokyo. In
August of the following year some of
my friends in Shanghai founded the
Cultural Life Publishing House and in¬
vited me to do some editing work. I ac¬
cepted their offer and edited several
series of books. In the next twenty
years, I spent part of my time editing
literary works and translating, and
naturally there was less time for writing.
But the enthusiasm of my youth did not
wane, and my pen did not allow me to
rest.
In 1937, when the war of resistance
against Japan broke out, I left Shanghai
for the south. I returned and then
travelled to the southwest. My way of
life was changing, but I did not stop
writing. It was in these circumstances
that I finished writing the trilogy
entitled The Torrent. I had scarcely
made a simple home for myself in a city
before I was forced to leave, empty-
handed except for some paper. In those
wandering days I had to change my
writing habits. In some places it was
even difficult to buy a bottle of ink!
When I was writing The Garden of
Repose, I always had an ink-stick, a
Chinese brush and a stack of letter
paper with me. When I stopped at a
place I would borrow a small plate,
pour a little water on to it, grind the ink-
stick and then sit down to write.
When the Chinese people were
liberated and the People's Republic of
China was founded, I wanted to use my
pen, which had been used to writing
about darkness and misery, to write
about new people and new deeds, to
celebrate the people's victory and joy.
But I had not had the time to familiarize ,v

Above, children in Shanghai's Tsao Yang Middle School take a short break to exercise their eyes. China is making massive efforts to
modernize and extend the benefits of its educational system. By 1 980, 93 per cent of children of elementary school age were in school,
as against 49 per cent in 1 952. Below, Shanghai shoppers take care not to put all their eggs in one basket. Shanghai is China's biggest
city (with a population of 1 1 ,859,000, according to the 1 982 census) as well as its greatest port and commercial and industrial centre.

with these subjects. I also took
part in non-literary activities and
therefore at this period I wrote little.
In 1952 I went to Korea to see the
Chinese volunteers and stayed among
them for some time. This was the first
time that I had met ordinary soldiers
and lived with them. I was somewhat
anxious : a man who had shut himself up
in his study for so long and who had
landed up in a great family of revolu¬
tionary soldiers would surely be a target
of criticism. Not a bit of it! The soldiers
did not treat me as an outsider and
welcomed me as if I were one of them.
I had come from the homeland, and
they were extremely kind to me. Feel¬
ings like love and hatred are more
manifest in places where war is raging.
I became attached to these people and
their surroundings and became their
friend. I no longer thought about my
writing.
I often travelled abroad. I published
a number of articles and essays in praise
of friendship between peoples. I made
new friends and envisioned the shining
future of cultural exchanges between
different nations. I wrote widely in
praise of our new society and our new
life. These writings were used as
evidence of my "crime" and were con¬
demned as "poisonous weeds" during
the ten years of the "Great Cultural
Revolution". I myself was illegally de¬
tained and suffered from all kinds of
mental torture and humiliation. During
these ten years I was deprived of all my
civic rights and denied the freedom to
publish. I began translating Herzen's
memoirs, a project I had had in mind
for some forty years.
Each day I translated several hundred
words. As I worked, I felt as if I were
walking through the darkness with
Herzen. As he cursed the dictatorship of
Tsar Nicholas I, I cursed the fascist rule
exercised by the "gang of four". I firm¬
ly believed that their days were
numbered. I survived to witness their
fall. I was liberated a second time, and
once again I picked up my pen.
Excited and elated, I felt that a vast
new horizon stretched before me. I
wanted to write. There was so much I
wanted to say. But I don't have many
years left, I can't afford to waste a
second. I've set myself a five-year plan.
I intend to write two novels, a book en¬
titled Reminiscences of Literary Crea¬
tion, five volumes of "Random
Thoughts", and to complete my
translation of Herzen's memoirs. Of
these thirteen books, four have already
been published, including the first
volume of Herzen's memoirs. The
second, entitled True Words, is being
printed. I shall do all I can to complete
the other eight works. I must steer clear
of anything that may sidetrack me, and
save every minute for my writing. Some
8
people regard me as a "personality"
and arrange all kinds of social activities
for me. Others want to interview me and
note down whatever I say, hoping to get
some historic testimony before it is too
late. But all I want to do is to write until
I die. I want to write novels, not
necessarily true stories. But I must sum
up what I experienced during the ten
years of the "Cultural Revolution".
Those ten unforgettable years con¬
stitute an important episode in the
history of humanity. Few writers in the
world experienced such dreadful,
ridiculous, strange, painful events. We
were all involved, we all played a part,
and today when we look back at what
we did during those years we find our
behaviour ridiculous but it didn't
seem like that at the time. I often say to
myself that if I don't sum up those ten
hard years and analyse myself sincerely,
I may one day again regard cruelty,
savagery, and stupidity as part of the
normal order of things. The mental debt
can never be paid. I have decided to
write these two novels first to pay off
this debt and secondly to end my fifty
years of literary life.
I have never thought about writing
technique or ways of expression when
writing my stories. What I care about is
how to help people lead a better life, a
worthy life, and how to help my readers
contribute to society and to the people.
All my writings have this aim.
In 1935, two years after the publica¬
tion of my novel The Family, I said: "I
have never ceased to attack my enemies
ever since I picked up my pen to write.
But who are my enemies? All the old
feudal codes, all the irrational systems
that hamper social progress and human
fulfilment, all the forces that destroy
Photo © China, Beijing
China's great rivers, supplemented b.y a canal net¬
work begun as early as the 5th century BC, are
vast arteries of communication and transport, pro¬
vide precious irrigation water and, harnessed to
produce electric power, are an increasingly impor¬
tant renewable energy source. But in many parts
of the country they also pose the threat of serious
flooding. The dramatic photo at right shows a
rescue team helping stricken villagers to safety
through the foaming waters of the Changjiang
(Yangtse) during a flood which in 1981,
devastated parts of Sichuan province. The

love. I've never budged from this posi¬
tion and never compromised."
When I met a group of Sinologists in
Paris in September 1981 someone asked
how I had survived the "cultural revolu¬
tion". Their sincere desire to under¬
stand something which seemed quite
ordinary to us set my mind working.
Those ten dreadful years had taught me
something. At last I came to realize
what I have learned from those long
years of disaster.
Gradually things became clearer in
my mind. It must be love, fire, hope,
something positive. Many people had
survived because they had these
qualities. But many had been destroyed
and left to us their love, fire and hope to
be transmitted to posterity. No, I shall
never lay down my pen.
Ba Jin
catastrophe rendered over a million homeless and
claimed 1,350 lives. Air photo above shows the
great hydroelectric power station at Liujiaxia. It
has been estimated that by 1977 hydroelectric
power stations provided nearly 38 per cent of
China's total power generating capacity. Above
right, detail of an ancient wooden temple in honour
of a water divinity at Taiyuan. The projecting
eaves are supported by the ingenious system of
bracket sets found in some of the earliest surviving
Chinese buildings and which became a
characteristic feature of Chinese architecture.
