The
eternal return
In Africa old age is a privileged
moment in the endless circle of life
by Nsang O'Khan Kabwasa
IN the African society from which I
comethe Ambuun, the people indi¬
genous to the Kwilu region in Zaire-
people are not regarded as being elderly at
a specific age, but are recognized as such
when their hair goes white or when they
become grandparents, and then they are
addressed with deference and honorary
titles are attached to their names. They
are generally called tata (father), mbuta
(elder) or even nkuluntu (literally: "old
head"). In this society of oral traditions,
as in most African societies, old people
are the foundation of village life. It is said,
moreover, that a village without old peo¬
ple is like a hut eaten away by termites.
The respect in which they are held
stems not only from their having achieved
long life a rare phenomenon in Africa
but also from the African animistic view
of the universe in which life is seen as a
never-ending current flowing through
succeeding generations of mankind.
Before his birth, the African is already part
of this process; he forms part of a group
from which he is indissociable, he cannot
be separated either from those who have
preceded him or from those who will
follow him, and traditional values will pro¬
tect him against abandonment and
solitude.
In this African view of the world, which
is linked to the concept of vital force, old
age constitutes a stage in human life
towards which everyone aspires since
the belief in an afterlife, in the continuity
of life and in ancestor worship places old
people in a special position, since they are
the link between the living and the dead.
This unending life is seen as a circular
movement going from birth to death and
from death to birth (see diagram).
Just as the child is destined to become
an adult, the adult an old man, and the old
man an ancestor, the ancestor as vital
force will be reborn to complete the circle
of life in the universe. In the Ambuun con¬
ception of. the universe, after death
begins the invisible life of the spirits, that
of the ancestors. This invisible world con¬
tains the supreme vital force which the
ancestors communicate to old people.
To each of the three ages of man there
corresponds a particular function. Thus
childhood ¡s a period of learning, a very
NSANG O'KHAN KABWASA, of Zaire, has
been a programme specialist In Unesco's Divi¬
sion of Literacy, Adult Education and Rural
Development since 1977. He was formerly a
programme officer with the Manpower and
Training Sections of the United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa, in Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia. He has won literary prizes for
his short stories, written in English, and his
short stories for children, written in French.
In certain countries there is
a strong and persistent
tradition that young people
should show respect and
deference towards the
"elders", protecting them
from solitude and neglect
in the village community.
At the same time there is a
growing tendency for
achievements in formal
education to become the
yardstick for determining
status. This erosion of
community values, linked
notably to the spread of
the individualistic values
of urban life, heightens the
risk that older people may
become isolated, marginal
figures. Right, an African
elder.
Photo Marc Riboud © Magnum, Paris
physical period of life, during which
spiritual development is in gestation.
Maturity is a productive period of life
when man reaches physical and spiritual
equilibrium. Old age is the age of wisdom
and of teaching. There is thus no question
of retirement, for "even if the bodies of
old people are frail, their spirit does not go
into retirement". On the contrary, it is a
time when the life of the spirit becomes
intensified.
Old people continue to fulfil important
functions in society, functions which rely
on their knowledge of traditions in various
fields: legal, religious, medico-magical,
educational or economic. It is at the time
of initiation that, as possessors of tradi¬
tional knowledge, they ritually transmit
their practical experience orally to the
new generation. That is why, as the
African sage Hampâté Bâ of Mali has so
aptly expressed it, it is a common saying
in Africa that "Each time an old man dies,
a whole library goes up in flames".
Moreover, old people are not only
respected, they are also feared; though if
it should happen that an elderly person is
not on very good terms with the other
members of the family, the magical force
which he possesses may sometimes
work against him and he runs the risk of
being regarded as a Ndoki (a sorcerer, a
Right, a banyan tree in
Madagascar. The banyan
(Ficus Benghalensls) is a
fig tree native to tropical
areas of Asia although
varieties are also found in
Africa and Latin America.
From its branches the tree
drops aerial roots which
form new trunks which
send out aerial roots in
their turn. Thus the tree
can grow to cover an im¬
mense area (up to
700 metres in circum¬
ference). It can grow to a
height of 30.5 metres. The
symbol of longevity and
the focal point of com¬
munity life, the banyan
was chosen as the logo of
the World Assembly on
Aging.
14

caster of evil spells). He may then be sent
away and banished from the village, but
generally efforts are made to appease him
with presents so that he will withdraw his
evil spells and bless the activities of the
young people.
With advancing age and the weakening
of physical powers, the elderly become
dependent, and it is the youngest
member of the family who is responsible
for looking after them. It is for this reason
that every man aims to have a large family
as insurance for his old age. Naturally,
such systems only work effectively when
the entire family lives in the same village
and follows a traditional way of life.
However, nowadays there is a risk of
old people being socially excluded or
isolated when the young go off to the
towns or to foreign countries. With the
decline in traditional values, the introduc¬
tion of modern Western schools and the
spread of the individualistic values of ur-
Reddish brown wood¬
en staff with female
head (length 105 cm;
Capico, Angola).
periences and imparting the history and
traditional knowledge which they alone
can transmit.
They could likewise contribute to the
establishment of "data banks" of tradi¬
tional knowledge. An attempt should be
made to develop the possibility of in¬
tegrating the elderly through their active
participation in the education of the
young, for they have their role to play in
contemporary African society and this is
the only way of avoiding their isolation
from the other generations. The elderly
still have something to teach us, and the
respect paid to them in traditional
societies should not be regarded as out¬
moded. The system which was founded
on the hierarchy of age and ancestor wor¬
ship should be preserved and readapted
to the circumstances of contemporary
Africa, in which African and Western
values exist side by side.
Chokwe staff sur¬
mounted by a head
wearing the tall
headdress of a
chief. Two smaller
heads are set into
the sides of the
headdress.
ban life, the spectre of old people's
homes has begun to appear in some
African cities. The question is what can
be done about it.
The affirmation of cultural identity and
the restoration to their true value of the
African traditions mentioned above could
serve as a guide to young people in Africa
in the construction of a modern Africa
which would not be based solely on im¬
ported values unsuited to African socio¬
economic conditions. This would reject
In black Africa the chief's staff is a mark of his
prestige and the insignia of his authority, and in
some regions plays an important role during
palavers between the elders of different clans.
The knobs of these "palaver staffs" are carved
with representations of human or animal
figures symbolizing the ancestor whose in¬
terests the chief defends. Right, copper nails
are embedded in the anthropomorphic knob of
this Chokwe chief's staff (length 77 cm;
Cubango district, Angola).
the individualistic conception of making
people of a certain age go into retirement
on the fringe of society because they are
no longer physically productive, ignoring
the spiritual contribution which old peo¬
ple can make to society.
The spirit of the old does not go into
retirement, and it would be a good idea, in
order to maintain the contacts between
the young and the old, to encourage the
young to take every opportunity to learn
from the old, who are the possessors of
wisdom and a knowledge of life, while at
the same time recognizing the impor¬
tance of Western science and tech¬
nology.
This return to the wisdom of our elders
might take the form of encouraging visits
by old people to schools. They would thus
be called on to contribute to education by
giving an account of their own ex-
Wooden staff with
knob depicting a fan¬
tastic animal (length
98 cm; Djougou dis¬
trict, Dahomey).
5
©
DEA TH west
visible world
IS years INITIATION
invisible world
African cosmogony: The circle of life
15
