Photo E. Erwitt © Magnum, Pans

Three in one
The single complete art of calligraphy,
poetry and painting
by Huang Miaozhi
IN China, poetry, painting and calligraphy are not
confined within the boundaries which usually separate
these arts. Whatever the specific characteristics of
each may be, all three are inspired and determined by the
nature of ideographic expression; all three aspire to grasp
with the same instrument, the brush, the profound nature of
existence, the "breath of inspiration" that quickens every
form and gives it its special rhythm; all three are the arts of
the brush-stroke. In the words of Han Yu, a great writer
who lived during the Tang dynasty. "It matters little
whether a speech be short or long... if the 'breath' be
powerful".
This notion of the "primordial breath" (the qi) is central.
The aim of Chinese aesthetics is to achieve the living essence
of the quickening breath, of rhythm, of life: art and the art
of living are one and the same. The brush-stroke, whether
in a painting or a poem, whether it transcribes the branch
HUANG MIAOZHI, Chinese art critic, is a member of the Chinese
Committee ofFine Arts and Literature. Among his published works are
How to Appreciate the Arts? and a number of biographies of modern
Chinese painters including Qi Baishi, Xu Baihong (Jupeon) and Fu
Baoshi.
of a tree or a character, must always be a living form. It is
this common effort to evoke the essential which is
characteristic of calligraphy, poetry and painting.
But painting alone englobes the other modes of expres¬
sion. The unity between painting and poetry appears early
in Chinese history. In a scroll painting attributed to Gu
Kaizhi (late fourth century AD), Admonitions of the In¬
structress to the Court Ladies, the elegantly calligraphed
text of a moralist may already be read.
During the Tang dynasty (7th to 10th century), the period
which marks the real beginning of scroll painting, painters
were inspired by the works of the great poets Du Fu and Li
Bai (8th century), and poets were closely interested in pic¬
torial creation. In a judgment which underscores the con¬
cern of the Chinese poet and painter to render life in all its
profundity, Du Fu explains why the renowned horse-painter
Han Gan is inferior to his master Cao Ba:
To paint his horses Han Gan has depicted the flesh but
not the skeleton
That is why his chargers have no stamina.
Already we find those who were both painters and poets.
Wang Wei (701-761), for example, was the inventor of the
12

Calligraphy Ung No Lee © Ed. Ides et Calendes, Neuchâtel
Writing at one
with the universe
Opposite page, morning gymnastics in
Shanghai. Above, the Chinese character ren,
"man". The two ¡mages strikingly illustrate a
distinctive feature of the Chinese ideogram: its
link with the real world. In early Chinese
writing, many characters even consisted of
small drawings, or pictograms. By preserving a
form of continuity between signs and the vis¬
ible world, the Chinese express the desire
which has always been theirs, that man should
not be cut off and isolated from the universe.
The affinity between ideograms and the signs
drawn in ink by the poet and painter Henri
Michaux (left) reflects his fascination with
Chinese writing and his desire to create a
poetic language halfway between words and
forms in which the stirrings of life can be felt in
the sign itself.
13

Photo © Private collection. Pans
Photo © China, Beijing
Mountains
and water
In Chinese, landscape painting is called
"Mountain and Water" painting. For
the Chinese, mountains and water are
the two poles of nature and also, by a
typically Chinese assimilation, of
human sensibility. In the words of Con¬
fucius: "The mountain enchants the
man of heart; water rejoices the man of
spirit." Painting landscapes is thus a
way of painting man, not his physical
attributes, but his inner being, his
torments, his dreams. Traditional
Chinese painting employed water col¬
ours and inks, and the water-holder,
above, which contained the water used
to moisten the artist's ink-sticks, is
itself in the form of a drop of water. The
"painting", left, is in fact a highly
polished piece of marble whose natural
veining forms a mountain landscape, to
which a calligraph has been added. The
calligraph, below left, of the Chinese
ideogram for the word shan, or moun¬
tain, is echoed In the bronze ritual ob¬
ject (4th century BC), bottom right. The
theme of the mountain is still omnipre¬
sent in Chinese art, as witness the pain¬
ting, above right, by the artist Fu Baoshi
(1904-1965) and the photo-landscape
with added calligraph, above far right,
by the world-famous Hong Kong
photographer Cheng Fuli.
Calligraphy Ung No Lee © Ed. Ides et Calendes, Neuchâtel
14

Photo © Chinese edition, Unesco Courier Photo Cheng Fuli © China, Beijing
Photo (9 China, beijing
technique of monochrome painting, an adept of chan (zen
in Japanese) spirituality, and a musician as well. The great
writer and calligrapher Su Shi would write of him:
You would say his landscapes are poems
And his poems landscapes.
Another painter-poet was Du Fu's friend Zheng Qian,
who presented the emperor with one of his paintings on
which he had calligraphed poems. In an extraordinary token
of esteem, the emperor himself noted on the painting:
"Zheng Qian, the genius with three talents."
This threefold mastery combined in a single person is that
of the "literary-man-painter' ' . Literary men's painting, which
developed under the Tang dynasty but blossomed above all
under the Song and the Yuan, the Ming and the Qing, is what
is usually meant when people discuss Chinese painting. It owes
its great freedom, directly or indirectly, to Taoist and Buddhist
influences.
One of the most subtle masters of this marriage of poetry,
calligraphy and painting was Su Shi (Su Dongpo,-
1035-1101), with whom the unity of the three arts was
established, to become the mainstream of Chinese painting.
One day, while intoxicated at the home of a friend, he
painted a bamboo tree on the wall and added this
comentary:
The alcohol vapours have expanded in my empty belly,
Rocks and bamboo grow there willy nilly,
My body cannot cope with them,
That's why I project them on your white wall.
And he went on, not without humour :
But you, you do not scold me, you seem content.
There are not many connoisseurs in the world like you,
my friend.
15

Drawing, below, of a young cowherd playing
the flute comes from a famous treatise on
Chinese painting. The Mustard-Seed Garden
(1 679-1 701 ) which contains over 400 illustra¬
tions. The caption to this drawing reads: "The
sound of a flute is heard among the flowers. A
young cowherd passes." Carved in stone, the
flautist, right, is one of 10,000 Buddhist
sculptures created over a period of a mere
70 years during the Song dynasty at
Baodingshan, near Dazu, Sichuan province.
The flute-player forms part of a series of reliefs
depicting the herdsman's life.
AC
tA
Drawing © Bollingen Foundation, New York Photo Ariane Bailey, Unesco
One of his contemporaries, Mi Fu, was a famous painter
and also a gifted calligrapher. The following story is told
about him, in accordance with a Chinese custom whereby the
distinctive styles of great painters are described in the form
of anecdotes:
"One day when he was at Wu-Wei, Mi Fu saw a giant rock
of extraordinary ugliness. Delighted, he donned his
ceremonial costume and prostrated himself before the rock,
which he addressed as 'dear elder brother'."
Under the Yuan dynasty (13th-14th century) this three-
point relationship became even stronger and deeper. Ni Zan
(or Yunlin, 1301-1374) was outstanding among the great
masters of the period. He was a peerless landscape painter
whose work was elegant, austere and imbued with poignant
nostalgia.
If painting in China is the complete art form in which poem
and calligraphy are an integral part of the painting, restoring
the harmony and mystery of the universe in all its dimensions,
poetry is considered to be the quintessence of art. It
transforms the written signs, enjoying an almost sacred
16
status, into song, and its supreme function is to link human
genius with the primary vital forces of the universe. Imbued
with Confucian and Taoist thought, Chinese poetry unites
reason and detachment. It aspires to penetrate reality and to
render, with the savour of life, "the impalpable rustling of
sound", helped by the innate musicality of the Chinese
language with its several tones.
In the painting, the poem is by no means an adjunct; it in¬
troduces a new dimension and opens the bounds of the picture
to life in time. Shi Dao, a celebrated painter of the early Qing
dynasty (18th- 19th century), was also the author of a famous
Treatise on Painting. His life was an unceasing investigation
both into technical problems and into the nature of artistic
creation and human destiny. In one of his landscapes he wrote
these lines:
This well-nigh deserted spot fills me with joy
The view of this mountain which hides clouds makes me
joyful.
Then he adds this piece of self-criticism, a reflection which
is Taoist in inspiration:

* * m
branch tip hibiscus blossom
Chinese poets have always made subtle use of the evocative
power of calligraphy. In a quatrain the first line of which is
reproduced above, the poet Wang Wei (701-761 ), describing an
hibiscus about to blossom, succeeds in conveying the idea of
what it would be like to live from within the tree the experience
of coming into bud and flowering. This is how François Cheng,
in his" book L 'Ecriture Poétique Chinoise (Chinese poetic writing),
comments on the first line of Wang Wei's quatrain.
"The line can be translated as: 'At the branch tips, hibiscus
blossoms'. Even a reader who knows nothing of Chinese can ap¬
preciate the concordance between the visual appearance of the
characters and the meaning of the words. Reading the characters
from left to right one has the impression of watching the process
of a tree coming into flower (Rrst character: a bare tree; second
character: something is visible at the end of the branches; third
character: a bud appears; fourth character: the bud opens; fifth
character: in full flower). But a reader who knows Chinese will
see even more. Subtly hidden in the ideograms is the notion of
man (X) entering into the tree in spirit and participating in its
metamorphosis.
Chinese poets have used a variety of methods to introduce the idea of
the Void into their works. Poem above is a veritable labyrinth of signs in
which, starting from any given point, the reader can choose to take
many different routes, full of surprises.
Naxi hieroglyphs
© Chinese edition, Unesco Courier
In addition to the characters used by the Han Chinese, certain of China's
minority nationalities have at one time or another created their own writ¬
ten language. The Naxi (230,000 persons who live mainly in the region
of Lijiang, Yunan province) developed a hieroglyphic language con¬
sisting of basic pictorial symbols and ideograms. The language was used
for the composition of canonical books of their religion (known as
Dongbaism), for recording events of everyday life, keeping accounts,
and the exchange of messages between mountain villages. It yields im¬
portant evidence on the origins of writing as well as throwing light on the
Naxi culture. In China today research is being carried out into the links
between Naxi hieroglyphs and the Chinese language. Table below
shows, Naxi hieroglyphs (left-hand column), Han hieroglyphs (right
hand column) and modern Chinese ideograms (central column). Above,
Naxi hieroglyphs from the Dongba scripture, "The Origin of the Human
Being".
My words are strange, my drawing is clumsy,
All is but illusion, even this work.
To look from the poem to the landscape, with its pines,
clouds and mountains, is to be filled with deeper emotion. Shi
Dao has heightened our perception of the uplifting of the
mountain and the Vacuity represented by the clouds. This no¬
tion of Vacuity, no less essential to Chinese philosophy than
the famous Yin-Yang principle, plays a central role in music
and poetry but is most fully and visibly expressed in painting.
Vacuity in a painting does not only mark the "unoccupied"
area in contrast to an "occupied" area; far from being an in¬
ert presence, Vacuity is a dynamic element. Linked to the idea
of the "breath of life", it is pre-eminently the location of
those transformations which lie at the heart of the conception
of man and the world in Chinese thought.
The favourite texts of Chinese calligraphers are doubtless
poetic texts (verses, poems, poetic prose). Calligraphy in
China exalts the visual beauty of ideograms . In practising this
major art, every Chinese rediscovers the profound rhythm of
his being and enters into communion with the elements. Not
confining himself to the simple act of the copyist, the
calligrapher reawakens the expressive movement and the im¬
aginary power of signs. Calligraphy must be the total projec¬
tion of the condition of a soul.
The writer Han Yu praised the famous Tang calligrapher
Zhang Xu in these words: "By the freedom of his script, in
the cursive style which he invariably practised, he expresses
his joy and his anger, his pain and his happiness, his jealousies
and hatreds, his affections and admirations, his intoxication,
his boredom, injustice, everything that thrills his heart." The
calligrapher should also exploit the pictorial possibilities, the
evocative power of characters, as Han Yu adds in his com¬
ments on Zhang Xu: "...he holds everything in his vision:
landscapes, animals, plants, stars, storms, fires, wars, feasts,
all the events of the universe, and expresses them through his
art."
Thus in China poetry, calligraphy and painting constitute
one complete art, a threefold pursuit in which all the spiritual
dimensions of its devoted practitioners are brought into play:
linear song and space, incantatory gestures and visualized
WOrdS. «Huang Miaozhi
17
