THE
SINEWS
OF
WAR
In the following section we
take a look at current use, for
military purposes, of labour
(including the scientific com¬
munity), industrial capacity,
raw materials and land. We
also examine two other
dimensions of the military
scene: military research and
development, and military ex¬
penditures.
10

Sleeping Mars, an
engraving by the 17th-
century artist Jacob de
Gheyn III.

1
MANPOWER
50 million people employed in
meeting the demand
for military goods and services
TENS of millions of persons around the
world are engaged in military activi¬
ties, whether as soldiers, sailors, air¬
men, bureaucrats, scientists, engineers or
general workers. It has been estimated that
over 100 million people are affected, directly
or indirectly, by the $500 thousand million
that the world now devotes to military
preparations. It has not been possible to
substantiate this figure, but the estimates
derived below suggest that roughly 50 mil¬
lion people are employed in meeting the de¬
mand for military goods and services, either
directly or indirectly.
Even this latter figure covers categories of
labour that differ in the manner and the
degree to which they depend on military
outlays. For our purposes it is useful to
distinguish between five categories of
demand for labour that can be said to
be generated or supported by military
expenditures:
a) The labour force, including uniformed
military personnel, engaged directly by
defence ministries to render services or to
provide goods and services that are ex¬
clusively military in character, that is, goods
and services that for all practical purposes
have no civilian utility whatever;
b) The labour force engaged in supplying
intermediate goods and services to the con¬
cerns engaged in meeting the direct demand
from ministries of defence for finished and
specialized military goods and services. This
indirect employment supported by military
expenditures relates to employment by sub¬
contractors, by firms supplying the subcon¬
tractors and so on. There will clearly be at
this level a lingering degree of specialization
for military work, but this would diminish
sharply as one moved down the manufac¬
turing chain;
c) The labour force in manufacturing and
service industries engaged in meeting the
direct demand from ministries of defence for ^
11

THE SINEWS OF WAR
and services that are little different
from those of the civilian market;
d) The labour force engaged in supplying
intermediate goods to the concerns under
(c), that is, a second category of labour
services supported indirectly by military
expenditures;
e) The labour force stemming from the
multiplier concept, which is quite distinct
from the other four categories. All expen¬
diture, including military expenditure, is sub¬
ject to a multiplier effect that permeates
throughout the economy. If, say, the
multiplier in a particular country is estimated
to be two, expenditure of $10 thousand
million will ultimately result in a total incre¬
ment in effective demand of $20 thousand
million.
Provided the economy is not already at
full employment, this means that, in addi¬
tion to the workers directly or indirectly in¬
volved in the provision of defence goods
and services, more jobs will be created as
the defence expenditure ripples through the
economy. Unlike the other categories of
defence-related employment referred to
above, however, these jobs cannot be said
to be "absorbed" by the defence sector.
The labour force directly engaged in ac¬
tivities that have no civilian economic utility
(category [a] above) includes the regular
armed forces and those paramilitary forces
that have similar functions and capabilities,
civilians employed in defence ministries,
scientists and engineers engaged in military
research and development and the workers
in industry directly engaged in the produc¬
tion of weapons and other specialized
military hardware.
At the present time, the world's regular
armed forces total some 25 million persons.
This figure has risen steadily over the past
twenty years, with net stability among the
developed countries accompanied by in¬
creases in many developing countries. The
global figure in 1980 was more than 10 per
cent larger than in 1970 and nearly 30 per
cent larger than in 1960. The countries of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
and the Warsaw Treaty Organization (WTO)
account for slightly over 40 per cent of the
total, China for about 17 per cent and the
developing countries of Asia, Africa and
Latin America for about 38 per cent.
Although it cannot be documented
statistically, it is important to observe that
the range of skills and experience in the
regular armed forces is very wide. A
disproportionately large fraction would con¬
sist of able-bodied young men with, at best,
a high-school education and possessed only
of basic skills in the handling of infantry
weapons. At the same time, however, there
12
would be significant numbers running into
millions world wide of mechanics, techni¬
cians, engineers, pilots and those with ex¬
perience in organization and management.
Indeed, the military's rising demand for skill¬
ed personnel of all kinds is a universally
observed phenomenon.
Paramilitary forces are forces whose func¬
tions and duties fall somewhere between the
civilian police and the regular armed forces.
The number of persons in paramilitary
forces with functions and capabilities in
terms of training, organization and
equipment that approximate to those of
the regular armed forces is estimated by the
International Institute for Strategic Studies
to be roughly 10 million world wide.
By and large, expenditures for para¬
military forces are not included in reported
military budgets. They remain relevant in the
present context because it is reasonable to
assume that an international climate that
made possible the implementation of disar¬
mament measures would also permit reduc¬
tions in paramilitary forces. Indeed, disarma¬
ment measures may require such reduc¬
tions.
The data available on civilians employed in
defence departments are far from complete,
but a very rough global estimate can be con¬
structed as follows. In 1975, nine coun¬
tries Canada, the Federal
Republic of Germany, France, Japan, the
Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the
United States of America, and the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics employed some
2.5 million civilians in their respective
defence departments.
These nine countries accounted for two
thirds of world military expenditure, so that,
assuming a linear relationship and making a
small upward adjustment for the subsequent
growth in the size and cost of the world's
armed forces, it can be estimated that ap¬
proximately four million civilians are current¬
ly employed in defence departments world
wide.
The scientists and engineers engaged in
military research and development (R and D)
are of particular importance both in militan/
terms and in terms of economic and social
consequences. This subject is discussed
more fully below, and here it may simply be
noted that, world wide, an estimated
500,000 scientists and engineers are engag¬
ed in research and development for military
purposes.
Thus far we have identified 39.5 million
persons directly engaged in purely military
activities, but the statement that this work¬
force is totally unproductive from the civilian
standpoint must be qualified somewhat.
The armed forces are frequently called upon
for disaster relief operations, for example. In
many countries the armed forces also
engage in certain civilian activities. Similarly,
a fraction of military R and D is basic
research with potential civilian utility, pro¬
vided, of course, the work is not classified
as secret. Similarly, there is always the
possibility that specialized military research
and development may yield some civilian
spin-offs. However, these qualifications do
not alter the general significance of the fact
that important human resources are being
used for military purposes.
The final body of labour relevant to
category (a), workers directly engaged in
the production of weapons and other
specialized military equipment, is perhaps
the most difficult of all to estimate reliably.
Most of the available information on
defence-related employment does not clear¬
ly distinguish between direct and indirect
employment nor between specialized and
non-specialized output. On balance it would
seem that direct industrial employment
associated with the supply of specialized
military equipment world wide is about four
million.
The global estimate of the labour force
directly employed by the military for the sup¬
ply of goods and services of a specialized
character including services provided by
uniformed military personnel is therefore
about 43.5 million. This is the size of the
labour force that has to be redeployed to
economically productive work and is of im¬
mediate concern in the context of disarma¬
ment and the associated requirements for
conversion.
To this figure must be added the number
of workers in the other four categories of
defence-related employment mentioned
above. With regard to direct employment
associated with military purchases of civilian
goods and services, the data for the United
Kingdom show this to be about 50 per cent
of the direct employment from specialized
demand. Crudely extrapolating this relation¬
ship suggests a global figure of about two
million.
Industrial employment sustained indirect¬
ly by military purchases is probably 50 to 100
per cent as large as direct employment. Tak¬
ing a crude estimate of six million for total
direct industrial employment world wide it
follows that there are an additional three to
six million industrial jobs indirectly sup¬
ported by military expenditure. It should be
stressed again that the output associated
with this indirect employment will
predominantly be directed, in the event of
disarmament, toward civilian markets that
would be expanding under the impetus of
compensatory programmes.

"The labour force directly engaged in activities that have no civilian economic utility
includes the regular armed forces and certain paramilitary forces (...), civilians
employed in defence ministries, scientists and engineers engaged in military research
and development and the workers in industry directly engaged in the production of
weapons and other specialized military hardware."
13
