WHERE
THE FUTURE
BEGINS
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco

SINCE Unesco was created thirty-seven years ago as a result
of its founders' determination to provide mankind, in the
sphere of activities of the mind, with the means for
influencing its own future development, the world has changed
profoundly. The international community has expanded
considerably with the emergence of new nations, and mankind has
constantly strengthened its control over the planet and increased its
mental and material powers. Scientific and technological advances,
the successive stages of which have conspicuously marked
development in the last quarter of a century, for instance, enabling
man even to explore space, have considerably improved the lives of
a certain number of peoples and have now given the whole human
race, for the first time in its history, the means of ridding itself of
the major concerns that have preoccupied it since the dawn of
time food, health, shelter, protection against natural calamities,
security.
The spread of education has given more and more people access
to the most varied and advanced forms of knowledge, thus greatly
enhancing the capacity for innovation, and hence the well-being of
many societies. The achievement of political sovereignty by almost
all nations has made possible an extraordinary widening of the
scope for human initiative and liberty and has given each of them
the opportunity to play an active role in a history that will
henceforth be worked out by a collective effort. Exchanges of
goods, capital, knowledge and know-how are becoming more and
more numerous; intellectual and cultural intermixing proceeds
apace; and anxieties, hopes and fears are beginning to converge,
transcending the demarcation lines drawn by history or established
by geography. As all communities are more and more gathered
together within one and the same network of vital relationships and
even mutual dependence, the prospect at last gleams ahead of a
world community joined in unity of purpose and finally reconciled
with itself, where all will be sure of the means to live a better life,
unhampered by fear, and where there will be an ever fuller
flowering of freedoms and creative faculties.
But entire populations are still living in absolute poverty.
Profound inequalities continue to divide peoples and individuals
and the pursuit of progress itself frequently gives rise to
contradictions; uncertainties and doubts. Disturbing harm is being
done to the natural environment. There is mounting tension
between countries and within some countries; life in many societies
is troubled by violence. Instruments of destruction are being further
developed and stockpiled. Nuclear weapons, by their quantity and
destructive capacity, are already capable of annihilating all that
mankind has constructed through thousands of years of effort, and
even mankind itself. Overarming is not only an expression of the
mutual distrust which is advanced to justify it; but it accentuates the
trend towards division of the world into spheres of influence and
leads to military, economic and cultural interference in the lives of
others; and it diverts an enormous volume of resources from the
satisfaction of societies' urgent needs.
One world
From whatever angle one approaches the major questions which
mankind has to answer, one realizes that the future of modern
societies will be enacted in a context now expanding to worldwide
scale.
As a result, societies which had been able to live in almost total
ignorance of each other up to a few decades ago are now in
increasingly regular contact. Reciprocal influences are becoming
ever more numerous and interdependence is becoming a
multidimensional reality. While interdependence is doubtless a
source of mutual enrichment, receptivity, initiative and creativity,
it also leads to frustrations when accompanied by a deterioration in
the lot of some people, a reduction in the scope for mansuvre,
increased unpredictability and greater vulnerability.
The image that emerges from any analysis or effort of reflection
is therefore that of an increasingly complex world in which sources
of friction are on the increase just as the reasons for co-operating
and the means for communicating are becoming stronger.
Asymmetries and inequalities
Economic statistics provide blunt evidence of the scale of the
disparities between nations and groups of nations. But inequalities
also persist within most societies and are in some cases even
becoming more pronounced. The prosperity of many industrialized
countries may conceal an uneven distribution of income, and some
sections of the population in those countries lead a difficult,
sometimes even precarious existence. In the Third World, vast
populations frequently enjoy none of the benefits of progress and
towns and cities in many cases and at least as regards certain social
categories are like islands of modernity cut off from the
hinterland.
The picture of destitution, concentrated for the most part in
countries of the Third World is a familiar one. An age-old word
poverty has today become a central concept of economics. It
betokens serious deficiencies in food, housing, health and
education and an extremely low income level. Depending on the
criteria adopted, it may be reckoned that there are some 800 million
people in the world living in a state of absolute poverty (World
Bank) or about 1,100 million poor (International Labour Office).
Other equally impressive figures have to be taken into account to
form a more detailed picture of various categories of unfulfilled
needs: 430 million people severely undernourished, 1,000 million
badly housed, 1,300 million without adequate access to drinking-
water, and, according to statistics established by Unesco,
814 million adult illiterates and 123 million children of school age
not attending school.
The international economic system
The present situation is really only the most recent stage in a
process that began in the distant past. The rise of certain countries,
the creation of vast colonial empires for their benefit and the
dawning and development within those same countries of the
industrial revolution had the effect of placing them in a position of
economic dominance, which has finally reduced many other parts
of the world to the state described by the concept of "dependence"
set forth in certain economic theories.
Whether politically colonized or not, most "dependent"
countries served as reservoirs of raw materials or specially
favourable markets for the manufactured goods of the dominant
countries. The economies of these countries have thus developed
basically under the pressure of demands originating elsewhere
rather than in accordance with their own needs.
Even today, with the exception of petroleum, the Third World
countries have no control over the prices of the products which
constitute the basis of their exports, nor over the prices of products
which they must import. Many of them are faced with a steadily
deteriorating balance of payments, while their borrowing capacity
is shrinking.
Notwithstanding the different constraints to which they are
subjected and the specificity of their situations, the development of
Third World countries has been conceived, given its basis in theory
and directed, in most cases, by reference to the international
economic situation ' which has been imposed on them.
Underdevelopment has been interpreted as essentially a time-lag in
the various branches of socio-economic activity, as compared with
the situation obtaining in the so-called developed countries, while
development has been seen as a universal process occurring in all
places and at all times in the same sequence of successive "phases".
A progression has thus been envisaged, leading necessarily from the
traditional, predominantly agricultural society towards "modern"
society, frequently described as the "age of consumption", and
inevitably involving, sooner or later, an "economic take-off". This
seems to have been the premiss, explicit or otherwise, behind the
efforts made in the last few decades, an approach which at times
failed to perceive the crucial importance of the constraints imposed
on the developing countries by the international economic system.
It appears, however, that genuine development has to be elicited
from within, willed and conducted by all the vital forces of a nation.
Accordingly, it should encompass all aspects of life and involve all
the energies of a community within which each individual, each p-
*'#-*WVUJlWtJ*

^ occupational category and each social group has its part to play in
the general effort and its share in the resulting benefits.
Development cannot therefore be considered solely from the
standpoint of economic performance and the growth of material
goods. No doubt economic growth and the production of material
goods will always be vitally important because of the essential
contribution they alone can make to the general welfare; but they
should serve purposes consciously accepted by all, that enrich
everyone's life, increase the creative capacities of the entire
population and have their roots in culture, with all that it implies
of truth to self and receptivity to progress.
A growing awareness of the importance of the cultural dimension
of development thus emerges as one of the salient facts of our time.
Peace and the arms race
The face of war has changed today. The quantity and destructive
potential of modern nuclear weapons and of chemical and
biological weapons, are such that a conflict between the great
powers, in which such weapons would inevitably be used, would
result in the destruction of the human race. The feature that makes
the present era radically different from previous eras is this capacity
of the human race for self-annihilation. It is a state of affairs
unique in the history of mankind, and one that must be constantly
borne in mind at a time when it is sometimes asserted that with
tactical nuclear weapons, a nuclear conflict could remain localized
and its consequences be surmounted. In practice there is no
guarantee that, once set off, a nuclear conflagration could ever be
contained. The after-effects of atomic explosions would be so
extensive that there would be a strong likelihood of the threshold
being quickly reached where the scale of destruction would prove
lethal for the whole of mankind.
It is against this background that the many localized conflicts
that have occurred since the end of the Second World War,
involving developing countries for the most part and causing the
deaths of millions of people, must be set. Several of those conflicts
have stemmed from the will of the colonized or formerly colonized
peoples to win their independence or to withstand external
pressures that imperil their freedom. Others, admittedly, have more
complex origins confrontations within nations or disputes
between nations but all of them are inevitably aggravated, if not
brought on, by the antagonisms within the world community.
The arms race, originating in many cases« from the will to
predominate or from a sense of insecurity which, far from
mitigating, it aggravates, accelerates under its own momentum. It
has undeniably become a phenomenon which, by virtue of its scale
and implications, dominates the international scene. Total military
expenditure in 1980 may be estimated at over $500 thousand
million a sheer waste of these colossal resources, it may be said,
since they do not enhance the security of those who foot the bill,
the balance tending simply to establish itself at an ever higher level.
It should also be pointed out that the arms race at present ties up
valuable human resources and, especially, very large numbers of
top scientists. If this huge research and development potential were
used for purposes of human welfare, considerable progress could
be made towards solving some of man's major problems, such as
those in the fields of health, education or agricultural production.
Quite obviously, such a redeployment has an ethical dimension and
is one of the major issues in the current debate on the ultimate
purposes of science and technology.
On a more general level, ethical concerns cannot be dissociated
from attempts to build peace, which means considerably more than
the absence of war. Peace has a positive content, demanding as it
does justice in relations between societies and recognition of the
equality in dignity of all peoples and all cultures. It is hence more
particularly synonymous with respect for fundamental human
rights and the freedom of the peoples to make their own decisions.
Human rights
Massive violations of human rights continue; foremost among
them, mention must be made of the apartheid regime that still
prevails in South Africa, despite repeated condemnations by the
international community. That regime continues to institutionalize
racism and to deny, by its very existence, the most fundamental
principle on which human rights are based: the oneness of the
human race and the equal worth of all human beings.
The right of peoples to self-determination is also seriously
flouted. Some peoples are still politically subjugated, as a result of
long-standing, or in some cases recent, historical circumstances.
Many communities are still deprived of the right to an identity.
There are some ten million refugees in the world today; their
situation is particularly grave because of the precariousness of their
living conditions, the fact of their having been uprooted and the
difficulty of finding viable solutions in the prevailing political and
economic circumstances.
No less disquieting is the trend with regard to individual
freedoms, which are jeopardized in various ways, either by blind
terrorism that strikes even at the totally innocent in the name of
particular aspirations or principles, or by the established
authorities. Authorities in many countries have curbed political
liberties and freedom of association and put down opposition
movements. In some cases, the law itself is used to redouble the
attacks upon human rights, for instance by retroactive, repressive
legislation, the widening of the interpretation of national security,
or the institutionalization of emergency measures. There is a
disquieting tendency to "criminalize" opposition by bringing mere
political disagreement within the scope of the penal code.
Furthermore, normal legal safeguards are often set aside, with the
resultant development of various forms of detention without trial.
No less serious, and perhaps even more serious, is the tendency
to adopt, parallel to official and legal repression, procedures
beyond the pale of legality and State power, involving undercover
operations of kidnapping or murder whose perpetrators enjoy a
sort of impunity.
Moreover, although prohibited by legislation in most States,
torture and, more generally, humiliating and degrading treatment
are still practised. In some places they are inflicted, seemingly on
a systematic basis, when suspects are arrested and during their
interrogation and detention.
But not even the denunciation of violations of human rights is
unaffected by the political rifts in the world. For instance, the very
people who habitually express indignation at certain actions tend to
minimize others that are equally serious, because the regimes
responsible for them share their view of the world or serve their
interests. The danger with such attitudes to violations of human
rights is that they may lull consciences into acquiescence; they must
be countered by an unconditional insistence on respect for human
rights, irrespective of the political judgements that may be passed
on particular situations. Individual freedoms and the freedom of
peoples are two sides of the same coin. These problems, like (hose
of development and peace, concern each human being and the
entire human race.

WHERE THE FUTURE BEGINS
The environment and natural resources
There is another area in which complex networks of interactions
now appear to bind the fate of the individual inextricably to the
collective future of mankind: this is the relationship between man
and nature. Attention is now also focused, as the result of a new
awareness which has become especially marked over recent
decades, on the pressure that man's activities, based on
technological advance, exert on the environment, either through the
unchecked eating-up of resources and of space, or through the
production of wastes that the natural environment can no longer
absorb without suffering far-reaching effects. The major risks
emerging in the relationship between man and nature are the
exhaustion or scarcity of certain non-renewable resources essential
for human activities and irreversible damage that might jeopardize
the balance of the biosphere.
These concerns must be seen in the context of problems of society
and development which are of decisive importance as regards the
environment. Underlying all these problems, in fact, are the forms
of production and consumption of the industrial societies. In the
purely technical and economic logic of industrialization as it has
generally been conceived, the environment and natural resources
are treated simply as instruments serving economic growth. The
pursuit of quick and high -returns means that the cost of
environmental damage is overlooked. Society as a whole,
considered either nationally or internationally, then has to bear
costs which are entirely neglected in any economic reckoning. This
type of behaviour, which leads to unrestrained and what might
fairly be termed unscrupulous exploitation of natural resources,
gives rise to serious damage. In many Third World countries, it
entails an overworking of natural resources that is detrimental in
the long term, whether they be living resources, like forests and fish
stocks, or mineral resources occurring in finite quantities.
But situations of underdevelopment, in themselves, also have
unfortunate implications for the environment. Poverty leads to
over-use or irrational use of the productive capacities of
ecosystems, of soil, water and wood. It also leads to uncontrolled
extension of urbanization, which has today become a major
problem in many countries.
Environmental problems can never be considered apart from the
present forms of the international division of labour and the
constraints imposed by the international economic system. Control
by the developing countries over their own natural resources is,
incidentally one of the main lines of emphasis in efforts to bring
about a new international economic order.
But this objective cannot be dissociated from the idea of a global
environmental ethic based on wise use of the resources that the
planet offers to men and that human ingenuity succeeds in
discovering and turning to account.
Such an aim may in the long term imply changes in the manner
in which resources are used in most countries of the world,
eventually involving far-reaching changes in behaviour and
recognition of the primacy of such values as solidarity and equity,
in application not merely to people alive today but to those who will
come after us, as opposed to behaviour guided solely by immediate
self-interest.
Communication between people and
between cultures
Recent developments have made the world more and more one
as regards communication and exchanges between people and bet
ween cultures. Countless communication networks have grown up
as production, management and organization technologies have
spread throughout the world, with the intensive circulation of pro¬
ducts and people, the rapid strides made by telecommunications
and data processing, and the huge increase in the volume of
messages put out all over the world by the mass media.
These technologies are playing a part in transforming societies
and causing them to move towards ever greater complexity. Com¬
munication and information may in fact be regarded as the nervous
system of contemporary societies: they are essential to their ac¬
tivities, particularly in economic matters, and play an essential part
in financial transactions and banking and in the development of
trade, of land, sea and air transport, of health or public administra¬
tion systems, and of military systems. Any political power is of
necessity placed at the centre of a complex communication and in¬
formation system, since decision-making increasingly necessitates
consideration of more and more constantly changing items of infor¬
mation, and since, furthermore, any policy needs to be explained
and commented on if- it is to gain acceptance. Some people con¬
sequently consider that tomorrow's economy will be one based
mainly on information, and that information is in the process of
becoming the key resource marked out for a major role still more
decisive than that of raw materials and energy.
This makes the very great disparities in the different countries'
situations as regards their communication and information capaci¬
ty all the more serious. The least well equipped countries, especially
the developing countries, are deprived of some of the most effective
means of controlling the various aspects of the development pro¬
cess. The development of communication and information in the
developing countries, which is generally recognized to be necessary
by the international community today, is therefore a prime pre¬
requisite for the advent of a world of greater equity and solidarity
and for the free development of democracy within the various
societies. If they were better able to communicate and to acquire
and impart information, the developing countries could not only
make their voices heard more effectively in international affairs but
could also make more progress in education particularly in the
struggle against illiteracy and could develop their scientific and
technological potential, improve their health systems, promote
rural development, and be in a better position to deal with natural
disasters. Communication and information can also help those
countries, and indeed all others, to consolidate national unity,
preserve their cultural identity and make provision for greater par¬
ticipation by the public in the changes currently taking place.
It seems essential, therefore, to do away with the obstacles that
prevent people and nations from gaining access to all sources of in¬
formation and from directly expressing their own points of view, as
also to avoid the distortions which compromise the dignity and in¬
dependence of peoples. In this context, it is clearly important to
foster the development of all forms of communication and infor¬
mation in all countries, and particularly in the developing coun¬
tries, and. to encourage efforts to discover and apply innovations
which will allow of readier adaptation of structures and content for
the purposes of different categories of users, the compiling of infor¬
mation with broader participation by the public, and greater diver¬
sification in cultural expression.
Science, technology and society
Existing modern technologies already confer enormous powers
upon man, and their potential is such that many of the problems
confronting human societies could be solved if they were ^
3

systematically employed. The prospects opened up by modern
science are therefore full of new promise.
To obtain a clearer picture of these prospects, it is important to
note that very profound upheavals have reshaped the map of the
scientific world and the relations between the various sciences. This
development and its practical implications are bound to exert a
strong influence on scientific and technological strategies. A new
configuration of fields of knowledge could be said to be forming,
in which the branches of the future appear to be biology, data pro¬
cessing, systems theory and the communication and information
sciences. We are thus witnessing nothing less than a scientific and
technological revolution, which seems capable of transforming not
only methods of production and patterns of consumption but men¬
talities and social practices as well. It is even tending to efface, to
some extent at least, the old-established demarcation lines between
the natural sciences and the social and human sciences. We are
perhaps living in an era in which cross-over points are emerging bet¬
ween the major fields of human creativity: among the various scien¬
tific disciplines and between them and culture.
Although considerable efforts have been made, much more re¬
mains to be done in order to find appropriate solutions to the prob¬
lems of energy supply, food, housing, transport, leisure or the
management of the environment still encountered in all societies in
different forms and degrees. The bulk of scientific and
technological potential is still concentrated in a limited number of
countries which alone possess the means for conducting research in
certain fields, especially the advanced fields, and therefore hold the
keys, so to speak, to the major advances of the future. Moreover,
the lines of emphasis in research and the choice of fields in which
it is applied are determined primarily by the needs and problems of
the countries that are already best provided for which adds to
their accumulated wealth of scientific and technological
knowledge, while the existing stock of knowledge and know-how is
still inaccessible to most developing countries.
Science must be used to increase the well-being of all peoples.
This presupposes a freer and more intensive flow of information
and knowledge concerning both science and technology, a
worldwide concerted effort to make scientific research more rele¬
vant to the needs of the whole of mankind, and to ensure in all
countries, the developing countries in particular, their own develop¬
ment of science and technology. On this last point, it should be
stressed that scientific and technological development must come
about as a result of a set of complex interactions between the need
for scientific and technological solutions to economic and social
problems, on the one hand, and, on the other, efforts to train
researchers and specialists and to organize scientific research and
experimental development programmes.
Cultural identity
The need to rethink development, and to invent new strategies to
take account of what is distinctive in each nation's way of life and
culture and to call into play the enterprise of all the individuals and
groups that go to make it up, is becoming all the more urgent today
because of the tendency towards uniformity that is developing and,
in many countries and among many sections of the population, im¬
pinging upon life-styles and modes of thought and on the organiza¬
tion of the social, individual and family environment. This tenden¬
cy results less from a convergence of the different values of civiliza¬
tion than from the predominance of certain centres propagating the.
knowledge, know-how and social usages specific to the best
endowed societies. The very fact of the growing oneness of the
world in economic, social and cultural matters is bringing certain
needs and aspirations to the fore, in more and more environments
and within various societies, and causing them all to follow the
same model, based on goods and services produced and distributed
throughout the world. In every area of life from food to clothing,
from transport to leisure the same patterns of consumption are
tending to spread. This tendency is enhanced by the media and the
cultural industries which are extending it into cultures, ideas and
ways of seeing or depicting the world.
This logic of growing uniformity favours certain lines in the pur¬
suit of knowledge to the detriment of other forms; it imposes cer¬
tain aesthetic or ethical values; it stimulates the growth of certain
areas of activity, encourages certain talents and modes of feeling
and ignores others. Whole sectors of creativity are thus repressed,
societies mutilated in their individuality and their distinctive struc¬
ture. Carried to the extreme, this logic could lead to mankind's
becoming ossified, since diversity, if accepted on a footing of com¬
plete equality, is indeed an essential and fertile source of vitality
alike for individual societies and for the whole world.
The growing homogeneity that world uniformity based on a
single model would produce could well leave all humankind bereft
of the means to face unknown or new dangers. Who can say
whether a given culture or a given genetic feature, now lost beneath
the ruins of traditional societies, may not have been an integral part
of a heritage and perhaps essential to the further progress of
humanity? Nor can we rule out the possibility that one day the
global technological society might perish from entropy, for lack of
a sufficient differentiation between cultures.
These would appear to be the historical implications in reaction
to the growing globalization of fundamental social processes and
the pressures towards uniformity brought to bear on the individual
or collective mentality of the reawakening of specificities, which
is the manifestation of a now overriding demand, that of identity,
which can be seen everywhere in the world and which in some coun¬
tries links up with the efforts successfully carried out or more
recently undertaken to enhance the status of the national culture.
In this respect, it is significant that the demand for cultural identi¬
ty, first voiced in certain parts of Europe in the nineteenth century
and which crystallized the aspirations of the young nations former¬
ly under colonial rule for whom the conquest or reconquest of
their mutilated past represented the most precious achievement in
the struggle for independence should now be raised again in the
industrialized societies, where the need to preserve or to revitalize
regional or ethnic identities is increasingly felt. In all regions,
cultural identity appears now as one of the chief driving forces of
history, representing neither a fossilized heritage nor a mere collec¬
tion of traditions, but an internal dynamic, a process whereby a
society continually creates itself, nourished by internal diversities
consciously and voluntarily accepted, and welcoming, assimilating
and if necessary transforming contributions received from
elsewhere.
Far from coinciding with withdrawal into an immutable, self-
enclosed past, it promotes a lively, original and constantly renewed
synthesis. Identity thus appears increasingly to be the sine qua non
of progress for individuals, groups and nations, for it is the force
that animates and underpins the collective will, that gathers to itself
the internal resources for action, and that turns necessary change
into creative adaptation. More and more linguistic, religious,
cultural and occupational groups are accordingly asserting their in¬
dividuality and strengthening their internal bonds. The protection
of their specific identities seems to be the first step towards the

WHERE THE FUTURE BEGINS
regaining of their creative faculties, their inventiveness and ability
to participate in a world that has tended to efface them. It should
in no way be interpreted as a mere revitalization of former values,
but betokens chiefly a search for new cultural designs whereby to
carry on from rehabilitation of the past by an awareness of increas¬
ed responsibility for the future.
Uncertainties and the renewal of values
While it is now clearly appreciated that economics cannot be the
only criterion in development, that other objectives must be defined
and that new methods, modelled more closely on the requirements
and aspirations of the community must be invented, the striking
feature of many contemporary societies is extreme diversity in the
behaviour, demands and aspirations of individuals and groups, and
the juxtaposition, at times, of different scales of values. This diver¬
sification in systems of standards is no doubt connected with the
development of societies and changes within them but it is also con¬
nected, in part, with the increasing flow of goods, services,
technologies and messages from one part of the world to another.
In most countries of the Third World, a host of needs and new
motivations are appearing, based on the systems of standards and
values specific to certain industrialized societies. The combination
of new aspirations and traditional loyalties produces divided values
in certain regions, within certain families and even in the hearts of
more and more individuals. The sharp division between modernity
and the underlying cultures appears in many countries to be open¬
ing a gulf between those who have integrated into the new world
and those to whom it remains foreign, thus aggravating the
polarization between groups, between town and country and bet¬
ween the industrialized and rural sectors.
In the past few years, however, there have in a number of coun¬
tries been attempts to rebuild society on the basis of a revival of its
most deeply rooted cultural values. It is this aspiration that is im¬
parting fresh impetus to the spiritual, religious or mystic
movements through which part of the population in those countries
is seeking to re-establish links with an ethic of solidarity and mutual
assistance. It is this, too, that is inspiring certain peoples with the
determination to build their own version of modernism, by reinter¬
preting tradition so as to identify its creative features. This ambi¬
tion calls for an endeavour to renovate social standards and prac¬
tices by drawing on those cultural traditions and traditions of work,
and aesthetic or moral values, that will enable the society to make
room for progress without self-betrayal, and by rejecting all those
traditions and values that would shut it into a past offering no way
forward.
Questionings and new approaches are also appearing, for dif¬
ferent reasons and in other forms, in a number of industrialized
societies where more and more groups, particularly among the
young, are tending to adopt new attitudes towards income and
social success, work and leisure, and the man-made and natural en¬
vironments. New aspirations are emerging and giving rise to a
greater demand for decentralization and participation; to an at¬
tempt to find a new, settled place in small communities, whether
geographical, professional, religious or linguistic; to a lesser em¬
phasis on order and even on economic security, and to a desire for
emancipation vis-à-vis anything that may have a centralizing func¬
tion. Are these changes the forerunners of an imminent transforma¬
tion in the axiological systems of certain industrialized societies? It
is difficult to assess either their scope or their precise significance
because of the extreme diversity of the attitudes involved, their
uncertain and often ambiguous or contradictory nature, and the
heterogeneity of the aspirations they reveal.
In some countries social movements of a new kind are emerging,
bringing into the political arena and the sphere of collective action
matters hitherto regarded as strictly private, like birth, old age,
housing, environment and communication. Associations that cut
across the usual social barriers are being set up women's groups
or clubs for "senior citizens", neighbourhood co-operatives, con¬
sumer or user associations, and groups getting together for leisure
activities or work which are experimenting with novel types of
cultural activity and often introducing new relationships between
the economic and political spheres. As a result, new issues now have
their spokesmen in society, while cultural production is linked once
more with social production as in the past.
All these ventures show that people are radically challenging the
established order and exploring new avenues in a great variety of
ways, which may denote a revival of social creativity.
Between breakdown and renewal, therefore, a fundamental
challenge arises and will no doubt face a large number of
societies and the international community itself in the coming
years: how, with the growing complexity of forms of organiza¬
tion and production systems, to reconcile the demand for the
cohesion and effectiveness needed both nationally and interna¬
tionally for action to promote development with the demands
for a share in initiative and creativity that are often voiced? The
movement towards a diversification of systems of references, in
reaction against the trend towards uniformity and conditioning,
is undoubtedly indicative of the intrinsic vitality of contem¬
porary cultures. It may herald a regeneration, on condition
however that more appropriate forms of communication and
exchange are established, within a context of greater justice,
among societies and within those very societies, among social
groups separated by their differing loyalties and aims, and
among nations which must arrive at mutual understanding and
reach agreement on the co-operative actions which are called for
and indeed demanded by the world today.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
