Equatorial Guinea:
a nation moulded
by the sea
by Catherine Gillard
AN archetypal maritime country by
virtue of its configuration and
history. Equatorial Guinea is a
land of shores and islands which has
been prominent down the ages as a base
for observation and action.
There are three Guineas in Africa: the
Guinea whose capital is Conakry;
Guinea-Bissau; and Equatorial Guinea.
The latter is the least known. Located in
the Gulf of Guinea, it is known as "Equa¬
torial" Guinea because its territory
straddles the Equator. Relatively small
(28,051 sq. km.), it comprises continen¬
tal Guinea, known as Rio Muni, and a
group of islands. Rio Muni is bordered to
the north by Cameroon, to the east and
south by Gabon. It has a long coastline
(around 180 km.) in comparison to its
maximum east-west distance (220 km.)
and its area (26,000 sq. km.). The insular
part of Guinea comprises five islands of
varying size in the Gulf of Guinea: Bioko
(formerly Fernando Poo), 2,017 sq. km.;
Annobón, 17 sq. km.; Coriseo, 15 sq.
km.; Elobey Grande, 2.27 sq. km.; and
Elobey Chico, 0.19 sq. km.
From this brief description it can be
seen that Equatorial Guinea is divided
into a maritime entity and an area of
mainland. If the islands are much less
important than mainland Guinea in terms
of size, they take precedence strategi¬
cally. Bioko provides an anchorage in the
Gulf of Guinea off the coast of Came¬
roon, and Annobón offers a harbour off
the coast of Gabon. It is not surprising
that the great navigators should have
been interested in these islands during
the period of colonial conquest.
In their quest for a new and quicker
route to the Indies, Spaniards and Portu¬
guese discovered new lands. Pedro de
Escobar and Juan de Santerem were
among the Portuguese sailors who fol¬
lowed the coast of Africa. After setting
sail from Sao Tomé, they sighted a
hitherto unknown island on New Year's
Day 1471 and named it Annobón ("New
Year" in Portuguese). In 1472 a Portu¬
guese adventurer named Fernao do Poo
landed on an island which he called "Fer-
CATHERINE GILLARD, of France, is prepar¬
ing a doctoral thesis under the supervision of
Professor Georges Balandier at the School of
Higher Studies in the Social Sciences, Paris. She
specializes in the study of the social and
economic problems of Equatorial Guinea.
mosa" ("marvellous"). This island
would later be named for him by the
Spaniards. The search for a route to the
Indies caused rivalry between Spain and
Portugal. By the Treaties of San Ilde¬
fonso (1777) and El Prado (1778) Portu¬
gal ceded to Spain both Annobón and
Fernao do Poo (Fernando Poo) together
with trading rights in the ports and along
the coast adjacent to Fernando Poo.
Spain wanted to provide herself with
supplies of slaves and grow rich in gold
and ivory. But she found it difficult to
penetrate into the interior of her new
territories.
The Spaniards did not really begin to
settle in the island and on the coast of
Equatorial Guinea until 1858; exploration
of the hinterland got underway even
later. The voyages of the great naviga¬
tors, the slave trade and the search for
wealth, all the great dynamic forces
which triggered the conquest of the
oceans, came into play on the modest
island territory of Equatorial Guinea. Its
history is a crucible of all the desires
which impelled peoples to embark on
epic journeys of seaborne exploration.
This magical point on the Gulf of Guinea
has attracted Portuguese, Dutch, Span¬
iards, English, and French, all seeking to
conquer the world and its wealth by sea.
These islands have long been seen as a
prize or as a gateway to power.
New commercial considerations are
emerging today, at a time when the
world powers are trying to find a basis for
agreement on the exploitation of the sea.
These islands of Equatorial Guinea are
once again a prize. The country's territo¬
rial waters and the continental shelf hold
rich promise since neighbouring coun¬
tries have discovered offshore oil depo¬
sits. Oil and mineral exploration compa¬
nies have offered to co-operate with the
Governments of Equatorial Guinea.
These resources may become an unde¬
niable asset in the political and economic
life of Equatorial Guinea.
Equatorial Guinea has an existence as
a nation moulded by the sea, different
from and complementary to its life as
part of the continent. From the time of
the great explorers to the most recent
negotiations on the law of the sea, this
small and unfortunately all too little-
known country has been constantly
marked by its island destiny.
17
