YUGOSLAVIA The Belgrade
International Theatre Festival
by Jovan Cirilov
THE Belgrade International Theatre Festival (BITEF) was found¬
ed at a time when great changes were occurring in the
European theatre. Its establishment was the outcome of a
meeting of actors held in Belgrade at Workshop 212, the theatre
which, during the 1950s, staged the first performances of the
works of Beckett, Ionesco, Adamov, etc., to be given in a socialist
country. Its slogan, "New Trends in the Theatre", proclaimed the
general line the Festival was to follow.
This was a period when a new form of theatre was reaching its
height, when informal groups were coming into being, the stages
of baroque and traditional theatre halls were being abandoned in
favour of the street, garages or disused sheds, a time of political
commitment which called for a theatre in its own image, a protest
theatre, an anti-literary theatre which saw itself as a theatre of ac¬
tion rather than of words.
It was a time when the avant-garde theories which had emerged
during the inter-war period, such as Antonin Artaud's "theatre of
cruelty", and Expressionism were being revived and new trends
were emerging such as the "guerilla theatre", the "theatre of ac¬
tion", "poor theatre", the "theatre of panic", the "theatre of the
absurd".
The first Festival, in September 1 967, brought together troupes
which had embarked on innovative courses, such as the "Living
Theater" of New York, with Julian Beck and Judith Malina, the
"Teatr Laboratorium" of Wroclaw, with Jerzy Grotowski, the
"Divadlo za Branou", with Otomar Krejca.
From the first, however, it was decided that the BITEF should not
be devoted exclusively to an avant-garde repertoire. Krejca, for ex¬
ample, staged Chekhov's Three Sisters, although he gave this
classic a new perspective which took account of the most advanc¬
ed research.
For sixteen years the Festival has been guided by this twofold ap¬
proach. Through many presentations of the masterpieces of the
world repertoire it has sought to provide a new interpretation of the
classics, be it Shakespeare re-interpreted by Peter Brook, Peter
Zadek or Yury Lyubimov, Strindberg by Ingmar Bergman, Molière by
Anatoli Efros or Roger Planchón, to name but a few. At the same
time, in keeping with the main purpose of the Festival, the most
JOVAN CIRILOV, of Yugoslavia, is drama critic with the Belgrade
newspaper Politika and has been artistic director of BITEF since it was
created. The author of a number offilm scenarios and plays which have
been performed in Yugoslavia, he has also published a collection ofpoems
and a novel, "A Time in Salzburg". He has translated into Serbo-Croat
works by Genet, Christopher Fry and Tom Stoppard.
diverse trends of the avant-garde theatre have been represented
through the work of directors from all over the world, including Vic¬
tor Garcia, Robert Wilson, Luca Ronconi, Shuji Terayama, Tadeusz
Kantor, Ariane Mnouchkine, Ljubisa Ristic, and many others.
The BITEF also pays homage to the guiding influence of age-old
traditional theatre forms on twentieth-century drama. In addition to
modern works, the Festival hosts almost every year a performance
which takes the public back, as it were, to the very roots of drama
thus giving them greater insight into aspects of present-day
theatre. There have been performances of Kathakali, Noh and
Kyogen, of the Beijing Opera and African ritual theatre, of Sicilian
puppets and the naive theatre of Naples.
Over the past sixteen years, virtually every performance has
been followed, the day after its première, by discussions between
the artists and the audience. Thus members of the public have been
able to put questions to the greatest directors, authors and actors
and let them know their own point of view.
Ever since the tenth festival, which was also that of the Theatre
of Nations, there has been a parallel festival called "BITEF on film".
Shows which for one reason or another could not be performed live
during the Festival are presented on film or video-cassette. The
public has thus been able to see, among others, Peer Gynt by Peter
Stein, Shakespeare's Memory by Giorgio Strehler, Ariane
Mnouchkine's film Molière, and Mother Courage by Bertold Brecht.
BITEF shows are often performed in other major cities in
Yugoslavia such as Zagreb, Ljubljana, Skopje, and Sarajevo, as well
as in smallercities, and the Belgrade television network broadcasts
the most important shows live or recorded.
At the close of the Festival a Yugoslav jury awards prizes
(sculptures by the Belgrade artist Nebjsa Mitric) and diplomas of
merit for those shows which best express the new trends. Au¬
dience surveys are conducted throughout the Festival and a further
prize is awarded on the basis of the views of the public.
During its sixteen years of activity, the BITEF has also dealt with
a variety of themes such as "the origins of the theatre",
"theatricalism", "directors of the new reality school", "new
stages", "the classics in a new light", and so on, which have led to
deeper research into contemporary problems in aesthetics and have
given rise to discussion in specialized reviews throughout the world.
Finally, the concept bf "Third Theatre" was born in Belgrade in
1976 during the tenth BITEF, when, at a special meeting on the
theatre in the Third World, it was proclaimed by Eugenio Barba who
has since brilliantly affirmed its practical, concrete existence
throughout the world. (See Unesco Courier January 1 978.)
The Performance Group of
New York in a scene from
Dionysos 69, directed by
Richard Scheckner and
performed at the Belgrade
Festival.
Photo © BITEF, Belgrade
