LATIN AMERICA
A theatre
of urgency
by Augusto Boal
LATIN American theatre should
not be considered from the
standpoint or in terms of the
values of European theatre. It should
be understood within its own context as
part of the Latin American situation.
Latin America is a diverse, many-
faceted continent. This variety may be
seen, for example, in its ethnic com¬
position. In some Latin American
countries which have a large propor¬
tion of indigenous peoples, there were
highly developed cultures when the
first European invaders arrived with
Christopher Columbus, Pedro Alvares
Cabrai and others. The Incas inhabited
Peru, Ecuador and Bolivia. Such
peoples as the Aztecs, the Mayas, the
Toltecas and the Chichimecas lived in
Mexico. In other countries such as
Brazil, already inhabited by Indians in
the Stone Age, the Portuguese invaders
decimated the indigenous population,
and in Brazil and Uruguay today the
Indian presence is virtually
unnoticeable.
On the other hand, the influence of
the black cultures brought by slaves
from Africa is immense in such coun¬
tries as Venezuela, but almost non¬
existent in Argentina. The influence
which European economic exiles have
contributed to Latin America is
similarly diverse: Italian is spoken in
entire districts of Sao Paulo, Buenos
Aires and other cities; 90 per cent of the
population of the Brazilian city of
Marilia are Japanese or their direct
descendants; in some cities of the
Brazilian State of Santa Caterina, Ger¬
man is the language you will hear in the
street.
AUGUSTO BOAL, of Brazil, is the author of
many dramatic works, including The Great Inter¬
national Agreement of Scrooge Mack Duck, and
essays on the "theatre of the oppressed" which
have been translated into a number of languages.
Among the groups he has directed are the Teatro
Arena ofSao Paulo (Brazil), the Grupo Machete
(Argentina), and the Grupo la Barraca (Por¬
tugal). He is currently director of the Centre
d'étude et diffusion des techniques actives d'ex¬
pression (Méthode Boal) in Paris.
Economically the differences are no
less great. There is the well-known ex¬
ample of Rio de Janeiro: in the hills a
few hundred metres away from the lux¬
urious apartment blocks of Copaca-
bana beach is the desperate poverty of
the favelas. Several million people are
concentrated in a handful of big cities,
while millions more live scattered over
millions of square kilometres. Immense
wealth is concentrated in select quarters
of a few cities, while the grip of poverty
reaches far over the mountains of the
altiplano, Amazonia and the waste ex¬
panses of northeastern Brazil.
There is one fundamental reason for
this massive disparity: the inequality in
economic relations between North and
South which reduces the majority of
Latin Americans to inhuman living
conditions.
And so Latin America is both
homogeneous, principally because of
the ills that beset it, and diverse in its
social, economic and geographical
composition. These simultaneously
identical and distinct societies produce
a theatre which is simultaneously the
same and different.
The theatre standardized by North-
South relations in the great capitals of
Latin America is the same as that you
will find in the capitals of Europe and
in New York; the same West End co¬
medies, with the same music,
sometimes with the same choreography
and décor, carbon copies of their
originals.
Fortunately there is another theatre,
the popular theatre, which is as diverse
as the peoples which populate our
America and which must adapt itself to
the conditions in which it is produced.
The story of the Bolivian director
Liber Forti is instructive. He became
used to working in extremely
precarious conditions and with slender
means, and put on shows wherever he
could, including the open air. He stag¬
ed performances in the mountains
where there was no electricity, for the
tin miners of Catavi and Siglo Veinte.
There was no point in holding perfor¬
mances during the daytime when the
miners were at work, and so he decided
to ask the audience to light up the stage
using their miners' lamps. "For the ac¬
tors," said Forti, "this was a
remarkable way of finding out whether
a scene was any good dramatically;
when the miners were bored with the
action the lighting dropped off, and
when something interesting was hap¬
pening the stage was more brightly lit. "
When I talked with Luis Valdez, who
directs California's Teatro Campesino,
and with the director of a remarkably
interesting Mexican group called Los
Vendedores Ambulantes de Puebla
("the travelling salesmen of Puebla"
the members of the company actually
are salesmen from the Mexican town of
Puebla who use theatre to denounce
their working conditions), I realized
that we had all three found similar solu¬
tions to identical problems. I told them

A scene from White Dream produced at the Tabarka Festival (Tunisia) by Graziella
Martinez's theatre and dance company from Argentina.
Photo © Hamid Belmenouar, Pans
how, when we were working in Brazil,
we were so poor that we had to make do
with discarded objects as décor and
props. When we presented Lope de
Vega's play El Mejor Alcalde, El Rey,
the nobles' costumes were made from
old carpets we found on the municipal
rubbish dump, and things of that kind.
Valdez told me that he and his group
had done the same thing and that they
had called their production "rascuachi"
(poor, meagre, worthless). We felt a
certain pride at having created beauty
from filth. Our Mexican friend told us
that they had done the same thing at
Puebla, "except that we never gave a
name to this form of presentation. We
used garbage because we had nothing
else."
Popular Latin American theatre is a
theatre of urgency. Plays are usually
chosen or improvised in accordance
with local social needs. Theatre is used
as a form of debate and protest, to
stimulate awareness and to help in
working out tactics. The social and
political nature of a play is never ignor¬
ed, even in the case of major works
from the international repertory. For
example, Molière' s Tartuffe was used
to denounce "parareligious" groups of
the extreme right which were using the
same methods as Tartuffe, that is
transforming God the Supreme Arbiter
into a partner in the social struggle. The
play was the same, the text was
Molière's, but the performance reveal¬
ed connotations, relationships and
meanings which remained hidden in
other more "aesthetic" productions.
This also proves the extent to which
Molière is universal, for he becomes in
this way a Brazilian, an Argentine or a
Uruguayan author.
In addition to the great universal
classics, which provide popular theatre
with many themes and ideas, all kinds
of stories or sources of dramatic in
spiration may be used. I remember the
case of the Paraguayan director An¬
tonio Pecci who decided to present a
life of Christ; it would be hard, one
might think, to imagine a subject more
inoffensive and less subversive from
the censor's point of view. All the
same, Pecci, knowing full well that the
people of Paraguay are bilingual and
that Guarani is the real mother tongue
of 90 per cent of the population, decid¬
ed that Christ, the Apostles and the
people in general would speak in
Guarani, while Pilate, the centurions
and other Romans would speak in
Spanish. In this way the audience
understood that Jesus lived in a coun¬
try occupied by foreign troops and this
of the Gospel came to serve as
a model of behaviour for the public.
Everything is grist to the mill of
popular theatre as long as it is con¬
nected with the social situation here
and now. A theatre group in Peru >
5

specialized in the "revision" of televi¬
sion serials. One such serial, which at¬
tracted a wide following, was called
Esmeralda; it told the story of a
domestic servant who eventually mar¬
ried the son of the master of the house.
The stage production followed the
original plot more or less faithfully,
and after the performance there was a
debate which focused on the overt and
hidden meanings of the play the public
had just seen. The members of the au¬
dience discovered the anti-feminism
which was built into the story: for the
son of the house a wife was not really
a woman he loved and with whom he
wished to live but a domestic servant
whose job was to look after his clothes,
see to the food, and keep house.
In one Andean country, a theatre
' company travelled through the moun¬
tains improvising sketches from true
stories told by the villagers. One of the
most successful was the story of a
rascally mayor, a man who existed in
real life. When the sketch was perform¬
ed in the mayor's home town, the au-
Photo © Roger Pic, Paris
Gimba, by Gianfrancesco Guarnieri, is set in the world of the Brazilian
favelas (shanty-towns). Above, scene from the Teatro Popular do Brasil' s
version of the play, directed by Flavio Rangel.
Photo © Augusto Boal, Pans
All the world's a stage for popular theatre
in Latin America, where actors perform
anywhere they are likely to attract the
public. Above, Sao Paulo's Teatro Arena,
directed by Augusto Boal, used a con¬
verted truck as a stage when taking
Revolución en América del Sur ("Revolu¬
tion in South America") to the desert
regions of northeast Brazil.
dience reacted with fury, went off to
the town hall and had the man arrested.
A few days later, the company an¬
nounced that they. would be perform¬
ing the same sketch in a nearby town
whose mayor was equally dishonest.
The latter decided to exploit the
widespread belief among the peasants
of the region in the existence of demons
known as pistacos, carnivorous spirits
which assume human form and eat
people. He broadcast on the local radio
the news that a group of pistacos
Photo © Roger Pic, Pans
Adapted from a story by the popular Colombian writer Tomás Carrasquilla,
A la Diestra de Dios Padre ("On God's Right Hand") is one of the most
successful productions of the Teatro Experimental from Cali, directed by
Enrique Buenaventura. Above, a scene from the play.

disguised as actors were in the vicinity.
When the company reached the town
they found the streets deserted; the ter¬
rified population had taken refuge in
their homes. Even the radio station had
been abandoned, although its
microphone was ^still "live". At the
drop of a hat the actors broadcast an
improvised sketch denouncing the
stratagem of the mayor, who suffered
the same fate as his colleague when the
people found out the truth.
Those who take part in this kind of
theatre are not professional actors with
the same training and the same
economic guarantees as their fellow-
artists in Europe and North America.
They are people's artists; they are the
people.
In the last twenty years I have travell¬
ed constantly in almost all the countries
of Latin America. I have been in con¬
tact with many of these forms of
theatre which are used principally as a
means of promoting dialogue, of
treating the theatre as a form of expres¬
sion. Thus I have been in permanent
contact with the many-sided reality of
Latin America as I have striven to work
out my own technique of "theatre of
the oppressed", the main objective of
which is to help any oppressed human
being to achieve a form of dramatic ex¬
pression through which he may attempt
to reach a deeper understanding of the
reality of his situation and transform it.
The fundamental forms of the theatre
of the oppressed are based on the same
principle, that all men are capable of
achieving everything within the limits
of human possibility. Theatre is, or can
be, an occupation, a profession, but it
is above all a vocation. And this voca¬
tion is within the reach of everyone.
Every art is a language. But what is
learned through one language cannot
be learned through another. The most
perfect and total perception of reality
can only be obtained through the sum
of all possible languages. Theatre is
precisely this total art, the sum of all
the arts: poetry, painting, sculpture,
music, dance, etc. And theatre, even at
its most impoverished, takes man as the
centre of the universe. It is urgent and
imperative that all those who are op¬
pressed should recover this dense, rich,
profound totality in order to under¬
stand the mechanisms of the oppres¬
sion they endure, in order to struggle
more effectively for their liberation.
"Theatre of Image" (which ex¬
presses itself through images, not
words), "Forum Theatre" (in which
tactics and strategies are discussed in
dramatic form) and "Invisible
Theatre" (in which fiction is
transformed into reality, that is, the
performance of a drama becomes real
action in the real world) are three
manifestations of "Theatre of the Op¬
pressed" which can only achieve
systematic form if they emerge from a
living, changing reality. That of Latin
America, for example.
Augusto Boal

