Islam's
Qur'anic schools
by Abdul Aziz El Koussy
THE main objective of the
Qur'anic school is to teach its
students to know by heart the
Qur'an, the sacred book of the Muslims
whose religion is Islam and who
wholeheartedly believe that the Qur'an is
the true word of God.
The population of the Muslim world is
currently estimated to be over 600
million people distributed largely in
Africa and Asia and also in smaller
groups in other parts of the world. For
Muslims the Qu'ran is the Divine Revela¬
tion which the Prophet Muhammad was
bidden to declare and to teach to all
human beings all over the world at all
times, in order to guide them to the right
path in this and the other world.
Muhammad appeared among the
Arab people with his message in the year
610 AD. Arab society was then made up
of a number of tribes, each of which had
its own deity which was usually
represented by an idol. The result was
the prevalence of idol worship, and a
multiplicity of Gods. Islam came to
establish uncompromising monotheism
and to do away with the chaos, to purify
human society, and to bring to it
balance, order, security and peace. The
Prophet was the first teacher, and the
Qur'an was the only book for the new
believers. There was an urgent and basic
need for education and instruction.
In the very early days of Islam the first
teaching place was the house in Mecca of
Al-Arqam, one of the Prophet's com¬
panions, and many of the early believers
received instruction privately in a house.
People would transform parts of their
homes for this purpose. When the Pro¬
phet migrated with his companions to
Medina he built the mosque which still
bears his name, and it was used both as
a place of worship and for instructing his
companions and-followers. The message
had to be accurate to the letter, and in
order to be transmitted to others it had
to be learned by heart. The believers sat
in a circle (Halaka) around the teacher,
and learned by listening, by repeating
ABDUL AZIZ HAMID EL KOUSSY, of
Egypt, is emeritus professor of psychology at
Ain Shams University, Cairo. A member of
Egypt's National Specialized Council for
Education, Science and Technology, he was
the founder-director of Unesco's Regional
Centre for Educational Planning in the Arab
States (1961-1971). His publications include
The Visual Perception of Space and Fun¬
damentals of Psychology.
26
and by trying to understand. For women
believers, the wives of the Prophet and
their companions played a very impor¬
tant role. Teaching and learning ac¬
quired so high a reputation during the
lifetime of the Prophet that the teaching
of reading and writing was accepted
from a non-Muslim as ransom for his
liberation from captivity.
there was at least one in every village in
the Muslim world.
In Egypt the University of Al Azhar,
with its various colleges and branches,
stands at the apex of a vast structure of
institutions including institutes of
Qur'anic elocution, large numbers of
primary and secondary schools, and
6,000 specialized Qur'anic schools. The
A blind sheikh teaching children the Qur'an in an Egyptian village.
As time passed and the numbers of
believers in Africa, Asia and other parts
of the world multiplied, Islamic schools
of various types were created. They had
different names, but all had the same ob¬
jective. In Egypt the Kuttab, which is
neither held in nor attached to a mosque,
teaches reading, writing, arithmetic,
religion and, most important of all, the
memorization of the Qur'an. The
Khalwa in the Sudan is a small room at¬
tached to a mosque and is mainly used
for mystic meditation and as a place
where students are helped to memorize
the Qur'an. Other Islamic schools in¬
clude the Zawia in Libya, the Dox in
Somalia, the Yemeni Milama, and the
Msid school in Morocco, as well as the
various levels of Madrasahs and
Maktabs. Qur'anic schools reached their
highest point in the Middle Ages, when
University receives male and female
students from all over the Muslim world
and offers a wide range of courses in
religious, linguistic, medical, engineering
and other subjects. Other universities
were founded in Damascus, Tunis, Fez
and other great cities over a thousand
years ago, but AI Azhar has won the
most recognition and is still developing.
Backed by the force of faith, the
schools multiplied, flourished,
developed and received financial and
moral support from the people. To give
a donation or help build a school was
considered an act of piety. The fact that
the people have supported this Qur'anic
educational movement spontaneously
and uninterruptedly for almost fourteen
centuries all over the vast Muslim world
is a firm indication of the genuine deep-
rootedness of the faith behind it.

The Qur'anic school usually has a
single room; the number of students
varies from ten or twenty to some hun¬
dreds. A typical scene during the school
day may be described as follows. The
teacher is squatting on a high platform,
orchestrating and vigilantly watching the
whole scene. Some students are copying
verses from the Holy Book on to a slate
while others revise their assignment
before being tested by the teacher, or
Sheikh. Some are being tested and
prompted by monitors, boys older than '
themselves, before taking the final test.
A group of five or six children in a cor¬
ner are reading chapters in a chorus with
a leading boy. They correct themselves
as they go along, and the chorus goes on
until they have all learned the passage.
The chorus method is very effective since
every child is keen not to be out of
tune hence the concentration of atten¬
tion, self evaluation and self-correction.
When a student can recite any part of the
Qur'an from memory, he too is given the
title of "Sheikh", a big celebration is
held by his family, and the teacher is
given a valuable present.
Pedagogically a number of practices
are questionable, but some others are
sound. It is worth noting that before the
close of the eighteenth century two
British educators, Andrew Bell and
Joseph Lancaster, independently of each
other, adopted the monitor method
from Indian Qur'anic schools. During
the expansion of schools in England at
that time very large numbers of students
were taught using this method by a very
small number of teachers. The monitor
system is also known in France, pro¬
bably as a result of the country's long
contact with North Africa. This practice
of encouraging the younger pupils to
learn from the older and more mature is
to be recommended. In Qur'anic schools
each student can proceed at his own
speed. Some learn the Qur'an in two or
three years, while others need six or
seven years, and it is understood that
some need not learn the whole text.
Until recently, the school day began at
sunrise and ended when the sun was half¬
way between mid-day and sunset. The
school day ended when the shadow of a
person standing in the sun was equal to
his height.
The students mixed their own ink by
collecting soot, mixing it with water and
oil, and soaking with it a piece of cloth
inside the inkpot. Pens were usually
made of Persian reed and were sharpen¬
ed by the students themselves. In some
schools students practised handwork
using local materials, some helped pro¬
duce the arts and crafts of the
community.
In Egypt a minister heads the whole
system of Azharite education, develop¬
ing its primary, secondary and higher
levels. Between Azharite and modern,
formal education there is a gap which is
wide at the lower levels, narrow at the
university level. Sometimes minor ten¬
sions arise. In the Sudan a Khalwa stu-
Right, the 14th-century
madrasah (school) of Bu
Inaniya, at Fez, Morocco.
During the first centuries
of the Hijra the madrasah
was the university of the
Islamic world. The cur¬
riculum was based on the
Qur'an and the Hadith
(sayings of the Prophet),
but grammar, literature,
mathematics and some¬
times medicine were also
taught. Below, detail
from a 15th-century
miniature now in the
Topkapi Museum, Istan¬
bul. It is an illustration for
Layla and Majnun, a
famous romantic poem by
the 1 2th-century Persian
poet Nizami, and shows
Majnun, the hero of the
poem, at school.
Photos Roland Michaud
Paris
Rapho,

dent can sit for an examination at the
fourth grade level and if he passes can at¬
tend a complementary school before
entering normal formal schooling. In
Tunisia Qur'anic schools were incor¬
porated into modern formal schooling
immediately after independence in 1956.
It is known that the ulemas or teachers in
the religious schools resisted French
colonization.
In Indonesia the Ministry of Religion
was responsible for some 19,000 schools
with about three million pupils in 1979,
at a time when the country's total
number of primary level pupils stood at
twenty-two million. Indonesia and Niger
are countries where there is no
discrimination whatever between the
Qur'anic school student and the formal
education student. But uniting the
various trends and policies regarding
Qur'anic schools there is an overriding
attitude of respect, and even reverence.
However, difficult problems have
arisen, particularly in Africa and South¬
east Asia. For one thing modern educa¬
tion with a European pattern has inun¬
dated the Muslim world and has had a
strong polarizing effect on resources.
Modern formal education gets practical¬
ly the whole of the State educational
budget while the Qur'anic school still
depends on private donations and im¬
poverished trusts. Qur'anic schools in
some countries occupy small, over¬
crowded rooms with poor and primitive
equipment. People support the
Qur'anic, the Government supports the
formal school.
In some countries two or more
streams of education exist, separated by
an unbridgable gap. This creates in
equality of opportunities and influences
currents of thought and prospects.
Difficulties also arise concerning the
meaning and understanding of the texts
beacause of the difference between
modern Arabic and the seventh-century-
AD Arabic in which the Qur'an was
written.
But the most important problem of all
is the tension in some Muslim countries
today between three types of language:
the official language, which is either
French or English; the vernacular, which
is the mother tongue of everyday living;
and the Arabic language of Islam and
the Qur'an. To be torn between three
very important options, one dear to the
student's creed, one for daily life, and
one for official use, creates a problem
which is difficult to overcome.
Abdul Aziz El Koussy

