Communicating
with glass
and light
OPTICAL fibres, hair-thin strands of
pure glass carrying information
as pulses of light, have been
described as "probably the biggest
breakthrough Nn telecommunications
since the invention of the telephone". All
kinds of communications can be carried
along the same optical fibre cable-
speech, text, photos, drawings, music,
computer data, etc. at higher speeds
than have been previously possible.
The fibres, made from glass so pure
that a block of it 20 km thick would
theoretically be as transparent as a win¬
dow pane, have many advantages over
metal wires. Small, light and easy to han¬
dle, they are made from an abundant raw
material, sand. They can carry the same
number of telephone calls as metal
cables ten times as thick dozens of
fibres, carrying around 100,000
telephone calls, could all pass through
the eye of a needle at the same time
and they are immune to electrical in¬
terference which affects the quality of
calls. An optical fibre cable the thickness
of a finger could bring a hundred TV
channels to a receiver.
The tiny strands are playing a key role
in the digital revolution which is sweep¬
ing through modern telecommunica¬
tions. The telecommunications network
developed for the telephone used a
system which turned the air pressure
waves created by speech into con¬
tinuous and variable "analogues" of
electrical waves and turned them back to
speech at the receiver. Expensive con¬
version equipment or separate networks
were needed to handle text, TV or com¬
puter data. In the digital world, however,
all forms of information are translated in¬
to bits, the standard internal language of
today's computers (see page 14), and
represented as pulses of light. Informa¬
tion in this form can be processed easily
and sent anywhere in seconds in a single
multi-purpose network. Optical fibres are
ideal for digital working and open the
door to a host of services not possible on
an analogue system.
Each strand of fibre consists of an inner
core to channel the light and an outer
cladding to keep it in by reflecting it back
along the core. To make the glass for the
fibres, the ingredients are deposited as
gases on the inside of a hollow silica tube
at temperatures of around 2000°C. The
tube is collapsed under intense heat to
form a solid glass rod about 1 cm in
diameter which already has the structure
of the fibre which will be drawn from it.
The rod is then loaded into a furnace,
drawn into fibre and coated with a resin
to protect it and increase its flexibility.
Tiny crystals the size of a grain of salt are
used to produce the light which carries
information along the fibres. This passes
through a lens into the fibre. At the other
end a receiver reverses the process and
turns each light pulse into an electrical
signal. Optical fibres will have countless
applications in tomorrow's "information
society".
17
