(US' AND THEM'
by Albert Memmi
AFTER twenty years of observation, reflection, research and
studies "in the field", I am convinced that racism is a
rotten plank. I am not speaking only of its moral aspect,
but of its very logic. No aspect of racism stands up to examination.
The ideas are inconsistent, the arguments dishonest, and the con¬
clusions either doubtful or crazy.
If the enormous quantity of writings in support of racism were
to be summarized, they would be found to consist broadly of three
assertions firstly that there are pure races; secondly, that these
pure races are biologically superior and consequently
psychologically and culturally superior; and thirdly, that these
forms of superiority explain and justify their predominance and
their socio-historical privileges.
Now, even a cursory examination reveals how fragile each of
these propositions is. Man's present biological nature developed,
and is still developing, in the course of continuous cross-breeding
processes. In this context, therefore, the concept of purity is no
more than a metaphor, wishful thinking, fantasy. This is not to say
that men do not differ from each other. They do, both culturally
and even biologically. But, surprisingly, the most recent scientific
research reveals on the contrary that the differences are so
fragmented that it is impossible to make a given social group co¬
incide with any one biological profile. Nor is the concept of
superiority any more sustainable on a functional level. There is
nothing to prove that biological superiority, assuming that it exists,
leads to psychological or cultural superiority. Finally, it is difficult
to see why any form of natural superiority should involve economic
or social advantages. One may so decide, but that is what is called
a privilege. In short, contrary to a widely held opinion, there is no
scientific theory nor even a clear distinct concept of racism.
However, although it should have been disposed of long ago, the
issue continues to provide a subject for endless debate. Why?
It is precisely because racism, being a pseudo-theory and a
pseudo-concept, has nothing to do with reason but is a mythical,
rationalized projection of a lived, emotional, confused experience.
This happens whenever an individual or group comes into contact
with another individual or group that is different or unfamiliar;
there is a reaction of uneasiness or distrust, with an aggressive
gesture of rejection all of which, incidentally, does not exclude an
ambiguous feeling of hope that the encounter may bring some
reciprocal advantage.
This is not the place to engage in a detailed description of this
very ancient mode of behaviour, which is inscribed in the history
of man. Suffice it to say simply that it is based on a combination
of fear and competition for survival. In order to survive, man seeks
to defend his integrity and his possessions and, on occasions, to ap¬
propriate those of his neighbour, whether they be movable or im-
ALBERT MEMMI, whose works have been published in some 20
countries, has many qualifications to describe the different manifesta¬
tions of racism. Notable among his works published in English are The
Colonizer and the Colonized (Souvenir Press, London, 1974) with a
preface by Jean-Paul Sartre, and The Pillar of Salt ( 1 955) with a preface
by Albert Camus. His most recent book is Le Racisme (Gallimard
publishers, Paris, 1982).
movable property, food, raw materials, territory, women, real or
imaginary religious, cultural or symbolical assets. Man is both ag¬
gressor and the object of aggression, both terrifying and terrified.
However, this aggressive rejection of another is not yet exactly
racism. The racist way of thinking is based on this rejection, and
on pre-existing cultural and social facts. It is a pseudo-justification
for aggression and profit in the name of differences which are sup¬
posed to confer a superiority on the accuser and to render his victim
inferior. It is good and beautiful to be white and conversely, it is
bad and ugly to be black hence the rightful privileges.
It is evident that on the one hand racism or, in other words, alleg¬
ed racial superiority based on alleged biological purity, is no more
than an ideological apparatus, one amongst many alibis for
domination and expropriation, and that on the other hand it forms
part of a more general mechanism which embraces it as a special
case.
For this reason, I think it is necessary to point out both this
general character of a form of human behaviour which is unfor¬
tunately only too common, and the specific character of racism.
Otherwise the false problems associated with racism will continue
to obscure the permanent drama represented by the aggressive re¬
jection of others. To make the distinction more clear, I have pro¬
posed that this terrified, aggressive rejection be designated by a new
word, heterophobia, and that the term racism be henceforth reserv¬
ed for that variety of heterophobia which exploits the fear
engendered by biological and racial difference in order to justify ag¬
gression and privilege. Similarly any operational definition should
cover both this wider meaning and this strict meaning of the same
form of behaviour. I therefore suggested the following formula¬
tion, which has been adopted by the Encyclopedia Universalis and
which Unesco has done me the honour of using as a basis for its
own definition: Racism is the generalized, permanent exploitation
of real or imaginary biological differences, to the advantage of the
accuser and to the detriment ofhis victim, for the purpose ofjusti¬
fying aggression.
As will be seen, it is sufficient to delete the term "biological" in
order to get a definition of heterophobia. Racist attitudes and
behaviour are like "swing-wing", or variable geometry aircraft:
any kind of difference can be exploited provided it appears to
justify the rejection of others and to legitimize any form of
advantage.
At the same time, we can perceive what could constitute a single
criterion for replying to those closely related questions which em¬
barrass contemporary consciences what connexion is there bet¬
ween anti-semitism and the slave trade? Can one speak of prejudice
against women or young people as forms of racism? Is there also
a form of racism affecting the poor and oppressed? etc. To
establish the connexion between these forms of behaviour, one has
only to ask oneself what advantage a particular aggressor could
derive from them at the expense of a particular victim.
Incidentally each of these forms of behaviour could be
designated by a term which would indicate its specificity within the
general scheme of heterophobia. Thus, negrophobia would mean
racism with specific reference to black people, judaeophobia the
11

Available scientific knowledge provides no basis for believing that the groups
of mankind differ in their innate capacity for intellectual and emotional
development.
Some biological differences between human beings within a single race may be
as great as, or greater than, the same biological differences between races.
Vast social changes have occurred that have not been connected in any way with
changes in racial type. Historical and sociological studies thus support the view
that genetic differences are of little significance in determining the social anc
cultural differences between different groups of men.
Statement on the Nature of Race and Race Differences,
Unesco, Paris, June 1951
aggressive rejection of Jews (anti-semitism, which is an excessively
broad term, would have to be dropped), arabophobia the rejection
of Arabs (today resurgent and based, paradoxically, both on the
wretched condition of immigrant workers and on fears aroused by
the oil crisis).
The lessons of history provide us with the best confirmation. The
main characteristics of the victims of present-day racism are suffi¬
ciently well dated and sociologically legible. It is clear that racism
as a doctrine is of recent origin and that it still has practical applica¬
tions. In the sixteenth century the Spaniards contrasted Spain's
"civilizing mission" in America to the "natural inferiority" and
even "perversity" of the Indians, hence the legitimacy of the Euro¬
pean conquest and settlement. Thus, the systematic attempt to
justify aggression against, and domination of, one group, describ¬
ed as biologically (and psychologically) inferior, by another group,
held to be superior, is contemporaneous with the beginnings of
colonization.
There is an obvious correlation between the black slave trade,
which reached its climax in the seventeenth century, and the first
arguments used in support of biological racism. True, the first ele¬
ment of such a demonstration can be found in certain ancient
writers. Aristotle favoured a social order based upon slavery, which
The ancient myth of the "noble savage"
popularized in the 18th century by Jean-Jacques
Rousseau presents a Utopian image of the
Amerindian as "primitive man" living in a state of
nature. Such a conception has clearly inspired
this 16th-century depiction of a South American
Indian chief who is shown half naked yet with the
undeniable air of a "gentleman".
he attempted to justify by reason of the natural inferiority of the
Barbarians, who were to act as slaves to the Greeks. But these are
isolated cases, and where it was present at all, biological stigmatiza-
tion played only a very secondary rôle. This latter system of argu¬
ment, which obviously had mercantile advantages, came into its
own with the growth of the slave trade.
Anti-semitism is of course very ancient, but it was originally a
religious or national issue. It appeared as a racist doctrine only
much later, simultaneously with the relative social emancipation of
the Jews and their consequent emergence as economic competitors.
It is interesting to observe an additional confirmation here.
Whenever difficulties of a social nature emerge or become ag¬
gravated, there is a reawakening of anti-semitism, as though the
anxieties of the peoples among whom they live were crystallized in
the Jews. The fact is that they are particularly convenient victims.
As negative stereotypes who are already widely scattered and
familiar, they can easily be used as scapegoats.
In short, then, it is only relatively recently that attempts have
been made to provide a systematic explanation of racism based on
an alleged science. Joseph-Arthur Gobineau, who was one of the
initiators of racism, already based himself on a comparative
analysis of the brain in order to assert that that of the Huron could
not contain, even in embryonic form, a mind similar to that of a
European. Even scientists of excellent reputation were not far from
sharing these opinions. Linnaeus and Georges-Louis Buffon were
not free from prejudices which paved the way for a self-styled scien¬
tific racism. The authority of Darwin was also invoked, and at the
end of the nineteenth century educated Europe was convinced that
the human species was divided into superior and inferior races (see
Ernest Renan and the anthropologist Paul Broca).
The soil thus prepared was destined to produce some extraor¬
dinary harvests. Gobineau was to produce violently anti-Jewish
successors in France, but it was in Germany above all that his ideas,
combined with a tradition of anti-semitism, led to concentrations,
deportations and genocidal extermination of entité populations. In
Italy, Fascism sought to justify Italian hegemony over other
peoples judged inferior (the Ethiopian campaign). In the Slav coun¬
tries, pan-slavist movements sought in literature, customs and
language alleged proofs of a superiority which led them to approve
or even promote bloody actions. The Anglo-Saxon countries did
not escape the contagion. As a result of research conducted by the
Englishman Francis Galton, experts seriously considered ways to
combat the proliferation of other races. In the United States, some
people tried to promote a veritable "ethnological crusade", and
South Africa based its institutions on Apartheid. (A manner of ex¬
pressing their "difference" adopted recently, for example, by cer¬
tain regionalists and certain young nations is not at times without
undertones of intolerance and sectarianism).
A comparison of these various doctrines social and cultural as
well as biological clearly reveals a constant factor, irrespective of
their specific characteristics or local circumstances: in the name of
a biological or other form of superiority, one human group believes
itself entitled to assert itself over another and to have recourse for
that purpose even to violence and murder.
Thus we find at the same time the answer to the most recent ques¬
tions with which people are concerned. Racism was a convenient
ideology for rising colonialism, for the black slave trade and for
anti-semitism. It can still be useful on a wide scale. The Algerian
war, followed by the presence of millions of immigrant workers in
France and throughout Europe provided and still provides.
12

Dr. Martin Luther King, winner of the
1964 Nobel Prize for Peace, ad¬
dresses participants in a "Prayer
Pilgrimage for Freedom" in front of
the Lincoln Memorial in Washington
D.C. It was here, on 28 August 1 963,
five years before he was
assassinated, that he uttered these
famous words:
So I say to you, my friends, that even
though we must face the difficulties of to¬
day and tomorrow, I still have a dream. It
is a dream deeply rooted in the American
dream that one day this nation will rise up
and live out the true meaning of its
creed we hold these truths to be self evi¬
dent, that all men are created equal.
I have a dream that one day on the red
hills of Georgia, sons of former slaves and
sons of former slave-owners will be able to
sit down together at the table of
brotherhood.
I have a dream that one day, even the
state of Mississippi, a state sweltering
with the heat of injustice, sweltering with
the heat of oppression, will be transformed
into an oasis of freedom and justice.
I have a dream my four little children will
one day live in a nation where they will not
be judged by the color of their skin but by
content of their character. I have a dream
today!
Photo USIS
favourable ground for arabophobia, renewed negrophobia and,
more generally, the aggressive rejection of.immigrants, which I also
suggest be included in the general concept of heterophobiathe
complex of fear of others and aggressiveness towards them.
Is there such a thing as "racism" against women? Strictly speak¬
ing, obviously no, since women do not constitute either a race or
people or even a definite socio-economic group. But heterophobia
towards women does exist, and it is more widespread than one
might think fears and aggressive impulses and justification of
these forms of behaviour by means of disparaging ideologies which
possess the twofold advantage of exorcizing these fears and confir¬
ming men in their alleged superiority and their real advantages. Can
we also apply the term "racism" to the ostracism of which young
people are often victims? It is easy to follow the same line of reason¬
ing and to include this phenomenon under the heading of
heterophobia. Young people, especially young men, are probably
felt as an obscurely dangerous force capable of destabilizing socie¬
ty. It is amusing to observe that here as in the case of women, the
biological dimension is not entirely absent. A young man or an
adolescent can inspire physical apprehension. To a questionnaire
sent to me by specialist educators, I felt obliged to reply that per¬
sons with motor or mental handicaps could inspire such apprehen¬
sions and provide pretexts both for rejections and "assertions" by
healthy people. Finally, yes, racism or heterophobia can and does
exist amongst deprived persons and former victims, in all groups,
including all social classes.
I do not propose to conclude by broaching the subject of possible
practical applications. Nevertheless, it is well realized that, unless
account is taken of the tenacity and complexity of heterophobia,
the fight against racism will, I fear, remain in the realm of pious
wishes and good conscience cheaply purchased.
Albert Memmi
Action against prejudice, intolerance and
racism in the field of education
As part of its Major Programme XII, Unesco aims to:
make individuals, communities and nations aware of
the manifestations of intolerance and racism and to
rally them against such things;
help change the attitudes and behaviour of in¬
dividuals, groups and nations towards one another by
providing them with the means of understanding
other cultures better.
Action in the field of education will be carried out on three
levels:
1. education policies, planning and structures, in order
to prevent discriminatory treatment and the
transmission ofprejudices, intolerance and spirit of
discrimination (racial or ethnic);
2. the training of teachers, in order to make them both
more aware of the importance of their role and more
alert to prejudice, intolerance and racism. Exchanges
of teachers to familiarize them with different cultural
backgrounds might, for example, be organized;
3. textbooks and teaching materials, which sometimes
glorify heroes and events in racist terms or, converse¬
ly, do not give sufficient prominence to historical
figures who have worked in the cause of tolerance
and respect for all cultures. Within this context, ex¬
changes of textbooks and teaching material will be
encouraged in order to facilitate the revision of their
contents and sharpen the criticalfaculties of teachers
and of students.
In this way Unesco is emphasizing the need to inculcate
new mental attitudes and thus to counter the evils of racism,
since many negative attitudes and prejudices are formed in
the early years of childhood and are reinforced during the
educational process.
13
