SOVIET UNION
The theatre of
the market-place
by Nelly Kornienko
THE theatre is as many-sided as
life itself. As the centuries go
by, its forms undergo modifica¬
tion, extinction, renaissance and
transformation, and its faces, imagery
and masks may change. But all these
formsthose which have had their
day as well as those which have been
transformed or reborn still continue
to sustain the culture of peoples.
...Colourfully painted with scenes
from fairy-tales, the curtain rises to
show the market square of an old Rus¬
sian town. On to the stage bursts a
noisy crowd of jesters, clowns and
buffoons. A dancing bear shuffles at
the end of its chain. Someone has
climbed up on a pair of stilts. Carriage
wheels turn, horses neigh and whinny.
There is a jingling of bells, a great
strumming of balalaikas and gusli*, the
shrill sound of pipes. This is how
Soviet director Les Tanyuk's produc¬
tion of Alexander Pushkin's Tale of the
Fisherman and the Fishwife begins.
First. staged at the Central Children's
Theatre in Moscow in 1966, it has
been performed since then on
something like 700 occasions before
audiences in Bulgaria, the German
Democratic Republic, the United
States, Canada, the Federal Republic
of Germany, and other countries.
In accordance with the conventions
of the entertainment staged by stroll¬
ing players at the old yarmarki, or fairs,
the actors become wild animals, trees,
the sun, the moon, the wind, with the
popular comic figure Shut Gorokhovy
leading the dance. "Look! Look! The
sea!" cries a little girl in the audience.
And lo and behold, embroidered cloths
which the actors have stretched from
one side of the stage to the other are
suddenly transformed into waves
which sweep over the heads of the
heroes of the tale. Flashing and
splashing, dancing on their crests,
Zolotaya Rybka, the Golden Fish of
Good Fortune, converses with Starik,
the old fisherman. Originally written as
a short story, Pushkin's fable about
NELLY NIKOLAEVNA KORNIENKO is a
Soviet specialist in stage aesthetics and the
sociology ofculture. Among the 40 works she has
published in the USSR and elsewhere is a transla¬
tion into Ukrainian ofOn the Art of the Theatre,
by the famous English director and innovator
Edward Gordon Craig. She has worked in the
Sociology of Culture Sector of the All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Art, and is cur¬
rently on the staff of the Russian language edi¬
tion of the Unesco Courier.
22
human pretensions and the cost of un¬
bridled ambition, carries a timeless
message. In the traditional fairground
entertainment played to a noisy, ap¬
preciative audience, with the spec¬
tators mocking the behaviour of the
characters portrayed, the director has
found a satisfactory means of adapting
Pushkin's story for the stage.
... On the stage of the Bolshoi Drama
Theatre in Leningrad, an old grey horse
bemoans his unhappy fate. Once he
was famous and handsome, a great
winner of rosettes. Today he is for¬
saken and condemned. Very soon, he
will be led off to the knacker's yard.
Never, perhaps, has this pathetic story
of a horse and not just any horse, for
we are listening to Tolstoy's
Kholstomer been told as movingly as
in this performance by Yevgeny
Lebedev, under the direction of Georgi
Tovstonogov.
Brought to the stage, exposed to the
eyes and ears of an attentive public,
related "from the inside", an individual
existence is revealed in all its
vulnerability and fragility. Perhaps for
the first time, the aesthetics of popular
theatre here venture into the hidden,
inner dimension of the human condi¬
tion. Human, because, in the last
analysis, Kholstomer's "internal mo¬
nologue" concerns each and every one
of us. It is a reflection of "the life of the
human spirit".
But for the existence of the berikaob,
a Georgian carnival masquerade
whose origins reach back to the pagan
fertility rites of an agricultural society
of the second millennium BC, Robert
Sturu's production in Tbilisi of Bertold
Brecht's The Caucasian Chalk Circle
would not have been both authentical¬
ly Georgian and authentically Brech-
tian, so international in spirit that it
was comprehensible without transla¬
tion to audiences from Mexico and
Greece, England and Yugoslavia.
In this production, the deliberate ra¬
tionality and restraint of Brecht's
original treatment is unexpectedly
replaced by a colourful, carnival at¬
mosphere in which the audience itself
participates. Brecht's "reasonable"
heroes break into snatches of Georgian
song, and punctuate their talk with the
spirited gestures of the country's
mountain people. They have, indeed,
become kinsmen of the traditional
characters of Georgian folklore the
* Gusli, a popular Russian stringed instrument.
Warrior, the Fiancé, the Match-maker,
the Bride... The device could hardly
fail after all, Brecht himself set the
action of his Chalk Circle in the
Caucasus and it is only surprising
that nobody had the same idea before
Sturu.
On the other hand, Sturu's choice
was perhaps a natural one. His produc¬
tion was staged in 1976, after a
decade which had seen a revival of in¬
terest in the roots of national cultures,
in the sources of different peoples'
ways of thinking. In the theatre, this in¬
quiry found expression in a renewed in¬
terest in, for example, the puppet
theatre of the Ukraine; the mummers
and wandering musicians of Moldavia;
the strolling players of Tajikstan, im¬
provising their performances with the
aid of masks; and the oyunthe
popular farcical plays of Azerbaijan.
In the Soviet Union, the renaissance
of the people's theatre, the "theatre of
the market place", may be observed
today in a great variety of dramatic
contexts from opera to vaudeville,
from ballet on ice to the experimental
theatre of the universities, from
festivals of sport and the Olympic
Games to overtly political theatre.
The Taganka Theatre in Moscow,
directed by Yury Lyubimov, con¬
sistently builds its productions around
the search for a synthesis between the
popular, festive, carnival tradition
(from which Lyubimov borrows the
spirit of improvisation but not the co¬
lourful atmosphere: his own approach
is particularly austere), and psycholo¬
gical, committed, morally didactic
drama. It is not by accident that the
foyer of the Taganka Theatre is
decorated with four symbolic
portraits of Stanislavsky, Vakhtan-
gov, Meyerhold and Brecht.
Brecht's The Good Woman of
Szechwan, Vladimir Mayakovsky's
Listen!, Mikhail Bulgakov's The Master
and Margarita and other productions
by the Taganka Theatre embody just
such a synthesis, which is also
reflected in the dramatic evocation of
the peasant rebellion of the eighteenth
century, led by Emel'yan Pugachev.
Here, the setting is the square where
the main events of the historical occa¬
sion took place, but the performance
CONTINUED PAGE 27
Colour page right
Pali, the monkey general allied to Rama,
fights with Thotsakan in this scene from
Thai Khon ("mask drama") theatre. Works
in the Khon repertory dramatize the pursuit
of Thotsakan, the ten-headed demon king of
Longka, by Rama whose consort. Sida, he
has abducted. The actors mime a text which
is recited and sung by a narrator and a
chorus. Scholars believe that the steps and
dance movements of Khon derived from
those of Chinese shadow theatre.
Photo © School of Oriental and African Studies, London

includes extracts from the works of the
great modern Russian poet Sergei
Yesenin, which the actors declaim in
the manner of town criers or old
masters of the art of rhetoric.
The "popular theatre" of a country
is a theatre which bears a specifically
national imprint, which is distinctive
and which exists in its own right. But it
is not merely an art form; it is also a
deeply ethical manifestation, the soil in
which a people's wisdom is rooted, the
repository of the axioms, standards of
behaviour, rituals, ceremonies and
concepts about the world which it has
accumulated over the centuries. For
this reason, the popular theatre is, as a
general rule, a matter of particular in¬
terest to creators and innovators, in
other words to.those whom history has
designated as the founders of a fun¬
damentally new art. In the Soviet
theatre, this was the role of such Rus¬
sian directors as Stanislavsky, Nemiro¬
vich-Danchenko, Vakhtangov and
Meyerhold, the Ukrainian Les Kurbas,
the Georgian Mardjanishvili, the Arme¬
nian Kalantar, and many others.
This year marks the centenary of the
birth of one of these great men of the
theatre, Yevgeny Bogrationovich
Vakhtangov. The event is being
celebrated by the international com¬
munity, in accordance with its inscrip¬
tion on the Unesco calendar of anniver¬
saries. Vakhtangov was one of the
most brilliant, original and famous ar¬
tists of his age. Joining the Moscow
Art Theatre in 1 91 1 , he quickly proved
to be one of the most talented disciples
of Stanislavsky and an ardent advo¬
cate of his system. For Vakhtangov,
the central precept of Stanislavsky's
teaching was that man's inherent crea¬
tivity must be awakened. If it failed to
convey an image, if it lacked inven¬
tiveness, if it did not speak in the
language of poetry, if it merely copied
life, the theatre had no claim to be call¬
ed an art. On the other hand, the
popular imagination was capable of
working wonders, because it was
nourished by, but never simply im¬
itated "real". life.
Vakhtangov believed that the mak¬
ing of an artist depended on the pos¬
session of the three faculties of inspira¬
tion, imagination and inventiveness. "I
love the theatre in all its manifesta¬
tions", he wrote in 1917, "but what
attracts me most of all are those
moments when the human spirit is at
its liveliest."
Even earlier, in 1912, he had spoken
of his dream of establishing a work¬
shop where, in a genuinely creative at¬
mosphere, a close-knit community of
apprentice actors could prepare
themselves for their great calling.
After the October Revolution, which
he called "a phenomenon of cosmic
dimensions", Vakhtangov addressed
himself specifically to the subject of
the popular theatre, which he con¬
sidered to be an ¡deal medium for the
expression of man's innate creativity.
"If the artist is chosen to bear the
Over the past twelve years, the "Subbota" (Saturday) Young Theatre Club, a
Leningrad-based amateur group, has been putting on avant-garde shows inspired by in¬
cidents of everyday life. There is virtually no separation between stage and auditorium
and everyone present is invited to take part in the performance and the discussion that
follows. Above, the group photographed in a Leningrad street.
27

Princess Turandot, based on an
eighteenth-century Italian play by
Carlo Gozzi, had its première on 28
February 1922, and has become a
classic of Soviet and world theatre, the
subject of thousands of pages of
criticism and analysis. At the
Vakhtangov Theatre in Moscow it has
been performed over 2,000 times, by
four generations of actors and before
as many generations of spectators.
Vakhtangov's unbridled imagination
lifted the spectator into the realm of
"fantastic realism" where everything
was possible. There was an orchestra,
but the musicians' instruments were
combs and paper. The beards of the
male heroes were made of scarves, or
tufts of coarse fibre. In place of tur¬
bans, the female slaves in the play
wore rolled-up pairs of trousers.
Sweet-box covers served as portraits,
paper-knives took the place of steel
daggers and, with suitable dignity, a
tennis-racket was brandished as a
regal sceptre. And God knows how
many other surprises awaited the au¬
dience on this gaudy stage!
What was being celebrated was the
rapturous free flight of the spirit a ge¬
nuine commedia dell'arte, an art form
which had leapt across time and space
to transform this Moscow theatre into
a place of popular festivity and car-
One of the rare photographs
of the Russian theatrical
director Yevgeny Vakhtangov
(1883-1922), the centenary of
whose birth is being celebrated
by Unesco and the international
community. A pupil of Konstan¬
tin Stanislavsky, the founder of
the "method" school of acting,
he is noted for his innovative
productions of Chekhov's The
Wedding and Carlo Gozzi's
Turandot.
spark of Immortality", he said, "then
let him direct his inner eye towards the
people, because what is in the people
is immortal. Today, the people are
creating new ways of living. If they are
doing so through Revolution, it is
because they had no other means of
proclaiming their sense of Injustice to
the world."
Vakhtangov's project for a truly
"popular" theatre, as accessible and
universal as the open-air, market-place
theatre of old, took shape in his mind in
1919; but it was not destined to be
carried to fruition during his lifetime.
Vakhtangov died three years later, and
failed to see the first public perfor¬
mance of his last great production
the embodiment of his central thesis,
that unfettered creativity, the celebra¬
tion of delight, abandonment to festivi¬
ty in all its forms are manifestations of
the highest spiritual leanings of
mankind.
The leading characters in Behold
Brecht's The Caucasian Chalk Circle, in a
scene from the adaptation by Robert
Sturu. Brecht's characters are portrayed
as traditional characters of Georgian
folklore.
On the stage of the
Bolshoi Drama Theatre,
Leningrad, actor Yev¬
geny Lebedev in the
role of the old grey
horse in the play based
on Tolstoy's short
story Kholstomer, a
satire on human beings
as seen from the point
of view of a horse.
Photo ©Bakhrushm State Museum
of Theatrical Art, Moscow
nival, where everyone could join the
crowd of merrymakers, exchanging his
identity for that of one of the "eternal"
jesters, Brighella or Truffaldino, Pan¬
taloon or Tartaglia.
Vakhtangov's Turandot was a
revolutionary event which brought
new ideas and new means of expres¬
sion to the theatre. His aesthetic
method, in which the actor both under¬
went his own authentic emotional ex¬
perience, in Stanislavskian style, and
also expressed his relationship with
the character he played, became one
of the key principles of the Brechtian
approach. His synthesis of the popular,
democratic values rooted in the com¬
media dell'arte, as reflected in Turan¬
dot, with the new principle of the
"dual" life of the stage character lent
itself to unlimited variations. The foun¬
dations had been laid for a tradition
based on a universal approach to the
future of the theatre. Vakhtangov was
a man who thought in terms of the
future. After him the scope of theatre
had to be redefined. The ideas of
popular theatre which he cherished still
live on today.
Nelly N. Kornienko
