I. World problems: Reflection
and future-oriented studies
THE purpose of this major programme is to strengthen
Unesco's role as a "think tank" which collects, analyses
and compares reflections and studies carried out in the
different regions and which concern the situation in the world
today, the trends emerging in all fields that affect the lives of
peoples, their progress and their co-operation in a word, the
destiny of mankind. The spirit in which this work will be carried
out will be one of rigorous independence from any partisan
position but also of a will to make room for the diversity of in¬
tellectual currents, for the sensibilities specific to different
cultures and for ideas from the most varied horizons, while
drawing inspiration from a vision centring on Unesco's lofty
ideals.
It consists of two sections: the first involves the analysis of
work already completed outside the Organization on the study
of the general situation at present and of prospects for the
future and methodological works aimed at identifying the place
of educational, scientific, cultural, communication and infor¬
mation factors in the overall analysis of world problems. The
second section is devoted to an international. future-oriented
study which should constitute an original contribution by
Unesco to international future-oriented reflection. Special em-
10
phasis will be placed on the cultural dimension of future
developments, taking account of different cultures' particular
viewpoints.
It seems more than ever necessary that all communities and
their individual members should become fully aware of the im¬
plications for the future of decisions adopted today. This would
make it easier to take preventive action in all fields so as to be
forearmed against any future intensification of existing pro¬
blems and to take steps in good time to avoid any exacerbation
of impending difficulties. Of course, a large number of future-
oriented studies are being conducted throughout the world, but
they are often prompted by specific considerations relating to
only one sector of community life or by a concern to help for¬
mulate the strategies, chiefly in the economic field, of a par¬
ticular State or group of States. There seems to be a paramount
need for an approach that transcends sectoral or regional con¬
siderations and makes full allowance for the social and cultural
dimensions of problems.
In implementing this major programme, much will depend on
the contribution of the social and human sciences and of
philosophical reflection: the latter is very likely to find its main
field of application at Unesco in this area in the next few years.
