XI. Culture
and the future
THE assertion of identity is inseparable from the store set
by a heritage: examples of art and architecture, but also
signs and symbols handed down through oral traditions,
literature and languages, handicrafts and folklore, music and
dances, beliefs and myths, rites and games.
Many kinds of problem arise regarding the conservation and
development of the monuments and the art inherited by
peoples: technical and financial, archaeological and historical,
socio-cultural, museological and legal. Some of them are
pyschological, primarily those caused by the indifference of
populations, even though a conservation movement has un¬
doubtedly developed during the last twenty years, thanks to the
international campaigns for the safeguarding of outstanding
monuments launched by Unesco.
In the case of countries dispossessed under colonial rule of
the works of art and monuments which were the most symbolic
of their identity, and in which the illicit traffic in cultural pro¬
perty is most prevalent, the problem of safeguarding is also the
problem of restitution.
Efforts to introduce on a general basis the conduct and co¬
ordination of surveys and the collecting and recprding of oral,
musical and gestual traditions, are still of a sporadic and
dispersed nature.
Culture as an industry
In this respect attention should be drawn to both the potential
uses and the risks involved in the development of the cultural in¬
dustries, which have profoundly changed living conditions and
25

In co-operation with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP),
Unesco created in 1980 at Niamey
(Republic of Niger) a Regional Training
Centre for museum specialists from
French-speaking African countries. Six-
month courses are scheduled to be held
at the Centre until 1 986. They will cover
museum administration and manage¬
ment, the preservation of the cultural
and natural heritage, African archaeo¬
logy and prehistory, ethnomusicology,
photography and display techniques,
taxidermy and conservation. Left, an
anthropomorphic harp from the Central
African Republic.
Photo © Musée de l'Homme, Pans
the climate of cultural expression in many countries. These in¬
dustries provide the possibility of considerably broadening the
fields of knowledge and the scope of man's imagination: they
can substantially increase the opportunities for contact with
outstanding cultural works and play an increasingly significant
part in encounters between cultures and their mutual enrich¬
ment. Nonetheless, they sometimes appear to set their seal on
a pattern of "consumption" of culture which does not always
foster personal, enriching contact with creative works. Thus
there is a visible deterioration in cultural practices, leading to a
kind of "cultural escapism" based on inactivity and a rejection
of reality.
The very nature of these industries makes them promote pro¬
ducts which are the easiest to distribute and which have often
been denounced for their standardization, not to say their
mediocrity. This can lead to the erosion of cultural values,
within a society or throughout the world.
The impact of the cultural industries will be considerably in¬
creased with the advent in the near future of cultural com¬
munication satellites.
The crucial question for each country will therefore probably
be not to limit the influence of foreign products, but to acquire
its own cultural industries which will be based on the cultural
values of the community, encourage the creative participation
of individuals and groups in the life of the community, and
enable national artists to gain access to commercial production
and dissemination facilities.
The cultural heritage
The cultural heritage, and especially its architectural compo¬
nent, is at present exposed to serious risk of damage owing to
the' effects of urbanization and industrialization, air pollution,
some types of climate and certain kinds of tourism. Further¬
more, the illicit traffic in cultural property is constantly im¬
poverishing the heritage of all peoples, thus compounding the
26
losses incurred by many countries in the past under colonial or
foreign occupation.
. The objectives of the proposed programme are first of all to
get to know, i.e. to draw up inventories of, the various com¬
ponents of the heritage, especially non-physical elements such
as oral traditions and languages, beliefs and myths, dance and
music. An equally urgent objective is that of protecting the
components of the cultural heritage: the drafting of appropriate
legislation, the adoption of international protective instruments
in fields not already covered and, above all, their implementa¬
tion at national level, and the continuation of operational ac¬
tivities to safeguard and enhance historic monuments, groups
of buildings and sites. All of these are vitally important tasks.
The principles of action to be applied in carrying out this pro¬
gramme are as follows: improved facilities for taking rapid ac¬
tion to counter threats such as war or natural disasters that may
have irremediable effects on the heritage; the protection of the
cultural heritage of mankind calls for a universal effort to com¬
bat the illicit traffic in works of art and archaeological objects;
each people which so desires must be given the opportunity to
reconstitute the irreplaceable components of its cultural
heritage.
Identity and inter-cultural contacts
Far from having to turn in on themselves, cultures need each
other. At both the national and international levels, a communi¬
ty that is firmly rooted in its own authenticity helps, through ex¬
change, to strengthen and diversify that larger community
created by co-operation. Increased co-operation in turn makes
it possible to preserve the diversity of cultures which is necessary
for human progress. But one condition has to be fulfilled: co¬
operation must take the form of relationships based on recogni¬
tion of the equal worth of cultures.
In this connexion, priority should be given to the following
objectives: the rejection of ethnocentrism, the recognition of
cultural pluralism within and beyond national frontiers, and the
discovery and appreciation of cultures of other groups or other
societies.
A major problem is that of the relationship between culture
and industrial development in general: data processing, infor-
Unesco encourages the return of
works of art removed from their coun¬
tries of origin. Right, the Afo-A-Kom, a
sacred throne figure of the Kom people
of Cameroon which was stolen and
later sold in the United States. It was
subsequently purchased by the
Museum of African Art in Washington
DC, with financial support from US
collectors, specifically for return to the
United Republic of Cameroon. Far
right, mannequin adorned with ritual
objects which were smuggled out of
Ecuador.
Photo © Museum of African Art, Frederick Douglass
Institute, Washington, DC

Unesco is preparing to launch an inter¬
national campaign for the safeguard of
Göreme in Cappadocia (Turkey) and
for the preservation of the historic
quarters of Istanbul, including the area
known as the Golden Horn, which are
threatened by modern urban develop¬
ment. Göreme (right) which began to
be settled in the 5th-6th centuries, is a
unique site where churches, shrines
and dwellings decorated with Byzan¬
tine frescoes were hollowed out of the
rock.
Photo Else Madelon Hooykaas © Rapho, Paris
mation technology, robotics, office automation, genetic
engineering. The interactions between pre-industrial and in¬
dustrial cultures may be negative, but compatibilities between
them may emerge under certain conditions.
Creation and creativity
Creativity, which represents the ability of groups and in¬
dividuals, or even whole societies, to discover, invent or rein¬
vent all the forms of expression related to their own universe is
a vital aspect of individual and group involvement in the crea¬
tion of their own culture.
Certain forms of creation seem to be on the decline, par¬
ticularly in the developing countries, owing to the weakening of
The world's common
heritage of rock art is
rapidly deteriorating
under, the combined
onslaught of public
works, pollution and
vandalism. Unesco has
therefore launched a
new programme which
aims to create a world
inventory of rock art
sites, to protect such
sites, and to promote
the development of ar¬
chaeological parks and
ecomuseums around
them. Right, rock pain¬
ting at Tassili N'Ajjer
(central Sahara)
depicts a dromedary.
Photo J.-D Lajoux © Rapho, Paris
their ties with certain functions of social life. In the industrializ¬
ed countries, other forms of creation are also in a state of crisis
because of competition from the audio-visual media. In the
field of literature, music, and sometimes the visual arts, con¬
sumer products are distributed on a massive scale at the expense
of more difficult works. '
Certain aspects of aesthetic and intellectual creativity are
likewise undergoing erosion or even being undermined. Leisure
time in the industrialized countries, although increasing, is
usually devoted to passive cultural consumption. In the ]
27

developing countries, alongside some remarkable forms of
creative expression, a certain loss of confidence in local values
as against imported forms can also be observed. A society which
loses its creativity, however, becomes weakened in general.
In order to act in these fields, first of all freedom of creation,
expression and dissemination should be established in the
various social and cultural contexts as a principle preceding any
action in support of creation and creativity. It will then be
necessary to facilitate relations between creative artists and the
society in which they live through all available means.
Cultural development
Development cannot be limited to economics alone but im¬
plies that the goals of growth must also be defined in terms of
cultural improvement.
This view of development, less energy-consuming, more
respectful of the environment and more concerned for com
munity life and conviviality, has begun to be accepted by the
developing as well as by the industrialized countries.
The objectives are to obtain a better understanding of the
concrete significance of considering culture a dimension, and
even the foundation, of economic and social development; to
study the discrepancies between individual and group cultural
practices (often different from their underlying aspirations) and
' the cultural policies applied; to enable all countries to obtain the
instruments necessary for cultural development and to assist
them in adapting the latter to the different political and social
contexts; to train the appropriate personnel, particularly need¬
ed in many countries, making sure they have multi-purpose
qualifications, know the cultural needs of each population and
maintain relations with the other agents of development; and to
contribute to the strengthening of international cultural co¬
operation, thereby helping to bring peoples closer together and
promoting the building of peace.

