THE ESKIMOS OF GREENLAND



The guidelines
of tradition
by Jean Malaurie
LIKE the entire Arctic region, Greenland has been thrown
open to rapid development. All the modern means
available to industrialized countries giant excavators,
ice-breakers, nuclear submarines, cargo planes, mushroom
towns, television networks are being mobilized for the ex¬
ploitation of its vast spaces.
The uranium deposits in south-west Greenland are said to be
the most extensive available to the European Economic Com¬
munity to which Greenland still belongs, although the precise
form of its membership remains to be negotiated. Substantial
oil resources are also being explored. Moreover, the future
Canadian Arctic gas route (the Arctic Pilot Project) could
become one of the West's main energy routes, traversed day
and night by giant methane-carriers, if it is established in spite
of Greenland's opposition because of the pollution risks.
Although modern Greenland is resolutely turned towards the
world of tomorrow, its attitude to these futuristic projects is
one of prudent reserve. In the midst of the frozen and particular¬
ly fragile waters which surround it, it has elected to be the pro-
JEAN MALAURIE, French geographer and explorer, is Director of
Research at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique and at the
Ecole des Hautes Etudes des Sciences Sociales, Paris and Director of the
Centre for Arctic Studies, Paris. He is the author ofmany scientific studies
and books, including a best-selling book on the life and problems of the
Green/and Eskimos, The Last Kings of Thule, (Crowell, New York, 1956).
This miniature ivory
mask, 3.5 cm. in
height, is one of the
oldest known
specimens of Dorset
culture Inuit (Eskimo)
art. It dates from about
700 BC and comes
from the Island of
Sugluk in Hudson
Strait, Canada.
Photo © Musée de l'Homme, Paris
tector of an ecological balance, thus maintaining its people's
age-old alliance with the sea. Less than thirty years ago, people
still gathered around the oil lamp in the igloos to hear the oral
traditions from the mouths of the older generation. The younger
people are still, consciously or unconsciously, imbued with this
tradition which for them is not mere "folklore". It is this tradi¬
tion which prompts Greenland's representatives at in¬
tergovernmental conferences to insist in the first place upon
their country's inalienable historic rights, and then on the need
for the greatest care in developing these spaces.



Greenland's leaders never tire of repeating, both in speech
and print, that "a natural order cannot be overturned with
impunity the ice restrains paroxysmal forces". Since time im¬
memorial, they have feared these hostile forces which their
high priests, the shamans or angakogs, had learned to appease.
In spite of their limited finances and although only 10 per cent
of their resources are still derived from hunting, they refuse to
agree to the exploitation, against their people's interest, of the
vast industrial wealth lying beneath their soil.
In this young nation, there are three distinct but connected
systems of thought: shamanism, Christianity and autonomism.
The Greenlanders want time for reflection, they want to follow
their own historical sense of time, to consider their history as
it is taught by their new élite while mobilizing all their spiritual
and intellectual forces hidden under two and a half centuries of
Christian mental colonialism which, though enlightened and
positive in many ways, was nevertheless extremely
dominating. It fought and destroyed the ancestral religion
which formed the backbone of the traditional group.
Thanks to a mental revolution which will enable it more fully
to assume its identity, the Greenland of the 1980's wants to
belong to the world of today. And after all, is not the Eskimo's
profound attachment to nature and its balances a direct expres¬
sion of his ancestral religion?
The beautiful words (below) of my friend Gaba Broberg, a
young Greenlander of insatiable curiosity, reflect the proverbial
prudence of Greenland's hunters and fishermen: Imera!
Perhaps!
He, too, reminds us that a country may be developed only in
the long-term interest of its inhabitants and with due respect for
their myths.
"Much of the progress that is being superimposed on socie¬
ty, although necessary, is too new or too rapid to be always
beneficial. We must reconsider it ourselves in the light of our
history which is being rewritten by us. Time, we need time..."
Such are the comments one reads in the press and literature of
Greenland, and how can one fail to approve of such prudence?
GODDESS OF THE SEA
"We are born of the sea", say the Inuits (Eskimos), and these
hunters and fisherfolk have traditionally been dependent on the
sea for their livelihood. The goddess of the sea, nourisher and
protectress of animals, is one of the major figures of Inuit
mythology. There are several versions of the myth about her,
but they have a common ending in which a young woman, her
fingers chopped off, sinks to the bottom of the sea where she
reigns as queen. The story of the goddess is frequently por¬
trayed in Inuit sculpture, engraving and drawing. This stone
engraving. Woman of the Sea (1976) by the Inuit artist
Soroseelutu, from Cape Dorset, Canada, recalls the theme of
the chopped off fingers, from which sea creatures are born.
Drawing 'ci National Museum of Man, Ottawa
