RACE, PREJUDICE
AND MYTH
by Michel Leiris
IT may be asked what is the origin
of the prejudice behind the at¬
tempt to classify certain human
groups as inferior on the ground that
their racial composition is an ir¬
remediable handicap.
The first point which emerges from
any examination of the data of
ethnography and history is that race
prejudice is not universal and is of re¬
cent origin. Many of the societies in-
MICHEL LEIRIS, French poet, essayist and
anthropologist, was formerly Senior Research
Fellow at the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Paris. His many published works
include an autobiographical tetralogy La Règle
du Jeu, Haut Mal, a collection of poems, and
an ethnological study Afrique Noire. The pre¬
sent text is an extract from his study "Race
and Culture" which appeared in Race, Science
and Society, a collective work published in
1975 by Unesco and George Allen & Unwin.
vestigated by anthropologists do in¬
deed display group pride, but while
the group regards itself as privileged
compared with other groups, it
makes no "racist" claims and, for in¬
stance, is not above entering into
temporary alliances with other
groups or providing itself with
women from them.
Much more than "blood", the uni¬
fying elements are common interests
and a variety of activities conducted
in association. In the majority of
cases such groups are not in fact
"races" if very isolated, they may
at most be homogeneous offshoots
of a race but are merely societies
whose antagonism to other
societies, whether traditional or aris¬
ing from specific questions of in¬
terest, is not biological but purely
cultural.
The peoples whom the Greeks
described as "barbarians" were hot
regarded by them as racially inferior
but as not having attained the same
level of civilization as themselves;
Alexander himself married two Per¬
sian princesses and 10,000 of his
soldiers married Hindus. The main in¬
terest her subject peoples had for
Rome was as a source of tribute and,
since she did not pursue the same
ends of systematic exploitation of
the earth and its population as more
recent imperialisms, she had ho
reason to practise racial discrimina¬
tion against them.
The Christian faith preached the
brotherhood of man arid, while all too
often it fell short of its own principle
in practice, it never evolved a racist
ideology. The Crusades were launch-
"Although there are differences of varying
degrees between contemporary human
societies, the explanation must not be sought in
the racial evolution of mankind (...) which has
produced variations from what was probably
an ancestral stock common to all humanity.
The differences in question are cultural varia¬
tions and cannot be explained either in terms of
biological background or even of the influence
of geographical setting, impossible though it is
to overlook the. importance of this last fac¬
tor..." (Michel Leiris). A superficial reaction to
the sight of these four new born babies (right)
might well be to describe them as being of dif¬
ferent races simply because each has different
colour skin; in fact, this criterion has very little
biological significance (see caption page 26).
Photo Kitrosser, Unesco

Photo Chasseloup-Laubat © Musée de l'Homme, Paris
ed against the "infidels", the Inquisi¬
tion persecuted heretics and Jews,
and Catholics and Protestants exter¬
minated each other, but in every
case the motives alleged were
religious and not racial.
The picture only begins to change
with the opening of the period of col¬
onial expansion by the European
peoples, when it becomes necessary
to excuse violence and oppression
by decreeing the inferiority of those
enslaved or robbed of their own land
and denying the title of men to the
cheated peoples. (Differences in
customs and the physical stigma of
colour made the task an easy one.)
That the origins of race prejudice
are economic and social becomes
perfectly clear, if we bear in mind
that the first great apostle of racism,
Count de Gobineau, said himself that
he wrote his two notorious Essays to
combat liberalism: the better to de¬
fend the threatened interest of the
aristocratic caste of Europe, against
the rising tide of democracy, he
postulated their descent from a so-
called superior race which he labelled
"Aryan", and for which he
postulated a civilizing mission.
We find the same motive yet again
in the attempt by anthropologists
such as Broca and Vacher de
Lapouge of France and the German
Ammon to demonstrate by an¬
thropometry that class distinctions
reflect differences in race (and hence
are part of the natural order).
However, the amazing intermingling
of human groups which has taken
place in Europe as in the rest of the
The 1978 Declaration on Race
and Racial Prejudice was
adopted by the General Con¬
ference of Unesco at its twen¬
tieth session. It defines racism
as "any theory which involves
the claim that racial or ethnic
groups are inherently superior
or inferior, thus implying that
some would be entitled to
dominate or eliminate others,
presumed to be inferior, or
which bases value judgements
on racial differentiation." The
definition is a broad one since it
continues: "racism includes
racist ideologies, prejudiced at¬
titudes, discriminatory beha¬
viour, structural arrangements
and institutionalized practices
resulting in racial inequality as
well as the fallacious notion
that discriminatory relations
between groups are morally
and scientifically justifiable."
Did racism exist in the world's
earliest, more loosely struc¬
tured societies? Left, ancient
rock-paintings of plumed men,
at Tefedest, in the Ahaggar
Mountains, central Sahara,
Algeria.
world since prehistoric times, and
the unceasing movements of popula¬
tion occurring in the countries of
modern Europe are enough to
demonstrate the fatuity of the
attempt.
Later, racism took on the virulent
quality we know so well and, more
particularly in Nazi Germany, ap¬
peared in nationalist guise, though
still remaining in essence an ideology
designed to introduce or perpetuate
a system of caste economically and
politically favourable to a minority,
e.g. by cementing a nation's unity by
the idea of itself as a master race, by
inculcating in colonial populations
the feeling that they are irremediably
inferior to the colonizers, by preven¬
ting part of the population within a
country from rising in the social
This 1944 photo shows a
Hungarian Jewish woman and
children arriving at Auschwitz-
Birkenau concentration camp
where they were to die in the gas
chamber. Six million Jews perish¬
ed in Nazi extermination camps in
the Second World War. Unesco's
mission to combat racism is set
forth in its Constitution, which
was adopted in 1945 and declares
that "the great and terrible war"
which humanity had just endured
had been "made possible by the
denial of the democratic principles
of the dignity, equality and mutual
respect of men, and by the pro¬
pagation, in their place, through ig¬
norance and injustice, of the doc¬
trine of the inequality of men and
races".

iv scale, by eliminating competition in
employment or by neutralizing
popular discontent by supplying the
people with a scapegoat which is
also a profitable source of loot.
There is bitter irony in the fact that
racism developed parallel with the
growth of democracy, which made
an appeal to the new-born prestige of
science necessary for the calming of
consciences uneasy over flagrant
violation of the rights of a section of
mankind or refusal to recognize
those rights.
Racial prejudice is not innate. As
Ashley Montagu has noted: "In
America, where white and black
populations frequently live side by
side, it is an indisputable fact that
white children do not learn to con¬
sider themselves superior to Negro
children until they are told that they
are so." When a tendency to racism
(in the form either of voluntary en¬
dogamy or the more or less ag¬
gressive assertion of one's own
"race's" virtue) is found in an "out¬
cast" group, it should be regarded as
no more than the normal reaction of
the "insulted and injured" against
the ostracism or persecution of
which they are the victims and not as
indicating the universality of racial
prejudice.
There are no races of masters as
opposed to races of slaves: slavery is
not coeval with mankind and only ap¬
peared in societies whose technology
was sufficiently developed to make
slave-owning profitable.
From the sexual point of view,
there appears no evidence of any
repulsion between race and race,
and indeed all the facts so far col
lected demonstrate that there has
been continual cross-breeding bet¬
ween races since the most ancient
times.
Race prejudice is no more
hereditary than it is spontaneous: it
is in the strictest sense a "pre¬
judice", that is, a cultural value
judgement with no objective basis.
Far from being in the order of things
or innate in human nature, it is one of
the myths whose origin is much more
propaganda by special interests than
the tradition of centuries. Since there
is an essential connexion between it
and the antagonisms arising out of
the economic structure of modern
societies, its disappearance will go
hand in hand with the transformation
of their economic structure by the
peoples.
Michel Leiris

