H
Demonstration of weighing with a
steelyard during a functional literacy ses¬
sion at Gounou-Gaya, Chad. The
villagers are cotton planters and need to
know how to weigh their cotton at the
annual sale of their crops.
Photo Madeleine Caillard, Unesco



Milestones to the
learning society
by Torsten Husén
TORSTEN HUSEN, ofSweden, is director of
the Institute of International Education at the
University of Stockholm. A member of the
Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, he was
chairman of the governing board of the Inter¬
national Institute for Educational Planning
from 1970 to 1980. He has been a consultant
with the Organization for Economic Co¬
operation and Development (OECD) since
1968 and is a member of the Max Planck In¬
stitute for Educational Research. He is the
author ofsome 40 books, the most recent be¬
ing The School in Question (1979), The Future
of Formal Schooling (1980) and An Incurable
Academic An Autobiography (1982).
WHAT constitutes a "mile¬
stone", or even a "revolu¬
tion", in education is, of
course, a matter of judgement. Impor¬
tant institutional changes in education do
not occur as abruptly as revolutionary
upheavals on the political and social
scene. Furthermore, it is not always easy
to distinguish lasting milestones from
ephemeral fads, such as the so-called new
mathematics, and only time can tell one
from the other. In education we can,
however, in retrospect, at certain points
in time, identify sequences of events that^
13

together constitute a change that over a
long period has had a strong impact on
the social fabric.
Looking back over a century and a half
it appears to me that one could identify
five sets of milestones on the road to the
learning society of today. The first was
the introduction by the mid-nineteenth
century of universal primary schooling in
the northern hemisphere when legislation
on mandatory schooling was passed in
many countries. This occurred mainly
during the period 1815 to 1880. Thus,
there was some spread between
countries.
The second set of milestones marked
the gradual introduction of a common
basic school, sometimes referred to as a
comprehensive school, catering to
students from all walks of life in a given
area or community. This occurred well
into the twentieth century with the Soviet
Union and the United States taking the
lead and Western Europe trailing behind
with a more class-stratified system, par¬
ticularly for the age range 10 through 15.
The third set of milestones could be
placed after 1960 and indicates the
"enrolment explosion" at all stages in
both the industrialized and non-
industrialized world. The fourth set
signals massive literacy campaigns in
Third World countries and a new concep¬
tion of adult education under labels such
as life-long, permanent or recurrent
education. A fifth milestone, finally, is
represented by the entry of new
technology onto the educational scene,
something that happened after 1960.
There were certain socio-economic,
ideological and political forces behind
the legislation on mandatory schooling
(either mandatory attendance or man¬
datory for the communities to set up
schools). Important changes occurred in
the role of the family in connexion with
industrialization and the concomitant ur¬
banization. There is no doubt that the
need for children to be cared for while
parents worked long hours in the fac¬
tories gave a strong impetus to the provi¬
sion of schooling. Typically, in several
European countries, in rural areas where
the children's labour at home was needed
they attended school only part-time,
whereas in the urban areas they went to
school full-time. Many farmers were by
no means enthusiastic about parliamen¬
tary decisions forcing them to send their
children to school.
Two new educational institutions
emerged in industrialized England during
the first part of the nineteenth century:
the Bell-Lancaster system for providing
elementary schooling (by using more ad¬
vanced students as tutors) on a massive
scale with a minimum of adult teachers,
and infant schools for children in the age
range 2 to 7.
A Swedish social statistician who went
to England in the early 1830s to study the
infant schools recorded his observations
in a travel report "Notes from a Journey
to England at the End of the Summer
1834". The infant schools which were
run by philanthropic organizations took
care of the small children when their
14
parents were away for long working
hours. They taught the children certain
skills, such as very elementary reading
and arithmetic. This was, however, not
their main aim. In these schools
"children already from the age of 2 are
getting used to attentiveness, order, obe¬
dience, reflection and self-initiated
activity".
When in the 1830s child labour was
prohibited or limited by law in Britain,
children in the age range 7 to 1 2 came into
focus, and demands for their schooling
began to be voiced. The need for
custodial care of children in urban areas
was in the interest of several parties, such
as parents and owners of enterprises. But
it would be a serious mistake to believe
that this was the main force behind the
introduction of universal elementary
schooling. The liberal quest for universal
suffrage, for democratic participation in
the decision-making process both locally
and centrally as well as for greater equali¬
ty of opportunity was also an important
motive for establishing a universal
elementary school.
During the decade after the Second
World War, largely under the prompting
of Unesco, mass literacy teaching became
a prime task in Third World countries. In
spite of the fact that universal primary
education was proclaimed a top priority
for educational policy, for instance at the
meeting of African Ministers of Educa¬
tion in Addis Ababa in 1960, the most
striking feature of educational efforts in
the developing countries has been the
massive literacy campaigns. They are,
with the exception of the Soviet Union,
without any historical precedent in pre-
literate Europe.
A characteristic of these campaigns
was the attempt to integrate literacy with
vocational skills with the aim of helping
to improve the economic plight in par¬
ticular of the small and poor farmers.
But, again, as was the case in the at¬
tempts to make primary schooling
universal, the chief impetus was a strong
belief in literacy as the backbone of a
functioning democracy with the par¬
ticipation of enlightened citizens.
The demand in Europe and North
America for a common school for
children from all kinds of homes can be
traced back to the time when legislation
was enacted introducing universal
primary schooling for "the people".
Typically, the elementary school
established by law at various points in
time in some European countries was for
the next century referred to as the "peo¬
ple's school" {Volksschule, folkskold).
It was a school that reflected a highly
class-stratified society. Different types of
schools for the various social strata were
in most quarters taken for granted. For a
teachers' conference in 1881 a Swedish
conservative educator, teaching in the
classical gymnasium, published a
brochure entitled "What Direction
Should a Reform of Our Schools
Take ?". The overriding idea was that
each of the three main social classes
should have the type of school that cor¬
responded to its "needs". The generals
In the developing countries the
majority of human resources are
concentrated in rural areas where
illiteracy is prevalent and educa¬
tional facilities are meagre. Efforts
are now being made not only to
step up the facilities available but
also to encourage the child's in¬
tegration into his environment and
to introduce productive work into
the school curriculum. Right,
learning how to tend the land in a
school garden in Madagascar.
Photo Duré. Unesco
In Upper Volta 95 per cent of the
population work on the land.
Government plans to improve liv¬
ing conditions for the rural popula¬
tion include the establishment of
social centres for the education of
farm women. Right, a home
economics teacher gives a
dressmaking lesson at the centre
at Koudieré. Some of the cotton
cloth used for this activity was
provided through a Unesco Gift
Coupon scheme.
Photo Banoun/Caracciolo, FAO, Rome


elementary ("people's") school was
meant for the "working classes and the
lower classes of artisans". The grammar
school was for the upper class. What was
now needed was a third type of school for
the middle class of skilled artisans,
business men and farmers. The three
types of school should run parallel to
each other without any organizational
connexions.
Two years later in deliberate criticism
of this a young elementary school
teacher, Fridjuv Berg, who some twenty
years later became Minister of Educa¬
tion, published a brochure called "The
Elementary School as the Basic School"
in which he advocated a basic school
which would cater to children from all
walks of life.
Comprehensive versus a stratified,
selective education was a major issue in
European public policy in the years
following the Second World War. The
word "comprehensive" denoted from
the outset a secondary school which
ideally served all the students from a
given area under the same roof and of¬
fered all types of programmes, both
academic and vocational. In Europe,
with its traditionally segregated school
structure, the comprehensive school was
advocated as a replacement for the
socially and academically selective
school. The breakthrough for a com¬
prehensive conception of schooling in
Europe came after 1960.
Enrolment statistics in the twentieth
century relating to secondary and higher
education show certain striking features.
In the northern hemisphere, well into the
middle of the century, formal education
beyond a minimum (compulsory)
primary schooling was the prerogative of
a small social élite, although there was a
limited flow of academically gifted
young people from the lower classes to
schools which prepared pupils for the
universities as well as to the universities
themselves. But by and large the in¬
dustrialized countries were still what
sociologists call ascriptive societies,
where social status is more or less deter¬
mined at birth.
By the mid-twentieth century the
enrolment pattern had changed
dramatically in both industrialized and
non-industrialized countries. Both types
of countries experienced what has often
been referred to as an "educational ex¬
plosion". Since the turn of the century
enrolment in post-primary education in
most industrialized countHes increased in
a linear fashion. This had been the case
with elementary education in the
preceding century. But since 1950 the
growth in secondary and higher enrol¬
ment in these countries has, to express it
in mathematical terms, been exponential.
There are countries in which the number
of students doubled or even quadrupled
in less than ten years. Similar patterns of
growth have occurred in Third World
countries but they apply there to all
stages of the educational spectrum.
Equality of opportunity has become a
major objective for educational policy in
countries all over the world. It is a 'grow-
16

The People's Republic
of Benin is currently
creating a "New
School" system based
on the idea that each
school is a production
unit which will attempt
to pay at least 20 per
cent of its operational
budget. One of these
Unesco-supported pilot
schools is located at
the small market town
of Come. It has some
60 teachers and about
1,200 students and
owns its own grounds.
The students farm
more than eleven hec¬
tares, growing maize,
beans, cotton and fruit,
and they have set up a
co-operative to manage
the marketing of their
produce.
Photo Unesco, Paris
The Rural Production
Brigade of Shi-Ping, in
Shansi Province, is
typical of many Chi¬
nese rural commune
brigades. The leaders
of the commune are not
concerned solely with
agriculture but are also
responsible for the co¬
ordination of educa¬
tion, health, welfare
and cultural projects.
Left, members of the
Brigade at work on a
millet plantation.
Photo F. Mattioh, FAO, Rome
ing concern as the employment system
tends more and more to use formal
education as the first criterion of selec¬
tion among job seekers and as educa¬
tional achievements increasingly deter¬
mine social status. The expansion of the
number of places in further education
has led to an increase in both the absolute
and relative number of young people of
lower class background who have won
access to upper secondary and higher
education. It appears that social
background plays a less powerful role in
educational attainments in non-
industrialized than in industrialized
countries. This has been an important
factor in the expansion of post-primary
education in the developing countries.
Many developing countries have ex¬
perienced an almost explosive increase in
secondary school enrolment. The finan¬
cial implications have been serious for
poor countries running schools entirely
on public funds and, with a population
structure dominated by young people.
The social structure of the enrolment
has, as indicated above, tended to
become more balanced than in the highly
industrialized countries and this in turn
has made formal education an even more
powerful vehicle of social mobility. In
other words, formal education is playing
a central role in an increasingly
meritocratic society. Educated in¬
telligence tends in our days to become the
substitute for social origin and inherited
wealth. No wonder, then, that formal
education is regarded as an almost
endless ladder up which one should try to
climb as high as possible. No stage or
level of the system tends to have a goal or
profile of its own. It is regarded merely as
a step to the next level.
Young people are keenly aware that
formal credentials in terms of schooling
are not only strategic in their life careers
but constitute the first criterion of selec¬
tion among those who enter the job
market. They are aware that unemploy¬
ment among those with a minimum of
formal education is much higher than
among those with more advanced educa¬
tion. There is much talk about the
"educated unemployed", but the fact is
that, all over the world, they find it much
more easy to obtain employment than
those with a minimum of education. The
employment statistics show that their
unemployment rate is much lower.
A fourth milestone on the way to the
learning society of today was recently
passed almost unnoticed: this was a
mushrooming growth of various forms
of adult education, not least the sudden
increase in many countries of adults "go¬
ing back to school". It appears that the
breakthrough in the industrial countries
occurred around 1970. Enrolment in for¬
mal schooling at the upper secondary and
the university level, which previously had
rarely included adults who had already
embarked on their working life, suddenly
exploded. This process was facilitated by
legislation on the right to leave of
absence for educational purposes and by
financial support, for instance, from
pay-roll taxes.
17

The rise of adult participation in for¬
mal education is largely a phenomenon
limited to the more advanced industrial
countries where until recently adult
education, often under the aegis of
various popular movements, was
dominated by evening classes or study
circles. Education is now closely woven
into the career web of the individual in
societies where the occupational struc¬
ture and the requirements for efficient
job performance continuously change as
technology changes.
Formal education has always been a
labour-intensive enterprise. The in¬
satiable demand for teachers, particular¬
ly in developing countries, has been a
serious bottleneck which has tended to
stifle the expansion of school education.
No wonder, then, that hopes ran high
about what the new educational
technology would be able to achieve.
In the developing countries radio and
television were in the early 1960s seen as
the answer to the teacher shortage. In ad¬
dition, other forms of technology, such
as programmed learning and teaching
machines, were considered in the more
affluent parts of the world. Distance
teaching, particularly by means of radio,
proved to have a strong impact in Third
World countries suffering under the
"tyranny of distance", but it has also
been a godsend in sparsely populated
areas, such as parts of Australia. A
breakthrough in the new technology was
triggered in 1947 by the invention of the
transistor. Within a few years it revolu¬
tionized electronic equipment and
brought the small, portable radio within
the reach of almost everybody.
The most recent development in educa¬
tional technology, that might eventually
revolutionize education, is represented
by the mini-computer. All technological
devices used in education so far have
shared the drawback of allowing only for
one-way communication. You cannot
talk back to a TV-screen or a teaching
machine. The computer, however, allows
student feed-back and two-way com¬
munication, and the student can thus in¬
teract with the computer, both in pro¬
gramming and in the actual learning
situation; this affords him ample scope
for creativity and this in turn stimulates
his motivation to learn.
Computer-based instruction remained
an exclusive amenity of affluent societies
and their schools as long as the equip¬
ment used in the individual school or
classroom had to be connected with a
computation centre with its big and ex¬
pensive machinery. But as computers
have become increasingly compact and
prices have gone down, they have begun
to be within the means of the less affluent
countries. When and to what extent they
will be financially accessible to students
in poorer countries only time will tell.
But considering how quickly and unex¬
pectedly pocket calculators have made
their entry on the educational scene there
is reason to believe that this will occur
fairly soon.
Torsten Husén
18
1 ~"'
fcf v-t ^
/&*
:-*?¿$k*
w
.
>v^

Cubahâscreated a large number of"basic secondary schools ¡jr»
the countryside where theoretical study alternates with prac¬
tical work in the fietds.and the latest audiovisual methods are
widely used. Above, studentatoffthe Isle of Youth (formerly the
Isle of Pines) at work in a citrus plantation. : '*^Ä '*
tion of .Cuba w Unesco, Pans
«
