A model school
for blind children
The school for the blind at Bargur, a small town in
southern India.
Parents are encouraged to visit the school as often as
possible. Arna, who suffers from other handicapé in addi¬
tion to his blindness, requires special attention, and his
mother, who lives nearby, comes to school almost every
afternoon to play with him.
,
t \\cm
Au
^^^^m ^B t4^^
iL *h
lin
At the Bargur school, boys as well as girls are taught to
mend clothes and sew on buttons and, if they wish, can
go on to learn fine needlework.
Photos Unesco, from one of a series of slide and script presentations giving examples
of good practice in the education of handicapped children, produced by Unesco's
Special Education Unit, Paris
TEN years ago, in the little town of Bargur in south
India, a school for blind children opened its doors.
Life is hard in this part of India, the majority of people
are very poor, and for most of them life ¡s a struggle for sur¬
vival. There is no industry, farm land is scarce, and the crops
are very often destroyed by droughts or floods. These condi¬
tions result in poverty, disease and malnutrition.
There ¡s a very high incidence of blindness in this part of
India, especially among children. The parents of such
children are helpless, and blindness constitutes an addi¬
tional burden on the family. Assistance and advice are not
available on the contrary, blindness meets with supersti¬
tion, prejudice and fear.
Perhaps the same situation would still exist today had it
not been for a lady whose vision and determination brought
some drastic changes. Near her home she often saw parents
taking their blind children to the local temple in order to seek
miracle cures. One day, while visiting the temple, she sud¬
denly became convinced that she should initiate some kind
of assistance for these unfortunate people.
She happened to meet a representative of an international
organization, Christophe! Blindenmission, based in the
Federal Republic of Germany, and asked him for support.
After a long series of talks and negotiations, in which she
encouraged and stimulated other people in the community,
plans were finalized for the establishment of a blind school,
in close collaboration with the international agency.
However, those responsible were determined not to create
a conservative type of school. Academic knowledge alone
would not be sufficient to equip blind children to cope with
adversity; they would have to learn many other skills to be
able to stand on their own feet.
Consequently, the leaders of the project decided to make
Bargur a "school for life", and the normal curriculum for
blind children was enlarged and enriched by a great variety
of useful and practical projects.
From the day of admission onwards, every student is
helped to become independent. Naturally the three Rs are
not neglected, so that the child learns to read and write in
Braille and do basic arithmetic. At the same time, a wide
variety of daily living skills are taught, including very simple
tasks such as dressing, cooking, laundering, ironing, sewing
and knitting, but also mobility and orientation and a
multitude of pre-vocational skills.
Great efforts are made not to separate the children from
their homes. Realizing that their parents are often more in
need of help than the children themselves, regular home
visits are paid by the school's social worker, and parents are
frequently invited to visit the school. During the school
holidays, all children must return to their homes, and the
school also encourages weekend visits to families and
friends who live in the vicinity of the school. The counselling
service is extended even to blind people beyond school age
and it is planned to organize special handicraft courses for
them in the near future.
When the school opened in 1973 there were already
forty-two pupils, and by 1 979, with the addition of another
hostel and two more classrooms, their numbers had risen to
almost a hundred.
One of the biggest problems was the recruitment and
training of good staff. The Management Committee decided
against sending any of the teachers abroad and instead in¬
itiated an in-service teacher-training programme at the
school. For this purpose an experienced German teacher of
the blind was invited and under her guidance almost twenty
teachers were helped to become familiar with appropriate
modern teaching methods.
Residential schools often have disadvantages for
N children, and the Bargur Committee has seen to it that these
will be avoided in their school. Several visitors have com¬
mented on the atmosphere of joy and happiness which
prevails there, which shows that even in these simple con¬
ditions, children can grow up to be happy young adults.
29
