EUROPE
Who's afraid
of the avant-garde?
Scene from The Conference of the Birds, a production staged by the British
director Peter Brook at the Bouffes du Nord theatre in Paris. The work is based
on an allegorical poem by the Persian poet Attar (12th- 13th century) which
describes the quest of the birds for the mythical Simorgh whom they wish to
make their king. Each actor symbolically portrays a bird.
by Ronald Hayman
RONALD HAYMAN, of the UK, is the author
of a number of books about acting and theatre,
including Artaud and After and British Theatre
since 1955. He is a regular radio broadcaster and
contributor to the London Times Literary Sup¬
plement. His most recent book is a biography of
Kafka, and his biography of Brecht will appear
later this year.
BOOKS are like bananas, said
Jean-Paul Sartre. They have to
be consumed immediately if the
flavour is to be fully appreciated.
Marcel Duchamp considered that the
life of a painting was limited to forty or
fifty years, and Antonin Artaud said:
"The masterpieces of the past are good
for the past; they are not good for us."
Indubitably avant-garde theatre is
indispensable if the theatre is to be kept
alive, but it is self-evident that avant-
garde theatre cannot go on for very
long doing the same thing, and in
Europe, it might be asked, what is there

During a rehearsal of the Polish dramatist Tadeusz Kantor's
Où sont les neiges d'antan? in Paris, the author can be seen
behind a member of the cast.
Photo © Nicolas Treatt, Pans
left for it to do? The main landmarks in
its past have been moments when the
audience has been shocked, and the
easiest way to shock is to break a taboo
or defy a convention. In 1896, when
Alfred Jarry's Ubu Roi had its
premiere, the opening word "Merdre"
was enough, in spite of the extra r, to
provoke fifteen minutes of pandemon¬
ium in the auditorium. In 1968, when
male nudity was fully exposed in Oh,
Calcutta!, a convention, which had
survived since the Greeks, was
slaughtered. But how many conven¬
tions still have life in them?
The convention that actors must be
audible? This came under attack in the
second decade of this century at the
Cabaret Voltaire in Zürich when
Dadaists performed on stage with their
backs to the public. That a play must
tell a story? In Peter Handke's Publi¬
kumsbeschimpfung (Offending the
Audience, written 1965, staged 1966)
the public was implicitly being
challenged not to submit to the pro¬
cedure which was being substituted for
the usual one: four speakers were ad¬
dressing the audience directly, teasing-
ly, talking mainly about the immediate
situation in the auditorium, where no
illusion was being created, no narrative
unfolded. How much further can the
8
avant-garde advance? How much fur¬
ther up the beach can any new wave
wash?
Though each wave has to recede, it
becomes increasingly hard to shock an
audience. Not long ago it would have
been quite disturbing to see two iden¬
tical middle-aged male twins, dressed
as cardinals, tangoing together up and
down an acting area to the tune of
"Hernando's Hideaway" from The
Pajama Game. But theatrical images
like this fall into place within the
natural progression of a piece like
Tadeusz Kantor's Où sont les neiges
d'antan, which was first seen in Rome
during 1978 and featured in 1982 at the
Autumn Festival in Paris. Today it is
easier to provoke an audience than to
shock it. In June of last year, at the
Holland Festival in Amsterdam, the
production of Walzer by Pina Bausch's
Wuppertal Dance Company incited
booing and catcalls. The audience was
irked by the exorbitantly slow perfor¬
mance of a song, and there were ap¬
parently unrehearsed incidents, as
when a dancer tauntingly shouted to
"the audience: "None of you are going
to entertain me, are you?" A great deal
can depend on the delicate art of con¬
trolling the way in which things appear
to be going out of control.
Fundamentally, by consenting to be
members of an audience, we are con¬
tracting to remain passive voluntarily
lowering ourselves under the surface of
the pool in which Narcissus will con¬
template his image and there will not
be much we can do to register com¬
plaint if the exhibitionistic performers
become sadistic. The six-hour produc¬
tion oí Hamlet in December 1982 at the
Schaubühne in Berlin looked as though
it had been central to the intentions of
the director, Klaus Michael Grüber,
either to ignore the audience altogether
or challenge it to clamber up on stage in
order to see and hear what was going
on. The dividing wall had been remov¬
ed between two of the theatre's three
auditoria, but instead of trying to fill
the enormous space, Grüber used it to
make the human figure look small. It
was like being forced to watch the play
through the wrong end of a telescope.
Luca Ronconi's production of
Ibsen's Ghosts at the 1982 Festival of
Two Worlds in Spoleto a four-hour
production in the crypt of the Chiesa
San Nicolodisplayed the same deter¬
mination to test the patience of the au¬
dience, which was distanced as far as
possible from the action and had to put
up with the slow, somnambulistic
movement of the actors and with pro¬
vocatively histrionic mannerisms in
both speaking and gesture.
One of the central paradoxes in con-

temporary theatre is that the avant-
garde needs the classics; the other is
that avant-garde theatre is on display at
the international festivals and in the
big, subsidized theatres with large
budgets and vast technical resources.
At the end of the sixties, when Rainer
Werner Fassbinder was working in
Munich with his Anti-Theater, the
group performed in cellars, changing
rooms and a room above a skittle alley.
In 1968, Jim Haynes, who had founded
the small Traverse Theatre in Edin¬
burgh five years earlier, opened the
Arts Lab in Drury Lane, London. It
gave hospitality to some of the earliest
fringe groups, including the People
Show, and it brought others into
existence. Pip Simmons formed a com¬
pany to put on a series of fifty-minute
plays, while David Hare and Tony
Bicat, who collaborated on a show
compiled from Kafka's Diaries, went
on to form Portable Theatre, a com¬
pany to take productions into non-
theatrical venues. It was not predic¬
table but it was not unnatural that
Fassbinder should move into cinema
and that David Hare should graduate
to directing his own plays at the Na¬
tional Theatre.
What is odd is that in spite of the
popularity fringe theatre has achieved,
there should be no eighties equivalent
to Anti-Theater or to the Arts Lab.
Contemporary theatrical conditions
Photo © Antonello Penssinotto, Padua, Italy
Commedia dell'arte mask worn by a character in La Moschetta
("The Fly"), a work written in Paduan dialect by the Italian
dramatist and actor Angelo Beolco, also known as Ruzzante
(1502-1542).
are not conducive to experimental
writing, while establishment theatres
quickly appropriate the most successful
experimental directors from fringe
theatres. One consequence is that plays
with a large cast and plays which for
other reasons are unsuitable for perfor¬
mance in a small space are no longer
protected from anti-theatrical aggres¬
sions. At the Berlin Theatertreffen of
1982, fashionable directors tried to
outbid each other in displays of ir¬
reverence towards the classics. Post-
Brechtian alienation effects were in¬
troduced into plays by Büchner, Less¬
ing and Kleist, while the text of
Goethe's Faust was submitted (by
Grüber) to drastic dramaturgical
surgery.
Scene from a production of the Austrian playwright Peter
Handke's They Are Dying Out, at the Théâtre des Amandiers,
Nanterre (France).
Photo © Nicolas Treatt, Pans

At the same time, avant-garde
theatre is becoming more international.
The festivals are encouraging ,this
cross-fertilization. London, unfor¬
tunately, has lost its World Theatre
Season, which exerted a healthy in¬
fluence on British theatre, but discerni¬
ble ripples of influence were spread
over a wide area after the Rustaveli
Company of Tbilisi, Georgia, was seen
at the Avignon Festival, the Edinburgh
Festival and at the Round House in
London.
Oriental influences, too, are strongly
apparent in contemporary Western
theatre. Peter Brook was one of the
great pioneers of intercontinental eclec¬
ticism in theatrical style. He recruited a
Japanese Noh actor for the polyglot
company he assembled in Paris at the
end of the sixties, and one of the central
ideas for his 1970 production ofA Mid¬
summer Night's Dream was derived
from Chinese circus. In Ariane
Mnouchkine's production of Richard
II last year at the Cartoucherie de
Vincennes in Paris, Japanese Kabuki
visibly influenced the design of the
stage, the declamatory acting style, the
percussive accompaniment and the
stylized movement with half-bent
knees.
The devaluation of the word a
tendency which had long been promi¬
nent in avant-garde theatre prepared
the ground for this new wave of inter¬
nationalism. Artaud believed in "the
absolute dominance of the director
whose creativity eliminates words". It
is only very seldom in such plays as
Peter Handke's My Foot, My Tutor
(1969) that words can be eliminated
altogether, but Mike Leigh is one of
several directors who have been using
their creativity to elicit a text from ac¬
tors by means of improvization, while
Peter Brook has been experimenting
with his international team of actors to
find whether there is "another
language, just as exacting for the
author, as the language of words... a
language of actions, a language of
sounds a language of word-as-part-of
movement, of word-as-lie, word-as-
parody, of word-as-rubbish, of word-
as-contradiction, of word-shock or
word-cry". When he commissioned the
poet Ted Hughes to invent a new
language for a production at the 1971
festival at Persepolis, he was trying to
test how far human beings could be
made to ignore differences of race,
language and cultural tradition, com¬
municating through movements and
sounds, using the lowest common
multiples of human expressiveness, and
raising them to a higher power.
When he took his actors to play in
African villages, he was again trying to
create a form of drama immediately
comprehensible to any human being, to
traverse linguistic and cultural fron¬
tiers. It is in the nature of avant-garde
theatre to pit itself against problems
that are at most partially soluble. As
one wave rolls back, the next is already
advancing, and it may be that different
parts of a solution are floating on each.
Ronald Hayman
Anthropological theatre
In January 1982 the Rome-based Teatro dell'IRAA (Institute of Research about the Actor's Art), founded by Renato Cuocolo and
Raffaela Rossellini, launched with Unesco aid a project entitled "Theatre out of Theatre". The aim, in Cuocolo's words, is to explore
"the possibility of a theatre of communication which could promote knowledge and understanding among different cultures and
peoples". The first experimental step in this direction took the Italian actors to the Rucahue reserve in southern Chile, the home of
many of the country's Mapuche Indians. There they presented their work to an audience remote from their usual European public,
took part in the daily activities of the Indians, and joined in their festivals and rituals in order to study certain cultural forms such
as shamanism, which is still prevalent among the Mapuche. Photo shows Italian actors and Mapuche villagers taking part in a
ceremony to consecrate the spot where the performances were held. The Machi (shaman) is seen initiating a rite of welcome and
fertility which took place near a sacred cinammon tree planted by the cacique (the chief of the community) in honour of the actors
from a distant land.
