A world human rights
congress in Costa Rica
A World Human Rights Con¬
gress was held last December in
the old Costa Rican city of Ala-
juela. The Government wished to
use this occasion to celebrate the
33rd anniversary of the constitu¬
tional reform by virtue of which
Costa Rica proscribed "the army
as a permanent institution" and
abolished the death penalty. At
the end of the Congress, the first
of its kind to be organized by a
State, the "Alajuela charter",
published here in its entirety, was
unanimously approved.



The Alajuela
charter
THE first World Human Rights Congress, meeting in the 200-year-old city of
Alajuela de Costa Rica from 6 to 12 December 1982, has proved the impor¬
tance which an entire people attaches to. the rights and duties of the person.
It has also showed that it could rationally deliberate, examine and discuss problems
pertaining to human rights in an atmosphere of total liberty.
Accordingly it considers, recommends and resolves:
1. That given the democratic institutional
system of Costa Rica, characterized by
freedom, justice and the lack of an army, it
would be fitting for Costa Rica to become a
world centre for study and research into
human rights, for the defence of human
rights and the diffusion of information about
them; for this centre a speedy, reliable inter¬
continental information network should be
established, covering everything connected
with human rights experiences and problems
in different parts of the world.
2. That the international community should
recognize and guarantee to Costa Rica a
status of perpetual neutrality, in recognition
of thefact that il is the only country that has
unilaterally opted for peace by deciding, 33
years ago, to abolish its army as a permanent
institution.
3. That it supports the proposal made by
Sean MacBride (Nobel Peace Prize) and Ben
Whitaker that the United Nations should
establish as soon as possible its own world
radio and television information system on
human rights.
4. That the Ibero-American services of the
above project, at least, should begin in Costa
Rica.
5. That Costa Rica should intensify its cam¬
paign in the United Nationsfor the setting up
of a High Commission for Human Rights.
6. That the world's educational systems
should be based on the study and inter¬
disciplinary practice of human rights.
10. That the industry of war, especially
nuclear, bacteriological and chemical,
represents a constant threat to every form of
life and is an immoral attack on human dig¬
nity. To denounce and combat it wherever it
exists is a fundamental right and duty for
free men.
11. That rebellion against any military,
tyrannical, despotic and dictatorial régime is
a fundamental human right and duty. It
should be recognized as such, guaranteed and
broadly extended by the international
community.
12. That the death penally, whether legal or
not, is a practice which attacks the supreme
human right, the right to life. It should
therefore be abolished.
13. That the judicial practice ofphysical and
mental torture constitutes aflagrant violation
ofhuman rights. It is the duty ofallfree men
to denounce and combat this sadistic and
abominable practice and to make the greatest
efforts to win approval for the International
Covenant on Torture and the Optional Pro¬
tocol of the United Nations.
14. That political régimes based on social,
religious, political, linguistic and economic
concepts and practices that discriminate
against national minorities, or discriminate
on grounds ofsex or other factors, constitute
a historical aberration and an intolerable af¬
front to the universal conscience of human
dignity. Men and peoples who love liberty,
democracy andjustice have the right and the
supreme duty to denounce and combat these
practices.
7. That an international human rights in¬
vestigating commission be created.
8. That an international penal court on
human rights be set up.
9. That a political régime characterized by
public freedoms, social security with
economic guarantees, ideological pluralism
and the periodical alternation of political
power through genuine free elections con¬
stitutes the securest guarantee of thefull exer¬
cise of human rights in the world.
14
15. That it is of paramount importance to
awaken the conscience of men, peoples and
nations regarding human rights, and that
consequently it is of the highest importance
that a second world human rights congress be
held, taking account of the experience of the
first, at a place and a date which will be decid¬
ed after consultation and deliberation involv¬
ing all the participants in the present
Congress.
Alajuela the twelfth day of December 1982
