BOLIVAR
THE LIBERATOR (1783-1830)
Undimmed by time, a bright
vision of a New World
by Arturo Uslar-Pietri
TWO hundred years after his
birth, Bolivar undoubtedly re¬
mains one of that tiny but
distinguished group of people who have
had something to teach mankind. He
died in 1830, but the sheer magnitude of
his personality is still being revealed to us
and still has the power to move us. In the
eyes of his contemporaries, he was the
outstanding leader of the struggle for the
political independence of Latin America,
a charismatic figure who, virtually
without resources, managed to overcome
all manner of obstacles and setbacks in
directing and sustaining the long-drawn-
out and difficult fifteen-year offensive
which was to put an end to Spanish domi¬
nion over America. His unyielding
tenacity, his conviction that in¬
dependence could and should come
about in his own lifetime and his far-
reaching vision of the future of the New
World, all set him apart from the many
other exceptional leaders who emerged
during the war for the emancipation of
the continent.
For the Western world, he soon
became the symbol of the struggle against
despotism and the old monarchies. His
name was synonymous with freedom.
The revolutionaries of 1 830 and 1 848 , the
"Carbonari", the liberals, the young
Romantics all looked to him and his ex¬
ample. He was the hero who had pitted
himself against three hundred years of
ARTURO USLAR-PIETRI, noted Venezuelan
writer and his country's former ambassador and
permanent delegate to Unesco, is the author of
many novels, short stories, and essays such as La
Otra América (The Other America). The text
published here is the introduction to a forth¬
coming anthology of the writings ofSimón Bolí¬
var which Unesco is publishing in Spanish and in
six other language versions.
Right, map of South America before Bolivar's time. In
1819 the Liberator constituted the Republic of Great Col¬
ombia (inset) from the independent territories of
Venezuela, New Granada (present-day Colombia) and
the présidence of Quito (today Ecuador). This was the
first step towards the fulfilment of his dream of unifying
all the countries of what is now Latin America. Later, in
1825, when Upper Peru became independent of Spain
and chose to be called Bolivia after the Liberator, it tried
to merge with Peru. However, the federation of States
envisioned by Bolivar broke up definitively in 1830. Op¬
posite page, the Liberator as depicted by artists from the
five countries whose destiny he shaped.
4
the old régime in Spanish America, had
succeeded in bringing it to an end, and
had proclaimed a new order of
democracy and freedom in its stead. His
admirers ranged from the restless young
people in the Paris of the Bourbons, who
sported the "Bolivar hat" as though it
were a battle standard, to students of
world politics and to Byron, who gave
Bolivar's name to the boat on which he
dreamed of bringing freedom to Greece.
Bolivar had become the eternal
"Liberator", the man who had per
sonified a continent's determination to
be free and who had striven to establish a
political order founded on justice and the
rights of the individual.
There can be no doubt that, as a
military leader, he won significant vic¬
tories against all the odds. He sowed the
seeds of destiny, in that nations were
born of the battles he waged, and he
secured freedom for vast numbers of
people and an enormous Iandmass. In
1825, when his triumph at Ayacucho put
an end to the Spanish Empire and made
^.^AMERIOUg
yMÉnWIONALE Y'
I AUWBOLIVAm
3i/pr.t / Alimy it H. Ö.-XK- I8Í5

him the arbiter of the destinies of Latin
America, he conceived and attempted to
give substance to the grandiose plan of
uniting America as he saw it, in a bid to
bring about a new age of stability and
justice for mankind. Indeed, his disagree¬
ment with his former followers and the
growing difficulties he had to contend
with stemmed from his vision of the
future.
For him, independence was not so
much an end in itself as a necessary step
along the road to a more difficult but
much more ambitious project. His aim
was not merely to replace one set of men
by another, to put Creole leaders in the
seats vacated by the Spanish viceroys and
governors and thereby perpetuate the
political and social patterns inherited
from the colonial past. He wanted
something totally different: literally to
create a powerful and free New World,
setting an example through its institu¬
tions, intent on dispensing justice in all its
forms, and laying the foundations for a
new global order which Bolivar himself
spoke of as a "new equilibrium for the
universe".
Right from the start, Bolivar was
distinguished for the clarity and boldness
of his thinking. Had he done no more
than commit to paper the ideas and
judgements on the American world
which he bequeathed to us, he would still
be considered one of the most original
thinkers of his time. Moreover, he was an
outstanding stylist and his letters and
speeches are among the best prose
writings of the period. No-one could
equal his gift for expressing himself in
terms that were robust and penetrating
Map United Nations
The boundaries on this map do not im¬
ply official endorsement or accep¬
tance by Unesco or the United
Nations

and charged with significance. His
language faithfully reflected his tempera¬
ment and his deep anxieties. He was a
master of concision and of striking
similes. His words were as good as his
deeds.
There have been few other figures in
history who combined as he did the gifts
and qualities of a man of action and those
of a thinker, of those who were leaders of
men and also visionaries, whose political
acumen did not prevent them from form¬
ing grand designs or from rising above
petty day-to-day concerns. His tragedy
was his inability to ensure that his vision
of the future would come true. He could
not rest content with the extraordinary
task he had accomplished, since he con¬
sidered it merely as the necessary prelude
to the new political organization of Latin
America and a new world equilibrium.
Only a person of his quality could have
regarded the second stage as being more
important than the first.
Bolivar is a figure of infinite variety. If
we see him as being no more than the
leader of a highly successful insurrection,
we obliterate one whole side of his per¬
sonality and overlook some of the most
interesting and admirable aspects of his
achievement. He was never just a man of
action, perpetually engaged in a struggle
that must often have seemed hopeless;
nor was he an ideologist unimaginatively
applying doctrines and examples culled
from other countries and other historical
situations.
What is more, he was not just a politi¬
cian bogged down in the immediate pre¬
sent. A study of his life leaves us con¬
stantly amazed at the profusion and
variety of talents he displays. In his eyes,
the past of the Latin American peoples
was as alive as their present. He identified
himself totally with the historical and
cultural predicament of his fellow
Americans, and yet at the same time he
could look forward to the future as he
wished to see it and could work for a far-
reaching transformation of society and
its goals. He was not blinded by the
various brilliant political theories of his
day. He had carefully scrutinized the
ideas of Rousseau and Montesquieu,
comparing them with his own experience
in the struggle and with the lessons of the
American past.
His conclusion was that the future of
the American peoples did not lie in mere¬
ly imitating or adapting the ideas and in¬
stitutions of other nations born of differ¬
ing historical and cultural circumstances;
in his opinion, only the facts, however in¬
tractable, could be the starting point for
the determined and clear-sighted effort
needed, since the colonial past had in no
way prepared those peoples for their dif¬
ficult metamorphosis.
One fundamental theme of Bolivar's
ideas on nation-building was what we, in
present-day international parlance,
would call the cultural constraints on
development and the difficulty of adap¬
ting foreign models. He was forever aler¬
ting legislators dazzled as they were by
the examples of the institutions that
emerged from the revolutions irt the
United States and France to the impor-
6
tance of allowing for specific Hispano-
American practices, traditions and ex¬
periences of the past. He ardently desired
freedom, justice and democracy, but he
did not lose sight of the social and
political realities which three hundred
years of life under colonial rule had
created in the America he knew.
Nor did he lose sight of the interna¬
tional situation hovering on the horizon.
The independence of Latin America
could not be envisaged and achieved as if
it were an isolated local phenomenon: it
was a major upheaval establishing a new
situation and a new pattern of worldwide
relations. The sudden emergence of a free
and sovereign America would inevitably
produce significant changes in political
relationships all over the world. This was
the exceptionally wide-ranging context
within which Bolivar's action and think¬
ing evolved and which afforded him his
status and relevance as the guide of the
American peoples and the embodiment
of their spirit.
and wealth, he climbed the mountain of
silver that had been the symbol of col¬
onial authority, accompanied by the
representatives of Argentina, Peru and
Chile. As he took in the panorama
stretching out before him, as he felt and
expressed the compelling need for in¬
tegration as the only course capable of
securing the future of so vast a slice of
humanity and territory, he caught a
glimpse of the scenario of universal
history. It was at this time that he conven¬
ed the Panama Congress that was to
bring together representatives of the
whole of America in a bid to work out the
practical aspects of the continent's
policies, its self-defence and the joint ac¬
tion it would be required to take in its
dealings with the rest of the world.
We need only leaf through the main
documents in which his ideas are
assembled to realize that his conception
of the common destiny of Latin America
never changed. As early as 1812, in Car¬
tagena, when he had scarcely emerged
To commemorate the bicentenary of the
birth of "The Liberator" (1783-1830)
Unesco is to issue an official Simón
Bolívar medal. Designed by the
Venezuelan artist Hector Poleo and
engraved by Denis Châtelain, the medal
will be struck by the Paris Mint. On its
obverse the medal bears a profile portrait
of Bolivar, while the reverse depicts a
symbolic sun rising over a Latin America
in the process of unification, with the
dove of peace taking wing.
This, moreover, is an attitude that
prevailed throughout his life and in all his
writings. From the outset, his vision of
independence embraced the whole conti¬
nent and, in this respect, he was at one
with his celebrated predecessor Francisco
Miranda. The issue as they both saw it
was not to win independence for a few
portions of the Spanish Empire but to en¬
sure that the whole territory it covered
would become conscious of its identity
and destiny, and would attain full
sovereignty. This accordingly implied a
form of political organization and the
adoption of goals that would encompass
the entire New World. From the very
beginning, he spoke in the name of
America rather than of Venezuela, and
was not afraid to suggest ways in which
political integration could come about.
As he said on several occasions,
"America is our homeland".
The question now is what he meant by
America and what form of integration he
had in mind. His scheme of things did not
rule out any significant part of the
America that had been subjugated by the
European powers. He started with the
peoples of Venezuela, New Granada and
Ecuador which were close at hand and
were subsequently to combine to form
Colombia, but he went on to include all
parts of the Empire in successive designs
for co-operation.
When, in 1825, after the final and
decisive victory at Ayacucho, he arrived
at Potosi, that magical centre of power
from the ruins of the first attempt he
made to set up an independent republic in
Venezuela, he issued a bold manifesto
sounding the alarm against the mistaken
belief that any part of America could
achieve and preserve its independence in
isolation. As long as Venezuela was not
liberated, the independence of New
Granada would be threatened, since an
expeditionary force organized from
Venezuela and setting out from the
"Provinces of Barinas and Maracaibo"
would be able to penetrate into "the fur¬
thest reaches of southern America".
Indeed, the huge efforts which he ex¬
pected on the part of the enemies of
freedom were exactly the same as those
he himself had to make throughout the
long hard years of his political and
military career. From then on, the whole
of Latin America became the theatre of
operations for a single combat, the strug¬
gle for independence, only to be achieved
by the integration of all its peoples in a
single body that would guarantee the uni¬
ty of its presence and action on the world
scene.
In the astonishing letter which he wrote
in Jamaica in 1815 to "a gentleman of
that island", he painted the most detailed
and challenging picture of his vision of
the American destiny. His theme was not
Venezuela but rather "a vast, varied and
unknown country, the New World". He
looked upon it as a fact of history and
geography, asking impatiently whether
the entire New World was not mobilized

and armed to defend itself, and adding:
"On this battlefield, some 2,000 leagues
long and 900 leagues wide at its extremes,
sixteen million Americans are either
defending their rights or are being
oppressed".
In his view, an unavoidable historical
phenomenon had occurred, one that was
bound to have far-reaching consequences
for the world. It was here that he express¬
ed the gist of his thinking: the projected
independence of America was a necessary
goal "because world equilibrium
demanded it".
This, then, represented his fundamen¬
tal view of things. The time had come to
strike a new universal balance. The pat¬
tern of imperial domination could not
continue. In the words used by Virgil in
his prophetic Eclogue, a new order was to
come to pass. The Spanish Empire had to
be brought to an end so that an authentic
New World could come into being and
engage in a dialogue on fair and just
terms with the other powers of the earth.
For Bolivar, the term "New World"
did not have the restricted connotations
earlier historians had given it. He did not
conceive of it merely as a recent adjunct
to an old world and an old order but as a
heaven-sent opportunity of creating a
new society that would not repeat the
mistakes of the old world and would
usher in a new era in relations between all
nations.
Bolivar thus became the prophet not
only of the New World but of a new
world order. Henceforward, he sensed
and made it plain that the time was ripe
for the emergence of new and indepen¬
dent nations and also that the very ex¬
istence of such nations would dictate the
setting-up of a new pattern of relation¬
ships. Using words that would be equally
relevant to the struggle currently being
waged by the new nations of Latin
America, Asia and Africa to bring about
a new order of relations, to the dramatic
dialogue going on between North and
South, or to the far-reaching process of
the emergence of the Third World,
Bolivar said: "There is another balanced
order of importance to us, and this is the
equilibrium of the universe. This struggle
cannot be partial for its outcome will af¬
fect vast interests scattered all over the
world".
How topical and alive his words sound
today! Their subject is the key issue now
being feverishly debated in the leading in¬
ternational fora. Two hundred years
after his birth, Simón Bolívar is in the
front line of the fight for the establish¬
ment of a new international order.
Unesco formally acknowledged this
when, in 1978, its governing bodies ap¬
proved the creation of the International
Simón Bolívar Prize "to be awarded
every second year, starting on 24 July
1983, the bicentenary of the birth of
Simón Bolívar, to those who have made
an outstanding contribution to the
freedom, independence and dignity of
peoples and to the strengthening of
solidarity among nations, or who have
fostered their development or facilitated
the quest for a new international
economic, social and cultural order".
Arturo Uslar-Pietri
