SATELLITES
Satellite earth station near Caracas,
Venezuela, for the transmission and recep¬
tion of television pictures, telephone and
telex communications.
Photo ITU, Geneva



The sky's the limit
OF all the applications of space
technology, satellite com¬
munications is the most widely
used. First utilized for intercontinental
communication, satellites are now used
primarily for international communica¬
tion. However, they are also being used
by a growing number of countries for
domestic communication.
Satellites for international communica¬
tion are operated by INTELSAT (Interna¬
tional Telecommunications Satellite
Organization), EUTELSAT (European
Telecommunications Satellite Organiza¬
tion) and INTERSPUTNIK (International
System and Organization of Space Com¬
munications). A global maritime com¬
munication system, INMARSAT (Interna¬
tional Maritime Satellite Organization),
went into operation early in 1 982. Some
countries have their own operational
domestic satellite communication sys¬
tems (Canada, India, Indonesia, USA and
USSR); many others have plans to set up
such systems soon.
A communication satellite is simply a
wholly self-contained electronic switch¬
board in orbit around the Earth. There is
one particular orbit, 35,800 kilometres
above the Earth's equator, in which a
satellite travels at a speed which keeps
pace exactly with the Earth's rotation. To
an observer standing on the equator a
satellite in this "geostationary orbit"
therefore appears to remain fixed in the
sky directly overhead. By the use of pro¬
perly designed antennas and electronic
This text is based largely on a UN brochure on
The Use of Outer Space for the Solution of
Earth-bound Problems, published for Unispace
82, the Second United Nations Conference on
the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Space,
held in Vienna, August 1982.
30
communication equipment, such a sat¬
ellite can be used to relay telephone,
television, numerical data and facsimiles
between any two points on Earth which
can "see" the satellite. Since each
satellite can be seen from over a third of
the Earth's surface, such satellites can
provide a complete global communica¬
tions network, ablento link any two
"ground stations" with each other.
In the early days of space flight,
satellites were severely limited in mass
(and therefore in capability) by the
rockets used to launch them into space.
The ground stations needed to interact
with these satellites were therefore big,
complex and expensive. With the advent
of modern, high-performance rocket
launchers and, perhaps even more impor¬
tant, the development of microelectronic
circuitry, communication satellites today
not only can handle thousands of
simultaneous telephone calls and many
television programmes, but also can
transmit to and receive from relatively
small, inexpensive Earth stations. This
development, called "complexity inver¬
sion" because the most complex equip¬
ment has moved from the ground into the
sky, is of considerable importance to the
developing nations, who now have ac¬
cess to the global INTELSAT network at
relatively low cost. It is far easier,
therefore, for a developing nation to build
low-cost ground stations and use the in¬
expensive satellite network circuit than
to build a complete infrastructure of
ground-based, hard-wire and microwave
communication systems over their often
difficult terrain.
As a result of the rapid development in
satellite communication technology and
the complexity inversion that went along
with it, the per-channel cost of com¬
munications has decreased dramatically,
even in the face of worldwide inflation.
But despite the low per-channel cost
and the availability of inexpensive earth
stations, the capital costs associated
with the setting up of a satellite com¬
munications system are still substantial
for many developing countries.
Communication plays a key role in
development, to the extent that it
transfers information, data and ideas. It
is one of the principal elements in social
advancement and economic develop¬
ment. It is therefore desirable that
developing countries examine in detail
the importance of satellite communica¬
tion (especially to and from rural areas) as
an integral element of their development.
In rural communications, for example,
the need is generally for only a small
number of channels. However, most ex¬
isting satellite systems are not designed
for this application; instead, they are in¬
tended to carry the high-density, inter¬
city traffic, and therefore their use for
rural communication is "sub-optimal".
For promoting rural communication, it is
thus necessary that systems be specially
designed to receive low-power signals,
to transmit concentrated beams at high
power, and to provide on-board signal ,
regeneration and switching whenever
feasible. Further,, ground terminals
should be as inexpensive as possible and
be capable of operating from standard
batteries. Current developments in
enhancing satellite on-board capability
are leading in this direction; inexpensive
ground stations as small as wrist-
watches appear to be possible in the near
future.
