Can creativity be taught?
Aesthetic education in Bulgaria
by Krestu Goranov
IN Bulgaria today great importance
is attached to creativity in all
fields, and consequently aesthetic
education is considered to make an
essential contribution to shaping the
individual both as a personality and
as a member of the community. By
rounding off intellectual, moral,
physical and working education, it pro¬
vides fulfilment for the creative instinct
by harmonizing the intellect with the
sensibility.
This long-established Bulgarian
tradition became stronger when the
country was liberated from the Ot¬
toman yoke in 1878.
First of all it found expression in the
cultural triangle of "school, church
and cultural centre", the latter being
popular institutions which sponsored
libraries and a wide variety of cultural
activities and which still play a major
role in national life.
Later, the artistic ideas and tastes of
democrat-revolutionaries . such as
Khristo Botev, Vasil Levski, Lyuben
Karavelov and of the Socialist Workers
Movement further strengthened the
secular and democratic evolution of the
school and the role it accords to
aesthetic education.
The aim of aesthetic education is to
form taste, that is the capacity to in¬
vent, understand, appreciate, con¬
serve, experience and create beauty in
daily life and in the arts. It also tends to
stimulate the creative gifts and to en¬
courage a desire to change life in accor¬
dance with an aesthetic ideal which is
indissociable from a social ideal. In
conformity with the dialectical rela¬
tionship between these ideals, a na¬
tional programme of aesthetic educa¬
tion was established in Bulgaria in
1975. The school plays a major role in
the programme, which also calls for ac¬
tive participation by artists and their
unions, public organizations and
representatives of the different age
KRESTU GORANOV, of Bulgaria, is pro¬
fessor of aesthetics, the sociology of the arts
and the theory of culture at the University of
Sofia, at the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
and at Bulgaria 's Higher Institute of Fine Arts.
He is the author of many published works,
notably Art as a Process, Arts and Social Life,
Artistic Culture in a Changing World, and Prin¬
ciples of Aesthetics.
20
Photo Dimitr Boginov © BTA, Sofia
Members of the children's theatre studio attached to the Varna Drama
Theatre (Bulgaria) in a scene from The Moon's Bedroom, a play by
Valeri Petrov with music by Tchaikovski.
groups. On the initiative of the late
Ludmila Zhivkova, a noted figure in
Bulgarian political and cultural life,
youth cultural movements were found¬
ed, notably the "Banner of Peace"
movement which enjoys international
prestige (see Unesco Courier, May
1981) and movements which popularize
the life and work of great figures in the
arts and sciences, such as Leonardo da
Vinci and Einstein.
The school is the centre of the na¬
tional aesthetic education programme,
which should begin at pre-school age.
Much attention is focussed on
children's games, and efforts are being
made to enrich them with musical and
artistic elements. Considerable success
has been achieved, notably in musical
education. Literature, the fine arts and
music are taught in secondary schools
from age eleven until the end of the
course, along with the theory and
history of art.
But other subjects can also make a
contribution to aesthetic education.
After all there is no reason why an
aesthetic meaning should not be given
to work, to social activity and to
human relations in general. Efforts are
also made to complete pupils' aesthetic
education by encouraging them to take
part in rewarding out-of-school ac¬
tivities such as art circles and amateur
dramatics, choirs, orchestras and danc¬
ing. They are urged to visit exhibitions
and museums, and to attend theatres
and concerts.
These out-of-school activities take
place in cultural centres, and centres of

aesthetic education belonging to
pioneer and youth organizations. New
conditions the building of socialism,
urbanization and the development of
new communications media permit a
wider application of an advanced
teaching practice whereby young
people teach themselves. According to
the same method, teaching is tailored
to different interests and gifts, and the
children may attend special optional
classes in literature, drama or cinema,
painting or dance studios, or else learn
to play a musical instrument.
In harmony with the national
aesthetic education programme,
Bulgarian schools thus try to serve a
great democratic principle by giving
everyone the opportunity to fully
develop his aesthetic sensibility and to
use his gifts. The school discovers the
most gifted representatives of the rising
generation and provides their earliest
artistic training. Not all the young peo¬
ple who learn the rudiments of painting
will, become painters, but those who
really possess gifts in this field should
be able to express them. The others will
be able to direct the impulse awakened
in them to other activities, in their work
and in their human relationships; and
as a result people's lives will be more
satisfying and more equitable.
The Bulgarian painter Dechko
Uzunov at work amidst a group
of budding artists.
Photo Stefan Tuxov © BTA, Sofia
A group of Bulgarian children
perform a traditional dance.
Photo Zhivko Angelov © BTA, Sofia
21
