TASHKENT
The capital of Uzbekistan celebrates
its two thousandth anniversary
by Erkin Yussupov
TASHKENT, the capital of the
Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic
and one of the major cities of cen¬
tral Asia, is two thousand years old.
The earliest references to it occur in
certain Chinese chronicles of the second
century BC which speak of the oasis of
Tashkent. A century later this oasis is
called Yuni or Yuini, and is described as
forming part of the powerful State of
Kangyu, with a town of the same
name Yuni at its centre. The distin¬
guished orientalist V.V. Bartold, who
analysed these chronicles, advanced the
theory that the region of Yuni was iden¬
tical with that now occupied by Tashkent.
Professor M.E. Masson, a specialist in
the history of Tashkent, came to the same
conclusion.
Later the region came to be known as
Chzhesi, which apparently renders the
Chinese pronunciation of Tashkent's an¬
cient name, Shash or Chach.
Information about the history of
Tashkent is also found in the writings of
the Greek astronomer and geographer
Ptolemy, who refers in his Guide to
Geography to a city called "Stone
Tower". The great scholar and en¬
cyclopaedist Abu Rayhan al-Biruni
(973-1048), who was familiar with
Ptolemy's work, wrote that the city
which was called "Stone Tower" in
Greek was actually Binkent, the capital
of Ash-Shash, "which in the Turkic
tongue is Tashkand".
The name Chach is found in early
eighth-century documents originating in
Sogdiana, the historical area which now
forms part of Uzbekistan. The famous
ninth-century mathematician and
astronomer al-Khwarizmi mentions the
names of Shash and Tarband (probably
today's Otrar). Valuable information
concerning the history of medieval
Tashkent may be gathered from Arabic,
Persian and Turkish manuscripts of the
ninth-twelfth centuries. The city's ex¬
istence was known in Russia as early as
the fourteenth century, and is mentioned
in the "Book of the Grand Design"
under the name of Tashkur.
ERKIN YUSSUPOV, Soviet educator, is vice-
president of the Academy of Sciences of the
Uzbek SSR. He is the author ofseveral scientific
works.
24
All these references have received a
surprising amount of backing from the
latest archaeological discoveries on the
site of modern Tashkent. Particularly in¬
teresting are the results of excavations
carried out at Shash-Tep (the "hill of
Shash", situated in the southern part of
the city) in an area covering some twenty-
five hectares along the banks of an an¬
cient tributary of the Dzhun river, and on
This year the two million inhabitants of Tashkent, capital of the Uzbek SSR and the
fourth largest city of the USSR, are celebrating their city's two thousandth anniversary.
Above, a view of modern Tashkent showing the boulevard and square of "Peoples'
Friendship".
One of the oldest cities of central Asia, Samarkand is famed for its fine, mausoleums,
mosques and madrasahs (Muslim schools) which span six centuries of central Asian
architecture. Above, the Ulugh Beg madrasah in Rigestan Square.

Cotton plantation at the Moskwa State Farm, near Andizhan, in the fertile Fergana
Valley, a vast area devoted to the growing of sub-tropical crops and known as "the
Pearl of Uzbekistan".
Part of an ancient fort, dating from the 2nd or 1st century BC, excavated at the site of
Shash-Tep (the "hill of Shash") to the south of Tashkent. Arrow-shaped loop-holes
were a feature of central Asian fortifications.
the site of the ancient town of
Manguryuk, where remains of dwellings
and fortifications have been unearthed.
The archaeologists have established that
here, in the earliest years of the modern
era, craftsmanship and trade were
developing alongside agriculture and
livestock-raising.
During the Middle Ages, Tashkent
underwent many changes of fortune. In¬
vasion first by the Arabs, then by the
hordes of Genghis Khan, incursions by
neighbouring nomad tribes and wars bet¬
ween the various feudal States led more
than'once to devastation and ruin, but
the city never totally disappeared. Its
favourable geographical position and the
strong traditions and solid relationships
established over the ages in the fields of
craftsmanship and commerce, invariably
provided the incentives for renewal.
Restoration of the natural tributaries of
the Chirchik river, the construction of
canals, the transformation of the city in¬
to a major commercial, industrial and
cultural centre and the growth of new ur¬
ban settlements in the vicinity all con¬
solidated the reputation of Chach as "the
land of a thousand cities."
The Middle Ages were a period of great
expansion for Tashkent. Its skilled crafts¬
men produced metal tools, weapons,
decorative objects and household articles
of the highest quality. Others excelled at
processing farm products, and others still
produced cotton and wool textiles, pot¬
tery and glassware. In terms of the
. number of its merchants, Tashkent held
third place among the great trading cen¬
tres of central Asia, after Bukhara and
Samarkand. At the same time, the
world's scientific and cultural heritage
was enriched by the achievements of the
many scholars and writers who have lived
and worked in Tashkent. These have in¬
cluded the philosopher, poet and
theologian Abubakir Kaffalon Shoshi
(10th century), the physician Abu Ab-
dullakh Mukhammad ibn Yusup al Iloki
(11th century), the eye specialist
Ubaidulla ibn Yusup Ali Alkakhal (16th
century), the poets Badir Chachi (14th
century), Kulfat (18th century) and
Komy Tashkandi (19th century) and the
linguist Kamaliddin Khafuz Kokhakki
(16th century).
The development of production, com¬
merce, science and culture in ancient and
medieval Tashkent did not take place in a
backwater. Study of the objects unearthed
by archaeologists, of manuscripts, ar¬
chitecture, and the age-old trades and
ceremonial customs of the people of
Tashkent reveals a combination of purely
local traditions with influences from
other lands. This is not surprising;
peoples and cultures cannot develop in
isolation. As a result of immemorial links
with- neighbouring regions and with the
more distant countries of the east, the
cultural traditions, the language and the
literature of Chach underwent external
influences and in turn exercised their own
influence elsewhere.
The seventeenth and eighteenth cen¬
turies saw a strengthening of commercial
and economic ties between Tashkent and
Russia, as the mutual advantage of such
relationships became increasingly ap¬
parent. The merchants of Tashkent
travelled to the Russian frontier towns of
Siberia. In 1739-1740, the first Russian
caravan made its way to Tashkent from
the newly-established city of Orenburg,
in the Urals.
The absorption of Tashkent, together
with the whole of central Asia, into the
Russian empire in the second half of the
nineteenth century opened a new chapter
in the city's history. The seemingly
endless period of internecine wars came
to an end, industry continued to develop,
and by the beginning of the twentieth
century Tashkent had been transformed
into the economic, cultural and ad¬
ministrative centre of the governorate-
general of a multinational province,
Turkestan.
After the October Revolution of 1917,
the city began to expand more rapidly
than ever before, thanks to the
disinterested and fraternal collaboration
of the different peoples of our country.
During the darkest days of the Civil War,
a decree adopted on the initiative of V.l.
Lenin created the first institution of
higher education in the Soviet East the
Turkestan State University, which at¬
tracted noted scholars from Moscow,
Petrograd and other cities. A "science
train" carrying books, personnel and
equipment set out from Moscow and ar¬
rived two months later at Tashkent,
whose people will never forget the names
of the engineers, teachers and doctors
who fostered the rapid development of
education, health services, science and
culture, and who did so much to
eradicate illiteracy, build new schools,
and create institutions of higher educa¬
tion and scientific and cultural centres.
In a relatively short time, Tashkent
became a major centre of social,
economic and intellectual progress for
the whole of central Asia, as the city
where many writers, politicians, scien¬
tists and intellectuals from all the Central
Asian republics and from Kazakhstan
came to complete their education.
25

Between 1941 and 1945, the city played
an important part in the struggle against
the Hitlerite invaders. Hundreds of
thousands of its people fought valiantly
on the battlefields. As a city far behind
the front, Tashkent gave refuge to hun¬
dreds of thousands of evacuees from the
areas then occupied by the Nazis,
lavishing particular care on the children
who had lost both parents during the
fighting. Among the moving episodes of
this period, the exemplary behaviour of
Shaakhmed Shamakhmudov, a foundry-
worker, and his wife is still remembered.
During the darkest time of the war they
adopted and brought up no fewer than
fifteen orphans of eight different na¬
tionalities. Their gesture was emulated by
tens of thousands of their fellow-citizens,
who became foster-parents to children in
similar circumstances.
No history of Tashkent would be com¬
plete without mention of the disastrous
earthquake of 1966 which destroyed or
damaged some 36,000 buildings, in¬
cluding 100,000 apartments, and left
hundreds of thousands of people
homeless. Damage was also caused to
factories, cultural institutions, hospitals
and community centres, schools, univer¬
sities and many other facilities. Represen¬
tatives of all the republics of the Soviet
Union joined in providing relief, and it
was not long before Tashkent had been
extensively rebuilt, and had become
View of the interior of
the Museum of Applied
Arts, Tashkent.
Photo © Progress Publishers,
Moscow
Carved from a single block of stone, this sculpture of the Bud¬
dha, seated under the Bodhi tree (tree of enlightenment) and
flanked by two disciples, dates from between the 1st and the
3rd centuries AD. Discovered near the city of Termez,
Uzbekistan, it is now preserved in the Museum of the History
of the Peoples of Uzbekistan, Tashkent. The Museum houses
some 50,000 items from prehistoric times to the 1 9th century.
Part of a 2nd-century ivory drinking horn found during the
excavation of Shash-Tep.
again one of the most attractive cities in
the country.
Today Tashkent is a city where two
million people, of some hundred dif¬
ferent nationalities, live together in amity
and harmony. Its highly developed and
diversified industries produce aircraft,
tractors, excavators and machine-tools
which, together with the products of light
industry and food-processing plants, are
exported to seventy-five countries.
Tashkent is also a major scientific and
cultural centre, the home of the Academy
of Sciences of the Uzbek SSR, the Cen¬
tral Asian Department of the Academy
of Agricultural Sciences, and many other
high-level scientific institutions. Young
26

people from . sixty countries study
alongside Soviet students in more than
twenty establishments of higher educa¬
tion. There are a large number of
technical high schools and hundreds of
primary and secondary schools. The
quality of the city's medical services is
high.
It would be difficult to enumerate all
the features of life in this effervescent,
kaleidoscopic modern city. Tashkent
regularly hosts meetings of writers from
Asian, African and Latin American
countries. Its international film festivals,
eight of which have been held since 1968,
have won a high reputation. Every year
international conferences and symposia
are held on themes related to social pro¬
gress, science and technology. All these
activities contribute to the strengthening
of mutual understanding, friendship and
peace among peoples. The international
prestige of Tashkent is also reflected in
the fact that it was there that the leaders
of India and Pakistan met in January
1966 to settle a number of controversial
issues between their two countries; the
result of this meeting was the historic
"Tashkent Declaration".
Visited by increasing numbers of
tourists, Tashkent is a member of the
United Towns Organization and has
special links with Tunis, Skopje, Mar-
rakesh, Potiala, Seattle, Tripoli and a
number of other cities.
The two millennia of Tashkent's
history are spanned by an invisible
bridge, whose outline may nevertheless
be discerned in the city's architecture and
also in the domains of science, literature
and art. The songs, dances, poetry, music
and popular wisdom of ancient Chach,
constantly enriched through contacts
with the cultural achievements of dif¬
ferent countries during different periods
in history, have won their place in the
modern world.
Modern dance, spoken poetry, and the
applied arts are not merely echoes from a
distant past; they are also achievements
of our times. Traditions of popular crafts¬
manship acquired during generations of
meticulous labour find a place in modern
industry. Cloth woven of gold thread,
national costumes and decorative art ob¬
jects are universally admired. The
dancers of the Uzbek State Ensemble
"Bakhor" and the singers and in¬
strumentalists of the "Yalla" and
"Navo" companies combine the tradi¬
tional and the modern in their
repertoires.
Drama has also followed a long path
from past to present in Tashkent, whose
people took pride in the fact that the
Uzbek Academy of Music, the Alisher
Navoi, was selected to represent the
USSR at the 1982 Berlin International
Opera Festival.
This fusion of the traditional and the
contemporary finds an echo in the hearts
of millions of people, whatever their
aspirations. May the invisible bridge
which spans Tashkent's two thousand
years of history serve the cause of peace,
brotherhood and friendship between all
peoples of the West and the East.
Erkin Yussupov

