HAITI
The awakening
of Creole
consciousness
by Félix Morisseau-Leroy
FELIX MORISSEAU-LEROY is a Haitian poet, novelist and dramatist
who writes both in French and in Creole. After studying in the United
States, he worked in the theatre in Ghana and Senegal. He is the author of
a number ofdramatic works including Natif-natal (poems), Kasamansa and
Jadin Créol (stories), and a trilogy about Creon, the figure from
Sophoclean tragedy.
THE Creole language theatre
scored its greatest success with
Sophocles' Antigone in a ver¬
sion which was not only linguistically
transposed but also adapted to take in¬
to account the traditions of the Haitian
people, their gods and the ways of their
leaders. The première on 23 July 1953,
at the Rex theatre, Port-au-Prince and
the performance in May 1959 at the
Theatre of Nations festival in Paris,
had a worldwide impact.
But in the opinion of the author
nothing confirmed this success more
than an exclamation by one of the five
thousand spectators, mainly peasants,
who were attending a performance of
the tragedy on the lawns of the Agricul¬
tural College at Damiens. Just when
Creon, in desperation, was calling on
Tiresias to invoke Danbala in his
favour, the spectator exclaimed: "Dan¬
bala won't reply!" Evidently the spec¬
tator who voiced this ill-timed com¬
ment had foreseen the dénouement of
the tragedy; he had already clearly un¬
derstood that the gods of African
Guinea, who had taken the place of the
Greek gods in the Haitian adaptation,
had abandoned Antigone's murderer.
Antigone continued its run at Port-
au-Prince, Saint Marc and Cap Haï¬
tien. It was performed in New York,
Boston, Montreal and Miami where the
Haitian community, comprising all age
groups, rediscovered their home coun¬
try or discovered aspects of it .which
were completely new to them.
Below, a production of Antigone by the Théâtre de Haïti. Sophocles' tragedy was not simply translated into Creole but adapted to
traditional Haitian ways and beliefs of African origin. An English version of this "Afro-Haitian Antigone" has been staged by the Arts
Theatre of Ghana. Right, a scene in which Tiresias, the Theban seer, invokes the African divinity Danbala.
Photo, © Roger Pic, Pans
V
i

An English version of the Haitian
Antigone, translated by Mary
Dorkonou, was performed in Ghana.
A young chief who had attended three
consecutive performances rushed back¬
stage at the end of the show to enquire
when he could see it for the fourth time.
The same version, slightly adapted for
a Jamaican audience, was performed at
the National Theatre Festival of
Jamaica.
After the initial success of Antigone
in Creole at the Rex theatre, Franck
Fouché put on his Oedipus Rex there
for the same popular audience. Later,
drawing on Haitian traditions, he
wrote a large number of plays in
Creole, which he staged for middle-
class audiences at the Rex theatre and
at the Théâtre de Verdure Massillon
Coicou. After his death his Bouki au
Paradis was performed at Port-au-
Prince before an enthusiastic audience.
It is difficult for me to talk about
Creole language theatre without using
the first person. The more I write in
Creole, the more I feel part of a Creole-
speaking community. Personal ex¬
perience is no more than the experience
of each of my characters within the
context of each new play.
I do not consider it immodest to talk
about it any more. Bernard Shaw said
that Joan of Arc wrote Saint Joan. I
can claim with even more justification
that, once they are placed in a dramatic
situation, my characters write my plays
in Creole, just as the people whose im¬
passioned scribe I am dictate the poems
and stories I publish.
In 1953, I said to Pradel Pompi-
lius who after thirty years of hesita¬
tion has become a fervent enthusiast of
Creole that if I were to cast Creon in
the role of a rural police chief obliged
to kill his niece and daughter-in-law-to-
be in order to affirm and consolidate
his authority, he would be quite
capable of expressing his dilemma of
conscience in Creole, "unless", I
stated, "one must speak French to have
a dilemma of conscience, or even to
have a conscience at all."
The men of letters of my generation
who, thirty years ago, did not think
that there could be a viable Creole
literature now support it fervently. For
me the case is won and I call on young
writers to stop wasting time on futile
polemics about the last of Toussaint
Louverture's sons and to devote them¬
selves to creative writing. The real pro¬
blem is whether one wants to emulate
Placide, Toussaint's son, who joined
the French army and fought against his
father, or Isaac, his son-inlaw, who
fought at his side.
Of course there were other issues that
bothered me, some of which have now
been resolved and others whose solu¬
tion has been put off till better days.
Where, for example, could actors for
the Creole language theatre be
recruited? The answer in this case was
obvious among Creole-speakers or
among those who, while speaking one
or more foreign languages had main¬
tained a Creole awareness.
Antigone was created in 1953 for the
literate audiences of the Rex theatre.
Anatol, written in .1955 and staged at
my theatre at Mont Hercule with a cast
recruited from the habitués of the oun-
fo, a temple of the Haitian popular
religion in the Plaine des Frères, en¬
abled me to put into practice many of
my new options.
Séfi, a fearless manbo (a high-
ranking member of the voodoo hierar¬
chy in Guinea) realizes that the power
which the gods on the side of good had
granted to Bout, her husband, until
recently a famous oungan (high priest),
is weakening because he uses it to do
evil. She therefore hands over the ason
(a rattle with a bell attached, the sym¬
bol of spiritual power) to her son. The
ceremony of this transmission of
authority is so moving that all the peo¬
ple present enter into a trance. All the
dramatic art of the Griots and the
Anansi story-tellers of Ghana and the
Ivory Coast combined with the tradi¬
tions of the commedia dell'arte to bring
about a miracle at the end of the per¬
formance the president of the Alliance
Française himself led the applause.
At the Institut Français the audience
interrupted the performance, rising to
acclaim Anatol for five minutes at the
moment when he raised his sword in
salute to the laplas, the voodoo master
of ceremonies.
At the open-air theatre, although it
started to rain in the middle of the
second act, the audience, far from dis¬
persing, called the actors back after the
end of the third act and began to sing
with them.
La Tragédie du Roi Christophe by the Martinique poet Aimé
Césaire, in a production by the Compagnie du Toucan at the
Theatre of Nations, in Paris. Henri Christophe, a freed slave,
became President of Haiti in 1 806. Proclaimed king in 1 81 1 , he
committed suicide in 1820 after an insurrection. His kingdom
became part of the Haitian Republic.
Photo © Information Service, Accra

Monsieur Toussaint, as performed by the Théâtre Noir de Paris. In this Antillean work, "a prophetic vision of the past", Toussaint
Louverture, a captive in the fort de Joux in the French Jura, evokes the slave insurrection on Saint Domingue which he led from 1 796
until 1802 when he was arrested and imprisoned by the French.
In Ghana, Anatol was renamed
Kweku, a title more in keeping with the
traditions of the Fanti chiefs. During
the 1960s the Dramatic Workers
Brigade troupe of Ghana, benefiting
from conditions conducive to the
development of popular theatre, per¬
formed it more than a hundred times
throughout the country.
In Dakar, Anatol was given the
Wolof title of Doodoo, but it was less
of a success since the favourable condi¬
tions mentioned above did not exist.
I have already spoken of Franck
Fouché, whose memory we cherish. It
must be stressed, however, that the new
generation of writers has hoisted high
the flag of the Creole language. In the
United States, the Koukouy Society
organizes Creole language cultural
evenings during which poems are
recited and dramatic songs are sung.
Among the most talented members of
the Koukouy Society Jean Mapou, the
author of Pwezigram, and the poetess
Deita, the author of Majordiol, can be
singled out. -
In 1953 it was unthinkable that
Creole would be used for all literary
genres, although the "literary men" of
the time reluctantly conceded that,
because it was closer to oral expression
than the written word, it was con¬
ceivable for the theatre to be in Creole.
But then a star of the first magnitude
20
appeared in the firmament of the Hai¬
tian novel. Astronomers adjusted and
re-adjusted their telescopes to focus
on... Frankétienne. A binary star? Two
surnames or two first names? At all
events a personage who quickly became
famous. One cannot think of his Dézafi
without a dozen passages worthy of
any anthology springing to mind. It
would take up too much space to quote
them here. I shall merely say that the
novel revolves round a zombi who,
having tasted the savour of love, comes
down again to reality.
But Frankétienne did not stop there.
He turned to the theatre and provided
us, in rapid succession, with two plays,
Twou Foban and Pelen Tel, which
were performed at Port-au-Prince to
packed houses. The second of these
Creole plays has achieved great success
among emigrant Haitian communities,
which are firmly opposed to any "zom-
bification" of the masses.
I do not want to write a conclusion.
I am opening the discussion. For, clear¬
ly, I have not told the whole story. I
will, however, say that the lyrical
theatre in the Creole language, just like
the successful Creole records and songs
of Maurice Sixto, Koralen, Martha
Jean-Claude, Faran Juste, Kiki Wain-
wright and others, has attracted the at¬
tention of the critics. No, I have not
told the whole story so I cannot write a
conclusion. My African experience
has, however, shown me that there are
new horizons for the popular theatre in
national languages. The Anansi, the
theatre of Ghana, the Gwee, the cir¬
cular stage of Senegal and the arena of
Casamance, to mention only a few of
the more striking aspects of traditional
African theatre, have given me an en¬
tirely new concept of theatrical
architecture.
In March 1982, in the "note to the
critics" for my Vilibone, I predicted
that, within twenty years, when speak¬
ing of the revolution in Haitian
literature, they would be referring to
the emergence of literature in the
Creole language. Haitian literature has
already gone beyond this irreversible
stage of cultural liberation. Even
though the government has shelved the
national educational reform aimed at
making Creole official at all levels of
primary education, the few, increasing¬
ly rare opponents of Creole seem
almost as backward as those who main¬
tain that the earth is flat.
Today, more and more authors are
writing in the Creole language and
none of them seems to be about to lay
down his pen. On the contrary, a mili¬
tant Creole language movement which
extends beyond the confines of the ar¬
chipelago is gradually taking shape,
ready to defend itself against the wiles
of cultural imperialism.
Félix Morisseau-Leroy
