XIV. The status of women
WOMEN represent 50 per cent of the world adult
population and one-third of the official labour
force, but they perform nearly two-thirds of all
working hours, receive only one-tenth of the world income and
own less than 1 per cent of world property. Much of the work
women do is not officially recognized, and consequently does
not entitle them to any remuneration, respect or rights usually
associated with work.
A source of cheap labour
Concealment of the real economic value of the daily tasks
that women perform in the home accounts for the belittlement
of this so-called "women's work", regarded not as work but as
a duty inherent in the natural function of women.
Moreover, despite anti-discriminatory legislation, in practice
bias often persists in recruitment or wage policies, owing to the
stereotyped attitudes of employers who, for equal qualifica¬
tions, prefer to reserve the best-paid positions for men,. In a
period of crisis, the image of women as "job-stealers" re-
emerges with all its force. Current economic difficulties have
been instrumental in reviving the ideology of "a woman's place
is in the home", which is hardly likely to speed progress towards
equal opportunity.
The situation of women in the labour force is connected part¬
ly with their education and qualifications, which are generally
inferior to men's. The most serious problem is undoubtedly il¬
literacy among women. From world figures available for 1980
it is projected that the number of illiterate women will reach an
estimated 539 million by 1990.
Out of the jobs that really matter
It should also be noted that in a great many countries women
have not yet succeeded as effectively as men in taking advantage
of the education that they have received in order to gain
equivalent economic, social or political power. Socio-cultural
behaviour, whether family attitudes or tendencies encouraged
by the school system, inclines girls more often towards literary
studies rather than training in science and technology. On the
whole, there are very few women at levels and in branches of
education leading to the upper echelons of the civil service.
Everything seems to suggest that women may have access to
culture and prestige, but not to power.
The difficulties women encounter in attaining positions of
responsibility strongly emphasize the fact that equality is
basically a political problem, and that it is related to the balance
of power. The participation, or rather non-participation, of
women in political life is a fundamental part of the problems
surrounding the status of women.
Education can play a decisive part in making women aware
of their own aspirations, their real potential and their rights. To
that end, it remains necessary to revise textbooks and educa¬
tional materials so as to rid them of all forms of discrimination;
to examine, in the same light, the processes of filtering and
orientation that take place at various levels of education; to take
specific measures to change the traditional attitudes of boys and
men towards women and to encourage a redistribution of roles
between the two sexes, particularly in the home.
As far as the media and cultural industries are concerned,
women are represented far more often as objects than as sub¬
jects, and have little opportunity to convey their own view of the
world, their interpretation of reality, and their image of the
future. It is a remarkable fact that almost all scenarios of the
future that have yet been devised have been the work of men.
Do they, in the long run, accept the man-made universe in which
they live, and confine themselves to seeking equality with men,
or have they a different vision of the world, one which they will
try to get their male partners to accept?
32
' ' Women 's problems ' '
problems of society at large
All too often, again, action undertaken on behalf of women
has been of a piecemeal and fragmentary nature: literacy cam¬
paigns, improvement of household and agricultural know-how,
access to technical and vocational training, etc., geared to par¬
ticular aspects of the status of women but not integrated into a
comprehensive view of society, its organization and its modes
of operation. The crippling restrictions which weigh on women
are hardly likely to disappear so long as they are regarded as
"women's problems" and not as global problems of concern to
society as a whole, so long as any action on behalf of women
is not preceded by the launching of activities designed to inform
the entire community and arouse its awareness.
For the whole of society must be involved. The achievement
of equality between the sexes does not merely mean enabling
women to attain the same status as men in order to fit into a
world fashioned according to the interests and dreams of men
alone. It means starting a decisive process of transformation of
the relationships between men and women in order to arrive at
a genuine redefinition of their respective roles.
Hitherto the international community has all too often
deprived itself of their contribution and their vision in the task
it was pursuing,- by trying to build the unity of the human race
on the basis of a single model and an implicit reference: the
male. Sustained efforts must now be made to eradicate the
masculine bias from the very concepts of universal knowledge.
Unesco is increasingly involved in the search for solutions to the
major problems related to women's status in the modern world,
notably their participation in development, the improvement of
their economic situation, literacy and education. Unesco's action
follows the lines of its participation in the activities of the United
Nations Decade for Women (1975-1985): equality, development

Giving all women access to
education, reducing female il¬
literacy and encouraging
greater participation of
women in the development
process are among the aims
of Unesco's major programme
on the status of women. With
these aims in mind, Unesco
collaborates in the organiza¬
tion throughout the world of
regional studies on equality of
educational opportunities for
women and training courses
for those responsible for the
education of women in rural
areas. Left, a Mexican woman
sets off to market.
Photo Silvester © Rapho, Paris
It is clearly for women themselves to define their problems
and to identify the solutions that appear most relevant. Hence
any action undertaken by Unesco to help in improving the
status of women must be devised and launched in close co¬
operation with governmental and non-governmental organiza¬
tions of women and with the institutions set up at the national,
regional and international level. Special efforts will be made to
assist women's movements and organizations in strengthening
their activities and in mobilizing greater numbers of women
from all walks of life. Broadly speaking, Unesco wishes to inte¬
grate the female dimension into the whole range of programmes
and activities contemplated under the second Medium-Term
Plan.
Effectively to put into practice in the world of today the need
for the solidarity of mankind, evoked by the founders of the
Organization, is a possibility now within our grasp, for events
in recent years have brought about the existence of a vast
worldwide human community; it is also an overriding necessity,
dictated by the perils with which we are threatened. If the frail
craft of mankind is to be prevented from drifting towards a
future beyond anyone's control, the only course is that which
leads to the emergence of a world community which will be
united and reconciled with itself, in a spirit of mutual tolerance,
justice and peace.
Among its other activities on behalf of women, Unesco seeks to
strengthen the role of women in national liberation movements and
to increase women's participation in national reconstruction in
newly independent countries. Above, a young mother waves Zim¬
babwe's new flag on the first anniversary of the country's in¬
dependence, achieved in 1980.
Photo James Stanfield © National Geographic Society, Washington, DC
and peace. But Unesco is also working towards an overall redefini¬
tion of the roles of men and women in the context of the problems
facing contemporary societies. Left, a young Indian woman
teacher at Bombay's higher technical school. Right, a young Euro¬
pean father does the family ironing.
33
