How Arab sailors
read the stars
by Régis Moretón
AS early as the beginning of the
eighth century, in the wake of
the great Islamic conquests, the
Arabs had direct access to many seas
the Red Sea, the Mediterranean, the
Gulf, the Indian Ocean, the Atlantic.
From end to end of this vast expanse,
trade and commerce were partly conduc¬
ted by sea, first of all in coastal waters
and later on the high seas.
At that time orientation was a major
problem. When we speak nowadays of
orientation at sea, we immediately think
of the compass, and we know that the
magnetic needle was, indeed, used for
navigation in the Gulf as early as the ele¬
venth century, but only when the stars
were not visible. All orientation at sea
depended on observation of the heavens.
Nautical instruction manuals in those
days were largely devoted to problems of
astronomical observations measuring
the height of the heavenly bodies above
the horizon and using the great cata¬
logues of the stars. The most famous of
these was the catalogue drawn up in the
tenth century by the Islamic astronomer
Al-Sufi in a manner that was both scienti¬
fic and practical, since it gave the co¬
ordinates of every star and contained two
drawings of each constellation one as it
appeared in the sky, and the other drawn
symmetrically, as it would be seen on a
copper globe reproducing the vault of
heaven. With this catalogue and the cop¬
per globe which was meant to accompany
it, the constellation by reference to which
one wished to take one's bearings could
easily be located in the sky.
At the turn of the fifteenth and six¬
teenth centuries, two great Arab naviga¬
tors of the Indian Ocean, Ahmed Ibn
Majid and Suleiman Mahri, revived this
traditional method, and it is to them that
we owe our knowledge of those features
of Arabian nautical astronomy which are
described below.
With the aid of a simple diagram (see
diagram 1), let us take a quick look at
some elementary facts concerning the
apparent movement of the stars on the
heavenly sphere and to which reference
will be made hereafter.
Let us consider the semi-vault of
heaven as it appears to an observer loca-
REGIS MORELON, of France, is a member of
the Dominican Institute of Oriental Studies,
Cairo. He is a specialist in the history of Arab
astronomy and his new study on Arab texts on
astronomy is to be published shortly.
8
ted at T, picked out with the aid of the
four cardinal points NSEW, the local
meridian being the circle NPZS. The
north heavenly pole is at P and its height
above the horizon the arc NP gives
the latitude of the observation point. The
heavenly equator is represented by the
circle EGW. A star situated north of the
by establishing that the particular stars F,
G, H, for example, on the diagram men¬
tioned above were at the same height on
the horizon, which corresponded to a
definite latitude.
In addition to latitude, observation of
the sky enabled them to determine the
direction in which they were sailing,
Diagram 1. Apparent movement of the stars on the heavenly
sphere (see article).
Diagram © Régis Morelon
equator rises at A, its apparent trajectory
on the heavenly sphere is the circle AFA'
parallel to the equator, and it sets at A',
symmetrical with A in relation to the
meridian. Likewise, a star situated south
of the equator will rise, for instance at B,
its apparent trajectory will be the circle
BHB', B' being symmetrical with B in
relation to the meridian. A star situated
at I, at a lower distance from the pole
than the latitude of the spot, will always
remain above the horizon in its daily
movement. If its distance from the pole is
known and its height as it passes below or
above the meridian is noted, this will
immediately give the height of the pole
above the horizon.
A point on the earth is determined by
its latitude and longitude. The longitude
is given in relation to a meridian of ori¬
gin, and involves the difference between
a local time and an origin-time. How¬
ever, movable chronometers which per¬
mit "time to be kept" precisely have exis¬
ted for little more than a century. Con¬
sequently, it was impossible for Arab sea¬
men to take a bearing in longitude. On
the other hand, they calculated their lati¬
tude by observing the stars, or by mea¬
suring directly the height of the pole, or
which was ascertained by what we now
call the compass-card.
The compass-card as it is represented
on present-day compasses and naviga¬
tional charts is a 32-point star which,
when related to the horizon, shows the
direction in which a vessel is heading.
This choice of 32 compass-points on the
horizon existed long before the compass
and it is very likely that this division,
established through observation of the
rise and setting of certain stars, origi¬
nated with the Arab seamen. Diagram 2
shows this card as it is described in the
nautical instruction manuals of the
Arabs, with the corresponding directions
related to the four cardinal points.
We can see at once the symmetry in
relation to the North-South line. On the
East side, each of the 15 divisions is en¬
titled "rise of such and such a star" and
on the west side "setting of such and such
a star". Thus we find repeated the sym¬
metry of the points A and A' or B and B'
in diagram 1. The names of the stars are
inscribed in the centre of the drawing.
Some of them still pose problems of iden¬
tification, but during the history of
navigation these names have become

Diagram 2. Compass-card as described in Arab nautical instruc¬
tion manuals.
Diagram © Régis Morelon
A North pole
1 Ursa minor
2 Ursa major
3 Cassiopeia
4 Capella
5 Vega
6 Arcturus
7 Pleiades
8 Altair
9 Orion
10 Sirius
1 1 Scorpius
12 Antares
13 Argo navis
14 Canopus
1 5 Crux (Southern cross)
B South pole
^¿JE-Jfe
Two symmetric drawings of the Corvus (Raven) constellation,
drawn by the great Islamic astronomer Al-Sufi (903-986 AD).
purely conventional, just as what are call¬
ed "the signs of the zodiac" have long
since ceased to coincide with the con¬
stellations in which this description
originated. Consequently, nautical in¬
struction manuals show this "compass-
card" with the old descriptions and in¬
dicate according to latitude which stars,
by reference to their rising or setting,
really determine on the horizon the dif¬
ferent directions to be taken.
With the aid of the co-ordinates of
those stars on the "compass-card" which
it has been possible to identify, it can be
calculated that this division was original¬
ly made by seamen navigating on the In¬
dian Ocean at about 10° north latitude
and simply noting the position on the
horizon when the most typical stars rose
and set.
We now have, then, sufficient infor¬
mation to read the instruction given for a
particular maritime route.
At the end of the fifteenth century,
Suleiman Mahri gave the following
description of the route between Diu
(Pakistan) and southern Ceylon (Sri
Lanka):
"From Diu head for the 'rising of
Suhayl' (SSE) until the north pole is 5
fingers (1) above the horizon, then turn
landwards until thou art within 5 or 6
zam (2) of the land, then turn back in the
direction of the 'rising of Suhayl' until
the north pole is at a height of 3 fingers,
then gradually head south because as
thou drawest near to Ceylon the sea
becomes rough whereas out to sea it is
less rough. Thou shouldst turn towards
the right very slowly. As soon as the 'two
calves' (Beta and Gamma of the Little
Bear horizontal to the East) are at a
height of 7.75 fingers, head for the rising
of 'agrab' (SE) until thou seest the 'two
calves' at a height of 7.25 fingers. Then
head eastwards for 18 zam until thou
recognizest that thou art south of
Ceylonthou shalt know by the light¬
ning flashes above the island, with or
without rain...".
These few lines from Mahri comprise
practically all the means of navigating at
sea known in his time height of the
stars, compass-card, distance covered
and indications furnished by the ap¬
pearance of a coast.
It was with the aid of these that Arab
seamen became the experts on navigation
in the Indian Ocean and so in 1498, after
rounding Africa, Vasco da Gama took
Ibn Majid as his pilot from Malindi, on
the east coast of Africa, as far as Calicut,
in India. But after this initial voyage Por¬
tuguese ships arrived in strength in the
Indian Ocean and snatched maritime
supremacy from the Arab seamen
throughout the region.
Régis Morelon
(1) The "finger" is a unit ofangle read on instruments
used by sailors lo measure the height ofa heavenly body
above the horizon.
(2) The zam mentioned here is a unit ofdistance depen¬
ding on the average speed of a sailing vessel of the
period: about 12.6 sea-miles covered in three hours.
