Coastal and island
civilizations
of Africa
by Ibrahima Baba Kaké
AS the German anthropologist Leo
Frobenius (1873-1936) wrote:
"When the first European navi¬
gators arrived in the Gulf of Guinea and
landed at Ouidah, the captains were
astonished to find well laid out streets, tree-
lined for several miles. Travelling from
dawn till dusk, they traversed a countryside
of magnificent fields and inhabited by men
dressed in silks and velvet. They saw great
States, well-ordered down to the smallest
detail, powerful sovereigns, rich industries,
and peoples civilized to their finger-tips.
IBRAHIMA BABA KAKE, of Guinea, teaches
history al a Lycée in Paris. A former lecturer at
the Centre ofAfrican Research at the Sorbonne,
he is the author of many articles and books in¬
cluding Histoire Générale d'Afrique (A General
History of Africa), in collaboration with Elikia
M'Bokolo.
And the countries on the eastern coast, such
as Mozambique, for example, were just the
same."
All the studies made of the history and ar¬
chaeology of the African coastal areas fully
bear out this report.
Let us first take a look at the west coast
of the continent. The area extending from
about longitude 15 degrees west to
longitude 10 degrees east, or from present-
day Guinea-Bissau to the United Cameroon
Republic, is known in geographical terms as
the Gulf of Guinea. The prevailing climate
is equatorial, very humid, and the region
owes its riotous vegetation to rain borne in
on the south-west trade winds and the
monsoon.
Generally speaking this coast is difficult
of access to snipping because of its coastal
bar and is not favourable to human settle-
: f
|
m * ï
' m*W
WPT, <* 1
m ti '
Kfr J 4HmJ
*£» '-'BT«'
Chinese plates of the late Ming period
are embedded in this 18th-century
pillar-tomb at Kunduchi, 25
kilometres north of Dar es Salaam
(United Republic of Tanzania). They
are one of many pieces of ar¬
chaeological evidence in this region
for the existence of trading connex¬
ions between the coast of east Africa
and China via the silk routes.



ment; it has been called "The White man's
grave", and it is equally deadly for the
"Black man".
However, long before the Europeans ar¬
rived on the scene, very advanced civiliza¬
tions flourished on these inhospitable
shores. The finest example of such civiliza¬
tions is that of Benin.
The archaeological digs carried out by
Leo Frobenius at the beginning of this cen¬
tury, at Ifé, have shown that, before the six¬
teenth century, the Yoruba people had
already established an advanced civiliza¬
tion. There Frobenius unearthed finely
moulded terra-cotta busts of negroes. Near
them were found headdresses decorated
with owls and crocodiles, the ¡mages of
divinities and other, richly-dressed per¬
sonages, as well as stone vases with vitrified
interiors, beads which bore witness to the
existence of an ancient glassware industry,
crystal, and large sculpted statues.
All these objects are the artistic evidence
of an advanced civilization whose existence
had previously been unsuspected. The
bronzes found by Frobenius are master¬
pieces, the precursors of the famous Benin
bronzes. From this ancient culture dating
from the beginning of the Iron Age, and
from its counterparts in the west, sprang the
technical innovations that were to enable
later peoples to create the States and Em¬
pires of the tropical forest zone: those of
Oyo, Benin, Adansi, Denkyera, Ashanti,
and others. The principal States of Guinea
and the hinterland were firmly established
by the time the Europeans arrived, but they
were inward-looking and owed little to their
Fishermen from Cayar
north of Dakar (Senegal)
watch as fire consumes
the hut of another fisher¬
man, lost at sea. They
have set fire to the hut in
accordance with an an¬
cient rite of the Ewe peo¬
ple which prescribes that
since the fisherman's
death has been caused
by a "sea demon" which
entered his hut, the hut
must be burned to pre¬
vent the evil from
spreading to nearby
dwellings and to force
the demon to return to
the ocean depths from
whence it was conjured
by an evil spell.
Photo © Folco Quilici, Rome
proximity to the sea.
Meantime, what was the situation in the
east? On the African shores washed by the
tides of the Indian Ocean, the Bantu-
Islamic civilization of the Swahilis (literally,
people of the coast) had developed.
This was a people with close links with
the civilizations of the Orient, and in par¬
ticular with India. The Portuguese were
astonished to find there City-States and
Governments as rich and as complex as
those of Europe, powerful stone-built cities
and ports bustling with merchant shipping.
They encountered men accustomed to
voyaging in eastern seas and whose
knowledge of navigation was greater than
their own.
The greater part of this east coast civiliza¬
tion was destroyed. Except in the north,
little or nothing survived of its erstwhile
prosperity. Most of the towns whose re¬
mains are to be found on the western shores
of the Indian Ocean date from the seven¬
teenth or eighteenth centuries.
It is said that, in the thirteenth century,
the Swahilis transported by sea an elephant
which was presented to the Emperor of
China. Their ships (mtepe), some of them

seventy-tonners, were in use for centuries in
the Indian Ocean. The Swahilis had a wide
range of sailing ships for trade, for fishing
and for the transport of farmworkers along
the eastern seaboard of Africa. According
to some researchers, hundreds of Swahili
vessels (in addition to the Arab dhows from
the Gulf) plied between the ports of Tanga
and Kilwa (in the present-day United
Republic of Tanzania).
A great variety of influences and cultures
contributed here to the establishment of a
long-lasting east African civilization. The
wide and varied trading contacts with the
Orient are attested to by the oldest original
document, a "Travellers Log", dating
from 100 AD and probably written by a
Greek from Egypt; it takes the form of a
guide for the sailor or the merchant, and
lists the ports of east Africa and their
trading interests; it covers an area extending
as far as the southern port of Rhapta, which
was, apparently, located close to present-
day Pangani in the United Republic of Tan¬
zania. Thus, some fifteen hundred years
before the arrival of the Europeans, the east
coast of Africa was already involved in
regular, peaceful trade with the cities of the
Red Sea, southern Arabia, the Gulf, India,
Ceylon (Sri Lanka) and more distant
countries.
In the Europe of the colonial period, this
was generally considered to be an Arab
civilization. The Portuguese of the six¬
teenth century gave none of the credit for it
to the Africans and invariably referred to
the peoples of Kilwa, Mombasa, Malindi
and other east African towns as "Moors".
Today it is recognized that, relatively early
on, the City-States of the east African
coast, although subject to strong Arab and
Muslim influence, were predominantly of
African culture. Undoubtedly, the brilliant
Swahili or coastal civilization owed much to
the Indian Ocean, since it was built on
maritime trade.
Leaving the mainland coasts, let us ex¬
amine the situation of the offshore islands.
When the Portuguese arrived at the Cape
Verde Islands in the fifteenth century,
although they were already known to the
Arabs, they found them virtually
uninhabited. The Portuguese navigators
settled there and began a fruitful two-way
trade with Europe and Africa, and for a
time Cape Verde became the focal point of
the slave trade in the Atlantic.
Carved wooden figures of a man and
woman adorn a Vezo tomb near Moron-
dava on the west coast of Madagascar.
The Vezo are a group of fishing people
living in close communion with the sea,
which is a favourite theme of Malagasy
poets such as Jean Joseph Rabéarivelo
who has written of:
she whose feet are impacted in the sea
and whose sticky hands emerge from it
full of coral and of sparkling blocks of
salt.
Photo © Siegfried Sammer, West Berlin
16

Further south, in the Gulf of Guinea, are
the volcanic islands of Fernando Poo (now
Bioko), Sao Tomé and Principe. They were
inhabited by Blacks, either the descendants
of shipwrecked sailors or of slaves who
went there with the first Portuguese
occupiers.
Throughout the sixteenth, seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, the Cape Verde
Islands, Sao Tomé and Principe (together
with other parts of continental Africa
where the Portuguese presence was less
lasting), Brazil and Lisbon were elements in
a single trading system based on a
geographical fact then of importance to
navigation, the maritime currents, and
which fed on the trade in slaves destined for
the American continent.
The culture that evolved in these
"creóle" islands has remained alive. In the
south Atlantic islands, the word "creóle"
evokes the most successful bio-social
amalgam achieved by the Portuguese in the
Tropics. Here was developed a new type of
man, a new type of mentality and even a
new language, Creole, born of a har¬
monious fusion of Whites and of Black
slaves. On the route between southern
Europe and South America, these islands,
with their original, racially-mixed society,
represented a transitional link between
Africa and the Atlantic world.
Much the same scenario is to be found in
the Indian Ocean, in the Mascarene Islands
(Mauritius and Réunion) and Madagascar.
From the end of the eighteenth century,
the peopling of Mauritius was dependent on
French immigration. French is still spoken
there today, along with English and seven¬
teen other languagesa veritable Tower of
Babel. But the most widely used language is
Creole. On Mauritius are to be found In¬
dians, Chinese, and east Africans, many of
whom are involved in the growing of sugar
cane, in the exploitation of the salt marshes
and in the construction of giant furnaces
for the burning of coral.
The Island of Réunion, it has been said,
was born of an idea of Colbert put into
practice by the Compagnie des Indes. In
1644, the Isle Bourbon, as it was then call¬
ed, had a population of 1,200 made up of
shipwrecked Dutchmen, pirates and women
destined for the settlers at Fort Dauphin, in
Madagascar. The slave trade provided the
first labourers. With the rise in demand for
coffee in the eighteenth century population
growth accelerated, with Blacks being
brought in from Madagascar and Mozam¬
bique. Bearing in mind the elements con¬
tributed by the Chinese and the Muslims,
Réunion could also be said to be a cross¬
roads for the intermingling of civilizations.
The most fantastic hypotheses have been
put forward regarding the origins of the
Malagasies. However, in 1614, the Por¬
tuguese Jesuit Luis Mariano wrote: "The
first inhabitants came some from Malacca
and some from Kaffraria" (the generic
term applied by the Portuguese to all the
territories along the south-east coast of
Africa).
Most Malagasies are of mixed descent.
The eighteen tribes of the Island are not
monolithic racial blocs, and the language
shows remarkable unity. It is an Indonesian
language, but its pronunciation suggests an
African influence.
CONTINUED PAGE 18


These children live on the Indian
Ocean island of Mauritius, where
European, African, Chinese and In¬
dian peoples and cultures have
met and intermixed. English,
French, Creole, Indian and Chinese
dialects are spoken on the island
which is dotted with Hindu
temples, Muslim mosques, Bud¬
dhist pagodas and Christian
churches.
Photo © Pierre Argo, Paris
Cultural features reveal a similarly pro¬
portionate balance of influences. Thus the
shape of the houses, the smith's bellows,
the megaliths, the ancestor cult, the polite
forms of address and ¿he oral literature,
among other characteristics, owe much to
Indonesia.
Other aspects, however, such as the im¬
portance of cattle, evoke eastern Africa.
Dance and musical instruments have been
borrowed from both areas, and these dou¬
ble roots are everywhere to be seen, with,
however, a certain Indonesian cultural
preponderance, which can perhaps be ex¬
plained on the basis of the supposition that
the Indonesians arrived via the northern In¬
dian Ocean and the African coast by taking
advantage of the monsoon winds.
It would seem, therefore, that, except for
the inhabitants of the islands, the African
coastal civilizations of the continent's
Atlantic flank drew little advantage from
the sea, whereas those of the eastern coastal
regions knew how to exploit the oppor¬
tunities offered them by the Indian Ocean.
The Swahili City-States were maritime
powers, thalassocracies. The absence of
maritime States on the west flank of the
continent was not due solely to
geographical considerations but also to the
lack of a merchant class anxious to grow
rich on maritime trade. Furthermore, the
peoples of the western coastal regions do
not appear to have mastered navigational
techniques.
Nevertheless, the sea played an important
role in the expansion of these coastal
civilizations, especially at the time of the
slave trade between Africa and the New
World. If Brazil is the country in which the
presence of African civilizations is most
clearly evident, it must not be forgotten that
they left a strong imprint on the southern
United States, the Caribbean and the whole
of South America.
Ibrahima Baba Kake

