The new nomads
by Jean Fauchon
Amotionless cloud of yellow dust hung over the sandy track
which had brought us, in three hours, from Lagbar, the
capital of the Ferio desert in the north of Senegal, to the
N'Doli well. Little by little the still air filled with a chorus of low-
ings and bellowings and cries of all kinds, as herds in ever larger
numbers crossed our path. At first a few white buildings and then,
suddenly, we came to an immense square. In the middle were long
iron troughs, supplied by a tall water-tower, and all around animals
in their thousands, carefully separated into groupswhite cows
with enormous horns, countless perfectly disciplined goats, long-
legged sheep and now and again cowherds or shepherds riding
horses and camels.
Each herd drank its fill then left the troughs, to be replaced im¬
mediately by another, and set off across the Ferio towards the
pastureland to spend the night, grazing on the carpet of grass and
flowers which the rainy seasonfrom about July to September in
those partshad just brought forth.
Though partially settled, the Peuls still remain nomads because
their lives are bound up with those of their animals and the tem¬
porary pastures on which they live. But they are " new " nomads
in that they follow organized circuits in search of grazing for their
herds, often watering them at specially bored wells around which
rural townships are gradually growing up, even providing medical
care, veterinary services, shopping facilities and sometimes schools.
Ail this is a far cry from the picture of nomads we have
cherishedhuge caravans traversing the steppes of central Asia to
trade silk and cinnamon for rugs, jade or ivory; warring Tuaregs
roaming the Sanaran wastes, keeping African slaves under their
yoke to farm for them the fringes of the desert; Peul or Masai
JEAN FAUCHON, of France, is a specialist in ecology and the problems
of rural development. He was formerly head of the Rural Training Divi¬
sion of the International Labour Organisation, Geneva, and director of the
Ecosystems and Natural Resources Division of the United Nations Envi¬
ronment Programme, Kenya.
herdsmen driving their half-starved cattle in search of conjectural
grasslands. In short, people living in arid, if not desert regions who,
out of economic necessity, have adopted a way of life involving vir¬
tually continuous movement in order to ensure their livelihood.
What is the position today? Maritime transport, lorries, even
aeroplanes, have consigned to history the once endless files of
caravans along the Silk Road. However, beasts of burden still have
a considerable role to play in the transport of certain goods, par¬
ticularly products which have to be brought from remote regions to
the major highways. Salt from the Uyuni lagoons of Bolivia is
distributed on the high Andean plateaux by teams of lamas several
hundred strong, and from the Bilma mines of Niger throughout the
Sahel and the Sudan by Tuareg caravans.
Other forms of transport are more local. Each year hundreds of
yaks cross the Tibetan border through the upper valley of the
Tsangbu to trade Chinese salt or wool for corn and potatoes from
Nepal. Camels bring to the road terminals cabbages, onions and
other vegetables from the region of the Nyayes, north of Dakar
along sandy tracks in which the wheels of motor vehicles would
sink, but which their wide-spreading, two-toed feet tread without
difficulty.
The men who lead these beasts of burden are rarely accompanied
by their families, and they could scarcely be said to be a " nomad "
society with all the attributes of nomad civilization. It might even
be asked whether such societies still exist today.
The pressure of economic, social and cultural upheavals is caus¬
ing these groups to evolve rapidly, if not to disappear altogether.
In the Sahara, some of them, having lost their sovereignty over the
oases cultivated by their former slaves, have begun to live off their
camels, rearing them for their meat and skins and constantly
searching for the grazing on which they are more and more depen¬
dent. Some make seasonal migrations, moving towards the arable
land along the river banks in the dry season and, when the rains
come, dispersing once more to the scattered temporary watering
An Afar encampment in Ethiopia. The Afars, also known as Danakils, are muslim nomadic herdsmen of the Horn of Africa.
Photo © Claude Sauvageot, Paris
3#&£$£&&?

The Rendille people, who number about 9,000, are nomadic
herdsmen from a region to the south-east of Lake Turkana,
Kenya. They depend for their livelihood mainly on camels with
whom they roam as far as Somalia and Ethiopia in search of
water and grazing. Above, a Rendille encampment and, below,
a tent being dismantled in preparation for a move.
places. Others have settled and started to grow crops on the former
flood plains, while still keeping some sheep and goats. Occasional¬
ly, newly-discovered mineral deposits, especially oil or uranium,
provide nomads with opportunities for employment, hampered
though they are by their lack of general or technical training.
The great droughts of the last decade have had disastrous conse¬
quences not only in the Sahel but also in many other regions. In
Mauritania, in 1965, 58 per cent of the population were classified
as nomads. Ten years later, the figure had dwindled to 25 per cent
and, after the great drought of 1977, which caused irreparable
damage, dropped still further. During the same period, the settled
rural population increased from 15 to 42 per cent and the urban
population from 7 to 31 per cent. Mali, Chad and the Sudan were
similarly affected; in certain regions men left their families to seek
a means of survival and never returned; sometimes,after losing all
their herds, they committed suicide. Thus the droughts hastened an
evolution which had been taking shape for several years.
Nomad herdsmen are, in fact, menaced by a more serious threat.
In the Sahel, the scarcity of arable land, combined with population
pressure, has caused farmers to extend the areas they cultivate fur¬
ther and further northwards, to the regions where the last of the
rains from the Gulf of Guinea fall. These regions, with their scant
and uncertain rainfall (from 100 to 300 mm a year), had long been
the preserve of the nomad herdsmen who knew how to use them to
the best advantage, moving their cattle from pasture to pasture. But
they are gradually being ousted by sedentary farmers avid for land
who refuse to allow them to graze their herds even in temporarily
fallow fields.
Moreover, governments almost everywhere have adopted a
policy of settling nomads. They reproach them with being unruly,
with refusing progress, hygiene and the control of the legal
authorities, and with living in archaic social conditions. Nomads
are often accused of being pillagers and, worst sin of all, of con¬
tributing nothing to the national economy. In that respect, the great

droughts, by eliminating a section of the nomads, were not
unwelcome in the eyes of certain local politicians.
What tends to be forgotten is that the disappearance of the
nomads would leave large stretches of arid land completely void of
human life and unexploited, even though, if properly organized,
the nomads' herds could supply large quantities of meat and hides.
Although there is little likelihood that the great caravans of the past
will be seen again, some use of beasts of burden will doubtless con¬
tinue, since the rise in the price of oil and the cost of the upkeep of
roads and vehicles makes this form of transport competitive, par¬
ticularly when it is a matter of carrying produce and wares through
difficult, roadless terrain.
In Scandinavia and the USSR, the Lapps, the nomads of the
north who lead large herds of reindeer from the great northern
forest, in winter, to the Arctic tundra, in the summer, are now
prospering thanks to economic and social measures which have
made it possible for them to maintain a traditional though moder¬
nized way of life. This limited but nevertheless real nomadism
based on new methods of reindeer breeding offers an intense social
life and all the advantages of modern times. Without these people
the vast north would be empty and this would create many prob¬
lems, including those of territorial defence.
The position of the nomad in arid sub-tropical regions is not
unlike that of the Lapps. The raising of camels, cattle or smaller
livestock remains the keystone of their existence. Many solutions
have been proposed and sometimes applied, for modern develop¬
ment of the arid lands on the basis of extensive stock-farming
surveys of migration routes, the provision of strategically placed
watering points, continuous supervision and development of wells
and the areas around them, control of the movement of herds ac¬
cording to the grazing available, and rational organization of the
marketing of the various animal products such as meat, hides and
wool.
State intervention is essential because the nomad shepherds, for
the time being at least, are technically and financially unable to bear
the burden of up-dating their breeding methods. But States should
not set out to settle permanently the maximum number of nomadic
tribes. Transforming nomads into farmers often proves an impossi¬
ble task, not only because of the fundamental opposition between
herdsmen and farmers, but also because the very way of life and
traditions of the nomads militate strongly against any settled form
of existence. This can have far reaching effects. Experience in some
training centres, for example, has shown that it is easier to train
young people from nomad groups for industrial occupations than
for agriculture and that they often make better lorry-drivers than
rice or millet farmers.
Nomads are citizens like anyone else, a fact of which they are
very aware. They are also aware of the need for integration into
modern society, the main route to which is through literacy. Com¬
pulsory education is inscribed in the constitutions of most of the
countries bordering on the Sahara, and this applies as much to the
nomads as to anyone else. But they will have to be provided with
education in their own language, perhaps by a judicious use of the
radio and school sessions for young people at specific periods.
Another essential aspect of the modernization of nomadic life is
the organization of medical care.. Although their hardy existence
results in the survival of the fittest, the women are no longer
prepared to accept the very high infant mortality rates that are too
often the rule in nomad tribes. Vaccination, the fight against
endemic disease and emergency treatment for accident cases must
be coupled with the introduction of elementary public health
methods. The training of health officers of nomad origin and the
setting up of welfare centres near the wells, for example, could
change the lives of nomad herdsmen and alter their attitudes
towards government authorities by demonstrating that they are not
a rejected category of the rural population.
For thousands of years men maintained a certain equilibrium in
the great regions consisting of a combination of fertile, arid and
desert land, making the most of the sparse resources offered by
their natural surroundings. Today, the economic and social evolu¬
tion of the modern world has finally destroyed these fragile
structures.
Nomadism probably remains the only way of developing im¬
mense areas which would otherwise be devoid of human life. The
States concerned should bear this in mind in seeking to establish a
new equilibrium that might eventually lead to the survival and im¬
provement of the nomadic world.
Jean Fauchon
A small Peul encampment sited near a well, in Mauritania. In the
foreground is the shaduf, the balance arm by means of which
water is brought to the surface. Successive droughts have
lowered the water table to a depth of 10 metres, well beyond
the operating reach of the shaduf.
Area already affected or at risk of being affected
by desertification in the developing countries, by continent
Region
Existing
extreme
desert
Degree of risk of desertification
Total
Percentage of
total
land areaVery high High Moderate
Africa 	
cm2 	 %
55
20
34
6 178
200
1 581
1 725
414
790
4 911
1 261
7 253
3 741
1 602
5 608
16 555
3 477
15 232
South America .
Asia 	
Total 	 7 959 2 929 13 425 10 951 35 264 28
Source: Agriculture: Toward 2000 - FAO
32

Right, Rendille camels at rest
near a watering-place. On
their backs can be seen the
frameworks of their owners'
tents which will be erected as
soon as a new camp site is
selected and which afford
some protection to the
women and children and
other precious possessions
while on the move.
In 1980, some 2,000 million
people, or three-quarters of
the population of the develop¬
ing countries, depended on
firewood and other traditional
fuels for their daily domestic
energy needs. Shortage of
firewood affects some 1 , 1 50
million people throughout the
developing world and is par¬
ticularly serious in Africa and
even worse in Asia. Right,
searching for firewood in the
desert.
Photos © Jean Fauchon, Ferney-Voltaire, France
Twice a year yak caravans from Tibet,
loaded with salt, grease and wool,
cross mountain passes up to 5,000
metres in altitude to reach the upper
valley of the Tsangbu, in Nepal,
where their cargoes are exchanged
for cereals and wood. This age-old
barter is essential to the livelihood of
both peoples. Left, naive map/pain¬
ting of the caravan route from Tibet to
Nepal by Lama Karma Chirum.
Photo © Eric Valli. ANA, Paris
33
