of study.
KeDROS, André
When Greek
meets Greek
The Greek language has changed less in
the course of time than many other an¬
cient idioms. Modern Greek is much
closer to the Greek of Plato than is
Italian to the Latin of Cicero. A Greek
high school pupil of today could just
about read Xenophon's Anabasis or
Plato's Dialogues without having
recourse to a dictionary (this would not
be true of Homer's writings). To do
this, however, he would need a good
command of "pure" Greek.
This is because modern Greek suf¬
fers from a dichotomy between
katharevusa, or "pure" Greek, and
demotiki, the popular language of the
people. A similar dichotomy within a
language is found in varying degrees in
other regions, particularly in Arab-
speaking countries. In Greece, this
resulted in a "war of words" that has
roused passions, at times been given an
ideological colouring, and has still not
been completely resolved.
Poor, the victims (even quite recent¬
ly) of their history, unable to acquire an
acceptable level of instruction from an
inadequate educational system, the
people of Greece have always spoken
the so-called "popular" language, a
flexible, expressive, living language,
but one which, cut off from the
mainstream and currents of thought
that have enriched Western culture, has
remained somewhat confined, as poor
as the people who speak it.
The "pure" language, on the other
hand, preserved by the Church and
close to classical Greek, has retained
the rich vocabulary and many of the
subtleties of a language with a noble
tradition; unfortunately, it is rigid and
archaistic and the ordinary people
understand very little of it.
In the early years of the seventeenth
century, Cyril Lucaris, patriarch of the
Greek Orthodox Church, wanted to
have the gospels translated into
Demotic Greek, but this initiative end¬
ed in tragedy. Denounced for "Pro¬
testantism" by his co-religionists, he
was condemned to death by Sultan
Murad IV and strangled by his Ot¬
toman guards.
At the beginning of the nineteenth
century, the Greeks, with the help of
some of the great powers of the day,
finally freed a large part of their ter¬
ritory from the occupying Turks. The
poet Dionysios Solomos helped to
rouse national feeling with inflam¬
matory poems such as his masterpiece
The Freed Besieged which, since he was
addressing the freedom fighters and the
Greek people as a whole, were written
in the popular language. Some of the
freedom fighters' leaders, men of hum¬
ble origin such as Makriyannis, also
left behind them remarkable memoirs
in demotiki.
With independence scarcely achiev¬
ed, social divisions quickly re-surfaced
in the new Greek State. The conser¬
vatism of the Church, which had had a
positive influence during the long years
of Turkish occupation, found an echo
in the conservatism of the privileged
classes, the big landowners and the
bourgeoisie who had taken over the
reins of power. This conservatism,
which made its influence felt in
schools, the judiciary, indeed,
throughout the administration, extend¬
ed even to the language question and as
a result katharevusa, the "pure"
language, was adopted by the entire ap¬
paratus of State.
The question of the two languages
thus took on a new dimension. The of¬
ficial adoption of katharevusa had the
effect of keeping the common people in
a clear situation of inferiority. It
severely limited their access to secon¬
dary and higher education, made them
dependent on "literate" intermediaries
in their dealings with the administra¬
tion and the law courts, and encourag¬
ed political patronage. The example of
Dionysios Solomos was forgotten, and
the literature of the period, as well, of
course, as the newspapers and
magazines were all written in the
"pure" language.
In 1888, the Greek writer Jean
Psichari attempted another
breakthrough by publishing his novel
My Journey in demotiki. The book was
greeted with howls of protest and was
to become a landmark in the "language
war". The objections to it were in large
part ideologically based, but it is true
that Psichari, a man of upper middle
class origin, seldom used demotiki
himself and in writing his book drew
largely on the rather stilted, artificial
language of folklore. Thus his
courageous initiative was open to
criticism and, although he was to in¬
fluence the poets and writers of the end
of the century such as Kostas Palamas
and Kosmas Politis they were careful to
avoid his radical approach.
The language problem soon
developed into a major political issue.
The left wing parties included the in¬
troduction of demotiki in schools and
the administration among their
demands for social reform and made a
point of using it in their own

newspapers and publications. The
quarrel reached such a pitch that, in the
1920s, any fervent protagonist of
demotiki was automatically considered
to be a political extremist.
Gradually, however, even the most
confirmed conservatives began to
realize that, in an ever more rapidly
changing world, the use o{ katharevusa
was isolating them more and more
from the ordinary people over whom
they were thus losing their control.
General Metaxas, who in 1936
established a nazi-style regime in
Greece, switched to using demotiki.
And it is significant that it was a fairly
conservative government that, in 1976,
issued the decree introducing the use of
the popular language in the schools.
A number of problems remain,
however. The demotiki used in the
schools was found in practice to be
rather too imprecise and only by mak¬
ing rather arbitrary borrowings from
katharevusa could it be made suitable
for the teaching of technology and the
sciences. Soon voices were calling "a
plague on both your houses", charging
the defenders of demotiki with sec¬
tarianism and denouncing the diehard
protagonists of katharevusa as elitists.
A language cannot be developed by
decree. It is a living thing which can be
modified only at the pace of its own in¬
ternal rythms and which enriches itself
by taking what it needs from wherever
it finds it. Demotiki, a living, popular
language, is lucky enough to be able to
draw on the wellsprings of an Attic
language which, though stiff and
pedantic in its present form, has reach¬
ed across the centuries to provide the
Western world with many of the terms
*ÉÍ»"*
^^ >
Photo David Seymour © Magnum, Pans After the fall of Constantinople
in 1453 and during the four cen¬
turies of Ottoman occupation
that ensued, Greece declined into
a dark age. Greek national spirit,
however, remained undimmed
and showed itself ¡n a series of
revolts and uprisings which
culminated in the War of In¬
dependence (1821-1828) and the
liberation of the country.
Preserved largely by the Church,
the Greek language throughout
this period was the buttress of the
national conscience. Above, one
of the Greek Orthodox Meteora
monasteries in Thessaly,
Preserved by the Church and a
literate élite, katharevusa, or
"'pure" Greek, remains close to
the Greek of Plato. Ordinary
Greeks speak demotiki, the
popular language of everyday
life. Left, Greek peasant women
sifting fiour.
17

A TREASURY OF TONGUES
and concepts its sciences and new
technologies require.
A language evolves slowly, find the
great Greek poets of modern times
have instinctively contributed to the
process of enrichment men such as
George . Seferis and Odysseus Elitis
(Nobel Prizewinners in 1963 and 1979
respectively), or Constantine Cavafy,
Angelos Sikelianos and Yannis Ritsos
who, like other great poets from small
countries, have succeeded in capturing
an international audience. Successes
such as these would be impossible
without a rich and expressive language
base, and these poets have called upon
all the resources of the sappy vitality of
demotiki, subtly enriched by borrow¬
ings from katharevusa.
Today, not only literature but also
the language of the school and even of
government can be seen to have
assimilated the lesson taught by these
poets. In a not too distant future this
evolution will reach its fulfilment and
then there will no longer be a
"language war" in Greece. The Greek
people will speak, read and write a
single language Modern Greek.

