Culture
in a cold climate
The reindeer herdsmen of Lapland
by Pekka Aikio
Members of the "Lapp Parliament" at work during the annual session of the
representative body founded in 1973 as an expression of Lapp identity and as a means
of preserving traditional rights.
BECAUSE of its latitude, Finno-
scandinavia the geographic to¬
tality of Finland, Sweden and
Norway constitutes the most densely
inhabited "desert" in the world. In
fact, the historical development of nor¬
thern Scandinavia owes much to the
temperate influence of the Gulf
Stream. Without this warm current the
land of the Lapps, at the northern ex¬
tremity of Finland, Norway and
Sweden, would be a sparsely populated
arctic tundra, like the vast tundra zone
of North America.
Around a million people live on the
PEKKA AIKIO, president of the Lapp parlia¬
ment of Finland, is a specialist in reindeer far¬
ming. He is currently contributing to research into
reindeer rearing being carried out by the univer¬
sity ofOula and the Finnish Academy.
30
Nordic ice-cap, the region of Sweden,
Finland and Norway north of the Arc¬
tic Circle. It is not easy to say how
many of them are Laplanders since on¬
ly Finland has attempted to define what
might be called the "Lapp ethnic
group" and the criteria on which this
definition is based are not accepted in
either Sweden or Norway. In Finland,
a person who speaks Lapp as his
primary language or whose parents or
one of whose sets of grandparents
spoke Lapp is considered to be a
Laplander. On the basis of this defini¬
tion the Laplanders of Finland elect a
representative body commonly called
the "Lapp Parliament", yet the situa¬
tion remains paradoxical since Lapp
does not have the status of an official
language and in the statistics it is not
recognized as a mother tongue.
-~.n
- ml* "
-ft
fi- **
w
MI..H-.* '***«*"
T^"*"*
^ gt
Definition of a "Lapp cultural iden¬
tity" is an even trickier question in the
neighbouring countries of-Sweden and
Norway, where the Lapp ethos has
always been closely linked with
reindeer herding, to such an extent
that, at times, only Lapp reindeer
farmers have been considered
Laplanders.
In 1973, Lapp territory was defined
in Finland as consisting of the com¬
mons of Enontekiö, Inari and Utsjoki
and the Lapp community's domain of
Sodankylä. It was at this time that
language was designated as the
criterion for belonging to the Lapp peo¬
ple. This definition increased the Lapp
population of Finland to somewhat
more than 4,500 people, ten per cent of
whom live outside their territory, in
southern Finland or abroad. This may
appear at first glance a conservative
estimate.
Sweden and Norway undertook
demographic studies of the Laplanders
in the 1970s. It was found that while the
Swedish Lapp population numbered
from 17,000 to 20,000 individuals, only
2,000 of them were reindeer farmers.
Norway was found to have approx¬
imately 2,500 Lapp reindeer farmers,
for eighty per cent of whom reindeer
farming was their main professional ac¬
tivity, out of a total of between 35,000
and 50,000 Laplanders. These figures

"A
». r- *
During their seasonal migrations reindeer herds cover very considerable distances, ranging in Norway, for example, from 300 to
400 kilometres. Special agreements allow the reindeer herders, who live a nomadic or semi-nomadic life, to cross the national fron¬
tiers of the Scandinavian States with their herds.
do not take into account the coastal
Lapps, the "Maritime Laplanders",
who pose extremely complicated prob¬
lems of cultural'identity. Thus it ap¬
pears that neither the use of the Lapp
language nor the practice of reindeer
farming are adequate criteria for judg¬
ing who is to be included in the Lapp
population.
The wild reindeer, from which our
modern herds are descended, were at
one time to be found throughout the
northern hemisphere. From very early
times the species branched out into two
distinct types: the arctic mountain
reindeer and the forest reindeer,
adapted to the conifer forest zone. The
nordic reindeer is descended from the
mountain reindeer, while the forest
reindeer, increasingly rare, has almost
A Lapp reindeer-farmer feeds his herd. In the Finnoscandinavian countries, with the
growth of domesticated herds,pasturelands are coming under pressure and at times the
reindeer are faced with local shortages of graze.
disappeared from the Finnoscandina¬
vian environment.
Traditional forms of domestic
reindeer husbandry have survived only
in Eurasia. Broadly speaking, all the
Eurasian zone north of the zero degree
isotherm can be considered reindeer-
raising territory. Of the world's four
and a half million reindeer, about three
million are domesticated, seventy-
seven per cent in the Soviet Union,
twenty-one per cent in North America,
and much smaller numbers in Scotland
and Greenland. Small herds have also
been relocated in remote places such as
the islands adjacent to the Antarctic
continent, where they have adapted
very well.
According to Soviet specialists, there
is enough pastureland in the USSR to
maintain three and a half million
reindeer, while North America is
estimated to have pasturage available
to feed three million. But in the Nordic
countries the number of reindeer can¬
not be appreciably increased; the
Swedish and Finnish pasturelands are
overgrazed and from time to time in
certain areas reindeer herds are faced
with famine.
There are four principal zones of
Eurasian reindeer-raising. To the ex¬
treme east the nomadic Chukchi and
Koryaks raise very large herds. They
use reindeer as draught animals and as
31

a source of milk. In western Eurasia,
however, the Lapps have developed a
totally or semi-nomadic husbandry
with the reindeer serving as both pack
and draught animals as well as for the
production of milk. On the Soviet
coastline of the Arctic Ocean, the total¬
ly nomadic Samoyed* use their reindeer
neither for milk nor as pack animals.
The forest Tungus, the Soyots and their
neighbours, who occupy a small area
between the Samoyeds and Chukchi
and the Koryaks, are semi-nomadic
reindeer farmers, milking their herds
and using them as beasts of burden as
well as for breeding.
Man's first contact with reindeer was
The coastal Laplanders were,
perhaps, the first to domesticate the
reindeer in Scandinavia. At first the
reindeer were used as harness, pack and
decoy animals, and for their milk. Not
yet very numerous, the reindeer accom¬
panied these primitive semi-nomadic
hunters in their search for game. As the
wild reindeer became more and more
scarce, the Laplanders increased the
size of their domesticated herds and in
their search for pasturelands gradually
became totally nomadic.
The first written evidence of reindeer
raising is contained in tax registers of
the 14th and 15th centuries. Since the
reign of Gustavus Vasa, the sovereigns
% "jwMtjjptr mi
Modem Lapp nomads use snowmobiles, motor-driven snow scooters,
to follow and round up their herds.
as prey to be hunted and snared by
means of traps, ditches and stockades.
Many traces of reindeer-herding
civilizations are to be found in Finland,
but little is known of more ancient
times when reindeer were. exclusively
hunters' prey. At Jiebmaluokta, near
Alta, however, a rock carving has been
found which depicts an enclosure for
reindeer. It is in the shape of a four-
leafed clover in which were enclosed
reindeer and elk. Several reindeer are to
be seen entering the enclosure while a
hunter, goad in hand, is herding them
into a corner. Since this carving is
thought to be between 5,500 and 6,000
years old, it would appear that a fairly
sophisticated form of reindeer hunting
was practised by the coastal Lapps as
far back as 3,000 BC.
* The editors of the Unesco Courierw/s/i to point
out that the Russian word "Samoyed" is used in
English and in many other languages as a purely
technical term without reference to its original
sense.
32
of Sweden have recognized the siidas
(traditional Lapp administrative
districts),- by virtue of which Lapland
was separated by a frontier from the
rest of the realm. Recent jurisprudence
seems to be unanimous in accepting
that since that epoch the right of the
Laplander to raise reindeer has not
been only a recognized, but also a
transmissible, hereditary, right.
At the end of the 17th century,
Lapland was still an undivided region
situated on the frontiers of the Nordic
States. The separation of the Kingdoms
of Denmark-Norway and of Sweden-
Finland, which was agreed to at
Strömstad in 1751, had significant
repercussions on the Laplanders' rights
and way of life. An annex to the treaty
of Strömstad specified that the Lapps
could cross the new frontier and make
use of the land and waters for husban¬
dry and fishing, but could own taxable
land in one State only. In addition, they
had to choose between Norwegian and
Swedish nationality. The Lapps lost
these rights when the frontier was clos¬
ed, first in 1852, then in 1854 and 1889.
The annex to the treaty of 175 1 con¬
tinues nevertheless to exert a certain in¬
fluence in Sweden and Norway. Thus, in
1972, the two countries ratified an agree¬
ment about the reindeer pasturelands,
according the Lapps of the siidas in
Sweden the right to use certain frontier
land on the Norwegian side as spring
and summer pasturage, the Lapps of
Norway having, reciprocally, the right
to use certain regions in Sweden for
winter pasture. As it now stands, the
agreement is criticized on both sides; it
seems to put the economic interests
related to reindeer-raising before the
political and national interests of the
Lapp community.
In Sweden and Norway, an essential
aspect of the annual reindeer-raising
cycle is the transhumance between
various seasonal pasturelands. These
migrations in Sweden follow ancient
custom, respecting the boundaries bet¬
ween the siidas. In Norway, these
migratory movements can cover
distances of up to 400 kilometres, going
from high mountain terrain to the
coastal archipelago of the Arctic Ocean
in the summer, and in the opposite
direction in the fall. Often a number of
communities follow the same itinerary,
the herds setting out at intervals of a
few weeks.
By means of what is designated as a
"reindeer-raising concession", the
right to raise reindeer is being granted

Photos Pal Nils Nilsson © G Bern. Paris
to non-Laplanders in Sweden. The
Lapps of the siidas fear that in the end
the owners of these concession lands
will have a decisive influence on ques¬
tions of reindeer-raising practice. In
northern Lapland, this has been the un¬
questioned prerogative of the Lapps. In
Finland, as we have seen, membership
The art of the lasso.
of this Lapp ethnic group is based on
the spoken language. But recent
juridical and historical research may
throw new light on the question of
ethnic roots. Most of the present-day
reindeer-raising domain of Finland
corresponds to the territories of the an¬
cient siidas, and it is highly possible
that the majority of today's reindeer
farmers are its lawful'owners. Should
these ancient rights be recognized, if
only in part, the protection of the
reindeer pasturelands and the defence of
the traditional Lapp way of life would
undoubtedly be greatly strengthened.
Pekka Aikio
-
."**- - *-*' tí*"*" 	 .	 , ^>
-*r - m
33
