Sampling sea water for analysis during a marine
pollution monitoring workshop in Bermuda.
THE Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission (IOC)
was created by Unesco in 1960. It now has 140 Member
States. Its principal governing body is the Assembly,
supported by an Executive Council of 32 Member States in¬
cluding those of the Chairman and four Vice-Chairmen.
The functions of the Commission are, briefly:
to define those problems, the solution of which requires inter¬
national co-operation in the field of oceanic research; and to
develop, recommend and co-ordinate international oceanic pro¬
grammes for
scientific investigations of the oceans,
related services
strengthening education, training and assistance in marine
science and its technology which call for concerted action
by IOC Member States
with interested international organizations.
Ocean science
The Commission has five major ocean science programmes.
The programme on Ocean Science in Relation to Living
Resources (OSLR), which FAO was invited to co-sponsor, is
aimed at identifying fields of ocean science that could lead to
a better understanding of the relationship between fish stocks
and ocean environmental variability, to provide the scientific
basis for fishery development and management.
The programme of Ocean Science in Relation to Non-living
Resources (OSNLR), which the UN, through its Ocean
Economics and Technology Branch (OETB) co-sponsors, is aim¬
ed at the study of regional geology and geophysical problems
so as to provide the scientific basis for mineral exploration and
exploitation.
In the field of ocean mapping, the IOC and the International
Hydrographie Organization (IHO) jointly published in 1982, the
fifth edition of the General Bathymétrie Chart of the Oceans
(GEBCO). The International Bathymétrie Chart of the Mediterra¬
nean (IBCM) was completed and printed in 1981, andthelBCM
Group of Specialists on Overlay Sheets in Geology and
Geophysics is preparing six geophysical overlay sheets. The
Geological and Geophysical Atlases of the Pacific and Atlantic
are in preparation. The preparation of specialized ocean maps
for the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of Central America, eastern
and western Africa, and the South Pacific, is under study.

>Q/ The Intergovernmental
Océanographie Commission
The Global Investigation of Pollution in the Marine Environ¬
ment (GIPME) includes marine pollution research, baseline
studies and the development of a global marine pollution
monitoring system, with a view to providing a sound scientific
basis for regulatory action to protect the marine environment.
The IOC is responsible for co-ordinating the oceanic compo¬
nent of the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), to im¬
prove our understanding of the ocean's role in climate change
and variability. The design of an ocean-monitoring system is be¬
ing undertaken in close collaboration with the IOC-WMO (World
Meteorological Organization) Working Committee for the In¬
tegrated Global Ocean Services System (IGOSS), the IOC
Working Committee for the International Océanographie Data
Exchange (IODE) and the ICSU Scientific Committee on
Oceanic Research (SCOR).
Ocean services
The IOC provides three major ocean services to its Member
States.
The Integrated Global Ocean Services System (IGOSS) is a
joint IOC-WMO, world-wide, operational service system pro¬
viding data and information on the state of the oceans for
various marine users. These users are concerned with explora¬
tion and exploitation of biological and mineral resources of the
ocean, shipping, weather and climate, recreation, search and
rescue operations, oceanic and offshore engineering, harbour
control and pollution abatement and control.
The major objective of the International Océanographie Data
Exchange (IODE) is to collect, process, archive, retrieve and ex¬
change océanographie data on a world-wide basis. These ser¬
vices are needed to be able to minimize the hazards of ocean
and atmosphere, protect and develop coastal areas, improve
weather forecasting and marine transport, safeguard the
marine environment and make proper use of oceanic living and
non-living resources.
A global network of National Océanographie Data Centres
(NODCs), co-ordinated by the Commission, has been establish¬
ed and is gradually expanding.
The IOC also co-ordinates the Marine Environmental Data In¬
formation Referral System (MEDI) and participates actively in
the Joint FAO/IOC/UN (OETB) Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries
Information System (ASFIS).
Within the coastal zones of the Pacific and the shores of the
Pacific Islands, twenty-two nations are now members of the
IOC International Co-ordination Group for the Tsunami Warning
System in the Pacific (ITSU). Educational and publicity material
has been published, and new and additional Tsunami Wave
Travel Time charts are being computed and drafted.
Training, education and mutual assistance (TEMA)
To support the Ocean Science and Ocean Service pro¬
grammes of the Commission, the IOC organizes specific train¬
ing, education and mutual assistance in the marine sciences. To
meet the aspirations of the developing countries, the Commis¬
sion has adopted a Comprehensive Plan for a Major Assistance
Programme to Enhance the Marine Science Capabilities of
Developing Countries.
Structures
The IOC also acts as a joint specialized mechanism of the UN
organizations members of the Inter-secretariat Committee on
Scientific Programmes Relating to Oceanography (ICSPRO):
UN, Unesco, FAO, WMO and IHO. IOC assists them in the
discharge of certain of their responsibilities in the field of ocean
science, ocean services and related training, education and
mutual assistance.
To execute its programmes, the IOC works, when ap¬
propriate, through regional subsidiary bodies; notably, the Sub-
Commission for the Caribbean and Adjacent Regions
(IOCARIBE), the Programme Groups for the Western Pacific
(WPAC), for the Co-operative Investigation in the North and
Central Western Indian Ocean (CINCWIO), for the Central In¬
dian Ocean (CINDIO) for the Southern Oceans (SOC), for the
South-east Pacific (through the Joint IOC/WMO/CPPS, (Perma¬
nent Commission for the South Pacific) Working Group on the
Scientific Investigations of El Nino; and efforts are under way
to form a regional subsidiary body for the Atlantic coast of
Africa.
For its global programmes it works through specialized in¬
tergovernmental Working Committees for GIPME, IGOSS,
IODE and TEMA, and other technical subsidiary bodies such as
the SCOR-IOC Committee on Climatic Changes and the Oceans
(CCCO).
The Integrated Global Ocean
Services System (IGOSS) in
operation.
41
