In 1 981 , an Intergovernmental Regional Meeting, held in Quito, Ecuador, laid down three main objectives for Unesco's Major Project
in the Field of Education in the Latin American and Caribbean Region: To ensure that by 1 999 at the latest all children of school age
are provided with a minimum of 8 to 1 0 years general education; to eradicate illiteracy before the end of the century; to improve
the quality and efficiency of educational systems. Above, Colombian schoolchildren work at their reading and writing.


The education gap
A hard look at the plight of the world's rural areas
by Hamidou Lailaba Maiga
SOCIAL, economic and cultural
progress is inconceivable without
the development and mastery of
knowledge, particularly scientific and
technical knowledge.
While almost 100 per cent of children
of primary school age are enrolled in
school in the industrialized countries,
where education is compulsory up to the
age of fifteen or sixteen, almost all the
developing countries are still far from
providing universal primary education.
In the latter countries illiteracy rates are
highest in the rural areas, and in this arti¬
cle when we refer to education in rural
areas we are thinking primarily of the
needs of rural areas in the developing
world.
HAMIDOU LAILABA MAIGA, of Niger,
teaches at the University of Niamey and is
secretary-general of the African Association
of Psychology.
It would, however, be wrong to think
that all is well in the industrialized coun¬
tries. Today they find themselves con¬
fronted with many tensions between the
dynamics of education, the dynamics of
economic life and social needs. These
tensions find expression in the changes
and reforms that are sweeping through
many national education systems and
which, although they may be a sign of
Experiment and reform in education are more necessary
today than ever before. Modern experiments include in¬
terdisciplinary instruction, group dynamics, self-
teaching and pupil-run schools, like the Barbiana school
in Italy. Above all, these experiments invite the child "to
learn to learn". Right, schoolchildren in Prague taking
part in educative games.
24

Above, an Ecuadorian workman áets out on the road to literacy. He is just one of the millions of people throughout the world who
are demanding the education which is their right. It was to help Member States meet this explosive demand that, in 1963, Unesco
established the International Institute for Educational Planning whose aim is to contribute to the development of education by pro¬
viding a centre for advanced training, and research in the field of educational planning.
W .^/^^^^¡Jf "'
» m^A ' «ST.
..>!
/&^
v±
r.
>
f
M»,
"¡?«C
| ^^^HHI 1


The expansion of education systems
in recent years has made great
demands on material, financial and
human resources. In the world as a
whole, the percentage of gross na¬
tional product allotted to State educa¬
tion rose from 3.7 per cent in 1 960 to
5.6 per cent in 1979. In the develop¬
ing countries alone, the number of
teachers rose from 4,720,000 in
1960 to 14,375,000 in 1980. Left, a
primary school classroom in Niger.
Photo © Claude Sauvageot, Paris
vitality, are in the great majority of cases
an indication that the systems in question
are not working well.
If a country such as France has granted
certain of its sub-regions the status of
"educational priority zones", it is
because regional and zonal inequalities
have been identified; the reduction of
these inequalities calls for urgent
measures. It is not surprising that all
these educational priority zones are in
rural areas. Think of the situation in the
rural areas of developing countries, the
overwhelming majority of which are still
unable to provide the necessary
minimum, universal primary education!
Think of the situation in countries pro¬
viding an education unadapted to their
cultural needs and dispensed in a foreign
language spoken in some cases by less
than 1 0 per cent of the population ! As far
as the provision and quality of education
are concerned, I feel it is no exaggeration
to say that some Third World countries
are suffering from a grievous handicap.
There is no point in repeating here
what has been said by specialists, interna¬
tional organizations and research in¬
stitutes which have produced incisive
analyses of the situation, to demonstrate .
the bankruptcy of educational systems in
the developing countries both in terms of
their internal and external efficiency. Let
us simply remember that school wastage
has become virtually endemic and that
school systems are incapable of pro¬
viding training to meet the needs of real
development.
Even a cursory look at social and
economic conditions in the rural areas of
developing countries shows that these
areas are facing many handicaps: lack of
infrastructures; populations living in ab¬
solute poverty and deprived of the fruits
of their labour; an education unsuited to
the on-the-ground situation and cultural
values; low productivity of work con¬
trasting with a high expenditure of
physical effort; illiteracy. The economic,
physical and cultural possibilities are so
limited by this combination of factors
that access to school and consequently to
knowledge is difficult. Malnourished,
physically wasted children, sometimes
walking long distances to school, can on¬
ly reap a meagre benefit from an educa¬
tion which is hermetic because it is not
adapted to their culture, and which en¬
courages competition to the detriment of
co-operation.
Examination of the growth of Gross
National Product (GNP) in different sec¬
tors of activity shows that growth in the
services sector and (in the last few years)
in industry has varied between 6 and 14
per cent while growth in the agricultural
sector has oscillated between 1 and 2.5
per cent.
The author of this analysis, the French
specialist on education for rural develop¬
ment Guy-José Bretones, points out that
these figures indicate "stagnating living
conditions" for the rural populations
which nevertheless constitute the biggest
proportion of the working population of
developing countries. This is clearly "a
considerable brake" on economic activi¬
ty and a major handicap for develop-
27

ment. As the Nobel Prizewinning
economist Sir Arthur Lewis has said: "if
agriculture is in the doldrums, it only of¬
fers a stagnating market and impedes the
development of the rest of the economy.
If you fail to develop agriculture to a suf¬
ficient extent, it becomes more difficult
to develop anything else. This is the basic
principle of 'balanced growth'."
Noted economists point out that "the
improvement of human potential (educa¬
tion, training, health care)" and the
transmission of knowledge and technical
skills are far more important factors in
increasing GNP than the quantitative in¬
crease in capital and manpower. Mean¬
while, the way in which GNP is divided
up is one of the factors which conditions
development; research plays an equally
important role. The increase in a coun¬
try's income is due first and foremost to
the updating of its people's productive
potential, the development of its human
resources, rather than "the accumulation
of material goods".
In the developing countries, the over¬
whelming majority of these human
resources are concentrated in rural areas
and especially in the agricultural sector.
Depending on the country, between 45
and 80 per cent of the working popula¬
tion may be involved in agriculture. With
the exception of countries such as Cuba
and Somalia which have eradicated il¬
literacy in record time, this mass of pro¬
ducers is almost totally illiterate. Il¬
literacy is particularly prevalent in the
forty-to-sixty age range, among those
who take the decisions in rural areas.
Apart from any moral or philosophical
considerations, therefore, in developing
countries, and especially in those where
agricultural production makes the big¬
gest contribution to GNP, growth of na¬
tional income and profitability of educa¬
tional costs must be based on the defini¬
tion of new educational objectives which
will attach great importance to the im¬
provement of living conditions, produc¬
tion conditions and productive tech¬
niques in the rural world. Among the im¬
plications of this are the development of
education, both in terms of quantity and
quality, and notably the establishment in
rural areas of training structures best
suited to meet the real needs of the
populations and their emancipation.
Immediately after achieving in¬
dependence, the great majority of
formerly colonized countries made a
major effort to improve the supply of
education. The Addis Ababa Declaration
(1961) is a good illustration of the way
many African countries pursued this ob¬
jective. However, the priority given to
"quantitative development" was to ag¬
gravate the various disparities and forms
of discrimination which had been in¬
herited from the colonial era (disparities
between regions, inequalities between
cities and rural areas, inequality between
the sexes, etc.). In the former French col¬
onies in Africa, although the "symbol"
disappeared, African languages were still
not taught in the schools (as is still the
case in many of these countries). In
general, the variance between school pro¬
grammes and local cultures and en-
28
vironments still creates and perpetuates
enormous problems of adaptation, learn¬
ing, and intellectual development. In
such conditions failure is hardly
surprising.
And so innovation appeared to be
essential. In practice it has taken three
main directions: the ruralization of
education; out-of-school training with a
rural orientation; and the integration of
productive work and in-school
education.
Niger and Cameroon each constitute
typical cases of ruralization of education.
In 1967 each of these countries asked the
United Nations Development Pro¬
gramme (UNDP) to help them finance a
college of education for training primary
school teachers for rural areas. Since the
teaching inherited from colonial times
had proved a failure, it seemed necessary
to train a new kind of primary school
teacher who could promote economic
development at village level. The teacher
training course lasted three years. In ad¬
dition to instruction in teaching methods
and practice, the courses included
sociology, child psychology, pedagogy,
technology, and a basic knowledge of
animal husbandry and farming. At the
end of the training period, the teacher
was to be equipped to look for the con¬
tent of his teaching in the local environ
ment. This teaching should be integrated,
by means of the study of the
environment.
Ruralized primary education, it is
hoped, will halt the exodus from the
countryside by encouraging the child's
integration into his environment, notably
by making him capable of "acting on it,
mastering it, transforming it and
developing it."
Neither in Niger nor in Cameroon does
the project for the ruralization of educa¬
tion seem to have met the expectations of
its promoters.
Out-of-school training with a rural
orientation is targeted at young people in
rural areas. It provides them with a
grounding in agricultural techniques
which are traditionally unknown in their
locality. The objective is to increase pro¬
ductivity and foster the economic
development of rural areas. Specifically
technical training is generally combined
with literacy courses and instruction in
elementary management techniques and
home economics. Experiments of this
kind are today being carried out in
several Third World countries, with vary¬
ing results. Tanzania, Niger, Mali and
Upper Volta are some of the African
countries concerned, and the case of Up¬
per Volta has attracted particular in-
The right to education has long been accepted as being one of
the basic human rights, but only in comparatively recent years
has it been recognized that this right encompasses lifelong
education extending throughout adult life. More and more
retired people are "going back to school" in order to pursue in¬
terests they were unable to satisfy during their active lives.
Above, a course in a "university of the third age", in the Ger¬
man Democratic Republic.
Education has become a powerful vehicle of social mobility,
with higher educational qualifications becoming more impor¬
tant than social origin and inherited wealth. Yet a multiplicity of
diplomas is not an end in itself and it is important that the con¬
tent of higher education be designed to meet the real needs of
society as a whole. Right, massed ranks of students taking an
examination in a sports stadium in Djakarta, Indonesia.

terest, notably in the Groupements post¬
scolaires (post-school groupings).
Post-school groupings have a dual pur¬
pose; they aim to train young farmers
capable of innovating and setting up self-
administered co-operatives, and also to
encourage the participation of the village
community as a whole. The originality of
the approach is that it attempts to adapt
a traditional association of young peo¬
ple, the nam, to the needs of the village
today.
The purpose of integration of formal
education and productive work is to form
a link between training and production
within the context of formal education.
Many kinds of experiment are being car¬
ried out in this field; that of the "basic
secondary school in the countryside",
launched in Cuba a few years ago, seems
promising. According to a French jour¬
nalist, Bernard Cassen, "each basic
secondary school in the countryside is set
in the midst of some 500 hectares of land
for which it is responsible. Depending on
the region, the schools produce citrus
fruits, coffee, tobacco, fruit, or
vegetables. Each school has some 500
pupils of both sexes... The pupils alter¬
nate between work in the fields in the
morning and in the school in the after¬
noon, and vice versa." According to
evidence cited by Cassen, the results in
both agricultural production and school
performance are extremely encouraging.
Proposals for reform are not usually
based on a critical approach which calls
into question those contradictions which
objectively constitute the severest han¬
dicaps for the society in question. The
prime target is the rural world, which is
usually said to harbour the potential
causes of failure. Attention is often
drawn to the rural world's resistance to
change, and particularly the resistance of
the old, who possess the powers of
decision.
This resistance is real, but is it a major
handicap? How can the rural world ob¬
jectively and subjectively go along with a
process of innovation conceived
elsewhere by a privileged minority whose
privileges weigh heavily on rural pro¬
ducers and their families? Can these pro¬
ducers modernize their farming tech¬
niques? Have they the means to do so in
an economy where the domination of the
great landed proprietors, the urban mid¬
dle class and a host of middlemen is in
process of turning them into a "rural
proletariat"? Are those who most
systematically deplore peasant conser¬
vatism always prepared to abandon cer¬
tain of their privileges for the sake of a
more equitable distribution of the na¬
tional income? Are not those who profit
objectively from the fact that education
is ill-adapted to needs more conservative
than the villagers? The deterioration of
terms of trade to the detriment of the
raw-material exporting countries hits the
rural world first and hardest.
Many obstacles also exist in the field of
cultural and administrative policies. It is,
for example, impossible for a school
which does not use the language of the
community in which it is established to be
a part of that community.
The problem of rural development
should not be formulated simply in terms
of increased productivity or production
in the agricultural sector alone. The
problem should be set against a wider
background including such measures as
the massive transfer of capital from the
cities to the countryside, the establish¬
ment of industrial units in the rural areas,
a national policy for the development of
scientific and technological research at
every level, the supervision and develop¬
ment of natural resources, the promotion
of national languages and cultures, the
growth of the capacity for training and
information through use of the mass
media, respect for liberties and a policy
of genuine national development instead
of the development of minority privileges
and dependence.
Hamidou Lailaba Maiga
