The
forgotten ones
of Latin America
by Guillermo Almeyra
the market system, since they have to de¬
fend their pre-capitalist way of life while at
the same time seeking a just integration into
the national community. Even when they
share the misery of other needy country
folk, they do so with a much greater degree
of helplessness and have to face much
greater obstacles.
The fact is that, just as there is not one
but several Latin Americas, brothers but
different from each other, there is not a
single rural world. For the peasants and in¬
habitants of the countryside, the difference
in conditions of historical development
from country to country or from region to
region, is both qualitative and quantitative.
There is no dualism, no juxtaposition bet¬
ween two modes of production, two ways
of life, two cultures. There is, on the other
hand, a form of development that is both
Photo Maximihen Bruggmann © La Spirale, Yverdon, Switzerland
EXCEPT for brief intense periods
during which they have occupied
the forefront of the national stage,
like lava which escapes through fissures in
the ground during an earthquake, the
peasants of Latin America have always
come last, have always been forgotten.
Nevertheless, it is on their shoulders that
the main brunt of the development effort
has always fallen. The economies of most
Latin American countries depend on the ex¬
port of farm products, and it is the produc¬
tion of basic consumer goods by them, in¬
cluding goods for their own consumption,
that makes it possible to sustain the living
standards of the continent's overgrown
modern cities. The backwardness in which
the rural areas and their inhabitants have
been kept and which is characteristic of a
certain type of economy and land tenure,
seriously restricts the expansion of the
domestic market, economic development
and the raising of the cultural, dietary and
material standards of Latin American
countries. It is an enormous historical in¬
justice and the source of much serious
social instability.
The peasants, who by definition are
isolated, scattered and trapped by local
living conditions, thus represent a burden
on the existing social structure of their
countries. This is why the searchlight of in¬
ternational public opinion has been focused
on them and why they are becoming a world
political force of primary importance which
the industrialized countries must take into
account in their calculations and in the for¬
mulation of their policies and strategies.
Hence the importance of keeping what hap¬
pens in the depths of this disorganized
human mass, which forms the bulk of the
population in many Latin American coun¬
tries, under constant observation. For this
GUILLERMO ALMEYRA, Argentine writer and
journalist, was formerly Professor ofAdvanced
Studies at the School of Political Sciences of
Mexico's Autonomous National University. He
is a contributing editor of the U.N. Food and
Agriculture Organization's magazine Ceres and
European correspondent of the Mexican Ministry
ofEducation Radio Service as well as of a num¬
ber ofLatin American magazines and newspapers.
4
reason also it is essential, if we are to
understand and foresee what may happen
in the future, to follow closely the main
trends which are agitating and transforming
the rural world.
For, to be precise, those concerned are in¬
habitants of the countryside rather than
peasants members of the indigenous
population in many countries; sometimes
co-tenants of the land; sometimes day-
labourers; sometimes landless peasants
without fixed employment; native or
mestizo artisans; small tradesmen who in
reality are needy unemployed peasants in
disguise; large families which are only part¬
ly involved in production as producers of
the manpower of the privileged classes.
Moreover, it is a rural world which varies
profoundly according to region, not only
between countries but also within each of
them. During good seasons, the peasants of
the Rio Negro or Unco valleys in Mendoza,
Argentina, used to sell their fruit crops at a
good price, buy a house, travel in Europe,
change their car, buy machinery. Now¬
adays, they give away their apples on the
streets of the cities which they invade with
their tractors.
The indigenous communities of Oaxaca
in Mexico react similarly to the direct ef¬
fects of the economic crisis on their lives,
defending their woods from the talamontes
who try to steal their timber, but there is a
cultural and social abyss between them and
the fruitgrowers of Argentina. The millions
of boias frias, the Brazilian day-labourers
who wait on the streets and market-places
of rural centres for someone to hire them if
only for a day, and who are defenceless,
without rights and any kind of organiza¬
tion, have very little in common with the
workers on the sugar plantations in the
north of Argentina, in Northern Peru, in
Mexico, who often own important pro¬
ducers' co-operatives which comprise the
land and factories and who are always
unionized and protected by the labour law.
The indigenous communities of Quiche In¬
dians in Guatemala, the Mexican sierras,
and the Andes mountain ranges have
special characteristics and problems which
distinguish them profoundly from the
mestizo peasants who are integrated into

unequal and linked. The so-called
economic, social and cultural marginaliza-
tion of vast numbers of human beings is an
intrinsic part of the particular kind of urban
industrial growth of the Latin American
region and of its integration, in the present
phase, into the world market.
This fragmentation of the Latin
American rural world does not, however,
exclude the existence of broad common
trends which are the immediate result of
"modernization", that is to say, the rapid
and ubiquitous penetration of the dominant
system of world production and the
transnationalization of the economy,
leading to common patterns of consump¬
tion and cultural models. Very broadly
speaking, and always bearing in mind that
different social fabrics offer varying
degrees of resistance to this modern
economic, political and social version of the
Procrustean bed, it is possible to discern a
number of common phenomena which are
changing the traditional characteristics of
Latin America. The most significant is
perhaps the demographic transformation.
Today, millions of needy peasants
wander through their countries, covering
thousands of kilometres in search of im¬
proved social conditions which are unat¬
tainable for them. Hundreds of thousands
of them cross national frontiers. Countries
like Paraguay and Uruguay have been vir¬
tually emptied of much of their active
labour force, of a decisive proportion of
their younger, more dynamic, more pro¬
ductive, . better trained people. The
capitalistic modernization of agriculture
acts in the Latin-American countryside like
a suction-propulsion bomb. It absorbs and
expels millions of people outwards towards
the cities, since the modern agro-industrial
enterprise needs a relatively- small labour
force and tends to maintain the small¬
holdings where the peasants live on their
own produce as reserves of seasonal
workers.
This migration of economic origin is
responsible for a veritable dissolution of the
old traditional type of agrarian society, and
is leading to the transformation of the
social, cultural and even physical environ¬
ment of the Latin American countries. But
in many of these countries, especially in
those of Central America, there is also
political migration. It is prompted and fed
by economic migration, but it also has its
own causes, dynamics and characteristics.
The insecurity in Guatemala, for example,
has forced a million people, i.e. one seventh
Peasants at work in the Peruvian altiplano, the high plains, 3,600 metres above sea level,
between the eastern and western cordilleras of the Peruvian Andes.

Photo Maximilien Bruggmann © La Spirale, Yverdon, Switzerland
Above, rice fields in the valley of the Rio Jequetepeque, near the ancient Inca city of
Cajamarca, the principal population centre of the north Peruvian Andes.
of the total population, to abandon their
homes and villages.
But the most typical feature of the new
Latin America is that it is ceasing to be a
rural continent. All of it is changing into an
area where, within a few years, the peasants
will be a minority. Even in Central
America, where the rural population still
forms 60 per cent of the total, cities are
growing at an annual rate of more than 5
per cent. Uncontrolled urban growth is
leading to "ruralization" of the cities, and
capitalistic modernization of rural areas,
which is being effected without the creation
of jobs corresponding to the changes, ab¬
sorbs and destroys the marginal lands,
violently transforms the natural and social
environment, polarizes the rural population
by creating a small sector of permanent
workers and a large mass of casual workers
or emigrants.
On the other hand, the transnationaliza-
tion of agriculture and the agro-food in¬
dustry has transformed countries which
traditionally produced and even exported
basic foodstuffs into importers of these
products, thus increasing their level of
dependence on the metropolitan countries,
who are no longer satisfied to export capital
and manufactured goods, but also export
agricultural products. Naturally, the im¬
portation of foodstuffs at lower prices than
those of the home product (thanks, in many
cases, to favourable tariff or credit policies)
deals a harsh blow to the stability of the
poor or moderately well-off peasant.
Moreover, the importation of finished pro¬
ducts as well as changes in taste imposed by
advertising which is also transnational,
leads to the replacement of locally produc¬
ed foods, such as manioc, cassava or
barley, by others which have to be paid for
in hard currency.

The prices of rural produce are declining,
ownership of land, of the means of produc¬
tion, and access to credit are being concen¬
trated in the hands of a few, rural
unemployment is spreading, large numbers
of indigenous peasants are being transform¬
ed into casual labourers in the coffee or
banana fields or on plantations owned by
big landowners or transnational com¬
panies. All this is creating great discontent
in the rural sector throughout Latin
America, irrespective of its level of develop¬
ment, ethnic origin, or culture.
At the same time, the enforced urbaniza¬
tion of millions of people is dramatically in¬
troducing the problem of the rural areas in¬
to the cities and putting an end to the
separation and historical confrontation bet¬
ween urban and rural dwellers, because the
former can no longer ignore the rest of the
country and the latter, who are being
transformed into a minority, cannot solve
their problems in isolation from their
fellow-citizens. So that, breaking out of
their traditional isolation, the peasants are
coming to depend upon national institu¬
tions and organizations of urban origin
such as the Church, the trade unions, and
the political parties, and this introduces
new problems and new social and political
forces into rural life.
At the same time, the birth rate is tending
to decline, but the death rate is declining
more. Life expectancy is increasing. The
level of education is also greatly improved,
so that the majority of the population is
now literate and better informed, especially
through the development of oral means of
communication, such as radio and even
television, which now reach the most
remote corners of the countryside.
This new cultural level and new capacity
to form judgments. are combined with a
critical economic situation and render in¬
tolerable political situations which were
previously contemplated with fatalism or
resignation. Obviously, this demand for
participation and democracy clashes with
the "modernization" of agriculture, which
grants less and less importance to the rural
vote and even undermines the basis of rural
populism. The paradox of development in
Latin America lies in the fact that this
development is not identified simply with
economic growth and that the powerful
forces interested in maintaining the present
social structure are working hard for a
change in the economy which cannot fail to
have profound political and social con¬
sequences. We are witnessing the disap¬
pearance of the old rural world (which will
survive only in pockets for use by
"modern" agriculture or will change com¬
pletely) and the birth of a new Latin
America.
Guillermo Almeyra
Above, harvesting the potato crop in the Andean region of Venezuela.
Market Scene, by the Haitian artist Micius Stéphane.
Left, on the high plateau (altitude 3,300
metres) near the town of Quinua, in the
Ayacucho region of north central Peru,
peasants laboriously air their wheat by
hand to prevent fermentation.
Photo Maximihen Bruggmann © La Spirale, Yverdon, Switzerland
