What's new
in science teaching?
First organized by University College,
Cardiff (UK) in 1981, an experimental
competition for schools in which
drama is used as a vehicle for pre¬
senting, understanding and enjoying
science was so successful that it has
become an annual event. Each entry
is a presentation, devised and per¬
formed by children from junior, middle
or secondary schools, of an episode
from the history of science,
technology or engineering, a con¬
troversial issue related to the social
consequences of science and
technology, or the exposition of a
scientific concept. Right, pupils from
Bodringallt Junior School, Ystrad
Rhondda, South Wales, depict water
in a scene from their prize-winning
1982 dance-drama Metamorphosis
which illustrates the compatibility
between Darwinism and Christianity.
by Mircea Malitza
NEW developments in the exact and natural sciences
have little direct influence on the curriculum.
After all, the requirements of social life guide
education in general; the aims of education are to provide
the student with whatever he needs for active, intelligent
participation in life.
Mathematics thus becomes increasingly "mathematics
for all"; its aims concern the individual as well as society,
and increasingly affect our culture and civilization.
The reform of the curriculum is a specific process in¬
volving the developmental characteristics and educa¬
tional traditions of each country. It seems to be
reasonable to use a negative model indicating which sub¬
jects should not be taught since they are totally outdated
and useless. Such a list could only be drawn up by a large
panel of specialists.
Until now the objectives of mathematics teaching have
mainly been concerned with the logical and formal
aspects, helping the child to acquire the capacity for
rigorous thinking, free from logical contradictions. This
is insufficient; in mathematics as in other fields, educa¬
tion should not shrink from an effort to grasp meanings.
Progressive learning, in which the pupil is exposed to a
variety of situations in which the use of mathematics
becomes meaningful, should accompany the axiomatic
treatment.
Intellectual curiosity should be cultivated. Only in¬
quisitive, critical minds can go beyond the superficial
MIRCEA MALITZA, of Romania, is professor at the faculty of
mathematics of the University of Bucharest and a former minister of
education of his country. He has lectured on international affairs at
academic centres in Asia, Europe and the United States. He is the
author of books on education and mathematics, and co-author of the
report to the Club of Rome entitled No Limits to Learning.
Photo courtesy of University College, Cardiff, UK
aspects of mathematics. In this way creativity is also
developed; it cannot be encouraged by the deductive
presentation of a finite, consistent system.of theories. To
arouse students' interest it is necessary to point out the
origin of concepts so that they can discover by means of
exploratory investigations the notions that are to be learn¬
ed. This presupposes, along with a logical exposition, a
psychological one in which more attention must be paid
to historical developments.
A generally acknowledged objective of mathematics
teaching is the development of probabilistic as well as
deterministic thought. This process should be initiated in
the first elementary grades, especially since mathematics
is increasingly bound up with science in which a pro¬
babilistic approach is common, and notions related to
this approach are not beyond the understanding of
students.
A final objective concerns the development of the
capacity to perceive, and not only to solve, problems.
Along with the usual activities of solving problems and
proving theorems, students should also have experience
of solving their own problems and proving their own
theorems. This issue is related to creativity and
understanding, and is far too often overlooked.
Certain themes should not be neglected in mathematics
teaching. Some of them have already been included in
many syllabuses and include such subjects as probability,
'statistics, discrete mathematics and matrix theory. Others
will be included very soon, namely: courses in the con¬
struction of mathematical models; courses in scientific
organization; and subjects from computer science (infor¬
matics) such as algorithms, formal languages, elementary
numerical analysis, programming; elementary education
in systems science; and applications as an integral part of
mathematics teaching.
15

Psychologists point to the fact that intellectual maturi¬
ty depends largely on having the opportunity to par¬
ticipate in activities. Hence there is a need to devise ac¬
tivities which lead the child to personal discovery. Ac¬
tivities must be rooted in reality, permitting pupils to in¬
vestigate and examine the environment. They should be
encouraged to collect data for themselves and devise their
own problems. Mathematical applications can be en¬
visaged in real-life activities such as census-taking and
meteorological records.
The impact of new technological inventions should also
be considered from the point of view of participation.
Pushed to its extremes, the technicization of teaching
evokes images such as that of the student isolated in a
cubicle listening to a taped lesson or sitting in front of a
computer terminal pushing buttons marked "yes" or
"no", staring mesmerized before a visual-display
screen all of which are instances of non-participatory
learning. However, if used judiciously, technological aids
enable students to concentrate on problems and their
solutions instead of cumbersome computations. Com¬
puter simulations, for example, permit students to in¬
vestigate more variants of a problem situation.
In science teaching, it seems that the general orienta¬
tion is towards the creation of "accomplished", open-
minded individuals who are aware of the enormous
destructive potential of science. The future scientist
should be actively involved in society and be aware of his
responsibilities.
Almost all contemporary sciences use models as a
means of investigating both the physical and social
phenomena of the real world that surrounds them.
Models may be simulated on computers, and this opens
new perspectives in secondary education. Good pupils are
often disappointed when, after learning classical
mechanics and acquiring a personal outlook on the func¬
tioning of nature, they are told that they were wrong and
that the theory of relativity alone corresponds to reality.
This is a result of inadequate teaching methods that place
too much emphasis on the basic hypothesis of the
Newtonian model, and do not critically discuss the
possibility that it may not necessarily correspond to reali¬
ty. If we teach pupils to conceive physical theories as a
changing mass of facts, theorems and ideas, then we shall
come very close to the ideal of modern thinking.
Integrated education has been intensively debated.
Thus there are discussions on "global" curriculum in¬
tegration, the integration of theory and practice, the in¬
tegration of the natural sciences and the social sciences,
vertical and horizontal integration. A profusion of in¬
teresting works have recently appeared on this theme.
The distinctive characteristic of contemporary science
is undoubtedly the quantity of data. If science continues
to develop at the present rate, specialization will remain
one of the major characteristics of the scientist in the
coming decades. The difficulties of such a situation are
well-known: limitation to a narrow field of knowledge
can hinder the understanding of general phenomena. One
method of coping with this problem is to promote
research groups as opposed to the individual approach to
science.
The integration of mathematics with physics and
chemistry seems at first sight superfluous, since it is a
natural process. However, there is still plenty of room for
improvement, especially when the material is designed for
younger pupils.
Mathematical problems, which are often abstract,
could generally be presented by demonstrating their
16
relevance to physics, particularly as regards probability
theory, the notion of complex numbers, the concept of
limits, the introduction and utilization of differential
calculus, etc. These examples are designed to show that it
would be well worth while to focus mathematics teaching
on the application of mathematics to physical
phenomena.
Although the integration of physics with chemistry is
almost inevitable, the two are still often taught as if they
were separate subjects. The demand for flexible forms of
education calls for the use of a whole range of methods
borrowed from the classic type of education. Non-formal
education must be carefully planned to complement and
supplement formal education. The most often quoted
forms of free scientific activity that concern mathematics,
physics, chemistry and related subjects are "the following:
These two works by the French artist Edgar
Degas 11834-1917) have been used by Pro¬
fessor Istvan Hargittai of the Budapest
Academy of Sciences to illustrate the scientific
phenomenon of isomerism, the existence of
two or more substances that have identical
chemical compositions but different ar¬
rangements of their atoms. Textbooks explain¬
ing isomerism often give the examples of
molecules of a certain type which appear in two
different isomeric forms ("staggered" and
"eclipsed") depending on the disposition of
their atoms (inset in the Degas drawings).
Hargittai noted that in "End of an Arabesque"
(far right) the position of the dancer's arms and
legs recall the staggered form, while the
"Dancer Seated Lacing her Buskin" (right) is a
representation of the eclipsed form.
Special publications and reviews for pupils contain¬
ing series of problems or open situations to be work¬
ed out outside school;
Science clubs or societies the activities of which in¬
clude carrying out projects, designing and building
models of specific items of apparatus, conducting
surveys, collecting data and materials, ecological
investigations;
Competitions on various subjects and at various
levels. They should be a means of furthering learning
in a spirit of friendship;
Popular scientific centres or museums endowed with
scientific libraries and facilities for showing scientific
films;

In schools: organization of scientific exhibitions,
productions by pupils on scientific subjects to be
broadcast on closed-circuit radio;
Science fairs, youth science camps, excursions and
field trips, quizzes;
Distance teaching by correspondence, broadcast
courses on national radio and television, and
multimedia teaching systems supported by a wide
variety of audio-visual aids such as slides, tapes,
cassettes, records, open-circuit radio and television
broadcasting.
The teacher is and will continue to be the keystone of
the educative process. In spite of many attempts in several
countries to replace the teacher with monitoring devices
poses that more attention will be paid to the history
of science.
Teaching will include elements of "science ethics"
and "technology assessment" calling into play a
system of values and a normative approach, in con¬
trast to the positivism that has prevailed so far.
It will explore border areas where fields with dif¬
ferent axioms and methodologies meet. This will
amplify the trends towards the integration of the
sciences, which has important consequences for
teaching and teacher-training.
system of interdisciplinary work-teams and
modular education will develop further.
and self-testing systems for pupils, there is no chance that
the teacher/human being will be replaced by the
teacher/machine.
It seems that in the future the computer will be mainly
used for communication rather than for computer-
assisted teaching.
Teacher training is an important problem. The in-,
tegrated teaching of science presupposes quite important
changes in the higher education of future teachers.
In conclusion we should like to emphasize the
following:
Teaching of science will be done in a more "contex¬
tual" way, drawing attention to the problems solved
by science, in contrast to the axiomatic trends of
thought which have prevailed since the beginning of
the century, reaching a climax in the 1950s. This sup-
Computer modelling will have a strong influence on
science teaching; it will be practised in all scientific
disciplines and will result in a spread of numeric
calculus and simulated experiences.
Computers and telematics will shift the emphasis
from data, information and memory to process
modelling, algorithms and operations.
Scientific organization will thrive, based on decision,
systems and games theories and on organization
techniques.
As the immediate future will be dominated by intense
research into new energy sources and less energy-
consuming technologies, the curriculum will reflect
this preoccupation.
Mircea Malitza
17
