them".
I^EKHLIVANOV, Ilya
Bulgaria's first
language laboratory
Over the past five years, Bulgarian ar¬
chaeologists have brought to light rich
evidence of the intense literary activity
of the disciples of St. Cyril and St.
Methodius (brothers who in 863 in¬
vented the Cyrillic alphabet) after their
arrival in Bulgaria. In 1978, the re¬
mains of a monastery were found near
Ravna on the shores of the Black Sea
some 70 kilometres west of Varna. So
far 200 inscriptions and 600 rock carv¬
ings have been uncovered which have
given a great impetus to Slav
epigraphical studies.
What conclusions can now be drawn
from these discoveries? According to
the Bulgarian archaeologist Kazimir
Popkonstantinov, the monastery was
built during the second half of the ninth
century on a site of about 8,000 square
metres. A church, a 35-metre-long
scriptorium, living quarters and a bath¬
house have been uncovered. An in¬
scription indicates that the church was
built in 889. The monastery was
doubtless destroyed during the
Pecheneg invasion in the second half of
the eleventh century.
The limestone walls of the church
and the scriptorium are covered with
inscriptions and paintings. The inscrip¬
tions are in several different scripts, in¬
cluding Runic, Greek, Glagolitic and
Cyrillic, and some are inscribed in both
Greek and Old Bulgarian. They repre¬
sent the beginnings of the creation of a
medieval Bulgarian and Slav literature.
Notable among the drawings are
representations of horsemen and
shamans (pagan priests) as well as of
the "horse" and the "cross", symbols
Two ofthe 200 inscriptions carv¬
ed on stonework which have so
far been discovered during ex¬
cavations of a monastery (late 9th
century) near Ravna in Bulgaria.
The inscription below is in old
Bulgarian. The name of Pope
Clement I of Rome (88-97) can be
deciphered in the inscription
above, written in Greek and old
Bulgarian.
Photos© Karimif Popkonstantinov. Sofia
of the dramatic clash between
Paganism and Christianity in the
Balkans. There are also portrayals of a
few Christian saints, including St. Basil
and St. Alexis, as well as of the Aseen-
31

sion. There are also drawings of
various animals stags, goats, wolves
and hares.
Vignettes and engravings similar to
those that embellish the most ancient
manuscripts in Old Bulgarian are also
to be seen on the limestone walls, and
the characters used in the inscriptions
are identical in form and size to those
on the old parchments. Clearly, the
early Bulgarian scribes saw writing,
whether on stone, ceramics or parch¬
ment, as the prime means of furthering
their mission of instruction and
evangelization.
What evidence is there that the
disciples of St. Cyril and St. Methodius
worked in this particular monastery?



First, its location, a three-hour ride on
horseback from Pliska, the first capital
ofthe Bulgarian State, founded in 681,
and the seat of Prince Boris I (852-889).
Thus the monastery was a haven far
from the disturbing influence of both
the Byzantine clergy and the pagan
proto-Bulgars who opposed the desire
of Prince Boris to establish an indepen¬
dent Bulgarian Church whose mission
would be to propagate Christian doc¬
trine in the common language.
Furthermore, the name of Saint Cle¬
ment, who as Pope Clement I (88-97)
was the third successor of St. Peter in
Rome, is mentioned in one of the in¬
scriptions, and it was the brothers Cyril
and Methodius who revived veneration
for him as a Saint during the ninth
century.
Finally, the layout of the church of
Ravna is a faithful reproduction of that
of the church at PHska, the most im¬
portant architectural monument of this
period still preserved in the Balkans.
This was no accident; all the buildings
of the monastery were erected at the
same time as part of an ensemble to
which the State had devoted very con¬
siderable resources with the aim of
creating a religious and cultural centre
of the highest importance.
In August 1982, a number of experts
on ancient Slav culture from eight
countries attended a Symposium on
medieval Bulgar literature and
language, the most recent in a series of
meetings organized every two years by
the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences and
the Clement Ohrid University of Sofia.
The participants visited the Ravna site
and their examination of the recent
finds gave rise to keen debate and
discussion.
Frederick Kortland, of the Universi¬
ty of Leyden, in the Netherlands,
summed up the opinions of the experts
when he declared that: "The ar¬
chaeological finds at Ravna may well
cause us to revise and reconsider our
views on ancient Slav history."
32
I
¿^i^tÇjHr^l^;^^:^^
P The h
