KARL MARX (1818-1883)
Above left, the last photo of Karl Marx (1818-1883). It was taken in Algeria
which he visited in 1882. His health was broken by the recent death of his
wife Jenny von Westphalen, above right, whom he had married in 1843.
Time is the field of human development.
Karl Marx
Many mansions
by Georges Labica
THE centenary of the death of Karl Marx, in London on
March 14, 1883, is being commemorated by an un¬
precedented number of ceremonies in almost every
country in the world. And at a time when, amid unabated sound
and fury people everywhere are making assessments of what
Henri Lefebvre called "a body of thought become a world", it
is perhaps opportune to point out that the works of this man.
GEORGES LABICA, French university teacher, is professor of
philosophy at the University of Paris X Nanterre. He has published some
20 studies on Marx and Marxism, notably Le Marxisme d'Aujourd'hui
(P.U.F., Paris, 1973) and Sur le Statut Marxiste de la Philosophie (Com-
plexe/P.U.F., Brussels/Paris, 1976). He organized an international sym¬
posium on "The work of Marx, a century later" which was held, under
the auspices of the French National Centre of Scientific Research, in
Paris in March 1983.
who wished to claim no country as his own, have not yet
revealed all their mysteries nor spoken their last word.
It is true that his was a singular destiny, a true adventure
story whose climactic moments punctuated the history of his
time, itself full of contradictions.
First of all, Marx published comparatively little during his
lifetime. After submitting his doctoral thesis in philosophy on
The Difference Between the Natural Philosophies of
Democritus and Epicurus, in 1 840, at the age of twenty-two,
he devoted himself to journalism, but his activities were cut
short by the Prussian censors. In 1 844, his two studies On the
Jewish Question and Toward a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy
of Right appeared in the first and only edition of the German-
French Yearbooks. In 1847, The Poverty of Philosophy, a
riposte to the French socialist thinker Pierre-Joseph Proudhon's
The Philosophy of Poverty, was published, and between 1848
18

Photos © Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels Museum, Moscow
and 1863, interspersed in a mass of articles, appeared Wage,
Labour and Capital (1849), The Class Struggles in France
( 1 850), The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte ( 1 852), A
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859) and
Herr Vogt (1860). For the International Working Men's
Association (The First International) Marx prepared the Address
and the Provisional Rules of the International Working Men's
Association (1 864) and the Programme for the First Congress
(1866), as well as The French Civil War (1871) in which he
made an analysis of the Paris Commune. The first volume of
Das Kapital appeared in 1 867 and was followed by the prepara¬
tion of various prefaces to the second edition of The Com¬
munist Manifesto (1872) and to the second German edition of
Das Kapital (1873), of the French translation of Das Kapital
(1 875), of the theoretical introduction to the programme of the
French Workers' Party (1 880) and, finally, of the preface to the
second Russian edition of The Communist Manifesto (1882).
This lithograph dating
from 1836 shows
students from Trier, Karl
Marx's birthplace, at the
University of Bonn. Marx,
fourth from the right, had
been elected president of
the Trier students'associa-
tion. Drawing of Marx by
H. Bach, left, was inspired
by the lithograph.
19

In collaboration, primarily with Friedrich Engels, whose,
writings are indissociably linked with his, Marx published The
Holy Family ( 1 844), the Circular Against War (1855), The Com¬
munist Manifesto (1 848) and a chapter of Anti-Dühring (1 877).
To these should be added a vast Correspondence (13 volumes
in the German edition, 1 5 in the French edition now being
published), little of which was made public at the time.
In fact, many of Marx's writings were not known until after,
in some cases long after, his death. The full story of the
upheavals, both theoretical and practical, these unknown
writings were to cause has yet to be written. To cite just a few
examples, the second and third volumes of Das Kapital were
published in 1885 and 1894 respectively, thanks to a mam¬
moth effort of editing by Engels; the Theories of Surplus Value,
three volumes written between 1861 and 1863 and which
together make up the fourth volume of Das Kapital, were
published between 1905 and 1910 after editing by Karl Kaut-
sky who succeeded Engels as Marx's literary executor; the Fun¬
damentals of Political Economy, the vast manuscript dating
from 1857-1858, was not published until 1939-1941.
Moreover, hitherto unpublished texts continue to appear; the
mathematical manuscripts of Das Kapital still await scientific
capitalist production system and social, political and ideological
relationships as being some kind of natural fatality.
The third is Leninism, whose definition gave rise, quite in¬
dependently of the will of its eponym, to heated debates which
foreshadowed the revolution that came in the era of imperialism
in the "weak link" of Tsarist Russia. Stalinism was another, the
most widespread and the most enduring.
This is to say nothing of the other Marxisms, official, semi of¬
ficial or underground that, with little reference to the opinions
of those concerned, have adopted the names of Rosa Luxem¬
burg, Leon Trotsky, Nikolai Bukharin or Antonio Gramsci, and
to evoke only the leading voices of a choir whose ever increas¬
ing numbers, before our very eyes, are even now ceaselessly
producing and thus reproducing the fecundity of the works of
Marx.
Furthermore, Marxism, whether that of its originator or that
of his interpreters and it is exceedingly difficult to make the
distinction is also, indeed perhaps mainly, the record of its
grafts, or of its "fusion" as Lenin used to call it, with the
workers' movement within the context of each nation. Thus
there is, as it were, a problem of translation, in every sense of
the word. What is received? When? How? And from whom?
©
.... -
.^T *-y-~ yk ¿J*.;_ii«S^=- ^5=r:-^ ....v>'?v-sy^i; ~
-r*-wC"^ TP iiJTi* tfr Jg£v*- M* .-w ¿àS^Sîar
ft* *ÎSÊ5 "
The outlines of Marx's
new vision of the world
and the theories and
programmes which he
would spend the rest of
his life elaborating
begin to appear in the
Economic and Philo¬
sophic Manuscripts of
1844 which he wrote in
Paris. Left, a page from
the Manuscripts.
editing and publication and the complete works, the new Marx-
Engels Gesamtausgabe, will not be published in full until about
the year 2000.
What conclusion can be drawn from this? This stirring body
of writings, still vital, like so many revolutionary rockets to
use the words Marx himself .employed in Das Kapital has
disturbed and will continue to disturb our century, despite the
derisory litanies of those who continually declare that "Marx is
dead".
But more than this, the singular destiny of this body of
writings was made even more remarkable by being inextricably
linked with the history of the international workers' movement;
it is to this history that it owes its constitution as a "corpus",
a language claiming universality, in a word, as Marxism(s).
New, criss-crossing roads to Compostella, whose story is slow¬
ly being pieced together again, found here their beginnings. "In
my Father's house are many mansions..."
Let us identify some of them, using the names that they have
given themselves, sometimes unwillingly, for fear of being
relegated to minor status. The first is the word "Marxism"
itself, which Marx and Engels, who found himself reluctantly
obliged to employ it, both mistrusted, sensing in it the odour of
dogma and of magister dixit. The second is the so-called (and
well-called) "Marxism of the Second International" which
owes so much to Karl Kautsky, an economism which saw the
20
And in what political, economic, cultural and ideological cir¬
cumstances? Under what weight of tradition, thought and
practice? In the heat of revolution or in the cold, calm setting
of established institutions? Some simple examples Guesde
and Thorez "Frenchified" Marxism, Labriola and Togliatti
"Italianized" it and Mao Ze-Dong gave it a "Chinese accent",
just as Lenin and Stalin "Russianized" it. What does this mean
if not that the universal everywhere encounters indefeasible
specificities to which it must adjust?
But how? In dogmas, formulae, models, or in the handling of
concrete situations? And by means of what adaptations? Is it
not important in this regard to know how Das Kapital was com¬
prehended in Egypt or in Greece, or how The Communist
Manifesto penetrated Turkey or Colombia? How was
"socialism" translated into Arabic or the dialectic adapted in
China? Although we are aware of how Marx came to be known
in Russia, from populism to the founding of social-democracy,
can we claim to be equally knowledgeable about events in
Belgium or Australia? Was the date of the invention of the term
Marxism-Leninism entirely fortuitous? And what about the in¬
ception of the principle of juche [autonomy or identity] in
Pyongyang is it not just as interesting as the coming of
Austro-Marxism or Eurocommunism? Why did the French and
Spanish communist parties give up the concept of the dictator¬
ship of the proletariat?
Do they not all claim to be Marxist?

The task of finding the answers to these questions, minor and
academic though they may appear, is nevertheless necessary
to a proper assessment of our era. This work is already in hand
and a great deal is at stake, dealing as it does with a century of
class struggle in which Marx, in reading Hegel, saw the beginn¬
ings of a new life for humanity, and, more precisely, the ad¬
vance from pre-history to history, to the consciously-decided
ordering of social relationships.
But this is by no means all, since the chronological disarray
in which Marx's works became known raises other questions.
The first concerns the way in which they are read and the
reconstitution of a chain whose links have been scattered. In
other words, if we want to be able to understand the evolution
of Marx's thought, it is essential to place in the order in which
they were written works such as On the Jewish Question,
Toward a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, The Holy
Family, the Theses on Feuerbach, the Circular Against War,
The Poverty of Philosophy and The Communist Manifesto. It is
also important to put back in their proper place in this progres¬
sion, as Marx himself suggested in one of the rare texts in
which he speaks of his own evolution, not only the important
letters he wrote to his father (1837), to Arnold Ruge
(1842-1843), to Feuerbach (1843) and to Pavel Annenkov
The philosophers have only interpreted the world;
the point is to change it.
Karl Marx
(1846), and articles such as those on Communism and the
Rheinische Zeitung (1 842), on the winegrowers of the Moselle
(1843), against Heinzen and Lamartine (1847), and the so-
called Notebooks of Bonn (1842), of Paris (1844), of Brussels
and Manchester (1845), but also the writings of Friedrich
Engels which Marx himself declared to be indissociable from his
own: first of all their Correspondence, the letters of Engels to
the Gräber brothers (1839), Frederick William IV (1842), the
Progress of Reform on the Continent (1843), the Letters from
London (1843), Outline of a Critique of Political Economy
(1844) and The Condition of the Working Class in England
(1845), the two latter being works to which Marx constantly
stressed his indebtedness. As for A Contribution to the Critique
of Political Economy, how can it be excluded from any study of
the research carried out by Marx starting from the period
1857-1858 and continuing up to the unfinished chapter on
Classes with which the third volume of Das Kapital concludes?
In recent years we have seen what animated discussions, not
only academic but also political, could arise from comparisons
between the Fundamentals of the Critique of Political Economy
and Das Kapital, and the polemics concerning Theories of
Surplus Value and the Unpublished Chapter.
And here we must ask another blunt question: have Marx's
writings really been read?
A further question also arises, to which reference has been
made above, concerning the widely differing ways in which the
works of Marx have been received. In the historical fate of his
works, that is to say, in the successive or even rival ways in
which they have been appropriated, there is a precise reflection
of their chronological avatars. Is it not possible to climb into any
carriage of this moving train and observe, jostling, confronting,
even excommunicating each other, so many different forms of
Marxism that they end by mixing up the labels with which we
try to distinguish them "University", "militant", "national"
of "X" and "Y"? Each one is a revision, but of what dogma,
of what law, of what doctrine?
From all this there is something new to learn. May not Marx
be unknown? And is it not precisely the function of the various
Marxisms, if only in self-defence, to maintain indefinitely this
ignorance of Marx by a continual process of covering up? Does
not the response to the cry of "betrayal", heard from every
quarter, demand a "return to Marx", just as there have been
demands for a "return to Kant", or, with Nietzsche, a call to go
"back to the Greeks"? But the quest for a return to a lost purity,
apart from the fact that it is always illusory or naive, can be
seen in this case to be an anachronism in direct contradiction
with its purpose, that is to say, with Marxism as a theory of
history, since the theory in question strictly forbids the leaving
aside of this history, of its history.
The last century provided a resounding proof of this: Marx¬
ism, the thinking or type of thinking originating with Marx, has
entered the public domain. This means, above all, that it has no
proprietor or authorized interpreter. Its terrain is our era in
which all languages are spoken. Marxism has become public
property was not that its vocation? And, in the end, is not this
the mark of its success? Is not the life of a work indissociable
from its effects, even those it did not seek?
Some decades ago Ernst Bloch suggested that in Marxism
could be distinguished, as it were, two mixed streams of water,
one "cold" and the other "hot". The "cold" stream cor¬
responds to the diagnosis of capitalist production relationships,
a task it is more than ever necessary to pursue. To the "hot"
stream belongs "the powerful recourse to man humiliated,
enslaved, neglected, vilified, and thus the recourse to the pro¬
letariat, seen as the setting of the upheaval that will lead to
emancipation". On the one hand well-founded knowledge and
its essential concepts, and on the other the "New", the
"Hope", the "Utopia" so dear to Bloch. The guerillas of central
America have certainly not read Das Kapital. Nonetheless they
bear witness to that fire that is always in movement and which
catches hold where least expected, to these uncodified Marx¬
isms that are erecting the Tower of Babel of our times, rejecting
our semantics, in Africa, in Asia, in Latin America, everywhere,
even among the well fed, everywhere that men and women
continue to suffer whether in their bellies, their heads or their
hearts. Did not the young Marx believe that philosophies, like
mushrooms, were the fruit of their time? Did he not affirm that
ideas, taken up by the masses, could become a material force?
A hundred years later, this final lesson remains with us.
Georges Labica
^¿j22^L^dlLmJ^
/7"\ ¿i^tc c/fh^j?t ^A^sJu
t
t E
^-vw«rl-«-Vv_
Telegram announcing the news of Marx's death was sent by Engels to F.A. Sorge,
a German worker who had emigrated .o the USA.
21
