Drawing © Gate-Pans for Pier N° 1
Project for a floating village of barges on the New York waterfront.



Barges ahoy!
WITH the growth of awareness over the past decade of
the need to husband finite energy resources, there
has been a renewal of interest in rivers and water¬
ways as an economical and reliable, if not the most rapid,
means of transportation. Locks and waterways have been
adapted and improved so as to be able to handle very large
barges and storage facilities at riverside ports have been enlarg¬
ed. One side effect of this has been that a number of the older
smaller barges, though still riverworthy, are lying unused
because they are no longer economic to run.
However, the construction and technical characteristics of
these traditional barges make them easy to convert to a wide
range of other purposes. "Pier No. 1", a Paris-based associa¬
tion formed to develop programmes for the conversion and re-
utilization of these barges, is now bringing its research to
fruition.
The Rhine
It was the voice of the noblest of rivers,
The voice of the free-born Rhine;
To other fields hope guided him, when, high up there,
He bade his kin the Tessin and the Rhone farewell;
Drunk with the taste of travel, eager to depart,
His regal soul to Asia drew him on.
Friedrich Hölderlin
Prompted by Pier No. 1, the New York municipal authorities
are studying a project for the creation of a "village" of tradi¬
tional barges (see drawing), an ensemble of dwellings, craft
workshops, cafés, shops, and so on. This operation, which is
destined to last for seven years, is aimed at bringing new life
to New York's waterfront. The speed with which the village
could be assembled and its low capital and maintenance costs
offer a rapid answer to the municipal authorities' needs.
Flat-bottomed, forty metres long, five metres wide and four
metres high, the traditional barge, dating from the beginning of
the century, has all the characteristics necessary for adaptation
to multiple uses. The living-quarters, narrow, functional cabins,
are situated aft, separated from the hold by the propulsion unit
which usually runs on diesel, although gas, petrol or coal-fired
engines may be used. Unaffected by the corrosion that plagues
marine engines, these units also provide power for other equip¬
ment aboard such as lighting and ventilation.
The hold offers a large space easily convertible to any use.
Transformed into an audio-visual viewing room, for example, it
could comfortably seat eight people. Similarly, if converted for
tourist travel, it could house ten cabins approximately the size
of a railway sleeping-compartment.
Studies being undertaken for the Government of Colombia
show that the hold of a barge converted to hospital purposes
could house some thirty beds, whilst the bridge could be used
as a reception and outpatient treatment area. Several of these
more or less permanently-moored, floating hospital wards
could be serviced by a small number of more mobile barges
equipped as operating theatres or analytical laboratories on
which major surgical operations or medical investigations could
be carried out.
This flexible type of organization has much to recommend it,
particularly in developing countries where patients often have
to make long and arduous journeys to reach the nearest land-
based hospital. Mobile riverborne medical units would make it
easier to maintain closer contact with larger and often widely
dispersed populations and would avoid the much heavier cost
of land-based medical centres.
Suitably adapted barges could also help to change the tradi¬
tional relationship between tourists and tourist centres.
Holidaymakers would no longer be obliged to crowd into
seaside or country resorts causing seasonal strain on local
facilities, encouraging unsightly, unplanned urban develop¬
ment and despoiling beauty spots with their litter.
Large numbers of barges of traditional type are now available
on the market. Their rational adaptation and re-use could effec¬
tively meet a variety of housing, medical, cultural, communica¬
tion and leisure needs, at minimum cost while respecting the
human and natural environment. _ . , M
m Benoit Delafon
15
