D
EMOCRACY is destined to
last long in India," ex¬
claimed a Delhi-based
foreign educationalist-turned-journa¬
list after watching the performance of
prize-winning Youth Parliament com¬
petition students from a higher secon¬
dary school take part in a contest
recently organized in New Delhi.
If democracy is to be a complete suc¬
cess as a participatory system,
democratic principles and norms must
permeate into every walk of a nation's
life. To ensure this, all sections of
society, especially young people, must
be adequately acquainted with the
functioning of the Parliament and other
legislative bodies.
With this as their prime objective,
the Central Department of Parliamen¬
tary Affairs and the education direc¬
torate of the Delhi Administration co-
sponsored in 1966-67 a unique
scheme whereby annual Youth Parlia¬
ment Competitions would be held
among the students of sixteen higher
secondary schools for boys and girls in
the Union Territory of Delhi. The
scheme had its origin in one of the
recommendations adopted by the All-
India Whips' Conference held in Bom¬
bay in 1962. The Conference desired
that the Government "should en¬
courage the holding of youth (mock)
Parliaments in educational institutions
and through Panchayats (village coun¬
cils) in the rural areas." This recom¬
mendation was reiterated by all the
successive All India Whips' Con¬
ferences. The seventh All India Whips'
Conference held at Madras in 1969
recommended that in view of the suc¬
cess of the Youth Parliament Scheme
in Delhi schools, the wide appreciation
it had received from leading Parliamen-
AMAR NATH RAI is an Indian journalist cur¬
rently working with the Government of India
Press Information Bureau. He has published
two books and over 200 of his articles on a
wide range of subjects have appeared in In¬
dian newspapers and periodicals.
18

Sowing the seeds
of democracy
India's youth parliament competition
by Amar Nath Rai
tarians, the press and educationalists,
all the States and Union Territories
should take steps to implement the
scheme with a view to building future
Parliamentarians.
The scheme aims at strengthening
the roots of democracy by inculcating
the spirit of discipline, decorum and
tolerance for the views of opponents
so necessary in a democratic society,
forming character, and acquainting the
younger generation with the practices
and procedures of the Parliament of
general concern such as social justice
and reforms, economic development,
communal harmony, the cultural heri¬
tage, national integration, student
discipline, international understanding,
human rights and peace.
Officers of the Department of
Parliamentary Affairs visit each par¬
ticipating school and witness the
Youth Parliament Competition, offer¬
ing on-the-spot guidance and sugges¬
tions. They also maintain contact with
the zonal education officers, other
gress. Within sixteen years of its in¬
auguration over 700 schools have par¬
ticipated and about 3,500 students
have received prizes and certificates
for excellence. A notable feature of the
prize-winning pattern is that the
number of girl students winning
awards has been proportionately
higher than that of boys.
The scheme has become very
popular not only in the Union Territory
of Delhi but further afield. The States
of Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh,
Union Territories (Chandigarh and
Arunachal Pradesh) have started orga¬
nizing the competition while other
States have agreed to implement the
scheme soon. There is also a proposal
under active consideration by the Cen¬
tral Government to introduce the Youth
Parliament Competition scheme Into
the training programmes of the Central
Board for Workers' Education.
The Department of Parliamentary
Affairs provides the States with the.
necessary training and encouragement
when introducing the scheme, con¬
ducts orientation courses for the com¬
petition organizers, and offers financial
assistance. To popularize the scheme
the country so that they grow into
well-informed citizens and, above all,
well disciplined parliamentarians of
tomorrow.
The working of Youth Parliaments
broadly follows the pattern of working
of the Lok Sabha (House of Com¬
mons). The students selected to par¬
ticipate in the Youth Parliament com¬
petition and the teachers in charge of
this activity acquaint themselves with
the functioning of the Parliament by
witnessing its proceedings during a
Session and learning about the ar¬
rangements made for the members.
The layout of a school Youth Parlia¬
ment is arranged to resemble as close¬
ly as possible that of the chamber of
the Lok Sabha. Though no particular
subjects have been prescribed, it is
desirable that matters raised in the
Youth Parliament relate to areas of
education officials and members of
Parliament, who constitute a panel of
judges who select the prize-winners.
The Department of Parliamentary Af¬
fairs awards four prizes to the best four
students, and the school also awards
prizes to meritorious students. When
assessing performance, the committee
of judges keeps the following points
in mind: discipline anddecorum (10
marks), observance of Parliamentary
procedures (20 marks), selection of
subjects for questions, for supplemen¬
täres and quality of answers thereto
(20 marks), selection of subjects for
debate (10 marks), delivery or quality
of speeches delivered, standard of
debates (30 marks) and general
assessment .of the performance as a
whole (10 marks).
The Youth Parliament Competition
scheme has made remarkable pro-
The Minister of Works and Hous¬
ing (left) answers a tricky ques¬
tion from the opposition front
bench (right). The "parliamen¬
tarians" in our photos, pupils of a
higher secondary school in India,
are taking part in the Youth
Parliament Competition, an im¬
aginative scheme aimed at
familiarizing the younger genera¬
tion with parliamentary practices
and procedures and inculcating
the spirit of democratic debate.
Over 700 schools have taken
part in the competition since its
inauguration 16 years ago and
some 3,500 students have
received prizes and certificates
of excellence, with a propor¬
tionately higher number of girls
than boys winning awards.
among students and the general
public, the Department of Parliamen¬
tary Affairs, the Government of India
and the Film Division of the Union In¬
formation and Broadcasting Ministry
have jointly produced a colour
documentary on the Youth Parliament
which should soon be released for ex¬
hibition throughout the country and
even abroad.
Though the results of the scheme
have not yet been rigorously
evaluated, its impact among young
people can be measured by its growing
popularity. Legislators, journalists and
educators who have seen the contests
take place have been highly impressed
and believe that a nation-building ac¬
tivity of this kind can transform the
social and political Parliamentary in¬
stitutions of the country.
19
