VIII. Principles,
methods
and strategies
of action
for development
THE industrialized nations have enjoyed unprecedented
economic growth during several decades, but have not
always succeeded in finding a satisfactory answer to the
question of the equitable distribution of income, nor to that
arising from the crisis of values that sometimes accompanies
rapid change. In some of them, poverty continues to prevail
among different strata of the population, and the decline in the
sense of civic and moral responsibility seriously affects certain
sectors of the population, particularly the young. New
economic and social difficulties are emerging as a result of the
recession and the combined effects of inflation and
unemployment.
While the revival of economic growth appears essential for
overcoming the crisis some of them are undergoing, differences
emerge with regard to the policies that should be adopted.
Far-reaching questions are being asked as to the aim of
growth, the consequences that it can have on the natural envi-
19

ronment and on human welfare. Furthermore, while the in¬
dustrial and sometimes even the agricultural potential of several
industrialized countries remain virtually underemployed, the
unsatisfied needs of the developing countries are still enormous.
This brings us to an issue that is at once economic, social and
political, but also ethical: that of the coexistence in the same
world of areas of poverty and even destitution with areas where,
conversely, it is over-abundance that poses the problem.
The need for global action
Although it has not been possible to make any decisive pro¬
gress in international economic co-operation, the international
community does seem to have become convinced that the in¬
creasingly worldwide nature of production, of economic and
financial flows and of exchanges of information henceforth
renders unilateral solutions based on a partial analysis of the
problems totally ineffective, and that only global, integrated ac¬
tion that takes into account the interests of all peoples and na¬
tions can bear any fruit. A global situation founded on competi¬
tion perpetuates a line of reasoning whereby everyone thinks he
can solve his own crisis by exporting it to someone else. This
produces situations where there are serious shortages in some
countries, while in others the means of production are either not
used to full capacity or else only used as a source of profit, even
if they run counter to the collective interests of humanity, as is
the case with the armaments industry.
Beyond a mechanistic view of growth
For a long time it was thought that development could be
reduced to its economic aspect only, and consequently all the
other sectors of human activity had to be subordinated to the
needs of economic growth.
In practice one should rise above such reductionist ap¬
proaches. Only by progressively wider integration of policies
relating to each sector of human activity social, economic,
technical and cultural would it be possible to create a motive
force of social creativity capable of harnessing science and
technology to the interests of communities, thus meeting the
aspirations of their populations.
It is therefore important that cultural dimensions be duly
taken into account in any enterprise relating to development. A
feeling for the continuity and vitality of cultural values is essen¬
tial. These values should be viewed in the light of the oppor¬
tunities they offer for development, a development that, in its
style and its rhythm, incorporates the heritages of the past and
the desire for change in such a way that the requisite changes en¬
joy the widest possible measure of popular support. One of the
principal methods of obtaining this general support is participa¬
tion by the people at large in the choices made on behalf of the
community to which they belong, with regard to the objectives
to be attained as well as the action to be undertaken and the con¬
cessions to be made in return.
Special attention will be paid to analysis of the significance
and ultimate aims of development in different cultural contexts
and to the study of the forms of action likely to foster participa-
,' tion by the people at large in defining development objectives.
Autonomy and self-reliance
It is particularly important to clarify the links between
development and international relations in order to bring out,
from the standpoint of the development of countries, the
positive factors inherent in international relations as well as the
constraints they entail. The studies to be undertaken along these
lines could focus, among other things, on: the relations between
peace, disarmament and development; the structural factors
responsible for the phenomena of domination and dependence;
the effects of the activities of transnational companies; the con-
Fashioned some 3,000 years ago, this 23 cm-high bronze
model of a mannikin atop a ladder was recovered from a
burial site in the Amlash district near Lahijan in northern Iran.
Today Unesco is helping Member States to construct a lad¬
der of international solidarity that will enable the under¬
privileged nations of the world to reach a level of develop¬
ment at which they will be able to achieve their deepest
material and spiritual aspirations.
20
ditions for the establishment of a new international economic
order and their impact in Unesco's fields of competence. We
need to study in greater depth the conditions that might enable
the developing countries to strengthen the bases for collective
self-reliance and development while stressing the socio-cultural
aspects of regional and subregional integration. The situation
of the so-called least developed countries should be given special
attention, as also should studies or action relating to strategies
for reducing the isolation of some of these countries.
As for the relations between population factors and develop¬
ment, they should undoubtedly be studied not only from the
historical and geographic standpoint but also in the light of
social, economic and cultural conditions.
It goes without saying that studies on development processes
should be conducted in different geographical settings in order
to bring out the specific nature of various experiences of
development resulting from the diversity of historical and
cultural contexts in which they take place.
