XIII. Peace,
international understanding,
human rights
and the rights of peoples
THE arms race is a major threat to peace, and constitutes
an enormous waste of human and material resources: a
million dollars are spent every minute on arms and
some 500,000 scientists are currently engaged in military
research throughout the world.
The arms race gives structure to systems of alliances and
perpetuates relationships of domination. The States which sell
arms also derive substantial economic benefits in that their
defence systems cost them less thanks to their large-scale arms
production. These States refine their technologies through the
intermediary of the "laboratories" provided by battlefields.
Peace is incompatible with malnutrition, extreme poverty
and the refusal of the rights of peoples to self-determination.
Disregard for the rights of individuals and peoples, the per¬
sistence of inequitable international economic structures, in
terference in the internal affairs of other States, foreign occupa¬
tion and apartheid are always real or potential sources of armed
conflict and international crisis. The only lasting peace is a just
peace based on respect for human rights. But it must be
recognized that human rights and the rights of peoples are con¬
tinually being violated. The worst of all the typical forms of
violation of human rights is torture; its very widespread practice
is a flagrant repudiation of human dignity.
Effective respect for human rights is one of the basic concerns
of Unesco, which attaches great importance to the connexion
between the rights of the individual and the rights of peoples.
Respect for the dignity of the human person is inseparable from
respect for the freedom of peoples and respect for the equality
of the rights of nations. While it is essential that the individuals
and groups concerned should be able to become aware of all
their rights and to exercise them effectively, the State must also
In search of peace
Article I of Unesco's Constitution
proclaims that "the purpose of the
Organization is to contribute to
peace and security by promoting col¬
laboration among the nations
through education, science and
culture...".. Accordingly Unesco is
doing all in its power "to bring about
a gradual change in mental attitudes
so that more thought is given to the
pursuit of peace" (Amadou-Mahtar
M'Bow). Recent Unesco activities in
this field include: a World Congress
on Disarmament Education (Paris,
1980); regional training seminars for
university teachers in the field of
disarmament (Caracas 1981,
Djarkarta 1982); studies on the
social, economic and cultural effects
of the arms race; publications in¬
cluding a reader on armaments, arms
control and disarmament (1981),
handbooks, and a series of works on
"New Challenges to International
Law".
Drawing André Pans Photo © André Paris,
Fontenouille, France

assume the great responsibilities which fall to it to guarantee the
exercise of individual rights, whether civil and political or
economic, social and cultural.
To express the idea of a "right to peace" for nations, peoples
and individuals, is to evoke not only a basic requirement of sur¬
vival and security, but also the legitimate aspiration of any na¬
tional community to participate fully and freely on equal terms
in the concert of nations and the building of a more satisfactory
world order.
Lastly, the recognition of the right of each people to the
preservation and full development of its personality and to a
determination of its future has contributed to a unanimous
awareness of the vital importance of the cultural dimensions of
the collective identity. The right of the individual to free access
and unhindered participation in the culture of his choice cannot
be called in question. However, the idea has taken root that the
right of peoples to the preservation, assertion and development
of their own culture, considered as a living and developing
culture, occupies an important place in the list of human rights
and the conditions necessary for peace.
From this standpoint, three plans may be distinguished: for
research and study in the field of social sciences and philosophy;
for standard-setting; and for education and information.
Whether the issue is human rights or peace, the emphasis
should be on reflection and research in a global and historical
perspective, bringing out, in particular, the role that education,
science, culture and communication can play or have played in
the past. It is for philosophical reflection to shed light on the
relationship between different systems of values and the exigen¬
cies of peace and of respect for human rights.
Ignorance concerning human rights is still widespread. By
virtue of its vocation, Unesco should pursue its educational mis¬
sion in this area with ever-increasing vigour. In addition, the
media should be encouraged to balance their presentation of the
results of research carried out in this field in different parts of
the world, so as to promote access to knowledge concerning
peace and human rights in a spirit of international
understanding.
The promotion of peace and international understanding, the
attainment of freedom by peoples and the realization of human
rights are the tasks of a strategy which must be devised as a
coherent whole, for the objectives to be pursued are interdepen¬
dent and mutually complementary. The struggle for peace and
human rights must be waged at all levels and in response to the
challenges of all specific situations.



HUMAN RIGHTS
SOME LINES OF UNESCO ACTION
.¿ViO' 4° <*
*° v> &