^HARAUDEAU, Patrick
The culture shock of
language learning
Until the beginning of this century,
foreign languages were taught like dead
languages such as Latin. On the one
hand there was the vocabulary, on the
other the grammar, two quite separate
fields of study. Translation was the
main teaching method.
This so-called traditional conception
was criticized and replaced here and
there, by the audio-oral method in the
United States and by the direct method
in Europe. These methods enjoyed a
certain success in the years after World
War II and marked the first departure
of modern-language teaching methods
from those of teaching dead languages.
They were based on the principle of
treating a foreign language from the
oral point of view, of encouraging the
pupil to speak (through question and
answer), and of bringing him into con¬
tact with the everyday environment
(learning how to name things).
In the 1960s and 1970s audio-visual
methods appeared in Europe in the
wake of structural linguistics, which
were then winning acceptance in
university teaching. These methods
were based on a structural-global
methodology originating in research in¬
to the basic foundations of the
language (Basic English, Français fon¬
damental). Their aim was to present a
language in the act of communication,
through simulated dialogues accom¬
panied by situations depicted in im¬
ages. Systematized exercises were used
to enable the learner to acquire the
basic structures of the language before
going on to dramatizations in class to
teach the learner how to use his
knowledge in different situations.
However, in the 1970s audio-visual
methods also came under fire. In
linguistics the success of the concept of
enunciation was dethroning the idea of
language as an object of study.
Language was no longer considered as
an absolute, disembodied entity but as
an act of communication linked to the
speaker's situation as a producer in
society. The notion of linguistic com¬
petence was replaced by that of com¬
municative competence. A new
hypothesis appeared: the learner's
motivation to learn a foreign language
may be related to the extent to which
the language is taught in a way cor¬
responding to his needs. For example,
the specialist may only learn what
relates to his own speciality (teaching
with specific objectives). As this notion
28

Photo Villeneuve © Rapho, Pans
"... Perhaps the most important development In the teaching of foreign languages
Is a new awareness ofthe intercullural Issues involved, "Above, lecture hall at the
Sorbonne, Paris,
This curious little character (90
centimetres tall) Is a robot endo w-
ed with artificial intelligence. His
name is BOB (Brain on board)
andhewas "born" afew months
ago in the United States. Thanks
to his sophisticated "brain" and
his capacious memory of 3
million octets, he decides where
he wants to go next, what he
wants to say and who he wants to
say ¡t to. Among his other ac¬
complishments, he can teach
foreign languages. And when his
energy starts to give out he goes
off to recharge his batteries at the
nearest electricity plug.
of need has broadened, a "universaliz¬
ing" attitude has disappeared from
language teaching and been replaced by
an attitude towards a given learner and
his needs. Thus began the era which
still exists of the functional and the
communicative.
Today, on the eve of the 21st cen¬
tury, there is a realization that not one
but several issues are involved in
language teaching. There is the scien¬
tific, interdisciplinary issue a refusal
to submit to the imperialism of
Photo © Androbot. Sciences et Avenir.Patts
linguistics and a belief that, in the
human sciences, modern thought can
no longer be divided into watertight
compartments. It is already apparent
that certain attempts to create common
ground for interdisciplinary reflection
lead to démystification which is
beneficial to science and education.
There is a new social situation owing
to the growth of the school population
and the number of people requiring
training; its main characteristic is a
change in the symbolic social function
of education. The institutional
character of education is no longer the
same, and differs from one cultural
context to another.
In some countries the task may be to
promote an active form of learning by
encouraging pupils to participate, in
others social customs will require
teaching and learning to be conceived
as a "show". The approach will de¬
pend ultimately on the society's image
of the role and power of the word.
Perhaps the most important develop¬
ment in the teaching of foreign
languages is a new awareness of the
inlercultural issues involved. This
awareness alone can bring about a final
break with the universalist conception
of language teaching, which still per¬
sists in a different modern guise. The
idea has been launched that the pupil's
essential purpose should be to learn
about the foreign culture and in so do¬
ing to learn about his own, that the



"culture shock" of discovering
something new and different should
also lead to self-discovery. In this set¬
ting the teaching of languages would be
above all an opportunity to become
aware of different mental approaches,
of the different forms of imagination
which exist in different societies and
cultures.

