BaREIRO SAGUIER, Rubén
The Indian languages
of Latin America
With the death in April 1983 of
"Abuela Rosa" (Grandmother Rose,
the last of the Yaganas, once an impor¬
tant ethnic group in Southern Chile), a
"vision of the world" as seen through
an indigenous American culture was
extinguished. It was another of the
many such cultures which have disap¬
peared since the European conquest
and colonization of this continent
started nearly five centuries ago.
Expert studies reveal that more than
five hundred languages or dialects still
survive in Latin America. They are
grouped in twenty main families,
established on the basis of different
criteria genetic-structural relations,
grammatical-lexical kinships, or simple
geographical groupings. The diversity
and dissimilarity of these languages
add to the mystery surrounding their
origins. Indeed, explanations of the
origin or cultural roots of the Amerin¬
dian people are still in the realm of
hypothesis. Are they autogenous, or
arethey of Asiatic, Oceanic, Africaner
runic origin? Or does their origin lie in
a mixture of all these possibilities? At
all events, serious investigations have
revealed noteworthy analogies with
such faraway languages as Finnish,
Basque, Turko-Caucasian or Sino-
Tibetan.
A feature of these languages is the
absence of unity within "families".
Thus Quechua, which was the language
of the most highly developed empire at
the time of the arrival of the Spaniards,
that of the Incas, contains a rather wide
diversity of dialects. In this regard, a
very typical case is that of the Maya
group, within which twenty-eight
dissimilar dialectic forms exist today.
The difference between Quiche (the
language of the' Popal Vuh) and
another important dialect, Cakchiquel,
for example, is as great as that between
French and Russian, both of which are
members of the Indo-European
linguistic family.
In order to appreciate the substantial
difference between the native
languages of America and those of the
so-called "Western" world, certain
basic characteristics of the former must
be pointed out. It is essential to make
the distinction because it was the
"Western" languages which entered
into contact with the Amerindian
languages, a contact marked by a con¬
flict of cultures and a relationship of
domination. In this connexion, the
French specialist in Amerindian
languages Bernard Pottier draws atten¬
tion to "the existence of categories of
thought manifested by grammatical
modes to which we are not accustom-
12
ed". This is an initial difference related
to "the Vision of the World", that is to
say "the connexions between kinds of
experience lived and linguistic
taxonomies".
Secondly, it is necessary to em¬
phasize the essentially oral character of
the Amerindian languages which have
no alphabet. I say "essentially",
because at least two of them Maya
and Náhuatl had a method of
transmission. This was based on a
system of grooves and ideograms
engraved on stone, wood, plaster, on
jade or drawn in the codices manufac¬
tured from the bark of the amate. But
writing did not exclude oral tradition
since writing was exclusive to the priest¬
ly class in particular, as well as to an
élite of nobles and rulers.
Of all these languages, the one which
is most widely used today is Quechua,
which is spoken by approximately
12,000,000 people (in Peru, Bolivia,
Ecuador, Northern Argentina,
Southern Colombia). Next comes
Guarani, spoken by 3,000,000 people
(in Paraguay, several parts of Argen¬
tina and pockets in Brazil and Bolivia).
About a million speak Maya (in
Guatemala, Southern Mexico, Belize, a
part of Honduras); Aymara (in
Bolivia, Northern Chile and Southern
Peru); Náhuatl (in Mexico and El
Salvador). The present standing of
these languages corresponds to the
characteristics of a general language or
a lingua franca which they possessed
before the conquest and during the col¬
onial period, i.e. vehicular languages in
extensive areas of the continent.
This leads us to an examination of
the consequences of the various contact
situations which arose as a result of the
European presence on the American
continent. This presence interrupted a
process of civilization by bringing two
different systems of values into con¬
frontation. It was a dramatic confron¬
tation which, because of the technical
superiority of the European, involved
the imposition of the "Western"
Christian model to the detriment of
Amerindian cultural values and, at the
same time, of the language of the con¬
quistador. The conflict opposing two
concepts of civilization was fundamen¬
tally an ideological confrontation.
Specifically, it derived from the need to
impose "an unquestionable truth"
the existence of one true god, that of
the conquerors, and consequently the
indispensable "destruction of
idolatry", the death of the "false
divinities" adored by the "infidels".
This was the main pretext for the entire
process of cultural substitution and
economic exploitation of the colony.
Language naturally played an essen¬
tial role in this confrontation, since it
was the material in which the
ideological content of the conditioning
process was moulded. It was also the
material in which resistance to that pro¬
cess was fashioned.
To the conquering language of
Castile, whose imposition on the
Iberian peninsula was completed in the
very year in which America was
discovered, was assigned the task of
conditioning. Initially, it was the
medium of evangelization, but it
withdrew from this role when the
superior efficacy of the vehicular
Amerindian languages for teaching the
"true faith" was realized. This victory
of the judgment of the "theologians"
over that of the "politicians" took
place during the 16th century with the
solid support of the Jesuits. This meant
that the natives were conditioned in
their own language but also that the
colonial process strengthened the status
of some languages, such as Guarani,
which was standardized in the Mis¬
sions, or developed the spread of
others, like Quechua, whose use was
greatly extended after the Conquest.
The most remarkable experiment af¬
fecting a native language was that per¬
formed by the Jesuits in the Guarani
Reductions during a century and a half.
This experiment consisted in using only
Guarani for the production of Chris¬
tian religious literature. This certainly
helped to strengthen the position of the
indigenous language (which, thanks to
a process of generalized racial integra-
The Lacandon Indians who live
in the south of the Yucatan
peninsula, between Mexico and
Guatemala, were only "dis¬
co vered ' ' at the beginning of this
century. Perhaps because of their
geographical and cultural isola¬
tion they speak an extraordinarily
pure form of the Maya language.

t>
ímomEim
« if ti j^^ Il ^^-^r1 II II Entitled "The Parish
Priest's Sermon", this il¬
lustration produced by
Felipe Guarnan Poma de
Ayala (1526-1613?) for his
book Nueva Crónica y
Buen Gobierno bears
witness to the evangeliza¬
tion which the Spanish
Conquest imposed on the
indigenous peoples 


of
America. As must have
been the case in sermons
preaclied at that time, both
Castillan and Quechua
words are used in the
manuscript, the text of
which reads, "My
children, I am going to
preach to you the Gospel,
the Holy Scriptures. You
should not worship the
idols of the sun. Your
ancestors did so in the
past, but you, my children,
have received the sacra¬
ment of baptism, "
Photo All Rights Reserved
Sbr(M*n
Whereas most Western languages employ cir-
cumlocuiions to describe the many different
»ays of "carrying" an object, Tzelial, the
Maya language of Mexico, has 25 different
terms to evpress these nuances.
1 on the bacl( (euch)
2 on the shoulders (q'uech)
3 on the head (pach)
4 on one shoulder (cajnuc'la))
5 under the arm dais')
6 in the pocket (chup)
7 in a bundle (lorn)
8 in the arms (pel)
9 on the hand (nol)
10 across the shoulder (jrlup'in)
11 in the fist (nop*)
12 in a container (lal")
13 by an edge of the object (Up")
14 in a bag (chuj)
15 in a spoon (lup)
16 between the teelh (cats*)
17 above (luch)
18 in the air (toy)
19 by letting it hang down (lie)
20 a spiral objcxrt (bal)
21 a rolled object (ch'cl)
22 by supporting with both hands (Chech)
23 with tweeters or tongs dut')
24 several objects together (yoin)
25 by the neck (pich')
(from Who brought the Word, The Summer
Institute of Linguistics. Santa Ana,
Calif., 1963).
14
18«
24
tion, was already well established in the
Province of Paraguay), but at the same
time it drained Guarani of its own
values which were essentially of a
mystical-religious character.
Not a single example of this oral
literature had been transcribed up to
the first decade of this century, which
proves that the "colonial process" con¬
tinued after independence (1811). And
this marginalization is even more
serious since the exuberant speech of
the Guaranis was the principal expres¬
sion of their culture.
However, Guarani has survived in
resemanticized, diglottic form until to¬
day as the generally spoken language of
a national community, Paraguay. This
is a unique case in America. 95 per cent
of the population speak it, 45 per cent
of the population are bilingual, 50 per
cent are monolingual in Guarani and 5
per cent are monolingual in Spanish.
Its use is not restricted to the regions of
the interior. It has also invaded the
cities. Nor is its use confined to certain
classes of society, as happens with the
native languages in other countries of
the continent. But notwithstanding its
general use. Guarani is only a "na¬
tional" language together with
Spanish as declared in Article 5 of the
Constitution which, in the next line,
consecrates Spanish as the "official"
language.
Literacy programmes are not con¬
ducted in Guarani and it is not used as
a medium of artistic expression. Thus
the Paraguayan writer has accepted his
condition of being a colonized writer
since, despite the fact of knowing the
native language, he does not write in it.
The impulses of the popular will
operate in Guarani, but social and
cultural advancement are achieved
through Spanish. These are signs which
show that Guarani is the language of a
dominated, albeit a majority group.
But what is happening to the other
great indigenous language. Quechua,
which is the most widely spoken on the
continent? To compare it with the
situation described above, that is to say
in the context of a State, let us take the
case of Peru. In May 1975, Quechua
was declared by law to be an official
language of that country on an equal
footing with Spanish. The purpose of
this was to strengthen the position of
Quechua in the national community
and to combat the social inferiority at¬
tached to the indigenous language and
its speakers. At the present time, the
linguistic position in Peru is as follows.
Between six and eight million out of a
total population of 16 million are bil¬
ingual in varying degrees, and about
1 ,600,000 are monolingual in Quechua.
That is to say that approximately 50 per
cent of the population are in a linguistic
situation similar to that found in
Paraguay. With one difference
however this half of the population is
linguistically isolated from the other
13

half, doubtless through lack 


of com¬
munication, but also because those
who speak Quechua are looked down
upon.
The situation of Náhuatl, the other
language which enjoyed great prestige
and was widely used in pre-Columbian
times, is even worse. Successive cen¬
suses reveal a progressive decline in the
number of speakers, again largely
because of the social opprobrium of
which the language is victim. This is
despite the admirable declarations of
principle enshrined in "indigenista"
policies which, judging by the results,
are ineffectual and incoherent.
There exists another approach
through which Amerindian cultures, or
the encouragement of the languages, is
extended or projected within the hybrid
societies of America, and here I am
speaking primarily of cultural hybridi-
ty. This is the approach which evokes
or proposes an image of the Indian and
of the components of his world. The
first projection, called indianismo, is
that portrayed in nineteenth-century
Latin American romanticism.
Alienated, stereotyped, idealized, it is
nothing else than the image borrowed
from the cliché of the "noble savage"
which was a fashionable invention of
European literature.
Towards the beginning of the present
century, an entire change of focus took
place, and the Indian portrayed in the
pages of the indigenista novel sym¬
bolizes a denunciation of, and violent
protest against, the exploitation of
which he himself is a victim in Latin
American society. This vision is com¬
passionate, indignant and committed
but it is outside the cultures it seeks to
defend. Thus the indigenistas fall into
an unconscious contradiction when
they propose the integration of the In¬
dian on terms of equality into national
or "white" society. In doing so, they
overlook cultural specificities, which
involves an obvious risk of con¬
tributing to a loss of identity.
Towards the 1940s, the nature of
writing underwent a change and the
Latin American writer lost his complex
of writing in an "imposed language".
Overcoming the old tyranny of "cor¬
rect" Spanish, he adopted a language
in which local, everyday elements
enriched the linguistic system
Castilian Spanish in which he ex¬
pressed himself. Much of this renewal
is due to the fact that a number of
writers assumed the profound values of
indigenous cultures. True, they write in
Spanish but knowing, as most of them
do, the autochthonous languages on
which in all cases these cultures are bas¬
ed, they employ resources and tech¬
niques borrowed from them which end
by changing or giving a profoundly dif¬
ferent colouring to what in literary
terms remains the predominant
idiom.
14

