"An illiterate is like a blind man for
whom failure and adversity lie
everywhere in wait" reads the cap¬
tion to this 1920 poster from the
Soviet Union (bottom right). With the
promulgation in 1919 of Lenin's
decree making it a duty for everyone
between the ages of 8 and 50, as part
of the revolutionary process, to learn
to read and write and the launching of
the "Down with Illiteracy" campaign
in 1923, the Soviet Union was
transformed into a gigantic school. Il¬
literacy dropped dramatically from 75
per cent in 1917 to 43 per cent in
1 926, and to 1 1 per cent in 1 939. The
Soviet experience influenced to some
extent every subsequent literacy
campaign. The notion of individual
fulfilment through the active par¬
ticipation in society that literacy
makes possible comes across clearly
in the poster from Ecuador (top right)
whose message reads: "to become
literate is to discover our world". For
the Brazilian educator Paulo Freiré,
men and women, whether literate or
not, are creators of culture. For him
learning to read and write is a political
act and constitutes a step towards full
participation in the life of the com¬
munity. Freire's method of adult
education involves the creation of
"Circles of Culture" whose members,
aided by a series of ten pictures (one
of which is reproduced far right), are
encouraged to analyse the realities of
their lives, using carefully selected
"keywords" as the point of departure
for discussion, a process he calls
"conscientization". Once the par¬
ticipants have gained confidence and
pride in their culture they are strongly
motivated to learn to read and write.

Stemming
the tide of
illiteracy
by Le Thành Khôi
THE number of illiterate persons throughout the world is
increasing. From 700 million in 1950, the ranks of the
illiterate rose to 758 million in 1970 and reached 824
million in 1980. If the present trend continues, there will be 884
million in 1980, excluding China, the People's Republic of
Korea, and Viet Nam.
Paradoxically, however, the rate of illiteracy is decreasing. In
1950, 44 per cent of the world's adult population over the age of
fifteen were illiterate. By 1970 the figure had dropped to 32.4 per
cent, and in 1980 it stood at 28.9 per cent.
Illiteracy affects women more than men (34.7 per cent as op¬
posed to 23 per cent in 1980), and rural communities more than
urban centres (the former are on average three times harder hit).
Even industrialized countries are discovering, or rediscovering,
the problem, not only among their immigrant worker popula¬
tions but within certain social strata which, because they read
and write infrequently, are tending to regress into illiteracy. j>
LE THANH KI10I, of Viet Nam, is a professor at the Sorbonne
(University ofPans V). He was a consultant to the International Com¬
mission on the Development of Education (1971) and rapporteur for
the expert group on the evaluation of the Experimental World Literacy
Programme (1975). He has carried out missions to 32 countries and is
the author of many published works including L'Industrie de
l'Enseignement (1967), L'Enseignement en Afrique Tropicale, (1971),
L'Education en Milieu Rural (1974), Jeunesse Exploitée, Jeunesse
Perdue? (1978) and L'Education Comparée (1981).

Yet development cannot be achieved unless workers reach a
certain level of education. Some observers have claimed that
literacy is not indispensable to growth. England and France, they
point out, began to industrialize in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries with illiterate populations.
This theory does not exactly correspond to the facts. For one
thing, the percentage of illiterates in both those countries did not
exceed 60 per cent. Furthermore, technology then was far less
complicated than it is now, and industrialization took place over
decades. If the historical record does not permit the conclusion
that schooling led to industrialization, it at least shows that there
is a parallel between economic growth and the decline of il¬
literacy. No country has ever attained the former without causing
the latter to diminish.
In the twentieth century the problem has been defined in new
terms, for it now has a political as well as an economic dimen¬
sion. Teaching literacy to adults has been theorized and closely
linked to social change.
An initial concept emerged in the wake of the Russian Revolu¬
tion of October 1917 and was to have world-wide repercussions.
The struggle against illiteracy became an integral part of the
revolution at every level: political, social, economic and cultural.
To bring literacy to the masses was to awaken their political con¬
sciousness and mobilize them in defence of the new régime.
Adult literacy was seen to be even more important than the
education of children, for adults were at once citizens, soldiers,
producers and parents. As early as December 1919 Lenin pro¬
mulgated a decree making it a duty for everyone between the ages
of eight and fifty to learn to read and write either in his native
tongue or in Russian, depending on the choice of the individual.
In 1923 a voluntary organization known as "Down with Il¬
literacy" was created and launched a vast campaign to raise the
necessary funds and to mobilize teachers, students, secondary
school pupils and clerical workers. The country was transformed
into a gigantic school. Gradually literacy came to be associated
with the teaching of basic industrial and agricultural technology.
Illiteracy dropped from 75 per cent in 1917 to 43 per cent in 1926,
and 11 per cent in 1939. Since 1932 all the nationalities in the
Soviet Union have possessed a written language, and can do their
studies in their native tongues.
All subsequent socialist revolutions have drawn inspiration
from this feat. In Viet Nam, immediately after the revolution of
August 1945, Ho Chi Minh called on the population to perform
three basic tasks: to conquer famine, foreign aggression, and ig¬
norance. The three were interdependent: as long as a nation is
underdeveloped and uneducated it is at the mercy of imperialism,
while conversely imperialism perpetuates underdevelopment and
lack of education. A country cannot achieve its economic and
social revolution without promoting a cultural revolution. Na¬
tional and social revolution is the driving force behind the
development of education which, in turn, bolsters the revolution
because education increases the political awareness of a people
and fosters its active participation in the revolutionary process.
It was from political and military directives that the peasants
learned to read. When the agrarian reform was launched in 1953,
literacy teaching became a part of the class struggle in the coun¬
tryside. It aimed to make the peasants understand how the social
and economic structure was the root cause of their deprivation.
It also showed the advantages they would reap from the over¬
throw of their landlords. Illiteracy was wiped out in the plains of
North Viet Nam in 1958, and three years later in the mountain
areas inhabited by minorities most of whom owe their ability to
read and write to the revolution.
The literacy campaign in Cuba in 1960 was also conceived as
a vast revolutionary movement. An army of young
volunteers 268,000 workers, students and teachers taught
over 700,000 illiterates how to read and write in one year. They
used a text-book, Alfabeticemos, which in addition to a section
on general approach consisted of texts on twenty-four themes
connected with the revolution, the land, the economy, im¬
perialism, and democracy, in conjunction with the fifteen lessons
in the primer Venceremos which also dealt with questions
; »ir
'

Adult education in India is aimed
primarily at the illiterate population
between the ages of 1 5 and 35. The
instruction given covers basic
literacy skills, functional develop¬
ment and the promotion of social
awareness. A number of Rural Func¬
tional Literacy Projects have been
launched which are financed by the
central government but ad¬
ministered by the authorities of the
individual States. In Bihar State
priority has been given to women's
education and in rural districts local
women are responsible for the
supervision of the women's adult
education centres and the teaching
given. Right, women workers in
Bihar State; in the background is the
Tata steel plant, the largest in India.
Photo Unesco
In 1979, Ethiopia launched a
massive campaign aimed at
eliminating illiteracy by 1987. In
two years 34,000 literacy centres
had been opened, 10 million people
had received literacy instruction and
20 million books had been printed to
maintain the literacy effort. These
initial successes earned for Ethiopia
the 1980 literacy prize of the Inter¬
national Reading Association. But
additional funds were needed and in
June .1981 the Director-General of
Unesco . launched ah international
appeal for material and financial aid
to complement the massive effort
being made by Ethiopia itself. Below
left, an adult literacy class in
[ progress.
Photo Dominique Roger, Unesco
relating to the revolution and were illustrated by photographs
which helped the student to grasp the spirit of the texts.
Technical work was aided by a propaganda thrust with three
main objectives: to motivate the illiterate by using all available
means from the mass media to fiestas and graduation
ceremonies; to create a climate of opinion which would en¬
courage as many people as possible to volunteer to be teachers;
to popularize the technological aspect of the campaign. The
teachers, as well as their pupils, acquired a political training.
Mostly volunteers from the cities, they came to know and
understand the peasants and workers.
Many other governments have tried to follow these examples
when launching their own mass literacy campaigns. Most of
them failed because the political factor, the national and social
revolutions basic to the cases cited here, were lacking. This is why
another concept, that of "functional literacy", emerged during
the 1960s. Launched by Unesco, it was adopted by the World
Congress on the Eradication of Illiteracy held in Teheran in
1965, and made operational the following year in the form of an
"experimental world literacy programme." This programme
was implemented with the assistance of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), Unesco, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the In¬
ternational Labour Organisation (ILO), and the World Health
Organization (WHO) in some twenty countries until 1973.
The objective was to make literacy a basic part of development
projects (in practice development was generally reduced to its
economic dimension). The corollaries of "functional literacy"
are the following:
selectivity of activities which relate to areas of industrialization
and to the modernization of agriculture, and which concern
those individuals who are most likely to profit from the scheme
and who are, therefore the most motivated to learn;
intensity of the acquisition of knowledge and of the attitudes
which contribute to development;
adaptability to the needs of each project of each category of ,
workers; hence a diversification of programmes;
integration of teaching into everyday life, the workers' profes¬
sional activities, and the problems they meet when confronted
with change.
Before drawing up a functional literacy programme, a
preliminary study is made of the environment (agricultural or in¬
dustrial) and of the persons concerned so that a list may be com¬
piled of the appropriate subjects to be studied and a timetable of
activities may be fixed. Theoretically, the illiterate persons are
encouraged to assume responsibility for each of the problems
they are asked to study and solve. In practice, more often than
not this solution is handed to them and the teacher's role consists
simply in getting them to recognize its soundness and to apply it
(whether the activity in question is planting out rice, harvesting
cotton, irrigation, health care, insect control, self-management,
or marketing).
During these explorations of their everyday problems, workers
are taught to read, write and count, and their capacity for
11

reasoning and understanding is developed. Theoretical training
(professional, technico-scientific, socio-economic, oral and writ¬
ten expression) goes hand in hand with practical training at the
worksite. Synchronized learning to read and write aims from the
outset to develop an aptitude for simultaneously perceiving sym¬
bols and their meaning, in accordance with this progression:
sentence -» word(s) -» syllables -» letters -> syllables -»
word(s) -» sentence.
In addition to "revolutionary" literacy and "functional"
literacy, there is a third method, literacy through
"conscientization ' ' .
This is the approach of the Brazilian educator Paulo Freiré.
His point of departure is a reflection on culture which man
creates by virtue of his work. But the illiterate person is oppress¬
ed. If education is to liberate, not tame him, it must make him
capable of critical awareness of his own living conditions. It must
make him discover, by a method based on dialogue, that he is a
subject and not an object, that he plays an active role in his en¬
vironment. The illiterate person then feels the need to learn to
read and write in order to become more effective and more
capable of changing his situation. At this point learning to read
and write can begin. The achievement of literacy is a form of self-
education progressing from the inside to the outer world through
the illiterate person's efforts helped by the educator: the content
and the method merge into a single process.
This is why the vocabulary that is taught is not put together
from the outside but springs directly from the verbal universe of
the particular group. Certain "key-words" are chosen on the
grounds of their syntactical and semantic values and their social
and cultural connotations. Examples: people, land, house,
poverty, work, drought, election. Each word is illustrated by a
picture depicting the life of the group. The illiterate person learns
syllables and families of sounds, and composes other words with
the combinations he can use. Within a month and a half or two
months he can read a newspaper, write a simple letter, and ex¬
press himself on questions of local and national interest.
What conclusions can be drawn from these different
experiments?
Motivation is the essential factor in success. It may be political
(social and national revolution), ideological (conscientization),
or economic (functional literacy). But only revolution is capable
of rousing a mass movement and eradicating illiteracy in a
relatively short space of time. The other methods have only suc¬
ceeded within limited groups.
Motivation is not enough, however. Literacy campaigns must
be well organizedand this does not mean that the State must
direct the whole operation. On the contrary, it is preferable for
the people themselves to take matters in hand, with a minimum
of outside help. Post-literacy work is indispensable if regression
into illiteracy is to be avoided. There must be newspapers, books
and libraries and a constant social pressure must be maintained
(e.g. schooling for children, the development of co-operatives).
The language factor plays an important role. Literacy teaching
in a mother tongue is bound to be more successful than in
another language. The spoken language may, for instance, be
different from the classical one, as in the case of spoken Arabic
as opposed to classical Arabic. This is a source of additional
difficulties.
Lastly, let us examine the question of teaching literacy to
women, which faces far more obstacles than teaching literacy to
men. These obstacles may be material, such as a lack of transpor¬
tation facilities in rural areas, the burden of household and fami¬
ly duties in addition to their work in the fields. But the major dif¬
ficulty often stems from the indifference, if not the outright
hostility, of their men. In the most traditional regions, generally
rural, many husbands fear that literacy courses may be, for their
wives, opportunities "to meet other men", a gateway to a new¬
found feeling of superiority, or even lead them to refuse to do
manual work. In India certain religious groups and castes are op¬
posed to letting women learn to read and write. In these cir¬
cumstances the wastage is considerable.
In Thailand a less direct approach has been adopted in the
fight to eradicate illiteracy. The country's Functional
Literacy and Family Planning project aims to help adults
develop an attitude of critical thinking through group
discussion techniques. Instruction in reading and writing
is seen as a by-product of this process rather than as its
main objective. Right, on the verandah of a school in
Bangkok.
12
Illiteracy among women acts as a brake on progress. Its effects
appear in many ways: in the family, where illiterate women are
handicapped in following their children's education and in
managing the household; at the economic level, since they face
difficulties in finding jobs, and in keeping them if they live in ur¬
ban areas unemployment among women is twice as high as
among men; at the social level, with women playing a negligible
part in local affairs.
Apart from transforming the traditional image of women in
men's minds, a remedy must be found for defacto discrimina¬
tion in access to education and employment, as revealed in such
phenomena as the lack of women teachers, who are indispen¬
sable in the most traditional areas, the lack of adequate equip¬
ment and social measures geared to relieve women of some of
their household tasks, inequality of remuneration and
advancement.
The promotion and emancipation of women presupposes that
they receive the same education as men, rather than an education
which is limited to preparing them for the role of housewife and
mother or for certain kinds of employment which are thought to
be "suitable for women" and which always carry the least
prestige and pay: teaching, the social services, para-medical
work, the retail trade, the food and textile industries. In rural
areas women's needs for economic training are just as great as
men's in such fields as agriculture, poultry and stock-raising,
dairy farming, fishing, making and repairing fishing nets, spinn¬
ing, weaving, sewing, embroidery and other crafts which can
boost the family income. _ . . _.. . ......
Le Thành Khoi
^r w}
1
fefelr
to - *-*.^ 	
V>
o ^M
©1
1
sz
