Glissant, Edouard
Beyond Babel
"Live in confinement or live with an
open, receptive attitude to others." It is
often maintained that the right of each
people to speak its own language boils
down to this straightforward choice,
which in point of fact legitimizes
premises inherited from a tradition of
domination. Either you speak a language
which is "universal" or is tending to
become so, and you participate in the life
of the great world; or else you withdraw
into your own idiom, which is so little
suited to being shared with others. I f you
take the latter course, you cut yourself
off from the world and languish isolated
and sterile within your so-called identity.
However, since so many liberated
peoples have taken their place on the
world stage, it has come to be felt that the
language of a community is the primary
vector of its cultural identity, which in
turn underlies all the dimensions of its
development. This desire to privilege the
cultural dimension, known as "cul-
turalism", has been stigmatized as
dubious if not harmful. At the same time
every .development process has been
reduced to a single kind of technology,
said to be advanced and inevitable. What
more can you ask for, when a single
language can offer you the key to
progress?
From the point of view of language
and culture, the world's nations would
seem to have no choice apart from that
between confinement in a restrictive par¬
ticularity on the one hand, and on the
other, dilution in the "generalizing
universal". From this dangerous theo¬
retical construction, the "spoken genius"
of the peoples of the world has brought a
brilliant release. Even crushed by the pro¬
ducts of pseudo-progress, the voice of the
African griots, the story-tellers maroon¬
ed on the edges of big cities, still obsti¬
nately refuses to disappear. Govern¬
ments are gradually coming round to the
idea that there is no single, transcendent
model of development that can be impos¬
ed everywhere.
The relations between languages today
are, then, characterized, in the explosion
of our unbelievable diversity, both by
creations which come like a bolt from the
blue, born of the "friction" between
languages, and by a mass of received
ideas and prejudices passively inherited
from the past.
Perhaps the most crucial of these
received ideas has to do with the tradi¬
tional hierarchic division of languages in¬
to the written and the oral. The latter
were reputedly crude, unfitted for con¬
ceptualization and as a result for the true
acquisition and transmission of know¬
ledge. The former were "civilizing"; they
allowed men to emerge from their
"natural state", endowing them with a
context of permanence and giving them a
destiny.
It is true that literacy teaching on a
massive scale is a task of the highest
priority and that it is often carried out,
for want of suitable materials, in what
8
are known as the vehicular languages of
communication. But it is increasingly felt
that literacy instruction in the strict sense
should go hand in hand with the teaching
of "cultural literacy" which widens the
spectrum of choices and permits
autonomous creative forces to be revived
from within.
Between those languages which are
supposedly entrenched in the transcen¬
dence of writing and the rest, which have
long been confined to what was called
with a hint of condescension the world of
oral expression, relations are thus com¬
plex and infinitely various.
Domination is, of course, the
characteristic of the most flagrant of
these forms of relationship, one which is
buttressed by technological expansion
and which usually opens the way to the
trivialization and neutralization of
culture. However carefully devised, the
way out of this paralyzing uniformity,
this banishment of dominated languages
into the restricted realms of folklore and
non-technological areas of expression,
does not lie in a universal language but in
the promotion of a plurilingualism in
which all the languages would be
associated, each responsible for its own
environment.
Fascination is the second of these rela¬
tionships. Admittedly this fascination is
becoming less and less virulent;
nonetheless it has incited the intellectual
élites of the developing countries to use a
prestige language in a reverent and
distorting way, thereby impoverishing
themselves.
Relationships based on contagion oc¬
cur when melting pots explode and yield
unexpected forms which are found above
all in the language used by young people.
Purists are shocked by such mixtures;
poets who are alert to the intermingling
of world cultures are delighted.
Linguistic "purity" is no longer a valid
criterion, and "borrowings" should only
be condemned when they uphold
political, economic and cultural
domination.
Relations based on compliance and
derision may occur, for example,
through fréquentation of tourist spots;
or are products of the very practices of
subordination. This tendency to en¬
courage the birth of hybrid "Tarzan"
languages is swept away when peoples
and nations take a firm grip on their own
cultures.
Tangential relationships are by far the
most insidious. They occur whenever
composite, compromise languages ap¬
pear, such as the Creoles of the French-
speaking parts of the Americas and the
Indian Ocean. In such cases it is
necessary to neutralize the erosion of the
new language, which in a sense takes
place from within the language when one
of its components from afar becomes the
dominant factor in their relationship.
Subversive relations, when a language
is "melted down" by a community and
put to a new use, often as a vehicle for
criticism. In the case of the English
language the English-speaking West In¬
dians and the Blacks of the United States
provide notable examples of this
phenomenon; the people of Quebec, in
the case of French.
Relations based on intolerance arise
especially in the teaching of a major
language of communication. These stem
from the fact that "atavistic fluency" in
the use of a language has hitherto been
tacitly considered indispensable in
achieving mastery of that language. The
language was presented, on a take it or
leave it basis, as wedded to its past
history and therefore intransigently
hostile to the dreadful contagions to
which it might be forced to "submit" by
speakers and creators from elsewhere.
Theories of teaching and learning the
language in question could only be
developed in its "original home".
Above, a Mauritanian village
schoolboy concentrates on his
homework. Mauritania has two
official languages, Arabic and
French.
But these distinctions between the writ¬
ten and the oral do not only date from the
recent past. In some cases they have ex¬
isted for a long time, creating a rift within
a single language by designating two
often irreconcilable orders of
expression one learned, the other
popular for the same community.
The case of monolingual countries
with "internal" problems (either because
two usages oral and written of a
single language may cause disruption; or
because regional dialects integrated into
the language have been crushed by the

uniformization of cultural practices; or
because the national language is con¬
fronted with problems of transcription)
is but one illustration of the inexhaustible
variety of linguistic situations in the
world today.
A list of such situations would include:
monolingual countries with "external"
problems. In this case a national
language, which is also a major language
of communication, is threatened
economically and culturally by a
"foreign" language.
Bilingual countries with "internal"
problems: there is a confrontation bet¬
ween two widely used languages, each of
which is used by a part of the community,
which is consequently destabilized.
Countries where diglossia exists; a ma¬
jor language of communication tends to
dominate and restrict one or several
mother tongues, sometimes until the lat¬
ter completely disappear.
Multilingual countries without ap¬
parent problems: a federative principle
governs relations between languages in a
single nation.
Multilingual countries where the ex¬
istence of a large number of mother
tongues makes it difficult to choose one
or several official languages.
These situations overlap, exist side by
side, proliferate, transcending the
straightforward conflict between the oral
and the written. They are spectacular in¬
stances of the relations between peoples
and cultures. Their complexity rules out
any summary or reductive assessment of
the strategies which might be employed.
There is no single solution.
This very complexity also makes it
possible to emerge from confinement.
Speaking one's own language does not
exclude a receptive, open-minded at¬
titude to other people and their cultures.
"I speak to you in your language, and it
is in mine that I understand you."
But the possibility of speaking its own
language above all offers to a people the
liberty to create, at all levels, by and
through its language. In other words, the
means of concretizing its relationship
with and place in the world.
Viewed in this light, it is by no means
certain that languages with an oral tradi¬
tion are fundamentally at a disadvan¬
tage. It even seems that, with a great flex¬
ibility and adaptability, they are more in
tune with today's linguistic ferment.
More, perhaps than languages which
have a written tradition and are ossified
in time-worn ways, they are suited to the
changing demands of audio-visual
techniques. Whether this is a weakness or
a strength, it indicates a greater flexibility
and availability. The problems of stan¬
dardization and transcription, when the
results of scholarly research have been
used by the communities concerned, may
lead to compromise solutions which will
gradually be sanctioned and systemat¬
ized.
Vast and dizzying possibilities are
opening up, transcending fierce struggles
against economic domination. This is not
the pre-apocalyptic dizziness which
precedes the fall of the tower of Babel,
but the tremors of creativity confronted
with these boundless possibilities. The
Tower can be built, in all languages.
<'*
.*.-»
«
i
Photo Schulthess ® Rapho. Paris
Nomad pastoral farmers, the Masai people live in parts of Kenya
and the United Republic of Tanzania, countries where Swahili is the
official language.
9
