EGYPT
The shadow
and the
substance
by Magda Wassef
MAGDA WASSEF is an Egyptian specialist on film and theatre. She is the
author of several studies on cinema and a doctoral dissertation on "The
image of the peasant woman in Egyptian cinema". For Unesco she has writ¬
ten a study on "The cultural heritage in Arab cinema".
Photo © All rights reserved
Dakket Zar (literally, "Music for a dance of exor¬
cism") by Mohamed El Fil, in a production directed
by Mohsen Helmy in Cairo, in 1 980. The play takes
a critical look at certain ancestral Arab rites.
THE origins of Egyptian theatre have been the subject ot
much debate: has it been influenced more by shadow
theatre and Karaghöz or by Western drama? Today this
debate is closed. For more than half a century theatre has been
fully integrated into Egyptian social and cultural life, and Egyp¬
tian playwrights, directors and actors today, like their counter¬
parts elsewhere, have other preoccupations. They are concern¬
ed with problems of modern theatre and forms of production,
the relationship between the latter and traditional and popular
theatre, the question of freedom of expression in relation to the
State, urban theatre and rural theatre, and so on.
Here I should like to give a brief account of the first of these
problems, that of modern theatre, taking into account the link
which exists between experimentation with forms inspired by
Western theatre and those derived from the Egyptian and
Arabic cultural heritage.
Egyptian theatre, has been characterized by two conflicting
trends since the 1960s, a period during which theatre has ex¬
perienced a remarkable flowering. The first trend is inspired by
Western formal experimentation and trends such as the theatre
of the absurd of Ionesco and Beckett, while the second draws
its inspiration from Egyptian and Arabic stories and popular
drama.
The "Pocket Theatre" created by Saad Ardash in 1962 and
the "Avant-Garde Theatre" founded a few years later both en¬
courage experimental work, but the more traditional National
Theatre and the "El Hakim Theatre" also support bold
productions.
These theatres have staged Tewfik el Hakim's Ya Tale'e El
Shagar (You who climb the tree), a first attempt at Egyptian
"theatre of the absurd", and El Farafir (The Fledglings) by
Yusef Idris, in which the author brings together Western
theatre and traditional forms by taking his two main characters
from the Egyptian shadow theatre. In El Ardehalgui (The Public
, Writer) and El Wafed (The Outsider), Mikhail Romain evokes the
absurdity of life through characters who shun reality and sink
into a kind of paranoia. Alfred Farag was one of the first Egyp¬
tian playwrights to draw inspiration from the Arab cultural
heritage. His well-known trilogy the Barber of Baghdad, AH
guénah el Tabrizi and The Letters of the Judge of Seville have
had a strong influence on the new Egyptian theatre. Farag is an
innovator in the sense that he adapts old tales to modern times;
he handles language and dialogue with great skill.
These playwrights produced their main body of work during
the 1960s, and left their mark on that decade. There are also
a number of talented young directors who have contributed to
Egyptian theatre the knowledge and experience they acquired
in Europe.
The development of Egyptian experimental theatre is largely
due to such directors as Saad Ardash, Karam Metawe, Galal el
Sharkawi and Ahmed Zaki. Their different approaches to their
work have brought great diversity and richness to Egyptian
theatre.
While social theatre was the dominant trend in Egypt in the
1960s and formal experimentation was relatively limited, the
1 970s saw the birth of a more aesthetically advanced theatre.
Certain forms, such as "poetic theatre" and "epic theatre" en¬
joyed a heyday. Salah Abdel Sabour, whose The Tragedy of El
Hallaje had enriched "poetic theatre" as early as 1 963, produc¬
ed Leila and the Madman and After the Death of the King. Draw¬
ing inspiration from the Arab cultural heritage, Chawki Khamis
brought a new dimension to epic theatre. Already perceptible in
The City of Masked Men and Love and War, this epic dimension
reached its apogee in Sindbad directed by Ahmed Zaki, a play
in which the chorus and not the individual hero plays the leading
role.
Fawzi Fahmi's The Virgin of Rachid is also a work of epic
theatre, but here the language used by the author is of para¬
mount importance; it is akin to the language of poetry, although
it does not respect all the rules of poetry, and is close to the
literary language, though lacking its rigidity.
The experiments carried out in modern Egyptian theatre thus
reflect the current preoccupations of their authors. Today a
period of pure experimentation seems to be over and to have
given way to a less esoteric, more popular form of theatre.
21
