MYTHS UNDER
THE MICROSCOPE
by Albert Jacquard
MAN is a creature endowed with the fabulous power
of self-construction, the ability to participate
in his own creation; but the price of this capacity
is investment with its opposite: that of self-destruction. The
latter may take violent forms even the collective suicide of
the species has now become possible, because of the ex¬
istence of nuclear weapons. But it also manifests itself in
mean, shifty, surreptitious types of behaviour, among
which racism is surely the most widespread.
Scorn for others because they belong to a different group
is by no means a recent phenomenon, but it is one which
during the present century has developed along new lines,
with the assertion that "recent discoveries of modern
science" and "biologically proven models" justify the
classification of human populations in hierarchical order.
If scientific progress had indeed led to such conclusions,
we would be obliged to take them into account, irrespective
of our moral, philosophical or religious opinions. But what
science tells us today, notably where the most relevant
disciplinegenetics is concerned, is the exact opposite:
to claim, on biological grounds, that certain individuals
within a given group, or certain groups, naturally constitute
an élite is totally to misunderstand the message of biology.
Awareness that scientists should be given the opportuni¬
ty of stating their views on the subject, unequivocally and
before the widest possible audience, led Unesco to organize
in Athens, in the spring of 1981, a symposium where
ALBERT JACQUARD is a French geneticist who teaches at the
Universities of Paris VI and Geneva. He is head of the genetics depart¬
ment of France's National Institute of Demographic Studies (INED) in
Paris. He is the author of a number of works including Genetics of
Human Populations, 7978.
representatives of various disciplines could set out their
most recent findings, and where racist arguments could be
countered in a reasoned, dispassionate manner.
Twenty-two scientists were thus able to spend a week
discussing the issues involved in a totally frank and open at¬
mosphere, bringing from a wide spectrum of countries that
included Lebanon, Tunisia, Morocco, Israel, Mexico,
France, Ivory Coast, Norway, the USA and the USSR, con¬
tributions in the fields of anthropology, ethnology,
psychology, genetics, sociology, history, mathematics, law
and philosophy.
The diversity of cultures and disciplines represented
strengthened, rather than weakened, the intensity of the
debates; the genuine interdisciplinarity which characterized
the exchange of views enabled each participant to under¬
stand the ideas communicated by the others and to share
with them his own questionings and commentaries.
Racism was successively examined in relation to the
following branches of learning: genetics; psychology and
neurobiology; sociology; anthropology and ethnology;
history and prehistory.
At the conclusion of the Symposium, the participating
scientists, together with the representatives of Unesco,
drew up a joint Appeal, the terms of which were discussed
at length and unanimously approved (see the Unesco
Courier, May 1981).
Genetics and racism. Advances in the field of genetics
have made it possible to determine with accuracy the con¬
tent of the biological heritage of human populations;
whereas, during the past centuries, attempts at racial defini¬
tion were based on observable, external features such as
skin colour, hair texture, and cranial structure, examination
Racism has historical roots. It has not been a universal pheno
menon. Many contemporary societies and cultures show little trace of
it. It was not evident for long periods in world history. Many forms
of racism have arisen out of the conditions of conquest, out of the
justification ofNegro slavery and its aftermath of racial inequality in
the West, and out of the colonial relationship. Among other examples
is that ofanti-semitism, which has played a particular role in history,
with Jews being the chosen scapegoat to take the blame for problems
and crises met by many societies.
Statement on Race and Racial Prejudice
Unesco, Paris, September 1967
.
25

i> of these characteristics has now been replaced by the in¬
vestigation of the genetic structures which determine them.
The overall frequency with which various genes are en¬
countered in the members of a given group constitutes the
genetic structure of that group. The differences between
the structures of two populations can be synthesiz'ed by
establishing a "distance" calculated from frequencies
observed in each group. The definition of races thus in¬
volves grouping together populations between which
genetic distances are small, and attributing to different
races populations between which genetic distances are
wide. '.
Where the human species is concerned, however, this
procedure proves fruitless. Migratory movements have
taken place on such a scale, and the isolation of individual
groups has been so short-lived that differentiations between
groups have not reached a level which makes it possible to
trace boundaries between separate, relatively
homogeneous populations. The variability of the human
species, which is considerable, is not to be explained in
terms of the differences between the average genetic
distances between various groups, but in terms of the dif¬
ferences to be found in individual members of the same
group. According to findings published by Richard Lewontin
in 1974, the average genetic distance between two in¬
dividuals increases by only 7 or 8 per cent when they belong
to two different nations, and by only 1 5 per cent when they
belong to two different "races".
Consequently, the type of grouping described above can
only be arbitrary. For the geneticist the concept of race cor¬
responds to no stable or objective reality where humankind
is concerned.
Genetics also provides us with an argument to set against
the second proposition of racist theory: that races can not
only be defined, but can also be classified by order of
superiority.
In fact, investigation of mechanisms of selection reveals
that their effect is not to retain the "best" and to eliminate
what is less satisfactory, but rather to preserve the coex¬
istence of a great variety of characteristics. Wealth, in
biological terms, is not synonymous with "good" genes,
but with genetic diversity: the "best" group is that which
has conserved the widest variety of genes, irrespective of
the composition of that variety.
From this point of view, therefore, it is obviously impossi¬
ble to invoke- biological arguments to justify some sort of
"natural" hierarchy of individuals or populations.
Psychology, neurology and racism. When psychology
became "scientific" in the mid-nineteenth century, it set
itself the task of comparing the intellectual performances of
individuals and groups. This analysis of differences was
quickly replaced by attempts to establish relationships of
superiority and inferiority. Techniques of testing were devis¬
ed whereby human beings were classified in relation to an
implicitly accepted norm, the average behaviour of modern
Western society. As a general rule, the results of such tests
are presented in numerical form, as the Intelligence Quo¬
tient, or IQ. This measurement is widely used, but it is rarely
interpreted in a way which takes into account the limits of
its significance.
The mere fact of expressing the IQ in numerical form
creates the illusion that it measures a magnitude with an in¬
dependent existence. In reality, however, comparisons bet¬
ween individuals of different cultures or between groups
which are made using IQ are, by virtue of the definition of
IQ itself, devoid of any real meaning.
Misunderstandings about the IQ are particularly
dangerous when they are related to the problem of "innate
and acquired" characteristics. Abuse of the concept of
heritability, devised by geneticists, has led certain
psychologists to attribute variations in IQ between in¬
dividuals or groups to a combination of genetic and en¬
vironmental factors (the ratio being generally of the order of
80 per cent for the former and 20 per cent for the latter). In
fact, none of the conditions necessary to validate the
measurements of heritability are here present; the figures
advanced are thus not even inaccurate, they are
meaningless.
26
Sociology and racism. Racism should not be considered
as the inevitable product of a necessary sequence of cause
and effect. More particularly, it is false to see racism as a
mere consequence of economic phenomena, when it is in
fact an interaction in which racial animosity and the quest
for a scapegoat combine and focus on a minority the ag-
gressivity engendered by failures and setbacks of all kinds,
notably economic.
It is not objective economic situations that encourage
racism, but the subjective interpretations of those situa¬
tions. The manner in which a situation is perceived is of
greater consequence than the situation itself. The process
is thus one in which political action plays a decisive role, and
where the media, by virtue of the notions to which they give
currency and the manner in which they present the facts,
also play a decisive part. The invocation of a "threshold of
tolerance" is a good example of the use of a mechanism
presented as natural, in order to justify the rejection of
minorities. In fact, such thresholds cannot be measured,
and correspond to nothing that can be objectively defined.
The situation of those who are oppressed because of their
"race" is not the outcome of an inevitable malediction; it is
In the last thirty years the classification of the human species
into a small number of major "races" has been increasingly
contested by scientists as imprecise, arbitrary, and of little or
no biological significance. One obstacle to the establishment of
such a classification is revealed by the inconsistencies that
arise when different kinds of criteria are used, such as blood
group systems on the one hand, and anthropometric data on
the other. The Ainus of northern Japan (top right) have a white
skin and according to traditional racial classifications were con-

simply an observable state of affairs which cannot be
justified in any way.
The often distorted propagation of certain arguments ad¬
vanced by sociobiologists can prove extremely dangerous.
Sociobiology deals with the causesand circumstances, in¬
cluding those of a genetic nature, which determine the
organization of animal societies, ranging from termites to
primates. The extrapolation of its findings to humankind is
obviously risky and should only be undertaken with the
greatest care. For example, the assertion that most human
behaviour is genetically conditioned rests on no serious
evidence. Little caution is shown by certain journalists who
claim that theories which are still the subject of debate are
"scientifically proved"; other writers conceal dogmatic at¬
titudes behind what they claim is scientific evidence.
Anthropology, ethnology and racism. Anthropology sets
out to make a global study of man, integrating the physical,
genetic, cultural and historical points of view. In all these do¬
mains, individuals differ from each other, and anthropology
endeavoured, over a long period, to take these differences
into account in preparing classifications and where possible
in tracing the outlines of more or less homogeneous groups,
sidered to belong to the white race. In terms of blood grouping,
however, they are much closer to the so-called "yellow" Orien¬
tal populations. Many "scientific" race classifications have
given rise to a misleading idea of "physical types". Blond-
haired "blacks", above right, frequently found among
Australian aboriginal groups are one example of the futility of
racial archetypes of this kind. Vogul populations of Siberia,
above left, differ in many ways from the "yellow" or Mongoloid
races to which they were assigned by classical anthropology.
or "races". The latter were thus defined as the product of
a division of humanity according to transmissible physical
characteristics. But this analysis is of doubtful value
because of the importance of the genetic exchanges occurr¬
ing between groups, the intensity of which has varied in dif¬
ferent ages and regions. Such exchanges have increased
during the past few centuries, and consequently groups
which might have been defined as "races" in the past have
disappeared, giving place to other, provisional regroupings.
But the essential contribution of anthropology is to show
that the feelings of superiority found in most human groups
is related to their culture, and not to their biological heritage;
their sentiments are ethnocentric, and not racist. Racism, as
a belief in the natural superiority of a given group, is of com¬
paratively recent origin. It developed parallel to the colonial
expansion of the European powers, finding scientific
justification in a mistaken extrapolation of the theories of
Darwin, social Darwinism. Reaching its height during the
period of Nazism, it has subsequently declined appreciably,
despite the rearguard actions of certain groups (which ap¬
pear notably in The Mankind Quarterly), or individuals, such
as the psychologist Arthur Jensen.
Anthropologists have reacted forcefully; for example, an
important study by R. Sinha, of India, has shown that "there
is no innate difference in intellectual capacities between the
different racial groups".
In the last analysis, the problem with which we are con¬
fronted is not one of justifying or invalidating racist at¬
titudes, but rather that of understanding why such attitudes
persist, despite a total absence of justification.
History, prehistory and racism. Over the centuries, racist
theories have developed in response to the requirements of
dominant groups. Not infrequently, they have embodied
contradictory premisses. The eighteenth century, for exam¬
ple, saw the simultaneous adoption of the myth of the
"noble savage" as opposed to the "wicked sophisticate",
and the uninhibited practice of slavery, while, at the present
time, when the findings of science are demolishing the very
foundations of racism, there are those who consistently in¬
voke science in their attempts to promote its resurgence.
Historical studies enable us to compare the mechanisms
which determine the evolution of a racist society (which in¬
evitably drifts into a state of tension between dominant and
dominated groups and in which the range of alternatives
grows steadily smaller), and those which govern the
development of a progressive, pluralist society (open to in¬
terchange and to all the different forms of creativity which
become possible thanks to a permanent ferment of ideas
and action).
The resurgence of racism presents a challenge to which
we must respond by a steadfast call for the social diver¬
sification which it is in our power to achieve: diversification
through science and technology, through culture, through
recourse to our origins and through freedom available to all.
Albert Jacquard
27
