Communications
technology
and development
by Ithiel de Sola Pool
ITHIEL DE SOLA POOL, U.S. educator, has
been professor ofpolitical science at the Mas¬
sachusetts Institute of Technology since
1953. A fellow of the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences, he is the authorofa number
of books on communications, including Talk¬
ing Back (7373,1, Handbook of Communication
(1973)andTbe Social Impact of the Telephone
11976). The present article has been extracted
from "Technology and Change in Modern
Communication", a document prepared for
the International Commission for the Study of
Communication Problems.
THE developing countries of the
world require large injections
of technology transfer in the
form of information if they are to have
economic growth and development.
The means for this, however, have been
largely beyond their reach. Today a
chasm separates the research facilities
available in developed countries from
the extremely limited research facilities
in most of the world.
With the development of informa¬
tion retrieval technology, the gap could
worsen, unless methods are devised to
facilitate information transfer by new
means. Given lack of money and skills
poor countries cannot be expected to
acquire comprehensive data bases;
however, as low cost global data net¬
works become available, they will per¬
mit remote access to the best informa¬
tion sources that exist.
If as seems likely, international data
communications networks make access
to data bases available from anywhere
in the world at communications costs



Farmers at a co-operative near Piura, northern Peru, attend a training course developed under a project assisted
by the United Nations Development Fund and the Food and Agriculture Organization. Robust modern portable
video recording and playback equipment enables the course to be held at the farmer's normal place of work.
less than that of the mails at present,
the information gap could rapidly be
narrowed. A researcher in a university
or planning office in a country without
adequate reference sources of its own
could retrieve a fact from a data base
anywhere in the world for a communica¬
tion charge little more than the cost of
a domestic telephone call.
In short, as advanced countries in¬
creasingly transfer their reference
materials from hard copy libraries to
computerized retrieval systems, the
underdeveloped countries will either
fall further behind in . information
capacity, or will begin to catch up
depending upon whether they are link¬
ed to these new information stores by
telecommunications .
One common reaction to such sug¬
gestions for sustained interaction is
fear of dependency. But in-fact the use
of the best scientific knowledge has the
reverse effect. Given access to advanc¬
ed knowledge, practitioners in less ad¬
vanced locations will more quickly ac
quire the skills to become independent.
Suppose medical advice was provid¬
ed to practitioners by global on-line
query to data bases, and if necessary to
live specialists. Medical practitioners
everywhere would quickly improve
their competence. Suppose that a new
country linked its computer centre on
line to a global network. Gradually, but
fairly rapidly, young programmers and
analysts would learn new skills. Doing
things that they could not otherwise
have done, they would develop expertise

that they otherwise would not have had.
They will start upgrading their own soft¬
ware and developing their own data
bases. They will be conquering the main
barrier to entering the computer game,
namely the lack of trained humans with
access to modern facilities.
Another objection often raised to
developing countries investing in
modern communications is that they
should be using intermediate rather than
high technology. They must learn to
walk, it is said, before they learn to run.
Poor countries, it is said, have
unemployed labour and very little
capital; they should use labour intensive
processes, like hand-set newspapers, not
capital intensive ones like computer
composition. Besides that, it is argued,
they should use things that they can
make themselves (like the Indian
chicken wire SITE antennas), not things
that they have to import. Also, it is
said and this is more to the point
that there exist in every society tradi¬
tional forms of communication, like
folksingers, plays or sermons and that
these have a credibility and mean-
ingfulness in the culture which no im¬
ported impersonal form can have.
AJÍ of those arguments and par¬
ticularly the last have a great deal of
merit, but the cliché so easily leaped to,
that high technology communications
are inappropriate to developing coun¬
tries, is a non-sequitur. Suppose that
when the transistor radio first came into
use someone had said that developing
countries should not use that advanced
technology, but should stick with con¬
ventional tube radios. We can see that
transistor radios were cheaper, more
reliable, easier to produce indigenously,
more portable, and used less current.
They were what developing countries
needed and as a result they spread
everywhere. Thanks to the transistor,
radio has become the developing
world's most pervasive medium.
It would be a mistake for poor coun¬
tries to simply imitate the media institu¬
tions and practices of wealthier ones. In
the United States and Europe, TV is a
household good; in India it has been
adapted to a village facility. In the West
broadcasting is done almost entirely
over the air; in China it was first done
via wired loudspeakers. Since wired
loudspeakers do not incur the monthly
cost for batteries, a wired system was an
appropriate early choice.
For a telecommunications system to
Reading the wall
newspaper, in Beijing.
Photo Dilip Mehta © Contact Press Images, New York
serve an underdeveloped area effectively
it must have certain characteristics. It
should serve as an adjunct to expression
by those persons who have credibility in
the culture. It should use the language
and the symbols of the culture. Its con¬
tents should be capable of local adapta¬
tion. It must be cheap. It should require
as little foreign exchange as possible. It
must also be reliable, relatively rugged,
and not require highly sophisticated
maintenance and operating personnel. It
must operate even in the absence of an
elaborate infrastructure of stable elec¬
tric current, nationwide microwave
relays or cable networks, and smoothly
functioning telephone service. Finally it
must link the underdeveloped region to
any possible sources of data, not just to
ones in a favoured métropole on which
it is dependent.
These are not insoluble requirements.
There are high technologies, in¬
termediate technologies, and primitive
technologies that meet many of these
requirements, and there are high, in¬
termediate, and primitive technologies
that fail. Equipment in remote loca¬
tions, where skilled maintenance men
are few, should be highly reliable.
Sometimes that favours solid state elec¬
tronics (as in telephone switching);
sometimes that favours manual
methods. Developing countries have
little foreign exchange for capital im¬
ports. Sometimes they can make ad¬
vanced equipment for themselves, as in
the case of the SITE ground station
dishes; sometimes they cannot. Such
considerations need to be looked at in
detail in each instance. They cannot be
bypassed by a verbal cliché about high
or intermediate technology.
Among the communications devices
that are most useful in developing areas
are some well-tried means like a folk
singer, or a traditional opera; some
simple technological devices like a
mimeograph machine, a slide projec¬
tor, a wall newspaper, a super-8 movie
28

School textbooks come off the press at the
printing works established at Yaounde by
Unesco in collaboration with the Govern¬
ment of Cameroon.
Photo Gary Fullerton, Unesco
camera, or a wired loudspeaker; and
some very sophisticated devices like
transistors, electronic telephone swit¬
ching, satellites and computer data net¬
works. The value of the simple devices
is recognized. What is sometimes
denied is how well some of the new
technologies match the requirements of
poor lands.
International computer communica¬
tions, using store and forward message
switching, is a technology particularly
well . suited to the need of the less
developed countries. It bypasses,
rather than being dependent upon the
problems of the ordinary phone
system. For a voice telephone call, both
parties have to be simultaneously pre¬
sent which can be very frustrating if it
takes a couple of hours to complete the
circuit. In a store and forward system
the message waits in the transmitting
computer until the circuit is available
and then gets sent to its destined ter¬
minal at any hour of the day or night.
Furthermore, low cost satellite
receivers can be installed in remote
regions, bypassing non-existent or
overloaded microwave or cable land
lines. Moreover, sophisticated data
processing operations can be done by
remote access to locations where the
prerequisites exist. All that the local
service must provide is the capability of
carrying low speed code such as that
which currently delivers telex or
telegrams.
A four-media communication sys¬
tem seems likely to be appropriate in
poor countries, particularly those with
large terrain and scattered villages. The
four media that seem most important
are radio, satellite TV, satellite
telephone, computer store and forward
message delivery.
Radio is found everywhere. Tele¬
vision adds something to the effec¬
tiveness of educational broadcasting
and to the quality of village life.
However, it is too expensive to be own¬
ed by many individuals. Its appropriate
use in the poorest areas is as a com¬
munity facility. Where territories are
small and densely populated, terrestrial
transmission to the village set is
economic, but where the territory is
large. and dispersed, the appropriate
means of dissemination is by satellite as
pioneered by the Canadians with their
programmes to the Arctic, and by the
Indians in the SITE programme.
Telephony to remote locations can be
delivered in the same way.
A sound development policy is one
that creates communications facilities
not only for the use of the central
authorities, but also for the use of
organizers at all levels. A single public
telephone call box in a village provides
a way of getting help in emergencies
and of putting villagers in touch with
their market. A tape recorder can be a
useful instrument for getting feedback
from illiterate villagers. Other grass
roots media include mimeographed
newspapers. Provincial broadcasting is
important to countries like Nigeria
where regional, tribal, and language
differences are great. Voices talking in
a strange accent from a remote capital
are less credible than a local man who
will be seen again the next day, and who
will have to answer his neighbours
about what he said.
Too little study has been done on
possible use of such devices as the
telephone or video recorder at the
lowest rural levels. When developing
countries invest in telephone develop¬
ment it is usually to improve the service
in the capital and between the capital
and other major towns. Large amounts
are being spent on such programmes,
and for good reason. They generally
show a high return on capital, reflec¬
ting the high demand for telephone ser
vice. Such market -guided telephone in¬
vestments, however, are rarely oriented
in a major way to giving a voice to
villagers who want to speak to nearby
villages or to their district town. A rural
village in a poor country is usually a
tightly settled community where
everyone is on top of everyone else.
The last need they are likely to feel is
for a telephone in each house to talk to
each other. The main function of
village telephones is to allow villagers
to be in touch with the market town and
district officials. It is two-way com¬
munication; it allows the local nurse, or
teacher, to make a request to their
superiors as well as to receive instruc¬
tions. It allows the farmer to enquire
about the price on the market or ask
whether the fertilizer has arrived. A
single community phone may be ade¬
quate for years, and may be used only
three or four times a day, but still
thereby change the life of the village.
That, at least, is the finding of the few
studies of rural telephony that have yet
been made. It is a subject that calls for
more attention.
Opportunities for using communica¬
tions to accelerate development are
waiting to be picked up. There are three
important sets of developments. It is
becoming cheaper and easier to get
mass media to the population because
of low cost cameras and video editing
equipment, satellites and low cost
ground stations along with parallel
developments in publishing. Secondly,
international data networks are
eliminating geography as a barrier to
access to the world's best information
resources; users can be on line to them
from anywhere. Third, satellites and
solid state electronics make two-way
communication more feasible for even
the most remote villages, bringing them
into the national system.
Ithiel de Sola Pool
29
