The development of primary education is a prerequisite for the permanent eradication of illiteracy, yet, today, 121 million children
of primary school age do not attend school. This is why Unesco is making the development and renewal of primary education one
of its main priorities over the next ten years. Above, pupils at a mission station school in Queensland, Australia.



Education in
a changing world
THE conception, aims and orien¬
tations of education are deter¬
mined by society, but education
itself greatly influences the evolution of
society, and the task of preparing it to
meet the demands of the coming decades
should be undertaken now.
With all due prudence, and without
seeking to impose norms, any considera-
SEMA TANGUIANE is Unesco's Assistant
Director-General for Education. He was a
director of research at the Academy of
Sciences of the USSR beforejoining Unesco in
1975.
by Sema Tanguiane
tion of the future development of educa¬
tion should take account of observed
trends and problems and try to identify
the factors that may influence its
evolution.
Examination shows that in recent
decades there has been a considerable
growth in the numbers of pupils and
teachers and that this growth has been
particularly rapid at the secondary and
higher levels. It also reveals, however,
that some 121 million children of
primary school age do not attend school
and that many countries have failed to
achieve the target of primary schooling
for all by 1980 which was set in the early
1960s by the different regional in¬
tergovernmental conferences on
education.
This analysis highlights the vast and
persistent problem of illiteracy. From
700 million adult illiterates in 1950 to 758
million in 1970 and 824 million in 1980,
the number of illiterates is likely to ex¬
ceed 900 million before the end of the
century if present trends continue. This
problem, one of the most dramatic facing
both educationists and governmental
policy makers, is also a problem that con¬
cerns the entire world community.

Because of its importance and the need to
solve it before the end of the century it
has engaged the attention of all regional
conferences of ministers of education
organized by Unesco as well as of the 2 1 st
session of the Unesco General Con¬
ference. The General Conference ap¬
proved a strategy whose aim is to solve
this problem by trying to achieve a higher
rate of school enrolment, so as to attack
the problem at its source, and by adult
literacy teaching.
The democratization of education,
which derives from the concept of the
right to education as being one of the
basic human rights, is essential to all
social progress as well as to the develop¬
ment of the individual. It is not only a
matter of eliminating quantitative
disparities and of correcting qualitative
inequalities, but also of providing
everyone with an education that fulfils its
essential function by giving to all a com¬
mon body of knowledge, skills and
know-how that meets the needs of both
individuals and of different social
groups.
This imperative of meeting different
aspirations and needs is linked to another
problem, that of the relevance and ade¬
quacy of education to the various roles
and functions it is called upon to fulfil. It
should contribute to the full, harmonious
development of the personality, to the
preparation of individuals for the
responsibilities they will assume in socie¬
ty and for their full and active participa¬
tion in economic, social, cultural and
civic life. It should also take account of
increasingly rapid social changes and
contribute effectively to progress.
The development of education does
not take place in Isolation. It is subject to
the often decisive influence of phen¬
omena, processes and factors which
distinguish societies, their evolution and
the changes which occur in them. These
include demographic trends, the
economy, science and technology, the en¬
vironment, social, cultural and political
factors, and international relations.
The acceleration of scientific and
technical progress, and the growing
aspiration of all social categories to ac¬
tive participation in economic, cultural
and political life, create an imperative de¬
mand for the democratization of educa¬
tion. It is essential to guarantee to
everyone the full exercise of his or her
right to education, and thus to enable
each individual to participate in the
changes which are taking place in an in¬
creasingly complex society and to ensure
the exploitation for society's benefit of
the reserves of human intelligence, talent
and energy.
Consequently, increased pressure can
be expected in many countries for real
democratization and equality of chances
in regard to education, especially for
workers and underprivileged classes,
both in town and country. In this
perspective, it can be presumed that, in
places where mass illiteracy exists, grow¬
ing stress will be placed on efforts to
eliminate it by expanding children's
school attendance and intensifying adult
literacy programmes.
Socio-economic changes and the speed
of technological progress call for greater
professional and social mobility. This de¬
mand is evident not only in developed
countries; it is also felt in developing
countries. It will undoubtedly influence
not only education policies and the fixing
of the initial level of pre-employment in¬
struction, but also the nature of educa¬
tion. Education will have to be
polyvalent and in many cases its content
will have to be re-defined in depth. Here
the link between education and the work¬
ing world and particularly the introduc¬
tion of productive work into the educa¬
tional process as an element of our con¬
temporary general culture and an essen¬
tial factor in preparing for active life and
mobility, acquire their full significance.
Likewise, it can be expected that this
trend will demand the introduction of
permanent education on an ever greater
scale.
The growing role of science and
technology in the development of
societies is another factor which will cer¬
tainly influence education policies and
the evolution of educational systems at
all levels. These systems will very prob¬
ably be obliged to give increasing priority
to the training of higher and intermediate
level personnel and also to introducing
the masses, via general education, to
science and technology. It will be
necessary to foster the receptivity needed
for an understanding of the role and ap¬
plication of science and technology, in
order to prepare people to live and act in
societies in which the most advanced
technologies are entering more and more
into the most varied aspects of profes¬
sional and daily life, and indeed to make
them an organic part of the national
culture of every people.
The tendency to assign more impor¬
tance in development policies to cultural
problems will probably become much
more marked than in previous decades in
the educational policies of many coun¬
tries. At the same time, the intensifica¬
tion and diversification of cultural action
on the one hand, and the development of
extra-scholastic forms of education both
One of Unesco's main tasks for the period 1 984 to
1 989 is "to help pave the way for the widest par¬
ticipation by individuals and groups in the life of
the societies to which they belong and in that of
the world community". The persistence of il¬
literacy is a major obstacle to such participation
and its elimination is one of Unesco's main objec¬
tives. Right, the nation-wide literacy campaign
launched in Nicaragua in 1980 has reduced the
country's illiteracy rate from 50 to 1 3 per cent (see
the Unesco Courier, June 1980).

In recent years the educational scene has been marked by a constant search for
new methods, ranging from the redefinition of syllabuses to structural reform and
the establishment of experimental schools, like the one shown above in the USA.
All these initiatives are aimed at ensuring the full development of the individual and
at making possible his or her smooth integration into society.
Who needs paper when there is vellum to write on? For those who thirst for
knowledge, any moment of the day, any surface on which to write, even one as
unusual as that used by the Vietnamese boy in our photo below, affords an oppor¬
tunity to learn. The aim of the democratization of education, which is a necessary
consequence of the concept that the right to education is one of the basic human
rights, must be to ensure "equal opportunities for all" by offering the "best oppor¬
tunities to each".
Photo © Claude Sauvageon Pans
for children and adults, on the other,
show that educational action and action
in the cultural field are drawing closer
together. It may be supposed that this
trend will become more marked and that
it will call for ever closer co-ordination of
educational and cultural policies, with
obvious consequences for the planning
and organization of educational systems
that integrate school education and
education outside the classroom within a
coherent global framework.
Consideration of the future develop¬
ment of education cannot fail to take into
account the effects that the spectacular
development of the communications
media and their growing importance in
society have for education. Contrary to
what some people may think, this will not
reduce the role of education. Indeed, it
may conceivably become more impor¬
tant. At any rate, it is evident that educa¬
tional systems will have to take account
of the phenomenon to an ever greater
degree, and they will have to be clearly
defined in the light of this development,
which will undoubtedly continue. How
can education enhance the value of the
countless messages and items of informa¬
tion dispensed by the media, how can it
utilize and control them, making them
truly educational? Will this problem be
solved in the coming decades?
Finally, it is obvious that international
relations provide a framework that tends
to favour the development of education.
They influence not only the
psychological climate in which education
is dispensed, but the resources available


finance it. These will vary considerably
depending on whether the world moves
towards disarmament or towards the
arms race. At the same time, it is clear
that a function of education is to pro¬
mote an improvement in relations bet¬
ween peoples, thus contributing to the
establishment of a spirit of international
understanding and peace, and thereby to
the advent of a new international
economic order based upon justice and
solidarity.
Indeed, the ever more intricate inter¬
connexions between education and other
elements of social life make it increasing¬
ly difficult to draw a distinction between
the internal and external problems of any
educational system. One of the
challenges of the future will be to
preserve the specificity of education as a
process and domain in its own right
while, at the same time, placing it in¬
creasingly at the service of society.
Moreover, it is only by remaining
faithful to its specificity that it can make
its full contribution to society.
The democratization of education as
well as its role in the service of the na¬
tional and international communities
both demand and justify the mobiliza¬
tion of all available financial, material
and human resources and their optimal
utilization. Clearly there is room for im¬
provement in the distribution of
resources, in a reduction of unit costs and
in recourse to new sources of financing.
But the fact remains that education is
costly and, as far as unit costs are con¬
cerned it is impossible to go below a cer¬
tain threshold without impairing the
quality of education.
The fact is that the democratization of
education cannot be conceived solely in
terms of quantitative expansion, even if
this is more than ever necessary. In many
cases, a rapid increase in the number of
pupils has been followed by a decline in
the quality of education. More than
anything else, this would impair the ef¬
fective equality in chances of success
which is a condition for genuine
democratization and which demands a
form of education that can contribute ef¬
fectively to the full development of
everyone, compensating where necessary
for the physical, social or cultural han¬
dicaps from which certain underprivileg¬
ed individuals or groups suffer. Now cer¬
tain experiments prove that it is possible
at the same time to generalize education
and to improve its quality. It is no doubt
along these lines that solutions should be
sought, no matter how the economic
situation evolves and no matter what the
size of the financial resources that
governments allocate to education.
The link between the permanent tasks
of education and its new responsibilities
should also be determined in the context
of foreseeable developments. It is univer¬
sally recognized that, in addition to its
permanent tasks, education should
prepare young people not only to live in
a changing society but to lead it, and
should help adults to come to terms with
it. It is also unanimously agreed that,
although education cannot by itself or in
a decisive degree resolve the major prob¬
lems of the contemporary world, it can
8
and should contribute to this goal. All
agree too that education can and should
contribute to the maintenance and
strengthening of peace in a world which
lives under the permanent threat of a
nuclear catastrophe. All rightly believe
that education is called upon to make an
important contribution to development,
to reducing intolerable disparities bet¬
ween countries, to establishing an inter¬
national order based on greater justice
and on respect for the equal rights of
peoples, as well as to protecting the en¬
vironment which is humanity's common
heritage.
Because it has failed to change as
quickly as its social and technological en¬
vironment, education sometimes seems
to be lacking in realism, and this may give
rise to scepticism and disaffection
amongst young people. To ensure the
necessary coherence and continuity bet¬
ween education and society, many prob¬
lems have still to be solved in order to
achieve better co-ordination between the
roles of the different educational agents:
the school, the family, the work environ¬
ment, the various extra-scholastic
organisms which propagate messages,
knowledge or information or which pro¬
vide training in skills.
One of the most striking technological
advances is the means which radio and
television, electronics and micro-
informatics make available to education.
But the development of what is
sometimes called "parallel education"
which dispenses information of very une¬
qual value, in which the ephemeral and
the fortuitous often take precedence over
what is essential and permanent, also
raises many questions which point to
lines of investigation. One of them is
related to the measures to be taken in
order to ensure that education prepares
the child, the adolescent or the adult to
select, interpret and arrange these items
of information in order to transform
them into knowledge. The other one, less
frequently mentioned, is the effect which
the use of certain new technologies in
education has on the development of the
personality.
These new problems will serve to
underline the current evolution of the
teacher's role. The importance and com¬
plexity of their initial and further train¬
ing, which is universally considered to be
an essential factor in educational pro¬
gress, will be increased. In this connex¬
ion, it is also well to remember that the
future educationists who are now being
trained will be teaching children who will
not embark upon adult life until the next
century.
In any reflection of an international
character, it is important to deal with
problems differently according to the
country or group of countries. Never¬
theless, it seems desirable to bear in mind
that there is a certain continuity in the
concerns of the international communi¬
ty. This is an added reason for exploring
the possibilities of international co¬
operation with a view to furthering the
development of education and seeking
solutions to foreseeable common
problems.
Sema Tanguiane
