From myth
to reality
The
rise of scientific
map-making
by Vitorino M. Godinho
i
The Portuguese "Cantino Map", dating
from 1 502, is a landmark in cartographic
history. For the first time a map depicts
the African continent in its true profile,
India as a triangular peninsula, a
somewhat deformed Indochina and the
immensity of both the Indian and the
Atlantic Oceans.
Photo (c) Roncaglia, Modena. Biblioteca Estense, Modena
- ^w "ttQF; j£gsa
The "Catalan Atlas" (1375) is thought to be the work of a
celebrated Jewish cartographer of Majorca, Abraham Cres-
ques. Consisting of six panels of parchment-covered wood, it
depicts the world from western Europe to the Far East as ¡t
was known from tradition and the writings of travellers.
Astrological, astronomical and cosmographical diagrams are
featured on the first two panels. Fragment shown here is se¬
cond half of the sixth panel. Text at bottom left corner, above
the picture of a mermaid, reads: "Sea of the isles of the Indies
where there are spices, in this sea sail a number of ships of
various peoples and there are several kinds of fish called mer-
ids, one species is half woman and half fish and another
woman and half bird."
Photo t Urs Graf, Dietikon-Zürich
20

DURING the Middle Ages geo¬
graphy was based on myth rath¬
er than on fact. The changes
that occurred in and around the thir¬
teenth century made possible the first
timid intrusion of reality. Before then
there had been no system for visualizing
the globe. Planispheres and maps of the
world, as they were known, merely jux¬
taposed land masses separated by seas
and criss-crossed by rivers which were
given imaginary courses (in keeping with
the logic of the myth) in disregard of any
scientific law of correspondence between
their forms, their dimensions or even
their relative positions; they were no
more than symbolic configurations.
The years 1270-1320 witnessed the
resurgence of Euclidean geometry (giving
science the means with which to define
space) as well as the astronomy of
Ptolemy (passed down through Islam),
the optics of Apollonius and Ptolemy,
Based on this new-found knowledge,
the first cartographic system was
established using rhumb lines and the
estimation of distances. At that time, the
"Sea between lands" (the Mediterra¬
nean) was plotted correctly (except for
elongation in the longitude) and became
the centre of the scientific representation
of the oikumene (the inhabited world)
which, on the basis of information
brought back by caravaneers on the
Asian routes, then extended as far as
Cathay.
Those who would like a view of the
world as it appeared in the years
1375-1381 need only examine the Catalan
Atlas of the Cresques, a father and son
team of cartographers from Majorca.
The splendour of its illumination reveals
the camel trails of Africa and the Orient,
kingdoms of gold, the opulent cities of
Asia, fleets of the Indian Ocean and the
galleys of the coasts of Madeira and the
Portugal and Bordeaux, wool from Old
Castile, Wales and the Midlands, linen
from Ireland and Minho, and fish from
all regions. Shipbuilding remained active
thanks to the timber from the Sierra de
Cantabria, the Landes and other areas.
It is often held that this maritime ac¬
tivity was due to the introduction of
Mediterranean shipbuilding methods
(galleys) from Genoa. But galleys were in
fact only useful for naval warfare, and
the vessels used in the Atlantic were of
Atlantic design and construction. From
Biscay there came the cog, a broad-
beamed vessel which was to serve as a
model for Italian and Catalan merchant
sailing ships, and it was doubtless in the
ports along the northern coast of Spain
that the hinged rudder was invented to
replace the two rear oars that were used
to steer ships. The triangular lateen sail
most certainly came from the Mediterra¬
nean, whilst improvements in hulls and
L cCiraiuiejitioiB-
m
©eonuê
1)01*31»
rouai iSrp»|B»Wu,ilí
ni« añüi S5I RcvääBo:
BdbnkifiHl «Sircraisonnitihi
fflwbAjaas
©fains vnSinii. iiKiiiuialB.
m \ Ma i
anppF¡>::r-»Vi)íB§
/
,i.
(Jimibripncii;!
%
É
è
j>wt!ii8#jnÄ.
the medicine of Hippocrates, Galen and
Avicenna. Indo-Islamic arithmetic and
algebra were introduced at the same time
as the Chinese "South Pole indicator",
which was used in the Mediterranean as a
veritable compass. Missionaries and mer¬
chants discovered the vast Asian conti¬
nent and the existence of the caravan
routes across the Sahara became known.
VITORINO MAGALHAES GODINHO, of
Portugal, is professor at the Faculty of Human
and Social Sciences of the University of Lisbon.
A corresponding member ofthe British Academy
and of the Royal Academy of History, Madrid,
he is the author of many articles and studies in¬
cluding a report on Cultural Identity and the
Universalizing aspects of Humanism, prepared
for the Council of Europe.
Canaries. The British Isles, however, are
sketched very approximately and, as one
moves away from the hub of scientific
knowledge and measurement, the detail
becomes blurred, as, for example, in
south-east Asia. Nevertheless, in this
same atlas, as in all maps of the thir¬
teenth and fourteenth centuries, mythical
elements still remain.
As early as the eleventh or possibly the
mid-twelfth century, from Guadalquivir
to the shores of the English Channel and
on up to Northern Ireland, people began
to settle on the sea coasts, building ports
which, by the fourteenth century, had
developed from simple centres of fishing
and other activities or small Muslim
trading posts into a network of com¬
munication and trade routes for the
barter of iron from Biscay, tin from
Cornwall, salt from Andalusia, Setubal,
the Tagus, Aveiro, Brouages and the
Breton coast, wines from Andalusia,
other parts of the ship came from Scan¬
dinavia and the North Sea countries.
Nor was the arrival of- Italian and
Catalan merchants responsible for
stimulating Atlantic trade; on the con¬
trary, the endogenous evolution of the
Iberian peninsula was the more probable
cause of oceanic and mercantile expan¬
sion from the eleventh to the fifteenth
century.
Although the annexation of the
Canaries (in the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries) resulted primarily from the ac¬
tion of groups from Catalonia, Valencia,
Andalusia and also Portugal anxious to
capture slaves for the sugar cane planta¬
tions and to obtain sealskins for leather-
working and other industries, and despite
the colonization of the archipelago by the
Normans at the beginning of the fifteenth
century, this period should not be con¬
sidered as the backcloth to the discovery
movement nor the point at which the cen-
21

Landing at the Azores; fresco painted in 1 580 by the Italian artists
Fabricio Castello and Nicolas Granello, now in the Monastery of San
Lorenzo el Real del Escorial, near Madrid. The development of the
caravel during the 1 5th century as a replacement for the galley made
possible the great voyages of discovery of the 15th and 16th
centuries.
tre of activity shifted closer to the Atlan¬
tic. Decades passed before Castile allow¬
ed its ships to fit out in ports on the
Guadalquivir in search of gold from the
coast of Mina (in present-day Ghana) or
a western route to Zipango (Japan) and
Cathay. Moreover, the French and
English turned their eyes to the ocean on¬
ly towards the end of the sixteenth
century.
It was primarily the Portuguese who
advanced the great discoveries as a solu¬
tion to the long depression that afflicted
Christendom (among other spheres) dur¬
ing the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries.
It was towards the middle of the fif¬
teenth century that this long downward
slide was reversed. About this time the
Portuguese began to take an interest in
African spices (not to mention the ivory
they had already been seeking), yet it was
under John II of Portugal during the
1480s that they began to covet Asian
spices and narcotics, and sought to link
the north-western African group of
countries and the Islands to the route for
22
the Cape of Good Hope. This occurred at
the same time as the voyages of Colum¬
bus and the Côrte-Real brothers (Por¬
tuguese navigators who discovered
Labrador, Newfoundland and
Greenland).
Three innovations were to open the
door to the oceans. The first, the caravel,
was launched by the Portuguese in
1440-1450. It replaced the galley which,
along with the heavy carracks and com¬
bined sail/oar boats, was poorly suited to
exploration. The caravel was an adapta¬
tion of earlier Muslim, Nordic and Atlan¬
tic vessels. It was longer for similar
width, had a hinged axial rudder and
triangular sails for bowline navigation
(hugging the wind), and was light, sturdy
and manoeuvrable.
Secondly, the caravel was an invention
that made the conquest of the oceans
possible because it was related to a new
style of navigation. This did not yet imp¬
ly the use of scientific experimentation;
the scientific aspect emerged gradually.
However, systematic exploration began,

and myths were tested against observa¬
tion. Winds and currents were noted
down, landmarks and depths were
recorded and an effort was made to
determine the position of a ship and its
course when it was on the high seas,
perhaps hundreds of miles from shore.
Regular observations of the height of the
polar star during the night watches com¬
bined with the use of other instruments
and observations made it possible to plot
courses on the open sea, especially for
return voyages or to reach difficult to
find islands in the ocean. During the
1480s, this systematic nautical practice,
coupled with important borrowings from
Judaic and Muslim sources, evolved into
navigation by the stars. Concurrently,
the works of Ptolemy and other ancient
scholars were rediscovered and type¬
setting made their dissemination possible
at the end of the fifteenth century.
Latitude, calculated according to the
midday height of the sun on land and at
sea, became a basis for scientific
cartography.
Thirdly, progress in artillery made it
CONTINUED PAGE 27

La Malinche, between the Aztec emperor Montezuma and the
Spanish conquistador Hernando Cortes. Of Aztec origin, and sold to
the Mayas as a slave. La Malinche was offered to the Spaniards as a
"gift". She became Cortes' interpreter, adviser and mistress and bore
him a son. She was long regarded by Mexicans as exemplifying the
betrayal of indigenous values and submission to European power and
culture, but today she is seen by some as the symbol of the intermingl¬
ing of cultures and the herald of the destiny of her country which was
to be neither Spanish nor Aztec but Mexican. More than this declares
the Bulgarian writer Tzvetan Todorov, she represents "the present
condition of all men, since, though we may not all be bilingual, we are
inevitably bi-cultural or even tri-cultural."
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 22
possible to instal weapons aboard ships.
Caravels and other vessels, heavily arm¬
ed, ruled the seas, forcing contact with
other civilizations.
The first resolve to explore grew from
an economic situation that followed the
great depression and a reversal in the
trend related to the "cluster of inven¬
tions" of the middle of the fifteenth cen¬
tury. Other series of inventions sprang up
at the end of the fifteenth century,
throughout the sixteenth century and at
the dawn of the seventeenth century. The
uncovering of things hidden and the
gathering together of dispersed informa¬
tion, required new patterns of reasoning
and a new procedure, the "experiment",
a word in common usage by then that
henceforth took on new meaning.
Of course, the importance of previous
intellectual revolutions should not be
underestimated. The Arabs, for instance,
who dominated the entire Indian Ocean
and communication with the Far East
possessed a chart indicating the actual
shapes of land masses and the true loca¬
tions of their coastlines, as Ibn Khaldun
explained in 1374-1378. This chart was
called al Kunbas (compass) because the
drawing was based on the use of the
magnetic needle. It indicated the places
where the winds blew, as well as their
direction, affording mariners a means to
take bearings during voyages. However,
the following remark was added concern¬
ing the ocean: "This is not at all validfor
the neighbouring sea, and that is why
boats do not sail in those waters if they
were to lose sight ofthe coasts they would
not know how to return, all the more so
since the vapours floating in the at¬
mosphere hinder navigation. "
To measure the progress achieved over
a span of 125 years thanks to the caravel
and the great discoveries, one need only
compare the Catalan atlas to the Por¬
tuguese map known as the Cantino map
of 1502. For the first time the entire
African continent appears in its actual
profile (only slightly elongated in
longitude). India has grown into the
shape of a triangular peninsula, shorten¬
ed and simplified. Although an inor¬
dinately swelled Indochina descends too
far in latitude and Sumatra is incorrectly
placed (the Portuguese still had not sailed
beyond the Malabar coast), the immensi¬
ty of the Indian and Atlantic Oceans is
here depicted, the Atlantic being
separated in part by the Caribbean
Islands in the centre, king of Portugal's
Land (Labrador-Newfoundland) to the
north, and Brazil, whose coastline is still
incompletely drawn, to the south.
Similarly, in the north, Asia is still shown
extending as far as Scandinavia. The
Americas came very slowly to be
distinguished as a single entity, separated
from the Asian and southern continents
by the immensity of the Pacific Ocean.
De Ruysch's planisphere of 1508,
Schöner's globe of 1513, Apianus' map
of the world of 1520 and Francesco
Roselli's map of the world of 1530 still
show Greenland and Newfoundland con¬
nected to Asia, while the Atlantic joins
the ocean that washes the Asian shore,
whether between Newfoundland and the
Caribbean or between the Caribbean and
Brazil a Brazil which is the southern
continent of traditional mythical iv
27

Detail from a 16th-century tapestry showing the arrival of the Portuguese navigator
Vasco da Gama at Calicut (Kozhikode) in India in 1498.
geography, at times rendered as an
island. The Globo Dourado, or golden
globe of 1528 shows the Americas to be
one solid land mass, undivided from
north to south, in which only the
southern part is detached from the
southern continent, whilst the whole is
still integrated into the enormous Asiatic
mass. New Spain was placed in Mangi
(southern China), Cathay bordered on
the Gulf of Mexico and Florida. Never¬
theless, the sea already separated
Greenland from the Land of Cod (New¬
foundland) and, in Portugal, as early as
1 50 1 , the concept of the Americas as con¬
tinents, apparent in the modified version
of Cantino's maps, had become the ac¬
cepted standard.
Another major revolution in the man¬
ner of thinking (after that of the thir¬
teenth century) manifested itself in the
drawing of the universal map of the globe
using the new scientifically-determined
latitudes, weaving the web of the world's
routes, placing mankind throughout the
entire planet. Thus was created an
organized system of researched informa¬
tion in which the observations of the
caravaneer combined with those of the
pilot against a background of expansion
and commerce.
For the first time, rather than acting on
the basis of symbols and myths, men
built physically upon the basis of
something they had defined space,
spaces and could base their actions on
rational thought. For thousands of years
the earth had been no more than a sort of
strip whose ends did not meet; the'
Americas and the Pacific were unknown,
and traffic existed only between Europe,
Eurasia and Africa north of the equator,
and between eastern Africa and the Far
East. The world was a mosaic of cultures
and civilizations, many of which were
unaware of the others' existence, and bet¬
ween which there was little or no com¬
munication. The intellectual and
Arrival of the Por¬
tuguese in Japan. This
detail from a 16th-
century Japanese
painted screen, by ar¬
tists of the Kanô
school, bears witness
to the influence which,
despite only brief con¬
tacts, Europe had on
Japanese art. After the
arrival of the Por¬
tuguese in Japan and
the two-year mission of
St. Francis-Xavier, the
Japanese made several
experimental attempts
to assimilate certain
aspects of Western art.
This example of Euro-
Asian art is purely
Japanese in technique,
but deals with scenes
and events directly
relating to Europeans.
Photo © Giraudon, Pans.
Musée Guimet, Pans.
28

technical resources of the time were in¬
capable of providing a conception of the
entire globe in all its diversity, divisions
and unities; there was no means of
guaranteeing that the traveller would be
able to return to his home port. There
were but shreds of reality in a world of
mythical geography and fabulous beings.
Henceforth, man possessed a system of
representation that was both verifiable
and effective for movement and com¬
munication. Barriers that compartmen¬
talized nations disappeared, and along
with them vanished the earthly paradises,
the Eldorados, fabulous islands of eter¬
nal youth, opulent kingdoms built entire¬
ly of gold and precious stones, lost
Christendoms, impassable deserts that
were hot as furnaces, boiling seas, giants
too fearful to meet, pygmies hidden deep
inside impenetrable forests.
The spherical conception of the world
predominated, although in certain circles
of bookish tradition, it remained related
to legend and myth. The Sphaera Mundi
of the thirteenth-century English mathe¬
matician and astronomer John
Holywood (known also as Sacro Bosco)
continued to be the foundation for a
great deal of educational and even prac¬
tical training. Thirty editions appeared
from 1472 to 1500, and forty more had
come out by 1647. The Mandeville book
was also widely published, the Imago
Mundi remained influential, and an
equally large number of copies of the
widely-read Auto das Sete Partidas
(which included the fabulous letter from
Préster John describing his kingdom to
the monarchs of the Western world) were
printed.
Men reasoned in terms of navigation
and relegated all fantastic geography to
literary circles, far from mercantile and
maritime practices. The idea of the
sphericity of the planet, recognized and
analysed, was proven scientifically by
means of the shadow of the eclipse, the
way in which boats disappeared beyond
the horizon, the circumnavigation of the
earth by Magellan and his lieutenant El
Cano. Discussions concerning the length
of degrees of latitude and longitude
(from 16 2/3 to 17, 17 1/2 and 18 leagues)
prepared the way for the establishment of
uniform measurements by the Academies
(especially the French) in the seventeenth
Henry the Navigator (1394-1460) is shown bottom right in this detail from the famous
St. Vincent polyptych, by the 1 5th-century Portuguese artist IMuno Gonçalves, now in
the Museum of Ancient Art, Lisbon. Henry was the third son of king John I of Portugal.
After having "evangelized" Morocco, Henry, who at the age of 26 was named Grand
Master of the Order of Christ, decided "to extend the arms of the Cross to the ends of
the earth". To his castle at Sagres, Cape St. Vincent, he summoned freebooters, Arab
merchants, Jewish cartographers, Venetian and Genoese sea captains, Ethiopian
monks and German astronomers. In his shipyards at Cape St. Vincent he built a new
type of vessel, the caravel, which combined the best elements of naval design of the
period. He ordered his seamen to turn their backs on the Mediterranean and head south
across the Atlantic. His ships explored the west coast of Africa as far as Senegal and,
before he died, had reached the Gulf of Guinea.
century. The installation of the maritime
clock mounted on a Cardan bearing
aboard ships for calculating longitude
meant that maps were drawn in an in¬
creasingly scientific manner. The ex¬
istence of the Antipodes was proven by
experience and solid reasoning and the
notion that the torrid and Polar regions
were uninhabitable was shown to be
false. This new way of thinking, based on
experience and rational demonstration,
is quite clear in the Tradado da Esfera
(1536?) by the Portuguese navigator
Joäo de Castro, the man who first con¬
ceived the scientific expedition.
Thus, the voyages of the navigators
and caravaneers, and the search for mer¬
chandise led to knowledge (using car¬
tographic representations based on scien¬
tific systems) about States, nations, pro¬
ducts, landscapes, and people of diverse
customs on the European, African,
Asian and American continents. Between
1560 and 1570 there already existed
literature covering a large part of the
earth, from China and Japan to Brazil
and Guinea, from Canada to the Cape of
Good Hope. Travel logs, books of
weights and measures, geographies, and
chronicles of all sorts provided a fairly
accurate body of knowledge about the
entire planet, lands and seas, peoples and
landscapes.
The Lusiads (1572) by the Portuguese
author Camoes summed up this new¬
found knowledge: The marvellous no
longer depends on wondrous deeds and
fables which are but a poetic way of por¬
traying reality and building a bridge over
to Utopia, the island of love. Even before
1516, Diego Velho had already sung:
The new things before us
Are now so evident to our eyes
That never did another soul
See a world like unto it.
Vitorino M. Godinho
Elephants, palm-trees
and exotic scenes of
African inspiration adorn
this 16th-century en¬
graved silver plate. In the
centre are displayed the
royal arms of Portugal of
that period.
Photo ©Council of Europe,
Strasbourg
29
