Right, panel in an exhibition on the theme of "Masks" held
at the Commonwealth Institute in London in 1980.



Shared
disillusion
by Michel Cournot
THEATRE is: one or several human beings, physically
present in the here-and-now, who simulate, who pre¬
tend, to do, to say something in the same place as other
human beings who are also physically present and who as a rule
do not move and are silent.
Those who make believe, who "play", are called "actors";
those who are silent are called spectators.
Considered coldly, from outside, theatre is not different
from that which is not theatre. It is the mother who sings a
lullaby or tells her child a fairy story; it is the unknown man
who contrives to dress, control his gestures, facial expressions
and tone of voice, and chooses his words in order to attract the
unknown woman. '
But the purely utilitarian act, like that of the workman who
performs the gestures of the assembly-line beneath the
foreman's eye simply to earn his living and without being in¬
volved heart and soul in his work that too is a form of theatre.
These gestures are so profoundly alien to the workman, so
much a matter of indifference and even distress, that the "acts"
when he performs them.
And then there are the more common theatres of social life:
judges and lawyers in the courtroom; political leaders watching
the parade from the rostrum; the soldiers or civilians marching
by (actors in the presence of actors); or the waiter in the
restaurant who "playfully" serves with stylized gestures.
Theatre in the strict sense, the "art" of theatre, so called to
distinguish it from the continuing social game, usually takes
place away from the workplace, in special premises in the even¬
ing after business hours, or on Sundays and during holidays.
In these moments and places of "leisure", actors and spec¬
tators perform this parallel activity: beginning again "outside
the real world", the acts, gestures and words of reality.
This counterfeiting, this imaginary imitation of real life, is
not a phony operation, a shared lie. The men and women who,
on stage on this particular evening, do the actor's job, really do
endure the physical and spiritual effort, the sufferings, joys and
anguish of authentically accomplished acts; it may even be said
that they have a stronger physical perception and awareness of
these acts than many clerks, labourers or intellectual workers in
their working life.
As for the theatre audience, all its members have been spec¬
tators before, leaning out of the window and watching the
MICHEL COURNOT, French journalist and writer, is theatre critic with
the Paris daily Le Monde and literary critic of the weekly Le Nouvel Obser¬
vateur. He has written several books (one of which won the Fénéon Prize)
andafilm Les Gauloises Bleues which was presented al the Cannes Festival
in 1968.
world go by, but the act of visual and auditory perception which
they perform in this particular place on this particular evening
they experience with far more attention and keenness.
Time spent at the theatre might be considered as time in a
thoughtful, contemplative life, a life of awareness and en¬
durance, in the tension of truthful expression, imaginative and
creative effort, while time spent away from the theatre, often
fraudulent and tedious, at home, at work or travelling between
the two, might be time in a mechanical, forced, uncommitted,
fictitious life.
The workaday repetition of life in society might be con¬
sidered as a fragile collective fiction which possibly continues to
function because it rests on an age-old nucleus of habit, submis¬
sion and thoughtlessness.
A spectator at the theatre, begun anew, of a great city in the
morning might feel giddy at the sight of these hundreds of
thousands of men and women who do not stay in bed, or at
home in an armchair, but instead go down into the metro once
again, take the dust-sheet off the typewriter, open the shop, sit
down again, wrists chained as a safety precaution, in front of
the automatic machine.
The whole performance begins anew, without conviction,
above all perhaps because the new beginning is in itself a train¬
ing to perform the gestures and words of this life. The perfor¬
mance begins anew independently of each person's real choice,
the true hopes and discernment he once had, the performance
begins anew and will go on until the final day in this woolly
unanimous state of sleepy assent and accustomed acceptance.
And some evenings, for some who steel themselves, in those
places of creation and reflection called "theatres", on the
fringe of this collective sleep, gestures and words are ac¬
complished in the light, in full awareness, with spectators who
are at last awakened. A few hours of responsible life stolen
from the illusion of the day.
This seems to be the meaning of Theatre in the old world.
11
