FRANZ KAFKA (1883-1924)
The devil's pay
by Maurice Nadeau
FRANZ Kafka was born in Prague
a hundred years ago, on 3 July
1883. Portraits and photos of him
until just before he died, ravaged by con¬
sumption, on 3 June 1924 show an eter¬
nal adolescent just as Lautréamont and
Rimbaud remained adolescent. There are
authors who do not age, and works
which, from the moment they are writ¬
ten, rush forward in time so that a cen¬
tury or more later we still breathlessly try
to catch up with them. The Penal Settle¬
ment, The Trial and The Castle are
stories we have known we read about
them in the newspaper only this
morningand, alas, they still presage the
future. In the last fifty years since
Kafka's work, most of which was
published posthumously, has come to
light, how many times has its author been
hailed as a saint and prophet? Today
does he not possess one of the common
characteristics of the prophet, namely
that he is (officially) not without honour
save in his own country?
He was nothing if not a man of
Prague, the city where he was born and is
buried. He was more a man of Prague
than he was Jewish (although he was
born a Jew) or German (although his
MAURICE NADEAU, French man of letters,
has been publisher and editor-in-chief of the
literary magazine La Quinzaine Littéraire since
1966, and publisher of Lettres Nouvelles
since 1953. Notable among his published
works are Histoire du Surréalisme (1945), Le
Roman Français depuis la Guerre (new edition
1969), and Gustave Flaubert, Ecrivain (1969).
writings are an adornment of German
literature). Fundamentally neither
Jewish, nor Czech, nor German, or else
all three at once, he belonged to no
category which would enclose him within
a people, a nation (or the conglomerate
of nations which comprised the Austro-
Hungarian empire) or a confession. A
member of the German Jewish minority
which engaged in trade and sent its
children to the Gymnasium, he found
himself at that intersection of space and
time where his family happened to live,
where he worked in an insurance office,
and where his grave is today. Look at his
contemporaries: the superabundantly
Czech Jaroslav Hasek, the undeniably
Austrian Franz Werfel, the militant Jew
Max Brod. It is as if they all insisted on
affiliation to a community. Kafka was
his own man. If he immersed himself in
Hebrew towards the end of his life,
perhaps it was because he felt that he was
so little a Jew. His German is sometimes
the German of the ghetto and sometimes
a German that can be traced directly back
to Goethe. There is nothing in common
with the expressionists of Vienna or
Berlin. What other literary influences
helped to shape him? Flaubert and
Dickens, a Frenchman and an
Englishman.
Shortly after meeting Max Brod, the
faithful friend (whose loyalty went so far
as the act of betrayal which brought
Kafka posthumous fame) Kafka tried to
collaborate with him in writing a novel.
Little came of it. However, the Descrip¬
tion of a Struggle (1905) and Prepara¬
tions for a Country Wedding (1907), in
between which a doctorate in'
jurisprudence had led to a position as the
conscientious and efficient employee of a
workers' insurance company, are already
pure Kafkawhat Sartre would call for¬
ty years later "a universe both fantastic
and rigorously true." In fact, and this
would only be realized later, Kafka was
writing in a new way.
But only on condition that he had the
time and the material conditions in which
he could write. Perhaps, as many com¬
mentators insisted after his death, the
drama of Kafka's life was metaphysical.
First and foremost, however, it was
physical: the drama of someone who car¬
ries within himself a world which he can¬
not bring to birth, trapped as he is bet¬
ween two swing doors in his room in the
family home, and, during the day, in his
office at the "Workers' Accident In¬
surance". He can only indulge his vice,
his reason for living, when all is asleep.
Short descriptions, suddenly interrupted,
a gesture captured in an instant, unusual
and fleeting situationsthese are the in¬
gredients of Kafka's Diaries, interspers¬
ed with outbursts of rage at the short
span of time at his disposal, complaints
about the task he feels entrusted to per¬
form and cannot, and those constant, ap¬
palling headaches. The monotony is
deadly. With a headstrong passion he
takes an interest in a troupe of Yiddish
actors and in its director Jizschak Löwy.
After holidaying with Kafka on the
Italian lakes, Max Brod makes him col¬
lect the texts of his first book Medita¬
tions, which would appear in December
1912.
Franz Kafka (1883-1924) was born and buried in Prague. Below, panorama of towers over the Moldau River,
Prague. In foreground, the Klementinum, a former Jesuit college and university, with its church, library and (far
left) astronomical tower.

iv 1912 was the crucial year. In January
he drafted the first chapters of The Man
who Disappeared, which would later
become America. While staying with
Max Brod in August, he met Felice
Bauer, his future fiancée. During the
night of 22-23 September he wrote The
Judgment at a single sitting. In
November and December he wrote
Metamorphosis.
In The Man who Disappeared he ad¬
mitted that he had unconsciously
plagiarized Dickens. The "fiancée" was
the woman he wished to marry and could
not bring himself to marry. One of the
dramas of his life, this engagement would
last until the final break came in 1917.
But before that it would be broken off,
then be renewed again, and he would
carry on a 500-letter correspondence, an
astonishing psychological document
If the book we are reading does
not awaken us with a punch on
the skull, what's the good of
reading it?
	Kafka
which shows him oscillating between
commitment and withdrawal, between
the desire to create a family in order to
enter fully into life, and the rejection of
the life of a petty bourgeois. And all the
time, looming in the background, is the
even greater fear that "the other" will in¬
terfere in what is most important to the
writer, his most precious occupation.
After writing The Judgment in a single
night, Kafka expressed his jubilation in
these words: "The fearful strain and joy,
how the story developed before me, as if
I were advancing over water... How
everything can be said, how for
everything, for the strangest fancies,
there waits a great fire in which they
perish and rise up again... Only in this
way can writing be done, only with such
coherence, with such a complete opening
out of the body and the soul. "Here can
be heard the voice of the young Flaubert,
who used almost identical words in his
letters. Flaubert, whose Sentimental
Education Kafka always had with him
and passages of which he knew by heart.
Writing can be a godlike activity or a
devilish one. Kafka talks of plunging into
"the underworld", of conjuring forth
"phantoms" and "demons", of
shadowy indulgence in guilty activities,
of living in the anguish of having
penetrated once and for all the
"nothingness" of life. "The point of
view of art and the point of view of life
are different even in the artist", he wrote
in Preparations for a Wedding. Like
Flaubert he knew that art is not life but
"a place where, in the dark void, without
foreknowledge, the rays of light can be
powerfully intercepted." These rays
make it possible to reveal the "truth"
around which art flies "with the set pur¬
pose of not burning itself." Were it to
burn itself there it would be extinguished
in the common reality, whereas what
must be done is to open reality to its own
potentiality, to "deliver" reality of what
it carries obscurely within itself. The
writer lives vicariously and in a state of
anticipation. The empty page is his
battlefield.
Judging from comments which have
been made on the occasion of the
centenary of his birth, this image of
Kafka as a writer and nothing else is tend¬
ing to become the new stereotype of the
author of The Trial. Perhaps it is more
accurate than the previous ones: Max
Franz Kafka in 1916 or 1917, The
photo, probably from a passport, is
now in the archives of the Beth
Hatefutsoth Museum, Tel Aviv.
Brod's "Saint Kafka" dedicated to
asceticism and transcendence; the
mystical Kafka who was for a time coupl¬
ed with an equally indecisive suitor,
Kierkegaard, the author of the Diary ofa
Seducer and the fiancée of Régine Olsen;
André Breton's Kafka, a practitioner of
"black humour"; Camus's Kafka, the
all-time champion of "the absurd"; and
many more, including the Kafka of
whom in 1945 a newspaper asked, not
altogether frivolously, whether he should
not be "burned" since he was distracting
young people from fundamental, life-
enhancing tasks. This effigy of Kafka as
"Kafka in Prague", a draw¬
ing by the Austrian artist
Hans Fronius, who il¬
lustrated most of the great
Czech writer's works.
Photo © Edimedia. Paris.
Private Collection
28

writer, the Kafka who noted in his diary
the famous sentence "All that is not
literature bores me and I hate it", is the
most acceptable effigy of all. But what
kind of a writer was he? In what sense
was he different from other writers?
The French critics Maurice Blanchot
and Jean Starobinski have said that the
difference lies in the fact that Kafka is
himself the material of his novels. Even
his characters are so much his other
selves that they are identified by the in¬
itial of his name or, like Samsa in
Metamorphosis, by a name related to it
in some way. Furthermore, their torment
is his, even more than the feeling of guilt
which nags at them, the search for the
transgression for which they are being
punished. If the punishment is to be
"slaughtered like a dog" or changed into
a beetle (or a monkey, or a mouse), the
transgression must be unatonable,
perhaps sacrilegious, a serious attack on
the order of things. This is what he wrote
to Max Brod about literary creation:
"Last night I saw clearly, with the
distinctness of a childhood object lesson,
that it is pay for serving the devil. This
descent towards dark forces, this
unleashing of spirits naturally bound,
these dubious embraces, and everything
that can happen down below and which is
unknown above, when one writes these
stories in the sun..." This "devil's pay",
a "sweet and marvelous reward", does
not redeem the transgression, which gives
rise to fear and remorse. "Terrible fear
of death". Not, says Kafka, because it
would end my life but because it would
prevent me from acceding to life "since I
have not yet lived." A terrible confes¬
sion. "Why," he asks again, "is the final
word always: 'I could live and I do not
live'?"
This incapacity to be born in the world,
this fate of someone who does not live, a
zombie, lead to despair but do not con¬
ceal the cardinal sin from him who has
reached the limits of extreme lucidity: "I
have not redeemed myself through
literature... What I have played at is real¬
ly going to happen." Joseph K., executed
on a patch of waste ground, is a victim of
this tragic "game", which will have no
end for the land surveyor in The Castle.
Kafka, writes Starobinski, is
simultaneously "the object of his cre¬
ation" and "the object of his destruc¬
tion". His work bears within itself its
own extinction. It consumes itself as it
burns, in unfulfilment, and perhaps this
is why Kafka did not wish it to survive
him. It is like the machine in The Penal
"Panorama of my existence" is the title Kafka gave to this card he drew in 1918 and
sent to his younger sister Ottla, the only person apart from his friend and biographer
Max Brod from whom he had no secrets.
©
ta.y»v
,$sJM*,
Ktr*. If**«*
¿tX fa/ -VovJ-^t; i
"Vt Ml**;!* «^ tf**v líF-^T' <h Jvvt~* !ri~~\
A /MA^
>(¿t*, Ha»«uv
t w"í ft
34I
Manuscript page from
Kafka's Diary for 1910.
The text reads: "I write
this very decidedly out
of despair over my
body and over a future
with this body.
"When despair shows
itself so definitely, is so
tied to its object, so
pent up, as in a soldier
who covers a retreat
and thus lets himself be
torn to pieces, then it is
not true despair. True
despair overreaches its
goal immediately and
always, (at this comma
it became clear that on¬
ly the first sentence
was correct)."
Men are bound together by ropes,
and it 's a bad thing even when the
ropes loosen around someone
and he falls into the void a little
below the others, but when the
ropes snap and he falls totally, it
is horrible. That is why we should
hold each to the other.
Kafka
Settlement which collapses when it in¬
scribes the fatal sentence on the skin of
the man who usually handles it and who
has offered himself to torture.
How can this body of work whose
material is its author and which is
nourished by his fantasms and his tor¬
ment render such a precise, glowing im¬
age, so clear-cut in its horror, of the
world in which we live? Of Auschwitz,
the totalitarian bureaucracies, everything
which systematically destroys the human
in man? This aspect of Kafka's work
the diagnosis it makes of our universe
has received too much attention for there
to be any need to return to it here. Kafka
says that the force of literature derives
from its nature as an "observation-act",
that is, "observation of a superior kind. . .
which obeys the laws of its own move¬
ment." Movement which mingles, which
should succeed in mingling, with the very
movement of the writing as long as they
both transgress their bound? as long as
(in the words of the Diaries) an assault
on the frontiers" is carried out. Then
comes the moment when, thanks to an
unassailable dialectic, and through a
rigorous form of language, a world
begins to unfold. It is either
transcendental, nor "realistii nor
"different", but it is neve iheless
"something else" just as the X-ray photo
of a body is not the same thing as the
body which has been pierced by the X-
rays; with its dark areas (its unsaid) and
its lines of force finally visible. Kafka
sees just as clearly into himself as nto the
reality around him, even into tht reality
gestating in everyday life. It is this lucidi-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 34

(CONTINUED FROM PAGE 29)
ty which in turn terrifies us. The world he
has taught us to read through his eyes is
indeed Kafkaesque.
The image which remains with us a
hundred years after his birth is as com¬
posite as the multitude of interpretations
his work has inspired. We have long been
familiar with the sanatorium patient,
ravaged by guilt and illness, dying of con¬
sumption without ever having succeeded
in really living, with illness serving as a
symbol for the profound evil which he
tried to exorcise through writing. It is
amazing to learn from witnesses that he
was a vigorous, athletic young man who
drew gusts of laughter from his writer
friends when he read them the first
chapter of The Trial. Without denying
the existence of a fundamental despair in
Kafka, one of these friends adds, "he
had weapons with which to defend
himself: they were humour, irony, and
hope." He did not hesitate to assert that
"hope finally triumphed; he possessed a
literally messianic force." Setting aside
the religious connotation, Kafka gave his
friends an impression of force, and it is
not pity he calls for, but the admiration
we feel for those who have had the
courage to take the measure of their evil,
of our evil, and who struggle with all
their might to overcome it.
"Strange and mysterious is the con¬
solation given by literature," he wrote.
Could this be because "literature alone
draws from itself no succour, does not in¬
habit itself, is both a game and despair"?
This desperate game, says another
witness, was "his only chance of hap¬
piness". The attempt of a man to destroy
himself through writing becomes in our
eyes one of the most solid constructions
in all literature, even in its in¬
completeness. The paradox continues to
the inevitable end. While in a matter of
months the illness made terrible inroads
in a body which it would even deprive of
speech, Kafka was at peace when he died
in the arms of his young friend Dora Dy-
mant. Long before he had asked Max
Brod to burn his manuscripts. But
perhaps on 3 June 1924 he thought in¬
stead that Franz Kafka was achieving his
transmutation. It was then that he came
into the world, for ever more numerous
generations of readers.
Maurice Nadeau
