The computer
generation
by O. Glissant, J.C. Maillard and M. Vertes
A S a result of the multitude of
Z\ possibilities opened up by the
¿ M. computer, human societies are
today moving firmly towards a greater
mastery ofscience and technology. But
is this development not leading us to
neglect ourpast, our origins, so that we
are deprived ofour artistic and cultural
heritage as we try to reduce the uncer¬
tainties of our future?
To answer this question we mustfirst
consider the advantages of the com¬
puter and assess the ways in which our
world is being transformed by infor¬
matics, before trying to define the rela¬
tionship between our past and this new
technology.
The computer can perform a series of
identical operations in which only the
data vary. By considerably reducing the
number of tedious and repetitious tasks
that have to beperformed, it saves time
and increases the productivity of the
brain. Because of the computer's abili¬
ty to do a very large number ofcalcula¬
tions at high speed, its user can examine
the problem in hand more deeply in¬
stead ofhaving to face the drudgery of
doing the calculations himself. But it
should never be forgotten that the
microcomputer is simply a tool which is
only capable of repeating and
remembering what the user has taught
it. Systematic use of the computer leads
to a situation in which it carries out a
number of tasks which the user could
easily perform himself. Perhaps the
computer-habit is causing man to lose
awareness of some of his possibilities.
It might be thought that over-use of the
computer could cause computer-
dependence, resulting in a loss of in¬
tellectual freedom and the risk ofmen¬
tal atrophy. Excessive use of the com¬
puter could also cut off the user from
the world around him.
The appearance of the computer in
schools is, however, leading to an ir¬
reversible technological and socio¬
logical change. We no longer acquire
knowledge in itself; we acquire access
to knowledge by means of the com¬
puter. Informatics is thus an inter¬
mediary between man and knowledge.
In the United States a number of
schools have already been created on
24
77/F C0/lPt/7ER is ß 100(....
this basis, with computers teaching
basic reading skills and arithmetic and
performing other tasks formerly car¬
ried out by teachers. Thus methods of
work in schools have progressed con¬
siderably; instead of people solving
problems, programmes are perfected in
order to solve them. The real benefit of
a programmable machine lies not in its
problem-solving capacities but in the
thinking that goes into the programm¬
ing. This thinking consists of breaking
down an operation into a series of di¬
rectives which can befed directly to the
computer.
The computer thus seems a
remarkable means ofliberating the user
from drudgery. In a similar way, man
might like to break free from the con¬
straints of tradition which hamper his
unending searchfor a betterfuture. But
what would be the value of a future
built on no foundations? If man loses
contact with his roots, with all that
makes up his culture and personality,
all that makes him both different from
and interdependent with other people,
what can he expectfrom afuture which
may be more or less well organized
apart from a material comfort which is

derisory in comparison with the
decadence which may well pervade his
mind? Scientific development can in no
way replace the role played by our ar¬
tistic and cultural past.
But in this case, is the impact of the
computer on man not a harmful one?
We wonder, on the contrary, whether
the use of the computer, which has
spread to so many of the modern sec¬
tors of the economy, could be extended
to the traditional fields of culture and
man's investigation of his roots. Can
the study of the past be computerized?
Will the conquests of technology give
us a better grasp of history? Is this
desirable?
Technically there is no reason why
the computer should not be used for
these purposes. The diffusion of
culture through the combined action of
informatics and telecommunications is
perfectly feasible. The most insignifi¬
cant piece of information is now at our
disposal, and the computer should even
make more information accessible to
more people. The way thus lies open to
the democratization of culture. Man
has within his reach the means of at¬
taching a new value to his collective
past through the availability of this
information.
If we want the computer's benefits to
reach everyone, we should not limit its
use to scientific activities. The use of.
the computer should be extended to
traditional, cultural and artistic fields
of activity in order to increase our
knowledge of the origins of mankind.
^\\=d?
Drawings © Jean-Christophe Maillard, Pans
W//y /Vor ¿fr
TUE a>rtP&T£K tVfly
In this way the computer could con¬
tribute to the construction of a future
firmly rooted in the experience which
can be derived from the past.
So far these possibilities have been
insufficiently explored. But the com¬
puter's high level of rationality, which
carries the risk ofblunting our sensibili¬
ty to nature, art and culture, should not
be an insuperable obstacle. Such
obstacles have always been overcome in
the long history of human progress.
Olivier Glissant (aged 14), Jean-Christophe
Maillard (aged IS) and Marc Vertes (aged 16) are
pupils at the Louis-le-Grand Lycée, Paris.
25
