The
United Nations
University
The United Nations University (UNU) was
established by the General Assembly of the
United Nations in 1972 and began operations
from its headquarters in Tokyo in 1975. Since
September 1980 the UNU's Rector has been
Soedjatmoko, an Indonesian scholar in the field
of international development and politics. Inter¬
viewed for the Unesco Courier by Gérard
Viratelle (of the Paris daily Le MondeJ and Rana
Gauhar (of Third World Quarterly, London) he
discusses the UNU's aims, activities and
prospects.
Gérard Viratelle: There are already several research in¬
stitutions in the United Nations system. Why was the UN
University created?
Soedjatmoko: The major characteristic of the United Na¬
tions University is that it is not an ¡ntergovernmental
body. Non-governmental organizations have greater
freedom to study problems and to come up with findings
without taking into account governmental sensitivities.
Many UN institutions, before they publish reports, have
to check those reports with Governments. We don't
have this obligation. Take, for instance, international
economic problems. The International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank combined have the largest research
capability in the world on international economic issues.
Still, there are several problems that they have not in
vestigated. Why? Because they are too sensitive for
Governments. We feel therefore that the UN University
has an obligation, for instance, to look at global economic
policy problems, especially at the kind of problems that
other intergovernmental agencies have difficulties handl¬
ing. There is an important role for such a non¬
governmental body.
Rana Gauhar: What are your hopes for the World Institute
for Development Economics Research which the Univer¬
sity is planning to set up?
Soedjatmoko: First, I think that the current recession has
made it very clear that it is no longer possible to think of
development only within the isolation of a single nation-
State. The development theory must be revised to take
into account international factors. At the same time, the
impact of national developmental policies on the interna¬
tional system has not been adequately studied. The
whole bank problem is an example of that.
There is also a dearth of study of which development
policies have succeeded and which have not, and why.
The search for more effective development theories
would be helped very much by independent assessments
of which policies have worked and why and which
policies have not worked and why.
Then there is the question of the workings of the inter¬
national economic system. The capacity of the world to
move more effectively in international development is
constrained by the malfunctioning of the international
system. These problems arising from the crisis of the in¬
ternational economic system should be looked at. It
would be very important for an independent institution to
do research on issues of particular relevance to the Third
World, without becoming partisan in the sense of taking
sides. We are a UN institution and we have to serve the
needs of all mankind, but we also have a commitment to
redress the disparities in the world. There ¡s a need for
that kind of research, and I intend that this new institu¬
tion should do it.
Viratelle: Is there not a kind of rivalry between UNU and
some other UN institutions? How is the co-ordination
done?
Human and Social Development and Co-existence of Peoples, Cultures and Social Systems is
one of the five broad themes or "problem areas" which form the framework for UN University
research programmes and projects. Migration within and across national boundaries by migrant
workers and refugees from war, famine and other disasters poses a major problem and over
the coming decades will change the ethnic and cultural composition of many countries and in¬
crease social tensions. Below, on the march in the high plateau near Tug Wajale, in north¬
western Somalia.
5ií i'A

Soedjatmoko: I don't think it ¡s a problem. We are too
small to be a threat to anyone, and fortunately so. We try
to co-ordinate. We join all kinds of co-ordinating
meetings, but that is not the important thing. More im¬
portant than co-ordination is collaboration and we try to
collaborate with larger United Nations agencies in
specific areas. With Unesco we have a number of col¬
laborative projects in the areas of communications and
the social sciences. In the area of development theory we
have collaborative projects with other UN agencies. I am
not worried about competition. I think a little competition
is good, it keeps everyone on his toes, and as long as it
leads to better quality it is fine.
Gauhar: Let's talk about the University's Charter and the
autonomy which is written into it. As each of your pro¬
jects develops further for instance the one on human
nutritional requirements and malnutrition you are going
to come closer and closer to political questions. At what
stage do you think you will need this academic freedom
when your projects get past collecting data and actually
point fingers at very unpleasant truths?
Soedjatmoko: I believe it is the legitimate task of the
social sciences and the policy sciences to study and
make recommendations as to what kind of food policies
in a given situation might be the best to ensure that the
poorest of the poor get as much nutritional value as
possible. If there are Governments which take exception
to this, then we have a problem. But I don't expect the
problem to arise. Many Governments run into food policy
difficulties, not because they want to but because they
have generally been looking at the supply side of food
and not at the consumption side. So my own experience
is that Governments are first rather surprised, then rather
pleased, that somebody is suggesting ways of making
sure that the poor get more value out of their purchasing
power. Of course, at some point one has to deal with the
fact that purchasing power is not enough and then one
will have to suggest policies. I believe it is the task of the
United Nations University to make recommendations
that are comprehensive and that pay special attention to
Photo © Bernhard Wagner, Stuttgart
Senegalese food scientist and UN University Fellow
Cheikh N'Dlaye examines a small storage silo which has
been made rat-proof using techniques developed at the
Central Food Technology Research Institute, Mysore, In¬
dia, an associated institution of the UN University.
the weakest and poorest in our societies. I think that this
is an obligation. I don't really expect any problems in
terms of academic freedom.
Viratelle: How is the Rector of the University chosen?
Since you have a governing Council what freedom of ac¬
tion do you have?
Soedjatmoko: First, the Secretary-General of the UN and
the Director-General of Unesco agree on the appointment
of the Rector from a list of nominations from various
sources. Once the Rector is appointed, he is a member of
the governing Council. The Rector is the chief Academic
and Administrative Officer, so the selection of research
topics, the direction of the research and the selection of
people is very much his responsibility always, of
course, in consultation with the Council. The Council ap¬
proves the budget and by doing so has its say on the pro¬
posals submitted by the Rector.
In institutional terms, the academic freedom and
autonomy of the University which we have talked about
is based on the Endowment Fund, the income from which
it is the University's responsibility alone to manage.
Viratelle: How are the developing countries participating
in your work and what can they expect from it?
Soedjatmoko: It was the vote of the developing countries
that pushed the resolution for the establishment of the
UN University through the General Assembly in 1 972. If
you disregard the contribution of Japan, more than 50
per cent of the remaining contributions come from the
Third World.
31

Under the UN University's Pro¬
gramme on the Use and
Management of Natural
Resources, the Alps, the Rocky
Mountains and the Himalayas
are linked in an ambitious pro¬
ject on mountain hazards map¬
ping, a new technique which
aims to define the extent, type
and degree of danger posed by
landslides, avalanches and
similar natural hazards. In
mountainous regions of the
world landslides are a major
threat, increasing soil erosion,
disrupting roads and destroying
houses and painstakingly con¬
structed terracing like these ir¬
rigated rice terraces (left) in
Nepal on the edge of the
Kathmandu Valley.
Viratelle: What do they get for it?
Soedjatmoko: Our research is primarily meant to con¬
tribute to knowledge that is of use to developing coun¬
tries in their development process. We are also providing
training designed to strengthen Third World institutions.
We are currently exploring the establishment of an Inter¬
national Institute for Natural Resources in Africa. This
would help strengthen local institutions that deal with
the various dimensions of the resource problem but don't
have the desirable concentration of expertise.
Viratelle: You don't have any student body, but you
undertake training through fellowships?
Soedjatmoko: Yes, our Fellows are post-graduates in
developing countries. Many of these young scholars are
isolated. It is our task to help identify them and give them
an opportunity to develop, particularly through inter¬
disciplinary training, and go back to their countries with
their skills reinforced. Our Fellowship programme is being
strengthened and developed and I think it makes a
valuable contribution to building Third World institutions
through relevant advanced training for Third World
scholars and researchers.
Then we are also concerned with improving the
dissemination of scientific information. This is one of the
reasons why we have established a new division, the
Global Learning Division, because it is very obvious that
even the available scientific knowledge does not reach
the people who need that knowledge. There are many
reasons why this knowledge does not reach them and we
want to have a more systematic look at that problem. To
take one example: as world population increases, more
and more people will have to move from the lowlands to
the uplands. Upland agriculture is usually done on
marginal land, land that is less fertile, with thin top soil,
and so on. Now if you increase the number of people liv¬
ing on that top soil, it will go beyond the ecological carry¬
ing capacity. You can increase the carrying capacity only
througfi the application of scientific knowledge and
32
The Marga Institute in Colom¬
bo, Sri Lanka, is the co¬
ordinating institution for the UN
University's project for the
study and sharing of traditional
technologies. Above, the tradi¬
tional method of cutting logs in
a Sri Lankan village.
through different social arrangements. There is no way
of bringing that about unless that scientific knowledge
reaches the peasants. This is one of the major world
problems, in my opinion.
Gauhar: Do you feel it is important for peasants
everywhere to know or to share in the experience of
peasants in other regions that will be helpful to them? Is
this something which you plan to do in the future, or is
the UNU already doing it?

Soedjatmoko: We are at present engaged in activities
along these lines. For instance, we have started on a
village video network activity. The idea is to see whether
it is possible for villagers to talk to other villagers without
interlocutors. In the field of rural energy systems we have
asked villagers in China to put themselves on video tapes
to explain why they have decided to have biogas and
bioconversion systems which created an integrated rural
energy system that has brought them considerable pro¬
sperity. Then they made a second video tape that show¬
ed the technology they developed. This is now being
adapted and shown in other places, in other villages, in
other countries, as well as in China itself. My main in¬
terest in developing this video programme is to transfer,
not technology, but hope; to show villagers, who have
been bludgeoned into passivity for many centuries either
by feudal lords or by the colonial régimes or later on by
military régimes, that it is possible for villagers to do
something for themselves. That, I think, is the most im¬
portant message that we could help bring, by simply
showing that there are villages that have made a success
of things.
There are many local success stories in the Third
World, which are not known. The thing is to eliminate
both the urban interlocutor of your own nationality and
the foreign interlocutor, and let villagers talk about
themselves and their achievements to other villagers.
Gauhar: I hate to inject a note of pessimism, but whether
you are thinking of transferring technology or hope to
peasants don't you have to by-pass the very people you
mentioned earlier, the military or landlords, or the urban
interlocutor?
Soedjatmoko: Yes. A medium like video has multipur¬
pose functions because we have found that there are
Governments which are interested in showing their tapes
as teaching material for their own civil servants.
Gauhar: It creates a greater consciousness?
Soedjatmoko: Yes. A lot of what we perceive as suppres¬
sion arises from ignorance rather than malice. I think that
one of the major problems that has led to violence and op¬
pression has not been any philosophical commitment to
it, but an incapacity to manage social transformations.
Gauhar: Wherever there is change, there is potential for
conflict. Are you saying that it is not necessary that
change will come about violently and that violence is in
fact a kind of mismanagement?
Soedjatmoko: I did not say that. I did not say that it is
possible to eliminate violence completely. The University
is studying the problem of the violence that accompanies
social change. When we started to design the "Peace
and Global Transformation" programme, we were faced
with the fact that there are more than 200 peace
research institutions in the world. What could our role
be? We found that very few studies had been made on
peace as it relates to inevitable social change. If you ac¬
cept that the world is changing, then the study of peace
and conflict resolution should aim at the reduction, as far
as possible, of violence and human suffering. For in¬
stance, massive migration is now increasingly a feature
of global change; the ethnic and cultural composition of
all countries is in the process of changing and this leads
to tension. The tensions may explode along fault lines not
only of class but also of ethnicity, of race and of religion.
These problems have not been sufficiently studied, and
we should understand the phenomenon more deeply.
Such understanding is necessary to enhance the adjust¬
ment capacity of society, because the movement of peo¬
ple from poor areas to rich areas and to empty spaces is
going to increase; no government can do much about it.
And it is a potential source of major conflict.
Gauhar: Although you don't have a student body as
such, every major educational institution tries to in¬
culcate certain values in people who come into contact
with it. Do you think that there are certain values which
are specifically those of the UNU and which UNU Fellows
or other people who come into contact with you should
benefit from? Perhaps a greater global awareness...?
Soedjatmoko: Yes. There are certain values which the
UNU is committed to. Probably the most important is the
sense of human solidarity. The UNU is an academic in¬
stitution which is not linked to any national interest but
is based on an acceptance of human solidarity. I think
that is a very important value perhaps the most impor¬
tant value of all.
1
^1 I The UNU is a new kind of university
1\B I designed to: 1) increase understanding
w ^fc^ of causes and solutions of what its
Charter terms "pressing global problems of human sur¬
vival, development and welfare;" 2) increase the prac¬
tical impact of research and post-graduate training by
organizing collaboration among scientists and scholars
across national boundaries; and 3) strengthen research,
training and dissemination of knowledge activities, par¬
ticularly in developing countries.
In its initial phase, the University developed three
programmesin World Hunger, the Use and Manage¬
ment of Natural Resources, and Human and Social
Development. Their scope has been broadened with the
adoption of a Medium-Term Perspective for the years
1982-1987 to ensure that this early work remains rele¬
vant to the current world situation. The new University
Programme that is emerging, under the leadership of its
second Rector, Soedjatmoko, is thus an organic growth
of the initial work.
This unified University Programme is planned and car¬
ried out by three divisions, each with a distinctive func¬
tion. Problems are explored at the local and country level
by the Development Studies Division. Their broader im¬
plications are looked at under the Regional and Global
Studies Division. The results of the work are com¬
municated to various users in the new Information
Society through the Global Learning Division.
The University's priority concerns are defined by five
themes which range across the modern world's most
urgent anxieties: 1. Peace, Security, Conflict Resolution
and Global Transformation; 2. The Global Economy;
3. Hunger, Poverty, Resources and the Environment;
4. Human and Social Development and the Co¬
existence of Peoples, Cultures and Social Systems; and
5. Science and Technology and Their Social and Ethical
Implications.
In the 1984-1985 biennium, the University's work
will fall under eight programme areas: 1. Peace and
Global Transformation; 2. The Global Economy;
3. Energy Systems and Policy; 4. Resource Policy and
Management; 5. Food-Energy Nexus; 6. Food, Nutri¬
tion, Biotechnology and Poverty; 7. Human and Social
Development; and 8. Science, Technology and the In¬
formation Society.
