I. A talking animal
Burgess, Anthony
Our greatest
possession
Man is called in Greek the Zoon
phonanta or talking animal. What
makes humanity different from the
brute creation is its capacity for con¬
structing a system of auditory signs
which stand not only for its thoughts
and feelings about the outside world
but for the outside world itself. You
will say at once that certain birds talk
and some of them, such as mynahs,
talk very well. Chimpanzees can be
taught a number of words and a few
simple linguistic structures. But only
human beings are defined by their
capacity to originate whole languages,
not merely mimic parts of them or han¬
dle a few nouns and verbs. When an
animal began to talk, that animal called
itself man.
We all have a vague, and totally
false, notion of very primitive man
making a few Tarzan grunts and howl¬
ing vocables, usually at the same time
accompanying these gruff melodies on
the drum of his chest. But human
language almost certainly did not begin
like that. It began as a continuous bab¬
ble and it probably began in the dark.
The dark is always frightening,
especially when one is alone in it, and
man learned very early in his career to
maintain the sense of society, the com¬
forting conviction that he was not
alone, when the sun went out and the
moon had not risen and the cave had no
lamp. Speech certainly came before the
discovery of fire. We still tend to use
speech not for conveying messages or
expressing feelings but merely for
establishing and sustaining human
contact.
The anthropologist Malinowski call¬
ed this kind of social speech "phatic
communion", pAcr/Zc deriving from the
Greek phatos, meaning spoken. The
act of speaking, the speech act, serves
primarily the end of sociability. It does
not have to mean anything, but it has to
be continuous. At dinner parties a pro¬
longed silence is the most embarrassing
thing in the world: it seems to indicate
that sociability has failed. It is often
broken by more than one person's
speaking at the same time excuse
me sorry after you no, after
you and what is said is far less impor¬
tant than the fact of somebody having
said something, anything. Everyone
breathes a sigh of relief, especially the
hostess.
We have no means of knowing what
the language of, say, Stone Age man
was like, but we know something of
that ancient language known as Indo-
European or Aryan because its struc¬
ture and some of its vocabulary, much
changed, survive in the daughter
languages, which means most of the
languages of Europe. It seems to have
been a complex language, with a rich
grammar, not at all like Malay or
Chinese, and it is fairly certain that the
further back we go in our study of
language the greater complexities we
find.
The simplification of language is
essentially a part of the modernization
of language: modern English is gram¬
matically much simpler than its
ancestor Anglo-Saxon, and Italian and
Spanish are much simpler than their
mother Latin. It is wrong to think of
the first talkers taking a few linguistic
bricks, cementing them together, then
baking more bricks and adding them to
make a more and more imposing struc¬
ture. An original babble was associated
with a particular feeling or thought,
but it was only in the period after, say,
There no longer seems to be any
doubt either about the deep-
seated unity of all languages
spoken throughout the world or
about the extension of this unity
to all three main aspects of
human language phonological,
syntactical and semantic. The in¬
nate character of the profound
structures in these threefields ap¬
pears to be confirmed.
Photo © G. Fischer Verlag. Stuttgart, Fed. Rep. of Germany
Text © copyright. Reproduction prohibited

A prayer wall (mani-wall) in the
Ladhak region of northern India.
Informer times each pilgrim add¬
ed a stone on which the monks
engraved sacred expressions.
Photo © Raphael Gaillarde, Paris
the break-up of the Roman Empire that
the specialists we call grammarians
began to analyse the component parts
of this babble and come up with terms
like noun, verb, adjective, adverb.
Noam Chomsky, the most impor¬
tant, certainly the most influential,
specialist in linguistic theory that the
post-war period has produced, has sug¬
gested that every human being has built
into his skull an apparatus that equips
him to master the whole of language,
any language. We all say things we
never said before, and without much
conscious effort; we're always inven¬
ting new things to say; we have within
us an apparently infinite capacity for
generating new statements. That is the
great human endowment. This endow¬
ment is based, however, on a very sim¬
ple peculiarity of the human brain its
capacity to think in opposed structures.
Look at it this way: the spectrum has
innumerable colours in it, and one
merges into another. Man learned to
pick out colours as separable items. He
did more; he learned how to make them
into signs of opposed meaning. You
have only to think of a traffic signal to
see that this is so. Now out of the bab¬
ble of noise which the human vocal
system is capable of producing it is
How many languages are there in the world in 1983? The answer depends
on what is meant by language and the way In which languages are differen¬
tiatedfrom dialects. Estimates thus vary between 2,500 and some 5,000.
Below, The Tower of Babel, by the Flemish painter Martin van Valken-
borch the Elder (1535-1612).
Photo © Bruckmann-Giraudon, Paris. Gemäldegalerie, Dresden, GDR
possible to separate specific sounds and
oppose one to the other. Pick does not
mean the same as pig, because /k/ is
opposed to /g/, though those two
sounds only differ (in English, anyway)
in that one is breathed and the other
sung. This structuralist gift of the
human brain enables us to talk of
phonemes (speech sounds) and mor¬
phemes (combinations of phonemes
that convey meaning) tiny structures
that oppose each other in doing
separate jobs and, taken together, add
up to a language.
What interests us most is why a word
should mean what it does. If primitive
man wanted to indicate that something
was high he probably instinctively
stretched up his arm, just as he brought
it down to indicate that something was
low. In other words, he used a mimetic
or imitative faculty. There is no
evidence to show that the physical
gestures which are speech (after all, you
use your vocal organs very athletically
to produce phonemes) were attempts at
imitating the things or actions or feel¬
ings described. Moon and ¡una and
bu¡an suggest something round and
high (the lips pout and the front of the
tongue is raised almost to touch the
roof of the mouth, which the Malay
language calls the langit or heaven), but
such imitative words are very rare in¬
deed. Dag does not sound like a dog,
nor does cat suggest a cat. If you want
the technical terms, language is not
iconic symbolism. Words are very ar¬
bitrary things. If it is suddenly decided
that cat shall mean not a cat but a dog,
it may take some time to accept the
idea, but there is nothing intrinsically
illogical about it.
With no evidence at all, I think of
primitive man looking up at the moon
and saying something like garava-
poiagiya. He does not mean moon; he
means: there is a situation in which I
5

A TALKING ANIMAL
"^^
il
1
I >^^ Á
If. - -
_!
-
The name of this little wayside
station in Wales Is Llanfairpwll-
gwyngy-llgogerychwyrndrobwyll
-llantysillogogogoch. It means
"The church of St.Mary in the
hollow of the while hazel tree
near the rapid whirlpool by the
church of St. Dysilio by the red
cave. "
am here looking at that round object in
the sky which began low and is getting
higher. In the morning, seeing the sun
rise, he might say something like gara-
sopalagiya. It would take him a very
long time to separate out the vocables
vapo for moon and sopo for sun, and
to understand that the po in both had
something to do with their both being
heavenly bodies apparently capable of
rising and setting. In other words, the
analytic approach to his own speech
which we take for granted without it
we could not learn foreign languages
was something that it would take him
many thousands of years to learn. As
for being able to write speech down in
ideograms or letters well, that came
very late indeed. The Western alpha¬
bet Latin, Greek or Arabic is an
idea so new that it still hasn't caught on
in China or Japan.
We are, it has to be confessed,
almost totally ignorant of the origins of
human language, but we do know that
it was the evolutionary breakthrough
which produced the species we call
man. And when language first ap¬
peared it was already fully grown: it
was not a tentative groping towards
greater and greater articulacy. The
symbolization of the outside world
(which includes our own bodies) was
the key to the creation of inside
worlds sciences and technologies.
Language is 


our greatest possession.
We would be wise to ponder on its
mysteries and cherish the miracle that it
is. But we will never be able to under¬
stand it. Chinese and Hindi and
English, yes. Language itself, no.
6

