The world of
the midwest farmer
by Don Peasley
AGRICULTURE is the largest in¬
dustry in the United States, ac¬
counting for 20 per cent of all the
country's businesses, manufacturing and
services. Farm assets are almost equal to the
assets of all the manufacturing plants in the
country.
fourteen times as much food as it did half
a century ago.
Productive efficiency in terms of time
and yield makes United States citizens the
best fed in the world. And they need work
much less than most to earn the money for
their food: only 16 per cent of their
other grains more efficiently than anyone,
yet we are confronted by economic conflicts
among nations."
Hughes belongs to the fifth generation of
his family to farm in Illinois, the third
generation on the farm where the family
owns and rents 600 hectares 100 kilometres
In the United States today farming is a highly industrialized a'ctivity which is the principal occupation of only some 2 per
cent of the country's economically active population. Above, farmstead in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. The US is the
world's leading cereal exporter. photo Georg Gerster e Rapho Paris
One out of every five workers earns a
living in the production, transportation,
processing, marketing and distribution of
farm products. Improved production effi¬
ciency from one generation to the next con¬
tributes to the nation's economic well-
being. Farmers today produce over 75 per
cent more crops than their fathers did on
the same area of land. A farmer's labour is
more efficient; an hour today results in
DON PEASLEY is a US editor and photo-
journalist who was born and grew up on a grain
and livestock farm in Illinois. He is closely in¬
volved in the work of various organizations of
farmers in the US, and maintains an active inte¬
rest in the family-owned farm.
disposable income, on average, goes to
food.
U.S. farmers are keenly aware that
millions throughout the world are
malnourished, and millions more are starv¬
ing. "We are deeply frustrated and sadden¬
ed that governments of the world won't get
together and solve barriers caused by inade¬
quate transportation, distribution and
jealousies", asserts Robert Hughes, a dairy
farmer in Woodstock, Illinois, the
heartland of the Midwestern United States.
"In the Midwest we are blessed with
outstanding soil and an exceptionally good
climate. We can produce wheat, corn and
northwest of Chicago. Lean and tanned,
the forty-four-year-old farmer works the
land with his father, Earl, and his brother,
Earl, Jr., plus two men hired primarily to
help with the dairy which produces an
average of 1,460 litres of milk daily.
Operated by the three Hughes families, the
farm is comparable in size to the typical
Midwest family holding where one farmer
and his family work on average between 140
and 160 hectares. In the Western States
where ranches and large wheat farms
predominate, the average is 2,000 hectares
for ranches and 1,200 for the Kansas,
Nebraska and South Dakota wheat farms.
The efficiency of the U.S. farmer is one
25

of the success stories of this generation.
About two-and-a-half million farmers in
the United States cultivate 140 million hec¬
tares. The United States exports about 115
million tons of its feed grain. Hughes says
55 per cent of that total is produced in the
great Midwestern heartland a dozen
States stretching from Nebraska and Kan¬
sas in the west to Ohio in the east.
What enables U.S. farmers to be so pro¬
ductive and efficient? Robert Hughes lists
some of the factors, in addition to soil and
climate. There is a system of incentives
where initiative and decision-making are
the catalyst. "If we do well, we are finan¬
cially rewarded," Hughes says simply. As a
result of the incentives, research is carried
out into new techniques. The development
of selective herbicides is one example of
this. Another is the more scientific ap¬
proach to the use of fertilizers which
enhances the selective breeding and improv¬
ed development of hybrid seeds. At the
same time improved herbicides and insec¬
ticides, combined with sophisticated fer¬
tilization techniques, permit farmers to
plant corn more intensely. Hughes recalls
that in the middle 1950s he planted corn in
rows one metre apart, 35,000 plants to the
hectare, and planted so that it could be
cultivated both ways. Now, with good in¬
sect and weed control, he plants corn 20-25
centimetres apart in rows that are 75 cen¬
timetres apart. "Genetic selection to pro¬
duce good seed corn that will thrive under
such crowded conditions is another factor
in successful crop yields," he says.
Finally, large machinery, with farmers
capable of planting forty hectares a day,
enables them to prepare the soil and plant
crops at the peak time to take advantage of
ideal moisture and sunshine conditions.
Hughes says that the ideal time to plant
corn in northern Illinois lasts only between
fifteen and twenty days. For each day out¬
side that "ideal time" that he plants corn,
yields decrease from one to five bushels a
day. The combine harvester, which costs
$75,000, adds to his efficiency, enabling
him to harvest corn at the best time, with
minimum field losses caused by bad
weather in late fall. ,
Developed in the early years of the century, milking machines were not widely adopted
in the United States until after World War II. Since then hand milking has come to an
end in commercial dairy farming. Illinois farmer Robert Hughes milks twice a day, like
most dairymen in the United States.
The lives of farming men and women in
the Midwestern United States centre on
their families. Virtually all choose to live on
the farm because of the joy and satisfaction
that comes from tilling the soil, nurturing
seeds, harvesting crops, and raising
livestock.
Their daily working responsibilities and
their social life are intertwined. They take
an active part in the life of their community,
in which there is a closely knit relationship
between urban and rural families because
Numbers of draught animals and tractors 1980-2000
Region
1980 1990 2000
Draught
animals
Tractors
Draught
animals
Tractors
Draught
animals
Tractors
90 developing countries . . .
Africa	
Far East
Latin America 	
	 millions of units 	
190
21
137
19
13
137
2.3
0.2
0.5
1.1
0.5
0.4
199
22
146
19
12
145
5.3
0.5
1.3
2.5
1.0
1.1
208
24
154
18
11
152
9.9
1.1
3.3
4.2
1.3
2.8
Near East
Low income countries 	
Source: Agriculture: Toward 2000 - FAO
26
their customs, economies and concerns
overlap.
For most rural people their local church
is a focal point of activity a social,
religious and community centre. They teach
Sunday school, which is a programme of
Bible study, meditation and learning how to
apply the teaching of Jesus Christ. Atten¬
dance at Sunday church service is followed
by relaxed socializing over coffee in the
community room with discussions of cur¬
rent crop conditions and local school news.
Free education for all is an inherent right
of all citizens, and farm people are among
the leaders in serving on the boards of un¬
paid volunteers which guide the work of
local schools. In Woodstock, Robert
Hughes's father was a long-time board
president and leader who insisted on quality
education for rural and urban families
alike. Robert and his wife Genevieve are
members of the Parent-Teachers Associa¬
tion, a group in which teachers and parents
work together so that their children can
benefit from enlightened educational
techniques.
Farmers invest much time in improving
their way of life through service and activity
in such organizations as Farm Bureau. The
nation's largest volunteer membership

organization of farmers, Farm Bureau aims
to promote better crop production, improv¬
ed marketing know-how and better com¬
munication with the 97 per cent of the
people of the United States who belong to
non-farming families.
An overwhelming number of future
farmers come from the families of farming
men and women. They learn a great deal
while growing up because they are involved
in the day-to-day responsibilities, from
milking cows to planting corn and mowing
hay. Eager to keep abreast of current
technological and scientific developments,
farm youngsters join their parents in the
quest for knowledge about scientific
breakthroughs. From computer programs
designed for farmers to improved seeds to
withstand the stress of drought or an insect
invasion, all family members welcome
seminars and college-planned programmes.
"Farming is a way of life," says Robert
Hughes. "That may seem simplistic, but it
is true. We devote a great deal of time to
farming. A dairy farmer, for example, is
tied down seven days a week. Farms in the
United States are 99 per cent family farms,
and so everyday living means the family is
together.
"By nature farmers are optimists. We
have the freedom to do what we can do
best: feed livestock, raise grain or milk
cows, switch to another crop or cut back.
We're on our own in that respect, even
though government involvement certainly
affects everyone. We are hardy and im¬
aginative. We'll fertilize more efficiently.
We'll use more no-till to reduce costs and at
the same time save our valuable soil. These
are some of the thoughts that go through
my mind when I look out over my growing
corn, bathed in sunlight and urged on by the
warm June sun."
Don Peasley
Rice is harvested by powerful combines in the United States before being trucked off
to storage. Legend has it that rice was brought to the US in the 17th century when a
storm-damaged ship from Madagascar took refuge in the harbour of Charleston, South
Carolina.
Left, Near Sundown, an
oil painting by Grant
Wood (1892-1942) who
won fame for his por¬
trayals of scenes from
Midwestern rural life.
Photo © Spencer Museum of Art,
University of Kansas
27
