Community radio for Kenya
by Jack Mills and James Kangwana
ATthe beginning ofMay 1 982, the
Homa Bay Community Broad¬
casting Station in Kenya's
Nyanza province started regular
transmission in the local language,
Luo. Manned by a producer from the
national Voice of Kenya (VOK) net¬
work and three assistants, the station
puts out one-hour daily programmes
covering local news, problems of health
and family planning, as well as news in
Kiswahili relayed from VOK.
Most of the programme materials are
gathered through interviews in the
market place, on farms, in schools and
with organized groups like the local
women's organization.
Homa Bay is a town of some 10,000
people, situated on the shores of Lake
Victoria about 430 kilometres by road
west of Nairobi. The main occupation
of the people is farming, especially
cattle rearing, and fishing. The town
was chosen as the site for a Unesco
community broadcasting project, the
aims of which were to establish in an
African country a low-cost rural broad¬
casting station with equipment design¬
ed and built with the full participation
of staff from the host country. The
system was to provide an alternative to
the usually expensive imported broad¬
casting equipment which sometimes
proves equally expensive to operate and
maintain.
The Unesco project was designed to
take account of a situation in which
sound broadcasting faces many prob¬
lems. In terms of coverage and utiliza¬
tion, the medium is more important
than television in African countries,
but even so the continent has only
about 3 per cent of the world's trans¬
mitters, and on average only about 7
per cent of the population has access to
broadcasts from these transmitters,
which are generally located in or near
to towns and cities. Very few transmit¬
ters cater specifically for the rural areas
where most of the population lives and
where the need for the benefits of com¬
munication infrastructure is greatest.
The principal concern of the Unesco
project was the provision of nationwide
coverage at least cost to the economy.
JACK M ILLS, of Ghana, is a consultant to the
Economic Council for Africa (ECA) and to
Unesco. He was formerly chief engineer and
deputy director-general of the Ghana Broad¬
casting Corporation.
JAMES KANGWANA, of Kenya, is project
co-ordinator of Unesco's Manpower Develop¬
ment Project for East Africa. He was formerly
director of the Voice of Kenya ¡VOK).
The extension of sound broadcasting
to rural communities can be achieved
by equipping the centralized national
network with more powerful transmit¬
ters. However, this is not the most
satisfying solution because the output
is seldom related to the needs of the
rural community it purports to- serve.
Programmes originating from the
towns and cities and beamed to the
rural dweller have often failed to
achieve their objective, for a number of
reasons.
Firstly, very few African countries
have a common language which can be
used for effective communication with
their rural populations. In some coun¬
tries there may be over sixty different
rural languages and numerous dialects.
The best that the broadcasting orga¬
nizations can do under these cir¬
cumstances is to select what are con¬
sidered the main languages or ver¬
naculars, usually not more than -ten,
and broadcast daily programmes in
these languages on a time division
basis. Thus no one community listens
to the language it understands for more
than a few minutes a day.
Secondly, the local language pro¬
grammes are often produced by city
dwellers who are not fully acquainted
with the way of life of the rural popula¬
tion and do not fully understand its
needs. The result is that listeners even¬
tually lose interest in the programmes.
Thirdly, the distance of some rural
areas from the national transmitters are
such that only weak and unintelligible
signals are received.
Hence there is a strong need for
technologically independent, commu¬
nity-centred systems which are capable
of being hooked up to the national
system by microwave links or off-the-
air pick-ups. However, the cost of do¬
ing this using current technology can be
prohibitive for most African countries.
One of the aims of the Unesco project
was to show that the engineering and
technology required for the production
of broadcasting equipment need not be
as costly as the price of imported ar¬
ticles would indicate.
The project involved a series of
feasibility and costing studies, as well
as the study of sound broadcasting
systems currently in use in 1 1 African
countries. Following this groundwork,
Kenya was chosen as the host country
for the on-site fabrication and testing
of a model broadcast Audio Mixer; the
Schematic diagram of the Homa Bay community radio transmitter.
micro Q
turntable
open wheel
recorder
H.y / / /
n i
audio mixer
fc
VHF/FM
transmitter
/
U *
O -
w
oo-
I - V
k
cassette i
recorder
\
.
ooo
ooo
ooo
ooo 31
solar cells

and testing of a low-power
transmitter; the installation of the com¬
pleted equipment in a rural location;
and the carrying out of a field strength
survey of the model station.
It was decided that the station should
use an easy-to-maintain, low output
power, VHF/FM transmitter. Power
consumption with this type of transmit¬
ter is low and it could therefore be
powered by solar energy. VHF/FM
had various other advantages, in¬
cluding simplicity of construction. On
the other hand, the main' disadvantage
of VHF transmission is that its pro¬
pagation is by "line of sight"; because
of this, nearby hills and mountains
form obstacles to the waves, thereby
"shielding" would-be reception areas
from the transmissions. Medium waves,
which rely on "ground waves" for their
propagation, do not suffer this defect.
The approach was tó produce equip¬
ment using a technology that would not
be too unfamiliar to engineers in the
African broadcasting organizations,
but that would at the same time make
use of new electronic circuit tech¬
niques. The objective here is an educa¬
tional oneto enable the engineers to
use some of these new techniques to
build similar equipment in their own
establishments, thereby cutting down
on the cost of imported electronic
equipment.
In line with this approach, the use of
operational amplifiers with discrete
components was chosen as a means of
introducing integrated circuits, which
will be the inevitable choice in future
design where low cost and simplicity
are the main objectives. The advantage
of the discrete design is that it in¬
troduces the principle of operational
amplifiers which are the building
blocks of integrated circuits. An elec¬
tronic building block was developed
which is versatile enough to be used
throughout the Audio Mixer for
microphone, gramophone, tape and
other input channels. Printed circuit
boards were used because they simplify
assembly and enable the sub-sections of
the design to be repeated.
Unesco was responsible for training
the African engineers and technicians
in charge of the project and provided
all the parts for the construction of the
Audio Mixer and the Transmitter.
Almost all the electronic components
used in the Mixer were imported, their
total cost amounting to $566. The
Transmitter is a direct VHF/FM
transmitter with a power output of 10
watts. Again almost all the component
parts were ordered direct from
overseas. The main transmitter unit
cost $266.72, the power unit $70.90.
Work on the fabrication of the Mixer
and the Transmitter went quite
smoothly. The sixteen channel modules
for the Mixer and the power supply unit
were completed within four weeks of
the start of the work, 24 June 1 98 1 , and
the assembly of the modules on the
32
"mother board" and testing were com¬
pleted three days later. The supplying
and cutting to size of the Mixer's metal
panels and the drilling of holes accord¬
ing to drawings and spraying were done
in the workshops of Kenya Railways.
Preliminary testing of the transmit¬
ter in Nairobi revealed that the signal
could be received about two kilometres
away. The complete station was then
transported on a VOK bus to Homa
Bay for the final test. The equipment
was installed in the Kenya National
Union of Teachers building.
With a mast height of 24.4 metres,
the coverage area includes the whole of
Homa Bay township. The farthest
places reached by adequate signals
(about 2 mV/m) are Gendia, a health
post 27.5 kilometres from Homa Bay,
and Kirindo, a State Irrigation Project
site 23.5 kilometres away.
Installation work at Homa Bay was
not as smooth as the fabrication work
in Nairobi. Almost all the installation
material had to be brought from the
capital since the local stores do not
stock materials for which local demand
is non-existent. On the other hand, the
local artisans were found to be quite
good, provided the materials they re¬
quired for their work were supplied. All
the woodwork for the studio acoustical
system was done by local artisans.
Before broadcasting began, a detail¬
ed cultural and socio-economic profile
of Homa Bay was prepared by a
Unesco consultant. This was followed
by training of three producers by
another Unesco specialist. Training
covered studio operations; announcing
techniques; preparation and recording
of interviews and discussions; recor¬
ding of singing groups inside and out¬
side the studio; and orientation on rural
and community programming. At pre¬
sent the station broadcasts between
5.45 p.m. when farmers and other
workers are expected to be back at
home, and 7.00 p.m., but a more ex¬
tensive programme schedule will come
into operation when the station is of¬
ficially commissioned.
On the whole, the objectives of the
project have been achieved. Although
the locally fabricated equipment lacks
the sophistication and complexity of
the imported type, tests have shown
that its performance is not below that
of imported counterparts; it can be
used to achieve the same objectives at
much lower .cost.
Although the station has not been of¬
ficially commissioned, requests are
already being received from owners of
FM receivers for certain programmes
to be repeated and in some cases special
music to be played back. Some of the
residents even walk into the studio and
ask to be interviewed about their work
and life.
Rural broadcasting as envisaged by
the project is new in Kenya, and new
for that matter in almost the whole of
Africa. It is hoped that with time and
the present interest being shown by the
people of Homa Bay, it will eventually
achieve its objectives and spread to
other parts of the continent.
H Jack Mills and James Kangwana
r
Prototype solar-powered radio
receiver developed by Unesco.
Photo Mtchel Claude. Unesco
