A strategy
for disarmament
by Constantin Ene
Since 1970, Sylvia Lind¬
ström of the Swedish Save
the Children Federation
has been gathering draw¬
ings on the theme The Tree
of Life by children from all
over the world. Left, The
Tree of Life as drawn by
Ana Maria, aged 12, of
Spain.
Photo Co Rabén and Sjoren, Stockholm
THE ending of the arms race and
the achievement of disarmament
have become a fundamental
challenge of primary importance and
urgency. Under the present cir¬
cumstances of grave international ten¬
sion the attainment of real disarma¬
ment measures has emerged as the main
path to the revival of the policy of
détente, mutual confidence and co¬
operation.
CONSTANTIN ENE, Romanian specialist in
international affairs, was formerly his country's
permanent representative at the United Nations,
New York.
Since its inception the United Na¬
tions has devoted much time and effort
to international action for disarma¬
ment. Yet, even today the traditional
way pursued by humanity the search
for security through the possession of
arms still has a strong appeal. Effi¬
cient action in favour of disarmament,
commensurate with its intended goal,
should include, along with a strong
political campaign, a reasoned orga¬
nization of efforts.
Disarmament requires deeper insight
and analysis. The first special session of
the United Nations General Assembly
devoted to disarmament had this in
mind when it proclaimed a "strategy"
for disarmament. Unesco has also tried
to achieve the same objective by apply¬
ing international co-operation in the
fields of education, science, culture and
information to the search for ways of
removing obstacles to disarmament
and of stimulating further thought and
action.
The main task of the second United
Nations Special Session on Disarma¬
ment, held in June 1982, was to develop
these efforts further. A prospective
view on disarmament should discover
in the investigation of the arms race
and its dynamic not only the roots of
34

the escalating spiral of competition
but, above all, the source of a dynamic
and a more rational approach towards
disarmament.
The existence of nuclear weapons
and the continuing arms race have
brought the world to a very critical
juncture.
In military terms the accumulated
destructive power, especially of nuclear
weapons, the emergence of a new
military technology and the armament
dynamic pose a most serious threat to
international peace and security and
confront mankind with the prospect of
self-extinction. In economic terms, the
arms race causes a huge wastage of
financial, material and human
resources, produces particularly grave
distorting and destabilizing effects on
economic growth and considerably
diminishes the economic and social ad¬
vancement of all peoples; in political
terms, it perpetuates the use and the-
threat of force in international life,
hinders' the solution of other vital
problems facing mankind and stifles in¬
novating processes.
Historical experience proves that
periods of détente were never accom¬
panied by a relaxation of the arms race.
This is, in fact, one of the reasons
behind the unprecedented tension we
are experiencing in international life to¬
day. And the existing tension is used as
an excuse to step up the arms race even
more feverishly.
Indeed the early part of the current
decade shows clear signs of a new
round of arms escalation, under the
powerful impact of modern military
technology, which is destabilizing by its
nature, and of new military doctrines.
The 1970s produced a series of
technical solutions designed to over¬
come many of the factors of inhibition
and restraint over the use of political
and military pressure, while the under¬
lying strategic doctrines enlarged their
operational area to cover both peace¬
time and war-time periods.
Of special gravity is the deployment
of nuclear missiles of intermediate
range in Europe, on a continent where
the existing vast arsenals, of nuclear
weapons alone, already pose an in¬
calculable threat to the European na¬
tions and where the two military ,
alliances face each other.
The seriousness of the present condi¬
tion is evinced by the fact that the
reassessment of the military and
strategic relationship is being under¬
taken against a background of an un¬
precedented exacerbation of interna¬
tional tension, in a world climate load¬
ed with numerous unsolved complex
problems and dominated by acute
mistrust. Any of these moments of ten¬
sion could become the trigger of partial
or all out use of existing weapons, in¬
cluding nuclear ones.
Disarmament talks are manifestly
stagnant. Mankind is justifiably disap¬
pointed with the sterile results of the
WAR. Doll sculpture by Christiane de Casteras
and Andrée Marquet, Paris
Photo © Christiane de Casteras and Andrée Marquet, Pans
WAR. Oil on canvas by Dado.
Photo © Private Collection

Unger Franz (Austria)
debates and the negotiations held dur¬
ing the past two decades, which pro¬
duced no more than resolutions on
disarmament, while the arms race, far
from being slowed down, was given a
new and strong impetus.
It is obvious that mankind has reach¬
ed a deadlock which can be overcome
only by a new and courageous ap¬
proach. More than twenty-five years
ago Bertrand Russell and Albert Eins¬
tein said: "We have to learn to think in
a new way. We have to learn to ask
ourselves not what steps can be taken to
give military victory to whatever group
we prefer, for there no longer are such
steps; the question we have to ask
ourselves is: what steps can be taken to
prevent a military contest of which the
issue must be disastrous to all parties".
The new approach, based on the
analysis and the appreciation of past
experiences should necessarily be
multidimensional .
The essential factor is the political
will of governments to overcome the in¬
ertia imposed by the technological arms
race. International effort always pro¬
ceeds from the national effort. To that
end States should give disarmament
priority in their foreign policy, par¬
ticipate in good faith in negotiations,
seek and propose solutions to the ex¬
isting problems and take unilateral in¬
itiatives, when necessary, as a
demonstration of good will and
readiness to increase mutual con¬
fidence. At times of tension, like the
one we are experiencing, unilateral in¬
itiatives are especially important.
History convincingly reveals the
value of such initiatives in the field of
disarmament. A positive experiment
was the decision taken by the USA and
the USSR in 1964-1965 to announce in¬
dividual reduction of their military ex¬
penditure on the basis of "mutual
example".
National example and unilateral in¬
itiative may play an important role as a
36
Hassan Rizig-alla Taha (Sudan)
confidence building measure. However,
only on the basis of negotiated measures,
under strict international control, can
disarmament be achieved.
A new approach to disarmament re¬
quires a fundamental revision of the at¬
titude of States, primarily of the heavi¬
ly armed States, towards the concept of
security.
The accumulation of weapons, par¬
ticularly nuclear weapons, today con¬
stitutes much more of a threat than a
protection. It is high time therefore, to
put an end to this situation and seek
guaranteed security by way of disarma¬
ment. Real security can be obtained on¬
ly through arms reduction and disar¬
mament. Since the arms race contains
in itself the cause of disruption of the
very military balance it seeks, the
military balance must be sought at
steadily lower levels.
Disarmament has become an integral
component of national security. The
history of the last two decades,
characterized by the departure from
disarmament efforts and their replace¬
ment by arms control, i.e. controlled
joint armaments, evinces the fact that
the policy of arms control cannot con¬
stitute the way of achieving genuine
progress towards disarmament.
When agreements of this type were
reached in the past a particularly dif¬
ficult process, with the slow pace of the
negotiations being constantly surpassed
by the fast-moving military technological
innovations, with destabilizing effects
the ceilings established under the
respective agreements were so high that
they served merely to codify a still
greater competition and a massive and
steady growth of nuclear armaments.
The arms control policy did not lead
to disarmament nor did it help build a
real and durable relaxation of tension.
The only viable alternative is a com¬
prehensive long-term programme of
genuine disarmament, within an agreed
step-by-step framework, leading to the
HALT
THE ARMS
RACE
In 1981, the United Nations
launched an international poster
competition on the theme of disar¬
mament. On these pages we pre¬
sent a selection from the 66 of¬
ficial entries from United Nations
Member States. The winning
poster was by Gerhard Voigt of the
German Democratic Republic (see
the Unesco Courier, March 1982,
page 6).
DEUXIEME SESSION EXTRAORDINAIRE
SUR LE DESARMEMENT
W
Riadh Larif (Tunisia)
ASSEMBLEE GENERALE
DES NATIONS -UNIES
DEUXIEME SESSION EXTRAORDINAIRE
SUR LE DESARMEMENT - 1982
-
Renée Weber (Luxemburg)

ultimate goal of general and complete
disarmament.
Resolute action in favour of disar¬
mament must be organically integrated
into a long-term policy designed to
bring about the ultimate removal of
force and war from international life.
History proves that as long as the
military balance is considered the cor¬
nerstone of an international system
based on force, in particular on
military force, the search for such a
balance will only serve to conceal the
steadily soaring arms spiral, with all its
consequences for the peace, security
and progress of mankind.
The conclusion of international
treaties, both at world and regional
levels, on non-resort to the use and
threat of force in relations between
States, as well as of international in¬
struments to secure the settlement of all
disputes between them by peaceful
means only, could substantially favour
progress towards disarmament.
By the same token, due considera¬
tion should be given to the natural rela¬
tionship between détente and disarma¬
ment, since progress achieved in the
field of détente is complementary to,
and mutually conditional on progress
in the field of disarmament.
Disarmament should be tackled in
direct relation with the social and
economic needs of States, in particular
of developing countries.
The relationship between disarma¬
ment and development embodies two
facets of one and the same imperative,
namely, reshaping international struc¬
tures and the system of traditional rela¬
tions based on inequality and on
dominance by the more powerful.
Linking disarmament to develop¬
ment efforts may open new vistas and
provide new levers capable of setting
the disarmament process on a new
course, one which would meet the
needs of the broad masses of the people
and eliminate economic underdevelop¬
ment. Such an approach could
materialize in a broad international ac¬
tion aimed at the freezing and reduc¬
tion of military budgets.
Any innovating approach to disar¬
mament efforts should be based on the
active participation and contribution
by all States. Disarmament is a matter
of vital concern to all countries and
peoples, whether big or small, irrespec¬
tive of their military force or the types
of weapons they possess. Therefore
decisions in this field can no longer be
taken by a restricted group of States.
As a corollary of this, the United
Nations should be the focus of inter¬
national activities devoted to
disarmament.
The arms race directly affects the life
and security of the people around the
world. Therefore they should be the
first to have a say in disarmament
negotiations and be able to protect their
own interests.
Public opinion has been lulled into
apathy by arguments that problems of
armaments, because of the high
technology involved, are too complex
to be understood and dealt with by
non-experts. The latest mass participa¬
tion in peace demonstrations all over
the world indicates mark a new mo¬
mentum in the history of disarmament.
It should become the central task of
peace education to raise societal con¬
sciousness and activate public opinion to
try to bring about change. As the presi¬
dent of Romania put it "one should not
expect to solve the vital problems of
mankind at the negotiating table only.
The masses should defend by their own
force, the life, security and future
development of human civilization. It
is the masses who will be able to impose
disarmament...".
A primordial role devolves upon
scientists, who are best situated to
know the dangers overshadowing
mankind as a result of the huge ac¬
cumulation of nuclear weapons and of
other means of destruction. Conse¬
quently, they must be provided with
adequate conditions enabling them to
voice their views at the United Nations,
in the Geneva Committee on disarma¬
ment and in other negotiating fora.
Implementation of dynamic -con¬
cepts in the field of disarmament re¬
quires efficient debating and
negotiating fora. The first United Na¬
tions Special Session on Disarmament
created a more democratic machinery.
It is essential now to use it more effi¬
ciently. Far from being a matter of
form, the institutional and the pro¬
cedural aspects of the negotiating
bodies have a direct impact on the very
content of the work. They may provide
or, on the contrary, deprive the
negotiating machinery of the necessary
instruments to mobilize the political
will of States. In this respect, the con¬
duct of negotiations outside military
alliances, which, by definition,
stimulate mistrust and confrontation,
is of special importance.
The task of the day is to resume the
disarmament negotiations. The decisive
factor for achieving genuine results is
the political will of States, especially of
those possessing nuclear weapons. This
goal can only be reached by the mo¬
bilization of governments, political
organizations and social forces favour¬
ing disarmament, by encouraging the
peoples and public opinion all over the
world to work together and to
recognize the urgent need to halt and
reverse the arms race, in particular the
nuclear arms race. The international
organizationsthe United Nations,
Unesco and other specialized institu¬
tions can make a major contribution
to developing international action in
order to reach this goal.
I Constantin Ene
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
SECOND SPECIAL SESSION
ON DISARMAMENT 1982
/
Lasse Persson (Sweden) Renato Bisquera (Philippines) Hubert Chaillet (Mauritius)
37
