JAPAN Noh and Kabuki:
The beauty of form
by Masao Yamaguchi
First performed in 1 71 3, Tsuuchi Jihei's Sukeroku Yukarino Edozakura (Sukeroku, Flower of Edo) is one of Kabuki's most scintillating
plays. With its extravagant procession scenes, sword fights and passages of pure slapstick, it portrays all the sensuality, vitality and
humour of Kabuki plays of the Genroku period (1688-1730). Below, a famous scene in which a comic servant, Sembei (right) con¬
fronts Sukeroku, the hero of the play.
OF the various forms of classical
Japanese theatre, Noh and
Kabuki are the best known
outside Japan. Chronologically speak¬
ing, Noh theatre, which originated in
the second half of the fourteenth cen¬
tury, preceded Kabuki, which dates
from the early seventeenth century.
Noh theatre was the invention of the
actor Kan-ami Kiyotsugu (1333-1384)
who, under the patronage of the all
powerful shogun Yoshimitsu Asikaga,
combined several earlier theatrical
forms to create a new genre known as
MASAO YAMAGUCHI, of Japan, is a staff
member of the Institute for the Study of
Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa,
Tokyo University of Foreign Studies. He is the
author of several published works, the most re¬
cent of which is "Invitation to Cultural An¬
thropology" (1982).
sarugaku-no-Noh. Kan-ami's new
creation was refined by his son Zeami
who not only raised Noh to the height
of artistic perfection but also left
behind him a corpus of philosophical
writings on the principles of its
performance.
Noh had immense appeal for the
warrior class of medieval Japan, partly
because its aesthetic rigidity seemed to
have something in common with
samurai rigorism. However, unlike the
rigour of the warrior ethic, the
aesthetic rigidity in Noh was achieved
through the creation of formal beauty
by means of body movements that had
the power to reach the subconscious
level of the mind of the audience.
Essentially, Noh is based on the
shamanistic layer of Japanese culture.
Economy in the décor is characteristic
of the staging of Noh. We see only a
picture of a huge pine tree on the
backdrop, a picture which reminds the
connoisseur of the kaju, or plank in the
shape of a tree, that is to be seen centre
stage in the wayang kulit (shadow
theatre) of Java and Bali. In Japanese
folk tradition big old trees were
venerated since they were thought to
be, like the kaju of the wayang kulit,
the mediating point through which the
gods descended to earth. The pine tree
may, in fact, have been thought to be
the axis running through the centre of
the earth and its association with the
notion of eternity supports the ex¬
planation that it is the pivot of the
world. It is therefore the focal point of
transformation where the gods, the ac¬
tors in whom they become incarnate,
and the audience undergo some kind of
change.
15

-The Noh repertoire includes several
types of play: okina and sambaso,
celebratory plays in which a god
assumes human form as an old man
and holds a dialogue with a local spirit
wearing a black face-mask; waki Noh,
in which local gods of lesser status are
represented; "warrior-ghost" plays;
"woman" plays; plays about insanity;
and "demon" plays.
Although outwardly different, these
Noh plays are all expressions of a
similar basic structure. They follow a
narrative pattern in which unworldly
figures, whether demons, the sub¬
conscious spirit of women, or the souls
of the dead, are evoked on the stage
through the agency of the "bystander",
act out their story in dance form and
finally disappear after having been ap¬
peased by the prayers of the priest.
There are usually three major roles in
Noh plays: the shite (hero), the waki
(the" "bystander", normally in the
character of an itinerant priest) and the
ai-kyogen (an intermediary represen¬
ting a local personage).
The role of the shite is divided into
two parts: the mae-shite, in the early
part of the play, and the ato-shite,
when the character appears in another
form. Thus the shite appears first as an
ordinary person who withdraws after
meeting the waki; the ai-kyogen then
explains the local legend relating to the
hero, or shite, who reappears after an
interval in his second form wearing a
mask.
In addition, a chorus, seated at the
right hand side of the stage, recites nar¬
rative parts of the script and, at
moments of climax, comes on to the
stage with highly symbolic expressions.
The chorus is said to represent the inner
voice of the audience.
The role of the waki is of interest
because it is in part a reflection of a
historical reality. In late thirteenth cen¬
tury Japan there was a Buddhist sect
known as jishu which specialized in
communication with dead souls by
means of chanting and dance.
Members of the sect are said to have
visited ancient battlefields and prayed
for the warriors who had died there.
The jishu priest would recount the
story of a fallen warrior to the people
who gathered round him, evoking the
spirit of the dead hero through the
power of his performance. These
priests were thus, in a sense,- the suc¬
cessors in medieval Japan of the
shamans of ancient times who acted as
intermediaries between this world and
the world beyond.
One category of Noh plays is known as "women
pieces" or Kazura Noh (literally "wig pieces",
since wigs are often used for women's roles). The
performers' masks and elaborate heavy silk
costumes contrast with the traditional austere
stage setting of Noh plays which consists of a
representation of an aged pine tree. In this scene
from Hagoromo (The Robe of Feathers), by the
great Noh playwright Zeami (1363-1443), a god¬
dess captivates a humble fisherman by the beauty
of her dance.
Photo © Mireille Vautier, Paris
16
Noh theatre is essentially a theatre of
fantasy. The stage can be visualized as
being the equivalent of a cinema
screen, the unworldly figures projected
on it being an extension of the waki's
subconscious mind which acts, as it
were, as the film projector. In watching
the "screen" of this theatre of fantasy,
each member of the audience sees deep
into the recesses of his own mind.
It is through these ancient roots in
the Japanese shamanistic experience
that Noh theatre still has power to
move the audiences of today. Watching
Noh is thus like a psycho-therapeutic
process which cures the audience of the
frustrations caused by its alienation
from the roots of human existence.
Kabuki is a later theatrical form than
Noh, being developed early in the
seventeenth century; but the relation¬
ship between the two forms should not
be seen only in chronological terms. In
the history of Japanese theatre, and in¬
herent in its very nature, we see a
tendency for new theatrical forms to be
created in terms of dialectical
frameworks.
From early times, the appearance of
gods in Japan was marked by the
presence of two in part opposing
figures: the kami (god) and the modoki
(interlocutor, intermediary). This di¬
chotomy is repeated over and over
again in the structure of kami belief
and also in the creation of new
theatrical forms in Japan.
Although this opposition between
kami and modoki originally signified
an opposition between god the visitor
from outside the community and
modokithe local interpreter of the
god's messageit could also explain
various types of dialectical relation¬
ship, for example: kami modoki;
sacred profane; master servant-
clown; conqueror defeated; shite
waki; aristocratic popular; senior
junior.
It was against this dialectical
background that Kabuki came into ex¬
istence. The art of Kabuki is said to
have been originated by a legendary
figure, Okuni, reputedly a priestess at¬
tached to a shrine called Izumo-taisha.
Appearing on stage as a waki who
evoked the spirit of Yamasaburo
Nagoya, a young and handsome war¬
rior said to have fallen in battle, Okuni
succeeded in attracting large audiences.
It should be noted that the essential
structures of Noh as a shamanistic
theatrical form was maintained in
Okuni's Kabuki.
However, Kabuki had a different
orientation and different patrons from
Noh. Whereas Noh had been patroniz¬
ed by the Samurai class and was
oriented towards the past, Kabuki drew
its patrons from the new merchant class
and was oriented towards the contem¬
porary world of affairs rather than the
legendary and historical past. While
evocation of the spirit of the past in
order to reach deep down into the unex¬
plored recesses or the mind was one of
the more important purposes of Noh,
Kabuki was concerned with glorifying
the vital energy of the urban commer¬
cial class. Although Kabuki often
employed historical settings, these were
used to disguise the contemporary
nature of events since the Tokugawa
government forbade Kabuki per-

/
¿r%s
t\
1
Irf
',' ,
An actor preparing for an aragoto (violent or warrior style) Kabuki play, applies a special form of stylized make-up, called
kumadori, which makes use of bold designs of bright red, blue, grey or black on the background of the whitened face. The
red lines represent the veins of the hero standing out in anger at the evil deeds of the villain.
WSKKKKÊtÊÊBKKmKIBÊBBKÊBKBKÊI^KKKBÊÊÊ^ÊmBBa
formers to draw on material from con¬
temporary political affairs.
The art of Kabuki was developed in
two cities, Osaka and Edo (today
Tokyo), with two different styles
emerging from the two cities: wagoto
and aragoto. The citizens of Osaka, be¬
ing principally engaged in commercial
activities, developed a gentler, more
realistic attitude which was reflected in
wagoto (soft or merchant style)
Kabuki, whereas at Edo, the centre of
military government, the mix of war¬
rior and citizen gave rise to a specific
life style and short-tempered behaviour
which was echoed in the highly stylized,
more violent aragoto (violent or war¬
rior style) Kabuki. Here again we find
a dialectical contrast similar to that bet¬
ween harmonious and violent gods
harmony being the attribute of the
parental deity and violence that of his
offspring.
Scene from a Kabuki
dance-play, Kagami Jishi
(The Dancing Lion).
Kagami Jishi is a Kabuki
version of an older Noh
play. Persuaded to dance
by her companions, a
lady of the court dons a
lion mask which gradual¬
ly takes possession of
her and begins to dance
of its own volition.
Photo © Toshiro Monta, National
Theatre of Japan
The association of violence with the
emergence of a young deity, as
reflected in aragoto, had long been an
element of the Japanese folk imagina¬
tion, while wagoto seems to have in¬
herited the structure of the visiting god
who is met by a local priest or priestess.
In a wagoto performance the scene is
usually set in the geisha quarter to
which rich merchants come to conduct
stylized love affairs following strict
rules of etiquette. The client is assumed
to be the visiting god, while the geisha
is cast in the role of the priestess. Thus
there is a continuation of the structures
based on the shite, or main character,
and the waki, or interlocutor.
Wagoto and aragoto developed in
different urban settings and are
.classified as different and contrasting
styles. Nevertheless, both forms are
sometimes found in the same play, as in
Sugawaradenju-tenaraikagami ("The
House of Sugawara"), and sometimes
the hero of a wagoto is transformed in¬
to the bloody hero of an aragoto, as in
Natumatsuri-naniwakagami (a bloody
incident in the festival of Osaka).
Being a free and popular form of art,
Kabuki was able to integrate many of
the arts of the street performer and
achieve a synthesis of various forms of
music, dance and performing style
which were excluded from the closed,
sophisticated Noh art form. It was par¬
ticularly suited to the assimilation of
material from marginal categories,
such as thieves and geishas, and turning
it into a refined aesthetic performance.
It is this ability to synthesize the central
and the marginal, the sublime and the
mundane, that enables Kabuki to con¬
tinue to attract large audiences in
Japan. Whereas Noh bases itself on the
deep structures of human experience,
Kabuki takes as its starting point the
trifling incidents of daily life. Both
forms, however, end up by achieving a
similar effect of formal beauty. In this
way each encompasses the other.
Masao Yamaguchi
17
