UNESCO,
THE UNITED NATIONS
AND SOUTH AFRICA
THE racial policies of the Government of South Africa
have been before the United Nations since the first
session of the General Assembly in 1946. India, in
that year, brought before the Assembly a complaint that the
Government of what was then the Union of South Africa
had enacted legislation which discriminated against South
Africans of Indian origin. The two Acts specifically aimed at
Indians were the so-called Pegging Act which froze Indian
land transactions in parts of Natal and the Transvaal and the
Asiatic Land Tenure and Indian Representation Act (1946)
which extended the provisions of the Pegging Act to the
whole of Natal and the Transvaal and which introduced
communal and separate political rights.
UN protests were ignored by the South African Govern¬
ment. Not only was the Asian Land Tenure Act enforced, in
1 948 the National Party came to power with a political plat¬
form based on "apartheid" or the separation of races. The
Group Areas Act No. 41 of 1950 was designed to enforce
this separation in urban areas.
In conformity with its terms, Africans were concentrated
in townships at the edge of "white" cities, while Indians
were further restricted to specific urban areas. Separation
was accompanied by a major campaign of racial classifica¬
tion. The Population Registration Act of 1 950, with its later
amendments, provided for the classification of the South
African population into three main groups: whites, coloured
and Africans with the Asians constituting a sub-group in the
coloured group.
In the same year two other acts were enacted which were
basic to South Africa's apartheid policy: the abolition of the
Native Representative Council (created in 1936 by the
South African Government and composed of whites and
Africans), the Suppression of Communism Act with its far-
reaching powers to restrict individuals and organizations
and the first stages of a statute designed to deprive the col¬
oured people of the Cape of the common roll franchise they
had enjoyed for nearly a century.
The General Assembly of the United Nations replied with
Resolution 395 (V) of 2 December 1 950. This stated that "a
policy of racial segregation (apartheid) is necessarily based
on doctrines of racial discrimination". Resolution 395 (V)
was followed by Resolution 551 (VI) of 12 January 1952,
615 (VII) of 5 December 1952, and 719 (VIII) of 11
November 1 953. These resolutions were principally design¬
ed to obtain from the South African Government a reversal
of its Urban Areas Acts as well as an extension of its fran¬
chise beyond the white population.
In 1953 the National Party again won the election con¬
siderably increasing its majority. The extent of this victory
practically destroyed the traditional white opposition parties
and groups. The election results also proved that the policy
of apartheid had wide support among the white population
going beyond the confines of the Afrikaner population.
In 1953 the Bantu Education Act of 1953 was passed.
This empowered the Minister to prescribe the medium of in¬
struction in government Bantu schools. This Act marked the
collapse of English as the principal medium in some African
schools and the introduction of Bantu education as part of
the Government's enforced tribalism.
In 1954, the General Assembly "invited" the Govern¬
ment of South Africa to reconsider its position in the light of
the principles of the Charter. In 1955, the Assembly "ex¬
pressed its concern" about the policies of the South African
Government. In 1 957, the General Assembly "appealed" to
the Government to revise its policy.
After the introduction of the Bantu Education Act of
1953, the Government introduced a ceiling on its financial
contributions from the general revenues. In 1955/56 this
was fixed at an annual amount which was insufficient and
substantially undermined the financial basis for the expan¬
sion of African education. Taxation was increased for
Africans worsening an already unjust tax system. The
Native (Urban Areas) Consolidation Act was further amend¬
ed in 1956 and 1957, the Native Administration Act of
1 927 was further amended in 1 956. This gave wide powers
to the State President with regard to the removal of Africans
or their banishment to specific parts of the territory. The In¬
dustrial Conciliation Act, 1956, permitted the government
to prohibit the replacement of employees of one race by
those of another race, to reserve certain types of jobs to per¬
sons of a specified race and to fix the number or percentage
of persons of a particular race to be employed in particular
industries.

The reaction to General Assembly resolutions was a
denial of the right in terms" of Article 2 (7) of the General
Assembly to discuss the issue. This position of South Africa
was coupled with certain proposals as South Africa faced
the beginning of the modern period of the anti-colonial
revolution in Africa. In 1953, Dr. Malan argued that the
removal of Western control would open the way for Com¬
munist influence in Africa and objected to any idea of admit¬
ting black African States to the British Commonwealth.
Instead, he proposed an "African Charter" which would
elaborate a common policy between the Western colonial
powers and South Africa with regard to the whole of Africa.
Meanwhile in 1950 Unesco had launched its race pro¬
gramme and begun to publish and disseminate Statements
on Race which struck at the heart of South Africa's ideology
of apartheid. The Statements, signed by leading scientists,
affirmed the equality of races and in particular that inter¬
marriage had no negative results. In South Africa inter¬
marriage was specifically prohibited by the Prevention of
Immorality Act which was an extension of the Prohibition of
Mixed Marriages Act of 1949.
Unesco also published a number of scientific studies on
racism. These were widely circulated in a number of coun¬
tries. Within South Africa, the Institute of Race Relations
was reorganized and expanded in 1 955-1 956. The Institute
gave publicity to and circulated Unesco's statements and
booklets. This was in a situation where, as we have seen
before, the white opposition had practically collapsed after
the 1953 elections. On 5 April 1955 South Africa gave
notice of its withdrawal from the Organization giving as its
reason "the interference in South African racial problems by
means of Unesco publications which are being advertised
and distributed in the Union by the South African Institute
of Race Relations".
In 1960, a non-violent protest against, in particular, the
introduction of compulsory pass laws for women resulted in
the massacre at Sharpeville of Africans by the South African
police. This action, which shocked the world, occurred in
the same year that sixteen newly independent African
States were admitted to the United Nations. The UN Securi¬
ty Council, for the first time, considered the apartheid ques¬
tion as a threat to world peace. "Threat to world peace",
which implied actions under the Charter, was not passed by
the Security Council. However, the Council's resolution of
1 April 1 960 deplored the Government's policies and called
on it to take steps to bring about racial harmony based on
equality.
The UN General Assembly, meeting at the end of 1960,
considered a draft resolution which would have introduced
sanctions against South Africa. This received a majority of
votes but not the two-thirds required for important
questions.
There was, however, a change in the attitudes of
"Western" countries. These had so far supported the South
African arguments of non-interference supposedly based on
Article 2 (7) and which had refused the General Assembly's
right to discuss the South African question.
White South Africans voted to become a Republic on 31
May 1961. Until then the Queen of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland was also the Queen of the
then Union of South Africa. Sharpeville had, however,
sharpened the opposition of African members of the Com¬
monwealth to the maintenance of South Africa within the
Commonwealth. The crisis threatened the continuing ex¬
istence of the Commonwealth itself. In early 1961, at a
crucial meeting in London, South Africa was faced with
either expulsion or withdrawal. Dr. Verwoerd, then Prime
Minister, decided on withdrawal charging Commonwealth
interference in South Africa's domestic affairs.
Sharpeville was followed by a veritable reign of terror
within South Africa. In reply to a day of mourning called by
the African National Congress, the Government arrested
some 1 ,900 of all races and from the African National Con¬
gress, the Pan African Congress, the Liberal Party and the
Congress Alliance. An additional 20,000 Africans were de¬
tained on charges of vagrancy. Chief Luthuli of the African
The anti-apartheid posters above, by the French ar¬
tists Paul Rebeyrolle (left) and Ernest Pignon-Ernest
(right), formed part of the exhibition Artists Against
Apartheid, held at the Galerie Maeght, Paris, in March
1983 and organized by the UN and the Committee of
Artists of the World Against Apartheid. Founded in
November 1981, the Committee consists of artists
from all over the world who support the efforts of the
international community to eliminate apartheid. The
National Congress was jailed and then placed under a bann¬
ing order under the suppression of Communism Act. Both
the ANC and the PAC were banned within the country and
their principal leaders sent to prison.
After 1960, therefore, on the one hand the international
community had increased its condemnation of apartheid
and its pressure for change, on the other hand South Africa
had embarked on a series of "treason trials" massive ar¬
rests, particularly of Africans, and the interdiction of the
two major African political parties with the banning and ar¬
rest of their principal leaders. 1 960 also marked a trek out
of South Africa by refugees in order to escape arrest. These
refugees, as well as the ANC and PAC, in line with their then
position of non-violent protest modelled after Mahatma
Gandhi reiterated the call for an external boycott of South
Africa as a support to internal non-violent action.
At the end of 1962, the UN General Assembly passed a
resolution (Resolution 1761 XVII) which received the re¬
quired two-thirds majority. This resolution contained a list of
actions which Member States should take against South
Africa and was designed to bring about peaceful change
within that country. The list of actions included the breaking
off of diplomatic relations, the closing of ports to South
African vessels, the boycotting of all South African goods
and an embargo on exports to South Africa including all

/ W W \/\
f
xx ^yCx
\/\^/
' xx^
S^\y^S\y^\^
/xl
/ yyVYl
Committee is organizing another anti-apartheid ex¬
hibition to be held in Paris at the Fondation Nationale
des Arts Plastiques, from 22 November to 31
December 1983, with the participation of 85 world-
renowned painters and sculptors. The exhibition will
travel the world and will ultimately form the basis of
the Museum of the Artists of the World Against Apar¬
theid which will be presented to the first democratic
government to be established in South Africa.
arms and ammunition. In addition, the Security Council was
requested to take all appropriate measures, including sanc¬
tions, to secure South Africa's compliance with United Na¬
tions resolutions. At the same time, a special UN Committee
on the Policies of Apartheid was established to review and
report on South African developments between General
Assembly sessions.
The General Assembly resolution did not however receive
the support of South Africa's major trading partners. The
question was referred to the Security Council who could
alone order mandatory sanctions in terms of Chapter VII of
the Charter.
In August 1 963, the Security Council met to consider the
proposal for sanctions against South Africa. The proposal
was not adopted principally because of the position of
South Africa's major trading partners when these were
members of the Security Council. However, the Security
Council called upon Member States to cease the sale of
arms and military equipment to South Africa. Since two
Western countries abstained, even this selective boycott
could not be adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter. It re¬
mained a recommendation. While, however, some coun¬
tries ceased arms sales to South Africa, and others, those
which in their opinion "could be used for enforcing apart¬
heid legislation", the manufacture of arms within South
Africa increased, including in co-operation with public and
private firms and with the technical co-operation of some
countries. Indeed, by 1982, South Africa announced that it
would now become a major arms exporter, while in the
nuclear field strategic studies from a number of countries
suggest that South Africa may already be an atomic power
in spite of the Non-Proliferation Treaty which in any case
South Africa has never signed. UN action therefore has fail¬
ed with regard to the arming of the apartheid State.
From 1960 to 1966 attention also focused on Namibia.
On 7 May 1919, South Africa was designated the Man¬
datory Power in South West Africa following the revelation
after 1914 of certain atrocities linked with German col¬
onialism. With the elaboration of the apartheid system.
South Africa interpreted certain articles of the League Cove¬
nant which regulated the Mandate, as requiring apartheid. In
addition, when the Charter of the United Nations was being
drafted at the San Francisco Conference in 1945, South
Africa had already presented her case for the incorporation
of South West Africa with South Africa.
In 1946, the South African Government had requested
permission to incorporate Namibia into South Africa. This
was rejected by the UN General Assembly on 1 4 December
1 946 in resolution 65(1). South Africa, however, continued
policies of incorporation. In December 1 949, the United Na¬
tions General Assembly, through resolution 338 (IV) decid¬
ed to clarify the legal status of Namibia and sought an Ad¬
visory Opinion from the International Court of Justice at the
Hague. The Court's opinion, handed down on 1 1 July 1 950,
unanimously concluded that (a) the Territory was under in¬
ternational mandate and that (b) Chapter XII of the Charter
was applicable "in the sense that they provide a means by
which the Territory may be brought under the Trusteeship
system".
As a result of this the General Assembly reiterated its re¬
quest that Namibia then the Territory of South West
Africa be placed under the International Trusteeship
System. South Africa refused to comply. In 1 953, a perma¬
nent UN Committee on South West Africa was established
by General Assembly resolution 749 A (VIM).
In 1961 after years of calling upon South Africa, the
General Assembly decided "to call the attention of the
Security Council to the situation in respect of South West
Africa which, if allowed to continue, will in the General
Assembly's view endanger international peace and securi¬
ty". In addition resolution 1705 (XVI) established a special
training programme for indigenous inhabitants of South
West Africa.
In 1960, Ethiopia and Liberia instituted proceedings
against South Africa in the International Court of the Hague.
Both countries argued that South Africa was imposing apar¬
theid within Namibia contrary to responsibilities under the
Mandate. The legal arguments lasted from 1960 to 1966.
In a surprise decision in 1966 the International Court judged
that, while not pronouncing on the substance of the case,
Ethopia and Liberia had no legal right or interest in the ques¬
tion of South Africa's Mandate.
The Court's decision had three results. First it served to
boost South African morale. Second, and more important,
it confirmed the views of SWAPOthe African liberation
movement within Namibia that armed confrontation with
South Africa was now inescapable. Thirdly, it threw the
question back to the United Nations.
By 27 October 1 966, by 1 1 4 votes to 2 (Portugal, South
Africa) and with 3 abstentions (France, Malawi,' United
Kingdom), the General Assembly adopted resolution 2145
(XXI). This resolution declared that South Africa had failed
to fulfil its obligations in respect of the Mandated Territory.
The resolution decided "that the Mandate conferred upon
His Britannic Majesty to be exercised on his behalf by the
Government of the Union of South Africa is therefore ter¬
minated, that South Africa has no right to administer the
Territory, and that henceforth South West Africa comes
under the direct responsibility of the United Nations".
Security Council resolution 269 ( 1 969) by 1 3 votes to nil
and 2 abstentions (France and the United Kingdom), took
note and accepted the General Assembly resolution. It: J

"Called upon the Government of South Africa to withdraw
its administration from the Territory immediately and in any
case before 4 October 1969;
Called upon all States to refrain from all dealings with the
Government of South Africa purporting to act on behalf of
the territory of Namibia;
Requested all States to increase their moral and material
assistance to the people of Namibia in their struggle against
foreign occupation."
South Africa refused the legitimacy of UN supervision.
Security Council resolutions increased. In the meantime
however the Namibian case was again taken to the Interna¬
tional Court. On 21 June 1971, the International Court
decided that the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia being illegal, South Africa was under an obligation
to withdraw its administration from Namibia. While UN ac¬
tion was continuing the Specialized Agencies were not im¬
mune to the effects of the apartheid question. In some cases
conflict was the result of the very presence of South Africa
in these organizations: i.e. International Labour Organisa¬
tion (ILO), World Health Organization (WHO), Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO). African regional co¬
operation, for example, could not be completely regional
where South Africa was in open confrontation with the free
countries of the continent and in an alliance with Portugal-
then engaged in a colonial war in Angola, Guinea-Bissau,
and Mozambique as well as with White-dominated then
Rhodesia.
NAMIBIA
The struggle of the Namibian people against the regime of
apartheid is a shining example to us all. That struggle is
mustering all its energy and is creating around it a great
movement of solidarity, in Africa and worldwide, which
broadly reflects its aspirations and is enlisting many dif¬
ferent forms of moral and material support.
It has culminated in the international consensus which is
now taking shape around the objective of Namibian self-
determination, and which has, in particular, found expres¬
sion in the resolutions of the General Assembly and of the
Security Council of the United Nations, concerning the right
to independence of the people of Namibia, the procedures
for its access to national sovereignty and the recognized in¬
ternational legitimacy of SWAPO [South West African
Peoples Organization] as the authentic representative of the
Namibian people.
Unesco wishes once again to pledge itsfull support for the
struggle of the Namibian people, led by SWAPO, until all its
fundamental objectives have been achieved.
Unesco has been one of the most active agencies of the
United Nations system in organizing campaigns against
racism and apartheid, and one of the very first to give prac¬
tical support to the liberation movements of southern
Africa. As such, it first of all admitted Namibia as an
Associate Member, and later, in 1978, as a full Member, en¬
joying the same rights as all the States that have already ac¬
quired their sovereignty. The Organization is at the same
time continuing to co-operate fruitfully with SWAPO, and
is implementing several programmes connected with educa¬
tion, communication and the promotion of human rights.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
(Extract from address at the opening of the International Conference in
Solidarity with the Struggle of the People of Namibia, Paris, 1 1
September 1980)
This alliance was not simply a passive one. It included a
fair amount of at least logistic military support, as well as at¬
tempts to establish a White-ruled Southern African "Con¬
federation" and common market. Worse, apartheid directly
affected wide areas under the concern of the specialized
agencies: lack of bargaining powers for African trade unions
affected ILO as did job reservation policies; separate and
gravely unequal medical services and widespread African
nutritional diseases affected WHO; the deliberate sabotage
of African agriculture affected FAO.
As we have seen, South Africa left Unesco in 1955.
Unesco therefore escaped the conflict caused by the very
presence of South Africa. It did not however remain unaf¬
fected by apartheid policies.
In 1963, the General Assembly invited the Specialized
Agencies to assist the Special Committee set up to report on
apartheid, in the fulfilment of its mandate. In conformity
with this, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, on
20 April 1 965, requested Unesco "to prepare a study on the
effects of apartheid in the fields of education, science and
culture". This request was accepted by the Executive Board
of Unesco which further accepted that this study should be
extended to information.
The report, completed in 1 966 and revised in 1 970 (again
in the course of revision) showed that apartheid had far-
reaching efects in education, science, culture and informa¬
tion. Not only were the United Nations Charter, the Con¬
stitution of Unesco and the United Nations' Universal
Declaration of Human Rights violated, apartheid had grave
consequences that went beyond simple violation. "It is a
policy of deliberate inequality built into the educational
system, expressed in scientific and cultural activities, and
underlined in the regulations governing access to informa¬
tion". Apartheid was not only an inadmissible answer to
racial and group conflict but was itself the major source of
this conflict. "This is most serious in relationships between
whites and non-whites, but the very heightening of group
awareness, which is part of the aims of the apartheid
system, should per se intensify hostilities between
Afrikaans and English-speaking South Africans, and, by the
separation of Africans into self-contained tribal units, create
a tribal nationalism leading to increased inter-tribal rivalry.
The Government of South Africa moved quickly. It
prepared a "reply" and after some legislative debate bann¬
ed the Unesco Report specifically.
Action has continued and indeed intensified. This is not
surprising. Apartheid struck at the roots of all that Unesco
stood for. Each study commissioned by Unesco illustrated
this. History had been deliberately falsified: this was the
conclusions of Cornevin's L'apartheid: pouvoir et falsifica¬
tion historique. Textbooks became the means whereby
racism was deliberately and often subtly «conveyed. This
was the conclusion of History in Black and White: an
analysis of South African textbooks. Social science
research was perverted, field notes confiscated, social
scientists banned. These were the conclusions of Apartheid
and Social Research. The mass media at home and abroad
was subverted. This was the conclusion of a look at news
agencies and South Africa. Academics were hunted outside
the borders of the Republic this was the conclusion of a
meeting at Maputo, Mozambique, three days after which
the distinguished social scientist Ruth First was
assassinated by a letter bomb.
There was no way Unesco could escape the struggle. In
speech after speech the Director-General has warned of the
enormity of a situation which is no longer simple racial
discrimination. It is a policy of deliberate oppression geared
to reinforcing white political domination, increasing white
profits by the use of cheap, mobile, directed African labour,
establishing an ideology in which racism is used to refuse
education, to deny Africans, Asians and coloureds access
to science and technology, an ideology which subverts,
constrains and fabricates so-called African cultures.
Unesco, with its mission of constructing peace in the
minds of men and constructing a world in which the co¬
operation of all peoples releases the best of man's spirit of
tolerance and of creation remains in direct opposition to
apartheid, and to its new name "separate development".
