MARTIN LUTHER (1483-1546)
The School of Life
by Jacques-Noël Pérès
ALTHOUGH Protestant churches
far and wide are this year cele¬
brating the 500th anniversary of
the birth of Martin Luther, the great
reformer, they are not so much com¬
memorating their founder (for they clearly
look upon the Gospel of Jesus Christ as be¬
ing their founding doctrine), or any par¬
ticular saint, as paying authentic tribute to
the genius of the man as he really was, with
his acute intuitive sense yet with his short¬
comings, a man intent on dedicating his
whole life to the Gospel. And when we
speak of his whole life, we are thinking not
only of matters pertaining to the religious
sphere, to faith and the aspirations of the
spirit, but also of the everyday aspects of
existence.
Although the Lutheran reform was
primarily aimed at ensuring observance of
the faith by deliberately ridding it of
everything that was regarded as extraneous,
it also addressed itself to making Christians
responsible-minded citizens in the world of
creation in which God placed them, in other
words citizens also imbued with a sense of
responsibility towards the community and
society in which they are called upon to live.
The age in which Luther lived was indeed
remarkable. Perhaps we do not attach as
much importance as we ought to the fact
that it was also the age of Erasmus and
Rabelais, of Albrecht Dürer and
Michelangelo, of Copernicus and
Paracelsus, of Machiavelli, Ignatius
Loyola, Magellan and a host of other
figures who gave added lustre to science,
literature and the arts and embodied all the
intellectual qualities, so much so that the
age rightly came to be known as the
"Renaissance".
It was also the age of Faust, or, again, of
the Fugger banking dynasty, a time when it
was thought that money could buy
everything. As trade and finance expanded,
the men of the sixteenth century and the
centuries that followed were drawn towards
a new path. Henceforward, they were to see
the world in a different light and, naturally
enough, a new quest for learning likewise
made its impact felt. We attempt, in the few
lines below, to highlight some of the aspects
of Luther's thinking on education which we
regard as very relevant to the culture of his
time and perhaps even of our own time, for
that matter!
Martin Luther was born in Eisleben, in
JACQUES-NOËL PERES, French theolo¬
gian, is a pastor of the Evangelical Lutheran
Church of France. President of the Lutheran
Cultural Centre in Paris and of the "Eglise et
Monde Juif" (Church and Jewish World)
movement, he teaches at the department of
ecumenical studies of the Catholic Institute,
Paris.
Saxony, on 10 November 1483, the son of
Hans Luther and Margretha Ziegler, his
wife. As he himself wrote: "I am a pea¬
sant's son and my father, grandfather and
forefathers were all real peasants". It is true
that he was of peasant stock but his parents
went to seek their fortune in the copper and
silver mines of the Mansfeld region and his
father became a member of the Common
Council of the town, where he had settled
with his family in 1484.
The young Luther had a strict upbring¬
ing, as he recalled in his Table Talk: "My
parents were very harsh with me and, as a
result, I grew up to be a shy child. On one
occasion, for some petty reason, my mother
whipped me so hard that the blood flowed.
My parents had only my welfare at heart,
but they were not good judges of character
and their chastisement knew no bounds".
He was to remember this lesson later in life,
when he came to think about teaching and
about education in general.
However that may be, the young Martin
attended the Latin school at Mansfeld and
was then sent to the school of the Brothers
of the Common Life at Magdeburg, and
later to the parish school of Eisenach. He
then went on to become a student at the
University of Erfurt, from which he
Leader of the 16th-century Reformation movement that led to the
birth of Protestantism, the German monk Martin Luther (1483-1546)
is depicted with members of his family in this engraving after Holbein.
Clockwise from top left: Luther, his wife, mother, and father. In cen¬
tre, his daughter Magdalena.

graduated as bachelor of arts before taking
his master's degree. He was set for a legal
career but, against his father's wishes, he
chose instead to enter the monastery of the
Augustinian Eremites at Erfurt. He was or¬
dained in the priesthood in 1507 and
thereafter devoted himself to the study of
theology. He was awarded a doctorate in
theology in 1512 and, from 1513 onwards,
taught Holy Scripture at the University of
Wittenberg.
Henceforward, all his energies were to be
directed towards the Holy Writ, which he
expounded with passion and which
prompted him to embark on the task of
reforming the Church, for which he is
known. It was in the name of the principles
which Luther discerned in the Bible that, on
31 October 1517, he publicly posted his
ninety-five theses against indulgences. It is
No tree bears fruit for itself; it
gives its fruit for others.
Luther
this act which is conventionally regarded as
being the starting-point of the reformist
movement, although it had, in fact, already
been taking shape for a long time.
In 1520 came the publication of the
"great reformist writings", the term
designating the Address to the Christian
Nobility of the German Nation and the
treatises on the Babylonian Captivity of the
Church and the Freedom of a Christian
Man. The Papal Bull "Exsurge Domine",
by which the Pope excommunicated
Luther, also dates from that year.
From then onwards, events were to move
quickly. In 1521, Luther was placed under
the ban of the Empire by the Diet of
Worms; in 1521-1522, the Elector of Sax¬
ony had him confined to the Wartburg for¬
tress, where he translated the New Testa¬
ment into German and thereby began to
mould what was to become the modern
German language (he completed the
translation of the entire Bible in 1534); in
1524-1525, the sorry Peasants' Revolt
broke out; in 1525, Luther became embroil-
All creation is the most beautiful
of books.
Luther
ed in controversy with the humanist
Erasmus of Rotterdam over the question of
free will and "unfree" will and, in the same
year, he married Katharina von Bora;
while, in 152°, he published the Short and
Long Catechisms, the remarkable guides to
Christian doctrine in which Luther revealed
his gifts as a teacher.
In 1530, the Protestant theologians
presented their confession of faith to the
Imperial Diet at Augsburg. This accord¬
ingly came to be known as the Augsburg
Confession and can be said to have formed .
the charter of Lutheranism. Up to 1546, the
year of his death, Luther went on writing
and preaching in his bid to exhort and con-
On 31 October 1517 Luther nailed on the door of the castle church
at Wittenberg his famous "95 Theses" attacking various ec¬
clesiastical abuses. His act is usually considered to have precipitated
the Reformation, the religious movement which would soon spread
over northern Europe, have a far-reaching influence on Western
Christianity and civilization, and also act as a seedbed of social,
economic and political thought. Engraving shows Luther preaching in
the church at Wittenberg.
sole the faithful and impart his teaching to
them. To date, the standard Weimar edi¬
tion of Luther's written works, known as
the Weimarer Ausgabe, consists of a
hundred-odd volumes and is still not
complete!
Education in the Middle Ages was com¬
pletely permeated by the "fear of God" and
it would not be altogether wrong to argue
that its chief purpose was to teach people
how to die well, in other words how to ap¬
pear before a God who was primarily look¬
ed upon as an implacable judge. Luther's
great discovery that God is not so much a
sovereign Lord as a loving Father offering
salvation through grace in an act of faith,
prompted him to visualize a new system of
education.
It is significant that, from as early as
1520, in the Address to the Christian
Nobility of the German Nation, one of the
three great reformist writings already men¬
tioned, Luther had already devoted several
pages to the problem of education and had
even sketched out a complete programme
for university reform. He was forthright in
voicing his opposition to scholasticism, in
rejecting knowledge culled at second hand
as a basis of instruction, and in advocating
a return to primary sources.
He urged the study of languages not for
their own sake but as a means, as he saw it,
5

of being able to gain a better understanding
of the Bible. As he himself put it: "I would
willingly agree that we could keep Logic,
Rhetoric and Aristotle's Poetics and that, if
they were put in a new and abridged form,
they could be read with profit and could be
used to give young people practice in the art
of discourse and preaching, but the com¬
mentaries and glosses should be deleted, in
the same way as Cicero's Rhetoric can be
read without commentaries or glosses.
Aristotle's Logic should be read as it
stands, stripped of all its long commen¬
taries. Nowadays, orators or preachers can
learn nothing useful from them, and they
are no longer matter for disputation or
quibbling. Along with these subjects, we
would still have the Latin, Greek and
Hebrew languages, the mathematical
sciences and history, concerning all of
which I defer to people who are more com¬
petent to judge. The results would certainly
be excellent if a serious endeavour were
made to embark on reform. The fact of the
developed an argument which still seems
strangely modern to us even today: "Sirs",
he wrote, "If such large sums have to be
spent every year on firearms, roads,
bridges, dykes and innumerable things of
the same nature, so that towns can enjoy
temporal peace and security, why should
not the same sums be spent on poor young
people in need by maintaining one or two
qualified men as schoolteachers?"
Indeed, the teaching profession was
highly esteemed by Luther, to the extent
that, in his Discourse on the Duty of Sen¬
ding Children to School (1530), he claimed
that, had he not been a preacher, the calling
he would have most liked to follow was that
of schoolmaster. And he went on to explain
how interesting and agreeable it was to
"train and raise young saplings" even if,
alas, some of them were to snap in the pro¬
cess. Thus Luther showed that he was
acutely conscious of the nobility of the task
facing educators and, while he singled out
a specific aspect of Luther's thinking about
education. Although, in some instances, he
claims that it is essential to set up schools
because the parents' own lack of education
prevents them from catering for the educa¬
tional needs of their children, it will be
noted that each of the fundamental points
in his Short Catechism, which dates from
1529, is prefaced by the phrase "as the head
of the family should present it and teach it
simply to his children and servants". This
calls for two comments: in the first place,
instruction (although, in the case in point,
it is true that he is speaking of religious in¬
struction) should not be confined to the
children of the family, but should also be
imparted to servants and to everybody liv¬
ing under the same roofin other words, in
modern parlance, there should be no
"streaming". Secondly, Luther calls for the
participation of the head of the family.
Parents should not stand aloof from the
education of their children and, what is
more, should play an active part in it.
A close friend of
Luther, the German
artist Lucas Cranach
(1472-1553) vigo¬
rously defended the
Protestant cause in
paintings, engravings
and woodcuts. Pre¬
figuring the modern
comic strip, this
engraving contrasts
Luther leading a
wagon to heaven
(above) and his
enemies riding to per¬
dition (below). It was
used to prepare the
ground for a notable
debate in Leipzig in
1519 at which Luther
was pitted against
Johann Eck, a Roman
Catholic theologian.
matter is that the issue is a most important
one!"
However, Luther was not only interested
in university education, and he made a
number of suggestions concerning elemen¬
tary schooling; among other things, he pro¬
posed that every town and village should
open a school not only for boys but for girls
as well. In his own words: "Would to
Heaven that each town had a girls' school,
where they could hear the Gospel in Latin
or in German for an hour every day!" It is
quite plain from this short passage that
Luther's main aim was to enable everybody
to read and understand the Bible.
Several years later, in 1524, in his Letter
to the Mayors and Aldermen of All the
Cities in Behalf of Christian Schoolsthe
title is a whole programme in itselfLuther
that aspect of the profession that was most
exhilarating, he did not gloss over the possi¬
ble failures they might encounter.
On this issue, Luther was neither naive
nor idealistic and he clearly realized that
what might be called theoretical education
was not an end in itself and that it was not
an adequate preparation for everyday life.
This is why he urged that, in addition to be¬
ing given a formal education, young people
should be taught a trade: "Boys should be
sent to such schools for an hour or two a
day but, even so, they should be made to
work in the home for the rest of the time
and to learn the trade or occupation for
which they are intended, so that the two go
hand-in-hand for as long as they are young
and are able to apply themselves".
Here again, emphasis has to be placed on
In the Short Catechism, Luther visualizes
the method of instruction as taking the
form of a dialogue, a sequence of questions
and answers which, little by little, enable
the pupil to grasp what the teacher wishes to
convey, whether this be the father, as
Luther advocated in his day, or the pastor
nowadays, for what is quite remarkable is
that the Short Catechism has dated so little
that it is still being used in a large number
of Lutheran parishes all over the world.
Knowledge is communicated, but there is
absolutely no question of cramming willy-
nilly abstruse notions into young people's
brains. It is much more in the nature of a
tradition, a living thing, an experience
which each generation hands down to that
succeeding it.
After Luther, the Reformers such as

Melanchthon who was known as the
"schoolmaster" of GermanyCalvin and
others followed the same path. The ap¬
proach they took may have differed, but
their goals were the same. What we are try¬
ing to say is that they all conceived of a ge¬
nuine "cultural design" embracing all the
facets of life, whether it be the life of faith
or life in society. Their main concern was
not to produce scholars but rather men and
women capable of living their lives in accor¬
dance with moral tenets bearing witness to
the immense upheaval in which they had
been caught up through grace. In other
words, the "fear of God" of medieval
education, which we have already mention¬
ed and which taught people to prepare for
death, was replaced by Luther and his
disciples by the passionate love of the God
of salvation which carries people along the
path of life.
In this sense, Luther's ideas on education
could still be said to represent a challenge.
In the wake of Luther the Reformer, the
present-day world, like that of the sixteenth
century, is constantly on the move and we
see the far-reaching changes taking place as
every day goes by. Should we not continue
to hold to the view, therefore, that a good
education, in fact, is an education that is
resolutely optimistic in outlook and evolves
through constant dialogue, with the aim of
teaching us to live with a sense of dignity
and an eye to the future?
It is true that Luther laid stress on what
might be called the Christian dimension of
education, in which the Gospel was ex¬
pected to occupy an overwhelming place.
This is how he set out to instil the idea that
discipline, culture and even morality are all
subordinated to the awareness which Chris¬
tians are expected to have of being invested,
through grace, with a new life that ultimate¬
ly enables them to assert their freedom from
what would otherwise be a form of con¬
straint. Yet Luther seems to be telling us
that this is the only means by which educa¬
tion can escape from the narrow confines
dictated by so-called philosophies or pass¬
ing fashions that go all too often by the
name of culture, so that it can ultimately
become the School of Life and we have
used capitals deliberately.
Jacques-Noël Pérès
The Wartburg castle, above, stands on a steep hill overlooking the town of Eisenach
in the German Democratic Republic. While confined in this romantic setting, Luther
began to translate the New Testament from Greek into German. The result, published
in 1 522, combined with his translation of the Old Testament which followed later,
was a literary masterpiece which did much to shape the development of the modern
German language. Left, the room in the Wartburg where Luther translated the New
Testament is today preserved as a memorial to his historic achievement.
Photos Hellmut Opitz © Panorama, German Democratic Republic
Detail of a group portrait of Luther (left) and his friends including
Frederick, the Elector of Saxony. The portrait was painted around
1530 by Lucas Cranach.
Photo © Edimedia, Pans
