How Borobudur was saved
by R. Soekmono and Caesar Voûte
THE present restoration project for Borobudur is the
culmination of a long period of studies and research.
Earlier restoration and conservation measures dealt
only partially with the factors endangering the monument,
even the major work carried out by Theodoor Van Erp bet¬
ween 1908 and 1911. Van Erp rebuilt the crumbling stupas
and cleaned many of the carvings of lichen and moss. Never¬
theless, if all the cleaning operations, repairs and studies car¬
ried out since the rediscovery of Borobudur in 814 are in¬
cluded then research and conservatory action can be said to
have covered more than 150 years.
The threat to Borobudur was due to a combination of
causes. The monument was built on an unpropitious site, not
on level ground but around and over the top of a hill. As they
worked the builders tipped loose earth and rubble before
them so that the foundations of the edifice rest on a layer of
man-made fill. Even during construction this unstable fill
caused sliding which the builders countered by taking
remedial measures notably the retaining wall which conceals
the "hidden foot" (see previous article).
Borobudur is in an earthquake zone and has suffered
seismic shocks ever since it was built. As recently as 1961 two
earthquakes took place within a month. Though only very
slight they dislodged numerous stones in the leaning walls
and produced new cracks and fissures.
For over a thousand years the rigours of the tropical
climate have probed the latent weaknesses of the edifice.
Sudden changes of heat and cold between day and night in
an area where temperatures may vary by 20° Centigrade in
twenty-four hours cause porous stones to crack. But the
worst havoc has been caused by the heavy rains (over 2,000
millimetres a year on average, with torrential downpours of
up to 15mm in five minutes). They overwhelmed the inade-
On-site research was carried out into techniques for cleaning,
treating and conserving damaged stones, statues and wall
reliefs. Above, chemical tests in the laboratory.
quate drainage system, percolating down into the central
core where they washed away the earth and weakened the
foundations. As a result the terrace walls sagged and tilted
at crazy angles and the floors sloped inwards. The lower ter-
, race walls were particularly affected and were on the brink
of collapse. Had they done so the whole colossal structure
would have come tumbling down in a great slithering avalan¬
che of earth and masonry.
Moisture on the stones had also corroded many of the
beautifully carved reliefs and favoured the growth of
disfiguring patches of mosses and lichens.
For Indonesians Chandi Borobudur is a spiritual beacon,
and even during the struggle for independence the monu-
Drawing NEDECO-Dwars,
Heedenk and Verhey,
Amersfoort, The Netherlands
CAESAR VOUTE, of the Netherlands, is professor ofgeology at the Inter¬
national Institute for Aerial Survey and Earth Sciences ITC, at Delft and
Enschede. He was Unesco co-ordinator on the Borobudurprojectfrom 1971
to 1975. He is the author ofsome 60 publications in various scientific disci¬
plines ranging from palaeontology to the conservation of monuments.
R. SOEKMONO (seepage 9)
Drawing Unesco
Overloading and stresses caused by sub¬
sidence (schematic drawing far right)
threatened to bring down the walls and ter¬
races of Borobudur in an appalling avalanche
of masonry and sculptures. Vertical section,
near right, shows design of the system of
reinforced foundations, filter layers,
drainage ducts and impermeable layers
whereby the monument has been saved.
16
ENCASEMENT'Vi- Á

Damaged Buddha statues await repair. During the rescue operation a computerized stone registration system was used to keep track
of over a million stone blocks which were dismantled, cleaned, dried, restored and treated before being re-erected on new founda¬
tions. Some stones had to be stored carefully for 4 or 5 years before rebuilding.
ment continued to receive special attention; In 1948 two In¬
dian archaeologists were invited to survey it, and in 1955 the
Government asked for Unesco's assistance. Regular measur-
ings carried out in 1959 revealed alarming irregularities; the
actual differences may have seemed insignificant but since
the slightest movement of a leaning wall might have been
fatal no deviation could be neglected.
Since Chandi Borobudur is so integrated and deterioration
was so widespread, it could not be effectively safeguarded by
partial restoration measures. Thus a bold plan was evolved:
to dismantle and rebuild the square terraces and at the same
time install an efficient drainage system behind the walls and
under the floors.
It was also decided that the earth-core of the monument
would have to be hydrologically isolated from the stone
masonry, and for this purpose it was proposed to install a
combination of filter layers and impervious structures when
building the new foundations. In any case, the weakness of
the foundations dictated a reconstruction of walls and floors
on new foundations of reinforced concrete. Adequate
strengthening of these foundations could only be achieved by
the construction of concrete slabs which would spread the
weight of the walls and the balustrades over a wide surface.
Another imperative was to maintain a certain flexibility in
the monument. Thus it was decided to construct independent
ring-like foundations under each of the galleries. I
FROM REDISCOVERY TO RESTORATION
Some time after being founded by a
king of the Sailendra dynasty of central
Java in the 9th century AD, Chandi
Borobudur is abandoned.
1814. // is rediscovered by Sir Stamford
Raffles and the envelope of rubble and
vegetation around it is gradually remov¬
ed. Specialists study all aspects of the
monument, recording its features in
drawings and photographs.
1885. Discovery of the "Hidden Foot",
bas-reliefs concealed by a retaining wall
built to prevent the edifice from
collapsing.
1907-1911. Restoration work carried out
by Theodoor Van Erp. "Thanks to him
the disappearance of the monument was
avoided". He dismantles and rebuilds the
three circular terraces and the stupas.
1929. A new commission appointed to
identify damage sources and propose
means of arresting further decay.
1950. The Republic of Indonesia joins
the United Nations and Unesco.
1955. Indonesia asks Unesco to advise on
problems of counteracting stone
weathering on Indonesian monuments,
especially Borobudur. A comprehensive
restoration plan is proposed.
1967. The Indonesian Government again
asks Unesco for technical assistance.
1968. Experts from several countries
carry out on-site studies in close co¬
operation with the Indonesian Ar¬
chaeological Institute and Government
agencies.
January 1971. International panel
meeting in Yogyakarta unanimously
agrees that the only way to save
Borobudur from disintegration is to
dismantle and rebuild the square
terraces.
April 1971. Indonesia sets up the Badan
Pemugaran Candi Borobudur (Agency
for the Restoration of Chandi
Borobudur) to handle all aspects of the
restoration project.' A Unesco co¬
ordinator appointed.
December 1972. International Con¬
sultative Committee set up. Unesco laun¬
ches international appeal.
29 January 1973. The Government of In
donesia and Unesco sign a formal agree¬
ment for the implementation of the
Borobudur Restoration Project. On the
same day agreements regarding volun¬
tary contributionsfor the preservation of
Borobudur are also signed between
Unesco and several donating Member
States. A special International Trust
Fund established, being managed by the
Director-General of Unesco assisted by
an Executive Committee comprising
representatives of Member States con¬
tributing to the project.
1975. Work begins on north façade.
Restoration will take 7 years after
dismantlement.
Early 1981. Reconstruction of east and
west façades well advanced.
October 1982. Final restoration work
completed.
23 February 1983. Grand celebration in¬
augurated by the President of the
Republic of Indonesia.
Total cost amounts to over S 20 million,
two-thirds of which are provided by the
Government of Indonesia.
17

It was originally intended to open up the bas-reliefs of the
"Hidden Foot" for permanent inspection by inserting a
covered trench in the encasement around the foot of the
monument. However, this part of the plan had to be aban¬
doned because of the risk of sliding and collapse, especially
during earthquakes.
A vast amount of preliminary research was carried out
before the final design was adopted. The disciplines involved
in these preparatory activities included: airphoto analysis,
archaeology, architecture, chemistry, conservation tech¬
niques, engineering seismology, foundation engineering, tech¬
nology, landscape planning, meteorology, microbioloby,
petrography, physics, soil mechanics, surveying and ter¬
restrial photogrammetry. It can easily be imagined hat a
project of such complexity and magnitude as this required
special measures for organization and management.
International involvement at first consisted of the provi¬
sion of expert advice and assistance in the training of Indone¬
sian personnel. Then Indonesia asked Unesco to launch a
campaign to mobilize international support for the operation
(see box page 17).
The execution of the project has been in Indonesian hands.
In April 1971 the Indonesian Government established a
special agency, the Badán Pemugaran Candi Borobudur
(Agency for the Restoration of Chandi Borobudur). Staffed
by senior engineers and archaeologists and assisted by scien¬
tific advisors from several universities, the autonomous
Badan has handled all aspects of the project, technical and
administrative, national and international. The setting up of
the Badan and the simultaneous appointment of a Unesco
CONTINUED PAGE 23
Before restoration, many of the superb Borobudur reliefs
were fractured and dislocated as a result of the strains
imposed on the colossal sanctuary by tropical weathering.
COLOUR PAGES
Opposite page. On the three circular upper ter¬
races of the great sanctuary of Borobudur (In¬
donesia) stand three symmetrical rings of 72 bell-
shaped stupas, or shrines, with perforated walls.
Each shrine contains a statue of a Buddha (below
left). Above, one of the statues whose shrine has
crumbled faces a line of smaller stupas which pin¬
nacle the walls of the colossal monument which is
adorned with the world's largest and most com¬
plete ensemble of Buddhist reliefs. Detail of carv¬
ing, below right, shows grace and simplicity with
which the sculptors treated the themes of Buddhist
iconography.
Photo bottom left Michelangelo Durazzo © ANA, Paris
Other photos © Bann Namikawa, Tokyo
Centre pages. As if suspended in mid-air above the
mist-wreathed plain the majestic upper terraces are
plain and unadorned. Close at hand, in the twilight
of the fretted stupas, the pilgrim can just discern
the meditating Buddhas. Surrounded by a sea of
light, his gaze encompasses the chain of volcanic
peaks rising on the horizon.
Photo © Kyodo News Enterprise, Japan
Page 22. Above, Borobudur is set on an un¬
dulating plain bordered on practically all sides
by rugged mountain ranges. Lower photos, in¬
spired by sacred scriptures and working with
consummate skill and precision of detail, the
ancient sculptors embroidered stone master¬
pieces which have now been saved for
posterity.
Photos © Bann Namikawa, Tokyo
18

* ft

m A
r
ÉK
'
tu»

m mm
1 ¿T
Ai
!
»,


CONTINUED FROM PAGE 18
co-ordinator proved to be of the greatest benefit. Awareness
of a common responsibility soon developed complete mutual
understanding and the closest co-operation.
The Badan has carried out all the photographic and non-
photographic documentation and survey work, stone
restoration, dismantling, stone conservation work and
reconstruction, including the construction of the watertight
layers behind the walls. Over 600 technicians and labourers
have been involved.
Among the new techniques introduced for the project have
available for damaged stones, bas-reliefs and statues. On
average it took about two weeks to treat and repair each
stone. Then the blocks had to be moved back to their million
positions. An additional task was that of identifying some
ten thousand stones that had fallen off the building over (he
years, matching them with the existing architecture and
finally restoring them to their original places.
Despite the vast scale of the undertaking re-erection of the
terraces on their new foundations has proceeded according
to timetable allowing for the reinauguration of the monu¬
ment in March 1983.
The same relief in 1910 (above) and in the late 1960s (below). Chemicals picked up by water seeping from inside the monument
to the surface and secretions from various organisms caused considerable changes in the appearance of the reliefs, as well as physical
and chemical modifications.
Photo from Chandi Borobudur, by R Soekmono © Unesco
been the use of airborne and terrestrial photogrammetry for
precision surveys, the analysis of aerial photography, the ap¬
plication of geophysical surveys as aids to archaeological
prospection, and the use of computer facilities for work
planning and project management.
The task has been colossal. After the completion of the
photogrammetric survey of the monument more than a
million stone blocks were dismantled by a forest of hand-
operated cranes in an order carefully planned beforehand to
prevent the risk of unbalancing the monument.
Each stone was identified and coded then transported to
the nearby treatment area where a battery of restoration
measures ranging from cleaning with water or dry brushing
to the application of a clay and chemical "facepack" were
The Borobudur project thus constitutes an example of
very close multidisciplinary collaboration between a large
number of specialists from many different fields all con¬
tributing to the preservation and better understanding of a
monument which is a highlight in mankind's cultural, artistic
and technical achievements.
It has reflected a nation's desire to preserve its cultural
heritage for the future; the wish of a people to permit the
greatest possible number of persons to enjoy the artistic crea¬
tion of the past; and the solidarity of the international com¬
munity in preserving a masterpiece that belongs to the
universal cultural heritage.
H R. Soekmono
Caesar Voûle
23
