Symbolically depicted, words
pour from the mouth of a Toltec
warrior in this Aztec bas-relief
from Chichen Itza (Mexico).
IL A treasury
of tongues
BaLMIR, Guy Claude
Black English
Since the publication, in 1972, of Joey
Lee Dillard's erudite study Black
English, it is no longer possible to dismiss
the Black North American's way of
speaking as "a vague and artificial
lingo". To be fair, this disdainful out¬
burst of the journalist and literary critic
H.L. Mencken, normally more cir¬
cumspect and balanced in his
judgements, referred only to the period
before the American Civil War.
Like the members of any mixed
language group trying ' to make
themselves understood, the first Blacks
reduced to slavery in North America at
the beginning of the seventeenth century
must have communicated, with the
Whites and amongst themselves, in some
kind of lingua franca, or Pidgin English.
Some of them would already have had
some experience of this aboard the slave
ships on which slaves from different
tribes were mixed up so as to lessen the
risk of escape plots or revolt. Others
from the West African coast might have
learnt one of the forms of Pidgin English
which, like the Portuguese Pidgins
before them, were known to have been
used during the sixteenth century as a
form of //rtgwa/ranea associated with the
slave trade.
It should not be forgotten that multil¬
ingualism and vehicular languages are
traditional in Africa because of the conti¬
nent's great diversity of languages, or
that, even today, many Anglo-West
African Pidgins still persist (krio in
10
Sierra Leone, Pidgin Liberian and
wescos in Cameroon and Nigeria). Fur¬
thermore, other Pidgins exist in the
United States, such as that of the
Chinese, for example, or of certain In¬
dians, like the Seminóles, who at times
lived in close relationship with runaway
slaves.
The basic lingua franca of the slaves
born in Africa was continually being
renewed by successive arrivals, and at the
same time a patois was developing which
served as a new vehicular language
among the creóles, or slaves born in cap¬
tivity. Some slaves, however, acquired
the language of the Whites, either by be¬
ing taught it or else simply by picking it
up, to the point where runaway slaves
succeeded in escaping by forging passes
"signed" by their masters. Thus, in the
words of Dillard, "by the end of the eigh¬
teenth century, slaves from
Massachusetts to South Carolina used
varieties of English ranging from West
African Pidgin to (nearly) Standard



English", and including, of course, the
Creole of the plantations. The planters
themselves, as well as their children
brought up by Black women servants and
in daily contact with young Black
playmates, gradually became bilingual in
Creole and English or, in Louisiana, in
Creole and French.
The Creole of the plantations reached
its peak in the nineteenth century. The
writings of both negrophiles, such as
Harriet Beecher Stowe, and negrophobes
such as N. Beverly Tucker, bear witness
to its vitality in the period up to the Civil
War. In his book Army Life in a Black
Regiment, published in 1870, Thomas
Wentworth Higginson not only left us
some of the finest examples we have of
Creole, but also gave an indication of its
links with the Gullah Creole, now an
isolated dialect, of the coastal regions
and offshore islands of South Carolina
and Georgia.
During the 1940s, Lorenzo Turner
discovered in Gullah many African bor¬
rowings: names of the days of the week
given to children (Cuffy-Friday, Kwame-
Saturday, Quashee-Sunday, etc.), and
common nouns and verbs such as
goober-peanut, tote-carry, buckra-white

man, nyam-yam, as well as banjo, gum¬
bo and jazz. The use of tote is recorded
from 1677 and as early as 1782 Benjamin
Franklin employed the word "boc-
carorra" (buckra) when writing about a
white man.
After the Emancipation and the
Reconstruction, the Negro speech of the
plantations underwent a gradual process
of "decreolisation", moving closer to
Standard English, although in the rural
areas, where schooling was less
widespread, it survived much longer, as
witness the accounts in Lay My Burden
Down; A Folk History of Slavery,
published in 1945, an anthology of
writings of generations spanning a period
long before that date.
As a result, twentieth-century Black
English, through a process of mutual in¬
teractions and influences, though not
identical, has become closer to that of
white southerners at least in its
phonology. But Dillard draws attention
to certain characteristics of its grammar
and recalls the richness of its slang,
especially that of the urban centres of the
North where migrants from the South
settled. What "blues" or "gospel" fan is
unaware of the Negro meaning of "soul"
or of its derivative "soul music"?
It cannot be denied that Black
American vernacular has given birth to a
speech form, even a literature, which is
distinct from that of the dominant
culture, a language the group recognized
as its own and in which it expresses its
collective consciousness. It was thanks to
the fecundity of their gestural "motor"
memory that these Africans, plunged in¬
to a European/Protestant environment
which effaced their residual "image"
memory, were able to structure the ex¬
perience they were obliged to live out in
the concentration-camp world of slavery,
then in a state of serfdom dosed with
"It cannot be denied that
Black American ver¬
nacular has given birth to
a speech form, even a
literature, which is
distinct from that of the
dominant culture, a
language the group
recognizes as its own and
in which it expresses its
collective conscious¬
ness. " Right, singers of
Negro spirituals.
Photo Herbert © Bapho. Pans
lynchings and, finally, in the racist urban
ghettos.
American neo-African expressionism
is based essentially on three elements.
First, rhythms, which in spite of the early
(seventeenth century) banning of the
native drum, at times expands to
polyrhythm and at times adds syncopa¬
tion to the songs adopted or invented in
the new surroundings. Second, the art of
improvisation which makes possible in¬
deed ensures the constant re-invention of
both music and words. Third, African-
style antiphony, that is, the rhythmic
division of the song, of the words bet¬
ween soloist and chorus, between the
preacher, the leader of a game, the work
leader and the group that participates
and supports him with their responses.
These elements shape all the tradi¬
tional forms; the religious forms,
especially the sermon with participation
of the congregation in which the preacher
goes into a trance, declaring himself to be
possessed of the Holy Spirit; the
spiritual, transformations by the slaves
of Protestant canticles into historio-
myths; the sung preachment which was a
happy combination of sermon and
spirituals (and also non-religious forms
such as work songs, adapted English and
Scottish ballads, country and city blues,
In the United States after the
emancipation of the slaves and
the end of the Civil War, "the
Negro speech of the plantations
underwent a gradual process of
'decreolization ', moving closer to
Standard English". Left, "the
old folks at home", a photo
taken around 1899-1900 by
Frances Benjamin Johnston
(1864-1952).
game songs and the pornographic poems
of the ghettos known as "dozens").
Today "gospel" is really no more than
a modern version of the old religious
songs and the participatory sermon has
moved into the towns where it occupies
improvised store-front churches. The
blues singer has stolen the limelight from
the anonymous bards of the spirituals of
bygone times, and the events of daily life
rather than religious topics have become
the theme of the blues. Nevertheless, by
enriching jazz with its melodies and its
tonality (the famous "blue notes" in par¬
ticular) the blues form has provided a
link between the traditional expres¬
sionism of song and the expressionism of
instrumental intervention which has
adopted all the elements of the Afro-
American language including its
vocabulary. What is jazz if not impromp¬
tu song, the voice of the Negro taken up
by the instrument, just as, in early times,
the beat of the banned drum was taken
up by the feet and hands of the slaves? Is
not "scat" the voice playing the role of
the instrument? Or could it be the instru¬
ment which turns again to the voice?
Here tongue and language become con¬
founded, as though unconsciously, in
their native ambiguity.
Nevertheless, although no mention has
been made here of the theatre, the novel,
or even of the improvised "jazz poetry"
of the 1960s, it is to the "folklore" poets
that we owe the final encounter between
literature and "orature". In the past,
Fenton Johnson, and later Weldon
Johnson, Langston Hughes and Sterling
Brown, and today Raymond Patterson,
by adopting popular forms and then
adapting them into literary genres, have
succeeded in giving back to the speech
forms and language of Black Americans
their beauty and their dignity.
11
