IX. Science, technology
and society
THE growth of human capacities for scientific and
technological creation is not always accompanied by a
commensurate mastery of technological developments,
and does not necessarily lead to uses that would meet men's
aspirations and serve all peoples fairly.
The worldwide scientific and technological effort which is
devoted to increasing the destructive power of armaments, and
which sets off the arms race, is a cause for grave concern. Not
only is arms research immobilizing substantial resources which
could be used to meet the priority needs of societies, but the
technological innovations which it yields call for further in¬
novations even more detrimental to the security they are sup¬
posed to provide.
Furthermore technological development, when poorly con¬
trolled, can have extremely disturbing consequences: degrada¬
tion of the environment, massive migrations and uncontrolled
urbanization, threats to employment and a calling into question
of certain cultural values. In the developing countries the im¬
portation of technologies, often through transnational corpora¬
tions, leads to the setting up of industries which, although re¬
quiring substantial investments, nevertheless do not create
many jobs and lead to profound changes in consumption pat¬
terns and life-styles. Elsewhere the progress of computer and
robot technology is causing concern on the score of the possible
effects of such technology on employment, on working condi¬
tions, on the freedom of individuals and on the preservation of
privacy.
Implanting science and technology
Technology is often treated as a commodity for export,
whereas what is needed is an organized transfer of know-how
and an endogenous capacity to adapt that know-how to the
socio-cultural and natural environment.
The implanting of science and technology in society is not a
mere matter of grafting knowledge, know-how, practices and
techniques on to social tissue that has not been prepared to
receive it. There cannot be a situation with science and
technology on one side and society on the other. On the con¬
trary, science and technology must put down deep roots in
society, and their rise depends at one and the same time on
material, social, economic, cultural, historical and political
realities.
Governments are aware of the importance of what is at stake
and are adopting an increasingly voluntarist attitude in the mat¬
ter. In this they are responding to an increasing demand on the
part of young people, who are no longer prepared to leave it all
to fate or chance. This is also the reason for the existence of
policies on science and technology.
Participation of specialists and the public
It is difficult for the developing countries to master or control
transfers of technology inasmuch as they do not possess enough
specialists capable of selecting and adapting foreign
technologies and seeing to it personally that those technologies
are assimilated. This shortage of specialists is often worsened by
the brain drain.
It is important that not only political leaders but also
academics, scientific researchers, engineers and representatives
of the various sectors of production should be associated with
the search for progress. It is also desirable to ensure the par¬
ticipation of the public in identifying their needs and their col¬
laboration in determining the orientation of research and in the
introduction and dissemination of innovations. In this
connexion it is particularly important to secure the participation
of women and young people.
It has been realized more clearly in the last few years that cer¬
tain fundamental ethical, religious and cultural values need to
be taken into consideration in the formulation of such policies.
The explanation doubtless lies in the need felt throughout the
world to keep up to date with scientific knowledge and advanc¬
ed technologies while at the same time cherishing whatever can
help to preserve or even bring to full flower the traditions and
human values through which each society expresses its specific
character, identity and dignity. As a result, science and
technology policies are less and less influenced by the
"technocratic" approach based on exclusively cognitive and
utilitarian criteria.
Technology is often treated as a commodity for export, whereas its
successful transfer requires a real appreciation of local needs and
an understanding of its long-term economic, social and cultural ef¬
fects. Above, a wind-powered water pump in the Gozirah district
of Sudan.
Photo Eric Schwab, Unesco
21
