VI. The sciences
and their
applications
to development
SUBSTANTIAL disparities are still a feature of the distri¬
bution throughout the world of material and human
resources in the field of science and technology. Expen¬
diture on research per head of the working population is sixty
times less in the developing nations than in the industrialized
countries. As regards results, the disparities are just as great.
Over 93 per cent of the patents registered throughout the world
come from the industrialized countries.
Science and technology
in the service of development
These disparities lie undoubtedly at the heart of development
problems. A more judicious distribution of research projects
and the creation of new poles of scientific and technological
development would enable societies which up to now have had
a very small part to play, to make a greater contribution to both
scientific and technical progress and the definition of the
ultimate aims of science and technology at the international
level.
The broadening of international co-operation in this way
would appear to be all the more necessary in view of the fact
that certain scientific fields, such as geology, oceanography,
climatology, radio-astronomy or epidemiology, transcend, by
definition, national or regional boundaries.
The International Centre for Theoretical Physics, at
Trieste, established in 1 963 and financed by Italy, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and Unesco, pro¬
vides post-graduate courses and high-level seminars
for young physicists from developing countries to
enable them to keep abreast of modern
developments, update their knowledge and enjoy the
stimulus of contact with other scientists. Below, a
few of the 1,500 physicists the Centre welcomes
each year.

More
than
enough
\n optimistic assessment of world ener©
Ldiled by Robin Clarke
Photo I Unesco Pr<
Photo Paul Almasy, Unesco
Is the world exhausting its energy supplies? Will there be enough to go round as the planet's population
rises to 6,000 million or more over the next twenty years? These are among the questions tackled by over
a dozen experts in More Than Enough? the first title (above left) in Unesco's new Sextant series, designed
to enable the layman to find his bearings in an ocean of complicated and often confusing information on
a wide variety of problems. New and renewable sources of energy are supplying an increasing proportion
of the world's energy needs; solar energy in particular holds great promise as an energy source for develop¬
ing countries. Above right, solar oven developed at the Solar Energy Laboratory of Dakar University,
Senegal.
The objectives are therefore to strengthen national research
potential in the natural sciences and to improve institutional in¬
frastructures; to develop university and postgraduate training
programmes, adapting them to specific needs and conditions;
and to broaden and strengthen international co-operation.
Like the natural sciences, the main engineering sciences have
developed rapidly, so that the increasing volume of knowledge
makes technical versatility harder to attain. The solution fre¬
quently advocated for this problem is a type of training design¬
ed to inculcate not encyclopaedic knowledge, but essential con¬
cepts, to be supplemented by other ways of learning and acquir¬
ing knowledge (lifelong education, individual research and
documentation, training courses in firms).
The new technologies hazards and hopes
The combined advances in computer technology and
microelectronics, and their applications, which are spreading
from the services sector (telecommunications combined with
data processing, office automation) to the manufacturing pro¬
duction sector (the development of robotics and other
.automated systems), will bring about radical changes in the
nature and structure of industry in the industrialized countries,
with the very probable result that the developing countries will
lose outlets for their products, which are less competitive.
Biotechnologies contribute both to the preservation of.
genetic diversity (collections of microbe cultures, the selection
of new strains, new cultivated plant varieties, and new species
of domestic animals) and to technological innovation, both of
which are of interest to the developing and the industrialized
countries. Biotechnologies draw to a greater extent on inven¬
tiveness and know-how than on sciences necessitating heavy
equipment, and their development is within reach of the less
privileged countries, provided that objectives are clearly
defined.
Unesco's objectives are therefore to contribute to the
dissemination of new technologies after assessing all their con¬
sequences and considering any necessary adaptations or ad¬
justments, to strengthen the training of the specialists and
18
technicians concerned and to create favourable research condi¬
tions; and to develop exchanges of specialized information.
The social sciences a vital role
The need for research in the social and human sciences has
become particularly acute in the developing countries. It would
appear vital to highlight the patterns of unequal terms of trade,
the consequences of the introduction of cash crop farming, the
forces at play in rapid social change and their repercussions on
human values and cultures in general. An effort must also be
made to assemble socio-economic data and devise the necessary
instruments for the formulation of development plans, and, at
the same time to elucidate historical processes, the nature of in¬
ternal social relationships and their impact on development pro¬
cesses, the juxtaposition of or the interference between modern
and traditional forms of power, the influence of certain pro¬
cesses of modernization on economic, cultural and social life
and on the technologies of traditional medicine, customary law
and the parallel structures of power in the rural environment,
etc.
The comprehension of such problems and the quest for solu¬
tions implies recourse to several disciplines operating in sym¬
biosis. An approach such as this is particularly important when
the issue under review is the vast field of development.
Here Unesco's aim is the introduction of training and
research programmes at university and postgraduate levels.
The programme activities planned within these key areas ac¬
cordingly include not only the establishment or strengthening of
research and training infrastructures, but also the formulation
of policies and programmes and, at the same time, a better
perception of the social and cultural consequences of introduc¬
ing and developing new technologies.
