The stream
of American
consciousness
by John Seelye
I am one of a clear minority in Ame¬
rica, for I have travelled on the
Mississippi River by paddlewheel
steamboat, the only way to encounter
that greatest of American streams, if only
because it connects you to a remarkable
epoch in our history. The steamboat was
the Delta Queen, originally a Sacra¬
mento-River auto ferry (the dining deck
slopes upward to the centre, giving your
soup a rakish tilt) built in Scotland, but
the experience was still authentic.
The river was at flood, stage and the
boat made slow time upstream, yet all
time on the river is slow time. Schedules
have to be revised every day, always
backward. Leisure is enforced as the
scenery creeps by, what scenery there is,
which isn't much, not on the lower river.
Because of the levees, which elevate the
stream above the flood plain, there is
literally no shore line by which to gain
perspective, no visible habitation of men.
Relief is provided by sandbars with a
stubborn clump of willows or alders
clinging to them or by an occasional
towboat pushing a string of barges
(towboats on the Mississippi do not tow),
with perhaps a deckhand or two in
evidence, a precious sa mpling of humani¬
ty. The rest is river, a rumpled copper
26
sheet of muddy water, apparently mo¬
tionless at a distance, but hissing around
the hull as it sweeps to the sea, pulling
itself into hundreds of small whirlpools,
a vast field of force drawn down from the
huge interior.
On the map, the Mississippi assumes a
serpentine shape not immediately ob¬
vious to a passenger on the lower river.
Early in the nineteenth century, one mad
projector suggested that the meanders be
bisected the entire length of the river by
means of two canals, with the intention
of improving navigation and reducing
floods. The project was never under¬
taken, but Americans have continued to
impose the rule of the line on the river's
natural inclination towards a serpen¬
tine which is to say spiral course.
Levees and wingdams act toward the
same desired end, but such is the force of
the river that all engineering feats are
never more than compromises with
short-range effectiveness.
Right now, it is only by means of ar¬
tificial devices including a controversial
dam that the river is kept flowing past
New Orleans. Its natural tendency to
change course will eventually win out and
the great city will be left high and boggy.
The Mississippi is like that great serpent
destroying the house of Laocoön: the
river takes its meaning from the futile ef¬
forts of men to overcome it.
Draining the centre of a large conti¬
nent, drawing down water from both the
Allegheny and the Rocky Mountains, the
Mississippi puts forth a seductively sym¬
metrical even neo-classical shape, linear
in implication and inspiring to the im¬
perial sensibility. Ironically (and much
associated with the great river is
ironical), the man who is credited with
discovering the Mississippi, De Soto,
regarded it as a barrier to his westward
search for the fabled Indian cities of
gold.
It was La Salle, a century later, for
whom the Mississippi first assumed a
promising shape: Joined to the St.
Lawrence by a network of lakes and
lesser rivers, it would extend the French
empire in North America all the way to
the Gulf. It is difficult to read the story of
La Salle as told by Francis Parkman
without thinking of the story of Kurtz as
told by Conrad, for both stories are
about the madness that quest for empire
engenders.
Reading the story of La Salle, we are
brought back to a time when the
Mississippi was a truly savage stream, an

American Congo: T. S Eliot's great,
brown God. "Nous sommes tous
sauvages," that was the slogan La Salle
found scrawled across the hull of the
boat that was to have taken him down the
Mississippi from Fort Crèvecsur on the
Illinois River. It had been left by de¬
serting coureurs de bois, and contains a
truth that may have escaped La Salle,
who persisted in his attempt to wrest the
serpentine Mississippi into an imperial
shape. The explorer finally did descend
the great river, but on a return trip he was
set upon by his own men and killed.
has many famous streams
the Hudson, the Ohio, the Potomac, the
Susquehanna, among themmost of
which bear Indian names, but it is the
Mississippi that is most Indian in
character. As the earliest explorers
noted, the Mississippi changes its nature
at St. Louis, where it is joined by the
Missouri: "The calm is gone, the
grouped isles disappear, the shores are
jagged and rent, the hue of the water is
clayed, the before moderate current is
rapid and vexed." So wrote Herman
Melville of the difference, drawing upon
not only personal recollection but many
observers before him: "Like a Pawnee
from ambush" comes down the Missouri
from the west, and "under the benign
name Mississippi it is in short the
.Missouri that now rolls to the Gulf... the
Missouri that by open assault or artful
sap sweeps away fruit and field, grave¬
yard and barn." Even now the Mississip¬
pi below St. Louis is still a savage stream,
an American Congo barely contained by
man-made chains. And at the start there
were no chains, the river a force without
constraint.
The symmetrical location of the
Mississippi did not escape that neo¬
classical geopolitician, Thomas Jeffer¬
son, who saw the river as a vast waterway
by means of which the interior of North
America could be settled and exploited.
The negotiations with Napoleon that
resulted in the Louisiana Purchase were
first undertaken merely to obtain naviga¬
tion rights on the Mississippi. Having
bought the river and much of the ter¬
ritory west of it, Jefferson and his con¬
temporaries were presented with yet
another problem, for descending the
Mississippi was not easy and going up it
was nearly impossible.
Flatboats and rafts were the chief
means of down-river conveyance: clumsy
and hard to manoeuvre, they did not all
make it down to New Orleans but were
torn apart by snags or wrecked on hidden
sandbars. Some were attacked by Indians
or river pirates, white renegades who im¬
bibed lawlessness from the wild river.
The up-river voyage was made by
keelboats, graceless yet somehow heroic
craft that were propelled by a unique
kind of boatman of which Mike Fink is
the legendary type: scarcely distin¬
guishable from river pirates because mad
with the licence of the untamed frontier,
these semi-barbarians poled and pulled
their slow way upstream foot by foot,
cordelling with winch and rope when
poles would not work or sometimes haul¬
ing themselves along by grabbing at the
foliage on the bank.
Heroic, yes, but inefficient, and it
would be a later generation that
celebrated Mike Fink and his wild
brethren. Americans of the period of
Washington and Jefferson did not much
prize heroism in its wilder forms, nor
were they charmed by picturesque ineffi¬
ciency. A contemporary carving by
William Rush decorating the Fairmount
Waterworks outside Philadelphia show¬
ed two opposing allegorical figures:
"The Schuylkill Chained" (an old man
lying on rocks wrapped in iron links)
and, "The Schuylkill Freed" (a young
27

William Faulkner (1897-1962), the U.S.
writer who won the Nobel Prize for
Literature in 1949, spent almost all his
life in the State of Mississippi. He
transposed the deep south he knew into
the imaginary "Yoknapatawpha", the
setting of a fictional saga which opened
in 1929 with Sartoris and ended with his
last novel. The Reivers (1962).
Yoknapatawpha, a compound of two In¬
dian expressions, means "the country
where the water flows slowly through
flat lands". Right, Faulkner outside his
home at Oxford, Mississippi.
woman resembling Liberty seated by a
waterwheel). Rush meant to demonstrate
that a river you cannot use is in effect an
imprisoned stream: dam it, pipe it, put it
to work, and you free it.
Robert Fulton, who had earlier seen
canals as the answer to America's
transportation problems (and sub¬
marines and torpedoes as instruments of
world peace) found the solution to the
navigational challenge of the Mississippi
in the steamboat. An eccentric inventor
named John Fitch had actually put
together a working steamboat in the
1780s, but the time was not right and
Fitch.died ruined and half-crazy, killing
himself on the banks of the Ohio.
Robert Fulton was nothing if not a
man synchronized with his age, and
though his submarine and torpedo found
no buyers, his steamboat sailed straight
into the future that is now our history.
Everyone knows about the Clermont (ac¬
tually called The North River, as was the
Hudson in Fulton's day) and its epochal
voyage in 1 807 up the Hudson to Albany.
But not everyone knows that Fulton, like
John Fitch before him, realized that his
invention would be of greatest service on
the Mississippi. Within four years the
New Orleans had made its epical way
downstream against a spectacular
backdrop of earthquake and flood all the
way from Pittsburgh to the Gulf.
28
Shortly after the imperial plan of
western waterways was linked to the
Hudson River by the Erie Canal, De Toc-
queville visited the United States to check
on the progress . of democracy. He
discovered that progress if not
democracy had been considerably ac¬
celerated by steamboats, but he also
learned that these distinctly American
craft were hastily and often shoddily con¬
structed, because, as a riverman explain¬
ed to him, they seldom lasted more than
five years and were always being improv¬
ed upon in terms of design and speed.
Along with Franklin's lightning rod, the
steamboat was an American invention,
perhaps the American invention (before
the light bulb and motion picture for
surely Edison is the American inventor)
in that it was a product of human in¬
genuity spurred by commercial necessity,
one which prized speed over safety.
One of the most beautiful of all
mechanical inventions, the paddlewheel
steamboat is now regarded with a great
deal of nostalgia, but until it was displac¬
ed by the locomotive, the riverboat was
for the mid-nineteenth century American
the apogee of technological progress, and
was celebrated as such in famous
lithographs by Currier & Ives. The Hud¬
son's riverboats were also known for
their beauty, but the steamboats depicted
by lithographers were most always boats
on the Mississippi, usually seen racing by
moonlight, their furnaces glowing and
smokestacks showering the scene with
sparks.
The Great River had at last met its
match, yet the imagery of savagery per¬
sists, put forth by the demon god Steam,
as tricky a servant as ever conjured up by
man (before nuclear power), nor did the
River quietly surrender. As De Toc-
queville's informant noted, the life span
of a Mississippi steamboat was not long,
and what snags and sandbars did not ac¬
complish, exploding boilers effected with
much more dramatic force.
Most of the Currier & Ives prints were
published after the Civil War, even as the
Mississippi riverboat was being replaced
by the steam locomotive as a symbol of
modern transportation. As celebrations
they were already tinged with nostalgia,
as was Mark Twain's Life on the
Mississippi (1883), a book that like its
author is split down the middle, one half
a sentimental memorial to life as it was
on the river before the Civil War ("Old
Times"), the other a paean to the
triumphs of modern technology that had
made piloting no longer a necessarily
heroic act. If the Mississippi is the Trojan
Serpent then Mark Twain is Old Man
Laocoön in our national iconography,
thoroughly wrapped up (as he might have
observed) in his subject, Snake and Man
virtually indistinguishable River and
River God.
Until Mark Twain's appearance upon
the literary scene rivers were not impor¬
tant to American fiction despite their
primacy in American life, but were most¬
ly seen flashing through foliage or
floating a Cooper Indian in a Cooper
canoe. Mark Twain is our premier river
writer as the Mississippi is our para¬
mount stream, and of the many books he
wrote we remember him best for those
through which the Mississippi moves. We
remember him best of all for one book,
through which the great river moves with
all the rights and privileges of a major
(though it is literally a supporting)
character: take away The Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn and you remove not
the cornerstone but the keystone to Mark
Twain's The rest simply will not
stand alone. Next to Old Man Laocoön
writhe his two sons, men in appearance
but boys in stature: call them Tom
Sawyer and Huck Finn, for if Mark
Twain is a boy man surely his greatest
creations, his Gemini, are children in size
only impossible kids.
Mark Twain, his boys, the serpentine
River, combine to put forth a mystical
CONTINUED PAGE 38
Trumpeter, singer, band leader and composer, Louis Armstrong
( 1 900-197 1 ) is one of the greatest names in the history of jazz.
He was born at New Orleans, the capital of Louisiana, on the
left bank of the Mississippi, the longest river in the United
States, initially playing on the riverboats before travelling on to
Chicago and New York.

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 28
union, a quaternity, the parts of which
are inseparable, caught up in what is less
a struggle than a synergesis. If the
Mississippi is natural power, a great
moving field of force, then Mark Twain's
Huckleberry Finn borrows a certain
energy from the river that runs through
it, for the river seems to have inspired in
the author an imaginative leap difficult
to match in our literature. It released
something in Mark Twain, something
called Huck Finn, an American version
of Wordsworth's Child of Nature, dirty,
smart-mouthed, ignorant, amoral, yet
clearly a blessed Innocent, whose sense of
freedom is invariably linked to the on-
moving River even though it is moving
in the wrong direction.
The explorer Henry Schoolcraft
discovered the ultimate source of the
Mississippi, a lake which the Indians call¬
ed "Elk" but which Schoolcraft named
"Itasca" (Verjitas Cajput), which he
later claimed was an Indian word for a
woman's breast, the very same
Schoolcraft whose Algic Researches gave
Henry Longfellow the Indian legends
which he warped into the weft of
Hiawatha. But in terms of our literature,
the true source of Mark Twain's
Mississippi in Huckleberry Finn is Henry
David Thoreau's Waiden Pond, much as
Huck's raft is Henry's cabin
reconstituted.
Thoreau spent the last decade of his
life pursuing the secret of the American
wilderness, personified for him as the In¬
dian, and though Mark Twain was con¬
temptuous of noble savagery as put forth
in Cooper's novels, his Huck Finn has a
lot more red man in him than does
Longfellow's Sunday-schoolcrafty Hia¬
watha. He is the spirit of American rivers
incarnate, happiest when free-flowing,
wary of civilization and its constraints,
and dedicated to helping his chain-laden
friend Jim escape society in its most
restraining form. These two are perhaps
our most famous pair, like the lovers on
Keats's urn, forever fleeing, forever pur¬
sued, yet somehow, paradoxically, sym¬
bolic of the personal freedom we all seek,
floating forever downstream over the
uneasy bones of De Soto, carried by the
river past the sunken wreckage of a thou¬
sand steamboats as it reflects the light of
a million untriangulated stars.
John Seelye
