Peasant values
An interview with French historian
Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie
Courier. In one of your books, you analyse a triangular relation¬
ship between peasant, land and lord. How has this relationship
evolved since the Middle Ages, especially in modern times?
Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie. The relationship is certainly very an¬
cient. In some respects it may, at least insofar as France, or Gaul,
is concerned, go back to the Celtic chieftains of the Iron Age, who
were perhaps "pre-lords".
This "triangle" implies that the lord has the higher title to the
land, that he may even enjoy property rights over men, in which
case they are serfs; but this is not always the case. It implies that
these men, the peasants, have a certain "possession" of their land
in common with the lord. Their connexion with the lord is express¬
ed in the fact that they pay him dues in cash or in kind. They obey
his orders. They sometimes, though not always, perform statute
labour on his land. This is, more or less, the nature of the land-
peasant-lord triangle. It has varied. During the age of Charlemagne
in Europethings may have been different elsewhereit required
the peasants to perform a large amount of statute labour for the
great lords, notably the great ecclesiastical landlords. From the
eleventh century on there is far less statute labour only a few days
a year; there are above all payments in corn, in grain, and later in
money. Finally, starting with the French Revolution, the lord
becomes simply the owner of a great estate, and his links with the
EMMANUEL LE ROY LADURIE is a French historian and a Professor
at the Collège de France. He is the author of a number of books including
Montaillou, Village Occitan (1975), Paysans du Languedoc (1977) and Car¬
naval de Romans (1979).
peasants continue to be links of patronage, protection and pater¬
nalism, but the peasants are no longer bound to pay him dues even
if they recognize his leadership and still feel a certain respect for
him. Sometimes they rebel against him. In Europe today the feudal
lord is a figure of the past, but there are still great landowners to
whom the peasants may sometimes feel bound by a certain link of
deference.
Courier. How do you see the reciprocal influence between rural
and urban civilization in Western Europe today?
ELRL. Urban civilization has destructive aspects. In a sense it has
destroyed many things, if only through the exodus from the coun¬
tryside. Villages have emptied; the peasants who have left the land
have done so to look for a more agreeable existence and in many
cases they have found one. There is no reason to idealize country
life in olden days, but the result of this exodus has often been to im¬
poverish social life in the villages. On the other hand, urban
civilization city culturehas introduced modernity into our
villages. The peasant in France, in Western Europe has
generated an increase in productivity which has been very swift and
much greater than in industry. It is true that agricultural productivi¬
ty was initially at a far lower level. The country people, in various
regions, were traditional. But now many of them have become en¬
trepreneurs, often burdened with a heavy load of work; no question
of a thirty-nine-hour week for them.
Courier. What about the influence of mass culture, the mass
media? How do you see the changes in what might be called the
peasant imagination?
Troglodyte dwellings near the city of Guadix, Andalusia, southern Spain.
T

Harvest-time at Saint-Loup-de-Naud, to the east of Paris.
>ELRL. Strictly speaking, the peasant imagination has virtually
ceased to exist today. In any case, it was always linked to urban
culture. Even what is called rural folklore was dependent on a com¬
parable folklore of the towns. One example of this is the religious
festivals which in "peasant" custom often derived from Christian
festivals as they were celebrated in the towns. It is true that
witchcraft in the countryside is an older phenomenon. It may go
back to certain pre-Christian religious forms but in any case it has
become extremely marginal. Today the fact remains that the
peasant is by definition more closely linked to nature (though he
sometimes destroys it with pesticides), and relates to the forest and
to animal life in ways which are much more direct and vital than
those of the city-dweller.
As for religion, it is a more living force in the countryside, where
traditional Catholicism in many cases still plays a more important
role than in the towns where, nevertheless, it has not totally ceased
to exist. Local patois have in many cases disappeared, notably in
France. They scarcely exist except in the form of an accent, and this
is dying out... Dialects are still used by a few old country people
and... on the campus by trendy students. It is true that in the case
of France the propagation of the national language has perhaps
been more forceful and determined than elsewhere... In
Switzerland on the other hand dialects are still used in the villages
and even in the towns, at least in the German-speaking cantons, but
not in French-speaking Switzerland. Furthermore, peasants are ful¬
ly involved in the audiovisual and televised culture which they share
with the towns. To round off the picture, let's not forget the young
rural-dwellers thundering through the countryside on their motor¬
cycles.
In France and in other European countries, many peasants fifty
years ago achieved an extremely high level of basic culture, thanks
to good primary school teachers. Today, as in the towns, there has
22
been a decline. On the other hand, the technical and farming
culture of country people has progressed. They now have a mastery
of modern technology.
Courier. From an anthropological point of view, do you consider
this influence to be a source of enrichment of peasant culture or as
an erosion, a loss of certain values?
ELRL. I think the effects are very different in nature. Again, it
would be wrong to feel an unqualified nostalgia. Immense gains
have been made from the point of view of social improvement. But
the problem is that each step forward, each individual benefit en¬
joyed by a person who leaves the village, often causes an erosion,
if not the destruction, of the village community itself, because of
the exodus from the countryside.
This is particularly true in the case of villages which are remote
from the towns. As soon as you get a little closer to the towns, a
certain suburbanization appears, with the result that the village is
still a living place in appearance, but in fact the community is no
longer the same. Around 1850-1880, a part of the village communi¬
ty achieved a certain level of culture, expressed in the form of
craftsmanship, modes of dress, and the propagation of an oral
culture, notably during the veillées, the social evenings spent with
neighbours during the winter months. There is absolutely no reason
to idealize that. The overall situation remained poor... The folk
stories transmitted by word of mouth were, for example, in many
cases simply a repetition of what such and such a villager had read
in the tales of Perrault or other anthologies. However, it is certain
that between 1850 and 1983 some ground has been lost.
Ultimately, the problems are perhaps not very different from
those you find in the towns; the new audiovisual media are jeopar¬
dizing reading, which was one of the great evening pastimes of a
(small) minority of peasants. Not that one should paint too sombre

a picture: in the last decade or so the reading habit is again
spreading in France, perhaps in the country areas.
Nevertheless, there is still a strong feeling of frustration. I am not
in any sense a countryman, although I was born in the country. But
recently I took part in a meeting of writers from rural areas who ac¬
tually were farmers: they were novelists, poets, and so on. They
gave the impression that they had a very big inferiority complex, a
feeling of deprivation and regret in relation to urban culture, and
of being despised. Sometimes, alas, this is so; but perhaps they were
exaggerating other people's disdain for them.
Courier. And is that literature still deeply rooted?
ELRL. It is often produced by old people, sometimes by women,
young women. I won't say that this peasant literature is out¬
standing, but it is evidence of an interesting initiative. It was
displayed at this year's Paris Agricultural Show. Publication at the
author's expense is a practice which provokes amusement and irony
in the average writer. Among these people, however, it is highly
thought of. They have no contacts with Paris publishers; they are
proud to pay for the publication of a book themselves and then to
sell it on their own initiative, just as they would sell fruit or cheese.
And so it is not at all the same value system as in the towns. In a
sense it is a marvellous thing to see someone finance a work that he
has written and then go off and sell it as he would the products of
his farm.
Courier. Among the regions of France you have studied, are there
some where peasant life is more strongly marked, with more
original values?
ELRL. The phenomenon is ambiguous. On the one hand in modern
areas like the Paris region, farmers are technicians of the first order
but they no longer have much in common with the peasants of
former days. They are not very interested in the culture of their
ancestors, which they consider to be a thing of the past. Con¬
trariwise, in the poorer, traditional regions, this traditional spirit
sometimes takes the form of a feeling of poverty or injustice. One
day I met a young countrywoman who kept a very strong connexion
with the ancient rural culture; her technique for making the Yule
log corresponded exactly with practices in the south of France a
century and a half ago. And around 1920 she had heard what is
known as the wild hunt, the rushing of the souls of dead children
above the forest. That is a very old myth. She told the story with
great conviction. She was close to an ancient rural culture of the
Middle Ages or the Renaissance, which was once common to the
towns and the countryside. Without being in real need, she was
nevertheless poor. Her sons were unmarried. She gave the impres¬
sion that she was not profiting from a certain number of the
benefits of modern civilization. Survivals of this kind do not always
mean happiness.
Courier. Is it possible to see traces of rural cultures in the culture
of certain provincial towns? I imagine that in Paris it is rather dif¬
ficult to find such traces.
ELRL. There were still cows in Paris fifty-odd years ago. Many
workers in medium-sized towns still have a vegetable garden. The
output from these gardens is quite substantial; this is a continuing
link with agricultural life. In addition, a number of customs have
survived to a marked degree, especially as regards modes of in¬
heritance. A French historian and ethnologist named Lamaison has
carried out a survey among notaries. Judging from the map of
France he has drawn up, it seems that the custom of organizing the
inheritance in favour of one child rather than several descendants,
in short the practice of not dividing up the goods after death in ac¬
cordance with a will, still bears a great similarity in certain areas to
what was going on even before the French Revolution. This is
permanence!
Courier. Have any beliefs other than Christianity survived?
ELRL. Yes. Not so many non-Christian beliefs, but others which
are on the fringe of Christianity. For example I have noted a certain
cult of trees in the Massif Central. In a shrine dedicated to a saint,
(Christian) agrarian rites for the fertility of livestock can be seen,
and such rites are even practised beside trees which are implicitly
believed to be sacred. These practices do not necessarily go back to
Roman times; perhaps they simply became established in the
Middle Ages or the sixteenth century and have lasted ever since.
This doesn't amount to very much. The real continuity is to be
found in such rituals as those concerning death and marriagein
Christian usages in the strictest sense. A burial requires, for exam¬
ple, a sense of the sacred, the religious spirit, the intervention of the
community... That joins us more to the past in the villages or in
small towns than in the big cities. The bonds of the community are
necessarily more distended there.
Burning vine prunings, in Provence, southern France.
^m®

Courier. And do you think that all these vestiges of peasant or
rural culture are tending to disappear forever?
ELRL. Not necessarily. Of course only a fairly small minority of
the population is concerned. In spite of everything, agricultural
production is still vitally necessary. In a sense, French agriculture
is in a better state than French industry.
Whatever happens, certain structures will remain. Furthermore,
not only the countryside is involved. We mustn't forget the small
towns. The percentage of French people who live in small or
medium-sized towns of less than 20,000 inhabitants has not greatly
changed in the last fifty years. From the point of view of the conser-
Courier. In general, do you think that all these phenomena which
are eroding an agrarian or peasant culture are common to the coun¬
tries of Western Europe?
ELRL. I don't know very much about what is happening in the
countries of the East, but I think that there are no basic differences
between the countries of Western Europe. Modernization and the
rapid depopulation of villages are rampant. And in spite of that
there is the conservation, not so much of a folklore which would
indeed be artificial, but of neighbourly relationships and a certain
religious assiduity in many cases... I imagine, for example, that a
The seasons, by Flemish painter David Teniers the Younger (1610-1690).
SPRING
AUTUMN
SUMMER
WINTER
Photos © National Gallery, London
vation of a relatively traditional way of life, these small towns and
the countryside seem to me to be the repository of a certain
continuity.
For better or for worse, some regions of Europe still preserve a
traditional way of life, I have visited one of these areas, that of the
Pomaks in northeastern Greece, Muslim Slavs who live in a frontier
area. There I saw an agriculture comparable to that of the eigh¬
teenth century. The slopes continue to be cultivated. The observer
feels that this is a way of life which has undergone little change. I
suppose that it would still be possible to find a few areas of the same
type in Europe.
24
region like Bavaria, although it is now urbanized, has succeeded in
preserving quite a few religious and dialect characteristics... The
same goes- for certain areas of Italy and Spain... Modernity is not
entirely nor necessarily destructive. It can also keep alive a certain
nucleus of human relationships. Paradoxically, it is in the regions
which are most rapidly becoming depopulated (as in the mountains
from which human life is withdrawing, except for skiing) that ar¬
chaic structures are destroyed. But in the more vigorous rural areas,
modernity is, I think, helping to preserve a nucleus of traditions,
or of continuity, at least, with moral and religious values, and also
community and family ties.
