X. The human environment
and terrestrial and marine resources
THE development of the industrial societies has come
about on the basis of the large-scale use of natural
resources, verging, in certain cases, on the squandering
of those resources, including energy, mineral and biological
resources.
These various processes, taking place in a world characterized
by a very uneven distribution of industrial activities between
countries and regions, have frequently given rise to the excessive
use of resources of all kinds from Third World countries, which
have played the role of suppliers of raw materials in the context
of the international division of labour. Another effect has been,
in some instances, the transfer to those countries of certain ac¬
tivities which cause pollution and which the societies that are
better provided for tend to refuse to allow to be carried out in
their own territories. In addition, the developing countries have
had only a limited capacity for exploring and exploiting their
own resources in the interests of their own progress.
With a view to the preservation of ecosystems and certain
threatened species, natural parks and biosphere reserves have
been established in most countries and in most biogeographical
regions. The protection of seas and coastal zones from increas¬
ing pollution has often involved concerted action by countries
bordering on those seas.
At the same time, there has developed a stronger awareness
of the importance for all countries but for developing coun¬
tries in particular of making more intensive use of and exer¬
ting better control over their own natural resources. Indeed, this"
constitutes one of the basic aspects of the search for a new inter¬
national economic order.
In this context, Unesco has specific programmes devoted to
the earth's crust and to mineral and energy resources; water
resources; the ocean and its resources; coastal and island
regions; and the resources of terrestrial ecosystems.
The Intergovernmental Programme on Man and the
Biosphere (MAB) thus finds concrete expression in five of the
proposed programmes (Management of coastal and island
regions; Land-use planning and terrestrial resources; Urban
systems and urbanization; The natural heritage; and En¬
vironmental education and information). The fact that MAB is
represented here, far from constituting fragmentation, makes it
possible to reflect its interdisciplinary character and its con¬
tribution to several important fields. The coherence of MAB
and the unitary nature of its work will be strengthened in its
specific activities and in its structure.
The earth 's resources
Research undertaken by Unesco on the earth's crust and its
mineral and energy resources covers the following areas:
Spatiotemporal geological correlation within the
framework of the International Geological Correlation Pro¬
gramme (IGCP), a joint undertaking of Unesco and the Inter¬
national Union of Geological Sciences designed to achieve bet¬
ter knowledge of the geological history of the planet; Geology
for economic development designed to provide the data need¬
ed to survey and develop mineral resources in the developing
countries; Geology for land-use planning including the study
of those geological and geochemical factors that should be
taken into account in land-use planning and civil engineering
projects; Processing and dissemination of data relating to the
earth sciences aims to collect, process and disseminate infor¬
mation on the earth sciences, largely in the form of geological,
metallogenic and tectonic maps, with emphasis on interpreta¬
tion of the data provided by remote sensing techniques.
Natural disasters of geophysical origin such as earthquakes,
volcanic eruptions, tsunamis and landslides year by year take a
heavy toll in human lives and cause destruction on a very large
scale. Other disasters, of climatic origin, such as exceptional
droughts and floods, may have even more far-ranging con¬
sequences, particularly in the developing countries.
Here the emphasis will be on international co-operation in the
fields of scientific and technological research, the social sciences
and the behavioural sciences, and through direct co-operation
with countries threatened or afflicted by natural disasters.
Droughts and floods
Although in global terms water resources are well in excess of
foreseeable demand, they are unevenly distributed and some
regions are already experiencing a severe water shortage which
is in danger of worsening1 in the future. Such instances of an in¬
sufficient supply of water in relation to demand are periodically
and, in some cases, endemically complicated by major fluctua¬
tions in supply.
In many cases, the situation is further aggravated by the poor
quality of water, which makes it unsuitable for various pur¬
poses, and by the pollution of surface water and even ground¬
water caused by factory effluents and the intensive use of
pesticides and fertilizers.
The International Hydrological Programme (IHP) will con¬
tinue to be the main instrument of action. The basic lines of em¬
phasis of the third phase of the IHP (1984-1989) concern the ex¬
tension of research and training activities in the field of water
resources planning and management and the encouragement of
interdisciplinary studies.
The three major regional projects on the rational use and con¬
servation of water resources in rural areas that were started in
1981 in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean and in the
Arab States are intended to contribute to the growth of en¬
dogenous scientific and technical potential, to the progress of
research and the development of information networks, and to
a rational utilization of water resources that is based on the
choice of the most appropriate technologies and takes account
of biogeographical and socio-economic conditions. These pro¬
jects may be extended to other regions.
Exploration and exploitation of the oceans
Even though the negotiations that have been under way for
the past ten years within the framework of the United Nations
Conference on the Law of the Sea have not yet culminated in
a "new "order" of the sea, a new customary law has come into
effect which sanctions national sovereignty over "exclusive
economic zones" and should vest the international community
with added responsibilities in the matter of exploration, conser¬
vation and management of the resources, including those of the
ocean depths, regarded as "the common heritage of mankind".
Many developing countries now find themselves in possession
of rights over very extensive sea areas which, for many island
States in particular, are considerably greater and possibly richer
in resources than their territory proper. Most of them, however,
have neither the technological and financial means nor the
qualified manpower for the systematic exploration of their new
domains. They thus have to concede deep-sea fishing rights or
the rights to underwater oil-prospecting and to purchase equip¬
ment and seek technical assistance from other nations, par-
ticularly the major maritime powers. ^
23

Unesco and its Intergovernmental Océanographie Commis¬
sion (IOC) must therefore take up a double challenge: on the
one hand, many Member States are in greater need of assistance
to attain their objectives in this area and to participate effective¬
ly in international programmes of oceanological research and
ocean services; on the other, océanographie knowledge must be
mobilized to achieve rational exploitation of ocean resources
and to protect the marine environment.
Coastal and island regions
Two persons out of three today live in coastal regions, near
the sea, on the shores of continents or on islands. This situation,
which is the consequence of population growth and population
movements as well as of economic development, concerns
regions with a delicate balance, very often areas of ancient
civilization whose prosperity was largely based on shipping and
maritime trade and also on the relatively high productivity of
the coastal environment.
The coastal environment is highly conducive to the establish¬
ment of human settlements, both permanent and seasonal, ur¬
ban and industrial. Coastal zones, in particular, are affected by
the scale of seasonal tourism. Beaches, estuaries, lagoons,
mangroves and coral reefs are all environments which are
vulnerable, and particularly exposed, to the effects of modern
development.
The countless islands of the world, especially those having an
area of less than 10,000 km2, are subject to the same pressures
as continental coasts and moreover are confronted by dif¬
ficulties of a specific nature. Island ecosystems are exceedingly
vulnerable and the efforts made to increase production to meet
development needs or respond to population pressure come up
against especially acute spatial limitations.
In a large number of islands, terrestrial resources, especially
agricultural resources, are no longer adequate to satisfy the
needs of a growing population; the exploitation of coastal and
marine resources thereupon becomes an economic imperative.
This is a problem of concern to all countries that are responsible
for managing more or less numerous groups of islands and of
particular concern to island States.
In this area Unesco has four main objectives: (1) to promote
better knowledge of the characteristics of certain particular
coastal or island ecosystems, to further interdisciplinary
research and to make a synthesis of available knowledge concer¬
ning interactions between the continental and coastal en¬
vironments; (2) to contribute to an integrated management of
coastal zones that takes account of the various options that
make possible the resolution of conflicts of interests between ur¬
banization, tourism, industrialization, intensive agriculture,
aquaculture and fishing; (3) to develop interdisciplinary
research on the island environment, the relations between
populations, resources, environment and development; (4) to
train specialists responsible for the integrated management of
coastal and island regions.
Unesco's International Hydrological Programme (IHP) is concerned
with the scientific assessment, development and rational manage¬
ment of one of the earth's most precious resources water. The
snow and ice programmes of the IHP are helping to broaden our
understanding of the interrelationships between snow and ice,
climate and water supply. Annual ice layers, like those clearly visi¬
ble in this photo of the Quelccaya ice-cap in Peru, constitute a
valuable record of climate and climatic change over a period of
several hundreds of years.
Photo L.G Thompson, courtesy of Science © The American Association for the Advancement
of Science, Washington, D.C
Man and the biosphere
In all regions, land-use gives rise to competing activities such
as farming and herding, the establishment of industries, ur¬
banization, tourism, etc. This results in conflicts of interest
linked with the specific nature of local conditions but also with
economic interdependence and imbalances on a world scale.
Numerous systems of land-use planning derive from those
adopted in a few industrialized, temperate-zone countries; they
are not readily applicable to the ecological or socio-cultural con¬
ditions of other zones. In the industrialized countries
themselves, land-use planning in certain vulnerable interface
regions (town/country, coastline and mountains) has taken on
new complexity and necessitates the development of new
approaches.
Unesco's action is aimed at developing scientific knowledge
of the physical and biological processes and the social and
cultural conditions that need to be taken into account in any in¬
tegrated land use policy and the rational use of the resources of
terrestrial ecosystems.
The Intergovernmental Programme on Man and the
Biosphere (MAB) provides conceptual unity and unity of
24
management for operational research, training and demonstra¬
tion activities relating to the conservation of protected natural
areas and the management of rural and urban areas.
Over 130 Member States will be participating actively in the
MAB programme by 1989; the projects, which will remain bet¬
ween 1,000 and 2,000 in number, will be more integrated and
more directed towards practical applications; they will include
a greater number of training and popularization activities. The
number of research workers and technicians involved in the
MAB projects will be in the region of 20,000.
As regards the national integrated pilot projects of research,
training and demonstration in land-use planning and the ra¬
tional development of national resources, which constitute the
key elements in the regional networks, there will be fifteen to
twenty such projects per network and, in all, about a hundred

towards the end of the period covered by the Plan. Each year,
over 300 specialists from the developing countries will receive
postgraduate training two-thirds of them on the site of the
pilot projects themselves and the rest at centres of excellence in
the industrialized countries.
Urban spread
By the year 2000, over half the six thousand million or so in¬
habitants of the earth will probably live in urban areas. In the
developing countries, two thousand million people will live in
the towns. Another thousand million will live in the urban areas
of the industrialized countries. Of the sixty cities with over five
million inhabitants, forty-seven will be located in the develop¬
ing countries. It is in these countries that twelve of the world's
fifteen largest cities will be found.
To date, planning has in most cases scarcely taken account of
the complexity of the relationship between the town and sur¬
rounding rural areas; this is without doubt one of its main short¬
comings. As they develop, towns come to depend on ever more
distant regions for their supplies of water, energy, food and
building materials. This increase in demand often leads to a
deterioration of neighbouring and more distant land through
overexploitation. A better understanding of the relationship
between towns and surrounding rural areas should make it
possible to manage this complex rationally.
The natural heritage
Immovable cultural property, such as historic monuments
and groups of buildings, and natural property, such as national
parks and outstanding sites, raise a set of common problems
regarding their preservation and enhancement and call in the
same way for international co-operation. They were placed on
an equal footing in the 1972 Convention for the Protection of
the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, which Unesco is
responsible for implementing and to which more than sixty
countries have acceded.
Preserving the natural heritage means, first and foremost,
preserving the living resources on which the survival of the
human race depends: all cultivated plants and all domestic
animals originate from wild species, and it is essential to
preserve as many wild congeners as possible for the purpose of
genetic selection, on which ultimately depend the maintenance
and expansion of agricultural production. In addition, as yet
unknown plants, animals or micro-organisms are capable of
providing mankind with products or of rendering it important
services, as is shown by a large number of recent discoveries.
Efforts will be directed not only at the protection of land¬
scapes or remarkable living beings, but also at the protection of
entire ecosystems, balanced man-made landscapes and certain
ecological and evolutive processes. This work will be conducted
mainly through the development of a worldwide network of
biosphere reserves containing representative samples of the
world's principal ecosystems.
A geologist's hammer has been
adopted as the "trademark" of the
International Geological Correlation
Programme (IGCP), a major scientific
venture, undertaken jointly by
Unesco and the International Union
for Geological Sciences (IUGS),
devoted to the study of the earth's
crust and its mineral and energy
resources. Projects undertaken by
the IGCP range from the study of
geochronology to prospecting for
economic mineral deposits and the
processing of geological data.

