Fyle, Clifford
National languages
and cultural i(ientity
The grammar, the proverbs, and the
idioms of a language give us a clear
understanding of how its mother
tongue users think and feel, and they
do this more completely than anything
else can. The vocabulary is the sum
total of all the objects, actions and
ideas that affect them or that they need
to know in their environment. Their
literature expresses the best of what
they have experienced and felt over the
years.
It is for these reasons that language is
an expression of the personality of the
group, a means of identifying its
members according to their culture.
When, for example, we say "I am
Italian" or "I am Yoruba", we are
identifying ourselves as members of a
particular cultural group using a par¬
ticular language.
This kind of identification is impor¬
tant. It provides authenticity for an in¬
dividual, in the sense of rooting him
firmly within his community, of
bonding him with others of the same
culture. In this respect, language is a
great unifying factor. One can in fact
say that an important essential for any
unified society is that all its members
should speak the same language.
This is why in many developing
countries there has been so much in¬
terest in a single national language,
which is seen among other things as a
means of achieving national unity. It
becomes imperative to. teach a
language, its literature and its oral
traditions to its users, so that they" can
have a proper appreciation of their own
culture.
This is necessary even when the users
are in their home environment; it
becomes even more so when they are
removed from this environment but
may have to return to it. This is the
case, for example, with the families of
migrant workers, who for various
reasons have taken employment in
other countries, but whose children at
least have to preserve their own culture
and may wish to return to their home
environment. These migrant workers,
however, also have to learn the
language of the other country in which
they find themselves, so that, at least
for the duration of their stay, they can
integrate also into these new
communities.
Since a person's mother tongue is the
language in which he is most adept, in
which he can best express himself,
which he can best understand, it
follows that it is the language in which,
for him, learning can best take place.
For this reason, there has developed the
worldwide educational principle that
all education is best achieved when it is
given through the medium of the
learner's own language.
Countries seeking to achieve rapid
development for their peoples need
rapidly also to provide education for all
their citizens. Only by mobilizing their
total manpower and putting it to effec¬
tive use will they be able to make the
economic strides that they desire. This
means mass education, the mass
teaching of reading and writing, a con¬
stant flow of information and constant
communication, teaching of new habits
and new attitudes, and not least of all,
training in new skills. All this is im¬
possible without a vast national mass
education programme. A country's
leaders are usually quick to realize that
such a programme can only succeed if
it is conducted in the language or
languages with which their people are
familiar.
At this point it is useful to reject the
popular linguistic fiction that some
languages are incapable of being used
for certain educational purposes. The
truth is that any language, any one at
all, is a complete and perfect medium
of expression and can be used to teach
anything. Initially it may not have
enough words to cope with a new situa-
In Africa, make-up, tattooing
and scarifications conveyed in¬
formation about a woman's
status and family. Today the
symbolic meanings of this
"language" are still far from dy¬
ing out. Above, a young Peul
woman from Benin.
tion or a new field of activity, but
whenever this happens the simple prin¬
ciple for all languages, in developed
and developing countries alike, is that
they either create new words or borrow
them from other languages. The only

problem for developing countries is
that, with the abundance of new situa¬
tions their languages have to face in be¬
ing used for modern education, bor¬
rowings have to be rapid, organized,
and are therefore generally expensive.
What are the major problems involv¬
ed in promoting and using 


national
languages as a means of reinforcing
cultural identity, and as educational
instruments?
The initial problem is that of which
language to choose, particularly in
countries with large numbers of
peoples using different languages. It
does not always help to say that one
must choose the language of the
greatest number of speakers, because
sometimes there are two or more
groups equal or almost equal in
strength, or there may be a minority
group which is socially or economically
more significant than a majority
group. The problem is not as serious
for countries with only one language
each; but even they do not escape it en¬
tirely. This single language usually has
a number of dialects that is to say, the
language, though basically the same, is
used in distinctly varying forms in dif¬
ferent parts of the country.
This explains why a number of
developing countries have still not been
able to choose their national languages.
For example, of the forty-five States in
sub-Saharan Africa, there are some
eleven which still have to make the deci¬
sion. It also explains why, in the coun¬
tries which have made the decision, the
term "national language" has been in¬
terpreted in different ways and cor¬
respondingly different choices have
been made. There are the cases where a
country has decided on one language as
a national language. Tanzania is an ex¬
ample of this. Then there are the cases
of multiple adoption. Some countries
merely choose a few of their many
languages as national. Others go fur¬
ther and add a few others for use at
some levels of formal education. Still
others go further and add a number of
other languages for purposes of
literacy teaching.
One problem facing all these coun¬
tries is the dominance of the old col¬
onial languages, usually English,
French or Portuguese. Traditionally,
all education in the Western sense of
the word has been given in these
languages, often for well over a hun¬
dred years. This has led to the assump¬
tion that modern education is only
meaningful if it is given in one of these
languages. The assumption is false
because, as we have noted above, given
vocabulary development, any language
can be used to teach anything. But it is
such a widespread assumption in
developing countries that it often acts
as an effective barrier against the
development and use of the country's
own languages.
But languages such as English,
French and Portuguese affect the
unesco's activities on behalf of migrant workers and their families reflect two major pre¬
occupations. On the one hand they seek to help second-generation migrants to adapt to living
conditions in the host country, chiefly by obtaining a command of the language. They are
also concerned with preparing migrant workers for integration In their home countries by
providing the children with an opportunity to learn their mother tongue and to acquire a
knowledge of their national culture. Above, an African migrant worker in France.
problem of African language develop¬
ment and use in another way. These
languages are international languages,
and so for the purposes of international
communication at least, the developing
countries wish to retain the one they
have been used to and to see that it is ef¬
fectively taught. In face of this, the
problem arises of how much use can be
made of the countries' own languages
as instruments of education, no matter
how the term "national language" is
interpreted.
But the biggest problem of all is the
practical problem of research and the
availability of materials. Some of the
heavily multilingual countries still have
not been able to determine exactly how
many languages are within their
borders and how many persons speak
each language, not to mention produc¬
ing the linguistic grammars and dic¬
tionaries needed as basic reference
works for the use of these languages.
There is also a need for educational
research into the proper curricula and
methodology for teaching the
languages in the languages. Then there
is the need to provide primers, readers
and other materials for literacy and
other forms of education.
Another problem is that of minority
languages. Except for the few States
which have only one language or which
have decided on the adoption of all
their languages as national, all develop¬
ing nations are faced with a minority
language problem. And when we con¬
sider that a country like Nigeria with
possibly some 400 languages has decid¬
ed to adopt only three as national, and
that Kenya with some ninety-four
languages has decided to adopt only
one, Kiswahili, we can appreciate the
scope of the minority language
problem. Properly used, minority
languages can contribute very greatly
to the enrichment of the national
culture and enrich and inform national
education. Yet very few countries, if
any, seem to have discovered exactly
how to take them into account. In
Africa only Tanzania seems to have
taken some action, and that only by
way of looking for words from these
languages to enrich the vocabulary of
Kiswahili. So important is the use of
national languages seen to be for pur¬
poses of national unity, identity and
development that more and more of the
developing countries are facing up to
these problems. The statistics would
seem to bear this out. They are
available for fifty African States, and
they indicate that whereas in 1976,
twenty-eight of these States had more
or less clear language policies and
ongoing programmes, mostly at the
primary level, for the use of their
African languages in education, by
1980, eleven more countries had
declared national language policies,
and six more had initiated primary level
programmes. By 1982, some twenty to
twenty-five of them were teaching
African languages as subjects in secon¬
dary education, and ten were actually
using the languages as media of instruc¬
tion at this level.
