VIL Information systems
and access to knowledge
WITH the explosion of knowledge during this century,
there has been a spectacular increase in the produc¬
tion of printed matter throughout the world. A few
figures will help to gauge the size of this phenomenon. In 1970
more than 6,000 items of printed matter appeared each working
day, i.e. 2,000,000 in a year, and it is estimated that this figure
will be four or five times greater by 1985, when 8,000,000 to
10,000,000 scientific and technical documents will be published
and printed. This significant increase in the volume of informa¬
tion has created a need for information storage and distribution
systems.
It is interesting to note that out of the 900 bibliographical and
numerical data bases now available on-line internationally, less
than one per cent are produced in the developing countries. Ac¬
cess by all nations to the whole range of these data bases would
seem essential to the progress of individual societies and the
In 1973 Unesco launched, in collaboration with the Interna¬
tional Council of Scientific Unions, an intergovernmental
programme known as UNISIST, to meet the need for "co¬
ordinated and sustained international action to facilitate
transfer of scientific and technical information for the
economic and social development of nations". In 1979, the
scope of the programme was expanded to include, in the
perspective of a worldwide information network, all scien¬
tific, technological, economic and social information useful
for development. Above, the logo of UIMISIST.
general advancement of human knowledge.
It is therefore essential that developing countries should be
able to use other countries' data bases, as and when they need,
and at the same time set up data bases and data banks of their
own, at the national or regional level.
Free access to information
Among the obstacles preventing free access to information is
the extremely high cost of the new data processing and telecom¬
munications technologies used for handling information. The
poorest developing countries may therefore find themselves
unable, without recourse to external aid, to set up the in¬
frastructure necessary for the installation of automated systems
and networks. Moreover, the new technologies raise complex
legal problems, especially in matters of copyright.
The industrialized countries at present enjoy a kind of defac¬
to monopoly in the field of information, affecting both the
substance of knowledge and the technical means of circulating
it. As a result, the transfer of information technologies and of
information itself to developing countries may be hindered by
restrictive practices, but it may also put these countries in a posi¬
tion of dependence on privileged suppliers.
Restrictive practices inhibiting the free flow of information
are also found in relations between industrialized countries and
within individual countries.
It is now clear that the setting up of a worldwide information
network is to constitute a major element in the development
strategy to be applied in establishing a new international
economic order.
The General Information Programme, which at present
covers most of Unesco's activities in the fields of information,
libraries and archivesand of which UNISIST forms an in¬
tegral part is clearly particularly well suited to the nature of
the main tasks that are to be carried out under this major pro¬
gramme. The latter will in fact be based on the machinery and
networks for co-operation established under the General Infor¬
mation Programme, UNISIST and the various specialized
systems and services developed under the Organization's other
major programmes. It applies to the natural and to the social
and human sciences, as well as to all the other branches of
knowledge and to all sectors of human activity.

