A driving force
of human evolution
by Nikolai Ivanovich Lapin
'T
HE chief guide which must direct us in the choice
of a profession is the welfare of mankind and our
own perfection.
"... If we have chosen the position in life in which we can
most of all work for mankind, no burdens can bow us down,
because they are sacrifices for the benefit of all; then we
shall experience no petty, limited, selfish joy, but our hap¬
piness will belong to millions..."
These were the words of Karl Marx, then a seventeen-
year-old schoolboy whose graduation essay on a subject of
his own choice already displayed an independence of
thought and purposefulness of feeling. He would be true to
this lofty humanistic ideal as long as he lived.
Karl Heinrich Marx was born on May 5, 1818 in the old
Prussian town of Trier, now in the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many. His father Heinrich Marx, a lawyer and a man of the
Enlightenment, guided his son towards a career in law and,
in October 1835, the young Karl Marx entered the Univer¬
sity of Bonn. His interest in philosophy was growing, and,
in October 1836, with his father's understanding ac¬
quiescence, he transferred to the University of Berlin where
he could study both philosophy and law.
Another mentor from whose advice the student Marx was
to benefit was his father's friend Baron von Westphalen, to
whose daughter Jenny he was engaged and was to marry
seven years later, in 1843. The Baron, a lover of the Greek
classics and of Shakespeare and a follower of the French
social reformer Saint-Simon, took a liking to the gifted
young student who in turn expressed his gratitude and af¬
fection by dedicating to him his doctoral thesis on The Dif¬
ference Between the Natural Philosophies of Democritus
and Epicurus.
This early study by Marx, written from an idealistic,
Young Hegelian standpoint, examined the duality of the in¬
terrelationship between philosophy and reality: philosophy
actively influences the real world and transforms it accor¬
ding to its principles; but philosophy itself is subject to a
reciprocal influence and itself becomes worldly.
In April 1841, Marx received his diploma of Doctor of
Philosophy and planned to give a series of lectures on logic
at the University of Bonn. At this time, however, the Prus¬
sian Government, considering the Young Hegelians to be a
subversive element, began to drive them from the univer¬
sities and Marx turned towards active political engagement.
He began contributing to the newly-founded newspaper the
Rheinische Zeitung which he succeeded in turning into an
all-German rostrum of freedom and humanism.
When, in October 1842 Marx became the editor of the
newspaper, he was faced with writing articles on a number
of complex practical questions that were quite new to him.
His analysis of .the debates in the Rheinlandtag on the law
NIKOLAI IVANOVICH LAPIN, is head of the philosophical and
sociological studies department at the Ail-Union Research Institute for
Systems Studies of the USSR Academy of Sciences, and Vice-
President of the Soviet Sociological Association. He is the author of
over 100 works on history, philosophy and sociology. Of his numerous
works on Karl Marx, the most widely known is "Young Marx"
(Moscow, 1968) which has been published in Russian, Bulgarian,
Hungarian, Chinese, German, Moldavian, Slovak, Finnish and French
editions.
22
prohibiting the taking of timber by the peasants from the
forests and his sociological study of the status of the
Moselle wine-growers convinced him that it was not the
State that imposed its will on private interests, as
postulated by Hegel and other idealists, but private interests
that bent the State to their will.
In March 1843, the Rheinische Zeitung was banned, all
hope of a press free from censorship vanished, and Marx
started looking for new, more effective ways of continuing
the struggle. But first he decided, in his own words, to
"retire to the classroom" in order to examine and con¬
solidate the theoretical foundations of his activities. He was
turning more and more away from Hegelian idealism and in
his study Toward a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right,
published in 1844, these doubts grew into a conscious
orientation towards materialistic principles.
In summer 1843, while living at Kreuznach, Marx under¬
took an analysis of world history ranging over the vast
period from 600 BC to the French Revolution. He came to
the conclusion that all historical processes were determined
by changes in the nature of private property; it was this that
exercised real influence on the State and not vice versa. For
the State to express the true interests of the people private
property would have to be abolished.
Atthe same time Marx was developing his views concern¬
ing the "essence of man". "The essence of a particular per¬
sonality, a particular man, is neither his beard, nor his blood,
nor his physical quality, but his social character."
In October 1843 Marx emigrated to Paris with his new
bride, Jenny von Westphalen, and threw himself into the
study of political economy, having come to the conclusion
that the world was ruled not by ideas but by economic laws.
From April to August 1844, working virtually non-stop, at
times going for three or four nights in a row without sleep,
he wrote his famous Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts
which contained all the roots and elements of his world-
embracing theory, a synthesis of his philosophic, economic
and political view of the world.
Comparative analysis of the three sources of income-
wages, interest on capital and land rents led Marx to the
conclusion that the many contradictions in the society of his
day, and first and foremost the antagonism between labour
and capital, were generated by the "alienation of labour".
Marx stressed the economic basis of this alienation: "The
more wealth the worker produces the less he has to con¬
sume, and the more values he creates, the more his produc¬
tion increases, the more he devalues himself. The devalua¬
tion of the world of men is in proportion to the increasing
value of the world of things... The object which labour
produces labour's market product confronts the worker
as something alien, as a power independent of the
producer."
Marx also attributed a wider meaning to "alienation",
seeing it not only in work but also in political, spiritual and
other spheres of social life. A new and genuinely humanistic
society would abolish all forms of alienation and thus
resolve the contradictions between man and man, man and
nature, individuals and groups. The self-alienation of man
would be overcome and a harmonious, whole new man
would emerge.

These new ideas brought upon their author new repres¬
sion. Marx was exiled from France, in 1845, and moved to
Brussels where he was joined shortly afterwards by
Friedrich Engels. Here they wrote The German Ideology in
which they criticized abstract idealistic concepts of man.
While writing it Marx made one of his great discoveries; he
showed that each stage of social evolution was characteriz¬
ed primarily by a certain mode of production of material
goods. His views on the dialectics of productive forces and
the interactions of production as the source of the auto-
development of history, as well as on socio-economic
systems and their changes at important, successive stages,
became the basis of the materialistic view of history.
The basic principles formulated by Marx and Engels in the
Communist Manifesto were put to the test in the crucible of
the European revolutions of 1848-1849. But this did not
mean that the development of these principles was com¬
plete. The main problem that Marx was trying to solve in
London, where he had moved in 1 849 and where he was to
remain to the end of his days, was how to explain the pro¬
cess of the creation of surplus value, that is, how a certain
additional product appropriated by the capitalist emerges on
the basis of the theory of value, i.e. the theory of equivalent
exchange between the workers and the capitalists.
In the process of solving this problem Marx discovered
that labour is a special kind of commodity which costs the
employer much less than the value of goods it creates.
Employing a worker, the capitalist purchases his labour
power and, being the owner of the means of production, he
provides for such use of this labour power that the value
created by it is higher than its own value, in other words, it
ensures that a surplus value is obtained without violating
the theory of value.
Marx's discoveries in economics came as a result of hard
work carried out in the most difficult conditions. Yet not all
his manuscripts were published during his lifetime. Ten
years were to elapse between the production of the great
manuscript of 1857-1858 and the publication in 1867 of
the first volume of Das Kapital. In the meantime, from
1861-1865, Marx produced two huge revised variants-
clear evidence of his conscientious scientific approach. The
second and third volumes of Das Kapital were prepared and
published (in 1 885 and 1 894 respectively) by his friend and
comrade Friedrich Engels; the fourth volume was published
in 1905 after Engels' death.
Das Kapital was the great original, seminal work of Marx's
life, taking account of the whole preceding history of
economic thought and subjecting a mountain of facts to
theoretical analysis. It contains a detailed examination of
the particular mechanisms of the links between the socio¬
economic structure of society and production under the
capitalist system whose tendency towards revolutionary
transformation into a new and more progressive system it
reveals.
Some concepts seem to be less in evidence or to have
been modified, but this does not mean that Marx had aban¬
doned them. In Das Kapital and other studies, for instance,
he consistently employs "alienation" as a philosophic no¬
tion. Generally speaking, Das Kapital has not only an
economic but also a wide-ranging philosophic,
methodological and humanistic content. The discovery of
the materialistic interpretation of the history of mankind and
the creation of the theory of surplus value brought about a
revolution in social thinking and made of socialism a science
rather than a Utopian dream.
Right up to the end of his life Marx worked intensively,
finding new horizons of creative thought. His Chronological
Notes on world history and on the history of specific coun¬
tries (India, Italy, United Kingdom, Russia, etc.), compiled in
the period 1880-1882, totalled over two thousand printed
pages. The idea behind their compilation is still a mystery,
but the most plausible hypothesis seems to be that of the
Soviet scientist B.F. Porshnev who believed that at the time
Marx was interested in the problem of the interconnexions
between the parallel histories of different countries.
While working on Das Kapital Marx had concentrated on
the study of one particular socio-economic system; next he
turned his attention to the problems of the interaction of dif¬
ferent systems existing simultaneously and to the problem
of the common aspects and contradictions of economic,
socio-political and spiritual processes which take place
within the context of humanity as a whole. His aim was to
achieve a global picture of a world in which many societies
co-exist and influence one another in all the main aspects of
their activities. The significance of this design has been con¬
firmed by modern researchers studying global problems.
Marx did not live to implement this great design. Ex¬
hausted by illness and depressed by the loss of his wife and
his daughter, he died quietly ¡n his armchair on March 14,
1883.
For hundreds of years mankind had been seeking ways of
achieving a just restructuring of a society which would be
free from exploitation, violence and material and spiritual
poverty. Many daring ideas had been put forward during the
course of history but few of them had succeeded in captur¬
ing the imagination of millions and becoming a driving force
affecting the evolution of human civilization. The theory of
Karl Marx ranks among the latter, incorporating as it does a
whole range of philosophic, economic and political con¬
cepts that gave people something they had never had
before a proper understanding of themselves and, conse¬
quently, of the way to emancipation.
Marx provided answers to fundamental problems that had
been raised by progressive human thought. He had
assimilated the best of German classical philosophy, English
political economy and French Utopian socialism, but he
drastically revised each of these fields of thought, syn¬
thesizing them into a qualitatively new entity a scientific
world outlook which has emerged as a specific socio-
cultural phenomenon of modern human history.
Nikolai Ivanovich Lapin
After the collapse of the
1848 revolution, Marx
spent the rest of his life as a
political exile in London. His
grave in Highgate Ceme¬
tery, left, is a centre of at¬
traction for visitors from all
over the world.
Photo Vince Blye © Parimage, Pans
23
