XII. Prejudices, intolerance,
racism, apartheid
IN spite of the progress that has been made in the last thirty
years, racism continues to flourish, ethnic conflicts are on
the increase, and intolerance and prejudice have even
gained ground, notwithstanding the fact that all States, with the
exception of the Republic of South Africa, have publicly under¬
taken to end all forms of discrimination.
Racism
In those countries where groups, often defined as "races",
have for historical reasons been discriminated against, in¬
equalities persist at nearly all levels. Education systems, even
where they are theoretically open to all, in fact often perpetuate
long-standing inequalities between racial or ethnic groups, as is
shown by the fact that the percentage of children completing
secondary education varies for different groups, and by data on
the ethnic origin of the vast majority of students in certain
disciplines in higher education. Mention must also be made of
the selection process, which often influences the professional
prospects and the social position of candidates having the same
educational background and qualifications, and operates to the
detriment of certain groups. The effects of obstacles resulting
from belonging to a particular "racial" or ethnic group are par¬
ticularly apparent in the crucial areas of science and technology
and in the matter of access to positions of responsibility. Thus,
if the members of certain groups are confined to particular sec¬
tors of the economy or are relegated to performing more menial
jobs, "race" or membership of an ethnic group may come to
coincide to some extent with class.
Situations of this kind are likely to lead to conflicts with the
dominant population on the one hand and subsidiary conflicts
between ethnic groups on the other.
While internal migration continues as a result of the scientific
and technical revolution, an increasing number of countries are
now using migrant workers.
More and more frequently, however, immigrants are not only
recruited to replace local workers in those sectors of the
economy where the latter no longer wish to work, but are also
in some cases employed as agricultural labour, concentrated in
sectors which are subject to specific discriminatory legislation.
Where the immigrants are from former colonies or dependent
territories, stereotypes associated with colonialism may con¬
tinue or be reactivated.
While situations of this kind occur mainly in the highly in¬
dustrialized countries, the use of immigrant labour in certain
28
sectors of the economy in some countries which are now in the
process of industrializationsomething quite separate from the
recruitment of highly skilled or trained employees may also
lead to difficult problems in "racial" and ethnic relations.
Ethnic or economic conflicts
and religious intolerance
Although problems of a "racial" or ethnic nature are more
noticeable in urban settings, they are by no means unknown in
rural areas. An extreme case is that which arises with the con¬
vergence, in certain areas, of extreme poverty, land shortage
and racial divisions. A frequent result of such a situation, which
may be a consequence of past conquest, is that certain groups
are relegated to the poorest agricultural areas or are concen¬
trated in the plantation sectors where there is a considerable
need for seasonal labour.
The existence of so-called "racial" groups and ethnic groups
is nevertheless a cultural fact resulting from language, religion,
common historical experience and shared cultural values and
forms of expression. Culture is also often the vehicle through
which prejudices are transmitted, ideas of dominance take
shape and resistance to injustice and inequality is forged.
In those countries where many languages are used, factors
that are primarily economicespecially in the case of the
poorer countriespreclude the equal use of all of them in
education, administration and the media; furthermore, the re¬
quirements of nationwide communication may make it
necessary to use, at this level, only one or a few languages. A
so-called common language may however be imposed as part of
the apparatus of domination, as a symbol of conquest, or to in¬
stitute a de facto "racial" or ethnic discrimination where none
is officially recognized. Some ethnic conflicts may thus be ex¬
pressed in terms of language.
As far as religions are concerned, although it is true that they
are inseparably linked with the highest spiritual and cultural
values of every society, it is no less true that religion may be the
cause and justification of certain kinds of exclusion. Different
religious affiliations may then be a cause of division between
groups or be a contributing factor in certain social conflicts,
despite the fact that these same religions preach tolerance.
Opposition to colonial systems has often united many groups
in their struggle for independence and freedom. But the way in
which the occupation was carried out, the inequality of access

to education, the methods of recruitment to the civil service and
of allocating land or settling disputes occasionally caused con¬
flict between different ethnic groups.
The inhuman policy of apartheid is the foundation of South Africa's
political and economic system. An essential element in the enforce¬
ment of apartheid is the system of passes, or "reference books",
which Africans, women as well as men, have to carry at all times
and show on demand to the police. A black South African who
enters a "white" area without a pass faces prosecution and im¬
prisonment. Above, cover and some of the inside pages of a
"reference book".
The media and textbooks as vehicles ofprejudice
While certain aspects of culture may be vehicles for the
transmission of prejudice, it is increasingly through the media
that the general public gains a knowledge of other countries and
of racial and ethnic groups. Even where it is not racist, the man¬
ner of presentation of news may nevertheless keep prejudice
alive by laying emphasis, for example, on crime associated with
particular ethnic or cultural groups. Articles on social questions
may involve negative stereotyping. Immigration may be
presented in such a way as to make one think that it is illegal or
in need of regulation. Cultural differences may be presented in
a twisted or negative way.
The influence of the media is often accentuated by that of
school textbooks. Although these may be free of explicit racism
and even proclaim the equality of all peoples, they nevertheless
tend frequently to describe historical events, industrial develop¬
ment and cultural achievements without adequate explanation
or simply in an unbalanced way. While some particularly
flagrant errors have been rectified, the stereotypes are still there
and are accepted all the more readily because the bias is not
perceived. "Aggressive nationalism" does not always identify
itself in clear terms. The way in which historical events are
selected may suggest the existence of intrinsic superiority or im¬
mutable differences.
The gravity and scale of these problems make it essential for
Unesco to mobilize its own forces and those of peoples
everywhere in the struggle against apartheid, racism and
discrimination, prejudice and intolerance. The first step should
be to analyse and expose the mechanisms of these phenomena.
Without prejudice to the role of governments and the political
decisions they must take in order to effect structural change,
Unesco's mandate lies essentially in the area of those social in¬
stitutions which are tainted by discrimination. Special emphasis
will be placed on the problems of access to education, science
(including the social sciences), culture and values that sustain
prejudice, intolerance and racism.
Against apartheid
Increased attention will be paid to the question of apartheid,
which will be the subject of a special programme. Studies based
on a structural analysis will be undertaken to expose the
methods used to ensure for the South African economy the
benefit of a virtually unlimited pool of labour that can be ex¬
ploited at low cost; to throw light on the specific mechanisms
whereby the tensions that exist in other societies are exploited
and magnified in the Republic of South Africa in the service of
a racist policy; to demonstrate the way in which spurious
"culturist" ideologies are used to justify the presentation of
apartheid as "separate development"; and to unmask the
deliberate use of language as an instrument of division.
More generally, this major programme will involve both con¬
sideration of the meaning of tolerance in the context of widely
differing social situations, historical experiences and cultural
and philosophical traditions and research activities centred on
the nature of prejudice and its modes of transmission and on the
aetiology and social implications of discrimination, prejudice
and intolerance this reflection and research to be conducted in
such a manner as to provide guidance and information for
action.
In addition to their publication in a form accessible to the
public at large and to their circulation among journalists,
educators, etc., steps will be taken to incorporate the results of
this works in teacher-training courses, and in education at all
levels.
Photos © International Defence and Aid Fund, London
29
