VaLLVERDU, Francesc
Spain's language
mosaic
The Spanish Constitution of 1978
recognizes the plurilingualism of the
Spanish State, which has four official
languages: Castilian (or Spanish) which
is the official language throughout
Spain; Catalan, or the language spoken
in Catalonia, the Valencia region and
the Balearic islands; Gallego (or Gali-
cian), which is the language of Galicia;
and Basque (or Euskera), the language
spoken in the Basque country and
Navarre. Twenty-two million Spaniards
live in regions where only one official
language (Castilian) is spoken, and
nearly sixteen million live in areas with
two official languages (see table on
page 26).
As the official language of the State,
Castilian is a language which all
Spaniards are required to know by law.
*
i
N
i.::z?^=^^H
ma
>#r- \m
- - . J
6 i
1
I
m^m.W»
»
tf
^r..
11
^^
I/'-'-
17
Jl:
2^S
i
luRíJ
The language of Castile,
Castillan Spanish, is the official
language of all Spain, But it is
also an international language
which is spoken on several con¬
tinents and especially throughout
Hispanoamérica, In Spain three
other languages share official
status with it in their respective
communities. They are Catalan,
Euskera (Basque) and Gallego
(Gallclan), Above, smiling specta¬
tors during Holy Week In Seville,
Accordingly, it is a compulsory subject
in all primary and secondary schools in
Spain and is virtually the exclusive
language of all branches of govern¬
ment. Furthermore, the nation-wide
press, radio and television only use
Castilian apart from one Barcelona
newspaper published in Catalan and a
small number of radio and television
stations broadcasting in Catalan,
Euskera or Gallego. Lastly, Castilian is
the vehicle of communication of
Spanish citizens belonging to different
language groups.
Photo J.M. Charles £) Rapho, Pans
Catalan is one of the three minority languages which coexist in Spain with Castillan.
Its roots, like those of Castilian and Gallego (Gallclan) He in the ruins of Latin. Catalan
is 'spoken by over 6 million Spaniards in the autonomous communities of Catalonia,
Valencia and Majorca. Above, an open-air gymnastic display has drawn a crowd at
Vilanova, near Barcelona.
25

A TREASURY OF TONGUES
Although, like other European
languages, Castilian is suffering more
and more from penetration by English,
especially as far as so-called "mass
culture" is concerned, its survival is en¬
sured not only by its ranking as the
most widespread language and its
resulting greater public impact, but
also by its international character, and
especially the fact that it is spoken in
almost the whole of Latin America.
With this large market open to it, it has
a competitive edge in both book and
newspaper publishing and in the pro¬
duction of films, radio and TV pro¬
grammes, gramophone records, and so
on, compared with the minority
languages, whose efforts in these direc¬
tions are more costly and require more
protection from the authorities. This
preponderance is illustrated by the fact
that, out ofthe 29,286 books published
in Spain in I98I, 26,721 or over 91
per cent represented titles published
in Castilian.
Catalan is a Romance language like
Castilian and is spoken mainly on
Spanish territory, but also in south¬
eastern France in the "Pyrénées-
Orientales" Department in the town
of Alghero on the Italian island of Sar¬
dinia, and in the principality of An¬
dorra. Catalan had a glorious period
from the thirteenth to the fifteenth cen¬
tury, when its literature flourished, but
it lost its official status in the eighteenth
century, as a result of the War of Suc¬
cession. The three main Catalan-
speaking areas forming part of the
Spanish State are as follows:
Catalonia. The Catalan people have
never ceased speaking their own
language, not even at times when they
were persecuted. In 1931, with the com¬
ing of the Republic, Catalonia regained
its autonomy and with it the official use
of Catalan until 1939, when General
Franco established a rigidly centralist
régime and banned the public use ofthe
minority languages. Since 1979,
Catalonia has had a new Statute of
Autonomy, which lays down the of¬
ficial character of Catalan, together
with Castilian.
In all Catalonian schools, the two
languages are compulsory, regardless
of which is the language of instruction.
In secondary and higher education,
both languages are used as vehicles of
instruction. The output of books in
Catalan has been growing steadily in
the past few years: in 1981, 2,140 titles
were published in that language. On the
other hand, the position in the other
communication media is less satisfac¬
tory: only one of the six daily
newspapers published in the capital,
Barcelona, is entirely in Catalan; the
two State-owned television channels
usually broadcast in Castilian and
devote only twenty-six hours a week to
Catalan; radio stations do not feature
many programmes in Catalan either,
although there are several FM stations
whose programmes arc exclusively in
that language; Catalan-speaking films
are likewise few in number. This situa¬
tion bears no relation to the socio-
linguistic facts of Catalonia, where
most of the population (68 per cent)
speaks Catalan and some 85 per cent of
the population is reckoned to under¬
stand it, although it is true that the in¬
habitants include many Castilian-
speakers from other parts of Spain.
The Valencia region. Owing to
special historical circumstances and to
the fact that part ofthe Valencia region
is Castilian-spcaking, the autoch¬
thonous language has tended to lose
more ground: for example, in Valencia
and Alicante, the two largest cities, less
than 40 per cent of the people habitual¬
ly speak Valencian, although some 80
per cent of the population as a whole
can understand it. Furthermore, the
form of the language spoken in the
Valencia region has given rise to con¬
troversy between those who claim that
Valencian is an independent language
separate from Catalan and those who
regard it in the light of historical and
linguistic considerations as being a
regional variant of Catalan. In general,
the advocates of the former view, who
are a socially very influential minority,
are not interested in their "language"
being used for public purposes,
whereas the second school, while not
overlooking the dialectical features of
the language, demand that it be fully
standardized and used in public. The
Statute of Autonomy of the Valencian
"Community" officially recognizes
the two languages, but only in regard to
the easternmost districts, since the
hinterland is Castilian-spcaking.
Tlie Balearic Islands. It is reckoned
that some 80 per cent of the population
speaks Catalan in one of its different
Autonomous Communities of Spain
in which there is a second official language
in addition to Castilian
Languages
Catalan
Gallego
Euskera '
Autonomous Communities
Balearic Islancis 	
VascongacJas (Euskadi) (the
Basque provinces) 	
Area * in km'
31,932
23,260
4,942
29,422
7,250
10,421
Population *
6,000,000
3,700,000
700,000
2,800,000
2,200,000
500,000
dialect forms, i.e. on the islands of Ma¬
jorca, Minorca, Ibiza and Formentera.
The Statute of Autonomy for the
Balearics recognizes the official
character of Catalan as a specific
language of the archipelago, together
with Castilian.
Galician (GaUego). Galician is also a
Romance language that is closely
related to Castilian and is spoken in the
north-western corner of the Iberian
peninsula. In the Middle Ages, the
language spread southwards and was
responsible for the formation of Por¬
tuguese. The number of Galician-
speakcrs is more or less the same as the
number of inhabitants of the region, to
which almost a million Galician-
speaking emigrants must be added.
The 1981 Statute of Autonomy for
Galicia recognizes Galician as a specific
language and accords it official status,
together with Castilian. The revival of
Galician is taking place at a pace which
varies from sector to sector: for in¬
stance, while only 41 per cent of all
schoolchildren received instruction in
Galician in the 1980-1981 academic
year, a large number of lectures were
given in the language at university
level. Similarly, although there is no
daily newspaper written entirely in
Galician, a number of scientific
periodicals are published in the
language. In addition, 201 books in
Galician were published in 1981. Gali¬
cian radio and television programmes
are still very few in number.
Euskera, the Basque language, . is
unrelated to any other language spoken
in Europe. Its origins are uncertain. On
account of its peculiarity, it has at¬
tracted the interest of many linguists
and anthropologists. Today Euskera is
1. Euskera or Euskara is the Basque name for the language, which is traditionally known as
Vascuence in Castilian Spanish.
2. In the Statute of Autonomy the autochthonous language is referred to as Valenciano, the
traditional name given to the Catalan language in the region.
3. Basque is an official language only in the northern part of Navarre.
4. Total area of Spain: 504,744 km'. Population: 37,700,000.
26

spoken in seven regions, three belong¬
ing to France (Basse Navarre, Laburdi
and Zuberoa) and four belonging to
Spain (Navarre, and Vascongadas or
the Basque Provinces: Alava, Guipúz¬
coa and Vizcaya).
Although some 2,000 years ago the
Euskera-language territory covered an
area four or five times larger than it
does today, it declined slowly until the
eighteenth century, and more quickly
since then. Today it is reckoned that
Basque-speakers account for only 1 1
per cent of the population of Navarre.
As for the Vascongadas or, to give
them their official title, the
"Autonomous Community of the
Basque Country" some 23 per cent of
the population speak Euskera.
The difficulties involved in achieving
linguistic standardization for Euskera
are greater than those for Catalan or
Galician, not only on account of the
ground it has lost in its home region but
also because of its unique nature, the
difficulty of learning it, and the cre¬
ation of neologisms. Even so, despite
the fact that in the 1960s Euskera seem¬
ed to be a dying language, there are
clear signs that it is now on the road to
recovery. Political autonomy (the
Statute was approved in 1979) is not the
only factor accounting for this situa¬
tion; there has also been a widespread
campaign to inform public opinion.
Special mention must be made of the
ikastolas, private schools in which
Euskera is the language of instruction.
These schools are now largely in¬
tegrated into the public educational
system. In the I981-I982 academic
year, more than 15 per cent of Basque
schoolchildren were taught in Euskera,
while the rest were taught in Castilian
Above, the fiesta of San Fermín
at Pamplona, capital of the
Autonomous Region of Navarre,
Euskera (Basque) is spoken and
has the status of an official
language only in the north of
Navarre and in the Autonomous
Community of Euskadi (the
Basque Country), Spain's fourth
official language, Gallego, is
spoken in Galicia, in the north¬
western corner of the Iberian
peninsula. Photo below shows
thepilgrims ' dance at thefiesta of
San Roque at Hio in the Galician
province of Pontevedra,
Photos © A. Muioz de Pablos, Paris
with Euskera as a compulsory separate
subject.
Shortcomings are more serious as far
as the Basque-language situation in the
media is concerned, in that there are
only two bilingual daily newspapers
containing features and information in
Euskera, although a number of
magazines are published in the
language. The State radio and tele¬
vision system does not broadcast pro¬
grammes in Euskera, although a
Basque regional government television
centre began broadcasting for four
hours a day in 1983, and this may go
some way to filling the gap. In 1981,
224 books were published in Euskera.
In short, the well-worn image of
Spain is changing as the new situation
of four official languages comes into
effect although the change has as yet
scarcely begun. Thousands of signposts
have been replaced or supplemented on
motorways and roads and in towns and
villages, but much still remains to be
done. Government departments are
endeavouring to adjust to the demands
of official bilingualism, in instances
where this exists. Schools and other
educational institutions have incor¬
porated or are incorporating languages
that were formerly banned into their
curricula, although the re-adaptation
process is not as rapid as might be wish¬
ed. The communication media are fac¬
ing material difficulties in broadcasting
in these languages, and consequently
the authorities should give them en¬
couragement. We are facing a historic
challenge; if we take it up successfully,
it will be possible to say that everyone
has gained from it, in that the
centuries-old cultures expressed in
these four languages, whose disap¬
pearance would have been a serious
loss for world culture, will have been
preserved and developed and the young
Spanish democracy will have been
strengthened.
27
