IV. The formulation and
application of educational policies
THE rapid pace of social change and progress in
knowledge and its applications, together with the
development of the means of communication, have of
necessity led to more dynamic development and an increased
capacity for innovation in education systems. At the same time,
the importance of the role of education and the complexity of
educational problems have prompted more systematic efforts to
devise and clarify education policies.
To enable education to fulfil its role, Unesco will promote the
elaboration of education policies and the conditions necessary
for their implementation with regard to the planning and
management of education, the renewal of content and methods,
the training of education personnel and of the infrastructures of
educational systems.
Decisions entailed in the formulation and application of
education policies are taken more and more often in the light of
experience acquired in the educational sciences and in the
related social and human sciences such as psychology,
sociology, linguistics and socio-linguistics and educational
economics, physiology, biology, dietetics, ergonomics and the
information and communication sciences. Educational person¬
nel can derive valuable assistance from the means of com¬
munication, data processing and the whole range of audio¬
visual media which help them to renew their methods and
evaluate their work.
Special prominence is given for the first time to developing
the education sciences it being considered vital to strengthen
and broaden education research if the renewal of the education
process is to be undertaken on a sound basis.
A wide dissemination of the studies and the findings of
research, of experiments and innovations is therefore of vital
importance to teachers, specialists in the design of curricula and
researchers, as well as those responsible for educational
policies, the planning, management and development of educa¬
tion as an aid to the decision-making process.
The various goals assigned to education, in its twofold func¬
tion of ensuring continuity and of creating receptivity to
change, are reflected, as regards the content of education, in a
large number of sometimes heterogeneous demands and pose
sensitive problems of priority, selection, organization and
balance in content. Indeed, the provision of education which is
adapted to the human and natural environment, the psychology
of the child or adult, to the state of knowledge and the needs of
society, is one of the most difficult of tasks.
A growing disparity is often to be found between the current
state of knowledge and values and the content of curricula,
which need to be updated regularly if education is not to become
marred by irrelevance or to be in danger of causing disaffection
or meeting with indifference among students. The emergence of
new fields of knowledge and activity often leads to the addition
of new subjects to those included in the curricula. Education,
however, cannot be divorced from the environmental context;
it is important, therefore, to see to it that education ensures the
transmission and development of indigenous values while being
a means of creating receptivity to other cultures.
In the near future, the proliferation of computers and the in¬
creased use of cable television, information technology and
communication satellites will make existing problems even
more acute such problems as the value of the contribution
made by these technologies to the educational process, their
harnessing for teaching purposes, the role of the teacher in rela¬
tion to the instruments which science has put at his disposal and
of which he now has to master the use, thus learning to enter a
new world. Preparing teachers for this new responsibility is one
of the features of the in-service training which is now added to
pre-service training in order that they may be equal to their ever
more complex and numerous duties.
To make education a continuous and coherent process which
preserves its specific features while renewing itself in rhythm
with changes in the social environment and the progress of
knowledge, such is the challenge facing all who, in various
capacities, are responsible for education, provide it or help to
promote its development.
A discussion group at a regional workshop held in the Philippines
in August-September 1 980 to review the state of biology educa¬
tion in Asia. The workshop was one of a number held under the
auspices of APEID (Asian Programme of Educational Innovation for
Development), a co-operative programme of Unesco Member
States in Asia and the Pacific region aimed at stimulating innovative
approaches to the problems of education related to development
needs.
Participants in a Unesco-sponsored regional seminar on problems
relating to the introduction of productive work into educational
systems, held at Porto Novo and Come in 1980, visit the craft
workshop of the Centre d'Enseignement Moyen Général (centre for
general secondary education). Come, People's Republic of Benin.
Photo Unesco
15
