RICHARD WAGNER (1813-1883)
A dilettante
genius
by Mamoru Watanabe
RICHARD Wagner belongs to that
select group of world personalities
Napoleon and Goethe are also
of their number to whom biographers
seem irresistibly drawn.
Some, drawn to his glorious music,
feel the urge to study his life; others,
maybe puzzled by the controversy sur¬
rounding his life and character, decide to
seek the truth through the story of his
life. Others, again, feel such antipathy
for the man that they embark on his por¬
trait much like a painter who, because he
does not wish simply to depict beauty, is
attracted to ugliness and uses it in an at¬
tempt to arrive at the truth. Such was my
motive when I set out to write Wagner's
biography.
I believe that no other musician lived
his life on such a vast and varied scale.
Perhaps no artist has ever been so
human, superhuman and sometimes in¬
human as Wagner. His life, like his
musical iuvre, was titanic.
Yet as I advanced in my research, I
realised that the most extraordinary thing
about Wagner was not the variety of his
life, nor the breadth of its range. Those
qualities masked something else a single,
soaring truth: to create great art, the ar¬
tist must be totally uncompromising.
Wagner was certainly that. Why did he
not try to change his life-style instead of
running up debts? Why did he betray the
man who was his generous benefactor by
having an affair with his wife? Why did
he take unfair advantage of the uncondi¬
tional affection shown towards him by
MAMORU WATANABE, Japanese musico¬
logist, was director of the Japanese Cultural
Institute in Cologne, Federal Republic of Ger¬
many from 1976 until 1982. He has published
widely on music and has translated many
works on music and other subj'ects from Ger¬
man into Japanese and vice versa.
This portrait of Richard Wagner (1813-1883) by the French Impressionist painter
Auguste Renoir was painted in Palermo on 15 January 1882. It is now in the Louvre.
the young king Ludwig II of Bavaria?
There is only one answer: the act of ar¬
tistic creation was the be-all and end-all
of Wagner's life; it guided his every deci¬
sion. All else, including bourgeois
morality, was relegated to second place.
There can be no doubt that he believed
in the worth of his music. That self-
assurance led him to publish private edi
tions of his works and get into debt as
a result after music publishers had
turned them down, and to throw his con¬
siderable energies into getting his operas
put on at various opera houses.
But when, on occasion, he acted in
such a way as to offend bourgeois stan¬
dards of morality, he was motivated not
by self-assurance, but by his irrepressible
15

Caricature of Wagner by J. Blass
Photo © Edimedia, Pans
The philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche
was right when he detected a certain dilet¬
tantism in Wagner. Thomas Mann was
of the same opinion. Recently, some
Japanese writers have argued that it is a
great mistake to regard Wagner as a di¬
lettante. In my view, however, it is by
recognizing his dilettantism that we can
properly appreciate his art. I do not pro¬
pose to discuss at length those charac¬
teristics of Wagner that marked him out
as a non-specialist par excellence the
grounding in dilettantism he received
when still an adolescent, the awkward
poetic conception of his inordinately
long libretti, his lack of discrimination
the German Romantic composers and to
have taken it to extremes. But in later
composers such as Brahms or Richard
Strauss, all traces of this approach have
disappeared.
It needs to be stressed that Wagner
became a successful artist precisely
because he succeeded, in many respects,
in overcoming his dilettantism. As
regards the technique of musical com¬
position, in particular, he achieved an
almost unparalleled virtuosity. The brio
and originality he showed in his modula¬
tions, instrumental technique, and use of
harmony are still extremely influential.
In the art of dramatic composition, too,
iv creative urge. Fanned by the confidence
he had in his music, that urge became in¬
creasingly violent. He thought it quite
normal for millionaires to give him
financial support so he could continue
creating. If he sank deeper and deeper in¬
to debt, it was not because he was sure
that his operas would be successful, when
staged, and thus enable him to repay
what he owed, but because with' ut
financial assistance he could not h re
created at all.
He believed that society alone, t
himself, bore responsibility for t' e
debts.
It was an attitude that was no doubt
justifiable in part, for if the present-day
system of royalties had been in force at
the time, he would probably have been
spared his financial problems, at least
during the second half of his life. Cre¬
ation also lay at the origin of his love for
another man's wife, and that love be¬
came indissociable for him from his cre¬
ative work. Wagner suffered from the
The goal ofmy work is the eternal
human delivered from every con¬
ventional element.
Richard Wagner
fact that his marriage with Minna had
failed, but he could not bring himself to
conform tö the ordered bourgeois ex¬
istence she wanted him to lead. The act of
creation forbade him to do so.
Moreover, Wagner's view of creation
was such that he did not regard an opera
as completed when he had finished writ¬
ing it: it had to be staged as well. But
staging often posed almost insuperable
difficulties, and caused Wagner to act in
a way which, according to bourgeois
standards, could only be described as
grossly selfish. Wagner was willing to
stop at nothing in order to get his operas
performed.
16
Photo Strohmeyer Photographs '-Q
San Francisco Opera Association,
San Francisco, California
This photo and the top photo on page
1 7 are taken from Richard Wagner:
Opéras de la Création à Nos Jours, by
Oswald Georg Bauer, Office du Livre,
Fribourg/Editions Vilo, Paris.
when it came to the visual arts, the
amateurish way he took up the ideas of
Schopenhauer, and his fondness for cir¬
cumlocution in both the expression and
the theoretical articulation of his essays.
It is more instructive to explore the
positive side of the relationship between
Wagner's art and dilettantism. We
should remember, to start with, that his
dilettantism formed part of, and helped
to accentuate, a trend among nineteenth-
century musicians. Many of them had an
unorthodox or insufficient musical
education, were also interested in other
arts than music (especially literature and
the theatre), and picked up the technique
of musical composition relatively late in
life. Weber, Schumann and Lortzing, for
example, differed in this respect from
earlier classical composers. Wagner's
own artistic approach could be said to
have followed the musical approach of
he displayed expert technical skill, and
Götterdämmerung, the opera he wrote
towards the end of his life, is one of the
great works in the world history of stage
performance. There remains the question
of Wagner's use of language, but as a
non-German speaker I do not feel quali¬
fied to pass judgment on that point.
However, as Thomas Mann pointed out,
there are many passages which undenia¬
bly reveal great talent. It would also be a
mistake, particularly in the case of
Wagner, to remove the poetry from its
musical context and evaluate it separate¬
ly. Wagner's achievements as a techni¬
cian are poles apart from dilettantism.
Dilettantism had another implication
for Wagner, for it enabled him to carry
through such a vast and original enter¬
prise. The proverb which says "the blind
man fears not the snake" is relevant to
the audacity of Wagner's genius. Similar-

ly, if he succeeded in breaking away from
the rules laid down by professional musi¬
cians and playwrights, it was entirely due
to his dilettantism. How else could he
have conceived his extraordinary theory
of the Gesamtkunstwerk, or total work
of art? How else could he have dared to
draw on German legends that even
Goethe had ignored? How else could he
have aspired to build a theatre where his
works, and his works alone, would be
performed?
Yet, in giving life to his audacious
visions, Wagner was driven by a creative
genius allied to extraordinary powers of
execution.
The fact that Wagner was such an ex¬
treme dilettante brings a note of bur¬
lesque to his biography. His life was a
human comedy, not a drama. Was des¬
tiny astonished by the force of his
creativity, for fortune smiled on him
many times? He had a narrow escape not
only when he fled the revolt of Dresden
but on many other occasions. Whenever
he found himself at bay, assailed by his
creditors, a generous benefactor would
inevitably appear on the scene. His ex¬
traordinary idea for building a theatre
where nothing but his own works would
be staged eventually came to fruition.
And if his operas continue to exert such
a wide appeal today, and to attract so
many directors, is it not because they are
in a way tragi-comedies?
Wagner wrote an impressive number
Where to find the human energy
to resist theparalysingpressure of
a civilization which denies man
utterly, to resist the presump-
tuousness of a culture which uses
the human mind only as the
motive force of the machine?
Richard Wagner
u : ''
*
. 't
V-
\ V
, i
1
'- '. .,
i
1
W'§^^Ë
i W '
4 {
;
|jï " Of, ti :."
©
Choral scene from Act 3 of Wagner's The Flying Dutchman as performed at the
Metropolitan Opera, New York, in March 1979. The structure of the ship is the only
scenery. In foreground the helmsman lies asleep before the ship's wheel. In a spectral
atmosphere created by the hanging skeletons, the choir interprets his nightmare.
of ideological essays and treatises on art
which once again display a combination
of dilettantism and its diametrical op¬
posite, specialization. Acute insights rub
shoulders with faulty judgments. But the
ultimate purpose of these essays was to
act as a spur to their author's creativity.
Among the many problems posed by
Wagner's philosophy, his anti-semitism
is justifiably condemned. Setting aside
the context of their time, Wagner's feel¬
ings appear as an emotional reaction
based on a crude generalization. Wagner
himself wondered whether he did not
have Jewish blood in his veins. The suf¬
fering that wracked his subconscious
mind was a reflection of the dark forces
of anti-semitism in nineteenth-century
Europe.
The number of Wagner operas per¬
formed in Japan is very low compared
with those by Mozart, Verdi or Puccini.
The most recent production of Wagner's famous tetralogy The Ring of the Nibelung,
by Sir Peter Hall, director, and Sir Georg Solti, conductor, was performed in July at the
annual Richard Wagner opera festival at Bayreuth. Above, a scene from The Twilight
of the Gods, the fourth part of the cycle, with Hildegard Behrens as Brunnhilde, Aage
Haugland as Hagen, and Manfred Jung as Siegfried.
This is not because Wagner is not liked in
Japan but because the staging of his
works confronts the Japanese with major
difficulties. When, however, a German
opera company on tour presents a
Wagner opera, all the tickets are snapped
up immediately. More copies of the com¬
plete recording of The Ring have been
sold in Japan than in any other country.
Why does Wagner's music appeal so
strongly to the Japanese, when it is
almost diametrically opposite in charac¬
ter to traditional Japanese art? An ex¬
planation is not easy to find, but since
Bruckner's music has won a following in
Japan in the last few years perhaps the
Japanese today are attracted by art which
is totally different from their own.
Much has been made of the extremely
Germanic nature of Wagner's music. I
cannot fully appreciate this point of
view. Myself I would tend rather to stress
the extremely human nature of his music,
its power to transcend frontiers and
speak to mankind as a whole.
Like the French, who have always lov¬
ed Wagner and towards whom Wagner
felt such hostility the Japanese cannot
resist the enchantment of his music.
Mamoru Watanabe
17
