The scramble for territory
by Godfrey N. Uzoigwe
ALTHOUGH by the end of the third
quarter of the nineteenth century
France, Britain, Portugal and Ger¬
many had acquired commercial interests
and were exercising considerable influence
in different parts of Africa, their direct
political control in the continent was ex¬
tremely limited.
Britain, in particular, and Germany were
wielding all the influence they wanted, and
no statesman in his senses would choose to
incur the costs and court the unforeseen
contingencies of formal annexation when
the same advantages could be obtained
from informal control.
This attitude began to change, however,
as a result of three main factors which emer¬
ged during the period 1876 to 1880.
The first was the convening by King Leo¬
pold of Belgium of the so-called Brussels
Geographical Conference which resulted in
the setting up of the African International
Association and the employment of Henry
Morton Stanley to explore the Congo in the
name of the Association. These moves cul¬
minated in the creation of the Congo Free
State, whose recognition by the European
nations Leopold managed to obtain before
the Berlin West African Conference ended
its deliberations.
The second factor was a sudden flurry of
Portuguese activity. Piqued by the fact that
GODFREY N. UZOIGWE, of Nigeria, is pro¬
fessor ofhistory at the University ofMichigan,
Ann Arbor, USA. A specialist in east African
history, and in particular on the former
Bunyoro kingdom in Uganda, he has written
several studies and articles on African history.
she had been invited to the Brussels Con¬
ference only as an afterthought, from
1876 onwards Portugal despatched a
series of expeditions which by 1880 had
resulted in the annexation to the Portuguese
Crown of the hitherto virtually independent
estates of the Afro-Portuguese rulers of
Mozambique.
The third and final factor was the expan¬
sionist mood which characterized French
colonial policy between 1879 and 1880, as
signified by her participation with Britain in
the dual control of Egypt (1879), the des¬
patch of Savorgan de Brazza into the
Congo and the ratification of his treaties
with Chief Makoko of the Bateke, and the
revival of colonial initiatives both in Tuni¬
sia and Madagascar.
These moves on the part of France and
Portugal between 1876 and 1880 clearly
indicated that they were now committed to
colonial expansion and establishment of
formal control in Africa; it was this that
finally compelled both Britain and Ger¬
many to abandon informal control and
influence in favour of formal control and
led to their annexations in southern, eastern
and western Africa from the end of 1883
onwards.
By the early 1880s, the scramble for terri¬
tory was well under way and it was out of
fear of being pushed out of Africa alto¬
gether that Portugal proposed the calling
of an international conference to sort out
territorial disputes in the area of central
Africa.
The idea of an international conference
to settle the territorial disputes arising from
European activities in the Congo region,
suggested by Portugal, was later taken up
by Bismarck. The conference was held at
Berlin between 15 November 1884 and 26
November 1885. The news that such a con¬
ference was to be held increased the inten¬
sity of the scramble. The conference did not
seriously discuss either the slave trade or the
lofty humanitarian ideals that were sup¬
posed to have inspired it. Delegates conten¬
ted themselves with passing empty resolu¬
tions regarding the abolition of the slave
trade and the welfare of Africans.
It was not, ostensibly, the initial inten¬
tion of the conference to attempt a general
partition of Africa. It nevertheless ended up
disposing of territory, passing resolutions
concerning the free navigation of the Niger,
the Benue and their affluents, and laying
down "the rules to be observed in future
Delegates from 15
nations at the West
African Conference,
convened in Berlin in
November 1884,
which laid down "the
rules to be observed in
future with regard to
the occupation of
territory on the coasts
of Africa".
t "'
>1

regard to the occupation of territory
on the coasts of Africa".
According to Article 34 of the Berlin Act,
any European nation which took possession
of an African coast or declared a "protecto¬
rate" there, would have to notify such
action to the signatories of the Act in order
to have its claims ratified. This was the so-
called "sphere of influence" doctrine, to
which was linked the absurd concept of the
"hinterland" which came to be interpreted
to mean that possession of a coast also
implied ownership of its hinterland to an
almost unlimited distance.
Article 35 stipulated that an occupier of
such coastal possessions must also
demonstrate that it possessed sufficient
authority there "to protect existing rights
and, as the case may be, freedom of trade
and of transit under the conditions agreed
upon". This was the so-called doctrine of
"effective occupation" that was to make
the conquest of Africa such a murderous
business.
Indeed, by recognizing the Congo Free
State, by permitting territorial negotiations
and by laying down rules and regulations
for "legal" appropriation of African ter¬
ritory, the Concert of Europe had ar¬
rogated to itself the right of sanctioning the
principle of sharing-out and conquering
another continent.
There was no precedent in world history
to justify one continent boldly talking
about the sharing-out and occupation of
the territory of another continent. This was
the major significance of the conference for
African history. The argument that, con-
Relief from the Palace of the King of
Dahomey (Benin) Illustrating the
superiority of European arms.
trary to popular opinion, the conference
did not partition Africa is correct only in
the most technical sense; in any case it is ir¬
relevant. The appropriation of territory did
take place at the conference and the ques¬
tion of future appropriation is clearly im¬
plied in its decisions. By 1885, in fact, the
broad outlines of the final partition of
Africa had already been drawn.
i
Prior to the Berlin Conference, spheres
of influence had been acquired by settle¬
ment, exploration, the establishment of
commercial posts, the occupation of
strategic areas and treaties with African
rulers. Following the Conference, influence
by treaty became the most important
method of effecting the paper partition of
the continent. These treaties took two
forms those between Africans and Euro¬
peans, and bilateral agreements between the
Europeans themselves. The African-
European treaties were basically of two
kinds. First, there were the slave trade and
commercial treaties, and, secondly, there
were the political treaties by which African
rulers either purportedly surrendered
sovereignty in return for protection or
undertook not to enter into treaty obliga¬
tions with other European nations.
African leaders entered into these ar¬
rangements for a variety of reasons. In
some cases they hoped that the prestige of
such a relationship would give them
political advantages in dealing with their
neighbours. An African sovereign might
desire a treaty in the hope of using it to keep
recalcitrant subject States in line.
Sometimes a weak African State would
desire a treaty with a European power in the
hope of using it to renounce allegiance to an
African overlord or as a means of warding
off a threat to its independence from
another European power.
Godfrey N. Uzoigwe
