Culture shock
and criminality
by Miguel Rojas Mix
HISTORY offers few better ex¬
amples of the link between ac¬
culturation and criminality than
the trial by Francisco Pizarro, the con¬
queror of Peru, of Atahualpa, the last
sovereign of the Incas. Atahualpa was
sentenced to death for the proven crimes of
idolatry, incest, polygamy and subversion.
He died without understanding what it was
all about. For him, his legitimate wife had
to be his sister, he was incapable of conceiv¬
ing that there could be superior gods to his
own and he had never heard of a higher
king against whom he could rebel. A change
in the terms of reference had transformed
what was normal or even pious and sacred
into a capital crime.
Atahualpa's condemnation symbolizes
what an encounter between two cultures
can lead to, and how criminality can emerge
from the conflict between them. At the
dawn of American history (as Westerners
would put it) acculturation was a massive
social process imposed by a colonialist
minority on an indigenous majority, and it
was started by outlawing the latter's
culture.
As a general rule, whenever acculturation
is at issue it is regarded as something that
affects only non-Westerners. The
Westerner brings his own culture along with
him and imposes it. Many people still find
it difficult to regard the excesses of col¬
onialism as crimes. For long, Western
violations of the rights of so-called
primitive societies (once I was corrected and
told that it was anachronistic to speak of the
"rights of primitive societies") were not
treated as crimes. The term used was
"civilizing process".
Since the eighteenth century, when Vico
and Herder put forward the idea of a
universal history led by progress, with
Europe at its head, the West has allowed
itself to break all the laws of the non-
Western peoples in the name of progress.
To consider this a crime would have seemed
as strange as to describe as a thief the ar¬
chaeologist who removed Aztec antiquities
to the great museums of the West. The
Third World has no "property", only
"treasures" and they were not "stolen" but
MIGUEL ROJAS MIX, Chilean art critic and
historian, is professor of the sociology of
literature and art at the University of Vincen-
nes, Paris. The founder and former director of
the Chilean Institute of Latin American Art, he
is the author of many books and studies in¬
cluding América Latina en el Arte Europeo
(Latín America in European Art), La Plaza
Mayor, Instrumento de Dominio Colonial (The
Main Square, an Instrument of Colonial
Domination) and a brief history of Latin
America for children.
"discovered". They were res nullius, they
belonged to no one.
Nowadays there are other massive ac¬
culturation processes which do not involve
the movement of colonists overseas but
take place in the metropolitan countries
themselves, in industrial centres oras is
more frequently the caseon the outskirts
.of the big cities of the West. These are the
acculturation processes of the immigrant.
Even now the term acculturation is still
understood to be a one-way process. Like
the notion of exoticism (1) it is not
reciprocal but denotes only that which is
strange to a Westerner. This disparity is still
maintained. In many Third World coun¬
tries acculturation of the European does
not arise because his status depends upon
his being European. The identities of
"bwana" or "sahib" are not
criminogenous and do not imply a deprecia¬
tion of a person's identity but rather its
enhancement. In Latin America there are
even compact European colonies, regular
enclaves in which not only is the mother
country's culture preserved but the writ of
an extra-territorial law runs.
Depending on the ability of the two
cultures to communicate, the cultural shock
will vary in violence and in the scope for
dialogue. In practice, cultural relations
seem to operate better at a distance, in the
form of occasional exchanges of exhibitions
and theatrical performances rather than in
the form of everyday dialogue in the ghettos
of great industrial cities. In France and the
Federal Republic of Germany, host coun¬
tries to large immigrant populations, the
cultural shock is less violent for a Spaniard
or Portuguese than for a North African and
greater for an immigrant of rural origin
than for one of urban middle-class
background.
In fact, acculturation presupposes the ex¬
istence of a dominant society and con¬
sequently a depreciation of the culture of
origin. This is accelerated by two sets of cir¬
cumstances which are frequently linked to
each other in the country of adoption,
namely, the processes of civic assimilation
and legal marginalization. Essentially the
civic assimilation process occurs in the
second generation through the education
system and life in the urban community.
Marginality results from a chronic feeling
of insecurity and uncertainty about the
future. It is certainly economic in character
but it is also largely legal, being associated
with such events as the renewal of residence
and work permits and especially with the
threat of expulsion.
The result of this depreciation of the
culture of origin, to which must be added in
many cases racial prejudice, incomprehen¬
sion, intolerance and, generally, all the dif-
30

Photo © Charles Carrie, Paris
"Obstinate attachment to the culture of origin (...) is also
manifested in exile in the form of an exaggerated love of tradi¬
tional customs (...) religious ceremonies and celebrations."
Above, carnival time in Brixton, London, for immigrants from
Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago.
The notion of the "right to be different" has little meaning
when "The Other" is looked upon merely as a source of labour
for the most unpleasant tasks and his customs and traditions
are rejected. Left, immigrant workers tarring a street in Paris.
Photo Rémi Berli © Rapho, Paris
ficulties of coexistence, is that cultural iden¬
tity becomes a matter of questioning in¬
stead of self-acceptance. The response to
this questioning will be either a search for
identity or flight from it.
The search for identity is often reflected
in an obstinate attachment to the culture of
origin, which is idealized, especially by the
second generation which did not know it in
situ. Material links with the homeland are
tenaciously maintained or renewed, houses
are bought in the native village and holidays
are spent there, the journey home being
made in a big car whose importance is less
as a means of transport than as a success
symbol with which to impress the folks at
home. This ritual is important because it
enables the emigrant to recover the esteem
of his former neighbours, even if it is only
in a remote, forgotten village.
This attachment is also manifested in
exile in the form of an exaggerated love" of
traditional customs. From time to time
religious ceremonies, celebrations, and
traditional dishes enable the immigrant,
like Antaeus, to recover his strength by
symbolically treading his native soil. This
form of behaviour, typical of the first
generation, contributes to deferring the
conflict of identity to their children and
even to their grandchildren. The identity
problem, which is faced by all adolescents,
is particularly acute for the young im¬
migrant, who has to assert himself both in
the host country and in his family group.
In their obstinate attachment to the coun¬
try of their birth, immigrants do not realize
that customs change rapidly and that they
themselves become cultural anachronisms,
isolated colonies perpetuating models that
v. are already obsolete.
By changing his social milieu the im¬
migrant loses the reference group in which
his identity was recognized, and even if he
does his best to behave in accordance with
the norms of the host country, his per¬
sonality is called into question because of
the culture difference. This is felt as an in¬
justice, leads to a sense. of insecurity and
may provoke reactions of various kinds in
the individual concerned. It may lead him
to seek a compromise and to assume a
chameleon-like identity. Typical of this is
the Muslim who observes Qur'anic rules at
home but eats pork and drinks wine with his
workmates in the canteen. On the other
hand it may cause him to become ag¬
gressive. But especially it may lead him into
a situation of fundamental uncertainty as
regards social models because he will
discover the lack of coherence between the
host culture and his own, and this may pro¬
duce in him an attitude of hostility to all
value systems. He then finds himself in a
situation of anomia (lawlessness) which
may transform him into an antisocial or
asocial person, not only in his adopted
country but also in his family's country of
origin.
Where it is conflictual or there is incom¬
patibility between two life styles and two
value systems, the cultural shock is of
relevance to the problem of criminality.
What is more natural in Mediterranean
cultures than to administer a couple of slaps
to a naughty youngster? In Sweden,
however, this is forbidden by law and what
is a purely family affair becomes a criminal
act. This apparently commonplace example
31

poses the question of the criminal inten¬
tions of the individual in a state of cultural
transition who commits an offence of this
kind.
Another, much more dramatic, example
concerns certain communities where the
father makes an attempt on the life of his
daughter because she has broken the rules
of premarital chastity. For the father the
essential matter is to purge the disgrace and
save the family's honour, an action which
courts in his society treat with considerable
leniency, whereas in the West it is an ex¬
tremely serious offence. Is the fact that the
offender was complying with the code of his
culture of origin taken into account? Is the
question asked what kind of behaviour
should be expected of the individual con¬
cerned? The problem is how to determine
precisely the degree of culpability of this
cultural nomad, who has not absorbed the
system of values of the host society.
On the other hand, where the criminality
of the immigrant is concerned it should be
pointed out that the acculturation problem
must be considered in conjunction with
other criminogenous circumstances which
affect society as a whole, such as social and
economic factors and the urban problem.
Many young offenders come from ghetto
communities. The formation of gangs leads
to early delinquency, often only occasional
but always dramatized and socially inaccep¬
table. It has also been established that ghet¬
tos favour recidivism. This group delin¬
quency offers a solution to the problem of
flight from identity. The ghetto enables a
second generation which feels completely
marginal to respond to the questioning
mentioned above by forming itself into a
cohesive minority.
Broadly speaking, criminality through
acculturation occurs only in two kinds of
circumstances where it is a product of two
systems of social images in which one of
them prohibits what the other permits or
even commands, and where it is a product
of cultural transition and the psychological
factors created by the latter. In any case it
must be observed that in spite of these addi¬
tional difficulties the incidence of criminali¬
ty does not seem to be significantly higher
amongst immigrants than amongst the
native population.
But does this exhaust the subject of
criminality through acculturation? Up to
now we have considered only the case of the
foreigner. But how should we classify
racialist crimes committed against im¬
migrant workers? Are they also attributable
to acculturation? At least they reflect a con-
flictual shock between two cultures.
Cultural dialogue between societies living
side by side, dialogue with minorities,
presupposes much more so than the
dialogue at a distance to which we referred
earlier a modification of social images,
not only on the«part of the minorities but on
that of society as a whole; otherwise
minorities will eventually become unaccep¬
table. There seems to be a tendency for
migrants to settle permanently in the host
country. This involves a fundamental
change in ideas about "the Other", about
one's neighbours, and more directly, a cam¬
paign against racialism, whether it be
ethnic, cultural or political.
It is difficult to explain criminality
32
"Whenever acculturation is at issue it is regarded as something
that affects only non-Westerners. The Westerner brings his
own culture along with him and imposes it (...) By culture is
meant a vision of the world which includes a system of values
and which finds expression in a way of life". Above,
automobile cemetery on the banks of the Choluteca River,
Tegucigalpa, Honduras.

through acculturation otherwise than as the
result of the failure of a society to integrate
an exogenous group while at the same time
protecting the latter's right to its own iden¬
tity. Any integration policy raises a series of
questions which do not so much demand
answers as point to a number of certainties.
It is inconceivable, for instance, that young
people of the second generation of im¬
migrants should feel threatened by expul¬
sion to a country of origin they have never
known. Equally unacceptable is any action
aimed at imposing conformity on another's
culture in the name of ideals or slogans
which are completely alien to it, such as
feminism or ecology, however relevant
these movements may be in the host
country.
The fact is that only a culturally pluralist
society can provide an answer to these ques¬
tions, and only insofar as it eschews
dogmatic models. Cultural pluralism in the
sense of respect for regional and immigrant
cultures is something which the developed
world must preserve. External colonialism,
now a thing of the past, must not be replac¬
ed by colonialist policies towards
minorities. It is inadmissible that the sole
logic and reason of history should be
economic growth, which seeks higher
returns by uniformizing society.
But pluralism implies that ghettos, isola¬
tion and cultural enclaves must be avoided
too. To ensure this, minorities must par¬
ticipate on equal terms in the organization
of society as a whole. How can this be
achieved? Perhaps by recognizing their
political rights.
Apart from this, we should not overlook
the real or potential importance of the
growth of hybrid creative activities,
especially when they succeed in ridding
themselves of the clichés that are castrating
them. They are one kind of response from
those young people who are looking for
new models. In practice, these models
reflect the conflict between the big city and
the Third World, like that of the
Rastafarians (2) or their marginality, even
in the legal sense. The most popular musical
group founded by North Africans in France
is called "Carte de Séjour" (Residence
Permit).
This hybrid creative activity forms part
of the mental decolonization process, and
will become increasingly necessary as the in¬
habitants of the big cities of the West come
into ever closer contact with the Third
World, not by crossing the Ocean but in the
suburbs of their cities. It will be conducted
by the immigrant, not through servile ac¬
ceptance of the values of the host society
but by realizing that he is creating new
values with them. But it also implies aban¬
doning the illusion that the values of the
past can be preserved, and understanding
that the past can only be preserved as a fer¬
ment to develop the roots of a future
identity.
The West, for its part, will be able to ac¬
cept and contribute to this hybrid creativity
only when it abandons its paternalistic
universalism, retaining of it only that ele¬
ment which does not oppress the im¬
migrant; when it takes notice of the
deleterious effects of its culture; when it
ceases to deify itself and to treat as
backward those societies which are ex¬
periencing acculturation; and when it stops
killing Atahualpa merely because he is
Atahualpa.
Miguel Rojas Mix
(1) The Larousse "Lexis" dictionary of the French
language defines exoticism as "all the characteristics
which distinguish what is foreign from what appertains
to Western civilization". ,
(2) Rastafarians: members of a Jamaican religious and
political movement which takes its name from Ras
Tafari, as Emperor Halle Selassie was known before he
was crowned in 1930. (See Unesco Courier, December
1981).
"Mestizo (hybrid) creative activity forms part of the mental decolonization process." It will develop
not from servile acceptance of the values of the host society but from realization that from them new
values are being created. Below, a performance by Carte de Séjour (Residence Permit) a musical group
formed by north Africans resident in France.
