THE LIFE AND
Starbirth
Stars are born out of interstellar gas, the tenuous
mixture of hydrogen, helium and smaller amounts
of other elements that lies between the existing stars
of a galaxy. In its natural state, this gas is too
rarefied to form into the dense gas globes of stars.
But the interstellar medium is disturbed by various
kinds of shock waves that compress the gas into
denser clouds, and it is here that starbirth occurs.
Astronomers believe that two main kinds of
shocks are responsible. The spiral pattern of a
galaxy like our Milky Way is a gravitational pattern
that rotates at different speed from the galaxy's
gas, so it is constantly piling up gas in new locations
as the spiral pattern rotates. In addition, the fast-
moving gases from an exploding star, a supernova,
can sweep up the tenuous gas and compress it into
dense clouds. Because of the clouds' large comple¬
ment of molecules, such as carbon monoxide and
alcohol, astronomers call them "molecular
clouds".
In the centre of a molecular cloud, the gas is so
dense that its own gravity pulls it inwards. This gas
is turbulent, so it does not all shrink towards the
same central point, but breaks up into dozens of in¬
dividual fragments of the cloud. Each fragment
then shrinks independently, and eventually
becomes a star.
These events are hidden from optical
astronomers, because the clouds are thick with par¬
ticles of interstellar dust that block off light. But
now radio telescopes can pick up radiation from
molecules in the cloud, and infra-red instruments,
like the Infra-red Astronomical Satellite, IRAS,
can detect heat from the protostars. They have
shown that each condensing fragment becomes flat¬
tened as a result of its own rotation, and blows off
gases at high speeds from either side of this flat
disc. These gas flows may trigger the birth of more
stars in the vicinity.
The newly-born cluster of several dozen stars is
generating radiation and gas flows that eventually
disperse the molecular cloud around them. This
takes one or two million years a short time in the
astronomer's reckoning. Sometimes the stars are so
close that they remain gravitationally bound
together as a star cluster, but more often they drift
apart. About one-third of all stars end up single,
like the Sun; the other two-thirds take along a close
companion from the original cluster and end up as
double stars.
20
(1) A star's life begins
when it condenses
out of dust and gas
scattered in space. (2)
As gravity begins to
act, the embryo star
starts to shrink. (3) As
it shrinks, the
temperature near the
middle rises until It
becomes high enough
for fusion to take
place. (4) The body
has now become a
real star, radiating
huge amounts of
energy.
Main sequence
The compression within a protostar
heats up its interior to some 10 million
degrees, and at this point nuclear re¬
actions begin to convert its hydrogen gas
into helium. The reaction releases
energy, which seeps up through the star
and shines out from the surface. The
energy source also opposes the in-pull of
gravity, so the gas globe stops shrinking
and remains constant.
The balance between energy produc¬
tion and gravity is so stable that the star
remains very much the same for millions
of years, or more. This period of
"hydrogen-burning" is in fact the
longest phase of a star's life. Tradition¬
ally, astronomers call stars in this phase
"main sequence stars", because their
properties follow a well-defined pattern.
All main sequence stars of the same
mass have a very similar luminosity and
surface temperature (the latter dictating
their apparent colours). The more
massive a main sequence star, the
brighter and hotter it is; the less massive
it is, the dimmer and cooler. The Sun and
Sirius are both typical main sequence
stars, for example, but because Sirius is
twice as heavy as the Sun, it is 20 times
brighter and has a surface temperature of
10,000°Centigrade as compared to the
Sun's 5,500°Centigrade surface.
Eventually a main sequence star will
consume all the hydrogen in its central
region where temperatures are high
enough for nuclear reactions to occur. A
star like the Sun reaches this point after
some 10,000 million yearsfortunately
for us, a long way in the future, as the
Sun is currently 5,000 million years old.
The highly-luminous massive stars are
ripping through their central fuel supplies
much more quickly, and reach the end of
their main sequence phase after only a
few million years.
Red giants
Once a star's core is bereft of
hydrogen, and is composed of helium
created by the reactions, it contracts
under its own gravity. Hydrogen im¬
mediately around the core then begins
to "burn" to helium, in a thin shell. To
compensate for the collapse of its core,
the outer layers swell out, to about a
hundred times its previous size. The
radiation from its interior now has to
spread out over more surface gases,
and so cannot heat it as much. The
temperature falls to only about

DEATH OF A STAR
White dwarfs
3,000° Centigrade, and the colour of
the star changes from the white or
yellow of a star like Sirius or the Sun to
a dull red. The swollen, reddish star is
now a red giant.
The outer gases of a red giant are
held so tenuously that they wobble in
and out, causing the star's brightness to
go up and down over a period of about
a year. The more massive stars expand
to become even larger, and are termed
supergiants. In some, the outer layers
oscillate in and out with a very precise
period, whose length is related to the
star's mass and hence to its brightness.
These Cepheid variable stars are im¬
mensely useful to astronomers measur¬
ing distances in the Universe.
After its red giant phase the final fate
of a star depends on its mass. If it is
similar to the Sun, the star sheds the
tenuous outer layers of its red giant
body. This gas spreads into space as a
glowing ring, known to astronomers as
a planetary nebula. (The name has
nothing directly to do with planets, in¬
cidentally; the rings simply look rather
like Uranus or Neptune when seen
through a small telescope.)
The star's core is left as a very com¬
pact little object, a white dwarf star. It
contains almost as much mass as the
Sun, but packed into a sphere only the
size of the Earth. The white dwarf is
made up of matter in an unusual state.
Like other stars, it consists of atomic
nuclei and electrons the components
of atoms broken apart in the heat of a
star's interior. While other stars are
gaseous, with pressure provided by the
fast speed of these constituents, a white
dwarf is effectively solid, because its
matter is so compressed that the elec¬
trons are packed together as tightly as
they will go. This is an example of what
physicists call "degenerate matter".
A white dwarf has no source of
energy, no interior nuclear reactions. It
begins life extremely hot, with the
residual heat from its days as a star's
core. But as time goes by, it radiates its
heat away to space, and eventually ends
up cold, dark and forgotten as a "black
dwarf".
Stellar Evolution
Small main sequence star
Large main sequence star
White dwarf
Very large
main sequence star
Diagram Dave Beckes © Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., Chicago

Supernovae, neutron stars, pulsars
A heavy star goes out with a bang. At
the end of its phase as a red giant (or a
Cepheid variable), the nuclear reac¬
tions near its centre become unstable,
and the star blows itself apart, as a
supernova. In this colossal explosion,
the supernova briefly shines as brightly
as a thousand million Suns.
As the outer layers of gas blow
themselves off, the core is powerfully
squeezed, and it collapses until it is only
about 20 kilometres across only the
size of a large city. During the collapse,
its electrons combine with protons to
make neutrons, and the collapse halts
when the neutrons are packed
together another example of
degenerate matter, but this time involv¬
ing neutrons rather than the electrons
found in white dwarfs. A typical
neutron star weighs a little more than
the Sun, and its small size means that
its density is incredible: a pinhead of
neutron star matter would weigh a
million tonnes.
As neutron stars rotate, they give out
radiation that appears to "flash".
Radio astronomers at Cambridge first
picked up these pulses of radiation in
1967, and called their sources
Magnetic
'lines of force'
Beamed
radiation
"pulsars". Pulsars, or neutron stars,
often give out flashes of X-rays and
gamma rays, too, and in a few cases,
flashes of light. These pulses show that
the small stars rotate unbelievably
quickly. The pulsar in the Crab
Nebula, the remains of a supernova
that exploded 900 years ago, turns 30
times per second; while a pulsar
discovered in 1982 rotates an incredible
642 times every second!
©
E i
LIGHTHOUSES IN THE SKY. As neutron
stars rotate, they emit beams of radiation
which we perceive as flashes as the
beams flick past us at regular Intervals,
just as a sailor sees the flashing beam of
a distant lighthouse.
Black holes
The centre of a very massive star cannot
end up as a white dwarf or a neutron star.
There is a natural weight limit for these
shrunken entities, of 1 .4 and 3 times the
Sun's mass, respectively. When an ex¬
tremely heavy star explodes, its collaps¬
ing core may be above these limits. As it
shrinks in size, nothing can stop the col¬
lapse; and as it gets smaller, the strength
of gravity at its surface increases con¬
tinuously. When the core is only a few
kilometres across, its gravity becomes so
strong that nothing not even light can
escape. It has become a black hole.
The black hole is thus a region of ir¬
resistible gravity just a few kilometres
across. It is a hole, because anything
dropped into it can never get out again;
and it is black because no light can
escape from within. The original core has
collapsed to a very small size somewhere
near the centre of the hole, but there is
3
E
22
literally no way of finding out what has
happened to it, because no radiation
from it can get out through the sur¬
rounding black hole.
Although theory tells astronomers that
black holes should exist, finding a black
hole in the darkness of space is rather
worse than locating a black cat in the
coal cellar on a dark nightl The only
giveaway is its gravity. Since two-thirds
of the stars are paired up with a compa¬
nion, there should be many black holes
teamed up with normal stars in orbit
about them. The normal star could be
sufficiently far away that it is not
swallowed up by the black hole, but still
near enough for the black hole to pull off
some of its surface gases. These gases
flow down towards the black hole,
heating up in the processes and emitting
X-rays before they disappear into the
hole.
«TT"r>
^£i§&-±
X-ray astronomers have indeed found
radiation sources in the sky where a visi¬
ble star is orbiting an invisible compa¬
nion. In many cases, the X-rays are com¬
ing in pulses, showing that the small un¬
seen star is in fact a neutron star. But
when they investigated a source called
Cygnus X-1, astronomers found that the
unseen companion star is at least six
times heavier than the Sunfar too
massive to be a neutron star. More
recently, two similar cases have come to
light in our nearest neighbour galaxy, the
Large Magellanic Cloud. Although the
evidence must necessarily be indirect,
the existence of black holes among the
stars of our Galaxy and others is now
proven to the satisfaction of most
astronomers. I
Diagram, illustrates, from left to right, the
stages In the formation of a Black Hole.
Left, during the stable life of a massive
star a state of equilibrium exists between
gravitational pressure (inward-pointing
arrows) and radiation and heat from the
core of the star (outward-pointing
arrows). Centre, as the star burns up its
supply ofhydrogen the equilibrium Is bro¬
ken and the star begins to collapse
towards Its core. Right, finally, the star Is
crushed Into a tiny volume of great den¬
sity and with such enormous gravitatio¬
nal pull that not even light can escape
from It.

The scale
of space
For the relatively short distances within
the Solar System, astronomers can use
the kilometre as a unit. But even the
distance from the Earth to the Sun. 150
million km, is becoming a little too large
to work with. Solar system astronomers
often take this distance as their unit and
call it "one astronomical unit". In this
way, the distance to Pluto, the outer¬
most planet, becomes a convenient 39
astronomical units.
Another measure of an astronomical
distance is given by the time taken for
light to traverse it. The Earth-Sun
distance is 8 1/3 light-minutes; the
diameter of Pluto's orbit is 1 1 light-
hours. The latter dimension, while
minuscule on the scale of the Galaxy, is
similar to the size of the compact
powerhouse within a quasar.
The nearest star, Próxima Centauri,
lies 7,000 times further off than Pluto, at
4.2 light-years. The brightest stars in the
sky lie at a variety of distances, Sirius at
8.6 light-years, for example, and Arc-
turus at 36; Deneb (in Cygnus) is among
the most distant of the "first magnitude"
stars, at 1 ,500 light-years away. But this
is just on our doorstep in the whole
Galaxy: it is 30,000 light-years from the
Sun to the Galaxy's centre; and the Milky
Way is some 1 00,000 light-years in
diameter.
Irregular galaxies are considerably
smaller than the Milky Way, and most
spirals are slightly smaller. Our
neighbour, the Andromeda Galaxy, is
one of the largest spirals known, with a
diameter of 150,000 light-years. The
largest ellipticals are bigger still, with
diameters of up to a million light-years.
These sizes refer to the extent of a
galaxy's stars. The beams ejected from a
radio galaxy can stretch much further
out, to make these objects the largest
connected structures in the Universe.
The nearest galaxy to the Milky Way is
the Large Magellanic Cloud, at 1 70,000
light-years. Our Local Group of galaxies
is five million light-years across. The
nearest large cluster of galaxies, the
Virgo cluster, is about 50 million light-
years away. Typical large clusters of
galaxies are about 30 million light-years
across. They are often grouped into
superclusters. These assemblies of
clusters are typically 200 million light-
years in extent, and they often form the
denser parts of filamentary structures
that stretch over 500 million light-years
or more. The clusters of galaxies are
gravitationally bound and will remain
roughly the same size; the superclusters
and filaments will grow with the expan¬
sion of the Universe.
