Science and science fiction
WHAT is science fiction? Prag¬
matically, it is what a pub¬
lisher puts out as science fic¬
tion. But as a purist I will quote from
my book The Cosmic Dancers a defini¬
tion that is particularly suited to the
purpose of this article.
"Science fiction is that class of fic¬
tion which contains the currents of
change in science and society. It con¬
cerns itself with the critique, extension,
revision, and conspiracy of revolution,
all directed against static scientific
paradigms. Its goal is to prompt a
paradigm shift to a new view that will
be more responsive and true to
nature".
As the definition implies, the impor¬
tance of science fiction arises from its
choreography of the dance between
science and reality; the best of science
fiction continually prods science
toward further discovery of the mean¬
ing of reality. "Do not adhere to fixi¬
ty", it seems to challenge. "The cur¬
rent paradigm, or world view, grew out
of the past and is only adequate for the
past; new ways are needed to tackle the
ever-unfolding present, let alone the
future."
Thus the modern science fiction1
writer envisions a future world in which
space travel is commonplace, a
universe in which life is known in other
star systems, cultures in which people
routinely communicate via telepathy
without sensory signals. Are such pro¬
jections legitimate challenges to our
science or mere fantasy? Certainly
there are fantasy elements that enhance
the story lines, but there are also some
profound challenges. A few examples
may be revealing.
In Ursula Le Guin's novel The
Dispossessed, the hero Shevek is a
scientist faced with the problem of im¬
proving communication between his



Co-explorers
home planet and its neighbour. He
responds by discovering the "ansible",
a machine that makes instantaneous,
signalless communication possible not
only between the planets of his con¬
cern, but with remote planets of the
galaxy as well.
In Ian Watson's novel Miracle
Visitors, the hero John Deacon in¬
vestigates sightings of UFOs, flying
saucers. He finds an unexpected
answer in the far reaches of his research
on the nature of human consciousness.
In Robert Silverberg's novel To
Open The Sky, the leaders of a new
scientific religion squarely fix the
priorities that are necessary to so meet
the threats of the present that they can
have a future. The priorities? to open
the sky and to open the mind.
In his novel Rendezvous with
Rama, Arthur C. Clarke beautifully
portrays an alien space colony. Implicit
is a challenge: will humans remain far
behind in that enterprise?
In The Black Cloud, author Fred
Hoyle depicts an alien life so fantastic
that it not only faces us with the poten¬
tial variety of extraterrestrial life, but
more importantly, it challenges us to
consider the whole question of the
origin and meaning of life.
In his novel Way Station, Clifford
Simak portrays a humanity on the
verge of a holocaust engendered by the
"terror" that man carries within him.
But the holocaust is avoided by a
transformation of man with the help of
a talisman and some wise intervention
from the galactic council. We intuit

ofreality
that the talisman, like the terror, may
lie within us, the touchstone for the
transformation of humanity.
Such scenarios call for a response
from science in vastly different direc¬
tions, from the outer reaches of space
to the inner reaches of the mind and
psyche of humankind. And in fact,
science has responded favourably to
challenges on both fronts; some of our
best minds are involved in serious fron¬
tiers of research today to open the sky
and to open the mind.
Princeton physicist Gerard O'Neill
originally suggested as a project in his
freshman physics course that the
students design a space colony. The in¬
itial results of this science-fiction ven¬
ture looked so good that the professor
himself began serious calculations. As
by Amit Goswami
a result, we now know that we actually
have the expertise and the raw
materials to build a space colony.
Perhaps the Soviet success with space
stations and the American success with
the space shuttle Challenger are the
first steps toward building our own
Rama.
And Carl Sagan has publicized the
continuing efforts of many serious
scientists in the area of CETI, com¬
munication with extraterrestrial in¬
telligence. Some answers and many
new questions, some examples of
which are noted below, are coming out
of these studies.
Although science fiction writers
and scientists alike have speculated for
decades about extraterrestrial in¬
telligence, there has until now been no
Scientists and technicians at a specially
prepared landing site watch the arrival
of an alien spaceship In Steven Spiel¬
berg's film Close Encounters of the
Third Kind (1977).
direct evidence for even the existence of
planets outside our solar system. But
now new data pouring in from an
orbiting infra-red astronomical
laboratory are providing direct
evidence that perhaps as many as forty
nearby stars are surrounded by cosmic
dust in the early stages of evolution into
planets. Some of these, including one
in the Vega system that is popular in
science fiction, may very well develop
life-supporting environments.
In research carried out at the
University of Maryland, the meteorite
Murchison, that fell into Australia in
1969, was found to contain all five of
the chemical bases needed for human
genes. Does this provocative evidence
indicate that life may exist elsewhere in
the universe?
In a stranger-than-science-fiction
theory of the origin of life, astronomer-
science fiction writer Fred Hoyle has
revived with many new twists the
nineteenth-century panspermis theory;
this is the theory that there are "seeds"
of life continuously bombarding the
Earth and other life-supporting planets
that create and rejuvenate life. Hoyle,
a respected scientist, seems to go
beyond the challenge of science fiction
in his most recent book The Intelligent
Universe.
Science's efforts to open the mind
are not far behind the challenge of
science fiction either. In the mid-1970s,
two Stanford Research Institute
physicists, Russell Targ and Harold
Puthoff, conducted rigorous ex¬
periments on telepathy in which one
psychic draws a picture of a distant site
that he "sees" through the eyes of
another psychic who is present at the
site. Neither psychic knows in advance
what site is to be visited; actually, the
sites were chosen by a computer.

Likewise, to ensure objectivity the
matching of the drawings and the sites
was done by judges who did not know
which drawings were done for which
sites. In more recent repetitions of this
experiment, which has been successful¬
ly replicated in dozens of independent
laboratories, the matching is being
done by a computer.
If we potentially have the telepathic
capacity that science fiction writers so
routinely see in our future, what is the
brain mechanism behind it? Premature
question? Hardly. In 1982, University
of Paris-Sud physicist Alain Aspect
and his collaborators demonstrated
conclusively that two photons objects
in the microscopic domain that obey
the laws of the new physics, quantum
mechanics can communicate at a
distance without exchanging signals.
This action at a distance, technically
called non-locality, is being heralded as
one of the fundamental properties of
quantum systems.
Could distance viewing be the result
of the brain's non-locality, a non-
locality that arises from a quantum
machinery that operates even at the
macrolevel of the brain's organization
that we call the mind? Many physicists,
among them Nobel laureate Eugene
Wigner, think that quantum mechanics
holds the key not only to our non-local
experiences such as telepathy, but also
to our consciousness itself. Some of the
new research in the frontiers of con¬
sciousness, reviewed in The Cosmic
Dancers, may truly be precursors of the
science of the twenty-first century.
Does this imply an ansible? Who
knows? But the new scientific model of
consciousness based on quantum
mechanics suggests that beyond our in¬
dividual I-ness, our ego-consciousness,
there may be a unitive, commonly-
shared primary consciousness, as fore¬
seen many years ago by Erwin
Schrödinger, the co-discoverer of
quantum mechanics; in his book What
Is Life? Schrödinger declared, "Con¬
sciousness is a singular". This message
from the new physics is clearly echoed
in the science fiction of Arthur C.
Clarke in his book Childhood's End.
"Imagine that every man's mind is
an island, surrounded by ocean. Each
seems isolated, yet in reality all are link¬
ed by the bedrock from which they
spring".
The imminence of a nuclear
holocaust incites pessimism in many
people today; as in Simak's novel, they
see the terror within us all too well. But
if we are all connected by a bedrock of
unitive consciousness, we also have the
talisman, the power of transformation,
to transcend the terror to peace and
harmony.
By now it should be clear that in
science fiction educators have an un¬
foreseen opportunity not only to instil
enthusiasm in the hearts of their
students for science, but also to en¬
courage them to follow the dance of
reality with the music of both science
and science fiction. For to cope with
the realitites of the twenty-first cen¬
tury, we will need both the arts and the
sciences.
I shall never forget the time when I
was confronted by a student in a con¬
ventional introductory physics course
for non-scientists after I had finished a
lecture that reviewed the meaning of
relativity and quantum mechanics to
our world view. "Professor," the stu¬
dent said, "these concepts are
fascinating. But the new physics seems
to apply only to elementary particles.
What is there for me, personally?"
This was many years ago, and I
couldn't answer him then.
Subsequently, however, I developed
a course at the University of Oregon,
aptly titled The Physics of Science Fic¬
tion, that uses readings from as many
as fifty science fiction novels to in¬
troduce the principles and messages of
both the classical and the new physics
to non-scientists. The advantage of this
approach is that science is no longer
seen as isolated from our lives, a view
that vexes many non-scientists like the
student quoted above.
Another reason why science fiction is
relevant to today's science classroom is
the growing importance of futuristics
in our global society. I suspect that
science fiction started the subject of
futuristics. It was in .1934 that the dean
of science fiction, H.G. Wells, sug¬
gested that universities establish
courses on human ecology. Science fic¬
tion writers examine future problems
such as overpopulation, intelligent
computers, and nuclear holocaust with
such insight and reverberating detail
that futurists and educators would be
well advised to honour their wisdom.
And the framework of immediate per¬
sonal impact in which that wisdom is
couched can be employed by educators
to focus the attention of today's youth
on the design of the future that will be
theirs.
Ultimately, the most common bond
between science and science fiction, the
one that makes them such good part¬
ners in the dance of reality, is imagina¬
tion. Nowhere is imagination, and the
openness of mind that fosters imagina¬
tion, more essential than when we ex¬
plore the nature, structure, and destiny
of reality itself. Both science and
science fiction are engaged in the ex-
The phenomenon of relativistic time dila¬
tion, which is central to Einstein 's theory
of relativity, is a concept which students
often find difficult to comprehend. In
1905 Einstein wrote that "a clock fixed
at the earth 's equator will run slower by
a very small amount than an identical
clock fixed at one of the earth 's poles ' '.
Many science fiction authors have made
use of this scientific notion of time dila¬
tion, notably in tales of space travellers
returning to Earth after a long voyage
only to find that time has advancedmor*
quickly there and that they are aliens in
a future society.

Each age produces its own myths and
the most persistent myth of modern
times is that ourplanet is being regularly
visited by alien astronauts from outer
space. In most cases the "flying
saucers" in which they are seen ap¬
proaching turn out on investigation to be
aircraft, meteors, artificial satellites or
weather balloons. This completely
genuine photo shows how easy it is for
reports of sightings of UFOs (Unidenti¬
fied Flying Objects) to arise; the "flying
saucers ' ' it depicts are In fact lenticular
cloud formationsphotographed in Brazil
in 1969.
ploration of space, time, life, the
universe, and the place of our con¬
sciousness in the universe; both do it
well, and with mutual attention,
respect, and encouragement. And since
imagination is one of the most impor¬
tant commodities for the classroom, I
strongly urge the educator to consider a
course on the science of science fiction
for the high school or college cur¬
riculum. Benefits accrue from both the
content and the dynamic vision of
science fiction.
I will end with an example of how
science fiction can lighten a lecture on
the phenomenon of relativistic time
dilation, the monumental discovery of
Einstein that moving clocks run slower.
Can time dilation serve love? Why, yes;
witness the following letter written by a
character in Joe Haldeman's novel The
Forever War.
"William,
All this is in your personnel file. But
knowing you, you might just chuck it.
So I made sure you'd get this note.
Obviously, I lived. Maybe you will,
too. Join me.
I know from the records that you're
out at Sade-138 and won't be back for
a couple of centuries. No problem.
I'm going to a planet they call Middle
Finger, the fifth planet out from
Mizar...
It took all of my money, and all the
money of five other old-timers, but we
bought a cruiser from UNEF. And
we're using it as a time machine.
So I'm on a relativistic shuttle,
waiting for you. All it does is go out
five light years and come back to Mid¬
dle Finger, very fast. Every ten years I
age about a month. So if you're on
schedule and still alive, I'll only be
twenty-eight when you get here. Hurry!
I never found anybody else and I
don't want anybody else. I don't care
whether you're ninety years old or thir¬
ty. If I can't be your lover, I'll be your
nurse.
Marygay"
I believe that Einstein himself would
have appreciated such an illuminating
and friendly invasion of the science
classroom!
AM IT GOSWAMI, of Bangladesh, is pro¬
fessor of physics at the University of Oregon,
USA. The author of many research papers in
nuclear physics, his book The Cosmic
Dancers: Exploring the Physics of Science Fic¬
tion, was published in 1983.
