A continent resists
West Africa
The fight for survival
by M'Baye Gueye and Albert Adu Boáhen
THE period from 1880 to 1900 was the
high-water mark of European con¬
quest and occupation of west Africa.
There were French campaigns in the west¬
ern Sudan, Ivory Coast and Dahomey bet¬
ween 1880 and 1898, and British campaigns
in Asante, the Delta region and in northern
Nigeria between 1895 and 1903.
During this period, practically all Afri¬
cans had the same objective, that of defend¬
ing their sovereignty and traditional way of
life, but the strategies and methods they
adopted varied. Three options were open to
the Africans, confrontation, alliance or
acquiescence and submission. The strategy
of confrontation involved open warfare,
sieges, guerilla tactics, scorched-earth poli¬
cies, as well as diplomacy.
From 1880, the French adopted a policy
of extending their control over the whole
region from the Senegal to the Niger and
then Chad and linking these areas with their
posts on the Guinea coast in Ivory Coast
and Dahomey.
In their occupation of west Africa, the
French resorted almost exclusively to the
method of military conquest, rather than
the conclusion of treaties as the British did.
In terms of African reaction, all the options
open to them, namely submission, alliance
and confrontation, were resorted to. How¬
ever, far more of the rulers opted for the
strategy of militant confrontation than for
submission and alliance, and opposition
here was far more protracted than any¬
where else in west Africa for two main
reasons. The first was that as already in¬
dicated, the French themselves used the
military option almost exclusively and this
evoked a militant reaction. The second rea¬
son was that the people were far more Isla-
mized than those of other areas of west
Africa and, as one scholar, M. Crowder has
pointed out, since "for Muslim societies of
west Africa the imposition of white rule
meant submission to the infidel which was
intolerable for any good Muslim", they
tended to resist the Europeans with added
fervour and a tenacity often lacking among
non-Muslims.
These general observations are well illus¬
trated in the history and person of Samori
Touré, the valorous leader of the Mandingo
Empire.
M'BAYE GUEYE, of Senegal, is a lecturer in
history at the University of Dakar. He
specializes in the history of west Africa in the
19th and 20th centuries and is the author of
several works on the slave trade and French
colonization.
ALBERT ADU BOAHEN (for biographical
details see page 15).
[One of the great resistance heroes of the
colonial era, Samori Touré was born in
about 1830, near Sarranko in present-day
Guinea. A Dyoula and a Muslim, he
succeeded in gaining the support of the
Mandingo people andpatiently began cons¬
tructing an empire which, at its height in the
early 1880s, stretchedfrom the Upper Volta
region in the west to the Fouta Djallon in
the east.]
Samori Touré chose the strategy of con¬
frontation and not of alliance though he
used the weapons of both diplomacy and
warfare but with the emphasis on the latter.
By 1881, Samori had already converted
"the southern part of the Sudanese savan¬
nah all along the great west African forest"
between the northern parts of modern
Sierra Leone to the Sassandra River in the
Ivory Coast, into a single empire under his
unquestioned authority.
Unlike the Tukulor Empire, the Man¬
dingo Empire was still on the "up-swing"
by 1882 when the first encounter between
Samori and the French occurred. The con¬
quest of the area had also enabled Samori to
build a powerful army relatively well-
equipped with European arms. This army
was divided into two wings, the infantry
wing (the Sofa) which by 1887 numbered
between 30,000 and 35,000 men and the
cavalry wing numbering not more than
3,000 by 1887.
The infantry was divided into permanent
units of 10 to 20 men known as the sé (feet)
or kulu (heaps) commanded by a kuntigit
Samori Touré at the time of his capture by
Captain Gouraud (seen right) at Guelemou
on 29 September 1898. (See also colour
page 19).

(chief), and ten se formed a bolo (arm)
under the command of a bolokuntigi. The
cavalry was divided into bands of 50 called
sèrè. The bolo formed the main striking
force while the sèrè rode alongside each
bolo. Since these units were permanent, its
members developed feelings of friendship
first among themselves and of loyalty first
to their local leader and then to Samori.
Thus, the army soon assumed "a quasi-
national character because it achieved a
very remarkable homogeneity".
What was unique about Samori's army
was the standard of its weapons and train¬
ing. Unlike most of the armies of west
Africa, not only was this army virtually
professional, but it was armed by Samori
himself. Up to 1876, he armed them with
old guns which the local blacksmiths could
repair themselves. But from 1876 onwards,
he also began to order more modern Euro¬
pean weapons mainly from Sierra Leone
and carefully studied them to find those
that were most suitable for his area. Thus
from 1885, he replaced the Chassepot rifles
whose big cartridges soon rotted in the
humidity of the area with the more suitable
Gras rifles with lighter cartridges and
Kropatscheks which were Gras repeater
rifles.
He continued to rely on these two till the
1880s since he was able to train a group of
blacksmiths who could effectively copy
those rifles. From 1888, he also added to his
stock some of the new quick-firing rifles
and by 1893 he had about 6,000 of them
which he used till his defeat. However, he
never acquired any artillery which was a
great handicap in his campaigns against the
French.
Samori was virtually at the height of his
power when he first came into contact with
the French in 1882. In February of that
year, he was called upon by Lieutenant
Alakamessa who notified him of the order
from the Upper Senegal-Niger high com¬
mand to withdraw from Kenyeran, an im¬
portant market-centre which controlled
Samori's route to the Mandingo areas.
As might have been expected, Samori
refused. This led to a surprise attack on his
army by the French commander Borgnis-
Desbordes who was forced to beat a hasty
retreat. Samori's brother, Kémé-Brema, at-
Resistance in the Niger Delta
In the Niger Delta, as in many other areas
of Nigeria, the British had by 1884 signed
treaties ofprotection with most of the Delta
chiefs. While some chiefs allowed mis¬
sionaries to operate in their States others
did not, but all of them Insisted on their
sovereign right to regulate trade and to levy
duties on British traders. This the new
British consuls such as Hewett and Johnson
would not tolerate. Jaja of Opobo (left),
one of the wealthiest and most powerful of
the Delta chiefs, insisted on payment of
duties by British traders and ordered a com¬
plete stoppage oftrade on the river until one
British firm agreed to pay duties. The con¬
sul, Johnson, ordered him to stop levying
duties, but instead of complying Jaja
despatched a mission to the Colonial Office
to protest against the order. In 1887, when
Jaja still refused to comply in spite of
Johnson's threats to bombard his town,
Johnson enticed him aboard a ship under a
promise of safe conduct, but then arrested
him and sent him to Accra where he was
tried and deported to the West Indies.
Stunned by this treatment the other chiefs
surrendered and accepted governing coun¬
cils imposed on them by Johnson.
Photo © Longman, London
tacked the French at Wenyako near
Bamako in April. Though he won the battle
on 2 April, he was defeated on 12 April by
a much smaller French army. Samori
thereupon tried to avoid conflict with the
French and directed his action towards
Kenedugu.
In 1885, when Combes occupied Bure,
the gold of which was important to the
economy of his empire, Samori realized
how great was the threat that hung over his
State. He resolved to expel the French from
the area by force. Three armies, his own
and those of Kémé and Masara-Mamadi,
. were charged with this operation. By a vast
pincer movement, Bure was easily recap¬
tured and the French were forced to decamp
for fear of being encircled.
Samori thereupon decided to cultivate his
relations with the British in Sierra Leone.
After having occupied Falaba in 1884, he
dispatched emissaries to Freetown, to pro¬
pose to the governor that he place his entire
country under the protection of the British
Government. The offer was a mere
manoeuvre on the part of Samori, whose in¬
tention was in no way to relinquish his
sovereignty but to make the French respect
it by allying himself with a powerful
government.
When that move failed, Samori turned to
the French and signed a treaty with them on
28 March 1886. He agreed to withdraw his
troops to the right bank of the Niger, but
maintained his rights over Bure and the
Mandingo of Kangaba. In another treaty
with the French on 25 March 1887 which
amended that of the previous year, Samori
ceded the left bank of the river to the
French and even agreed to place his country
under French protection.
Samori had perhaps signed the other
document in the hope that the French
would help him against Tieba, the Faama of
Sikasso whom he attacked in April 1887
with a 12,000 strong army, while the French
had signed it because they needed to prevent
any alliance between Samori and the
Soninké leader Mamadou Lamine whom
they were then fighting. When he saw that
instead of behaving as allies and assisting
him, the French were rather encouraging
dissidence and rebellion in the areas recent¬
ly subdued and were attempting to prevent
him from obtaining supplies of weapons
from Sierra Leone, he raised the siege of
Sikasso in August 1888 and prepared to
take up arms against the invader.
He reorganized the army, concluded a
treaty with the British in Sierra Leone in
May 1890 which enabled him to buy
modern weapons for the next three years in
increasing quantities, and trained his troops
in the European manner. Platoons and
companies were activated. He adopted
defence as his military tactic. Of course,
there could be no question of using the tatas
(earth-walled settlements) for shelter, as
there was no chance that they could hold
out against artillery. His strategy consisted
of endowing his troops with great mobility,
so that they could surprise the enemy, in¬
flict heavy losses upon him, and disappear.
In March 1890, Archinard captured
Segou and in his attempt to defeat Samori
before ceding the Upper Senegal-Niger
command to Humbert, attacked him in
March 1891. Archinard thought that

Samori's empire would collapse at the first
onslaught. Though that attack resulted in
the capturing of Kankan on 7 April and the
burning of Bisandougou, its effect was
quite the opposite since it not only provided
Samori with a salutary warning but it enabl¬
ed him also to continue the attacks on the
French at Kankan and to defeat them at the
battle of Dabadugu on 3 September 1891.
The major confrontation between the
French and Samori, however, took place in
1892. Bent on defeating Samori, Humbert
launched an attack on the central part of the
Empire in January 1892 with 1,300 careful¬
ly picked riflemen and 3,000 porters.
Samori took personal command of his
carefully chosen army of 2,500 men to meet
Humbert. Though these men, "fighting like
demons, clung fiercely to every defensive
point on the way", to quote historian Yves
Person's words, they were defeated and
Humbert succeeded in capturing Bisan¬
dougou, Sanankoro and Kerwane.
Humbert himself admitted, however, that
the results were meagre in comparison to
the heavy losses that he had sustained. Fur¬
thermore, Samori had ordered the civil
population to withdraw at the approach of
the French troops.
However, Samori had no illusions. After
the violent encounters with the Humbert
column in which he lost over a thousand
men of his élite units as compared with only
about a hundred lost by the French, he
became convinced of the futility of con¬
fronting the French. There were then two
options open to him: either to surrender or
to withdraw. He ruled out the former and
decided to abandon his homeland and move
to the east to create a new empire out of the
reach of the Europeans.
Still continuing his scorched earth policy,
he began his move eastwards towards the
Bandama and the Comoe rivers. Though in
1894 he lost the last route supplying him
with modern weapons, which was the one to
Monrovia, he nevertheless fought on. At
the beginning of 1895, he encountered and
beat back a French column coming from
the Baule country under the command of
Monteil, and between July 1895 and
January 1896 went on to conquer the Abron
(Gyaman) kingdom and the western part of
Gonja. By that time, he had succeeded in
creating a new empire in the hinterland of
the Ivory Coast and Asante.
In March 1897, his son Sarankenyi-Mori
met and defeated a British column under
the command of Henderson near Wa while
Samori himself attacked and destroyed
Kong in May 1897 and pushed on to Bobo
where he encountered a French column
under the command of Caudrelier.
Caught between the French and the
British and having vainly attempted to sow
discord between them by returning to the
latter the territory of Bouna coveted by the
former, Samori decided to return to his
Toma allies in Liberia. On the way, he was
captured in a surprise attack at Guelemou
by Gouraud on 29 September 1898 and
deported to Gabon where he died in 1900.
His capture brought to an end what a recent
scholar has described as "the longest series
of campaigns against a single enemy in the
history of French Sudanese conquest".
M'Baye Gueye and Albert Adu Boahen
The Hut Tax Rebellion
The Hut Tax Rebellion of 1898 was the
response of the Temne and Mende peoples
of Sierra Leone to the consolidation of
British rule by the appointment of District
Commissioners, the expansion of the Fron¬
tier Police, the abolition of the slave trade
and slavery, the Protectorate Ordinance of
1896 andfinally, the imposition of a tax of
five shillings a year on all two-roomed
houses and ten shillings on all larger houses
In the Protectorate. All the Temne chiefs
refused to pay the tax and rose up in
rebellion under one of their number, chief
Bai Bureh. They . were joined by almost
three-quarters of the Protectorate. The
rebelforces attacked and looted trading sta¬
tions and killed British officials and troops
and all those suspected of assisting the col¬
onial government. By May 1898, the rebel
armies were within about 25 miles of
Freetown and two companies of troops had
to be hastily brought In from Lagos to de¬
fend the town. What was the true nature of
this revolt? The British Governor of Sierra
Leone attributed not only this rebellion but
the general resistance to colonial rule that
was raging at the time to "the growing
political consciousness of the African and
his increasing sense of his worth and
autonomy". As he put it, "the native is
beginning tofeel his strength from the value
that is set on him for products ofhis coun¬
try and his labour by the white man and in
future the latter will not be able to trade so
much on his simplicity and ignorance of the
world as in the past". Above, a sketch by a
British army officer of the rebel leader, Bai
Bureh, after his capture.
Photo © BBC, Hulton Picture Library, London
29
