A LABYRINTH OF FORMS
The pre-Hispanic culture of Peru
by Jesús F. García Ruiz
WHEN one enters the world of the
arts and creations of pre-His¬
panic Andean societies, one fact
become immediately evident; although the
creative artists of these different cultures
employed similar techniques and materials,
each society excelled in its mastery and
perfection of form in only one of the
various branches of creative activity.
The craftsmen of Chavin had no equals
when it came to expression in stone; those
of Paracas used the distaff and spindle to
create original forms in textiles; the Nazcas
and Mochicas modelled the most beautiful
ceramics; the craftsmen of Tiahuanaco in¬
troduced the monolithic architecture which
would later be developed by the Incas; no
one equalled the Chimús in the art of
feather-work and in metalwork. The Incas
synthesized the various branches of creative
art by incorporating into their empire the
artists whom they found throughout the
length and breadth of the territories they
conquered or subjected. It is from this
specificity and variety that the art of the
Andes derives its importance.
The world of forms reflects an
astonishing level of artistic maturity in
Chavin de Huantar (1500 BC to 400 BC).
The techniques and materials used vary, but
it is in bas-relief stone carving that excep¬
tional perfection of form is displayed.
Like their contemporaries the Olmecs of
Central America, the artists of Chavin suc¬
ceeded in mastering stone and imprinting
upon it complex meanings through a
labyrinth of forms. The genius of these ar¬
tists can be appreciated at its best in bas-
reliefs such as those at El Lanzón, the
Raimondi and Yauya stelae, the obelisk at
Chavin or the warriors of Cerro Sechin,
where we can admire the genius of these ar¬
tists at its greatest. The theme is a symbolic
group embodying the anthropomorphiza-
tion of the jaguar associated with the ser¬
pent, the condor and the fish. At EI Lan¬
zón, for instance, the figure is depicted in a
standing, forward-facing position. The
head clearly indicates the symbiosis of
feline characteristicsfangs, claws, eyes
and maw. The body, like the extremities, is
reduced in size and the hair is in the form of
JESUS F. GARCIA RUIZ, of Guatemala, is a
doctor of ethnology who is currently a
research officer with the French National Cen¬
tre of Scientific Research. He is the author of
Los Mames: Estructura Sociopolítica y
Sistema de Creencias (E.H.E.S., Paris, 1977),
and Los sesos del Cielo: Etnología del Copal
(Colección Ceiba, Chiapas, Mexico, 1984)
and many articles published in international
reviews.
serpents. The Yauya stela bears an even
more striking composition. The head is
formed of two feline faces meeting in a
common mouth, while the body is that of a
fish with its gills and dorsal, ventral and
caudal fins.
The underlying meaning of this world of
forms is still to be discovered. But one thing
is clear: the artists of Chavin had mastered
the technique of working in stone and were
capable of imprinting upon it an indelible,
permanent testimony of their wisdom and
knowledge.
The civilization of Paracas (1100 BC to
200 BC), for its part, attained a high level of
artistic production in textiles. Thanks to the
ecological conditions prevailing in the
region, specimens have come down to us in
a perfect state of preservation. They include
many burial fardos (bales or bundles), with
the offerings and the cloths in which they
were wrapped. Amongst the many items
discovered ceramics with decorations in¬
cised after baking, fire-engraved vessels,
obsidian knives, cotton netting and
gauzethe painted cloths and cotton and
woollen embroidery are especially striking.
For archaeologists and art historians the
artists of Paracas will always be associated
with the art of textiles because of the com¬
plexity of their motifs and the harmony and
beauty of their colours. The most in¬
teresting items are the so-called mantos.
The base of the textile is formed of a weft
of wool or cotton, upon which a multitude
of motifs are embroideredjaguars similar
to the Chavin stylizations, bicephalous con¬
dors, reptiles, fishes, birds, hands grasping
obsidian knives, severed heads. All these
motifs are worked with great freedom of
form. The attention is especially attracted
by the wealth of ornamentation, the move¬
ment given to the forms, the constant
balance of colours. The colouring has re¬
tained all its freshness and intensity.
While it is true that pottery techniques at¬
tained high levels of artistic maturity
amongst the ceramists of Chavin, the
highest artistic levels were achieved by the
Nazcas (200 BC to 600 AD), and the
Mochicas (200 BC to 700 AD).
The Nazca ceramist was also a master of
forms and of polychrome painting. The ar¬
chetype of his creativity is the semi-globular
pitcher with two cylindrical beaks placed
vertically and joined by a bridge neck. The
potter's wheel was not used in America.
Ceramists used the technique of the rolled
clay "snake", which was first fixed at the
base and then stretched to form the walls of
The oldest culture of Peru takes its name
from the archaeological site of Chavin de
Huantar in the country's northern
highlands. Between 700 and 300 BC the in¬
fluence of the Chavin culture spread
throughout the central Andes. Chavin stone
carving, perhaps the most beautiful in South
America, is inspired by a religion based on
the worship of a feline god. The site itself,
extending over some 12,000 square metres,
consists of a complex of massive construc¬
tions. Nearby, a number of carved stone
blocks, which may originally have been
decorative elements, have been found. One
of the most famous is the diorite Raimondi
Stone, left, which stands 1.95 metres high
and dates from 1200-600 BC. This strange
semi-human figure, holding a long
ceremonial staff in each hand, displays the
combination of interwoven human and
animal forms which Is characteristic of
Chavin art.

The influence of Chavin art is
reflected in that of the Cupisni-
que culture which flourished
on the northern coast of Peru
from around 850 to 300 BC.
Cupisnique craftsmen produc¬
ed outstandingly beautiful
brown and black pottery with
curves and whorls in
decorative patterns In which
the feline motif predominates.
Left, black ceramic stirrup
vase from the Cupisnique
region (c. 850-600 BC).
The Mochica culture
associated with Moche, the
valley on the northern coast of
Peru where its most important
remains have been found,
flourished from the 2nd to the
8th century AD and is noted
for its remarkable ceramics
evoking aspects of everyday
life. Below, polychrome terra¬
cotta vase-effigy (600 AD,
height 32.5 cm). The forehead
is framed by two birds (only
one of the wings is visible in
photo).
^ the vessel. When this initial stage had been
completed a coating of fine sand was ap¬
plied to protect the object during baking.
Afterwards it was polished to obtain the
smooth, brilliant surface which would serve
as a basis for the pictorial decoration.
It was in this final stage of painting that
the Nazca artists excelled in the creation of
unique forms. Their mastery of abstract art
attained such a level that even today we are
amazed by the imaginative power displayed
in their designs. Some pieces contain as
many as eleven colours, not counting blend¬
ed colours. The motifs used are sometimes
similar to those found in the textiles of
Paracas. They consist of anthropomorphic
figures framed b'y geometrical patterns. The
central figures are overlapped by real beings
from the animal and vegetable worlds,
everyday objects and utensils.
Apart from their paintings, the ceramics
of the Mochicas achieved a level not attain¬
ed by other cultures. They introduced, a
sculptural dimension into the modelling of
clay. Unlike the Nazcas, the Mochicas were
completely true to life. Both in painted
scenes and in the sculptured forms given to
clay the dominant theme is that of daily

life banquets, official ceremonies, dwell¬
ings and their surroundings, flute-players,
drummers, dancers, hunting, fishing,
warfare.
But it is in the huacos-retratos that this
lifelike quality is most apparent. This term
is applied to a certain kind of object in pot¬
tery which is an exact reproduction of the
human head, with the various expressions
that can appear on the human face. These
expressions are so true to life that some peo¬
ple believe them to be genuine portraits of
historical personalities. These huacos-
retratos provide us with a mass of informa¬
tion of the greatest value, unique in
American ceramics. They are veritable
historico-ethnographical documents, sup¬
plying information about systems of
decoration, face-painting, possible facial
deformation, varieties of human expres¬
sion, and so on.
This realistic art includes ceramics of
erotic inspiration. The many examples ex¬
tant include all the possible forms, variants
and expressions of sexual life. The Mochica
artist was capable of capturing and
reproducing them with all the unmistakable
veracity of his powers of observation.
The Chimú civilization (1000 AD to 1470
AD) is notable for the quality of its work in
feathers and gold. Like the Aztecs in Cen¬
tral America, the Chimús used feathers to
clothe and adorn themselves. The feathers
were placed overlapped on a textile base of
cotton or fibres, the end of each feather be¬
ing folded and fastened with knots of
various kinds. Cloaks made in this manner
became a part of the ceremonial wardrobe.
They were not only beautiful but
waterproof.
We are also indebted to the Chimús for
specimens of the goldsmith's art which are
amongst the finest and most perfect of the
pre-Hispanic world. They mastered the
techniques of smelting and welding, the lost
wax process, beating out leaf metal,
gilding, plating and the manufacture of
alloys. Tempering was achieved by cold
hammering, repoussé-work by hammering
the metal sheet on wooden moulds. With
moulds they made masks, ceremonial
vessels and knives, and all kinds of jewels.
There are many proofs of the artistic skill
of the Chimús. Here is what the Spanish
historian Juan de Torquemada wrote in
1613: "They were very skilful in the arts of
The Chimú were outstandingly accomplish¬
ed metallurgists, and the funerary masks,
sacrificial knives, ornaments, breastplates,
and decorative architectural elements
which they made In precious metals were
largely Instrumental In Inspiring the myth of
Peruvian gold, the Eldorado which bewitch¬
ed the Conquistadores. Above, ceremonial
knife in copper, gold and turquoise (length
40.5 cm) is from Mima in the valley of Lam-
bayeque and dates from 1100-1400.
Skilled metallurgists, the
Mochica worked in gold, silver
and copper. Above, gold
votive hands (300-600 AD).
From the year 1000 onwards,
the Chimú extended their In¬
fluence to the whole of nor¬
thern Peru, creating an empire
which was conquered by the
Incas around 1465. In the ruins
of their immense capital,
Chan-Chan, on a site
stretching over more than 28
square km at the mouth of the
Moche valley, Is a complex of
rectangular walled precincts
or "palaces" which measure
as much as 530 m by 265 m
and must have been used as
dwellings by the ruling class.
The brick walls are decorated
with relief designs (right).

The astonishing wealth of pre-
Columbian civilizations is il¬
lustrated by these objects from
three major cultural areas, Meso-
America, the Caribbean, and the
Andes.
Reclining figure carved in
lignite; length 15 cm
(Venezuela).

smelting and casting and made gold and
silver jewels of great beauty, greatly sur¬
passing our Spanish jewellers because they
could make birds whose heads, tongues and
wings could be made to move. They made
monkeys and other animals in whose hands
they placed trinkets which seemed to dance
with them... which caused Spanish jewellers
to marvel".
When the Incas burst upon the Andean
cultural scene, they brought about a pro¬
found change in the different pre-existing
creative currents. Ruling an empire implied
a strict, efficient organization of society.
This was made possible by concentrating
and centralizing power in the hands of the
Inca and his council. Since art formed an in¬
tegral part of social life, it was in turn con¬
centrated and became, as it were, a State
art. The Incas were efficient planners and
brought to their capital, Cuzco, all those
who in one way or another were
depositaries of knowledge and skills. In this
way artists were identified and brought
together.
The specific creative contribution of the
Incas was manifested principally in ar¬
chitecture. Inspired, perhaps, by their
ancestors from Tiahuanaco, the Inca ar¬
chitects seized space and filled it with
massive constructions on a gigantic scale.
Cyclopean blocks of stone were cut, ad¬
justed and arranged with the utmost preci¬
sion. At Sacsahuamán, for example, one of
the stone blocks forming the wall is seven
metres high. Solidity was ensured by
embedding and adjusting the blocks in such
a way that the projecting parts of some fit¬
ted into the depressions of others, and so
perfect were the joints that it was impossi¬
ble to insert even the blade of a knife.
Cuzco was the architectural centre par
excellence of the Incas. The temple of Cor-
icancha was the centre of the empire and its
most important building. The complex was
situated on a terrace surrounded by sanc¬
tuaries and dwellings. A stone aqueduct
brought water from the mountain. All the
façades of the palaces and temples were
painted and decorated with gold plate.
Standing on top of a hill a kilometre away
from Cuzco, the fortress of Sacsahuamán is
another amazing example of Inca architec¬
ture. The defensive walls are made of
megaliths, one of which weighs about two
hundred tons. These walls were constructed
in saw-tooth form by more than 30,000
workers shortly before the Spanish
conquest.
Machu Picchu is the best preserved of the
Inca cities. It was discovered in 191 1 by the
American archaeologist Hiram Bingham.
Built in the midst of a mountain range, on
top of a peak, its construction was very
carefully planned. Defended by inaccessible
slopes more than a thousand metres high,
and by two lines of fortifications, Machu
Picchu is at one and the same time a city, a
fortress and a sacred enclosure. It is an
overwhelming sight. Situated on high,
pointing skywards, built stone upon stone,
it exemplifies a fundamental aspect of the
Inca genius majesty of form and solidity
of construction, in the service of the cen¬
tralizing power of the State.
Jesús F. García Ruiz
Machu Picchu, the most fan¬
tastic fortress of the Incas,
stands on a rocky spur
overlooking the river Urubam-
ba in the heart of the Peruvian
Andes. Inhabited by the Incas
between the 15th and 16th
centuries, it was abandoned
for reasons that have not been
explained, and only redis¬
covered, by the American ar¬
chaeologist Hiram Bingham,
in 1911. At the topmost level
of this impregnable
stronghold is a city with a
multitude of dwellings and a
ceremonial centre dedicated
to the sun. Right, terraces and
staircases of Machu Picchu.
