"The need for a fundamental change in the nature of the relations between the industrialized and the non-
industrialized countries is becoming increasingly urgent. These relations are governed at present by an evolu¬
tionist, linear, diffusionist concept. Despite the obvious heterogeneity of our world, a 'massification' ideology
that is as tenacious as it is false would have us believe that every country and culture should behave in the same
way and pursue the same goals." Above, carved handle of a cane or sceptre belonging to the Oni, the spiritual
leader of the Yoruba people of Nigeria.



Anatomy of inequality
The economic crisis seen from the Third World
by Jean Sayinzoga
JEAN SAYINZOGA, of Rwanda, is an
economist, a member of the editorial staff of
the Geneva based magazine Genève-Afrique
and an associate of the Refugee Section of the
Protestant Social Centre of Geneva. A former
consultant to the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development IUNCTAD), he is
the author of several articles and monographs
on the developing countries.
Adecline in the growth rate of
gross national product (GNP);
high unemployment; high infla¬
tion, chronically adverse foreign trade
balances and, in the case of the countries
of the southern hemisphere, an external
debt which is becoming dangerously
heavy such are the main indicators of
the economic crisis which currently af¬
flicts the market-economy countries.
It is a commonplace that economic
crises and the decline which they bring
iead to explosive social and political
situations. In some countries' today we
see sudden changes of Government,
reflecting a swing between two oppos¬
ing political trends a phenomenon
which some observers have dubbed "the
hen syndrome", thinking of the way a
hen transfixed by the headlights of an on¬
coming car tries to escape by crossing
the road first in one direction, then in the
other.
In order to analyse this economic crisis
which some describe as short-term but
15

1983 1984
(forecast)
3 % 3.5 % o
ri
n oil-producing c
o
1982 1983
en
a
>
2 to ri
1.5% 2.5%
rr
m
which others regard as structural, let us
examine these indicators more closely.
A comparison of GNP growth rates in
the industrialized countries (not including
the socialist countries of eastern Europe)
with those in the non oil-producing non-
industrialized countries reveals the
following situation:
Industrialized countries:
-year 1982
- average
growth rate 1.5 %
Non-industrialized, no
countries:
-year 1981
- average
growth rate 2.5 %
In the latter category of countries, the
rate of growth of GNP declined by 6 per
cent between 1960 and 1970 and by 5
per cent between 1 970 and 1 980. Even
assuming that an attempt to catch up is
desirable, Irrespective of the conditions
in which it takes place, it is clear from the
above figures that such an eventuality is
not feasible at the present time.
While the unemployment rate in the
non-industrialized countries is at a level
which may without any exaggeration be
described as catastrophic, it should not
be forgotten that in the industrialized
countries 5.5 per cent of the working
population were unemployed in 1972, 5
per cent in 1 979; 8 per cent in 1 98 1 , and
9 per cent around the end of 1 982. Since
this unemployment exists in societies
where the individual is fully socialized,
that is, responsibility is taken for him
from birth to death by the capitalist
economy so far as employment is con¬
cerned and by the State so far as services
(education, health, etc.) are concerned,
the gravity of the situation can be fully
gauged.
Although inflation continues to be ram¬
pant in many countries of both North and
South, some industrialized countries
nevertheless seem to be bringing it under
control. The inflation rate in these coun¬
tries has been brought down from 7 per
cent in 1982 to 5 per cent in 1983 and
the same figure is forecast for 1984.
A direct result of this lower inflation
rate could be a drop in interest rates and
therefore an alleviation of the financial
burden for countries which are saddled
with the enormous external debt which
they contracted with public and private
bodies in the industrialized countries of
the North.
While the average rate of inflation in
the oil-producing countries was 13 per
cent in 1 980 and 1 981 and 1 0 per cent
. in 1982, ¡t reached the record figure of
30 per cent in 1982 for the third con¬
secutive year in the non-industrialized,
non oil-producing countries, mainly
because of the rise in the price of fuel.
The cumulative foreign trade deficit of
the non-industrialized non oil-exporting
countries was 87 thousand million US
dollars in 1982. The figure at present
16
©
Work in progress on a weir which forms part of a project for the improvement of the
surface water irrigation system at Wadi Zabid, Yemen Arab Republic. The project,
financed with the help of a 1 0.9 million dollar credit from the International Development
Association (IDA), was completed in 1979 and covers some 17,000 hectares.
forecast for 1983 and 1984 is between
67 and 68 thousand million dollars.
In this respect, the situation of the oil-
producing countries is worse because it
seems to be in constant decline. After a
surplus of 1 1 4 thousand million dollars in
1980, which was completely wiped out
in 1 982, a cumulative deficit of 27 thou¬
sand million is forecast for the end of
1983. One of the reasons for this situa
tion is a drop of 14 per cent in the price
of oil in 1982 and of 6 per cent in the
volume of sales.
The growth rate of the external debt,
.which was 10 per cent ¡n 1982 (still
higher than that of exports) is half as high
as during the 1 975-1 981 period, but this
is only a slight glimmer of hope.
The fact is that the cost alone of ser¬
vicing this debt as a proportion of export
Export earnings of developing countries,
1965 and 1980
Nonfactor
services
(percent)
J Manufactures
J Agriculture
] Fuels
Metals
1965
$44 billionb
1980
$498 billion"
a. Excluding gold
b. Current prices.
Developing countries can
no longer be caricatured
as exporters of primary
products and importers
of manufactures. Some
have even become
significant exporters of
capital goods, account¬
ing in all for about 6 per
cent of the world total.
These changes, how¬
ever, should not obscure
the fact that for many
developing countries,
particularly the poorest,
primary products still
dominate their exports or
that many countries are
dependent on a single
export commodity.
Source: World Bank, Washington, D.C

revenues was 1 5 per cent in 1 976-1 977,
20 per cent in 1981 and 24 per cent in
1982. In other words, the situation is
getting worse.
The two camps, namely, the in¬
dustrialized and the non-industrialized
countries, may tax each other indefinite¬
ly with responsibility for the present
situation without either side being entire¬
ly in the right or in the wrong.
The industrialized countries can
criticize the countries of the South for
not having shown sufficient
perseverance and determination in their
political and economic struggles. This
shortcoming has made it easier for the
North to dominate the South and has led
to the present impasse. But since the
days when many Third World countries
achieved independence, the centres of
responsibility have moved from London,
Paris, Lisbon, etc. to Dakar, Kigali,
Caracas, Bangkok, and so on.
For their part, the countries of the
South can always point to the continuing
deterioration in terms of trade, which is
making them progressively poorer and
the industrialized countries ever richer.
Similarly, they can protest against the
corrupt application of aid programmes
which at present impoverish the
receivers both materially and
psychologically by developing an
"assisted person" complex in them and
making them bear the burden of heavy
financial commitments.
From this three major conclusions
emerge: the gap between the in¬
dustrialized and the non-industrialized
countries is growing bigger every year;
all the remedies tried so far have failed;
the need for a fundamental change in the
nature of the relations between the in¬
dustrialized and the non-industrialized
countries is becoming . increasingly
urgent.
These relations are governed at pre¬
sent by an evolutionist, linear, diffu-
sionist concept. Despite the obvious
heterogeneity of our world, a "massif ¡ca¬
tion" ideology that is as tenacious as it is
false would have us believe that every
country and culture should behave in the
same way and pursue the same goals,
wherever on the earth's surface they
may be situated. This is the basic idea of
the theory of development, which
presupposes the existence of a model
society which supposedly possesses all
the saving virtues and to the level of
which the others must climb by the same
ways and means which it employed and
go through the same stages as. those
through which it passed. This model
society is supposed to embody the future
of all other societies. The vocabulary of
this ideology reflects this pattern of
events which is considered to be in¬
dispensable. Yesterday's "civilizing"
mission becomes today's "aid" mission.
Yesterday's "savage" becomes
"undeveloped", and in the minds of
those concerned the "colonized" com¬
plex is replaced by that of someone who
is "aided".
It is well known that in international
trade any product with a high
technological content enjoys a definite
advantage from the start, whereas the
A new super highway rakes
across the desert in Abu Dhabi,
United Arab Emirates. The con¬
struction of adequate networks
of roads and highways is a key
factor in the development pro¬
cess, but the burden of road
maintenance weighs heavily on
the developing countries (see
box below).
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
The costs of poor road maintenance
The worldwide road-building boom of the 1 960s and 1 970s threatens to
become the road-maintenance crisis of the 1980s and 1990s. Over the
past ten years, roads in many developing countries have been allowed to
deteriorate beyond the point where normal maintenance could be effec¬
tive. Traffic loading has been much heavier than intended, and mainte¬
nance has been widely neglected. Funds budgeted for highways have
been mostly absorbed in expanding rather than maintaining the network.
In a recent survey of twelve developing countries, more than 25 percent
of the tarred road network in eight of them required rehabilitation, streng¬
thening, or resealing.
To prevent further deterioration, maintenance budgets need to be
increased by at least 25 percent in three-quarters of the countries for
which recent studies are available; in more than half, the required
increase exceeds 75 percent. But more money is not the only answer.
Maintenance costs could be significantly reduced by improved efficiency.
For example, use of plant and equipment is often extremely low, some¬
times only a quarter or a third of the rates achieved by the best main¬
tenance organizations.
When road authorities are not able to afford maintenance work, the
costs passed on to road users are larger than the "savings" in public
expenditure. Over the life of a road, the total operating costs of vehicles
are typically four to ten times the costs of road construction and mainte¬
nance. Since operating costs may easily double on poorly maintained
roads, the economic loss is considerable. Moreover, in most countries
the extra costs chiefly involve spending foreign exchange on spare parts,
fuel, and replacing vehicles.
Source: World Development Report.
17

Irrigation design
and management
Public and private investments in irriga¬
tion in developing countries have increa¬
sed dramatically over the past twenty
years, reaching about $15 billion in 1980.
But the returns are much below their
potential: one recent estimate for South
and Southeast Asia suggested that an
additional 20 million tons of rice, enough
to provide the minimum food require¬
ments of 90 million people, could be pro¬
duced every year with inexpensive im¬
provements in water distribution.
A simple measure of the efficiency of an
irrigation system is how much water is lost
in distribution. Although losses of 25 per¬
cent are regarded as acceptable, they are
often much higher due to management
weaknesses in the operation of the
system.
Losses can often be reduced by rela¬
tively cheap improvements in irrigation
design. In Maharashtra, India, the public
distribution system traditionally consisted
of unlined canals serving forty-hectare
blocks. Where these have been replaced
by lined tertiary canals serving eight-
hectare blocks, water available at the field
has increased by 40 percent, and net
returns on the investment by some 160
percent.
Source: World Development Report 1983
im
mm
The World Food Programme IWFP) is supporting "food-for-work" projects in
Bangladesh employing up to two million workers. The aim of these projects is to reac¬
tivate some of the country's great waterways both to conserve water for irrigation and
to drain away flood water during the monsoon season. The projects include construc¬
tion of over 3,000 kilometres of embankments and the re-excavation of about 3,000
kilometres of canals. Workers are paid in wheat provided by the WFP. The work com¬
pleted so far has already resulted in a large increase in rice production.
producer of raw materials loses both in
the short and long term because in the
present state of economic relations his
commodities are undervalued and in
many cases are non-renewable. In any
case, even if raw material prices were
stabilized, not to say increased, the non-
industrialized countries which are rich in
raw materials would continue to be poor
unless the method of exploiting the latter
is changed. It should not be forgotten
that only from 1 5 to 35 per cent of the
capital invested, for instance, by an inter¬
national company remains in the host
country. The remainder goes into im¬
ported plant, capital depreciation, in¬
terest payments, the salaries of ex¬
patriate staff, transport costs, insurance,
etc. Ultimately, the raw material produc¬
ing country does not gain very much.
It is clear that, for better or worse, the
economies of both the non-industrialized
and the industrialized countries are
bound together, and that the growth of
each should benefit the others. Let us
take two examples.
It has been estimated that if, in order to
18
make up for the 1973-1974 oil price in¬
creases, the non-indus'trialized, non oil-
producing countries had reduced their
imports of manufactured goods, there
would have been 3 million more
unemployed in the member countries of
the Organization for Economic Co¬
operation and Development (OECD).
When asked to estimate the number of
job losses in their country between 1 970
and 1976 because of competition from
Third World countries, heads of major
French enterprises and senior officials
advanced figures that varied between
200,000 and 500,000. They were a long
way from the real figure which was in the
region of 25,000. It occurred to nobody
that, side by side with these lost jobs,
130,000 others were created through
exports of capital goods and consumer
goods. In fact, the growth of trade in in¬
dustrial goods between France and the
Third World from 1970 to 1976 led to a
net increase of 105,000 jobs.
The world is going through a crisis to
which every expert is trying to apply his
own diagnosis and his own treatment.
Each of the protagonists, the North and
the South, is praying for a change that is
slow in coming.
However, the critical situations of the
past and of today can still be a source of
profit. Paradoxical though it may seem,
certain financial bodies may be increas¬
ing their assets thanks to the (temporary)
insolvency of certain debtors, since
renegotiation of the repayment
schedules involves an addition of 2 per
cent on the initial interest rate.
It is therefore becoming imperative to
find alternative solutions to the present
development strategy. There has, of
course, been no shortage of catch
phrases, such as "basic needs", "self-
centred development", "collective
autonomy". But it is the entire concep¬
tion and orientation of the ideologies
underlying the idea of development
which must be thoroughly revised, both
by the North and by the South. It is no
longer permissible to rely on day-to-day
realism, which is often no more than a
lack of new ideas.
Jean Sayinzoga
