
rv
The Dream of the Professor of Architecture (1844). Pen and
brush workby the English architect Charles Robert Cockerell
(1788-1863).



'In the Age ofOne World'
A Chinese Utopia
by Kang You wei
A utopia (from the Greek words ou and topos, meaning no
place) is an imaginary land where everything is perfect. Uto¬
pian thought has been a feature of Western intellectual life
for centuries: one of the first books to describe a utopia was
Plato's Republic, and other utopias include those created
later by Thomas More in the 16th century and Samuel Butler
in the 19th. In China, unlike the West, a utopianizing tradi¬
tion scarcely exists, and the text published below is therefore
a historical rarity. It is an extract from the Ta Tung Shu or
One World Book written in the late 19th century by the
Chinese thinker Kang You wei (1858-1927). In this long work
of over 150,000 Chinese characters, the author develops a
visionary conception of a world in the future in which the
sufferings of mankind would be ended and age-old barriers
between man and man, group and group, would be done
away with. The expression Ta Tung, here translated into
English as "one world", denotes an ideal state of society and
of human nature and has also been rendered in other ways
including "the great commonwealth", "the great unity",
and "the era of 'world brotherhood'".
Colour page
Contemplating the Horizon, 13th-century painting on silk, by Chu Huai Ching.
31

IN the beginnings of man he suffered
because of hunger, and so he
sought the fruit of the grasses and
trees, and the flesh of birds and beasts,
to fill himself. If he could not get flesh
and fruit, then he suffered. If he got
and ate them, filled up on them,
satiated himself with them, then he was
happy. He suffered because the wind
and rain and mist attacked his body,
and so he wrapped himself in the bark
of grasses and trees, and wove hemp
and ge (a plant of the bean family with
fibres from which cloth is woven) into
garments to cover his body. If he could
not get them, then he suffered. If he got
and wore them, then he was happy. He
suffered because he did not obtain
satisfaction of his human desire and so
he sought a mate to embrace. If he
could not get a mate, then he suffered.
If he got one, then he was happy.
Later, there were wise ones who "in
pursuing affairs added refinements" to
the old ways. Taking food, they cooked
it, roasted it, mixed it and so increased
men's happiness. Taking clothing, they
used silk material, made it gay with the
"five colours and the six hues", devis¬
ed gowns, caps, and sandals, and so in¬
creased men's happiness. (Similarly,
with dwellings, and with gratification
of sexual desire.)
The increase of happiness is caused
by that which more suits and better ac¬
cords with man's spiritual soul and
bodily soul, which heightens and ex¬
pands man's enjoyment and pleasure.
The inability to attain this happiness is
suffering. Suffering is the spirit
knotted-up, the body wounded, the
soul melancholy and downcast. The
capacity for increased happiness is
limitless; the capacity for increased suf¬
fering is also limitless. The two are
related faculties. Daily to bend our
thoughts more earnestly to means of
seeking happiness and avoiding suffer¬
ing: this is to progress.
This is what all the sages have had as
their purpose, with all their material in¬
ventions and social techniques. We
may judge them by the one criterion of
the extent to which they have increased
human happiness and decreased
human suffering. Their methods must
also be judged as valuable or not, ac¬
cording to the times and the
environment.
In One World everyone will live in
public housing. Outside of their regular
rooms at their place of work,
everywhere they will find great hotels,
whose beautiful and pleasant accom¬
modations defy description. They will
be of several grades, according to the
money the guest wishes to spend. There
will be four better kinds: "movable
rooms" (i.e. electrically powered cars
that run on tracks), "flying rooms", or
flying ships" and "marine" ships.
The people of this age will love to
travel. The grasses and trees are the
most stupid, and therefore flourish but
do not move about. The sheep and
swine are not so stupid as the grass and
trees, and are able to move about, but
cannot go far. As for the great peng-
bird and the yellow ku-bird, they fly a
thousand // with a single movement of
their wings. In antiquity, men aged and
died without leaving their native
village; thus they were like the grass
and trees. In the Middle Age, men
travelled about like sheep and swine
(i.e. only short distances). In the Age of
Complete Peace-and-Equality, then
they will be like the great peng-bird and
the yellow ku-bird.
All public buildings and residences
will have to pass the inspection of the
health authorities. Public hotels will be
equipped with air-conditioning, elec¬
trical heating, massaging machines.
There will be fast, electrically propelled
ships on the water, equipped with every
comfort and pleasure even to
gardens and many people will live on
these ships. On land there will be
automobiles. These will be developed
to the point that they will seat perhaps
several hundred persons, and will go at
great speeds. Perhaps they will be elec¬
trically powered; or it may be that they
will be powered by some new fuel.
Horse-drawn carriages will be used on¬
ly for hauling short distances, or they
may be entirely replaced by the elec¬
trical vehicles. Therefore, at the begin¬
ning of One World, people will live on
mountain tops; at the middle period of
that age, they will live on the sea; later,
they will live in the air.
There being no private homes,
everyone will dine together, like a great
convention. There will be no slaves or
servants, but their functions will be
performed by machines, shaped like
birds and beasts. One will order by
telephone, and food will be conveyed
by mechanical devices possibly a
table will rise up from the kitchen
below, through a hole in the floor. On
the four walls will be lifelike, "pro¬
truding paintings"; music will be play¬
ing, and there will be dancing. All this
will stimulate the appetite. In all these
things there will be refinement and
moral uplift.
Below, illustration ofSir Thomas Mote's
ideal island-State of Utopia. Published in
1516, Utopia (the word was coined by
More) is an indictment of the social and
economic conditions prevailing in the
Europe of his day which are contrasted
with those ofan imaginary ideal society
located on an island off the coast of the
New World.
VTOPIAE INSVLAE HGVRÄ
32

At this time, people will eat their
food in a liquid form the essences ex¬
tracted from solid matter. These essen¬
tial juices will be more easily absorbed
by the body than are the solids. There
will be vapours which will be inhaled to
give a joyful intoxication, but without
harm to the body. By imbibing only the
essences of foods, man's life will be
prolonged.
There will be three stages within the
Age of Complete Peace-and-Equality
itself: The Age of Disorder, in which
meat will still be eaten; the Age of In¬
creasing Peace-and-Equality, in which
the flesh of birds and animals will no
longer be eaten; the Age of Complete
Peace-and-Equality, in which even in¬
sects and fish will no longer be eaten,
and in which all forms of life possessed
of cognition will be equal. Equality will
not extend to the vegetable kingdom,
for man must eat to preserve himself,
and because these forms of life are not
possessed of the cognitive faculty, and
hence are not to be included in the do¬
main of Ren*.
Clothing in this time will be made of
materials and patterns suitable to
weather conditions and to working
* Ren is an important Chinese philosophical con¬
cept which is difficult to translate but could,
perhaps, be summed up in the words
"compassion-attraction-empathy" Editor.
Rivers and Mountains as Far as the Eye
Can See, a painting by an anonymous
12th-century Chinese artist.
comfort. They will have great variety
and beauty, but will indicate no distinc¬
tions between people, except for the
badges of honour for Ren or
knowledge. There will be constant pro¬
gress in the use of all kinds of im¬
plements to advance civilization. Music
will play a great part in all phases of
human life. People will shave off all
hair except for that in the nose which
fulfils the function of straining dust
and impurities from the air. This is on
the ground that the nearer we are to the
beasts, the hairier; the more civilized
we become, the less hirsute. Further¬
more, lack of hair contributes to
cleanliness.
Men and women will bathe several
times daily, in water which will leave
them fragrantly scented. This is not a
matter of perfuming in the present
manner, so that a woman will be more
attractive as a sexual plaything. Rather
it is like the matter of hair: thereby
humans are farther elevated above the
filthy, foul-smelling beasts. "The
beauties of the present age will still not
equal the ugly of the Age of Complete
Peace-and-Equality". Even the toilet
facilities of that time will be made plea
sant with music and fragrant odours
and mechanical contrivances for
flushing away the filth. For the time
when people go to the toilet is the time
when they are most tranquil and
withdrawn from the hubbub of the
world. If there is that whereby to lift
their thoughts above this world [literal¬
ly, move their thoughts of abandoning
the world], to inspire their imagina¬
tions beyond the mundane [literally,
ideas of discarding forms], then their
souls will of themselves rise far above
the wordly level.
Everyone will receive a daily medical
check-up. All phases of life will be
under the supervision of the medical
authorities. Contagious diseases will be
eradicated. The whole earth will be
made clean and healthful. About the
only ailments remaining will be exter¬
nal ones, easily treated with medicines.
Thus, although there will be public
hospitals, they will be almost empty;
the sick will comprise only those who
are about to die of old age. In the case
of the latter, should their sufferings be
acute, and the doctors agree that there
is no hope of improvement, then they
may be mercifully put out of their
agony by electrocution. . . People of this-
time will attain to longevity of from a
hundred or two hundred, to over a
thousand years, due to progress in
medical science, clothing, and diet.
33

1 * " OK ^J>,1-
3Í^H V?
nor ivr+jt* ^ir^*W'iri*t+^
x
©
c
o
Í
The search for longevity, for the art
of becoming a spirit or immortal (shen
xian) may be carried on only by those
who have returned with twenty years of
service the twenty years of support and
education received from the public.
Those who wish to retire from the
world to carry on these practices may,
therefore, do so after the age of forty.
These capabilities will be the highest at¬
tainment of One World. But they may
not interfere with the public service
owed by everyone, or else the work of
the world might be neglected, and
civilization retrogress.
Therefore in the Age of One World
only the studies of the art of becoming
a spirit or immortal, and of becoming
a buddha, will be widely practised. For
One World is the ultimate Law of this
world; but the study of immortality, of
longevity without death, is even an ex¬
tension of the ultimate Law of this
world. The study of buddhahood, a
state without birth or death, implies
not merely a setting apart from the
world, but an actual going out of this
world; still more, it is a going out of
One World. If we go this far, then we
abandon the human sphere and enter
the sphere of immortals and buddhas.
Hereupon, the study of immortality
and buddhahood then begins. Compar¬
ing the two, the study of immortality is
too crude, its subtle words and pro¬
found principles are not many, and its
ability to intoxicate men's minds is
limited. As for the universality and
subtlety of the study of buddhahood, it
extends to the point where the speaking
of words is discontinued, and the ac¬
tivities of the mind are terminated.
Although having sage-wisdom, not to
move a hand [i.e. to remain quiescent]:
such self-containment is yet more pro¬
found. And further, there are also the
mysterious arts of the Five Van-
quishings and the Three Brilliants, the
application of their supernatural
powers is still more singular.
Therefore after One World there will
first be the study of immortality. After
that there will be the study of bud¬
dhahood. The inferior knowledge is the
study of immortality; the superior
knowledge is the study of buddhahood.
After the studies of immortality and
buddhahood will come the study of
roaming through the heavens. I have
another book on that subject.
The German architect Wenzel August
Hablik (1881-1934) invented "a new
architecture as the basis for a new reli¬
gion and world view". In 1924 he pub¬
lished a series of engravings entitled
Utopian Architectural Cycle to which this
Free-Standing Dome Construction
belongs. Inscription at top of engraving
reads: "This cupola can be built on the
largest scale with reinforced concrete ".
34
