From analysis to action
New trends in the psychological sciences
by Agnès Oppenheimer
PSYCHOLOGY, which at one time
was a branch of philosophy, has
always attempted to assert its in¬
dependence by establishing a particular
goal and a specific method of approach. Its
vocation has been to study the psyche of the
individual, along with his cognitive, emo¬
tional and behavioural processes, based on
the concept of man as an individual
represented by a biological, medical,
physical or metaphysical model.
Shortly before the turn of the century,
Freud's discovery of unconscious processes
could have caused irreparable damage to
psychology, the scope of which was limited
to the sphere of consciousness. On the con¬
trary, this revised view of man gave
psychology a foundation and a new point of
departure. Similarly, developments in the
social sciences were to define this discipline
in terms of then recent advances in
sociology, linguistics, economics and other
areas.
To this day, no clear preference has been
expressed either for including
psychoanalysis as a part of general
psychology or for accepting that since
psychoanalysis is centred on unconscious
manifestations, it breaks away from the
point of view of classical psychology and
exists as an independent science. In the
United States psychoanalysis claims to be
the basis as well as an integral part of a
broader field of psychology, which itself is
concerned with pathology and health. In
France, it is most often looked upon as a
distinct field, not derived from any other.
Photo ©1983 ADAGP, Paris
"Psychology, which at one time was a branch of philosophy, has
always attempted to assert its independence by establishing a par¬
ticular goal and a specific method of approach. Its vocation has been
to study the psyche of the individual along with his cognitive, emo¬
tional and behavioural processes." Above, Exchange of Thoughts, oil
on canvas by the French artist Jean Dubuffet.
Psychology has itself split into several
fields of specialization: social psychology,
psychometry, clinical psychology (per¬
sonality tests), developmental psychology
and psychoanalytical psychology.
Psychoanalytical theories remain a major
point of reference in testing, pathology and
laboratory research, whether efforts are
made to apply them to other fields or to
refute them.
It is inappropriate to distinguish
psychological and psychoanalytical ap¬
proaches by referring to health and
pathology, as the borderline separating the
two is difficult to ascertain and should be
drawn with care. Some therapies are based
solely upon psychoanalysis, while others
are purely psychological; all refer to dif¬
ferent theories that must be taken into
account.
Historical perspective is an essential
feature herein, to the extent that it recreates
certain aspects of individual development
and forms an integral part of all
psychological parameters.
The definition of the unconscious is in¬
separable from the manner in which it was
discovered. Freud sought to cure symptoms
of hysteria using hypnosis. During patients'
trance states, he realized that their recalling
certain traumatic memories caused the
symptoms to disappear. He also noticed
that "abreaction", or gaining awareness of
a traumatic event to which emotion is at¬
tached, has a healing effect. Forgetting is
the cause of neurosis, in other words, un¬
conscious activity exists.
Little by little, Freud substituted free
association for hypnosis. He found that the
act of forgetting is motivated and that sub¬
jects tend to resist their memory. A fantasy,
a psychological phenomenon, comes to
replace the traumatic and pathogenic
memory. Unconscious desire is seen in its
different ramifications, hence the Oedipus
and castration complexes orient human
development.
Psychoanalytical treatment is intended to
recognize intrapsychical conflicts stemming
from the subject's unconscious., The
method consists of reserving judgment con¬
cerning the reality of the events mentioned.
The external factor is not denied, but its im¬
pact is measured in terms of the resonance
it finds in the individual. The individual
AGNES OPPENHEIMER, French psycho¬
analyst, is a lecturer at the University of Paris
VII. A member of the Psychoanalytical Society
of Paris, she is the author of Le Choix du Sexe
( 1 980) as well as many articles and studies on
psychology and psychoanalysis.

recreates his conflicts during treatment and
the interpretation of this reaction through
transference enables the patient to become
conscious of his psychical determinism. The
analyst's attitude, therefore, must be
neutral when comprehending and judging
phenomena. His silence should be broken
only for as "objective" an interpretation as
possible, since the analyst is no more than
a receiver, a mirror reflecting back the un¬
conscious meanings of the patient's con¬
scious speech. As treatment progresses, the
task becomes more complex, and the
analyst must take into account the different
psychical processes he discovers.
Psychoanalysis does not deal with symp¬
toms, but with the unconscious of a given
subject as a whole whose psychical ap¬
paratus is composed of forces in conflict.
Psychoanalytical theory implies a par¬
ticular technique and attitude which stem
from a precise scientific model, that of the
sciences of nature and empiricism. The ex¬
ercise consists of discovering a cause, a
truth, basic desires, and of decoding an
original unconscious message that is ex¬
pressed in a distorted state, censored by the
conscious awareness. Admittedly, how¬
ever, psychological experiments that have
attempted to confirm these theories have
met with failure.
Over the past twenty years, interven-
tionism has returned to psychoanalysis and
is now a directing force in all therapies. This
^< n 1
^^^^^^^?ï/rrbi ^
"The individual is no longer considered as a decomposable structure, and thus the
understanding of the psyche becomes secondary and seemingly inefficacious. The in¬
dividual exists only in terms of the function he performs in communicating with others,
for everything is communication." Above, Deux Têtes (Two Heads), 1973, gouache
by the US artist Alexander Calder.
©
"The expansion of psychoanalysis and increased understanding of neuroses led to the
development of different, complementary models that offer an insight into other
aspects of pathology, including narcissism and identity." Above, Metamorphosis of
Narcissus, 1 937, by the Spanish artist Salvador Dalí during his surrealist period, clearly
draws its inspiration from psychoanalysis. Freudian theory had a profound influence on
surrealism (dream interpretation, free association, automatism).
9

^ change can be explained by various factors.
First, the activity of psychoanalysis,
which was limited to the comprehension
and treatment of neuroses, branched out to
cover other, more serious types of
pathologies. It then became necessary to
revise theoretical concepts and create new
technical features. For a new goal it became
necessary to have new explanations and
methods, and above all, a new outlook.
It appeared necessary to take into ac¬
count those early events that conditioned
the environment and gave rise to specific
problems. An individual cannot become
neurotic unless the first years of his life were
free from serious traumas, thus allowing
for the development of a stable psychical
organization. In other cases, it is impossible
for the individual to comprehend himself
with respect to internal conflicts which
could not have taken shape. In the latter in¬
stance, the structure is too deficient.
Moreover, social changes influence the
course of mental pathology, both in form
and definition.
The expansion of psychoanalysis and in¬
creased understanding of neuroses led to
the development of different, complement¬
ary models that offer an insight into other
aspects of pathology, including narcissism
and identity. A more complex clinical ap¬
proach and a modified therapeutic view¬
point are associated with increased
theoretical knowledge.
Admitting the importance of reality in
psychical processes leads to taking into ac¬
count interpersonal relationships during
both infancy and treatment. Observation of
babies supports this discovery.
Parallel to this, there is an
epistemological change. It becomes clear
that the observer influences the observation
and neutrality is a myth. Thus silence is a
form of intervention and the analyst ceases
to be a neutral receiver, since his personality
is just as important as his capacity to em¬
pathize with his patient. The moment un¬
conscious reality reaches the surface, it can
no longer be considered as data, but rather
as a simple version of facts or a point of
view.
From a psychological standpoint, dif¬
ferent models either complement or negate
each other. Aside from basic treatment,
analysis has extended its activities to
borderline and narcissistic cases. In addi¬
tion, psychoanalytical-type therapies are
currently used to treat psychotic subjects.
Research into rapid techniques con¬
tinues. Psychoanalytical psychodramas
allow the individual to act out and exter¬
nalize his conflicts. Psychoanalytical relax¬
ation takes the body into consideration and
is appropriate for subjects who experience
difficulty in verbalizing their emotions.
Psychoanalytical perspective aside,
various therapies are appearing, some of
which focus on abreaction. One example is
the primal scream, the cry of the newborn
infant, which induces regression into past
experience, enabling patients to integrate
this experience. Whether used individually
or in groups, the "new therapies" are based
on the concept of living one's emotional ex¬
periences, coming into contact with one's
body.
10
The multiplicity of therapies answers a
need for change, rapidity, and often
economy. They are based on a certain re¬
jection of psychoanalysis as well as on the
idea that the unconscious cannot be directly
taken into account; thus, mere understand¬
ing is no longer adequate, and the import¬
ant factor is to live.
The coexistence of psychoanalytical and
psychological therapies is accompanied by a
reciprocal influence, unless deeper-lying
changes create a certain diversity. Reality,
pathology and clinical medicine are now
plural concepts. Treatment is no longer
considered a theatre of pure re-enactment
but offers the possibility of living a new
experience.
Over twenty years ago, a new theory
came into being, accompanied by a
therapeutic method which alone could well
become a branch of psychology. Founded
on mathematical discoveries and the theory
Developed in 1921 by the
Swiss psychiatrist Hermann
Rorschach, the Rorschach Test
is a projective method of
psychological testing in which
the testée is asked to describe
what he sees in a series of ten
symmetrical ink-blots. From
the replies received the tester
attempts to establish a broad
picture of the testee's per¬
sonality typewhether, for ex¬
ample, he or she is basically in¬
trovert or extrovert. Below, a
test in progress.
Photo Inge Morath © Magnum, Paris
of systems, it focuses on communication,
the relationships and laws governing the
functioning of families as systems.
The individual is no longer considered as
a decomposable structure, and thus the
understanding of the psyche becomes
secondary and seemingly inefficacious. The
individual exists only in terms of the func¬
tion he performs in communicating with
others, for everything is communication.
"Sickness" does not exist per se. It is the
effect of pathological communication
whose most extreme manifestation is what
has been termed the "double constraint", a
contradictory order one subject gives
another, placing the latter in a position
whereby his choice is impeded. Based on
that premise, there is no such thing as a
disturbed individual; only the system is ail¬
ing, seeking balance through the most
pathological means open to it. The answer
is thus to treat a system. This technique may
be applied to an individual, but he must
always be regarded as part of a system.
The notion of intrapsychical conflict is
absent from this approach, which is centred
on interaction and interpersonal relations.
It is useless to understand, because
understanding does not elicit change, and it
is precisely change that is important. This
method is active, entailing suggestion and
order. It highlights the pathological aspect
of communication that must be modified,
and it is based on psychology without
psychism.
Recent developments in psychology have
led to a division into psychologies or
psychological disciplines. This is due as
much to epistemological changes as it is to
economic and social changes and
ideological influences.
Looking from within the different
psychologies, it is the interaction between
theory and clinical practice that induces
methodological changes, the goal of every
therapy being to effect change. There are
differences in the methods employed both
to cause change and to enable change to oc¬
cur. Interventionism still applies, even
when it takes the form of non-intervention.
However, the active techniques that pro¬
mote change (catharsis, systemic therapies,
etc.) differ from psychoanalytical tech¬
nique, which seeks to make change possi¬
ble, to free the subject from his bonds
without conditioning him in any way
whatsoever.
From a psychoanalytical standpoint,
distinctions are drawn in terms of a given
pathology, making it possible to obtain in¬
dications for treatment, but they are also
drawn with respect to the different
theoretical models that give rise to different
types of intervention.
Some models focus on conflict, others on
certain aspects of pathology, others still on
the development of the personality.
It is possible to discern a trend towards an
integration of the various theories, each of
which represents one aspect of the human
being. All of them are distorted representa¬
tions of phenomena they refract, and which
otherwise would never have come into con¬
scious existence.
Agnès Oppenheimer
