TWTDTl^srtíW^^^
A world athirst for oil
by Vincent Labouret
MOST of the oil discovered since the
early years of this century has
been found in countries where it
has been used only in small quantities,
whereas several major oil-consuming coun¬
tries have little or no oil on their own ter¬
ritory. Hence trade in oil has grown con¬
stantly until oil has become the most impor¬
tant internationally traded commodity in
terms of both volume and value. In 1982,
for example, energy products accounted for
one-quarter and oil for one-fifth, of a total
volume of trade in commodities amounting
in value to 1,850,000 million dollars.
The situation of oil is even more striking
when its transportation by sea is con¬
sidered. In 1980, oil or oil-based products
accounted for half of the 3,732 million
tonnes of cargo carried by the world's
ships. In fact the volume of petroleum pro¬
ducts carried by sea grew at the extremely
rapid rate of almost 10 per cent a year bet¬
ween 1950 and 1973 when, at its peak, it
represented 57 per cent of all sea-borne
commodities.
The importance of this trade is further
compounded by the very long distance that
oil tankers cover. The United States is
13,500 kilometres from the Gulf, southern
Europe 7,800 kilometres distant (via the
Suez Canal), and Rotterdam almost 20,000
kilometres away (via the Cape of Good
Hope). Tankers sailing from Venezuela and
unloading in Rotterdam have a voyage of
some 7,500 kilometres. Japan is 12,500
kilometres from Saudi Arabia.
VINCENT LABOURET, of France, is Secretary-
General of the French oil company Total. He
holds the rank of Minister Plenipotentiary.
The history of the "oil routes" is thus
linked to the technical means used from the
early days to ensure the increasingly
economic transportation of the precious
cargoes of crude oil over these long
distances in other words, to the growth of
the tanker fleet.
As early as 1870, only some ten years
after oil had been discovered at Titusville in
Pennsylvania, 64 per cent of America's pro¬
duction was already being exported. The
United States and Russia, which together
supplied more than nine-tenths of all the oil
extracted in the last quarter of the nine¬
teenth century, exported more than half
their output. The two countries engaged in
fierce competition on the European market
from 1883 onwards, after the inauguration
of the railway linking the Russian oilfields
to the Black Sea port of Batumi.
The first bulk exports of oil from the
United States to Europe were carried by
sailing ships on which tanks had been in¬
stalled. The first such vessel seems to have
been the Charles, which was built in 1869
and was fitted out with fifty-nine tanks
representing a capacity of 714 tonnes.
Owing to technical ballasting problems,
however, the bulk transportation of oil was
limited until 1875.
It was the need to keep the French refin¬
ing industry supplied that first occasioned
the bulk export of crude oil in 1874, when
such exports amounted to 300,000 barrels;
they had risen to 450,000 barrels by 1879.
By then the French refining companies had
already built a series of unloading and
storage facilities between Le Havre and
Rouen which were very large for that time.
In 1879, Norwegian ship-owners put four
vessels into service on the Philadelphia-Le
Havre run. Three of them were sailing ships
but the fourth, the Stat, was steam-
powered. The Siaf shared with the
2,748-tonne Belgian ship, the Vaderland,
built in 1872, the distinction of being the
first steamship to carry oil in bulk.
By 1 885, more than one thousand vessels,
almost all of them sailing ships, were plying
between the United States and Europe. At
the same time, the Glückauf, the first
tanker of modern design, in which the crude
oil was actually carried in the ship's hull,
was being built in a British shipyard.
The use of steamships for this purpose
had a big economic impact. Whereas sailing
ships could make three return voyages
across the Atlantic in a year, the new
tankers made up to seven. By the mid-1890s
virtually all America's oil exports were be¬
ing carried by steamship. The age of the
sailing ship had gone for ever.
The world's fleet of engine-driven oil
tankers continued to grow in the early years
of this century, keeping pace with world¬
wide crude oil production and the growth in
consumer demand. Motor vehicles had ap¬
peared on the scene by 1910, and supersed¬
ed the oil lamp as the main market for
petroleum products. Growth was rapid: it
had taken the oil industry thirty-six years up
to 1895 to produce its first thousand million
barrels, but it was only eight years later that
the second thousand million barrels had
been produced, and by 1920 the industry
was producing five hundred thousand
million barrels a year.
When World War I broke out, the in¬
dustrial world was so dependent on oil that
31

Charles (1869)
From square-rigger
Gluckauf (1885)
Azov (1892) Atlas (1902)
4 É I
Outfield (1906) Motricine (1914)
^ a prime objective of the military strategy of
the belligerents was to secure access to
sources of supply. The war created so great
a demand for oil in Europe that soon there
were not enough tankers to cater for it. The
precious fuel was accordingly transported
in conventional cargo boats, in many cases
in their ballast tanks or in the space between
the hold and the hull.
The world's tanker fleet was thus able to
grow in pace with demand, which quad¬
rupled between 1918 and 1939. This period
saw the decline of the United States as an oil
exporter and the rise of production in many
parts of the Middle East, Latin America,
and Asia. The oil industry became truly in¬
ternational, even though the United States
continued up to 1947 to produce more than
60 per cent of the world's crude oil, and to
control 60 per cent of the world's tanker
fleet.
From the 1950s, the tanker fleet grew at
a hectic pace, doubling in size between 1947
and 1957, again by 1966, and yet again by
32
1973. What is more, in the twenty years
after 1950, the world recorded an un¬
precedented rate of economic development,
with growth rates in the western nations
reaching as high as 5 per cent a year. During
the same period, world oil consumption
grew by 7.6 per cent a year, in other words
even faster than overall energy consump¬
tion, which tended to .parallel growth in
GDP.
As oil consumption increased, the United
States' share of world production declined,
falling from 61 per cent in 1942 to 16 per
cent in 1973. Indeed, from 1947 onwards,
the United States became a net importer, in
a bid to meet ever-increasing demand.
It was from this time that the structure of
the modern oil industry took shape: pro¬
duction centres were located far from the
consumer centres, refineries were situated
near to the markets for the processed end-
products, and a fleet of oil tankers provided
the link between the two.
The "supertanker" generation was soon
to emerge. The first vessels of this type,
gauging some 32,000 d.w.t.*, were limited
in size to the capacity imposed by the Suez
Canal, but when the Canal was closed for
five months in 1957 ship-owners raced to
build jumbo-size tankers to derive max¬
imum benefit from economies of scale on
the route from the Middle East to Europe
via the Cape of Good Hope. By 1960, the
70,000 d.w.t. "Suezmax" class of tankers
was emerging from the shipyards, soon to
be followed by the 100,000 d.w.t. class.
However, the lack of suitable çort facilities
and limited storage capacity at the
unloading points acted as a brake on this
trend.
The 1960s brought a drop in the real price
of oil and cut-throat competition between
* Dead weigh! tonnage (d.w.t.) is equivalent to the full
load a ship is capable of carrying, plus the tonnage re¬
quired for its own needs by way of fuel tanks, crew
facilities, and so on. Hence the actual tonnage that can
be transported is slightly less (93 to 97 per cent) than the
d.w.t.

to supertanker
the international oil companies. The
transport component in the cost of oil
delivered to importing countries was high,
and operators soon realized the advantage
of optimizing this link in the oil chain in
their efforts to secure the edge over their
competitors. When the Suez Canal, the
strategic lifeline between the Gulf and
Europe, was again closed on 7 June 1967,
the ship-owners, who were largely the oil
companies themselves, quickly set about
building tankers in the "Very Large Crude
Carrier" (VLCC) class, displacing more
than 160,000 d.w.t. Initially, the construc¬
tors kept within an upper limit of 250,000
d.w.t. in view of the expansion plans of the
Suez Canal Authority, but when it became
clear that the Canal would remain closed
for longer than expected, they began to
build "Ultra Large Crude Carriers"
(ULCC) with a capacity of up to 550,000
d.w.t. Thus just before the first oil price
shock in 1973, the world tanker fleet con¬
sisted of 3,458 vessels gauging more than
10,000 d.w.t., with an average capacity per
vessel of 62,000 d.w.t., five times the 1947
figure.
The steep rise in the price of oil in 1973
caused world consumption to drop for the
first time since 1949, so much so that the
amount of oil consumed in 1979 was no
higher than the estimates the operators had
made for 1976! In spite of this decline, the
tanker fleet continued to grow, as the
shipyards went on delivering the vessels that
had been on order before the crisis. In 1979,
one-third of the world tanker fleet could be
regarded as surplus to requirements. Yet, at
the same time, tanker sizes were still on the
increaseto about 99,000 d.w.t.al¬
though the economic motivation for such
large vessels was by no means so clearcut.
The second oil shock in 1979-1980 dealt
another severe blow to the maritime oil in¬
dustry. Over the four years 1979-1983 oil
consumption fell by 12 per cent. In addi¬
tion, the flow patterns of the oil trade
changed. Long-haul European and Amer¬
ican imports of crude from the Middle East
gave way to short-haul crude imports from
North Africa and the North Sea, and this
significantly reduced transport needs.
As of 30 June 1983, the commercial oil
tanker fleet consisted of 3,048 vessels,
representing a total capacity of 278.5
million d.w.t., added to which there were
seventy-nine vessels gauging 1.8 million
d.w.t. which belonged to governments, and
fifty-eight others which had been converted
into floating storage facilities or used for
other purposes. In one year, 110 tankers
had been phased out, most of them ending
in the breakers' yards. Today, two tankers
out of every five belong to the oil com¬
panies, and the rest to independent ship¬
owners, illustrating the important role
played by integrated international
companies.
More than one-quarter of the tanker fleet
sails under the Liberian flag, with Japanese
registrations far behind in second place.
33

The fact that by far the largest number of
tankers fly the Liberian flag or other flags
of convenience is due to the lighter burden
of operating costs of vessels registered in
the countries concerned.
Without undue exaggeration, the
"1984-style" tanker could be described as
too big, young (most of them have been
delivered in the last decade), under-used,
and inefficiently propelled, since at a time
when maritime fuel is expensive and it
would be more economical to fit out ships
with diesel engines, half the fleet is driven
by steam turbines. Its initial capital has not
been amortized.
Even though at the present time the max¬
im "small is beautiful" does not necessarily
apply to sea transport, it would certainly be
wrong to claim that "big is economical".
The average size of the vessels currently on
order has been scaled down and now lies in
the 50,000 d.w.t. range. The new-style
tankers are often designed to carry process¬
ed end-products, since the creation of
substantial refining capacities in the oil-
producing countries themselves means that
there will be more trade in such com¬
modities in future.
In spite of all the economic unknowns in¬
volved in so strategic a commodity as oil, is
it possible to make a reasonable prediction
of the sea-routes that the oil trade will take
in future? The statistics relating to the
world's proven oil reserves suggest that the
Middle East accounts for 55 per cent of the
total, followed by Latin America with 1 1.7
per cent, the Soviet Union, and Africa.
Hence the ports at which the tankers take
on their cargoes and the itineraries they
follow will probably continue unchanged
for several decades to come. On the other
hand, the United States, Europe, Japan and
The Onyx, a French oil-tanker
en route for France with a
cargo of crude oil from the
Middle East.
other importing nations may be joined by
the newly industrializing countries, and this
would add further ramifications to the flow
pattern, without transforming it altogether.
Competing conveyance systems such as
pipelines cannot be disregarded either. The
transport of oil by sea is liable to slow down
even further with the commissioning of the
new pipeline crossing Saudi Arabia and
terminating at Yanbu, and with the increase
in the throughflow on the Sumed and Iraq-
Turkey pipelines, for example. Tankers will
be faced with a big challenge in preserving
the slot they have cut out for themselves.
Vincent Labouret
