Unesco and the preservation
oímoving images by Wolfgang Klaue
WE live at a time when there is every¬
where a growing awareness of
the importance of history and of
the need to preserve the cultural heritage of
past centuries from destruction. Yet,
paradoxically, we are allowing important
products of our own audio-visual age the
cultural heritage of future generations to
be destroyed or irretrievably lost. More
filmed material has been lost since the
beginning of the present century than has
been preserved.
What Bela Balacz, one of the most im¬
portant theoreticians of the cinema, said
over fifty years ago is, unfortunately, still
valid today: "We have libraries and picture
galleries, museums devoted to the history of
art and of culture as a whole, special collec¬
tions and archives for every imaginable sub¬
ject from shoemaking and tailoring to
brush-making, but none for the art of the
film. The Louvre possesses a complete col¬
lection of regimental buttons, but epoch-
making masterpieces of a new art form
WOLFGANG KLAUE is director of the national
film archive of the German Democratic
Republic and president of the International
Federation of Film Archives (FIAF). He played
an active part in the preparation of the Unesco
Recommendation on the safeguarding and
preservation of moving, images. Among his
publications are Filmcataloguing and a
number of books on the history of the
documentary film.
(which also captures and records real life
better than any other) are nowhere to be
seen. The creation of a museum of film art
would appear to be an urgent task for the
State".
In 1913, in his Das Kino und die
Gebildeten (the Cinema and Educated Peo¬
ple) Hermann Häfker developed a com¬
prehensive concept of the tasks and func¬
tions of a film archive. But these proposals
were far ahead of their time and evoked no
reaction. A few film collections were
established in the 1920s at a local level or in
specialized form.
The nationalization of film production in
the USSR created favourable conditions for
the collection and preservation of films in
State archives, but it was only at the end of
the silent film era that an important interna¬
tional movement for the preservation of the
moving image heritage came into being.
Film experts in a number of countries
(Henri Langlois in France, Iris Barry in the
USA, Bengt Idestam-AImquist in Sweden)
undertook this mission with great en¬
thusiasm. The first film archives were
private foundations (Cinémathèque Fran¬
çaise, Paris) or part of larger museums
(Museum of Modern Art Film Department,
New York).
The pioneer work accomplished in those
days to save part of the moving images
32
heritage is still worthy of our admiration.
But it was not enough to halt the massive
destruction of films which, through indif¬
ference, ignorance or hostility to culture,
went on just as before. The International
Federation of Film Archives (FIAF),
established in 1938, failed to develop inter¬
national activity on any significant scale. It
resumed its activities in the immediate post¬
war period, but these were confined mainly
to the traditional film-making countries. In
many instances archives did not receive suf¬
ficient material support and lacked a
satisfactory legal status, and as a result
there were further losses during this period.
The fact that, for a variety of reasons, the
moving image heritage received little or no
attention in the cultural policies of many
States and even in the Unesco Programme
prompted the Delegation of the German
Democratic Republic to take an initiative at
the 18th General Conference of Unesco
which was to focus greater attention on this
problem. The Delegation's proposal was
supported by several States. Resolution
3422 of the 18th General Conference re¬
quested the Director-General of Unesco to
examine the technical, legal and ad¬
ministrative aspects of safeguarding mov¬
ing images, and to discuss the advisability
of adopting an international recommenda¬
tion or convention for the protection of
moving images from destruction.
Annie Bos in Majoor
Frans (1916), one of
the many silent
films from an active
period of produc¬
tion in The
Netherlands that are
not known to have
survived.

A preliminary meeting of experts was
held in Berlin (capital of the German
Democratic Republic) in 1975.
Of particular interest was the discussion
of the question as to how, given the domi¬
nant role of the audio-visual media in social
communication, the importance of the
cinema and television as instruments of
entertainment, education and culture, and
as a form of documentary reflection of con¬
temporary events and phenomena, this
medium has been so undervalued as a
heritage.
The reasons are complex. Following the
development of cinematography the film
was regarded in many countries primarily
as a form of cheap, low-level entertain¬
ment, an expression of a sub-culture and
not as a means of artistic expression or con¬
temporary historical documentation.
Another cause of losses in the moving im¬
age heritage is the lack of adequate material
and financial support for carrying out this
task. There is probably no form of cultural
property whose safeguarding and preserva¬
tion costs as much as that of moving im¬
ages. If the storage conditions are less than
optimal, films suffer decomposure through
chemical reactions and are ruined by fungi
and bacteria. In the case of colour film, its
instability leads to fading of the colours.
Only heavy investment in equipment to en¬
sure optimal storage conditions (e.g. in the
case of colour film, at a temperature of
- 7°C and a 25 per cent humidity level) and
in restoring damaged films can guarantee
safeguarding and preservation over long
periods.
The problems connected with collection,
selection, cataloguing, documentation,
restoration, technical processing, storage
and air-conditioning are new ones that de¬
mand scientific study. Furthermore, the
development and dissemination of know-
how relating to archives for moving images
Model design of a futuristic
city was produced by Erich
Kettelhut for Fritz Lang's
visionary film Metropolis
(Germany 1925-1926). A
reconstitution of Metropolis
has been made from the
original script and a hand-
coloured version is being
shown for the first time in
Paris this summer.
are essential if further destruction is to be
avoided. This is especially true for Asia,
Africa and Latin America. These regions
now produce more than two thirds of the
world's output of feature films, but the
development of their archives for moving
images has not kept pace with their film
production.
There is another aspect of moving images
which has affected, and still affects, their
safeguarding and preservation. The pro¬
duction of moving images necessitates
much heavier investment than does that of
other works of art. Moving images have a
twofold character. They are both works of
art, and merchandise. Their distribution
must cover production costs and provide a
profit. Fears that material stored in ar¬
chives would escape the control of pro¬
ducers and distributors, and that their in¬
terests would suffer as a consequence, have
accompanied moving image archives since
the beginning.
On 27 October 1980 the Recommenda¬
tion for the Safeguarding and Preservation
of Moving Images was adopted by consen¬
sus at the General Conference of Unesco in
Belgrade. It is a document of historical im¬
portance. For the first time, eighty-five
years after the invention of the
cinematograph and fifty years after the in¬
vention of television, Unesco called upon
its Member States and the international
public to treat moving images, because of
their educational, cultural, artistic, scien¬
tific and historical value, as an element of
national culture and to protect and preserve
them for transmission to future
generations.
The Recommendation includes a list of
fundamental legal, administrative and
technical measures for protecting the mov¬
ing image heritage, its use, and the develop¬
ment of international co-operation in this
field. The Recommendation had to take ac¬
count of differing interests and concepts
and this is reflected in its compromise
character.
The document presents a series of choices
in the scope, contents and methodology of
measures to achieve this aim. For instance,
in addition to the "mandatory deposit"
provision, which exists in most countries in
regard to books, other measures, such as
deposit, purchase or donation, are recom¬
mended whereby moving images can be
transferred to archives. The rights and
powers of archives in regard to the
safeguarding and use of their collections
and the treatment of foreign works are also
defined in a manner which reflects differing
points of view.
The implementation of a recommenda¬
tion of this scope demands time, but the
progress already achieved in the past three
years is encouraging. The Recommendation
has attracted the attention of many govern¬
ments and specialized bodies. The situation
of existing archives for moving images has
been improved in many countries as a result
of legal measures and financial support. In¬
itiatives have been taken in Asian, African
and Latin American countries to create the
necessary conditions for the preservation of
the national heritage of moving images.
This development has been promoted and
accelerated by the adoption of measures in
the Unesco Programme.
M Wolfgang Klaue
33
