The artistic ferment
of a continent
by Carlos Rodriguez Saavedra
FOR more than four centuries Latin American art has
reflected both the impact, the imposition or the
variously assimilated influence of the Western system
over a vast area originally inhabited by indigenous peoples
of a variety of cultures, and the beginning of a slow, complex
process of hybridization. Latin America is a prolonged
historical assertion of a vast plurality, open to all the world's
cultural manifestations but capable of absorbing them
without impairing its identity.
The characteristic feature of Latin American painting in
general from 1920 onwards was the rejection of academic
precepts and their replacement to a greater or lesser extent by
avant-garde trends. Many painters from the Andean and
tropical countries decided at an early stage to express in¬
digenous national or regional themes in the new idiom. In
Mexico, painting was also to be used as a means of political
CARLOS RODRIGUEZ SAAVEDRA is a Peru¬
vian writer, essayist and art critic. He has
published many articles and studies on pre-
Columbian art and modern Latin American
painting.
and nationalistic expression. The mural painting associated
with the revolution in that country began as a form of
glorification and finally became a vehicle of criticism and
controversy.
Because of their volume and importance the works of
Orozco, Rivera and Siqueiros occupy a special place in the
history of Latin American art. They also demonstrate the
capacity of the American world for cultural syncretism.
With deliberate anti-Western emphasis, they use Western
painting techniques and idioms to express Mexican na¬
tionalism and reassert the country's Aztec past. In
monumental style and descriptive virulence, the works of
Rivera displayed in public buildings, especially in the Na¬
tional Palace in Mexico City, attain a grandeur hitherto
unknown in Latin American painting.
By contrast, the works of Clemente Orozco are devoid of
rhetoric and figurative detail, but in their plenitude and
tragic intensity they represent the highest achievement of
painting during this period. Like the painter himself, the
work of David Alfaro Siqueiros was violently concerned
with revolutionary politics and has been the subject of much ^
DIEGO RIVERA (1886-1957).
The Conquest of Mexico: the
true portrait of Hernán Cortés
and the enslavement of the In¬
dians. Fresco, 1929-1935, Na¬
tional Palace, Mexico City.
Along with other mural
painters, such as José
Clemente Orozco and David
Alfaro Siqueiros, Diego Rivera
was a successor of José
Guadalupe Posada. This mural
offers a new vision of the
past the Conquest as seen by
those who were its victims. The
re-interpretation of history from
this standpoint and the recon¬
ciliation of the pre-Columbian
tradition with modern times
were two of the great themes of
the Mexican revolution, and it
was from them that present-
day Mexican art was born.
37

<
©
.JOSE CLEMENTE OROZCO (1883-1948).
The Slave. Oil on canvas, 1947.
"Ours is the only way" declared David
Alfaro Siqueiros, the leader, with Diego Rivera
and José Clemente Orozco, of the great Mex¬
ican muralist movement. Orozco, however,
distanced himself somewhat from the others,
rejecting the demagogic, "folklore" aspects
of the movement, preferring to give free rein
to his highly personal conception of painting.
In his polemical Carta a Orozco (Open Letter to
Orozco) Siqueiros acknowledged that he had
created "the finest plastic forms that heralded
the Mexican movement". Guatemalan art
critic Luis Cardona y Aragón declared that
Orozco was the most important artist to come
out of Latin America.
controversy. However, perhaps because of the controversies
it provoked, the revolutionary period and the mural paint¬
ings associated with it have served as a starting-point for con¬
temporary Mexican painting. If these paintings had not ex¬
isted to serve as a basis or a challenge to be rejected or sur¬
passed, the works of such painters as Rufino Tamayo, José
Luis Cuevas or because of the vast scope they have opened
up for Mexican art of more recent artists, would be
inconceivable.
In Brazil the new art burst on the public with the challeng¬
ing "Modern Art Week" in Säo Paulo in February, 1922.
The conjugation of avant-garde initiatives in literature,
music and the plastic arts by Oswaldo de Andrade, Anita
Malfatti, Mario de Andrade, Tarsila de Amaral, Lasar
Segall, Victor Brocheret and Emiliano Di Cavalcanti,
amongst others, was primarily aimed at asserting the right to
aesthetic revolt and freedom of expression. At the same
time, by using the conquests of the European "isms" these
artists came to the rescue of personal, popular and national
values.
The international recognition and official support accord¬
ed a few years later to Cándido Portinari demonstrated the
extent to which this aesthetic revolt, in addition to changing
the orientation of art, had gained solid ground in the coun¬
try. Born and bred amongst the cotton and coffee planta¬
tions, Cándido Portinari remained faithful until the end of
his life to the images of his childhood. His masterly series of
murals for the Ministry of Education in Rio de Janeiro
demonstrate, in an integrated pictorial idiom combined with
a personal style, his capacity to use freely the vocabulary of
Cubism, Expressionism and even Surrealism to represent the
country's regions, ethnic types and products. The main
features of his work were described by Mario de Andrade as
traditionalism, lyricism, realism and nationalism.
Meanwhile in the Caribbean Amelia Peláez, a powerful
Cuban artist who had assimilated and selectively rejected in
Paris the teachings of such masters as André Lhote, was
using the formal achievements of Cubism to express typical¬
ly tropical themes, especially in her still-lifes. Just about this
time another Cuban, Wifredo Lam, was setting out on his
journey through the world of painting, taking with him
ancestral elements which, thanks to his contacts with Picasso
and the Surrealists, he would later release in images that were
strange to Western art.
At the opposite extreme, painting in Argentina and
Uruguay, having no pre-Hispanic roots or nationalist or
political commitments, developed from the beginning within
the main currents of Western art. Emilio Petorutti, who had
lived in Florence since 1913, returned to Buenos Aires in
1924 enriched not only by his study of the 15th century
masters but by his friendship with the leaders of the new
"Futurism". At the time of his return he had achieved a
38 ?

DAVID ALFARO SIQUEIROS (1898-1974).
The Kiss.
The eager impetuosity with which Siqueiros
lived his life, a life full of incident, of ups and
downs and adventures, was also the driving
force in his artistic work, in the service of his
revolutionary ideas. His murals, like those of
those two other great Mexican muralists
Diego Rivera and José Clémente Orozco,
adorn the walls of many public buildings in his
own country (for example, his famous
450-square-metre mural La Revolución Mex¬
icana) as well as in Chile and in Cuba. Influenc¬
ed by Expressionism and Surrealism, Si¬
queiros' work is inspired particularly by social
and proletarian problems.
. RENE PORTOCARRERO (1912- ). Carnival,
Gouache, 1970.
Cuba is the focus of René Portocarrero's
preoccupations Havana, its folklore, its
fiestas, the Afro-Cuban tradition. In his urban
landscapes, in which are to be found echoes
of the stained-glass window and the baroque
tradition characteristic of the island, the
houses seem to move to the rhythm of form
and colour. Portocarrero works mainly on
three themes portraits of Flora, the carnival
and the town three images and a style which
are his contribution to the Cuban identity.
k JORGE CAMACHO (1934- ). L'Ornéoscope.
Oil on canvas, 1981.
For Camacho death is a dance to the rhythm
of the rumba. For Cubans the Angel of Death
is a lifelong companion. Camacho's world is a
charnel-house. His ossuaries in metamor¬
phosis are surrealism impregnated with
African rites; they recall both Breton and
Chango (a Voodoo deity), are both playful and
macabre, and in them are echoes of Bosch,
Goya and, above all, of José Guadalupe
Posada.
mastery of the forms established by Braque, and especially
of the synthetic Cubism introduced by Juan Gris. During
this period others, including Horacio Butler, Juan del Prête,
Héctor Basaldúa, Antonio Berni, Raúl Soldi, Raquel Forner
and Lino Eneas Spilimbergo, made a decisive contribution
to the establishment of modern art in Argentina in works
which demonstrated individual creative assimilation of the
main currents represented in the Paris School.
Uruguay's contribution to the Latin American art of this
period is represented by the work of two quite dissimilar ar¬
tists. Pedro Figari crowned a rich career successfully devoted
to a variety of humanistic activities by exploiting the Post-
Impressionist vein opened up by Bonnard. Joaquin Torres
Garcia, whose reputation has continued to grow since his
death in Montevideo in 1949, embodies the highest achieve¬
ment of Latin American art at this period.
His life, marked by sojourns and experiments in many
cities Barcelona, New York, Paris, Montevideo was con¬
tinuously devoted to intellectual and artistic investigation
aimed at solving a fundamental problem: that of the rela¬
tionship between reality, which painting normally
represents, and the absolute which it aspires to reveal, bet¬
ween the fleeting image and the eternal idea. In opposition
to the transient and the descriptive, Torres Garcia elaborated
his theory of "Constructive Universalism". In his books
Metafísica de la Prehistórica Indoamericana and Estructura
he analyses the fundamental principles of ancient American
art and postulates constructive principles for the new art. In¬
spired by this model, he invented a symbolic alphabet or con¬
structive cryptography whose aim was to give universally
valid expression to man and reality.
The work of the so-called indigenista painters in Peru bet¬
ween 1920 and 1940 was a response, not only to a social reali¬
ty but also to an aesthetic demand to create an art form
with its own meaning and importance, rooted in native im¬
ages and values, and through this art to restore to the in¬
digenous inhabitant and his milieu their original rightful role
in Peruvian culture. From 1920 onwards José Sabogal
assembled around his painting and doctrines a group of
pupils that included Julia Codesido, Enrique Camino Brent
and Camilo Blas, who formed the nursery of indigenista art.
For the first time Peruvian painting was devoted exclusively
to recording and representing people, customs, architecture
and landscape, especially amongst the Andean communities
and in the interior.
Armando Reverón is undoubtedly the greatest name in
Venezuelan art of this period. After his studies in the
academies of Madrid and Barcelona the work of Reverón in
his native country is a true reflection of his personality, com¬
pounded of total dedication and demand, which in its last
phase could be defined as absolute illuminism. Derived from
an Impressionism that progressively discarded nearly every
39

©
JOAQUIN FERRER (1 929- ). Restless Space.
Oil on canvas, 1978.
In 1960, the Cuban painter and engraver
Joaquin Ferrer came to Paris on a government
grant to study painting. There he came into
contact with surrealist groups and has since
developed his career there with a number of
collective and one-man exhibitions. Ferrer's
graceful "geometric" designs, usually in two
distinct tones, have the ordered aspect of
vegetation that is both lush and restrained.
A HERVE TELEMAQUE (1937- ).
Tribute to the Equals Sign. Collage,
1983.
The Haitian artist Hervé Téléma-
que studied in the United States of
America from 1 957 to 1 960 before
settling in Paris in 1961. Influenced
at first by the lyrical abstractions of
the American school, he has since
returned to the fundamentals of
surrealism (Chirico, Magritte)
which has led him to discover the
object as an important element in
the urban landscape.
Photo © All rights reserved
ALICIA PENALBA (1918-1982).
Great Vegetation Liturgy. Bronze,
1957.
After winning the prize for paint¬
ing at the National Exhibition at
Buenos Aires, her native city, Alicia
Penalba moved to Paris in 1947. It
was at this time that she turned to
sculpture. From the beginning her
style was founded on basic forms.
Her first series of sculptures, entitl¬
ed "Totems", seems to evoke
great petrified plant forms, such as
the giant cacti to be found on the
flanks of the Andean cordillera. Her
later works retain this plant-like, ar¬
chitectural quality.
kind of objective support, his so-called "white" and
"ochre" periods identify the dazzling light of the Caribbean
with the very reason for painting.
The Second World War brought Latin America closer to
European trends. Even where art was concerned the conflict
lent a new, magnified dimension to Europe in the Latin
American consciousness. Furthermore, because of the war a
number of artists who had been formed in the Paris School
returned to their native countries. The presence and
contribution conceptual freedom and formal
experimentation of some of these painters played a lasting
role in the modernization and Westernization of Latin
American painting. The postwar period, especially from the
1950s onwards, was marked by another development. The
centre of artistic experiment moved to New York and, start¬
ing in the mid-1950s, that city began to exercise a powerful
influence on young Latin American artists both as a centre
for the diffusion of new trends and as a pole of attraction.
The scope and variety of Latin American art was sustained
and even intensified throughout the period of renewal that
started about 1960. During these years a style of painting was
40
defined in most of the Latin American countries which
responded creatively to their specific cultural circumstances
through full assimilation of contemporary aesthetic
postulates. In the leading artists of this period identification
of substance with form, the assumption of meaning by the
vehicle of its expression, produces that revelation of hitherto
unknown contents an opening to forms of life previously
culturally felt but not yet given objective visual
expression which is typical of authentic artistic creations.
This is true of Wifredo Lam, Rufino Tamayo and Roberto
Matta.
Thanks to his own creative urge and to the "tools" sup¬
plied by avant-garde trends, Tamayo, who received his early
training during the last stage of Mexican muralism, escaped
from the political and nationalistic limitations of revolu¬
tionary art. Post-Cubism enabled him to break down form
and liberate its content. This is essentially evocative of
magical, mythical, pre-Columbian or folk symbolism. But it
is his aesthetic ability to transform this material into struc¬
tured forms of refined chromatic lyricism that make it a
work of art. This explains why, while affirming that he per-

GONZALO FONSECA
(1922- ). Sculpture.
Marble, 1970.
Architecture? Fantastic
constructions? Rather we
should think in terms of
enigmas, of timelessness,
of metaphysics. Fonseca
has assimilated the example
of Torres Garcia and
transposed it to sculpture.
His works, like those of Gar¬
cia, seem to be imbued with
a cosmic feeling. For
Fonseca, "humanist con¬
structivism" means seeing
the block as living-space.
Reliefs, symbols, epochs
are integrated in the unity of
form and the compactness
of volume, yet they are dif¬
ferentiated as different
worlds because they are
constructed on different
scales.
ANTONIO FRASCONI
(1919- ). Comes the
Storm. Wood-engraving.
For years now the
Uruguayan artist Antonio
Frasconi has been one of
Latin America's most
outstanding xylographers.
Resident for many years in
the United States of
America, where he works
and teaches, Frasconi has
brought to his coloured
wood-engravings a style
which strives to go beyond
the normal limits of this
medium to achieve the
delicacy of an oriental paint¬
ing, yet with no loss of
strength and firmness of
line.
Photo © All rights reserved
JOAQUIN TORRES GARCIA
(1874-1949). White Construc¬
tive. 1931.
In 1891, at the age of seven¬
teen, Torres Garcia set out from
his native city of Montevideo to
which he was not to return until
1934on a crucial Odyssey
which took him to the Barcelona
and the Paris of the first three
decades of the century and to the
discovery of the most vital cur¬
rents of the European avant-
garde. His iconoclastic tenden¬
cies were already apparent in a
note written during his youthful
days in Barcelona: "Nothing is
more wonderful than to forget the
past and to set out in search of
adventure. I am the enemy of all
traditions, whatever they may
be." Drawing inspiration from the
work of Van Doesburg and Mon-
drian, Torres Garcia laid the foun¬
dations of "constructivism", one
of the two or three great
movements of twentieth-century
Latin American art. His El Univer¬
salismo Constructivista, publish¬
ed in Buenos Aires in 1 944, sums
up the purpose of his artistic
quest.
©
sonally has "very deep roots", he can assert that a work of
art is "a product that derives its value solely from its plastic
qualities, acquired through a process of purification until its
essence is obtained".
The paintings of Wifredo Lam demonstrate the catalytic
power and disturbing revolutionary effects that a study of
Picasso could produce in a young Cuban artist. "What he
learned from Picasso and from Oceanic and West African
sculpture", writes Gilbert Chase, "bound him to his own
Afro-Cuban heritage". For this reason people have tried to
see in the work of Lam a direct pictorial expression of the so-
called primitive animist and fetichist religions, and of the
jungle. This is a simplistic analysis which ignores« the in¬
decipherable part of the creative process. In this respect the
work of the Cuban artist, like that of Tamayo, reveals an
authentic dimension of the cultural infrastructure of Latin
America. Compounded of ancient roots given new
significance, it produces a disturbing effect. It has an im¬
pressive, sombre power.
The effect of Surrealism on Roberto Matta was similar to
that of Picasso on Lam. Coming from Chile, a country in the
Western tradition, without any pre-Columbian or African
cultural heritage but possessed of intense visionary power,
Matta has created works that are unusual even in avant-
garde terms. The originality of his work lies, not in technical
or formal innovations, but in the creation of a boundless
universe full of strange dynamic energy and peopled by am¬
biguous, brilliant, erotic, violent, disturbingly fascinating
creatures.
The following generation extended the expressive scope of
Latin American painting even further, in conditions of
growing internationalization. In Ecuador Diogenes Paredes,
Eduardo Klingman and Oswaldo Guayasamin, who evolved
from indigenismo to Expressionism with unparalleled vigour
(especially Guayasamin, with his paintings, murals and
sculptures) were succeeded by artists like Enrique Tábara,
Aníbal Villacís and Oswaldo Viteri, whose work, although
purely pictorial, was more complex in content and quality.
After Reverón there was a void in Venezuela which has
been filled by a large group of artists, most of whom have
acquired and used the language of contemporary painting.
In 1955 Jesús Soto (born in 1923) started to use plexiglass for>
41

k GERARDO CHAVEZ (1937- ). Mother Earth.
Oil on canvas, 1979.
Chavez is a Peruvian artist who has been liv¬
ing in Paris for many years. The all-pervading
theme of his work is the imaginary. He creates
a world of forms in constant physiological
metamorphosis. The cultural roots of this ex¬
travagant, forcefully personal painting can be
deduced from its echoes of Spanish Baroque
as assimilated by Peru, from its echoes, too,
of the great painters who fascinated Chavez
during his adolescence Bosch and Brueghel.
RUFINO TAMAYO (1899- ). Man with
Telephone. Oil on canvas, 1956.
Mexican artist Rufino Tamayo's early paint¬
ings drew their inspiration from the structural
and symbolic geometrical forms of pre-
Columbian sculpture. Soon, however, his
work became less abstract and acquired more
movement, his use of colour became more
subtle and his subject matter more universal.
His unusual studies of the human form came
close to surrealism. The French poet and
writer André Breton said of him that he raised
the humdrum daily round to the realms of
ritual and poetry.
compositions which, through the inter-relation and interplay
of planes, produced a remarkable impression of optical
vibration, with similar but more subtle results than those
previously achieved in experiments in geometrical abstrac¬
tion. After 1958 he began to use metal wires grouped
together and moving freely over plane surfaces, enabling
him to create multi-dimensional spaces in which strange ef¬
fects of dynamism were produced which were previously
unknown in abstract art. The field of abstract art has been
cultivated by many other excellent Venezuelan artists. Carlos
Cruz-Diez has produced some solid work, carefully executed
and of remarkable optical refinement, of which his
Fisiocromias are an example.
The rich variety of Argentine painting in the mid-1960s led
Tomas M. Messer to wonder why so many excellent artists
emigrated to other art centres. Broadly speaking it can be
said that the transition from the early Informalism to
present-day styles of painting represents an assertion and
clarification of positions. This is demonstrated by the
Abstract Expressionism of Sarah Grilo and Antonio Fer¬
nández Muro. In her sensitivity of expression and colour
Sarah Grilo has achieved a degree of maturity that is rare
amongst avant-garde artists, and the constructive precision
of Fernández Muro's work is accompanied by a classical
balance that is also rare nowadays. The first neo-
figuratives Deira, de la Vega, Macció, Luis Felipe Noé,
42
Antonio Seguíhave followed a variety of paths. Seguí
enlivens his themes with a mixture of humour and drama but
avoids pictorial literature. Despite the individuality of its
members the Geometries constitute one of the most coherent
groups. Vidal, Brizzi, McEntyre, Silva and the "generative
painting" concept invented by them represent an advance on
static geometrism. A combination of the mysterious with
precision of language, a translation into lines of the energy
which animates the world and the vitality which actuates
lifegenerative art uses the idiom of the technological age
to which it belongs.
The so-called "Recherche d'Art Visuel" established in
Paris in the 1960s and including Gyula Kosice, Hugo Demar¬
co, and Julio Le Parc represents better than any other group
the need constructively to break through the plane of tradi¬
tional pictorial support and the possibility of creating tri¬
dimensional works that are rich in optical effects and kinetic
values.
The characteristic features of the movement in Peru which
followed indigenismo were a growing receptiveness to con¬
temporary concepts from the liquidation of the Paris
School to the adoption of the Abstract idiom together with
the use of these concepts by a number of leading artists to ex¬
press values of an impersonal, mythical, magic character.
This was true from the 1960s onwards of Fernando de

k OSWALDO GUAYASAMIN (1919- ).
Hands of Protest. Oil on canvas, 1968.
At one with the Mexican mural painters in
his passionate involvement with indigenous
culture and sharing their aamiration for Pablo
Picasso, the Ecuadorian painter Oswaldo
Guayasamin is a man firmly rooted in the soil
and in the people. He is concerned more with
space than with history with his dominating
views of rugged scenery as seen from Mount
Pinchincha to the more reverential vistas from
the valley of Quito. Rather than with its past
he is concerned with the soul of Ecuador
which he lays bare to us in his "Hands" series
of paintings.
Szyszlo, who learned to express a Peruvian content, com¬
pounded of formal allusions and chromatic qualities, in
purely abstract language.
Brazilian painting also adopted contemporary language
and outgrew the influence of the Paris School in the 1950s
and especially in the 1960s when the European influence was
replaced by that of North America. Ibere Camargo, Arcanio
Ianellitrue to an intense European-style FormalismIvan
Serpa and Manabu Mabe are among the exponents of the
new painting in this period. The scene became richer and .
more varied towards the end of the 1960s and after. After
1970 the new Brazilian painting embraced all contemporary
forms of expression.
In Mexico the generation of artists who came after Rufino
Tamayowho was responsible for the break with revolu¬
tionary muralismare those who have incorporated the new
trends into their painting. The breakthrough was made in the
1950s by a group of young artists including Manuel
Felguérez, Vicente Rojo, Pedro Coronel, Lilia Carrillo,
Alberto Gironella, Vlady and José Luis Cuevas, who
welcomed the foreign ideas. Gifted and receptive, they
followed a variety of paths, introducing a range of concepts
which now form the basis of Mexican art.
From an early stage José Luis Cuevas displayed an incisive
mastery, free of illusions, in the portrayal of an entire series
JESUS SOTO (1923- ).
Vibration (the swimming-pool).
Wood and plastic, 1962.
The Venezuelan artist Jesús
Soto maintains that true
abstraction can only be achiev¬
ed through movement not
mechanical movement but the
potential movement created by
the observer when he moves,
the vibration created by the
repetition of shapes, the super¬
position of geometrical objects
on a striated background, the
reverberation of two moiré
screens. Soto's aim is to free
himself completely from the
restraints of figurative art.
CARLOS CRUZ-DIEZ (1923- ).
Fisiochromia. Mixed technique,
1967.
With his "Fisiochromia", the
Venezuelan artist Carlos Cruz-
Diez reveals his "additive col¬
our" theory. Using fine
transparent or opaque strips at
regular intervals, he uses red,
green, black and white, causing
an interaction between these
colours which act on the
observer's retina creating the
full range of the chromatic spec¬
trum. A combination of the
movement of light and of the
observer provides an infinite
' variety of effects.
43

i JULIO LE PARC (1928- ). Knocking the
Establishment. Tumbler-dolls, 1968.
Founded in Paris in 1960, the "Visual Arts
"Research" group uses optical and kinetic ef¬
fects to induce observer participation. The
Argentine artist Julio Le Parc gives the added
incentive of a game-playing element,
sometimes using figurative ¡mages. Here the
observer is invited to knock down people from
the establishment, presented in the form of
tumbler-dolls.
DE SZYSZLO (1925- ).
House No.8. Engraving, 1975.
"Indigenism" (the integration of indigenous
culture) is a growing trend in the Andean
region. Initiated in Peru by José Sabogal and
Julia Codesido, it has evolved with Szyszlo in¬
to what might be termed "abstract in¬
digenism". His work, which draws its inspira¬
tion from literature, aims to recover and revive
traditional myths or, if necessary, invent
them.
JUAN CARLOS LANGLOIS ( 1926- ).
Miguel Angel Asturias. Indian ink on paper,
1981, in the Homage series.
Leopold Sédar Senghor described the work
of the Argentine artist Juan Carlos Langlois as
"painting-poetry", and pointed out its resem¬
blance to Chinese and pre-Columbian art.
Langlois' art is an art of metamorphosis, of the
reduction of the ¡mage to its basic elements
which, in the case of Latin America, are essen¬
tially, "bone, root and cloud".
ARMANDO MORALES (1927- ).
Two Figures. Oil on canvas, 1 970.
The Nicaraguan painter, engraver and car¬
toonist Armando Morales has lived in New
York for many years. He has alternated bet¬
ween figurative and abstract work; in his
latest stage which has most enhanced his
name as a painter his work has taken a
"metaphysical" or "visionary" turn with
representations of large figures, generally of
female nudes, against dark backgrounds or
dark blue skies with cotton-wool clouds.
44

. ENRIQUE ZANARTU (1920- ).
The Beachcomber. Oil on canvas, c.1962.
The Chilean Enrique Zañartu is a surrealist
rather than an abstract painter since the
figures that fill his canvases are symbols. He
makes play of ambiguity in that shapes are
people and splashes of colour or shading in¬
dicate the landscape. He juggles with the logic
of the "real" and the logic of "form". Like the
"Beachcomber" pacing the shore, all is
illusion.
, FERNANDO BOTERO (1932- ).
The Horseman. Bronze, 1981-1982.
By drawing on the heritage of popular art
and devoting his work to the study of daily life,
the Colombian artist Fernando Botero has
established his own distinctive identity of
style. Botero's world is an impressive, more
than life-size world. Everything is large-scale,
from his view of the history of art to the
tablecloths and watermelons of his still-lifes.
With his "over-sized images he has taken
possession of the world and made it
Colombian".
t- of tragi-comical characters. The penetrating, sarcastic sen¬
sitivity of his pen, pencil and ink rapidly placed him in the
front rank of his generation. Shortly afterwards some evolv¬
ed towards geometricism. Outstanding amongst them is
Manuel Felguérez. His sound theoretical basis, technical
precision and advanced investigations he is at present
working with computersplace this extremely sensitive ar¬
tist amongst the most important of his generation in Latin
America.
Others, such as Francisco Toledo and Alberto Gironella
are, to quote the historian and critic Jorge Alberto Manri¬
que, "establishing a special relationship with objects and the
living world that is both critical and oneiric". Although they
do not possess the instantaneous permeability of the Argen¬
tine artists, the young Mexicans have a capacity for selective
.assimilation and are capable of achieving a high degree of
maturity. They, too, occupy an outstanding place in Latin
American painting.
The generation immediately following that of Roberto
Matta in Chile includes two outstanding artists, Nemesio
Antuñez, who in recent years has been expressing on canvas
his concern for anonymous humanity, and Enrique Zañartu,
whose work is an investigation of the deeper, darker
realities.
The founder and most distinguished representative of con¬
temporary painting in Colombia is Alejandro Obregón. His
work draws its sustenance from the very sap of the Latin
American tropics. It radiates energy and creates its own
myths and images. Fernando Botero, who is internationally
known for his stylistic concept of the circular form carried
to the utmost extremes, is a complex artist. He is both a
realist and a satirist. He takes an ironic delight in reality,
which he magnifies for sarcastic purposes. He is more subtle
and ambiguous than the satisfied collectors of his works are
aware. The elegance, compassion, not to say tenderness, of
his images are only lightly suggested in the fullness of his
forms. The most recent Colombian painting reflects the
wealth of talent and variety of ideas to be found in the new
generation.
One of the most surprising developments in terms of scope
and quality is that recently achieved by painting in Bolivia.
The. pioneers of contemporary painting in that country in-^
45

^ elude artists like Maria Luisa Pacheco, who preserves her in¬
ner Andean soul in abstract form in New York, and Gil Im¬
ana. Amongst the uncompromising cultivators of abstrac¬
tion, mention should be made of Alfredo La Placa, Alfredo
Da Silva and Maria Esther Ballivian. Enrique Arnal is the
most gifted and brilliant. Social protest, the quest for pic¬
torial quality for its own sake, abstract landscape and in-
timism also have their adeptsValcárcel, Herminio Forno,
Inés Córdoba, Gustavo Madeiros, Chela Rodó, among
others. New generations of artists are emerging not only in
La Paz but also in other parts of the country.
The early success of the Guatemalan artist Rodolfo
Abularach has recently been confirmed at the Latin
American and international levels. He is extraordinarily
talented and prolific. His search for a style and his incursion
into pre-Columbian art in the manner of Rufino Tamayo
and Mérida came to an end during his stay in New York at
the beginning of the 1960s.
The Nicaraguan Armando Morales is one of the foremost
Latin American painters. Born in 1927 and therefore formed
amongst the trends and "isms" of contemporary art, he
reflects in his work a resolute independence of expression,
uninfluenced by any avant-garde trends and indifferent to
fashion. Nevertheless his work is fully contemporary and
purely pictorial.
The predominance of trends which originated in the world
centres of Western art has led some critics to deny the ex¬
istence of Latin American painting in the strict sense. I
believe on the contrary that the use of an international
system does not necessarily exclude creative originality
which in the case of Latin America is essentially hybrid. But
what, then, is the position, the contribution, the
distinguishing feature, of Latin American painting?
When trying to answer this question one must above all
avoid making false dogmatic statements of the kind one still
currently hears, and be prepared to accept a pluralistic reply
corresponding to the cultural reality of Latin America. Like
the vast region extending from Mexico to Cape Horn, this
plurality must perforce include elements that are
recognizable as specific or significant. Some of our art
critics, and some prejudiced, naive people abroad, would at¬
tribute those elements exclusively to original or indigenous
values. In fact they should be attributed to all those values
resulting from international exchanges which have taken
root in our soil. Hybridization is Latin America's vocation,
and no living language is foreign to it.
Carlos Rodriguez Saavedra
