ENCHANTED SEASHELL'
SOMETIMEaroundl515,ahandfulof
Spaniards led by Captain Panfilo de
Nárvaez and Fray Bartolomé de las
Casas established a settlement in Cuba on
the southern coast of what is now the pro¬
vince of Havana. However, this settlement
did not last long and its founders moved to
the northern coast near the Straits of
Florida, whose swift currents were an aid to
navigation. They came to a harbour con¬
sisting of a narrow inlet opening into a large
bay, well protected by hills against hur¬
ricanes. The town of San Cristóbal de la
Habana was finally established on the
western shores of this bay in November
1519. The exact date is no longer known
since the records of the municipal council
covering the period from that year to 1550
were burned by the French pirate Jacques
de Sores.
Oral tradition has it that, in accordance
with the custom of that time, the weary
founders celebrated their first mass and
held their first meeting beneath a ceiba tree,
in the shade of which a settlement of bohíos
(huts) began to grow, for initially the Euro-
MANUEL PEREIRA is a Cuban novelist and
journalist whose novels El Comandante
Veneno and El Ruso have been translated into
several languages. His reports on Nicaragua
have been published under the title Cro-Nica.
He is currently a member of Cuba's Permanent
Delegation to Unesco, and is working on a
novel set in Old Havana.
peans adopted the indigenous style of
dwelling houses made of palm-leaves with
a roof of two sloping sides and a beaten
earth floor.
Gold fever and Faustian restlessness so
captivated the minds of these con¬
quistadores that their only thought was to
set forth in search of riches on the mainland
(Mexico, El Dorado, El Darien) and of the
Spring of Eternal Youth in Florida. The
embryonic town lapsed into oblivion and
only acquired the title of city when the
Spanish crown realized that, thanks to its
geographical situation, it was the principal
port of call on the route to the Indies. It
became the gateway to the New World,
through which all the gold and silver from
America had to pass on its way to
metropolitan Spain.
Pirates and privateers soon became
aware of this traffie and were not slow to at¬
tack it. Havana was fortified and surround¬
ed with a girdle of stone ramparts which
made it impregnable. Remains of this ar¬
chitectural frenzy can still be seen: Morro-
Castle, La Punta, and the Castilla de la Real
Fuerza.
Set on a rock at the mouth
(like the lighthouses of San
Rico and of Arico in Chile),
of El Morro has been aid
since 1630. The Castillo de
was built between 1555 and
oldest castle in America,
of the harbour
Juan de Porto
the lighthouse
ing navigation
la Real Fuerza
1577. It is the
and the first
building of its kind on the continent in
which the Renaissance design which revolu¬
tionized military architecture was used. On
one of its bastions stands the Torre del
Homenaje (Tower of Homage) the cupola
of which is topped by a weathervane known
as the Giraldilla, an obvious allusion to the
Giralda in Seville.
The famous nine o'clock cannon fire,
which alarms foreigners and enables the
locals to check their watches, is another
reminder of those nights of torches and
General view of Havana and its bay, in a
lithograph by Eduardo Laplante (1818-7).
Old Havana, one of the oldest and most
beautiful cities of the New World, was
founded by the Spanish in 1519. Since 1982
it has been included in Unesco's World
Heritage List. However, its restoration and
preservation today pose a serious problem
for the Cuban authorities who addressed an
appeal for help to Unesco. In July 1983, the
Director-General of Unesco, Mr. Amadou-
Mahtar M'Bow, launchedan appeal to the in¬
ternational community in favour of a cam¬
paign to safeguard the Plaza Vieja, the city's
historic centre, and Old Havana in general.
In making his appeal Mr. M'Bow described
Old Havana as "the epitome of all the new
cities that have landmarked the epic of the
Americas and as an example par excellence
of the flamboyant intellectual, artistic and
architectural syntheses that sprang from the
intermingling of so many destinies all over
the continent".

A portrait of Old Havana by Manuel Pereira
daggers. It announced the closing of the
gates in the ramparts (built in the seven¬
teenth century and demolished around
1865), for after this hour Havana was in
danger of attack by pirates.
It was thanks to the growing importance
of the port that Havana became a maritime
city. Carpenters, cabinet-makers, caulkers,
mast- and spar-makers and labourers
thronged its streets lined with stores,
workshops and merchants' premises. The
most important ships in the Spanish fleet
were built in Havana's shipyards.
The city was also evangelized. The sword
was an earthly cross, the cross was a
heavenly sword. The green cross embedded
in a corner of the Calle Amargura (the street
of bitterness) still marks a halting-place for
the procession of the Via Crucis to the
church of Cristo del Buen Viaje. But
Havana's oldest surviving church is that of
The Holy Spirit, built between 1638 and
1661. It is the only one whose catacombs
have been preserved intact.
At the same time Havana acquired its
squares: the Plaza de Armas; the so-called
Old (formerly New) Plaza; the Plaza de San
Francisco; the Plaza del Cristo del Buen
Viaje; and most famous of all the Plaza
de la Catedral. Construction of the
cathedral was started by the Jesuits in 1748;
it marks an explosion of Baroque, a splen¬
did unfurling of forms, a book of rock,
music turned to stone. Its highly wrought
volutes in coral-veined rock recall the
spiralling smoke of a Havana cigar.
The cathedral façade is the finest surviv¬
ing expression of Cuban Baroque, unique
for the simplicity of its lines and its sensual
movement.
Inside the cathedral there is a niche
dedicated to Christopher Columbus,
although his sarcophagus, borne by the col¬
ossal statues of four sailors, is in Seville,
and his body is said to be in Santo
Domingo.
The noblemen's palaces lining the
cathedral square form the best-preserved
and most harmonious architectural group
in Old Havana. "This is the finest colonial
square in America," said Walter Gropius,
founder of the Bauhaus.
An endless dialogue between architecture
and nature was the distinctive feature of
these buildings, which were adapted to local
conditions and represent a distinctive
Havana cathedral is a
noteworthy example of the
adaptation of Spanish
religious architecture to the
needs of the West Indies. The
great Cuban poet and writer
José Lezama Lima observed
that one must see the
cathedral in profile "in order
to capture its undulating
rhythms".
Cuban style. Venetian blinds to let in the
land breeze, multi-coloured window-panes
to attenuate the glare of the Cuban light,
narrow streets shaded by awnings these
are the constant features of an urban ar¬
chitecture that is integrated into the land¬
scape and in which stone, sea and vegeta¬
tion form a harmonious whole. Ayagruma
flowers on a balcony; the walls are veined
with white fossils; no house turns its back
on the sea; all seek its breeze.
Havana also has its little mysteries. The
stones in the walls still bear the personal
marks of the masons, cut with their chisels,
sometimes initials, sometimes in¬
decipherable signs. Many of the tiles bear
the thumbprints of the tilers who moulded
them into shape on their thighs, and there is
even one which has a proverb inscribed on
it in Chinese ideograms "What the heart
commands, the hand performs".
In the patios palm trees conduct a
dialogue with pillars, as though trunks and
columns had mingled and the colonnades
been transmuted into petrified palms. Such
correspondences and syntheses are a cons¬
tant feature of this labyrinthine city, which
grew in harmony with its surroundings,
profiting from the changing light, assuming
the varying rhythms of the waves, imposing
itself as a living, dynamic organism. Old
Havana is a habitable animal, an en¬
chanted, convoluted seashell.

Courtyard of the Palace of the
Captains General of Havana,
now the City Museum.
^ Arab influence is evident in the
geometrical ornamentation of the carved
ceilings, the ironwork arabesques, the
foliate motifs on the arches, the stars etched
by fire on the ceilings, the proliferation of
patio fountains, reflecting nostalgia for the
starry skies of the desert and the unquench-
ed thirst of the mudejar. If Havana
resembles any other city, it is Seville, except
that its walls are not whitewashed; its col¬
ours have always been green and blue,
vegetation and the seathe city's secret
passions.
In 1762 the British made a breach in El
Morro and occupied Havana for eleven
months. The fortifications which had so
stubbornly resisted pirates and filibusters
succumbed to British dynamite. This period
became known in folk humour as "the time
of the mammees", from the name of the
Antillean apricot-tree, because of the red
coats of the British soldiers.
Spain recovered Havana, and Charles
III, having learned a lesson, ordered a huge
fortress, La Cabana, to be built on the hill
dominating the western shores of the har¬
bour. Havana thus became the first for¬
tified stronghold in the Americas, but it
cost such a colossal sum that Charles III,
appalled by the cost, went out onto the
balcony of his palace and asked for a
telescope to look at the lofty walls of La
Cabana. "It has cost me so much", he said,
"that it should be visible from here".
At this period Havana, with its 30,000 in¬
habitants, was already one of the major
cities of the New World, more populous
than Boston, New York, or Philadelphia.
The snuffboxes of Louis XVI's courtiers
20
were filled with Havana snuff, and our
sugar was beginning to sweeten Europe.
The sugar boom transformed Havana
from a place of transit into a terminal.
Towards the end of the eighteenth century
about a thousand ships a year entered the
bay to load sugar and deliver goods from
overseas. The independence of the United
States brought an influx of traders eager to
make fortunes. The revolution in Haiti led
to the arrival of large numbers of French.
Cosmopolitan elegance prevailed, but
slavery was a powder keg ready to explode.
Thus appeared the Cuban capital at the
beginning of the nineteenth century. It was
at this time that neo-classical architecture
appeared in Havana. A small-scale imita¬
tion of the Parthenon, El Templete, stands
a stone's throw from the mole, on the spot
where the city is supposed to have been
founded more than four and a half cen¬
turies ago. It was erected, not only to com¬
memorate the foundation, but as an act of
fealty to Spain by the Captaincy General in
the name of "faithful Havana", at a mo¬
ment when America was swept by rebellion.
The entrance pillars are surmounted by
bronze pineapples, an emblem of Havana.
Behind the gates stands the founding ceiba
treeor rather its descendant, since the
original died in the middle of the eighteenth
century from the effects of the salt air from
the sea nearby.
The inventions of the nineteenth century
soon reached Havana. Watt's steam engine
was operating in the city within four years
of its invention. Havana was the fourth
capital in the world to establish a railway
and the third to be lit by gas. Morse had
scarcely launched his campaign to promote
his telegraph system before Havana had its
telegraph lines. The telephone arrived with
its inventor. Moreover, Havana was the
first city in the world to have an automatic
telephone system, because it was chosen as
a showplace for the experiment. The first
radio station was opened by Marconi
himself in Havana. Six months after their
introduction in Paris, the first
cinematographs to appear in America were
set up in Havana.
It was a century of prosperity, or rather
of apparent prosperity, for after 1868 the
flame of the fight for independence from
Spanish colonial rule was alight in the
eastern part of the country.
Meanwhile, splendour took over in
Havana. In the mansions of the nobility,
luxurious but on a human scale, iron
gradually replaced wood: doors patterned
with nails, grilles, door-knockers, locks and
handrails... roofs with terracotta denticula-
tions. What we now call Old Havana and
what was then simply the city within the
walls, is thronged with images. This is the
Havana of Marti and Carpentier, of Hum¬
boldt, Einstein, Sarah Bernhardt,
Garibaldi, Juan Ramón Jiménez, Lorca,
Antonin Artaud, Mayakowski, Isadora
Duncan, André Breton, Caruso, Simón
Bolívar, Benito Juarez, Francisco de
Miranda, Valle-Inclán, Igor Stravinsky...
They all came here and were dazzled.
When the twentieth century began, the
star-spangled banner was flying over El
Morro. After thirty years of war against
Spain, Cubans had failed to achieve full in¬
dependence because of armed intervention
by the United States. A make-believe,
frustrating republic was subsequently pro¬
claimed. The last gas lamps gave way to
electricity, trams replaced the two-wheeled
carriages called voluntas, and asphalt took
the place of cobblestones. Art Nouveau and
Art Déco made a fleeting appearance on
some buildings, but the dominant style was
that of the foreign banks: grandiloquent,
eclectic, theatrical. Meanwhile, first the
aristocracy then the bourgeoisie moved out
to the new suburbs El Cerro, El Vedado,
Miramar that were growing outside the
city walls, and their city mansions were con¬
verted into phalansteries, the community
dwellings known in Havana as solares.
Overcrowding and promiscuity were the
hallmarks of intra-mural Havana during
the first half of the present century. The
port area was full of "joints" with il¬
luminated signs in English in a country
where more than a million people could not
even read Spanish. Many historic buildings .
were demolished to make way for absur¬
dities in imported glass.
The Cuban historian Emilio Roig de
Leuchsenring (1889-1964) protested, but
the demolitions continued, and it was only
the triumph of the revolution.in 1959 that
halted the destructive advance in the name
of "modernity" and "civilization" which
threatened to fill the oldest part of the
capital with skyscrapers. After half a cen¬
tury of officiai indolence, the Revolution
inherited a sad, badly scarred Old Havana.
A land of passage for so many years, peo¬
ple of the most diverse origins from
Africa, Europe, China, Yucutàn have
met here in a kaleidoscopic amalgam that
has produced our unique but varied ethnic,
ethical and aesthetic identity. A crucible of
cultures, styles, iconographies and
mythologies. Is it because our streets are so
narrow and the balconies so close to each
other that the inhabitant of Old Havana is
such an expansive, loquacious, cordial
being? The humble folk who people this
city, living in former palaces, are like new
princes who need no coats of arms because
their nobility is of the heart.
It is impossible to rescue 465 years of
stone overnight, but Old Havana will be
saved. Its splendid face will be restored and
be converted, not into a lifeless museum but
into a museum that is living and can be lived
in. It will be saved, with its gas lamps and
distant ships, its harbour wall for lovers,
and its shadow pantomime, its nine o'clock
cannon and whispering fountains, its damp
pavements and the winking eye of the
cyclops on El Morro.
Manuel Pereira
