New writing in Tamil
by S. Ramakrishnan
THE late 1960s were marked by an
upsurge in Tamil creative writing.
The preoccupation with ancient
Tamil culture had subsided, Tamil had been
made the language of school and higher
education and world Tamil conferences
were making the Tamil language interna¬
tionally known. The new poetry movement,
which had started in the early 1930s, was
still finding its feet, fostered mainly by
small, short-lived magazines reaching a
reading public of not more than one or two
thousand.
Against this background Tamil writers
turned for encouragement and support to
two small-circulation but influential
magazines, C.S. Chellappa's Ezhuthu
(founded in 1959) and Ka Na
Subramaniyam's Ilakkiya Vattam (found¬
ed in 1964). These two magazines, and the
writers who contributed to them, took as
their model Manikkodi, a magazine found¬
ed in the mid-1930s, in which the first at¬
tempt had been made to base literature on
the realities of life.
The founders of Manikkodi were vi¬
sionaries. They realized the need to provide
an alternative to the new popular magazines
which were beginning to make their in¬
fluence felt. Although they were na¬
tionalists committed to liberating the coun¬
try from foreign rule, they were also alive to
the need to bring Tamil consciousness into
contact with the mainstream of interna¬
tional culture. They themselves had
benefited from English education and
through it from exposure to world culture.
In Manikkodi there arose a major voice,
that of Pudumaipittan, who still remains a
main source of the contemporary literary
tradition. Pudumaipittan held that writers
had purposes other than that of using
literature simply as a vehicle for the pro¬
pagation of certain ideologies. He declared
that his stories were not intended to be a
means of educating the world and that art
could not be confined within a philosophy
of the sustenance of life. At a time when a
group of writers, such as Girija Devi,
Tamamirthammal and Va Ra, were obsess;
ed with the evils of the caste system and the
need to cut across caste barriers, particular¬
ly as far as marriage was concerned,
Pudumaipittan had the courage to point
out in his writings the problems that could
arise in intercaste marriages as a result
of the partners' differing cultural
backgrounds.
Almost all the progressive writers of to¬
day who subscribe to the Marxist ideology
trace their lineage back to Pudumaipittan.
Among the writers of the post-
independence generation T.M.C. Reghu-
nathan was one of the first to attract wide
attention with his Panjum Pasiyum (1953),
a novel depicting the capitalist/worker
34
THE THREAD AND THE BOOK. Venerated as Mother Tamil and Goddess Tamil,
the Tamil language is traditionally regarded as the creation of the god Murugan
and its grammar as a revelation by the Lord Siva. Tamil literature is the oldest
in India apart from that written in classical Sanskrit. In the Tamil language the
same word nul is used to denote both a thread and a finished work, symbolized
by three generations of villagers, above, twisting coconut fibres into cord.
relationship. He was followed by D. Jaya-
kanthan, a more prolific writer whose
earlier stories and novels espoused the
cause of the underdog.
Jayakanthan wrote about a wide range of
issues: the urban middle-class, the under¬
privileged urban slum-dweller, women in
revolt, the notions of art, the confrontation
between the traditional and the modern way
of life and the changes this necessitated, the
notions of brahminhood, justice, aspects of
sexuality, and so on. His vociferousness
was infectious and he became a model for
many writers.
The younger generation of leftist writers
(including Poomani, Pa Jayaprakasam and
Rajendra Cholan) drew their inspiration
from both Pudumaipittan and Jayakan¬
than, but without displaying the same
breadth of vision and limiting themselves to
close examination of village life and the
working class.
What has marked the work of pro¬
gressive writers has been a common concern
to make literature a tool to awaken and
reunite the working classes. Basically they
are propagandists and, in one sense, this
trend has dominated most modern Tamil
literature.
The earlier progressives were motivated
by what they saw as the threat to Indian
culture from English education and grow¬
ing urbanization. Vedanayagam Pillai, a
former district judge and a Christian whose
first novel Prathapa Mudaliyan was
published in 1879, declared that his work
emphasized devotion to God and the
obligatory social responsibilities. His con¬
temporary Rajam Iyer felt compelled to
write by the need to preserve rural tradi¬
tions and the path to Bhakti (devotion),
while Madhaviah, who also shared the anx¬
iety about the survival of traditional
culture, was urged to write by the status of

women, ignorant and uninformed (it was
the period of child-marriage and child
widows), and the threat urbanization posed
to the individual.
In the same vein, the succeeding genera¬
tion of writers used literature as a tool for
social purposes. Two good examples are Va
Ra's Sundari and Bharati's unfinished
novel Chandrikaiyin Karai. Both deal with
the problems of widows, their position in
society and their re-marriage. In 1920 Gan¬
dhi entered the arena of national politics
and his philosophy began to assert its in¬
fluence on many writers. In 1926 Panayap-
pa Chettiyar first wrote about the need for
national independence and in 1930 K.S.
Venkataramani wrote his novel
Desabhakthan Kandan which propagated
Gandhian ideals regarding rural develop¬
ment and the place of the village in the life
of the country.
During the 1930s commercial magazines
began to appear, the most popular being
Ananda Vikatan. It owed its success mainly
to Kalki, a prolific writer and the author of
Thyaga Bhumi, a novel which became an
instant success due to its nationalistic
message. Kalki's impact on his readers was
such that more magazines began to appear
thus creating a vast market for popular
writing. Since the 1970s these magazines
have proliferated and today they have a
strong hold on the cultural life of Tamil
Nadu.
The Pudumaipittan "lineage" can be
traced among a certain number of writers
whose works constitute a very significant
contribution to the language. In a sense,
Sundara Ramaswamy's J.J. Sila Kurip-
pukal and Puliya Marathin Kadhai, and G.
Nagarajan's Nalai Matrumoru Nale, and a
number of his short stories, represent the
realization of Pudumaipittan's objective of
placing literature in the context of the harsh
reality of life. These two writers have in
common their lucidity, their incisive points
of view, sincerity with regard to their ex¬
perience and a balance between social pur¬
pose and the needs of art.
From the time of Pudumaipittan on¬
wards, Tamil literature has drawn inspira¬
tion from a handful of writers, almost all of
whom are the product of Indian culture and
Indian ways of thought. Among the most
important of these are Ka Na
Subramaniyam and C.S. Chellappa. These
two writers were the ones who sustained
modern creative and critical prose and
poetry in the most adverse conditions dur¬
ing the period 1945 to 1965, both, with
equal fervour, leading the movement
towards literary criticism and the new
poetry through the medium of various
small-circulation magazines.
Ka Na Subramaniyam's Poithevu (1943),
one of the most important novels in the
Tamil language, draws upon the Tamil
psyche with its innate preoccupation with
the God/man relationship and the
philosophical quest. His short stories are
uneven in quality, yet one or two of them,
like Azhagi, are very important. Chellap-
pa's Vadivasal and Jeevanamsam also find
their source in the traditional world.
Mowni, whose writings were first
published in Manikkodi, must be con¬
sidered a major figure in Tamil literature.
Mowni's world is the world of the introvert.
He brought forth in his stories an intensity
of feeling which is unmatched in Tamil. He
was able to create this intensitymostly
centering on the themes of man/woman
relationships and death thanks to a
powerful yet deceptively simple prose style.
One of the most popular yet accomplish¬
ed writers in the literary sense is T.
Janakiraman. He is a strange combination
of traditional influences and a capacity to
give a dream-like quality to the life he
depicted. Like many of his predecessors he
was fascinated by the man/woman relation¬
ship, but his depiction of it was a clever
balance between the popular writer's over¬
simplification of its intricacies and the com¬
plexity of Mowni. Born in a Tanjore
village, his descriptions of the enchanting
aspects of rural Tanjore, with its
agricultural setting, temple culture and
music, enhanced the appeal of his writing.
It was in his short stories, however, that
he achieved his greatest literary success, and
in this tradition a group of modern creative
writers has emerged. Significant among
them are Asokamithran, Vannanilavan,
Vannadasan, Sa Kandasamy and Ra-
janarayanan. These authors are situated
somewhere between Pudumaipittan and the
leftist writers. With their under-stated style
Asokamithran and Kandaswamy evoke the
charm and elusiveness of the day-to-day life
of the middle-class. They never over-react,
they operate within narrow stylistic ranges,
but their sensibilities are a sincere reflection
of their experience.
Vannadasan and Vannanilavan have
much in common. Both are post-1970
writers, they come from similar
backgrounds and they are very sensitive to
the physical and emotional life around
them. To both, the simple joys and depriva¬
tions of ordinary people are important,
though Vannadasan tends to romanticize
them. He is a little dreamy-eyed in his por¬
trayal of the eternal abiding goodness and
charm of simple folk. Vannanilavan has a
slightly larger canvas and is concerned with
the psychological implications of
situations of human relationships, of
economic situations and those arising from
a sense of awe at the world.
S. Ramakrishnan
CONTEMPORARY TAMIL PAINTING
In both style and content contemporary
artists of Tamil Nadu draw inspiration
from many sources ranging from tradi¬
tional sculptures with their mythological
allusions to folk themes and devel¬
opments in 20th-century European art.
Brahmasutra (1978), above, by K. V.
Haridasan, who has taken Yantras, linear
diagrams used in ancient Tantric texts as
a support for meditation, out of their
mystical context and used them as a
basis for abstract designs. In Toilette,
below, K. Srinivasulu has combined folk
motifs with a cubistic approach. Discuss¬
ing the challenge modern Tamil artists
have faced as they seek to develop their
own individual styles of expression, the
Tamil artist and critic V. Jayaraman has
written: "... it was and still is today dif¬
ficult for Tamil Nadu artists to give ex¬
pression to an identity in line with their
rich cultural heritage which is tightly
woven around metaphysical values.
Painters were particularly at a loss since
there was no real prototype of traditional
' work for them to follow. Sculptures were
the only forms of plastic expression to
which they could refer since so little an¬
cient painting had survived. They were to
find the nucleus of their inspiration in the
architecture of temples, in the roman¬
ticism that exists within a sculpture in
spite of its rigorous classical
measurements, in the rhythm of rasa
[flavour] and bhava [mood], and in the
fascinating contradiction between
abstract ideas being expressed through
form and figurative forms expressed
through abstract designs a rich foun-
tainhead of 'Surrealism' as opposed to
the self-induced hallucinations of the ac¬
cepted Surrealists."
35
Photos © V. Jayaraman, Madras
