THE most important feature of the
physical world around us the
Universe is its structure.
Rather than being scattered haphazard¬
ly, the matter that surrounds us is, to a
large degree, assembled in various for¬
mations or structures. Structures of
one type constitute the building blocks
from which are formed structures of a
second level that are considerably
larger in spatial dimension. These
second-level structures are in turn
assembled into third-level structures
and so on, but, as we shall see later, not
ad infinitum. In other words, there is a
hierarchy of structural levels.
If we confine ourselves to
astronomical scales, any enumeration
of these structures must necessarily
start with the Earth and the other
planets of the solar system whose cen¬
tre is the star we call the Sun. Hundreds
or thousands of millions of stars are
grouped in galaxies like our Galaxy, the
Milky Way, or the nebula in An¬
dromeda. This is the second astro¬
nomical structural level. Galaxies,
however, are unevenly distributed in
space and form huge clusters or
superclusters. It is these structures that
are of interest in cosmology the study
of the Universe itself.
For the non-expert in astronomy the
unit of distance of which he can most
easily form a mental picture is the light-
year the distance travelled by light in
one year. A light-year is approximately
equivalent to ten million million (1013)
kilometres. For comparison let us
YACOV BORISSOVICH ZELDOVICH,
Soviet physicist, is a member of the USSR
Academy of Sciences. In the field of
astrophysics and cosmology he has been In¬
volved in the development of theories con¬
cerning the evolution of stars and stellar
systems, and of processes in an expanding
"hot" universe. He has been awarded the
Lenin Prize and four State Prizes in recognition
of his scientific achievements.

by Yacov Borissovich Zeldovich
>*3S?5fc
W$k *; f*¿.
recall that it takes light eight minutes to
reach the Earth from the Sun, but ap¬
proximately four years from Próxima
Centauri, the nearest star. Próxima is
therefore four light-years away.
The diameter of a typical galaxy may
be as little as ten thousand or as much
as one hundred thousand light-years,
and the distance from the Earth to the
nearest giant galaxy, Andromeda's
nebula, exceeds two million light-years.
Galaxies are grouped together in
clusters, and the diameters of the big
clusters of galaxies are of the order of
ten million light-years. Clusters
themselves group together in
superclusters that are between one
hundred million and three hundred
million ,;ght-years across.
Big clusters of galaxies, containing
thousands of galaxies and more, have
been known for a long time because
they stand out clearly in the sky. Figure
(1) overleaf, for instance, shows the
great cluster of galaxies in the direction
of (but far beyond) the constellation
Coma. But superclusters have only
been unambiguously identified as a
result of progress achieved in observa¬
tional astronomy in the past decade.
The structure of the superclusters
could not be determined as long as the
photographs studied in stellar atlases
showed only a projection of a galaxy's
position on the celestial sphere. If
galaxies seem to be alongside each
other in photographs, it does not
follow that they are actually near one
another. It is quite possible that such
galaxies are at different distances from
the Earth and that it is only by accident
that they lie almost along the same line
of sight as viewed from the Earth. The
true position of galaxies in space can be
ascertained only by constructing a
three-dimensional picture. To do this a
third co-ordinatethe distance to the
galaxymust be added to the two
angle co-ordinates which give the posi¬
tion of the galaxy on the celestial sphere
(these are analogous to geographical
latitude and longitude).
The distances to the distant galaxies
are found using Hubble's Law, which
tells us that the velocity at which a dis¬
tant galaxy is receding from us is pro¬
portional to its distance from us. The
coefficient of proportionality is called
Hubble's constant (see page 16). The
velocity of a galaxy can be determined
from the Doppler effect on the light
coming from that galaxy, that is to say
by measuring its "red shift" (see page
16).
Red shifts have now been measured
for more than ten thousand galaxies.
Using the distances to the galaxies thus
obtained, three-dimensional pictures
of the distribution of the galaxies in
space have been constructed with the
aid of computers. The results were
unexpected.
Why unexpected, and what distribu¬
tion of galaxies would we have ex¬
pected a priori? If all structural levels
of matter are qualitatively similar to
each other and differ only in spatial
dimensions, then something not unlike
the structure depicted in Figure (2),
where every dot represents a galaxy,
should have been obtained.
In other words, on the basis of our
previous knowledge it was quite
natural to suppose that galaxies are
grouped in clusters in exactly the same
way that stars are grouped in galaxies.
The existence of such clusters, as in
Coma (see Figure 1), would furnish an
additional argument in support of such
an hypothesis.
The reality, however, proved to be
quite different. An overwhelming pro¬
portion (80 to 90 per cent) of the galax¬
ies proved to be concentrated in greatly
extended, thread-like (filamentary)
patterns with a thickness of less than
thirty million light-years and a length
of up to three hundred million light-
years. Adjacent threads intersect each
other forming a combined, three-
dimensional structure like a network of
cells, or a honeycomb. This structure is
usually called a supercluster system, a
boundary being conventionally drawn
between separate superclusters where
the threads become finer and more
distinct. The large clusters of galaxies,
of the type depicted in Figure (1), con¬
tain an extremely small proportion (less
than ten per cent) of all the galaxies,
and as a rule they are situated near the
points of intersection of the filamen¬
tary structures.
A schematic, very simplified picture
of the distribution of the galaxies is
given in Figure (3). Superclusters oc¬
cupy a very small portion (about ten
per cent) of the volume of the Universe
as a whole. The remaining space con¬
tains hardly any galaxies. In a projec¬
tion of the visible celestial sphere these
huge voids disappear completely
because the superclusters lying behind
these voids are seen through the gaps.
The same thing happens with the
filamentary structures. Only the big
clusters, having a very marked concen¬
tration towards the centre, still stand
out (as in Figure 1). This is why it was
necessary to construct a three-
dimensional picture.
The structures as represented in
Figures (2) and (3) are clearly visible to
the eye and it is impossible to confuse
them. But how can they be distinguish¬
ed from each other mathematically and
quantitatively? The problem is rather
like one we encounter in everyday life.
We instantly recognize someone we
know in a photograph or on meeting
him, but how can we describe him in
words so that others can recognize
him? (It is even more difficult to teach
a computer to recognize someone from
his or her external appearance).
25

Figures (2) and (3) have been drawn
so that the average density of the galaxy
dots and the density contrast (defined
as that portion of the volume of space
in which most of the galaxies are. con¬
tained) are identical. We can easily tell
them apart. At the same time a strict
mathematical criterion is essential in
order to discern the structures because
the human eye is capable of seeing
structures where none exists. The story
of the "canals" on Mars, seen by
observers with poor telescopes only to
vanish from view when more powerful
instruments were used, is a good exam¬
ple (see opposite page).
Our Moscow team recently succeed¬
ed in establishing such a criterion.
Leaving aside the mathematical details,
this criterion can be explained as
follows. Suppose your problem is to
cross from one end of Figure (2) or
Figure (3) to the other, but the Figure
represents the whole of the infinite
Universe. You are entitled to touch on¬
ly upon those places where there are
galaxy dots. Moreover, your physical
possibilities are limited you cannot
make steps or leaps of more than a cer¬
tain length. The question is: what is the
maximum length of step you must be
capable of in order to perform the task
of completing a voyage through the
whole of the Universe?
The answer depends on the ratio of
this maximum length of step to the
average distance between the galaxy
dots, which we may call the critical
parameter.
If we look at Figures (2) and (3), we
see that when crossing the structure
shown in Figure (2), it is necessary to
take big leaps between the clusters (so a
maximum length of step of the order of
the distance between the clusters is
necessary) whereas it is possible to
cross the structure in Figure (3) in small
steps, and the maximum length of step
in this case does not exceed the distance
between the galaxies within the fila¬
ment. Consequently, the critical
parameter in the first case turns out to
be considerably greater than in the
second. For the purposes of com¬
parison we can consider a third case,
where the galaxy dots are disposed
quite haphazardly and independently
of each other. In this case the
parameter acquires an intermediate
value close to three.
So which structure does the real
Universe resemble? When we in¬
vestigate a real three-dimensional
distribution of galaxies we find that the
parameter is significantly less than
three and close to that obtained for the
filamentary structure in Figure (3).
This tells us, in rigorous mathematical
terms, that the honeycomb structure of
the superclusters that we perceive with
our own eyes is real.
Observations also prove that on a
scale of the order of a thousand million
light-years, which is twice as much as
the maximum scale of a supercluster,
the distribution of matter in the
Universe is, to a high degree of preci¬
sion, homogeneous (the same every¬
where), isotropic (it looks the same in
all directions) and unstructured. Devia¬
tions from the average density on this
scale do not exceed ten to twenty per
cent. On still larger scales the degree of
homogeneity and isotropicality is even
greater. Therefore, non-homogeneous
structures of a higher level than
superclusters do not exist. Super-
clusters are the biggest structures in the
universe, at the top of the hierarchy.
On bigger scales, the Universe is
uniform.
How can we explain this observed
structure? The general characteristics
of the Universe, such as its overall
homogeneity, isotropy and its expan¬
sion are vividly described by means of
the "hot Big Bang" model. To explain
the origin of the galaxies, their
assembly into clusters and super-
clusters, we must assume that at the
time of the Big Bang there were very
slight inhomogeneities (unevennesses
or "lumpiness") in the distribution of
matter. In recent years some very at¬
tractive and exciting theories have been
proposed to explain these initial in
homogeneities (see article page 8). But
here we shall consider only how those
inhomogeneities grew as the Universe
got older.
It is easy to investigate the evolution
of inhomogeneities (lumps in the
universe) as long as they are small. The
lumps grow because because gravity
pulls more matter onto them and,
although they start small, ultimately
they become more pronounced. As
they grow, the equations needed to
describe their behaviour become more
complex, but I have succeeded in show¬
ing that the first solid structures to ap¬
pear must have had the form of a flat
thin cake with sharp edges. Because of
this the theory became known as the
"pancake" theory of galaxy form¬
ation. In the course of time the pan¬
cakes grew until they intersected each
other. The density of the matter on the.
lines of intersection increases further as
gravity does its work and it is precisely
these lines that form the cellular net¬
work structure during further evolu¬
tion. Numerical calculations made on
computers in Moscow and by other
teams of experts give a picture of a
large-scale honeycomb structure on the
whole similar to the one observed,
although there is not yet complete
agreement on all the details.
Great advances are being made in
cosmology as a whole and in the theory
of the structure of the Universe.. Fur¬
ther work remains to be done but the
rate of progress is such that we can ex¬
pect real advances towards finding the
answers to these profound questions
within the lifespan of this generation.
Yacov Borissovich Zeldovich
Figure 1
26
Figure 2 Figure 3
