The fragile art of film by Raymond Borde
THE cinema is a fragile art. Before the
first film archives were established
it suffered grievous losses and it
remains vulnerable to the unconsidered
destruction of negatives and prints.
The scale of these losses is horrifying.
There are grounds for believing that almost
half of all the films made throughout the
world in the period between the invention
of the cinema in 1895 and 1950 have disap¬
peared. There were variations from one
country to another; but taking into account
the history of the cinema as a whole, varia¬
tions in production methods, the evolution
of the market and technical progress in the
conservation of film, this is a reasonable
estimate of average losses between the
period in which destruction was rife and the
present era in which conservation is a prime
concern. It provides overwhelming
justification for the call for a world policy
for the safeguard of "moving images".
The underlying reason for these losses is
to be found in the very nature of films,
which are both a form of merchandise and
objects of cultural value. For half a cen¬
tury, commercial considerations were up¬
permost. Producers simply destroyed old
films that were out of date, had lost their
RAYMOND BORDE, French film historian and
critic, is the founder-curator of the Toulouse
Cinémathèque and Vice-President of the Inter¬
national Federation of Film Archives (FIAF).
His study Les Cinémathèques was published
in 1983 by L'Age d'Homme publishers,
Lausanne.
popularity or, for technical reasons, were
no longer marketable. The idea of moving
images as being part of the cultural heritage
developed only slowly, thanks to the efforts
of historians and those who pioneered the
first film archives.
The first wave of destruction on a
massive scale occurred in about 1920. The
principal victim was the so-called "early"
cinema the cinema of the fairground and
the popular entertainment houses. Pan¬
tomimes, spectaculars, one- or two-reel
melodramas and comic chases full of
special effects which delighted popular au¬
diences were the first to be scrapped, but the
early "art films" of the period immediately
preceding the First World War, which
sought to earn the cinema a status com¬
parable to that of the theatre, also suffered
the same fate.
Tastes had changed. After 1918 films
became more ambitious, more realistic, and
ran on average for an hour and a half. Ac¬
tors of quality replaced the light-hearted
entertainers of the pre-war years and film-
directing became an art in itself. There was
a complete break with the past, with the
"old" cinema as it was termed disdainfully.
Distributors hurried to get rid of their
stocks of films which had lost their com¬
mercial value, selling them off to dealers
who washed them to recover the silver salts
contained in the emulsion.
The same thing was happening
everywhere. The American Film Institute
has estimated that eighty-five per cent of
the films made in the United States between .
1895 and 1918 disappeared in this manner.
The figures are similar for France, Italy and
the Scandinavian countries. The works of
Georges Meliès and Ferdinand Zecca suf¬
fered particularly, but the early films of
Abel . Gance, Mauritz Stiller and Victor
Sjoestrom were not spared either. This was
spring-cleaning with a vengeance.
The second wave of destruction, just as
wholesale as the first, took place around
1930 with the transition from silent to talk¬
ing pictures. The cinema underwent a
radical change. As far as the film itself was
concerned, the standard gauge remained 35
mm, but the image was reduced in size to
make room for the sound track. Projectors
were replaced or modified. Speech, song
and operetta invaded the screen. A new
generation of actors drawn from the theatre
replaced film stars who could mime but not
speak their parts.
Within two years, the cinema industry
throughout the world found itself with
enormous stocks of rejected film on its
hands which were bundled off to the scrap
dealers. Global statistics concerning the
losses of films of the 1920s, the golden age
of the silent cinema, do not exist, or remain
to be compiled, but approximate estimates
put these losses at eighty per cent for Italy,
seventy-five per cent for the United States
and seventy per cent for France. In coun¬
tries where State Film Archives had been
created in time to preserve at least one
negative or print the figures are somewhat

This year, in a notable example of interna¬
tional collaboration between film archives,
the Gosfilmofond of Moscow enabled the
Cinémathèque of Toulouse (France) to pre¬
sent a programme of 38 little-known Soviet
films of the 1920s and an exhibition of 350
photos taken from them. Below and on op¬
posite page, 4 of the photos. From left to
right, shots from: Katka's Reinette Apples
(Katka, Bumajnyi ranet) by Friedrich Ermler
and Edouard lohanson (1926), a portrayal of
ways of life in the Soviet Union at that time.
The Extraordinary Adventures of Mr. West in
the Land of the Bolsheviks (Neobytchainye
prikliutcheniia mistera Vesta v strane
bolchevikov, 1924), by Lev Kuleshov. The
actor in photo is the great Soviet director
Vsevolod Pudovkin (1893-1953). Aelita by
Yakov Protazanov (1924). The costumes
and sets for this science-fiction film were
designed in the constructivist style. Photo
shows Aelita, ruler of the planet Mars,
played by Julia Solntseva. The Girl and the
Hooligan (Barychnia i khuligan) by Vladimir
Mayakovski and Evgeni Slavinski (1918).
This was the second of3 films written for the
Neptune company in 1918 by the poet Maya¬
kovski (1893-1930), shown in the photo.
Above Durutta ippeiji ("A Page of
Madness") a dramatic story filmed in 1926
by Kinugasa Teinosuke, one of the great
pioneers of Japanese cinema. The scenario
was by Kawabata Yasunari (Nobel Prize for
Literature, 1968). In this masterpiece, set
almost entirely in a lunatic asylum,
Kinugasa used a wide range of ingenious
techniques to heighten the visual intensity,
including the superimposition ofbars in cer¬
tain sequences. For many years it was
thought that all the prints of the film had
been lost until Kinugasa himself discovered
a copy in 1971 in his garden shed.

lower (forty per cent in Germany and ten
per cent in the USSR).
Whatever the exact figures, these
catastrophic losses had the effect of alerting
public opinion and launching the idea of
film archives. Journalists and men of letters
took up the cause and, whilst recognizing
that there were economic constraints,
argued in favour of conserving the products
of the industry as part of the cultural
heritage.
The third wave of destruction occurred
much more recently, during the early 1950s.
Until then, the thin strip of material used as
a support for the light-sensitive emulsion in
which moving pictures were recorded had
been made of cellulose nitrate (celluloid) a
highly inflammable and dangerous
substance. When a number of governments
prohibited the use of cellulose nitrate,
manufacturers generally turned to non-
inflammable cellulose acetate as the sup¬
port for what came to be known as "safety
film"
At this time, in the early 1950s, it was not
yet realized that old films of any kind might
one day acquire renewed value as material
for television programmes or as the focus of
retrospective projections in avant-garde or
experimental film theatres. Masterpieces
were preserved but run-of-the-mill movies
which appeared to have had their day were
scrapped. The deposit of nitrate films in na¬
tional archives was encouraged in some
countries, but the rate of destruction re¬
mained high. Here again, global statistics
concerning total cinematographic output
between 1930 and 1950 (the period between
the arrival of talking pictures and the
replacement of nitrate by acetate film) are
lacking, but it has been estimated that some
thirty per cent of all films from this period
were lost.
So far we have spoken of losses that can
be ascribed to human negligence or to com¬
mercial considerations of profitability. But
the laws of chemistry have also been
responsible for the disappearance of many
films. Nitrate film is unstable and gradually
decomposes. Colour films fade and lose
their harmony and chromatic balance as a
result of chemical reactions among the
three basic colouring materials. Victim of
human negligence, the cinema has also
come under a sort of technical curse which
makes it one of the most endangered of the
Egged On (1926) by the
American director and actor
Charley Bowers. The film was
recently discovered in France
in a gypsy's caravan.
arts. Thus the role of the chemist has
become determinant in the salvaging of this
element of the cultural heritage.
This salvage operation constitutes the
substance of the long history of film
libraries and archives. As long ago as 1898,
a Polish cameraman. Boleslaw
Matuszewski, published in Paris a pam¬
phlet entitled Une Nouvelle Source
d'Histoire (A New Source of History), in
which he proposed the creation of a
cinematographic museum where motion
pictures of historical, educational, in¬
dustrial, medical and theatrical interest
could be preserved. Matuszewski's aim was
to transmit to future generations the
authentic image of his own age, the idea be¬
ing to establish an official archive for the
statutory deposit of cinematographic works
which would also be authorized to accept
films in the form of gifts, bequests or on an
exchange basis. Priority was to be given to
the conservation of negatives and the ar¬
chive was to be open to the public.
The project was ahead of its time and
failed to materialize. Thirty-five years were
to pass before Matuszewski's prophetic
message was rescued from oblivion. (See
extracts from his pamphlet on page 27).
It is true, however, that up to the end of
the silent film era collections were built up
in various countries, but their purpose was
utilitarian. The aim was not to preserve
cinematographic works as such, but rather
to assemble various categories of films for
a specific purpose. This could be military
(as in the case of collections in the British
War Museum, in London, B.U.F.A. in
Berlin and the Section Cinématographique
of the French Army, in Paris); religious (the
collection of the Abbé Joye, in Basle); legal
(the Library of Congress collection in the
United States, preserved for copyright pur¬
poses, and the Gaumont, Pathé, Metro-
Goldwyn-Mayer and other studio archives);
educational (the Soviet Documentary Film
Archive, created in 1926); or even
philosophical (the Albert Kahn Collection,
in Paris).
Not until 1933 was the first film archive
in the modern sense of the term an institu¬
tion which has as its prime function the
safeguarding of moving images as part of
the cultural heritage established. This was
the Svenska Filmsamfundet, set up in
Stockholm by a group of film enthusiasts
who had been shocked by the wholesale
destruction of silent films. This modest in¬
itiative proved to be a landmark in the
history of film archives. Film collections
were soon established in other countries:
in 1934, in Berlin (the Reichsfilmarchiv),
and in Moscow (the V.K.I.G., the School of
Cinema Archive);
in 1935, in London (the National Film
Library), New York (the Film Library of
the Museum of Modern Art) and Milan (the
Mario Ferrari Collection, which later
became the Italian Film Archive);
in 1936, in Paris (the Cinémathèque
Française);
in 1938, in Brussels (the Belgian Film
Archive).
The same year, 1938, saw the creation of
the International Federation of Film Ar¬
chives (FIAF), which at first only had
members in Berlin, London, New York and
Paris, but which gave international form to
the new awareness and the common ideal.
The public too was beginning to discover,
thanks to retrospective showings of early
films, that the cinema already had a cultural
history and that it belonged to the artistic
heritage of mankind.
After the Second World War, this move¬
ment grew in strength and wherever a na¬
tional cinematographic tradition existed na¬
tional film archives were created. Today,
FIAF comprises seventy-two institutions in
fifty States, and the trend seems irreversi¬
ble. The Recommendation for the
Safeguarding and Preservation of Moving
Images, adopted by the General Conference
of Unesco in 1980, is also bearing fruit. The
developing countries are showing a steadily
increasing interest in the preservation and
utilization for cultural purposes of films
and other audio-visual material from the
past.
At the same time, the concept of film ar¬
chives has itself evolved. The pioneers of
the 1930s were strong-minded people and
their tastes and preferences coloured their
judgment in selecting films for preserva¬
tion. They behaved more like collectors
than archivists and some of them were
unaware that there was a technical aspect to
the process of storing films. Nevertheless,
credit is due to them for the historic role
they played in creating the first film ar¬
chives and in saving for posterity thousands
of films which would otherwise have disap¬
peared. With the extension of film archives
has also come the development and imposi¬
tion of international standards for preser¬
vation and cataloguing.
Nowadays, scientists and jurists have as
important a role to play as film enthusiasts.
Their task is to render the concept of archiv¬
ing credible to today's more understanding
film-makers. After more than a few set¬
backs, as well as successes, the great adven¬
ture launched prophetically by a Polish
cameraman in 1898 is nearing fulfilment,
and this is surely the best guarantee that the
cinema will never again suffer the destruc¬
tive acts that have marked its history in the
past. _ _
Raymond Borde
