An unequal combat
by Godfrey N. Uzoigwe
Throwing axes and
knives used during the
1896 Asante War.
Photo © The National Army Museum, London
Colour page left
The roots of apartheid, South Africa's of¬
ficial ideology built on white supremacy and
racial segregation, can be traced back
through the historical record of domination
practised by small white minorities over a
large black majority. This collage, Livre sur
l'Afrique du Sud, by the South African
painter Gavin Jantjes, formed part of the Ar¬
tists against Apartheid exhibition held in
Paris last year and organized by the United
Nations and the Committee of Artists of the
World Against Apartheid.
THE story of the military conquest of
Africa is an epic of heroic resistance
against tremendous odds. It was a
struggle in which, in virtually every respect,
the dice were heavily loaded in favour of the
European invaders.
In the first place, thanks to the activities
of European explorers and missionaries, by
1880 Europeans were far more knowledge¬
able about Africa, its topography and
resources and the strengths and weaknesses
of its States and societies, than Africans
were about Europe.
Secondly, owing to the revolutionary
changes in medical technology, and in par¬
ticular the discovery of the prophylactic use
of quinine against malaria, Europeans
became far less fearful of Africa than they
had been before the middle of the nine¬
teenth century.
Thirdly, the material and financial
resources of Europe were overwhelming in
comparison with those of Africa. Thus,
while Europe could afford to spend mil¬
lions of pounds on overseas campaigns,
Africa could not sustain any protracted
military confrontation with Europe.
Fourthly, while the period following the
Russo-Turkish war of 1877-1878 was mar
ked, according to historian J. Holland
Rose, by "a state of political equilibrium
which made for peace and stagnation in
Europe", in Africa it was marked by inter-
State and intra-State conflict and rivalry
the Mandingo against the Tukulor, the
Asante against the Fante, the Baganda
against the Bunyoro, the Batooro against
the Bunyoro, the Mashona against the
Ndebele.
Thus while Europe could focus its atten¬
tion on imperial activities without any
major distractions at home, African States
and countries had their attention divided.
Moreover, divided though the European
States were on imperial and colonial issues,
throughout the era of partition and right up
to 1914, they always resolved these ques¬
tions without resort to war, except in the
single case of the conflict between the
British and the Boers in south Africa.
Despite competition and crisis, therefore,
the European powers involved in the parti¬
tion of Africa displayed a remarkable spirit
of solidarity which not only eliminated wars
among them but also prevented the African
rulers and communities from playing one
European power off against another.
Throughout this period, various European
powers took on the African powers one at^
23

The period of the colonial conquest of
Africa coincided with technical advances in
arms manufacture which revolutionized
warfare and gave the European powers an
overwhelming firepower advantage over
African resistance fighters. The introduc¬
tion during the second half of the 19th cen¬
tury of breech-loading rifles and metal-
cartridge ammunition enormously increas¬
ed the range, accuracy and rate offire ofthe
individual rifleman and signalled the end of
cavalry as an effective military force. Even
more striking was the evolution of the
machine-gun with the invention, in par¬
ticular, of the Gatling gun (see previous
page), in 1862, and the Maxim gun (left), in
1883. With their outdated muzzle loaders,
throwing axes and spears, even the largest
and most dedicated African armies were no
match for the small, well-disciplined,
highly-trained European expeditionary
forces equipped with these deadly new
weapons.
a time and never was an African State as¬
sisted by another European country.
The behaviour of the African States,
however, was marked, by and large, by lack
of solidarity, unity or co-operation. Some
did not hesitate to ally themselves against
their neighbours, only to be vanquished
later in their own turn. The Baganda allied
themselves with the British against the
Bunyoro and the Barotse with the British
against the Ndebele while the Bambara
teamed up with the French against the
Tukulor.
The final and easily the most decisive fac¬
tor was, of course, the overwhelming logis¬
tic and military superiority that Europe
enjoyed over Africa. While Europe had at
its disposal well-drilled, professional
armies, very few African States had estab
lished standing armies and fewer still had
professional armies. Furthermore, the
Europeans could always rely on African
mercenaries and levies to give them the
numerical superiority they needed.
Above all, under the Brussels Convention
of 1890, the imperial powers agreed not to
sell arms to Africans. This meant that most
African armies were armed with outmoded
guns, mainly flint-locks or muzzle-loading
muskets and had no heavy artillery or naval
power whatsoever.
The European armies, on the other hand,
had the support of their navies and were
armed with the most up-to-date heavy artil¬
lery, repeater rifles and, above all, Gatling
and Maxim machine-guns. Towards the
end, they were using motor vehicles and
even aeroplanes. It is significant that
Samori and Menelik, the two African
leaders who succeeded in inflicting some
defeats on the Europeans, were the two who
managed to obtain a certain quantity of up-
to-date weapons. The overwhelming mili¬
tary superiority that Europe enjoyed over
Africa was succinctly summed up in this
couplet by the British poet Hilaire Belloc:
Whatever happens, we have got
The Maxim gun, and they have not.
In view of all these economic, political
and, above all, military and technological
advantages enjoyed by Europe over Africa,
the contest was a most uneven one and its
outcome was inevitable. Indeed, for
Europe, the timing of the conquest could
not have been better; for Africa it could not
have been worse.
Godfrey N. Uzoigwe
A 19th-century Yoruba Oba (king) with two
of his generals. They are armed with flint¬
locks known as "Dane" guns.
