George Orwell,
a Tory anarchist'
by Jacques Charpier
SOMETIMES the anniversary of the birth or death of an
author, or of the date of publication of a book, offers an
opportunity to pay tribute to universal culture by lighting
candles which in many cases shed only a brief flicker of light on a
writer or his work. This year is somewhat different; it is itself the
title of a book George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four which
since it was published over thirty years ago has made its author
world famous.
Orwell, whose real name was Eric Arthur Blair, was born at
Motihari in Bengal on 25 June 1903. His father, Richard Walmesley
Blair, was in the Opium Department of the Government of India.
Eric's family belonged to the outer reaches of the Establishment.
His great grandfather (died 1820) had been a rich planter in
Jamaica who had married into the aristocracy but had died a poor
man. His youngest son, Eric's grandfather, after briefly studying
at Cambridge, was obliged through indigence to make a career in
the Church of England. His son, Eric's father, became a minor col¬
onial civil servant at the age of eighteen. Somewhat late in life he
married Ida Mabel Limouzin, daughter of a French teak merchant
and boatbuilder. Risky speculations in rice brought the Limouzins
down in the world. This relative social decline may shed some light
on the personality of the future author of Nineteen Eighty-Four
and on a certain ambiguity that can be sensed in him. He said that
he belonged to "the lower upper middle class".
His parents' relatively modest situation did not prevent them
from sending him to Eton, where he studied Latin, Greek,
mathematics and divinity, and rowed and played cricket. He seems
to have been an average student, but he was already determined to
become a "famous author".
Like some of his fellow pupils, Eric displayed a certain refusal to
conform. He read Bernard Shaw, H.G. Wells, and Galsworthy,
and "loosely described myself as a Socialist". One question in a
general knowledge paper at school in 1920 was "Whom do you con-,
sider the ten greatest men now living?" Blair, like fifteen out of six¬
teen in the class, included Lenin in his list. Either because of his
mediocrity as a student or, more likely, because of his family's
financial straits, he did not go on from Eton to Oxford. Instead,
he became a trainee at the Burma Provincial Police Training School
at Mandalay, graduating at the age of twenty-one as an Assistant
Superintendent of Police in the British colonial administration.
About the details of Blair's life during his five years in Burma not
much is known, but we do know that he was torn between two feel¬
ings: a certain distance from the colonialized peoples and a growing
rejection of British imperialism and colonialism. His Burmese ex¬
perience was probably much more important than his unconven¬
tional reading at Eton as a source of his "socialism", and from it
he developed his critique of imperialism and of capitalism in
general.
In 1927 Blair resigned. "I gave it up", he wrote later, "mainly
because I could not go on any longer serving an imperialism which
I had come to regard as very largely a racket".
JACQUES CHARPIER, French poet, essayist and radio producer, is
literary director of a French publishing house. A former professor of
French literature at Bryn Mawr College, Pennsylvania, he is the author
of many articles and books, including Paysage du Salut, Le Fer et le
Laurier, Paul Valéry, Villon and Saint-John Perse.
Back in England, Eric Blair's vocation to become a "famous
author" took practical shape: he decided to start to write. An
unusual period of his life now began. Even though he was in poor
health, there was no question of living off his family. However, I
do not think that it was for such simple and immediate moral
reasons that he chose to live as a vagrant in Paris and London. In
his first published book, Down and Out in Paris and London (when
he adopted the pseudonym George Orwell), he stressed the literary
nature of his work, and it is true that he published a number of ar¬
ticles at this period. He also refers to two novels which he claims
to have written then, but all trace of them has disappeared. It is not
impossible that his deliberate decision to live the life of a tramp was
taken for other reasons. He was not, in the narrow sense of the
term, politically minded. His unconventionality at Eton and his
o
@
George Orwell his real name was Eric
Blairwas born at Motihari, in Bengal,
on 25 June 1903. He is seen above,
aged six weeks in the arms of his ayah
(nursemaid).
criticisms of British imperialism did not go far enough to mould his
behaviour. On the other hand it cannot be ruled out that there were
psychological impulses behind his excursions into vagabondage. He
was aware of belonging to the "lower upper middle class" which
was simultaneously linked to and excluded from the Establishment,
conscious of its poverty yet remote from the "people", stripped of
its ancient privileges but still attached to certain traditions. Let us
say that there was a "bourgeois" streak in Eric Blair and also,
possibly, some unconscious failing which had given rise to certain
feelings of guilt. I would not go so far as to say that during the
Down and Out years Orwell was taking part in a play in which he

- 1 <il 4 <
At that time, the Left in England consisted of the Labour Party,
with its various tendencies, the (orthodox) Communist Party and
the Independent Labour Party (ILP), a group whose ideological
identity is difficult to define but which brought together socialist
humanists as well as communists opposed to the doctrines of the
Third International.
Orwell, who was closer to the ILP, described himself as a "Tory
anarchist", a contradiction in terms which can be seen as reflecting
the personal ambiguities of someone whom the experiences of life
and certain personal fantasies had pushed towards socialist
theories. Nevertheless there remained within him the man of the
past who placed great trust in the middle-classes whose leader he
aimed to be in the coming revolution. This contrasted with the
Marxist-Leninists who saw in the Proletariat and its "dictatorship"
the only dynamic, historic revolutionary force. Orwell, who saw
himself as an out-and-out revolutionary, was not a populist, and
even less a plebeian. At times his writing hints at a certain distance
from the common people, who "smell".
But by then it was 1936 and Orwell was seriously concerned
about the threat from nazism and fascism which some elements of
the Left tended to under-estimate and shrug off as merely
epiphenomena. Eric Blair decided to take part in the war in Spain.
dozen of the other" and that this kind of war could end, even in
England, only in a fascist solution.
A new novel, Coming up for Air, appeared between Homage to
Catalonia and his two last works which were to make of him an
author of world stature. It is a nostalgic book. Times past are gone
for ever and unrelenting pessimism is the keynote of the present
pessimism which no belief in the future can fully assuage.
Something died forever in the world at the same time that George
Bowling (the hero of Coming up for Air) said goodbye to his
youth the tranquillity of old England threatened with a political
and warlike Apocalypse.
At that period Orwell seems to have turned to out-and-out
pacifism; the "democracies" such as France and England, with
their colonial empires and millions of men held in subjection and
exploited in shameful fashion, appeared to be in no moral position
to take a stand against the nazi and fascist dictatorships. He saw no
other way out of the existing situation than the creation of a party
of the masses whose aims and actions would be fired by a common
determination to oppose both war and imperialism. But all this he
himself seems to have seen as nothing more than a pious hope, and
the signature of the German/Soviet pact convinced him that the
war had already begun. At this point Orwell discovered in himself
"In the early 20th century the vision of a
future society unbelievably rich, leisured,
orderly and efficient a glittering an¬
tiseptic world of glass and steel and
snow-white concrete was part of the
consciousness of nearly every literate
person." (George Orwell in Nineteen
Eighty-Four). Right, 4D Time Lock:
Modified 4D Twin Tower Office Building,
A-1-13, 1927. Mimeo drawing by
Buckminster Fuller.
This work and that reproduced on page 5 were part of the ex¬
hibition Dreams and Nightmares: Utopian Visions in Modem
Art ax the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Smith¬
sonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Photo © Buckminster Fuller
He turned once again to his friends.of the ILP and finally ended up
in Barcelona, in the ranks of the POUM (Partido Obrero de
Unificación Marxista, the United Marxist Workers' Party).
Unlike a number of other intellectuals, Eric Blair did not go to
Spain as a humanist, literary tourist. He went to the front line as
an officer of a POUM centuria, or battalion, complete with car¬
tridge belt and an old model 1889 Mauser. On 20 May 1937, a Fran-
coist bullet struck him in the throat.
Nursed back to healthhe nevertheless had some difficulty in
speaking for the rest of his life he returned to England. He had
thrown himself wholeheartedly into this war which for him was a
war of humanist socialism against totalitarianism. This Spanish ex¬
perience seems to have finally convinced George Orwell the writer
of the "singleness of the adversary": totalitarianism whether of
Party or of State. He was to publish an account of his Spanish ex¬
perience in Homage to Catalonia in which the theme of "revolution
above all" seemed to predominate; the impending conflict with
nazi Germany confirmed him in the idea that a war between
capitalism and fascism would be a case of "six of one and half a
6
a sense of patriotism, somewhat resigned, perhaps, but un-
shakeable. Whatever her faults old England had to be defended
against Hitlerism and, without abandoning his revolutionary
theories, he decided to work as effectively as he could for the war
effort.
His ill health he was suffering from tuberculosis prevented
him from serving in the army. He worked for the BBC on broad¬
casts to India, joined the Home Guard and wrote The Lion and the
Unicorn, a book in which he praised patriotism and criticized those
intellectuals (one of whom he had been himself) who declared their
disdain for national values, while insisting that the war must be a
people's war accompanied by a radical change in society based on
a liberal, collectivist socialism which, nevertheless, must not be
dominated by the State. It must be an English socialism which
would suppress neither the monarchy nor traditional culture and
customs and would respect the nation's past.
He contributed to Left wing magazines such as Tribune and
Horizon and, in November 1943, he began work on Animal Farm,
which he was to finish at the end of the following February.
This work brought Orwell the international fame that Nineteen

Eighty-Four would confirm. The subject matter is well known.
Revolt is brewing amongst the animals at Mr. Jones's ManorFarm.
But once freed from their human masters, the animals find
themselves in the same condition of servitude as before the revolt,
some of their own kind having replaced their former masters. The
slogan that inspired their revolt, "All animals are equal", has
become "All animals are equal, but some are more equal than
others". Written at the height of the war, the book was refused by
several publishers. When it finally appeared in August 1945, it met
with immediate success.
Already, while he was completing Animal Farm Orwell had in
mind another book which he was to finish in 1948 whilst seriously
ill and which was to be published in June of the following year,
some seven months before his death on 21 January 1950.
The year is 1984. (Let it be said in passing that this date has no
particular significance, being merely the date of the year in which
the book was completed with the last two figures transposed). The
world is divided between three superpowers Oceania, Eurasia and
Eastasia. The action takes place in England which has become an
integral part of Oceania. The country, completely State-controlled,
is dominated by the figure of a single man, Big Brother, supported
by the Inner Party which in turn is backed up by the Outer Party
tellectual manipulation of people through Newspeak, a language
specially designed to eliminate all contestation, indeed all nuances
of thought, while imposing the official "truth", however subject to
change this may be, in a manner that defies logical or factual con¬
tradiction. "The earth is the centre of the universe. The sun and the
stars go round it", O'Brien tells Winston; and, holding up the
fingers of his left hand with the thumb concealed, "There are five
fingers there. Do you see five fingers?"
Orwell examines the question of why and how a regime such as
that of Oceania can exist and last. It is because the men who control
it are interested only in power, power for its own sake, devoid of
any other purpose such as comfort, happiness, liberty, rationality
or ideology. This is a form of oligarchic totalitarianism which is
based on a sort of institutionalized schizophrenia, the single State
for which the exterior, objective world does not exist.
Certain of the themes of Animal Farm are echoed in Nineteen
Eighty-Four, but it is not a political novel. It is not a forecast of the
way in which a particular regime may develop; it is, as Orwell wrote
to his publisher, a parody of the "intellectual consequences of
totalitarianism", and, to some extent, this parodying aspect of the
book attenuates its pessimism. In the same way as we speak of
"black humour" we might describe it as "black burlesque". There
After the publication, in 1948, of his
book Nineteen Eighty-Four, George
Orwell wanted to make his position clear:
"I do not believe that the kind of society
I describe necessarily will arrive, but I
believe (allowing of course for the fact
that the book is a satire) that something
resembling it could arrive. I believe also
that totalitarian ideas have taken root in
the minds of intellectuals everywhere,
and I have tried to draw these ideas out
to their logical consequences. The scene
of the book is laid in Britain in order to em¬
phasize that the English-speaking races
are not innately better than anyone else
and that totalitarianism, if not fought
against, could triumph anywhere." Left,
view of London.
Photo Malcolm Pendrill © Parimage, Paris
machine. The hero, Winston Smith, is an employee at the Ministry
of Truth, an organization whose task it is to spread the official
"truth" of the day and to correct or to eradicate from the records
of past events, declarations, decisions and persons in contradiction
with the present policies of the State. Winston gets to know Julia,
a young woman who works for the Anti-Sex League. One day, by
means of various subterfuges, the young couple succeed in starting
an illicit liaison. Meanwhile Winston comes into contact with a
mysterious person in a position of considerable authority, O'Brien,
who reveals himself to Winston as being an opponent of the regime
and a supporter of Goldstein, the enemy number one and scapegoat
of the leaders of Oceania. Winston confides in O'Brien, but the lat¬
ter turns out to be an important member of the Inner Party, and
head of the Thought Police. Arrested and tortured both physically
and mentally, Winston ceases to oppose the Party, becoming en¬
tirely subject to its will, betrays Julia who in turn betrays him, and
is finally despatched to a minor post in an obscure section of the
Ministry of Truth.
The story line of 1984 is relatively weak. From the relationship
between Winston and O'Brien, however, there emerges a profound
study of every aspect of totalitarianism, not least of which is the in-
is nothing to laugh at about the picture of the world presented to
us in Nineteen Eighty-Four, but the prevailing feeling we have when
reading it is not one of terror. One can even see in it glimpses of
optimism.
"If there is hope, wrote Winston, it lies in the proles (proletariat)
(...) The future belonged to the proles. And could he be sure that
when their time came the world they constructed would not be just
as alien to him, Winston Smith, as the world of the Party? Yes,
because at least it would be a world of sanity. Where there is equali¬
ty there can be sanity. Sooner or later it would happen, strength
would change into consciousness. The proles were immortal (...)."
From this moment on, the lower upper middle-class socialist with
such fond respect for the old English ways, looked to the proletariat
as the liberating force, not without reservations, but with a mes¬
sianic intensity and a poetic power difficult to define and with all
the imprecise passion of the humanitarian, progressive outpourings
of the nineteenth century; thus, in evoking a possible future he
becomes a Utopian voice from the past. After all, we are only in
1984.
Jacques Charpier
7
