I '«J
***
::::::
2?-^Ä*«J
II
I
I»
V Ki
lit
I
-
J "J
»Uli* ,
¡S'il1
* 3.3*»;
>. * *
^îW1 2 ST1
t
X"
f
> t
r^ ^ -»«''
,
"
Is
1»)
> -J
1 1

y. by A IbertAdu Boahen
BY 1935, colonialism had been
fastened on Africa like a steel grid,
and it looked as if it was going to
remain there for ever. However, colonia¬
lism proved just as ephemeral as any other
institution created and maintained by force.
Within a matter of only some forty-five
years from 1935, the colonial system had
been uprooted from over ninety per cent of
Africa and confined to that part of the con¬
tinent south of the Limpopo River.
What legacy did colonialism bequeath to
Africa? Did it constitute an important revo¬
lutionary episode in the history of the conti¬
nent? Was it a major break with the past, or
was it, after all, merely a passing event?
To some historians its impact was on
balance either a blessing in disguise or, at
worst, not harmful for Africa:
"It is easy to cavil today" wrote
P.C. Lloyd, "at the slow rate of economic
development during the half-century of
colonial rule... Nevertheless, the difference
between the condition of African society at
the end of the nineteenth century and at the
end of the Second World War is staggering.
The colonial powers provided the infra¬
structure on which progress in the 'inde¬
pendence' period has depended: a fairly
efficient administrative machine, reaching
down to villages in the most remote areas,
a network of roads and railways, and basic
services in health and education."
Others have contended that the beneficial
effect of colonialism in Africa was virtually
nil. The Black Guyanese historian, Walter
Rodney, has taken a particularly extreme
position:
"The argument suggests that, on the one
hand, there was exploitation and oppress¬
ion, but, on the other hand, that colonial
ALBERT ADU BOAHEN (for biographical
details see page 15).
"The phenomenal growth of the popula¬
tion of the urban centres [during the col¬
onial period] was not the result of the
natural increase of the urban population
but rather of the continuous pull of young
men and women to the urban centres by the
need for education and employment and
the push from the rural areas by famine,
epidemics, poverty and taxation. "
Since independence the rapid growth of ur¬
ban centres in Africa has continued. Op¬
posite page, the modern face of Dakar,
capital city of Senegal.
"A huge gap exists even today between ur¬
ban and rural areas in Africa and there is no
doubt that it was the colonial system that
originated and widened this gap. "
Left, a kraal (village) surrounded by tilled
fields in Ovamboland, Namibia.
Photos Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
The impact of colonialism on African art
was neitherprofound norpermanent. Even
when commenting on the colonial condi¬
tion, African artists drew on the continent's
age-old artistic traditions, as witness this
tongue-in-cheek portrayal (inset left) by a
wood-carver from the Congo (Zaire) of a
1920s Belgian colonial official in his
chauffeur-driven car.
Photo © Werner Forman Archive, London 33

Jr^W
"Because of the concentration on the pro¬
duction of cash crops during the colonial
era, Africans were compelled to Ignore the
production offoodfor their own consump¬
tion. It was this neglect offoodproduction,
coupled with forced labour, which caused
so much malnutrition, severefamine and so
many epidemics in some parts of Africa
during the early colonial days. Thus, under
the colonial system, Africans were In most
cases made to produce what they did not
consume and to consume what they did not
produce." Above, harvesting the cotton
crop in the Sudan.
governments did much for the benefit of
Africans and that they developed Africa. It
is our contention that this is completely
false. Colonialism had only one hand it
was a one-armed bandit."
From the available evidence, however, it
would appear that a much more balanced
assessment is necessary. The impact of
colonialism was positive as well as negative.
However, it should be emphasized that
most of the positive effects were, by and
large, rather accidental by-products of acti¬
vities or measures intended to promote the
interests of the colonizers.
The first positive political impact was the
establishment of a greater degree of con¬
tinuous peace and stability in Africa than
before. The nineteenth century was the cen¬
tury of the Mfecane and the activities of the
Swahili-Arab and Nyamwezi traders such
as Tipu Tip and Msiri in central and sou¬
thern Africa, of the Fulani djihads and the
rise of the Tukulor and Mandingo empires
in western Sudan, and of the disintegration
of the Oyo and Asante empires in west
Africa; and all this caused a great deal of
instability and insecurity.
The first two or three decades of the colo¬
nial era, that is from 1880 to 1910, intensi¬
fied this state of instability, violence and
disorder and caused wholesale and unpar¬
donable destruction and loss of population.
But after the colonial occupation and the
establishment of various administrative
machineries, most parts of Africa, espe¬
cially from the end of the First World War
onwards, enjoyed a great degree of con¬
tinuous peace and security.
The second positive impact is reflected in
the very geo-political appearance of the
modern independent States of Africa. In
34
place of the hundreds of independent clan
and lineage groups, city-States, kingdoms
and empires, without any clearly defined
boundaries, were now established fifty new
States with, in most cases, fixed bounda¬
ries; and it is rather significant that the
boundaries of the States as laid down
during the colonial era have not undergone
any changes since independence.
Thirdly, the colonial system also intro¬
duced into most parts of Africa two new in¬
stitutions which have been maintained since
independence, namely a new judicial system
and a new bureaucracy or civil service.
The final positive impact of colonialism
was not only the birth of a new type of
African nationalism, but also of pan-
Africanism. Important as this legacy was,
however, it is a typical example of the ac¬
cidental by-products rather than the
deliberate creations of the colonial
presence. No colonial ruler ever set out to
create and nurture African nationalism.
But if there were positive effects, the
negative effects were even greater. In the
first place, important as the development of
nationalism was, it was generated by a sense
of anger, frustration and humiliation
caused by some of the oppressive,
discriminatory and exploitative measures
introduced by the colonial rulers. With the
overthrow of colonialism that feeling was
bound to lose some of its momentum and
the problem that has faced the rulers of in¬
dependent African States has been how to
replace it with a positive and enduring feel¬
ing of nationalism.
Secondly, while admitting that the geo¬
political set-up that emerged was an asset,
even though an accidental one, it never¬
theless created far more problems than it
solved. Though the boundaries of the States
that emerged were not as arbitrary as is
generally believed, there is no doubt that
many of the States that emerged were ar¬
tificial creations made up of a medley of
peoples with different cultures, traditions,
origins and languages. The problems of
nation-building posed by such a medley of
peoples have not proved to be easily
soluble.
Another outcome was that the States that
emerged were of widely differing sizes with
unequal natural resources and economic
potentialities.
Another important but negative political
impact of colonialism was the weakening of
the indigenous systems of government. The '
colonial officials on the spot became, in ef- \
feet, dictators instead of advisers to the <
traditional rulers whom they used to en- ^
force some of the measures deemed obnox- i
ious by their subjects, such as forced ;
labour, direct taxes and compulsory recruit¬
ment of men for the colonial armies. <
Moreover, the spread of the Christian
religion further undermined the spiritual ¡
basis of the authority of the kings.
A product of colonialism which is often
ignored by historians but which has turned
out to be of crucial importance was the
creation of full-time, standing armies.
These armies were originally created, most
of them in the 1880s and 1890s, first for the
conquest and occupation of Africa, then
for the maintenance of colonial control,
and, finally, for the prosecution of global
wars and the suppression of independence
movements in Africa. After the overthrow
of the colonial rulers, these armies were not
disbanded but were taken over by the new
independent African rulers and they have
turned out to be the most problematic of the
products of colonialism.
The final and probably the most impor¬
tant negative political impact of colonialism
was the loss of African sovereignty and in¬
dependence and the right to deal directly
with the outside world.
This meant, above all, the loss of their
right to control their own destiny, to plan
their own development, manage their
economy, determine their own strategies
and priorities, borrow freely from the
world at large the latest and most ap¬
propriate technology, and generally
manage, or even mismanage, their own af¬
fairs and derive inspiration and a sense of
fulfilment from their successes and lessons
and experience from their failures. In short,
colonialism deprived Africans of one of the
most fundamental and inalienable rights of
a people the right of liberty.
Moreover, the seventy-year period of col¬
onialism in Africa was the very period
which witnessed tremendous and decisive
developments and changes in both the
capitalist and socialist countries. It was the
period, for instance, that saw the entry of
Europe into the age of the aeroplane and
the motor vehicle and the nuclear age. Had
Africa been in control of her own destiny,
she could have benefited from or even been

"Closely associated with the spread of
Christianity was that of Western education.
Certainly, by the end ofthe colonial regime,
there were relatively few areas without at
least elementary schools... The curricula
provided by these institutions were deter¬
mined by the colonial rulers and were close¬
ly modelled on, if not carbon copies of,
those of the metropolitan countries and
therefore irrelevant to the needs of the con¬
tinent." Right, the Church Missionary
Society High School, Mengo, Uganda.
part of these phenomenal changes. But col¬
onialism completely insulated and isolated
her from these changes and kept her in a
position of dependency.
The impact in the economic field was
equally important and equally mixed. The
first and most obvious of the positive im¬
pacts was the provision of a basic in¬
frastructure of roads, railways, telegraph,
telephone and, in some cases, even airports.
Completed by the 1930s, this infrastructure
facilitated the movement not only of goods,
the new cash crops and troops, but also of
peoples, and this latter factor helped to
minimize parochialism, regionalism and
ethnocentricism.
Equally important and significant was
the impact of colonialism on the primary
sector of the economy. It was during the
colonial period that the full mineral poten¬
tial of Africa was realized; the mining in¬
dustry boomed while the cultivation of cash
crops such as cocoa, coffee, tobacco,
groundnuts, sisal and rubber spread. In
west Africa these cash crops were produced
by the Africans themselves, clear evidence
of their willingness and ability to adapt and
respond to the right incentives.
This economic revolution had some far-
reaching consequences. Before the colonial
era huge tracts of land in many parts of
Africa were not only under-populated but
also under-utilized. The introduction and
spread of cash crops and the mining in¬
dustries put an end to all this. Secondly, the
economic revolution led to an increase in
the purchasing power of some Africans and
with it an increase in their demand for con¬
sumer goods. Thirdly, the growing of cash
crops by Africans enabled individuals of
whatever social status, especially in the
rural areas, to acquire wealth.
Another significant revolutionary impact
was the introduction of the money
economy. This led to the emergence of a
new class of wage earners and salaried
groups. The introduction of the money
economy also led to the commencement of
banking activities in Africa, which became
another significant feature of the economy
of independent African States.
By 1935, the economy of Africa had
become inextricably tied to that of the
world in general and of the capitalist
economy of the colonial powers in par¬
ticular. The years after 1935 merely deepen
ed this link and not even independence has
fundamentally altered this relationship.
Was the colonial impact on Africa in the
economic field then a desirable one? Far
from it.
In the first place, the infrastructure that
was provided by colonialism was not as ade¬
quate or as useful as it could have been.
Most of the roads and railways were con¬
structed not to open up the country but
merely to connect the areas having mineral
deposits and the potential for the produc¬
tion of cash crops with the sea, and there
were hardly any feeder or branch roads.
Nor were they meant to facilitate inter-
African travel and communication.
In the second place, such economic
growth as occurred in the colonies was
based on the natural resources of the area
and this .meant, therefore, that areas not
naturally endowed were totally neglected.
Thirdly, a typical feature of the colonial
economy was the total and deliberate
neglect or discouragement of industrializa¬
tion and the processing of locally-produced
raw materials and agricultural products in
most of the colonies . Simple and basic items
such as matches, candles, edible oil, even
lime and orange juice, all of which could
easily have been produced in Africa, were
imported. All African States were therefore
turned into markets for the consumption of
manufactured goods from the metropolitan
countries and producers of raw materials
for export. This total neglect of in¬
dustrialization by the colonial powers
should be chalked up as one of the most un¬
pardonable indictments of colonialism.
Fourthly, not only was industrialization
neglected but such industries and crafts as
had existed in Africa in pre-colonial times
were almost destroyed as a result of the
importation into Africa of cheap, mass-
produced commodities. African techno¬
logical development was thereby halted and
was not resumed until after independence.
Fifthly, even though agricultural crops
came to constitute the main source of in¬
come for most African States, no attempts
were made to diversify the agricultural
economies of the colonies. On the contrary,
by 1935, the production of only single or, at
best, two cash crops had become the rule
cocoa in the Gold Coast, groundnuts in
Senegal and Gambia, cotton in Sudan, cof¬
fee and cotton in Uganda and coffee and
sisal in Tanganyika. Most African States,
on the attainment of independence, found
themselves saddled with monoculture
economies and were therefore highly sen¬
sitive to the prevailing international trade
winds. Colonialism did indeed complete the
integration of African economies into the
world international economic order, but in
a very disadvantageous and exploitative
manner.
Because of the concentration on the pro¬
duction of cash crops during the colonial
era, Africans were compelled to ignore the
production of food for their own consump¬
tion. It was this neglect of food production,
coupled with forced labour, which caused
so much malnutrition, severe famine and so
many epidemics in some parts of Africa
during the early colonial days. Thus, under
the colonial system, Africans were in most
cases made to produce what they did not
consume and to consume what they did not
produce, clear evidence of the lopsided and
exploitative nature of the colonial
economy.
The colonial presence also led to the ap¬
pearance on the African scene of an increas¬
ing number of expatriate banking, shipping
and trading firms, and from the 1910s on¬
wards their amalgamation and consolida¬
tion into fewer and fewer oligopolies. Since
it was these trading companies that con¬
trolled the export as well as the import trade
and fixed the prices not only of imported
commodities but also of the exports pro¬
duced by Africans, the huge profits that ac¬
crued from these activities went to the com¬
panies and not to the Africans.
Colonialism also virtually put a stop to
inter-African trade as the flow of trade
from each colony was reoriented towards
the metropolitan countries.
Finally, whatever economic growth there
was during the colonial period was achieved
at a phenomenal and unjustifiable cost to
the Africanforced labour, migrant
labour, compulsory cultivation of certain
crops, compulsory seizure of land, forced
movements of populations with the con¬
sequent dislocation of family life, the pass
system, high mortality rates in the mines
and on the plantations and brutal repres¬
sion of the protest and resistance
movements these measures generated.
What is the record of colonialism in the
social field? The first important beneficial
35

During the colonial period, "In the rural
areas, and even to some extent In the urban
centres, new beliefs, new gods, new uten¬
sils, new artifacts arid new objects were
added to the old ones. Certainly, In these
areas many Christians did andstill do retain
their beliefin their traditionalgods. Indeed,
in thefield ofreligion, it was ifanything the
European religions that were Africanized,
as is obviousfrom the rituals ofsome of the
syncretic and mlllenarian churches, and not
the other way round".
Above, Baoulé Gu mask representing the
creator of the universe. The curves of the
mask direct the eye to the mouth, source of
the creative "breath spirit".
"Another highly regrettable social Impact
of colonialism was the deterioration that it
caused in the status of women in Africa...
There does not appear to be any doubt that
women were inhibitedfromjoining in most
of the activities introduced or intensified by
colonialism. The colonial world was indeed
a man's world and women were not en¬
couraged toplay any meaningful role in it. ' '
Below, Fang mask from Gabon.
social effect was the overall increase of the
population of Africa during the colonial
period of nearly forty per cent after an in¬
itial decline during the first two or three
decades. This increase was due to the
establishment of an economic base, the
spread of roads and railways which ensured
that food could be rushed to famine areas,
and the campaigns launched against
epidemic diseases such as sleeping sickness,
bubonic plague and yellow fever.
Closely connected with this was . the
second social impact of colonialism
urbanization. The kingdoms and empires of
Africa had such capitals or political centres
as Kumbi Saleh, Benin, Ile-Ife, Kumasi,
Gao and Zimbabwe, commercial centres
such as Kano, Jenné, Sofala and Malindi,
and such educational centres as Timbuktu,
Cairo and Fez. But there is no doubt that,
as a result of colonialism, the pace of ur¬
banization was greatly accelerated and
completely new towns came into existence.
Moreover, the population of both the
already existing towns and the new towns
grew by leaps and bounds during the col¬
onial era. The population of Nairobi,
founded in 1896 as a transit depot for the
construction of the Uganda railway, in¬
creased from a mere handful to 13,145 in
1927 and to over 25,000 in 1940, and that of
Lagos from 74,000 in 1914 to 230,000 in
1950, that of Dakar from 19,800 in 1916 to
92,000 in 1936 and to 132,000 in 1945.
There was also undoubtedly an improve¬
ment in the quality of life, particularly for
those living in the urban centres. This was
the result of the provision of hospitals,
dispensaries, pipe-borne water, sanitary
facilities, better housing and the abolition
of such practices as domestic slavery by the
colonial rulers as well as the increase in
employment opportunities.
The spread of Christianity, Islam and
Western education was another important
impact of colonialism. It was during the
colonial period that Christianity gained a
firm foothold in eastern and central Africa,
at times following and at times being
followed by the flag and trade. Islam also
spread rapidly in western and eastern
Africa as a result of the general improve¬
ment in communications during the col¬
onial period and the patronage of both the
French and the British rulers. It should be
emphasized that these gains were not made
at the expense of traditional religion. What
colonialism did, then, was to strengthen
and perpetuate religious pluralism in
Africa, thereby enriching its religious life.
Closely associated with the spread of
Christianity was that of Western education.
Certainly, by the end of the colonial regime,
there were relatively few areas without at
least elementary schools. The spread of
Western education had far-reaching social
effects, among which was an increase in the
number of the westernized educated
African élite, an élite which now constitutes
the ruling oligarchy and the backbone of
the civil service of African States.
Another important colonial impact, a
mixed blessing as we shall see, was the pro¬
vision of a lingua franca for each colony or
set of colonies. In all the colonies, the
mother tongue of the colonial power, either
in its pure or pidgin form, became the of¬
ficial and business language and, in many
cases, the main means of communication
between the numerous linguistic groups
that constituted the population of each col¬
ony. It is significant that, except in north
Africa, The United Republic of Tanzania,
Kenya and Madagascar, these languages
have remained the official languages to this
very day.
The final beneficial social impact was the
new social structure that colonialism in¬
troduced into some parts of Africa or
whose development it accelerated in others.
Although the traditional social structure
allowed for social mobility, its class struc¬
ture appeared to give undue weight to birth.
The new colonial order, on the other hand,
emphasized individual merit and achieve¬
ment. All these changes radically altered the
traditional social structure.
Thus, by the 1930s, in place of the pre-
colonial social classes of the traditional
ruling aristocracy, the ordinary people,
domestic slaves and a relatively small
educated élite, a new society emerged that
had become more sharply divided than
before into urban and rural dwellers, each
of which was differently stratified. Mobility
within this new structure was based more on
individual effort and attainment than on
ascription.
On the negative side, however, the
phenomenal growth of the population of
the urban centres was not the result of the
natural increase of the urban population
but rather of the continuous pull of young
men and women to the urban centres by the
need for education and employment and
the push from the rural areas by famine,
epidemics, poverty and taxation.
Moreover, since the Europeans tended to
live in the urban centres, all those facilities
that improved the quality of life were
established only in those areas. The rural
areas were therefore virtually neglected and
this in turn accentuated the drift from one
to the other. A huge gap exists even today
between urban and rural areas in Africa and
there is no doubt that it was the colonial
system that originated and widened this
gap.
Nor did the migrants find the urban cen¬
tres the safe and rich haven they had ex¬
pected. In no town were the Africans ac¬
cepted as equals and fully integrated.
Moreover, nowhere did a majority of them
find jobs or decent accomodation. Most of
them found themselves crowded into the
suburbs and the shanty towns in which
unemployment, juvenile delinquency,
drunkenness, prostitution, crime and cor¬
ruption became their lot. Colonialism did
not only impoverish rural life, it also
bastardized urban life.
A second serious social legacy has been
the European and Asian settler problem.
What made their presence so inimical to
Africans was that the Europeans came to
occupy most of the fertile lands while the
Asians monopolized the retail and
wholesale trades. By 1935, this Asian and
European problem had assumed very
serious proportions for Africa and it has
not been entirely resolved to this day.
Furthermore, though colonialism did in¬
troduce some social services as we have
seen, it must be emphasized that not only
were these services grossly inadequate and
unevenly distributed in each colony, they
were all, by and large, meant primarily for

* -
*- fc**
the benefit of the few white settlers and ad¬
ministrators, hence their concentration in
the towns. In Nigeria in the 1930s, whereas
there were 12 modern hospitals for 4,000
Europeans in the country, there were only
52 for Africans numbering over 40 million.
In the field of education, what was pro¬
vided during the colonial days was grossly
inadequate, unevenly distributed and badly
orientated and therefore not so beneficial as
it could have been for Africa. Five different
types of educational institutions were
established under colonial rule: primary,
secondary, teacher-training, technical and
university. But while many primary schools
had been established by 1860 in British
West Africa, it was not until 1876 that the
first secondary schools were established in
the Gold Coast and Nigeria. It was not until
after the Second World War that technical
schools and university colleges were
established in most parts of Africa.
The curricula provided by all these in¬
stitutions were determined by the colonial
rulers and were closely modelled on, if not
carbon copies of, those of the metropolitan
countries and therefore irrelevant to the
needs of the continent. They also struck at
the very roots of African religious beliefs,
sanctions and taboos and thereby shook the
foundations of African societies, bringing
in their trail a sense of uncertainty, frustra¬
tion and insecurity.
The impact of this inadequate, lopsided
and wrongly orientated education on
African societies has been profound and
almost permanent. First, it left Africa with
a huge illiteracy problem, a problem whose
solution will take a long time. Secondly, the
educated élite that was produced was, by
and large, an alienated élite that adored
European culture and civilization and look¬
ed down on African culture. However,
since the élite included the wealthiest people
and since they occupied the highest posts
available both during and after the colonial
era, they came to wield power and influence
out of all proportion to their numbers.
Beneficial as the linguae francae pro¬
moted through the educational systems
were, they had the regrettable consequence
of preventing the development of some of
the indigenous languages into national
languages. Twi, Hausa and Swahili could
easily have been developed as the national
languages of the Gold Coast, Nigeria and
the three British East African colonies
respectively. In fact, an attempt was made
by the colonial administrators of British
East Africa to develop Swahili as a lingua
franca during the 1930s and 1940s, but this
attempt was countermanded by the Col¬
onial Office.
Another highly regrettable social impact
of colonialism was the deterioration that it
caused in the status of women in Africa.
This is a new theme which needs further
research, but there does not appear to be
any doubt that women were inhibited from
joining in most of the activities introduced
or intensified by colonialism. The colonial
world was indeed a man's world and
women were not encouraged to play any
meaningful role in it.
Moreover, under colonialism Africans in
general were looked down upon, humiliated
and discriminated against both overtly and
covertly. In his recent Reith lectures, Ali
Mazrui emphasized this legacy of humilia¬
tion imposed on the African by the triple
sins of the slave trade, apartheid and col¬
onialism when he declared:
"Africans are not necessarily the most
brutalized peoples, but they are certainly
the most humiliated in modern history."
Some historians have concluded that
"colonialism produced its own grave-
diggers", while Maugham has maintained
that "On the tombstone of the British Em¬
pire may be written 'Lost by snobbery".
Worse still was the impact of colonialism
in the cultural field. Throughout the col¬
onial period, African art, music, dancing
and even history were all not only ignored
but positively discouraged or denied. As
one speaker declared at the Second Con¬
gress of Negro Writers and Artists, in
Rome, in 1959: "Among the sins of col¬
onialism, one of the most pernicious,
because it was for a long time accepted by
the West, was the concept of people without
culture."
"The educated élite that was produced [by
colonial education] was, by and large, an
alienated élite that adored European culture
and civilization and looked down on
African culture. However, since the élite in¬
cluded the wealthiest people and since they
occupied the highest posts available both
during and after the colonial era, they came
to wieldpower and influence out ofall pro¬
portion to their numbers." Above, toppers
and frock-coats, picture hats and croquet
on the lawn at Government House, all these
were the status symbols of the "new élite"
of the colonial period.
37

Ornamental detail on the facade of a tradi¬
tional house of Senegal's Sarakolé people.
Traditional architecture using earth as a
building material has qualities ofform and
insulation that are no longer found in
modern dwellings made of rubble and cor¬
rugated iron sheeting.
Nevertheless, in the cultural field, the im¬
pact of colonialism was relatively speaking
neither profound nor permanent. Such
changes as were introduced in the cultural
field, such racial discrimination as was
practised, and such condemnation of
African culture as was preached, even in the
heyday of colonialism, were all confined to
the coastal areas and the urban centres and
never penetrated into the rural areas where
life ran gaily on very much as before.
African dance, art, music and traditional
religious systems held their own and any
borrowings and adaptations were additions
rather than substitutions.
In the rural areas, and even to some ex¬
tent in the urban centres, new beliefs, new
gods, new utensils, new artifacts and new
objects were added to the old ones. Certain¬
ly, in these areas many Christians did and
still do retain their belief in their traditional
gods. Indeed, in the field of religion, it was
if anything the European religions that were
Africanized, as is obvious from the rituals
of some of the syncretic and millenarian
churches, and not the other way round.
What is more important, the ground that
was lost in the field of culture, even in the
urban centres, has virtually been regained.
Today, African art, music and dance are
not only taught in educational institutions
of all kinds but are now booming in Africa
and gaining recognition in Europe. Thus, as
far as the cultural field is concerned, col¬
onialism was certainly only a brief episode
and its impact skin-deep and ephemeral.
From all the above it should be clear that
it is an over-reaction to write off col¬
onialism as an unmitigated disaster for
Africa that caused nothing but under¬
development and backwardness. Equally
guilty of over-statement are those colonial
apologists who see colonialism as an un¬
qualified blessing for Africa.
But whatever colonialism did for
Africans in Africa, given its opportunities,
its resources and the power and influence it
wielded in Africa at the time, it could and
should have done more. As P.C. Lloyd
wrote:
"So much more might perhaps have been
done had the development of backward ter¬
ritories been seen by the industrial nations
as a first priority."
It is precisely because colonial rulers did
not see the development of Africans as their
first priority or even as a priority at all that
they stand condemned. It is for these two
reasons that the colonial era will go down in
history as a period of growth without
development, of the ruthless exploitation of
the resources of Africa, and, on balance, of
the pauperization and humiliation of the
peoples of Africa.
In the long history of Africa, colonialism
was merely an episode or interlude in the
many- faceted and variegated experiences of
its peoples. It was nonetheless an extremely
important episode politically, economically
and even socially. It marks a clear water¬
shed in the history of Africa whose deve¬
lopment has been and will continue to be
very much influenced by the colonial im¬
pact. The most expedient course of action
for African leaders to embark upon today,
then, is not to write off colonialism, but
rather to be conversant with its impact and
to try to redress its shortcomings and its
failures.
Albert Adu Boahen
