HIGH SOCIETIES
Spate settlements oftomorrow
SETTLEMENT of our sister planets
and planetary systems of stars
outside our solar system is one of
the recurring themes of science fiction.
However, we now know that planets
such as Mars and Venus are not capable
of supporting life, and the technical prob¬
lems of achieving the velocity necessary
to reach even the nearest star within one
person's lifetime seem today to be
insuperable.
Undeterred, science fiction writers
came up with the idea of the "generation
starship", a kind of Noah's Ark in space
in which the crew completing the mis¬
sion would be the descendants of the
original crew several generations remov¬
ed. In other words, the starship would, in
effect, be a miniature, self-contained
"travelling world".
When high-energy physics professor
Gerard O'Neill considered the problem,
he asked himself "If several generations
can survive in a starship, why send it to
the possibly hostile environment of
another planetary system? Why not
create the desired environment in the
starship itself and simply place it within
easy reach of the Earth?"
Why should we want to create col¬
onies in space? There are many good
reasons for doing so. With the world
population doubling every thirty-five
years, our own planet is becoming over¬
crowded and suffering increasingly from
the effects of pollution and its renewable
energy resources will eventually run out.
It makes sense to move some of our
polluting industries out of the Earth's at¬
mosphere and to construct solar power
stations in space where radiation from
the Sun is available twenty four hours a
day, at full strength. (1) Artist's impres¬
sion of the scene during the construction
of a space power station.
It would also be possible to develop en¬
tirely new industries. Alloys can be made
under the weightless conditions of space
from metals which do not mix suc¬
cessfully under the pull of gravity on
Earth. Experiments conducted in Skylab
and the Salyut space station have
already resulted in the production of new
alloys and special types of glass that are
unobtainable on Earth. (2) Soviet
cosmonaut Svetlana Saritskaya, the first
woman to walk in space, conducts an ex¬
periment in welding, soldering and cut¬
ting metal in space.
20
Skylab and Salyut are, in fact, the first
existing space habitats, and three Soviet
cosmonauts, Leonid Kizim, Vladimir
Solovyev and Dr. Oleg Atkov, have just
completed a mission in which they spent
a record, 237 consecutive days (eight
months) in space. (3) Interior of the
Salyut space station during a previous
mission.
Skylab and Salyut were not, of course,
designed as long-term habitats and can
only accommodate a handful of specially
trained cosmonauts. However, advanc¬
ed, technically feasible designs for space
habitats which could accommodate
some 10,000 people in Earth-style com¬
fort already exist. (5) The Stanford torus
(doughnut-shaped) habitat was designed
at Stanford University in 1975. Approx¬
imately two kilometres in diameter and
with a mass of over ten million tons, the
torus rotates around a stationary central
axis to provide a simulation of Earth
gravity. (4) An artist's impression of the
living area in the outer rim of the torus.
The windows at the top of the illustration
look towards the central, stationary axis.
That is to say, the "floor" of the living
area is perpendicular to the central axis
but would feel "downwards" because of
the spin of the torus.
The space colony would need to be
self-sufficient in food. (6) An artist's im¬
pression of the agricultural area designed
for the Stanford torus space colony. The
area is situated between two areas of
parkland. On the top four levels of the
farm, soybeans, wheat, sorghum and
some other crops would be grown. The
bottom level is a drying facility. Water
would be supplied directly from the river
(centre foreground) and indirectly
through the fish tanks that line the sides.
Nearly a kilometre in length, the farm
would also be inhabited by rabbits and
some 3,000 cattle. Since moisture,
sunlight and heat conditions could be
controlled, the farm would yield far more
than a farm of comparable size on Earth.
In developing their designs for space
habitats, scientists seem to be out-doing
the science fiction writers in their ex¬
ploration of the fantastic. Yet these
designs are serious, science based pro¬
jects and to many experts they appear no
more fantastic, and just as feasible, as
did the project of landing on the Moon
thirty-five years ago.
Photo © Science Photo Library, London
Photo © APN, Paris

