A continent resists
East Africa: diplomacy and defiance
by Henry Mwanzi
THE colonialist scramble for east
Africa was three-pronged, involv¬
ing, as it did, three competing
powers: the Sultanate of Zanzibar, Ger¬
many and Britain. The first on the scene
were the Arabs who operated from Zan¬
zibar. Their interests both on the coast and
in the interior were largely commercial,
revolving around the trade in slaves and
ivory. Before the 1880s and 1890s, these
Arabs and Swahili traders were content to
operate from the coast. But during the clos¬
ing decades of the last century, Arab in¬
terests in the interior of east Africa began to
be threatened by German and British in¬
terests that had been steadily penetrating
the area. In the face of this, the Arabs at¬
tempted to take political control of some
areas in order to protect their commercial
concessions.
The Europeans in the interior included
traders and missionaries, all of whom
wanted the occupation of east Africa by
their home governments in order to provide
them with security as well as a free hand to
carry out their enterprises without
hindrance.
The methods of European advance
varied from place to place. But, on the
HENRY MWANZI, of Kenya, is senior lecturer
in history at the University of Nairobi. He
specializes in east African history on which he
has written several articles and studies.
whole, they were characterized by the use of
force combined with, where it was possible,
diplomatic alliances with one group against
another. The African response to all this
was both military and diplomatic" though
at times there was withdrawal or non-co¬
operation or passivity.
The coastal people of Tanganyika
organized their resistance around the per¬
son and leadership of Abushiri. Socially,
the coast of Tanganyika, as of Kenya, was
dominated by Swahili and Islamic culture.
Here existed a mixed population of Arabs
and Africans who intermarried freely and
carried out local trade.
In the nineteenth century, the coastal
Arabs increased their activities in the in¬
terior in response to increased demand
for ivory and slaves. The result of this
flourishing trade was that many towns
sprang up along the coast. The coming of
the Germans threatened this trade which
they sought to supplant with their own. The
local populations, especially the Arabs,
resented this and organized a resistance.
Abushiri, the leader, was born in 1845 of
an Arab father and a Galla mother. He was
a descendant of one of the first Arab settlers
¿t v | ;¿¡L.ÄW-JT í¡rfdi : - ¿sra
on the coast who came to regard themselves
as local people. Like many others, he op¬
posed the influence of the Sultanate of Zan¬
zibar on the coast and even advocated in¬
dependence. As a young man, he had org¬
anized expeditions into the interior to trade
in ivory. From the profits made, he bought
himself a farm and planted sugar cane.
Under his leadership, the coastal people
fired on a German warship at Tanga in
September 1888 and then gave the Germans
two days to leave the coast. They later at¬
tacked Kilwa and killed the two Germans
there and then attacked Bagamoyo with
8,000 men on 22 September. But the Ger¬
mans who termed this "the Arab revolt"
sent out Hermann von Wissmann. He
reached Zanzibar in April 1889, attacked
Abushiri in his fortress near Bagamoyo and
drove him out. Abushiri escaped nor¬
thwards to Uzigua where he was betrayed
and handed over to the Germans who hang¬
ed him at Pangani on 15 December 1889.
The coastal resistance finally collapsed
Railways were an important instrument of
the colonizing process; they facilitated
military conquest, helped establish political
control and enabled the colonies to be
developed as sources of raw materials for
export to Europe rather than as areas of in¬
dustrial development. The British-built
Uganda Railway, which linked the interiors
of Uganda and Kenya with the coast, reach¬
ed the Lake Victoria basin in 1901. In
Tanganyika a German-built railway was
started at Tanga during the early 1890s and
reached the foothills of the Usambara
mountains in 1905. Below, a plate-laying
gang employed on the construction of the
Uganda Railway shifts camp.
H j U TT O" :V*W*ñVié1 ' ^Bt »
- /X

when Kilwa was bombarded and taken by
the Germans in May 1890.
The Germans,, like the British in Kenya,
were practiced in the art of divide and rule
by allying with one group against another.
There were many such allies. The Marealle
and the Kibanga near the Tanganyikan
mountains of Kilimanjaro and Usambara
were, to name but two examples, among
those who saw in the Germans an oppor¬
tunity to make friends in order to defeat
their enemies. These people, like others
such as the Wanga in Kenya, believed that
they were using the Germans even though in
the process they were made use of much
more by the Germans than perhaps they
realized. The Arabs on the coast, however,
were firmly in the employ of the Germans as
they were in that of the British in Kenya and
they provided the first local personnel in the
service of imperialism.
A similar pattern of response to British
colonialism took place in Uganda. The
period between 1891 and 1899 saw a clash
between the forces of Kabarega, the King of
Bunyoro and those of Lugard and other
British agents. After some clashes in which
his forces were defeated, Kabarega turned
to diplomacy. Twice he attempted to come
to terms with Lugard, but the latter would
not countenance these gestures. Mwanga,
the Kabaka of Buganda, at times tried to in¬
tercede on behalf of the Bunyoro King but
to no avail. Eventually, Kabarega resorted
to guerilla warfare, probably the first of its
kind in East Africa. He withdrew from
Bunyoro to the Lango country in the north
from where he harassed British forces time
and again.
One of the British officials occupying
Bunyoro at the time, Thurston, com¬
mented: "Kabarega was at his old tricks
giving every possible trouble but never
standing up for a fair fight, preferring to
pursue his favourite methods of assassina¬
tion. Kabarega caused poison to be given to
a friendly chief and he died, but I have had
the poisoner killed".
What Thurston says here is a perfect ex¬
ample of guerilla tactics, of withdrawing to
a neighbouring country in order to harass
occupying forces in one's own country.
Kabarega was later joined in Lango by
Mwanga, but their hide-out was stormed in
1899 and both kings were captured and
taken to Kisimayu where Mwanga died in
Henry Mwanzi
King Mwanga of Buganda (left) and King
Kabarega of Bunyoro on their way under
escort to the coast after their capture by
British forces in 1899. Kabarega was exiled
to the Seychelles and Mwanga to Kisimayu,
where he died in 1903. Both rulers resisted
British colonialism with a mixture of
diplomacy, direct confrontation and
guerilla warfare.
Chief Abushiri, the
leader of the coastal
people of Tanganyika
in their resistance
against the German
colonial occupation.
©
©
¡1 ü^
w &
[ 'te¡_f
'
1 m Bfc
^^^^H ^ i_
- \J ' Vj
