Red shift and the Doppler effect
Like Monsieur Jourdain, the hero of
Molière's Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme, to
whom it came as a considerable shock to
learn that he had been speaking prose all
his life, anyone who has stood on a
railway station platform as an express
train thunders past with whistle blowing,
may be surprised to learn that he or she
is quite familiar with the "Doppler ef¬
fect", one of the keys to modern
cosmology.
When a train driver blows his whistle
as he approaches a station, he hears a
steady sound at a fixed pitch. To the man
standing on the platform, however, the
sound of the whistle rises in pitch as the
train approaches and drops again as the
train speeds away into the distance. This
is because sound is a succession of
waves in the air. As a source of sound ap¬
proaches, the waves are compressed
and the pitch rises, as it recedes, the
waves are stretched out and the pitch
falls.
The Doppler effect is named after the
19th-century Austrian physicist Chris¬
tian Doppler who pointed out that the ef¬
fect applies also to light waves. When
light from a moving source reaches the
eye, there is a shift in frequencythat is,
colourwhen the source is moving fast
enough. If the source is moving towards
us, the light waves are compressed and
the light perceived shifts towards the
high-frequency, blue end of the spectrum
(blue shift); if the source is moving away,
the light waves are stretched and the
light shifts towards the low-frequency,
red end of the spectrum (red shift).
The importance of red shift became
evident early this century with the ap¬
plication of spectroscopy to astronomy.
Astronomers began studying the spectra
of nebulae. Some, such as the spiral
nebula Andromeda, showed blue shifts
in their spectra, indicating that, in accor¬
dance with the Doppler effect, they must
be moving towards us. Others showed
red shifts and were therefore receding
from us.
The recession of the galaxies can be com¬
pared to the way markings on a balloon
recede from each other as the balloon Is
Inflated. Illustration shows successive
doublings of the size of a "balloon
Universe". The points (galaxies) on the
balloon recede from each otherat a speed
proportional to their distance apart.

