The dance of death
by Miguel Rojas-Mix
EVERY year on the second of November
Mexicans eat death. They consume it in
the form of sugar skulls and savour it in
confectionery. Children play with death,
manipulating skeletons with string and making
them dance. They amuse themselves with little
figures called padrecitos ("little fathers"),
which have a chickpea for a head, or make
death jump out of a cardboard coffin like a jack-
in-a-box. In fact, the whole country moves to
the rhythm of an enormous dance of death:
shop windows, cyclists, toys, couples dressed
up in wedding costumes. Everything is
transformed into a calavera, a word which in
Mexican Spanish means not only a skull (as it
does in Castilian Spanish) but a whole
skeleton.
Eros and Thanatos, love and death. On the
second of November death succumbs to the
pleasures of life and calls on craftsmen to
depict death in order to help those who mourn
the dead. In other words death becomes a
source of livelihood for the confectioners who
fashion the traditional sugar calaveras and in¬
scribe on the foreheads the names of relatives
of their customers, and for the potters of Oax¬
aca, Santa Fé de la Laguna and Michoacán
who make incense burners for the altars to the
dead or floral decorations for tombs. It provides
a living for those who make the little black glaz¬
ed bulls surrounded by candles and zem-
pasuchitl flowers which are found at Puebla,
multi-coloured images of souls, earthenware
toys with skeleton drummers from Guanajuato,
and coaches with musical skeletons from
Metepec.
In death two traditions meet to form the basis
of the Mexican identitythe indigenous pre-
Cortesian tradition, and the Spanish. The
former has left us marvellous artefacts such as
skulls carved in rock crystal, the finest example
of which is Coatlicué, the Aztec goddess of the
earth and of life, depicted with a skull-like face.
This tradition is preserved in the Mexican
sense of life, which is quite different from that
of the Old World. For the Mexican, death is not
something frightful but a necessary prelude to
resurrection. In the cosmic cycle it engenders
life.
Death is also embraced in the European
especially the Spanishmystical tradition, in
the danse macabre evoked in the poetry of
François Villon and the engravings of Holbein
and popularized in Latin America through
Baroque art. The calavera called in question
the power and riches of this world. It is shown
carrying away kings, bishops and peasants
and thus restoring human equality. As the
fifteenth-century Spanish poet Jorge Manrique
wrote:
Popes and emperors
Prelates and poor shepherds
There, death treats them all alike.
In the engravings of José Guadelupe Posada
death is transformed into an image of the Mex¬
ican people. The pelona ("bald one") as she is
popularly called, goes off to the Revolution with
Zapata, brandishes a sword, weeps, dances,
eats spicy meat dishes, and gets drunk on pul¬
que. Posada's skeletons are corrosive precise¬
ly because they form part of an ancient tradi¬
tion of social criticism associated with death. In
his La Quijotitaysu Prima (1818) Fernández de
Lizardi tells us that it was the custom on the se¬
cond of November to send leaflets to politicians
and people of standing anticipating the dates
of their deaths and presenting an obituary
notice. These leaflets which described how the
"deceased" had lived were called calaverasM
Calavera of a Zapatist Revolu¬
tionary by José Guadalupe
Posada (1851-1913).
The Venezuelan writer and art
critic Mariano Picón Salas
observed how the Mexican
people "by force of wisdom
and experience play with
death in order to grow ac¬
customed to it without fear".
The famous Aztec skull carved
from rock crystal which is now
preserved in the British
Museum, London. Aztec
lapidaries cut hardstones with
tools made of wood, plant
fibres, and emery.
MIGUEL ROJAS-MIX, Chilean art critic and
historian, is professor of the sociology of
literature and art at the University of Paris. He
is the author of many books and studies in¬
cluding América Latina en el Arte Europeo
(Latín America in European Art), La Plaza
Mayor, Instrumento de Dominio Colonial (The
Main Square, an Instrument of Colonial
Domination) and a brief history of Latin
America for children.
I
Imposing plastic "calaveras"
(death figures) of musicians in
Mexico City.
