Word within world
A critical reading of the universe
Photo Claude Jacoby © Parimage, Paris
"Reading the universe must always precede reading the word, and reading the latter implies continui¬
ty in reading the former." Below, pupils in a primary school near Victoria de Santo Antao, Brazil.
by Paulo Freiré
PAULO FREIRÉ, noted Brazilian educator, is
the originator of a method of literacy teaching
which has attracted widespread attention. He
developed this system, which is based on en¬
couraging adults to become "critically con¬
scious" of their situation, in Brazil, Chile and
other Latin American countries. Formerly pro¬
fessor of history and philosophy of education
at the university of Recife (Brazil) and a
visiting professor at Harvard, he has also
worked with the United Nations and Unesco.
Among his published works in English transla¬
tion are: Pedagogy of the Oppressed (Penguin,
London, 1972), Education for Critical Con¬
sciousness (Sheed and Ward, London, 1974)
and Education and the Practice of Freedom
(Writers and Readers Publishing Co-operative,
London).
BEFORE discussing the importance of
the act of reading, I feel I should
say something about the process in
which I engaged as I wrote this text. It is a
process that presupposes a critical
understanding of the act of reading, which
is not simply a matter of decoding the writ¬
ten word or language but is preceded by and
extends to an understanding of the world.
Language and reality are linked
dynamically. The understanding of a text
that is achieved through a critical reading
implies a perception of the relationship bet¬
ween the text and the context. When I at¬
tempt to write about the importance of the
act of reading, I feel impelled to "re-read"
essential moments of my experience, from
the earliest memories of my childhood,
adolescence and early manhood, in which a
critical understanding of the importance of
the act of reading was developing within
me.
While I was writing this text, I was
"distancing" myself from the various
moments in which the act of reading took
place in my existential experience. First of
all "reading" words, which during my
schooldays was not always reading the
"word-world". For me the recollection of
my distant childhood, trying to understand
my act of reading, the special world in
which I lived, is very significant. In this ef¬
fort in which I am engaged I recreate and re¬
live in the text I am writing my experience
at a time before I could read words.
I can see myself in the modest house sur¬
rounded by trees where I was born, in
Recife. This old house, with its rooms, cor¬
ridors, cellar and spacious patio was my
first world. It was here that I crawled on all
fours, uttered my first sounds, learned to
stand, walk and speak. Indeed, this special
world was offered to me as the world of my
perceptive activity and, therefore, the world
of my earliest readings. The "texts",
"words" and "letters" of this context (the
more practice I got in perceiving it the more
my perceptive capacities grew) were em¬
bodied in a number of things, objects and
signs, and in the course of my contacts with
them and of my relations with my older
brothers and sisters and my parents, my
comprehension grew.
The "texts", "words" and "letters" of
29

this context were embodied in the song of
birds the sanhacu, the elha-pro-caminho-
quem-vem, the ben-te-vi, the nightingale; in
the dance of the treetops swayed by strong
gusts of wind that foretold storms, thunder
and lightning; in rainwater playing at
geography, inventing lakes, islands and
rivulets. Other "texts", "words" and "let¬
ters" were the whistling of the wind, the
clouds, their colours and movements, the
colour of the foliage, the shapes of leaves,
the scent of flowers (roses and jasmin), tree-
trunks and the skin of fruit.
Animals were also part of the context
the household cats with their clever ways of
coiling themselves around people's legs and
their miaows of supplication or anger; my
father's old black dog Joli. It also included
the world of language in which the old peo¬
ple expressed their beliefs, tastes, fears and
values. All this was linked to wider contexts
than that of my immediate world, contexts
of whose existence I was totally unaware.
In this attempt to return to my distant
childhood, as I try to understand the act of
reading the private world in which I moved,
I recreate and relive in this text I am writing
the experience I had before I could read
words.
But I must insist that "reading" my
world, which was always of essential impor¬
tance to me, did not transform me
prematurely into a man, a rationalist in
short trousers. My childish curiosity would
not be deformed simply through being exer¬
cised, and here too I was helped by my
parents. Indeed, it was with them that I was
introduced to the reading of words, at a cer¬
tain moment in that rich experience in ap¬
prehending my immediate world, an ap¬
prehension that did not contain any an¬
tipathy for its enchantment and mystery.
Decipherment of words was not super¬
imposed on my "reading" of my private
world; it flowed naturally from it. I learned
to read and write on the floor of the patio,
in the shade of the mango trees, with the
words of my world, not those of the adult
world. The floor was my slate and twigs
were my chalk.
This is why I could already read when I
began to attend the private school run by
Eunice Vasconcelos. Eunice continued my
parents' work and took it further. With her,
reading words, sentences and prayers never
meant a break with "reading" the world.
With her, reading words was reading the
"word-world".
Continuing this attempt to "re-read"
essential moments in the experience of my
childhood, adolescence and youth, during
which a critical understanding of the impor¬
tance of the act of reading was developing
within me through the practice of reading,
let me return to the period when I was
studying for my baccalauréat and I trained
myself in the critical perception of texts
which I read in class with the help (which I
still remember today) of my teacher of
Portuguese.
Some of us teachers sometimes entertain
a false idea about the act of reading which
emerges when we insist on students
"reading" a massive quantity of chapters
of books in a single semester. In the course
of my wanderings around the world young
students often told me of their struggles
30
&&K8Í
"I learned to read and
write on the floor of the
patio of my house, in the
shade of the mango
trees, with the words of
my world, not those of
the adult world of my
parents. The floor was
my slate and twigs were
my chalk." Right, a little
girl in an Indian village.
Photo Jyoti Bhatt,
©ACCU. Tokyo
Baroda India.
with long reading lists of books which they
had to devour rather than read or study,
veritable "reading lessons" in the most
traditional sense to which they were sub¬
jected in the name of scientific training and
of which they had to give an account in a
test. I have sometimes even seen in book
lists indications of which pages should be
read in a given chapter of a given book.
Insistence on the quantity of matter to be
read, without due in-depth study of the
texts so that they are understood and not
just mechanically memorized, reflects a
magic approach to the written word. This
approach should be rejected. The same ap¬
proach, although from a different angle, is
found in the case of a writer who identifies
the potential quality or otherwise of his
work with the number of pages he has writ¬
ten. And yet one of the most important
philosophical documents we have, the
Theses on Feuerbach, consists of barely two
and a half pages...
However, in order to avoid any
misunderstanding I must emphasize that
my critical remarks about the magic con¬
cept of the word in no way imply an ir¬
responsible attitude on my part towards the
need for us educators and students to read
constantly and seriously the classics in all
fields of knowledge, to deepen our
understanding of them and to create that in¬
tellectual discipline without which our work
as teachers and students loses its viability.
From my rich experience as a teacher of
Portuguese, I remember as if it were only
yesterday and not long ago how I used to
pause to analyse the writings of Gilberto
Freyre, Lins do Rego, Graciliano Ramos
and Jorge Amado. I would bring these
works from home and read them to the
class, pointing out those aspects of their
syntax which were closely related to the
good taste of their language. To these
analyses I would add some remarks about
the obvious differences between the Por¬
tuguese of Portugal and that of Brazil.
In this paper on the importance of the act
of reading I am trying to showand I shall
never tire of doing so that my main pur¬
pose has been to explain how that impor¬
tance emerged in my personal experience. It
is as if I were studying the "archaeology"
of my understanding of the complex act of
reading throughout my existential ex¬
perience. This is why I have spoken of cer¬
tain moments in my childhood, adolescence
and early youth, and I shall now conclude
by recalling in broad outline some of the
main features of the proposal I made some
years ago in the field of adult literacy
teaching.


First of all, I have always regarded adult
literacy teaching as both a form of political
action and as an act of cognition and
therefore as a form of creative activity. Per¬
sonally I should find it impossible to par¬
ticipate in work which consisted in the
mechanical memorizing of ba-be-bi-bo-bu
or la-le-li-lo-lu. For this reason also I can¬
not reduce literacy training to a form of
teaching where the teacher "fills" the sup¬
posedly empty heads of his pupils with
words. On the contrary, the subject of the
literacy learning process as a cognitive and
creative act is in the pupil.
The fact of needing the teacher's help, as
is the case in any pedagogical relationship,
does not mean that such help does away
with the pupil's creative role and his respon¬
sibility in constructing his written language
and reading it. In fact both the teacher and
the pupil, when, for instance, they grasp an
object, feel it, perceive the felt object and
are capable of expressing the felt and
perceived object verbally. Like me, the il¬
literate person is capable of feeling a pen, of
perceiving it, and of saying "pen". But I
am capable not only of feeling and perceiv¬
ing a pen and saying "pen" but also of
writing "pen" and therefore of reading
"pen". Literacy consists in the written
creation or montage of oral expression.
This montage cannot be performed by the
teacher for or on the pupil. This is the mo¬
ment when the pupil performs his creative
role.
I do not intend to say more here about the
complexities of this process, which I have
analysed more fully elsewhere. But I should
like to revert to one point which I have rais¬
ed several times in this text because of its
importance for a critical understanding of
the act of reading and consequently for the
task of literacy training which I have mark¬
ed out for myself. I am referring to the fact
that "reading" the universe must always
precede reading the word, and reading the
latter implies continuity in "reading" the
former. This movement from universe to
word and back again is always present in
literacy teaching. It is a movement in which
the spoken word is born of the world itself
through our "reading" of the world. In a
sense, however-, we can go further and say
that the reading of the word is preceded not
only by the "reading" of the universe but
also by a certain form of "writing" it or
"rewriting" it in other words, of
transforming it by means of our conscious
practice.
In my opinion this dynamic movement is
one of the central features of the literacy
process. That is why I have always insisted
that the words with which literacy training
is organized must be selected from the
universal vocabulary of the persons con¬
cerned, expressing their real language, their
desires, anxieties, demands and dreams.
They should be charged with the meaning
of their experience of life and not of that of
the teacher. Investigation of what I have
called the "vocabular universe" thus gave
us the world-charged words of the people.
They came to us through the reading of the
universe effected by groups of the people.
Afterwards they returned to them, grafted
on to what I called and still call decodifica-
tions, which are representations of reality.
The word brick, for instance, would be
included in a pictorial representation of a
group of building workers constructing a
house. But before the oral word of a group
of the people was restored to them in writ¬
ten form for comprehension and not for
mechanical memorization, we would con¬
front the pupils with a set of coded situa¬
tions whose decodification or "reading"
led to the critical perception of what culture
is, through an understanding of the human
practice or work which transforms the
world. Basically, thanks to this set of
representations of concrete situations it was
possible for the group to "read" a previous
"reading" of the world before reading the
word.
This more critical "reading" of the less
critical previous "reading" of the world
enables groups of the people, who are
sometimes fatalistic about injustices, to
have a different understanding of their
needs. In this sense, a critical reading of
reality, whether made in the course of a
literacy process or not, and primarily
associated with certain clearly political ac¬
tions of mobilization and organization, can
become an instrument of what Antonio
Gramsci would call "counter-hegemonic
action".
Paulo Freiré
Photo Bruno Barbey © Magnum. Paris
"The 'texts', 'words', and 'letters' of this context were embodied in... rainwater playing at
geography, inventing lakes, islands and rivulets... in the colour of foliage, the shapes of leaves,
the scent of flowers...". Below, amidst giant lilies a boy fishes in a Brazilian river.
\p'
r5* \ 'Pir***
J
