Galaxies and Quasars
by Nigel Henbest
ACCORDING to Greek legend,
the pearly band of the Milky
Way stretching across the sky
is milk spilt from the breast of the god¬
dess Juno. Since Galileo first in¬
vestigated the Milky Way by telescope,
we have known it is in fact composed of
stars. It is our own "star island", and
the Sun is just one of the 100,000
million stars making the Milky Way
Galaxyoften known simply as the
Galaxy.
Beyond the Galaxy, thousands of
millions of other galaxies stretch out to
the limits of the observable Universe.
Decades of detailed study have shown
that there is a fundamental simplicity
to galaxies. They fall into three main
types: spirals,, irregulars, and ellip¬
ticals. The recent techniques of radio,
NIGEL HENBEST is a British freelance
science writer and astronomy consultant to
the magazine New Scientist. Before becoming
a full-time science writer he was a radio
astronomer at the Cavendish Laboratory,
Cambridge University. He is the author of a
number of books; the latest, The New
Astronomy, (1983) was written in co-
authorship with Michael Marten.
The Whirlpool Galaxy (M51).
X-ray and infra-red astronomy have
shown that some galaxies are much
more violent than typical specimens
like the Milky Way Galaxy; but it is
worth remembering that although the
violent galaxies may grab the
headlines, they are very much in the
minority.
Our Galaxy is typical of a spiral
galaxy. These are named for the
beautiful two-armed spiral shape
visible on photographs but it is an ap¬
pearance that is misleading. The bright
spiral arms are just one region of the
whole galaxy. For a start, there is good
evidence that most of a galaxy's matter
is not in the form of the stars, gas and
that we can detect, but consists of
some invisible material filling a large
volume of space within and surround¬
ing the galaxy. This dark matter makes
its presence felt only by its gravitational
influence.
The oldest stars of a spiral galaxy fill
a large spherical volume of space
around the galaxy, and become in¬
creasingly concentrated towards its
centre. The outer regions of this halo of
stars are difficult to detect, but the
inner parts show as an orange bulge at
the centre of the spiral.
The spiral arms are the most promi¬
nent regions of a thin disc of stars,
which stretches away from the central
bulge like the broad rim of a hat. As
well as stars, the galaxy's disc contains
gas spread tenuously between the stars,
mixed up with small solid particles of
interstellar dust. The gas and dust
amount to about ten per cent of the
mass of stars in the disc, and much of
it is clumped into dense molecular
clouds where stars are currently being
born.
In many galaxies, the spiral shape is
a gravitational pattern. As a com-
The American astronomer Edwin Hubble
proposed the system ofclassifying galax¬
ies that is now generally In use. He divid¬
ed galaxies Into ellipticals, spirals, barred
spirals and Irregulars. Elliptical galaxies
are oval shaped and can be up to three
times the size of our own galaxy. Spirals,
such as our own galaxy, have arms which
swing out In a semi-circle from a nucleus.
Barred spirals have a bar-shaped nucleus
with two arms curving out from the end of
the bar. Irregular galaxies, which are not
shown In the diagram, are usually
somewhat smaller groupings of stars
with no particular shape.
17

galaxy passes by, it stirs up a
ripple in the disc of stars, and this
propagates around the disc in a
spiral-shaped "density-wave".
Where the spiral is less well marked,
it may be due to a chain of exploding
stars compressing nearby interstellar
gas. Either way, the spiral marks a
region where matter is more concen¬
trated and where a lot of bright,
energetic stars are now being born.
The Milky Way's companion, the
Andromeda Galaxy, is one of the most
massive spirals known, weighing as
much as 400,000 million Suns (ex¬
cluding the dark matter). The range of
spiral galaxies goes down to about
1,000 million solar masses. Less
massive galaxies are not able to main¬
tain a regular disc and stable spiral
arms. They have roughly the same pro¬
portions of stars, gas and dust, but
their unkempt appearance has led to
the classification "irregular galaxies".
The smallest irregular galaxies are
hardly larger than the clumps of stars
and gas found strung along the arms of
a spiral galaxy.
The third major category of galaxy is
the ellipticals. These are simply balls of
stars, spherical or elliptical in shape.
Although they may be surrounded by
dark matter, they contain only a
negligible amount of gas and dust. As
a result, there are no regions where
stars are forming, and no young stars.
The elliptical galaxy's stars all date
from the time when the galaxy first
formed. Ellipticals range from the big¬
gest and most massive galaxies of all,
with a million million stars, to the
faintest star assemblages which contain
less than a million stars.
Galaxies are rather gregarious
creatures. Most live in groups, where
they are gravitationally bound to
neighbour galaxies, and will stay
together as the expansion of the
Universe carries other groups of galax¬
ies away from them.
The Milky Way lies in a group of
about twenty galaxies, called the Local
Group. Other members include the An¬
dromeda Galaxy, a giant spiral; the
Small Magellanic Cloud, an irregular;
the Large Magellanic Cloud, which is
on the borders between spiral and ir¬
regular galaxies; and many small ir¬
regulars and ellipticals.
The Local Group is typical of many
groups and larger clusters of galaxies,
in containing a diversity of types. But
large clusters with a dense concentra¬
tion of galaxies towards the centre tend
to be different. Their galaxies are
distributed in a more regular swarm,
and X-ray telescopes show that they
often contain a pool of very hot gases
around the cluster's centre. The galax¬
ies in these clusters are almost entirely
ellipticals, or the strange creatures call¬
ed lenticulars. The latter are lens-
shaped galaxies, consisting only of
stars, and they are probably spiral
galaxies that have been stripped of their
interstellar gas and dust as they have
ploughed into the cluster's pool of hot
gas. The dense packing of galaxies in
these rich clusters means that galaxy
collisions must be commonplace, and
indeed the cluster's centre is often
marked by a massive elliptical galaxy
which is probably the accumulated re¬
mains of galaxies that have collided at
the centre of the cluster.
Optical astronomers see a galaxy by
the light from its stars. This gives a
good measure of the galaxy mass (ex¬
cept for the dark matter) because the
matter resides largely in the stars. The-
starlight can blind astronomers to
other kinds of activity in a galaxy,
however, and the development of
radio, X-ray and infra-red astronomy
has led astronomers to galaxies which
are producing immense quantities of
these radiations. Although these galax¬
ies are in a minority, they are providing
new information on galaxies' work¬
ings, just as a study of diseases can tell
us more about the healthy human
body. And they have a fascination of
CONTINUED PAGE 23
9 Leo II
Milky Way
Ä Leo I
NGC 6822 « Small Magellanic Cloud
NGC 147*
Andromeda Galaxy
(M31; NGC 224)
ft NGC 185
M32(NGC221)
Large Magellanic
Cloud
Sculptor $ fl? Fornax
THE LOCAL GROUP, a
cluster of some 20 known
galaxies Including the Milky
Way and our own solar
system, Is represented In
this cube each side of which
measures some 4 million
light-years. Apart from the
Milky Way, only the An¬
dromeda Galaxy and the two
Magellanic Clouds are visi¬
ble to the naked eye.
Diagram John Painter © All rights
reserved
18

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 18
their own, for some active galaxies, the
quasars, are the most powerful objects
in the Universe.
Astronomers now recognize two dif¬
ferent kinds of active galaxy. The
"starburst galaxies" are spiral or ir¬
regular galaxies where a large propor¬
tion of their interstellar matter is turn¬
ing into stars all at once. The light from
these new stars is hidden by dense dust
clouds around them, but their energy
eventually escapes from the clouds as
infra-red, "heat" radiation. Astro¬
nomers only vaguely suspected the
existence of starburst galaxies before
1983, when the first orbiting infra-red
telescope was flown on the Infra-red
Astronomical Satellite (IRAS). IRAS
discovered thousands of starburst
galaxies, some emitting a hundred
times as much heat as light, and the
analysis of the results is still under way.
The strongest active galaxies
however fall into the second class,
those with a central "powerhouse".
This is a small region of concentrated
power in a galaxy's centre, probably no
larger than the Solar System, and pro¬
ducing an amount of energy equivalent
to the output of up to a million million
Suns. The powerhouse can also send
energy out into space, in narrow
beams.
The largest of the elliptical galaxies
frequently have a powerhouse that
gives out little radiation itself (and so is
not easily detected by optical, radio or
X-ray telescopes), but puts its power
into two oppositely directed beams.
These probably consist of high-speed
electrons, like the beam from a tele¬
vision tube's electron gun. The beams
speed out into space on either side of
The great spiral galaxy in the Andromeda
constellation.
the galaxy, still giving little hint of the
energy in flow. But eventually they
strike the very tenuous gas that sur¬
rounds the galaxy, and they surrender
the energy. It goes into a random mix¬
ture of magnetic field and chaotic elec¬
trons that generates radio waves, by a
process called synchroton radiation. A
radio telescope thus "sees" not the
galaxy itself, but a pair of bright
clouds, one on either side of the galaxy.
The powerhouses in spiral galaxies
are not so coy. They generally produce
a lot of light, X-rays and radio waves
directly. The most common type, and
the best-studied, are Seyfert galaxies.
Carl Seyfert, working in America in
1943, first investigated spiral galaxies
with a tiny bright point of light at the
centre. As well as this inexplicable light
source, he found that the central
regions of the galaxies contain gases
moving at high speed.
The next step came twenty years
later, when astronomers found that
some radio sources coincided with
small points of light in the sky.
Although these looked like stars, the
red shift of their light showed they were
very distant objects, being carried away
by the expansion of the Universe. Their
conflicting properties led to the name
"quasi-stellar objects", later shortened
to quasars.
More recent research has shown that
quasars are simply more powerful ver¬
sions of the galaxy cores that Seyfert
had studied. With sensitive electronic
detectors, astronomers have found that
the brilliant powerhouses are in many
cases surrounded by a faint "fuzz"
that corresponds to the galaxy we
would expect to find there and the^
23


fuzz generally shows a spiral shape.
Both quasars and the centres of Seyfert
galaxies are constantly fluctuating in
brightness, so it's quite likely that they
are one and the same phenomenon,
caught at different levels of activity.
The powerhouse in a quasar is a truly
diabolic inferno. Some quasars change
their output of X-rays in only a couple
of hours, implying that the powerhouse
is just a few "light hours" across-
only the size of the Solar System. Yet in
the largest outburst yet seen from a
quasar, this tiny region was emitting
the power of over a thousand normal
galaxies!
Most astronomers believe there is
only one possible source for concen¬
trated power of this magnitude: the
powerful gravitational field around a
black hole. As gas spirals downwards
into a black hole, as much as 40 per
cent of its mass can be converted into
energy. A spiral galaxy would certainly
have enough gas to "feed" the black
hole of a quasar lurking in its centre.
There is more of a problem in ex¬
plaining the powerhouses in elliptical
galaxies that eject the electron beams,
because these galaxies are relatively
gas-free. But even here there is a solu¬
tion: the gravitational pull of the black
hole can rip stars apart as their orbits
bring them too close to the hole, and
the spilt gas from the disrupted star can
then spiral inwards.
Backing up this theory- are sensitive
measurements of two nearby active
galaxies. The elliptical galaxy M87 is a
radio galaxy, and a team of British and
American astronomers have discovered
that the stars near its centre move as if
they are constrained by the gravity of a
compact, invisible object some 5,000
million times heavier than the Sun.
Only a black hole could be this heavy
yet so small. And an international team
studying the motions of gas in the
Seyfert galaxy NGC 4151 have con¬
cluded that it is orbiting a black hole
about 500 million times the Sun's
weight.
An active galaxy's outbursts must
depend not only on the presence of a
central black hole, but also on gas cur¬
rently spiralling inwards. About 10 per
cent of large spiral galaxies are Seyfert
galaxies, and most astronomers believe
they are not continuously active. To
turn the statistics around, then, it is
possible that all spiral galaxies contain
a central black hole, but that they are
fuelled for only ten per cent of the time.
In that case, the distinction between a
normal galaxy and an active galaxy
becomes blurred. Perhaps ordinary
galaxies, like the Andromeda Galaxy
and even our Milky Way, contain a
dormant black hole, have suffered out¬
bursts from a central powerhouse in the
past and may possibly do so again.
Nigel Henbest
24
The Crab Nebula, produced by the explo¬
sion of a supernova In 1054.
The barred spiral galaxy NGC 1300.
The "Sombrero
spiral galaxy.
Hat" galaxy, a young

