*4r*â A
***
Im- 9SS -
,*L
' *--nr_ ... JJ *Ä *4
HrFI^1 ^
'7 *\
V
BrueesS(
TOWARDS the end of the fifteenth
century Duke Philip the Fair
brought his young bride Joanna of
Castile to his native city of Bruges. On her
return from a walk in the city the future
mother of the Emperor Charles V, surpris¬
ed by the rich apparel of the patrician
ladies, is said to have remarked: "I thought
I was the only queen in this country, but I
have seen many others!" The story may be
apocryphal, but it says much for the
opulence and splendour of what has been
called "the Venice of the North". One
, might just as well speak of Venice as "the
Bruges of the South" without in any way
offending the prestige of the city of the
Doges. Numerous canals crossed by pic¬
turesque bridges, imposing public
buildings, rich patrician houses, winding
old streets make up the charm of both
cities each of which, however, has its own
special character and each of which was a
nerve centre of trade in the Middle Ages.
The sea wind still blows in Bruges,
"although nowadays the city is about fifteen
kilometres from the sandy beaches of the
North Sea, to which it was connected in the
Middle Ages by the estuary of the Zwin,
which provided access to the city for vessels
of every kind. Today the Zwin is a protected
natural reserve where fauna and flora
typical of the region continue to survive.
Although he never set foot in Flanders, in
his Purgatorio Dante mentions the Flemish
towns, which were amongst the most im¬
portant of his time. Bruges comes first on
his list. These towns which developed very
early in medieval Flanders were soon
known all over the western world for the
quality of their fabrics, manufacture of
which was one of the chief industries in the
Middle Ages.
Trade grew very rapidly. Initially it was
conducted mainly during annual or bi¬
annual trade fairs, when merchants travell¬
ed from town to town according to a well-
regulated calendar. Although a system of
fixed trade centres came to be preferred to
this arrangement, this did not mean that
fairs ceased to exist, at least not immediate¬
ly. It was at this time that the rise of Bruges
began. Its growth was stimulated by a
favourable geographical situation at the
heart of busy, densely populated western
Europe, where important countries and
kingdoms met on the frontiers of two cur¬
rents of civilization, the Germanic and
Roman. The town was easily accessible by
land and sea. When the silting-up of the
Zwin estuary, by which Bruges was con¬
nected to the North Sea, later prevented
vessels from entering the town itself they
could still come within a short distance of it
and moor in the outer harbour of Damme.
The people of Bruges were actively
engaged in trade until the thirteenth cen¬
tury. They travelled to England and
Scotland for their precious wool and they
Air view of Bruges, one of Europe's most
flourishing commercial and artistic centres
in medieval times. At centre is the Markt (the
main square), with the governor's palace to
the left. Above, the covered market, begun
1248 and altered in the 16th century, is sur¬
mounted by an 84-metre-high belfry, one of
the finest in Belgium.
nim

A M ED I EVA L C E N T R E OF C O M M É R CE



FAIR CITY OF FLANDERS
by Paul Aforren
-J^**¿0F
Bruges was the' most important seaport in
northwest Europe in the 12th century when
the Bruges Hanse, a federation of from five
to seven cities, controlled the market in
English wool. In the middle of the following
century Bruges advanced towards becom¬
ing a major centre of international trade
when the Teutonic or German Hanse (map
above) founded a commercial enclave there.
The Teutonic Hanse was a confederation of
towns and cities centred on Lübeck which
dominated the Baltic Sea trade from the 13th
to the 15th century. In exchange for mer¬
chandise brought from northern and eastern
Europe by the Hanseatic merchants, Bruges
sent to the Baltic products from western
Europe, the Mediterranean and the orient
such as Flemish cloth, English wool, French
wine and salt, and Italian silk and spices.
sailed along the Atlantic coasts, from which
they brought back grain, wine and cheese.
Bruges was a leading member of the
Hanseatic League of Flemish towns.
A profound change took place in this
economic pattern when the English mer¬
chant adventurers started to bring wool to
the continent themselves. Bruges gave up
active trade and concentrated on other ac¬
tivities. First it became an industrial town
where the manufacture of cloth and
clothing was stimulated and improved.
Other textile-related industries also
developed, as well as the manufacture of
furniture, tapestries and other articles of in¬
terior decoration. Amber rosary beads were
a highly esteemed speciality.
Above all, Bruges became a major inter¬
national trading centre, the greatest market
north of the Alps. Merchants came there to
get supplies of the striped or single-
coloured cloth from which the best clothes
were made. This product was highly ap¬
preciated throughout Europe and even
PAUL MORREN, of Belgium, is State Inspector
at the Ministry of Education and Dutch Culture
in Belgium. He has been editor, since its incep¬
tion in 1972, of the Dutch edition of the
Unesco Courier. The author of many books,
articles and radio and television scripts on
human rights, he was awarded the 1979
Unesco Prize for the Teaching of Human
Rights.
beyond. Thirteenth-century German poets
sang the praises of Bruges breeches and in
Russia the word bryukish was coined to
describe Bruges cloth. Actually Bruges did
not have a monopoly of this speciality but
shared her skill in making it with a number
of Flemish and Brabançon towns.
Those who frequented Bruges were sure
of finding top quality goods at a reasonable
price. But they were also sure of finding an
outlet for the goods they brought with
them, and of finding other interesting pro¬
ducts brought there by their fellow-
merchants from elsewhere. Henceforth,
goods werfe no longer made for local con¬
sumption, but for international trade. It
was this direct exchange of foreign products
with all its attendant activities that brought
great wealth to Bruges and enabled it to re¬
main prosperous after the heavy cloth in¬
dustry declined.
Towards the end of the thirteenth century
the communal authorities issued a docu¬
ment which gives an idea of the products
that could be procured in Bruges and of
their countries of origin. It mentions no less
than thirty-four different regions (in some
cases, like the kingdom of Germany, the
regions were grouped). All the regions of
Europe were mentioned, from Sweden to
Andalusia, from England to Russia. Also
mentioned were Tunisia, Morocco, Con¬
stantinople, Jerusalem, Egypt, the Sudan,
Armenia and Tartary. The document ended
as follows: "From all these kingdoms and
lands merchants and goods come to the
land of Flanders, not counting those who
come from the kingdom of France, from
Poitou, Gascony... whose merchants come
every year to Flanders, and from many
other countries too. This is why no land can
be compared with Flanders for
merchandise".
Five main routes ended in Bruges from
London; from Genoa and Venice by the
Mediterranean and the Atlantic coast; from
Hamburg, Lübeck and the Hanseatic
towns; from Cologne along the Rhine; and
from Genoa overland via the Rhône valley
and Champagne.
Many foreigners settled in Bruges, where
they organized themselves into groups and
depended on what might be described as
consulates. The most influential of these
organizations was that of the Hanseatic
cities (the great German Hanseatic League,
not to be confused with the league of
Flemish towns mentioned above). During a
ducal visit in 1440 a procession of foreign
residents included 136 members of the
Hanseatic League, forty-eight Spaniards,
forty Venetians, an equal number of
Milanese, thirty-six Genoese, twenty-two
Florentines, twelve representatives of the
town of Lucca and an unknown number of
Portuguese and Catalans. For some reason
the English, preponderant though they were
in numbers, were absent that day.
In 1438, the Spanish chronicler Pedro
Tafur set out on a journey "in search of ^
17

adventure, and opportunities to prove my
personal merit and that of my family and
country". He had the excellent idea of
keeping a diary of his journey in which he
confides that he found Bruges to be
superior to Venice, because it was a
meeting-place for people from many coun¬
tries, whereas on the shores of the Adriatic
the natives attended to everything
themselves. "I have been told that on cer¬
tain days as many as 700 ships leave the
port. The capital of Flanders is a very big
town with pretty houses and fine streets. It
is densely populated and includes a great
many craftsmen. The town is full of
churches and convents as well as good inns.
Everything, including the administration of
justice, is organized in an exemplary man¬
ner. The inhabitants display boundless ac¬
tivity. Merchandise from all parts of the
world is offered for sale in Bruges."
The comparison between Bruges and
Venice does not end with their sites and
economic activities. Here is the account of
Leo von Rozmital, brother-in-law of the
King of Bohemia, who in 1466 travelled
through Germany, Belgium, England,
France, Spain, Portugal and Italy, accom¬
panied by a suite of forty gentlemen and
servants. "In this country, but especially in
Bruges, it is customary at the beginning of
carnival for people of importance to
disguise themselves, vying with each other
to have the richest apparel. The colour
chosen by the lord is also worn by his ser¬
vants. But the wearing of masks prevents
their being identified. Thus attired, they go
wherever there are balls and other enter¬
tainments, accompanied by players of
trumpets and drums."
In the fifteenth century the many feudal
principalities which had arisen on what is
today the territory of Belgium and the
Netherlands were united under the sceptre
of the Dukes of Burgundy. For several
decades this extensive State was the richest
and most powerful in western Europe. It
had no fixed capital, but Bruges was one of
the favourite places of residence of the
Dukes and the Court. It was here that
Charles the Bold and Margaret of York
were married and that Philip the Good
founded the Order of the Golden Fleece. It
was at Bruges that much of the splendour of
the Burgundian era was displayed. This in¬
cluded the development of music, the
flowering of secular and ecclesiastical flam¬
boyant Gothic and the fabulous school of
painting which began with Jan Van Eyck
and whose members have infelicitously
The canals and monuments of
Bruges form a magnificent
urban landscape which today
attracts large numbers of
tourists. Bruges Is linked by
a canal to Its seaport,
Zeebrugge, 10 km away.
Zeebrugge Is Belgium's
second most Important port.
The béguinage, right, is one of
the most famous sites in
Bruges. A béguinage is an
enclosed district which Is the
home of "Béguines", pious
women who belong to a
religious community although
not under vow. The movement
began in the 12th century and
became . particularly wide¬
spread in Belgium.
18

been dubbed the Flemish Primitives,
although this school was, in fact, one of the
great achievements of plastic art.
For economic, social and political
reasons the proud and valiant city of
Bruges, which had even taken the liberty of
imprisoning Maximilian I, then Regent of
the Burgundian State, was obliged at the
end of the fifteenth and the beginning of the
sixteenth century to give ground to other
cities, above all to Antwerp, which was to
become the most important commercial
and financial centre of the sixteenth
century.
Foreign merchants abandoned Bruges
which fell asleep and became a quiet provin¬
cial town, whose atmosphere was evoked by
the novelist Georges Rodenbach in a book
published in 1892 under the title Bruges-la-
Morte. Today, thanks to its economic
recovery and to the influx of tourists in
search of beauty and the past, it is a dead
town that has come to life again. It takes
jealous care of its medieval character and
the unity of its architectural style. For this
it was awarded the European Prize for Ur¬
banization in 1975.
Paul Morrren
In the 15th century Bruges
became the cradle of Flemish
painting. Not all the artists
who brought distinction to the
city were natives of It. Jan van
Eyck (c. 1390-1441), whose
powerful and meticulous
realism opened up a new way
of painting, settled in Bruges
in 1431. Left, one of his
masterpieces, The Betrothal
of the Arnolfinl (1434) may be
the first example of a full-
length portrait. Hans Memling
(c. 1433-1494) was another
great master of the Flemish
School. A painter of religious
subjects and portraits, he
worked In Bruges throughout
his career. Below, Memling's
The Virgin, St. John and Three
Holy Women Is the right hand
panel of an altar diptych por¬
traying the deposition from
the Cross.
19
