In the last 20 years or so, the China Film Ar¬
chive has assembled over 100,000 reels of
film from China and elsewhere. Thirty per
cent consists of inflammable and increas¬
ingly fragile nitrate film which the Archive is
restoring in a specially created laboratory
and transferring onto safety stock. Techni¬
cians have succeeded in restoring to a
usable condition a nitrate print of one of the
first talkies made in China, Cai Chu Sheng's
Song of the Fishermen (1934) which has not
been seen by the public for 40 years (left).
The film had irremediably shrunk, and a
specially adapted system was developed to
pass it through the projector. The Song of
the Fishermen, which won an award at the
1935 Moscow Film Festival, has already
been shown on Chinese television and is to
be presented in a forthcoming retrospective
ofChinese filmsofthe 1930s and 1940s. The
China Film Archive has been a member of
FIAF since 1980.



The International Federation of Film Archives
by Robert Daudelin
FOUNDED in 1938, the International Federation of Film Ar¬
chives (FIAF) today has a membership of seventy-three
archives throughout the world: four in Africa, seven in North
America, twelve in Latin America, nine in Asia, thirty-eight in Europe
and three in Oceania.
The Federation has four main objectives:
to promote the preservation of films considered to be works of art
or historical documents;
to encourage the creation and development of cinémathèques
(film archives) in all countries;
to facilitate collection and international exchange of films and
documents concerning the history and art of cinematography so as
to make them accessible to the widest possible audience;
to foster increased co-operation between its members.
Members of the Federation are independent, non-profit
cinémathèques whose aim is to study the history and art of the
cinema and whose services are available to the public. Their prin¬
cipal task should be the acquisition, preservation and cataloguing of
films and documentation relating to the cinema.
In order to foster the culture and art of the cinema, members are
authorized, indeed encouraged, to undertake other activities such
as the organization of film showings, exhibitions, symposia and
ROBERT DAUDELIN, of Canada, is Director-General of the Cinémathè¬
que of Quebec, and has been for the last six years Secretary-General
of FIAF.
meetings and the publication of books, pamphlets and periodicals.
The Federation itself has published several technical works which
have become essential reference sources for both newly-formed and
longer-established archives.
From modest beginnings, when it had all the appearance of a
private club, the Federation has become as it were the "United Na¬
tions" of the moving image. Its annual congress, which now includes
historical and technical symposia, is attended by over one hundred
delegates from all over the world. The proceedings of these
meetings and symposia regularly give rise to publications that have
become essential tools for researchers and historians of the cinema.
These publications include such works as The Influence of the
Soviet Cinema on World Cinema, The Cinema from 1900 to 1906,
and The Problem of Selection in Film Archives.
In 1983 alone, the collections of Federation member archives in¬
creased by more than thirty thousand films (both feature-length and
shorts). In the same year some eighty million metres of film were ex¬
amined by technicians of member archives. Also in 1983, twenty-
four member archives started work on or completed construction of
specialized film conservation store-rooms many of which met the
standards required for the preservation of both video-tapes and
cinematographic film.
The permanent secretariat of the International Federation of Film
Archives (FIAF) is located in Brussels (Coudenberg 70, 1000
Brussels, Belgium). Further information can be obtained from the
secretariat concerning the activities of the Federation and the help
available to those wishing to establish new archives.
