Singing a soft lullaby a Madras
grandmother rocks the baby to
sleep in a traditional Tamil
hammock-cradle.
Photo © Faivre, Paris



Scenes from everyday life
by Sundara Ramaswamy
TAMIL people today have a way of life that carries them
back and forth over twenty centuries. When a young
Tamil with a doctorate in atomic science from a famous
American university advertises for a bride in the matrimonial
columns of a Madras English-language daily, he mentions his
caste and sub-caste and asks a suitable girl with the height and
waistline he desires to write to him immediately enclosing a
SUNDARA RAMASWAMY is a leading contemporary Tamil poet and
novelist.
horoscope. And since computers are now used for casting
horoscopes there need be no delay.
On the day of Ayudha Pooja, the annual festival at which
craftsmen honour the tools of their trade, surgeons who per¬
form open-heart surgery will put a kumkumam mark on their
minute, high-precision equipment.
Village, town, city: each has its own pace and style of life.
Morning begins much earlier in the cities and villages than in the
small towns. In the villages this is a natural and in the cities an
enforced inconvenience.

Village scene in western Tamil Nadu.
Photo © Vivant Univers, Namur, Belgium
In the cities a generation may still survive which remembers
the sound that wonderful sound of milk squirting into empty
metal pots from the teats of cows and buffaloes. The milk
sound, the sound of cow bells, the sound of hoofs, the rattle of
horns, the rustle of straw, the clatter of milk cans on the
ground the only sound like these in the cities today is that of
bicycle bells. In the city milk is left on the doorstep in plastic
sachets, and the customer does not even see the face of the girl
who delivers it. Alas, the alarm has been set too late for that.
Beside the milk is the morning newspaper, and soon the odour
of coffee and news will be in the air. While reading his
newspaper and drinking his coffee, the prudent householder
will remember to turn on the tap and fill his pots and pans with
water. The water supply may continue to flow all day... but
then again it may not.
In the city as in the village, the first thing the housewife
should do when she has taken her morning bath is to draw the
traditional kolam sign in front of her door (see photos page 31 ).
I still remember forty years later how my grandmother once ac¬
cusingly pointed out to her daughter-in-law that although it was
already noon she had still not drawn the kolam. (In fact the sun
had only just risen). In those days the kolam was drawn with
rice flour; today it is traced with white lime powder. Over the
years it has become accepted that a housewife can draw the
kolam after merely washing her face, provided that she has ap¬
plied the kumkumam and arranged her hair above her forehead.
Methods of cooking have changed. There has been a real
revolution in the kitchen. Yesterday gas stoves, electric
grinders, pressure-cookers, hot-plates and refrigerators were
possessions of the rich; today middle-class people aspire to
them. Working housewives are discovering time-saving
strategies in the kitchen. The menfolk and the children will have
to learn to do their bit in the morning hustle and bustle.
From eight o'clock in the morning onwards the sparrows
start to fly away from every home. First the little sparrows, then
10
the big sparrows. Then the house subsides into a great calm.
Now, if anyone rings the doorbell, the door will usually be kept
firmly shut. Even if it is opened, it will only be to a width of four
fingers, and an elderly face, frightened by the sound of its own
non-committal reply, will close the door upon itself.
Crowded buses and trains. Even if a seat is vacant, tradition
still requires that a woman should not sit beside a man nor a
man beside a woman. While boarding, however, men and
women inevitably jostle one another in the crush. They are
bound to bump into one another while standing or moving
down the aisle. But for the time being they have decided not to
sit side by side. Some humorous conductors crack jokes and
make the passengers laugh, helping to dispel the nervousness
that has been rising into the mind like poison ever since
daybreak.
The evenings are starting to belong to the television, which
the middle class has welcomed with open arms. For all practical
purposes the television is simply the cinema that has entered
the home; films that have already been seen at the cinema get
a second showing in the drawing room. Groups of children from
neighbouring families are sitting on the floor in front of the set.
They know what is going to happen next on the screen, and
shout out the emotion-packed dialogue being breathlessly
delivered by hero or heroine, delighted to beat the actors to the
end of each sentence. Not that television has depleted the
cinema audiences; even for midday shows long queues can be
seen waiting outside the cinemas in the scorching sun.
Women attend the free meetings held by religious preachers.
When these erudite religious scholars intersperse epic stories
with examples of behaviour drawn from everyday life, from the
cinema, and from politics in order to show how the ancient vir¬
tues have fallen into neglect, the people in the audience can find
tearful consolation in relating the trials and tribulations of their
own lives to the general decline in values.
The men, and more so the women, also flock to the plays put

on by the Sabha, local cultural associations. They rock with
laughter at the crackling jokes, secretly weep with the heroine
when she bewails the sorrows besetting her, and share her joy
when her problems disappear like mist driven away by the sun¬
shine. Then they return home, glad to have found an outlet for
their mental tensions.
For those who do not want to go out or who cannot afford
to do so, there are the weekly and monthly magazines to be
read. These magazines contain adventure stories, love stories
with a social or historical background told with bubbling en¬
thusiasm and ending with a strong insistence on the moral vir¬
tues, titbits of information, revelations about politicians and
film stars, as well as light poetry and essays. Tamils who do not
feel some mental bond with these magazines or who do not
glance at them at least once a day are few and far between.
Sunday is a wonderful day. Sunday mornings are for routine
jobs and the afternoons for more spiritual satisfaction. Piles of
clothes must be mended, washed, ironed and put away. The
bank must be visited (banks are open on Sundays in residential
areas). Certain skills must be brought into play to obtain from
ration-shops slightly higher quantities of scarce grains, low-fat
vegetable oils (sought-after not because of their low
cholesterol but because of their low price), sugar and/or
kerosene. Grain must be pounded and ground. Then, after ap¬
plying oil to the head, it is time for a leisurely bath with careful
rinsing of the hair, followed by a siesta to squeeze out the last
drop of body fatigue. In the afternoon, a film or a trip to the
beach or to a friend's house. And so on and so forth... When
Sunday dawns there are so many plans and projects nagging at
the mind. If you listen to the voice of physical fatigue that says
"Not today, not today", and you stay in bed, then the family
is done for. Even if you get up briskly and chase after time's
fleeting chariot and rush through your chores, time's chariot
somehow manages to keep ahead and when it disappears into
darkness not even a quarter of the work is done. Every Sunday
it is like this. You think back and remember the careless
mistakes you have made, the things you have forgotten to do.
Next Sunday you must try even harder.
The gap between cities and villages has narrowed. Efficient
and steadily improving road transport is helping to bring people
together. The expanding city suburbs are reaching out to the
villages.
The village revolves around agriculture. It is very early in the
morning when the men and women of the village set out to
work in the fields or gardens. There is no time to prepare
breakfast, nor any modern time-saving kitchen equipment. If
there are any left-overs from the previous night's food the
villagers swallow a mouthful before they leave. It is becoming
a custom to drink a cup of tea on the way to work. In the
villages few parents devote much time or trouble to getting
their children off to school; the children must fend for
themselves.
Changing fashions are also reaching the villages. Touring
theatre companies have become very common. Electricity has
brought lighting. It has also brought the blare of loudspeakers.
Simple make-up accessories and new kinds of dresses are
finding a place in village life. The villagers are obsessed by films
and politics, even though their lives are not dependent on them.
In the little shops, at the hairdresser's, and under the trees,
people gather and discuss the cinema and politics. The two
fields are not unrelated. Yesterday's film personalities are to¬
day active in politics. Today's cinema people may go into
politics at any moment.
It would be wrong to say that the old life-style in the villages
has completely disappeared. Time once went by at snail's pace;
now it has started to walk; but it does not yet run. Leisurely
conversation can still be heard on the thinnai, the verandahs of
the houses. In rivers and ponds women take their time to bathe.
Women still carry pots of drinking water on their hips. The har¬
mony that once existed everywhere between men and other liv¬
ing creatures continues to exist in the villages. There are cows,
buffaloes, chickens and dogs. The grinding mills still turn in the
homes, the pestle still rotates in the mortar. Healthy women
still pound paddy with heavy pounding rods* Boiled paddy is
spread outside in the street in front of the door.
The sun still rises over the village. Leave the house, walk
across the fields, look to the far horizon and feel the mountain
breeze like the soft touch of children.
Sundara Ramaswamy
