The electronic alternative
by Kerns H. Powers
FROM the beginnings of large-scale
television operations in the late
1940s, motion pictures on film have
been a major source of television pro¬
gramming. Even to this day, a majority of
programmes aired in prime viewing time are
originally produced on film, including those
produced exclusively for television. When
first aired, these films are converted to video
in a telecine machine (a combination film
projector/television camera) but are general¬
ly stored for later replay in the video-tape
medium.
Over the past decade, we have witnessed
an explosive growth of new media for
distributing motion picture features to
homes: Pay TV on cable and multipoint radio
distribution systems, prerecorded video
cassette tapes, and video-discs. Soon to
follow are the direct broadcasting satellites.
All of these media as well as the normal
television broadcast systems require a con¬
version of the feature from film to video.
We have also witnessed the spawning of
a new industry, that of the film-to-tape
transfer houses, of which there now exist
several dozen in the United States alone.
These transfers require colour correction as
a minimum, and may require timing ad¬
justments and other edits as well. Most
houses offer a broad range of video produc¬
tion and postproduction services. As a con¬
sequence of the less-than-orderly develop¬
ment of this new industry, a typical motion
picture feature when distributed by several
video media might find itself duplicated in
four or five electronic masters, no two of
which are identical.
In fact, these "dupes" are technically far
from being identical to the master film or its
release prints. Not only is the colorimetry a
variable, the resolution (the ability to resolve
fine detail in the images) more closely
matches 16 mm film than the 35mm master
stock. Furthermore, the features have been
KERNS H. POWERS, of the USA, is vice-
president for communications research, Radio
Corporation of America Laboratories, David
Sarnoff Research Centre, Princeton, New
Jersey. He is also chairman of a future
technologies working group of the Society of
Motion Picture and Television Engineers.
Charge-coupled device (CCD)
chips are used as electronic
"eyes" of a new portable
solid-state colour television
camera for news and sports
coverage. The CCD tech¬
nology is being developed for
electronic production of mo¬
tion pictures.
converted in frame rate from the twenty-four
¡mages per second of the original shooting
to sixty modified images per second in the
video format (sixty per second in the North
American and Japanese television stan¬
dards, fifty in Europe). These "modified" im¬
ages in the frame rate conversion are either
repeated in a nonuniform repeat cycle or are
blurred in a lap dissolve between two adja¬
cent frames of the film stock. Thus motion in
the scene may appear to the viewer to be
jerky or smeared out in the video format.
Finally, a substantial portion of the original
scene is usually cut out during the conver¬
sions. The aspect ratio (the ratio of the width
to the height of the displayed scene) has
been modified. The wide-screen format of
the cinema has given way to the narrower
aspect ratio (four-to-three) of television. It is
this latter mutilation of the original that has
the most significant effect on the viewer's
perception.
The recent developments of high-
definition television (HDTV) and digital video
technology promise for the future a way out
of this dilemma. Digital video effects
generators have been used for the past ten
years to create a vast array of electronic
special effects and image manipulations
during the postproduction (editing) of TV
12

programmes. These techniques are now
finding their way into motion picture films
with computer-generated animations and
electronic "opticals" (laboratory optical
special effects such as fades, wipes, and lap
dissolves).
In digital video, the electronic signals that
represent the red, green, and blue primary
colour components of each picture element
(pixel) of the scene are digitized into bits
(binary digits) for storage in computer-like
memories, and the images are processed
under computer control with "software"
flexibility. A "studio quality" television
signal in either the 525- or 625-line stan¬
dards requires digital encoding at a rate of
approximately 200 million bits per second.
High definition television promises for the
future a TV system of resolution equal to that
of 35mm film, a widescreen aspect ratio, and
a universal frame rate selected to minimize
the image deterioration in the frame rate
conversions for all release media. A digital
HDTV signal would require encoding and
recording at rates exceeding one thousand
million bits per second, a value beyond the
current state-of-art.
Although HDTV cameras (even with
analog signals) are expected to be more ex¬
pensive than quality film cameras for many
years to come, their use could be cost-
effective relative to film in shooting because
of the immediacy in screening the results of
a shoot. In any event, the use of improved
resolution digital video technology in elec-
This projection device with a
sprocket camshaft was made
in 1908.
tronic postproduction could be cost-effective
very soon, even if both original shooting and
release are accomplished on film.
One significant advantage of postproduct¬
ion in digital technology is that a single
digital master tape can be generated during
editing under the watchful artistic eye of the
producer or director, with the assurance that
all subsequent copies whether they be film
release prints or television video-tapes will
be derived from either the digital master
itself or identical clones of it. A property of
the digital video format is that copies can be
made through multiple (conceivably, hun¬
dreds of) generations without errors in col-
orimetry, contrast range, brightness level, or
pixel position.
The digital master can be archived on
digital video-tape having far less suscep¬
tibility to magnetic fields or "print through"
than is characteristic of analog tape media.
It is believed that digital optical video-discs
will have even longer storage life with,
possibly, higher storage density (bits per
cubic metre) than video-tape. Current
estimates of the near term technology
predict that a two-hour sound motion picture
feature of television studio quality (220
million bits per second) can be stored digital¬
ly with ruggedness for multiple replays and
in convenient environments for many
decades of life in a volume of 1,500 cubic
centimetres on tape cassette and 1,200 cu
cm on disc, as compared with 4,000 cu cm
in 16mm film cans. Each of these numbers
should be multiplied by a factor of about five
for wide screen HDTV quality and 35mm
film.
The major impediment to this panacea for
electronic archiving is not the technological
development required but is, rather, the lack
of common standards. There not only exist
three different frame rates to contend with,
but motion picture films are released in no
fewer than five different aspect ratios spann¬
ing the range from 1.33 to 2.35. An ideal
solution to the standards problem would be
for the motion picture and television in
dustries to reach an agreement on a single
aspect ratio and a single frame rate to be us¬
ed worldwide in future productions, both
electronic and film. Backward compatibility
with both existing cinemas and television
systems can be achieved through standards
conversions for the release film and tape
media.
The standards discussions have com¬
menced for high definition television within
the Comité Consultatif International des
Radiocommunications (CCIR), the study
arm of the International Telecommunica¬
tions Union, based in Geneva. The studies
are being supported by the world's major
Broadcasting Unions such as the European
Broadcasting Union and by the international
engineering professional societies such as
the Society of Motion Picture and Television
Engineers in the USA and the British
Kinematograph, Sound and Television
Society in the United Kingdom. The CCIR
has set as a target date its Plenary Meetings
in 1986 for approval of a recommendation
for HDTV standards for television studio use
and for international programme exchange.
Hopefully, the common worldwide stan¬
dards developed for television will also serve
the needs for electronic production and ar¬
chiving of motion picture films as well.
I Kerns H. Powers
Regina Linnanheimo and Otso
Pera in a scene from Nuroena
Nukkunut (1937). This Finnish
film directed by Teuvo Tulio is
thought to be lost. (See article
page 17).
13
