INTERDEPENDENCE
'Nationalism provides too narrow a
focus for overcoming poverty and hunger'
by Paul Steidl-Meier
PAUL STEIDL-MEIER, of the USA, is a
member of the Society of Jesus and is on the
staff of the Pontifical Gregorian University,
Rome. He is a specialist in social ethics and in
international development, with particular in¬
terest in the problems of poverty, hunger and
rural development. He is the author of a
number of articles and studies on develop¬
ment problems, including several on rural
development in China.
FOR years the international commu¬
nity has been pushing uphill in the
battle against poverty and hunger
only to find that the problem seems recur¬
rently to get worse. In a manner reminiscent
of the tse-tse fly, which has survived all
manner of attacks upon it by developing
genetic mutations, world hunger has
resisted the assaults of various development
decades. Accordingly in recent years there
has been increasing debate over the theory
of development as well as the orientation of
international politics.
On the international level the discussion
has focused upon forging a "new interna¬
tional economic order" and "managing in¬
terdependence." Talk of interdependence
implies that it is no longer feasible or
desirable for nations to pursue policies of
narrow self-interest. And even though
development is usually discussed in terms of

Above, carved wooden hook (height 74 cm)
from the Sepik region of Papua New
Guinea. Such hooks arefixed to the ceiling,
andfrom them hang baskets in which food
and other valuable commodities are kept
out of range of children, domestic animals
and pests.
Drawing ofpainted reliefs in the tombs of
Ti and Ptah-hotep, two dignitaries of the
ancient Egyptian empire. The tombs, which
datefrom the 5th dynasty (c. 2400 BC), are
at Sakkara southwest of Cairo. Reliefs
show, from bottom to top: ploughing,
harvesting com, stacking, loading the crop
onto donkeys, treading out the corn,
harvesting papyrus reeds.
the Nation-State, what is implied is that na¬
tionalism, after all, provides too narrow a
focus for overcoming poverty and hunger.
The new character of interdependence is
'manifested in three major ways: tech¬
nological, geopolitical and cultural. Almost
more than anything else this new in¬
terdependence is a function of new means
of transport and communication. The abili¬
ty to scan the globe for resources, produc¬
tion sites and market opportunities as well
as to process, cross-reference and com¬
municate this information have made the
activities of businesses now more truly
transnational than ever.
The geopolitics of interdependence
reveals a radical transformation of the
traditional economic notion of comparative
advantage. Dominant States pursue their
own narrow interests globally in a spirit of
group egoism. The economies of develop¬
ing countries are locked into, dependent
upon and exploited by the developed coun¬
tries. Furthermore, the developing coun¬
tries are frequently viewed as political
pawns in the struggle taking place between
the powerful to maintain and even expand
their so-called spheres of influence.
Finally there is a culture of in¬
terdependence. The material aspect is seen
in the dominant forms of technology and
their diffusion. The spiritual aspect is seen
in the continuing battle over ideologies.
This latter struggle has been so intense that
voices suggesting alternatives to present
forms of capitalism and socialism are bare¬
ly given a serious hearing, with the result
that a new culture of international solidari¬
ty is stifled.
Interdependence is a fact; and it looks
like being an ever increasing aspect at all
levels of contemporary life: political,
economic and cultural. What is at issue is
the quality of interdependence which would
assure the dignity of all persons and of all
peoples. To the point, it is clear that hunger
is not primarily caused by population
pressures, scarce resources or the lack of
adequate technologies. Rather, it primarily
derives from a failure of political will,
which failure has roots both in individual
and social abuses of power as well as an im¬
poverished level of international culture
which is bereft of a truly effective (rather
than merely affective) solidarity and, thus,
provides no guiding vision of development.
The present quality of interdependence is
troubling indeed.

fV J\ n n
A&4i
ls«tíu«i«<iiji/uí4SMíT-írS* <<=*"
U
5^^-tfe
There are many .crises in the world of in¬
ternational economics and development to¬
day. And, whether one- considers them
dysfunctions or fundamental flaws in the
system, they cry out for an answer. Yet any
effective answer is clearly impeded by
political economic realities.
The first crisis of interdependence is the
legitimacy of present political economic in¬
stitutions and structures. In the Third
World absolute poverty is growing, even
amid economic growth. "Development"
does not reach the poor, who are concen¬
trated among the rural landless, urban
unemployed, women and children. Nor will
it do so without radically changed domestic
priorities. At the same time the well-off
countries are only just now emerging from
one of the worst recessions in fifty years.
Poverty itself is even growing in the in
dustrialized world. Increasingly the
developed countries are in deficit and can¬
not fund their own welfare programmes.
Domestic concerns rather than the more
glaring international needs garner the atten¬
tion of politicians. These and related issues
have combined to provoke a legitimacy
crisis for the present international economic
order. Increasingly the guiding vision of
"progress" and "economic development"
is being questioned and faith in social in¬
stitutions is being undermined.
The second crisis afflicting contemporary
interdependence is a resource crisis. This
touches human resources and has to do with
population numbers, rights to migration
and the development of human capacities,
issues which directly relate to programmes
to meet basic needs and to foster human
rights. It also includes non-human
resources which comprise both renewable
and non-renewable categories. Discussion
today focuses upon energy, improvement
of natural resources, and, above all, access
to capital, management and technology
which are very scarce in developing
countries.
Finally contemporary interdependence is
involved in a crisis in management and
organization, at both domestic and interna¬
tional levels. This includes planning and ad¬
ministrative skills, but much more it has to
do with organizational politics of
bureaucracies, corruption, and with in¬
tergovernmental pacts touching terms of
trade, transfers of credit, and so forth. The
question is whether the large complex
organizations and institutions that
dominate public life today are capable of
^27

Photo All Rights Reserved
assessing and reacting effectively to the
problem of poverty and hunger and im¬
proving the quality of interdependence.
Normally in discussion of development
the emphasis falls upon the Nation-State.
This is as it should be for through its
legislative, judicial and administrative
functions the Nation-State plays the most
pivotal role in development. Yet many
States today present a sorry picture. On the
national level one frequently finds a na¬
tional security State ideology which sup¬
presses the participation of the country's
own people, wasteful spending on ar¬
maments, corruption, privileged élites who
are beyond accountability, and tremendous
bureaucratic inefficiencies in economic
planning and administration. The interna¬
tional scene is not much more heartening.
Developed countries doggedly pursue their
narrow self-interest by destabilizing local
governments, withholding contributions to
international funds, tying technology to
geopolitical concessions and so forth. There
is no effective and fair international law.
In the face of the lack of meaningful in¬
ternational political controls and the
domestic lack of a stable, efficient and
honest set of legal institutions, market
forces such as the transnationals can have a
field day in the developing countries.
Theoretically, however, the activities of a
transnational can be harmonized with na¬
tional development plans. The key depends
on good, honest and effective government
in the developing countries. Yet it must be
recognized that both local élites as well as
international interests frequently sabotage
such good governments. However, even if
things could be set in order, it must be
realized that there can be no market solu¬
tion to poverty and hunger that is not based
upon profits. And not just any profits, but
a level of profit commensurate with oppor-
28
tunities elsewhere. Market forces can con¬
tribute to overcoming hunger. But for a
market solution to be fair and reach the
poor, adequate price, incomes and financial
policies must be put in place. Again the role
of the government is pivotal.
Finally, there are groups whose power in
society turns upon persuasion. Although
they lack a government's instruments of
social control as well as a corporation's
market clout, these groups are nonetheless
very important in galvanizing political will.
They are seen in interest groups such as
ecology and peace movements, in univer¬
sities and research institutes and also in
religious groups. The focus frequently
enough falls upon social prophecy, which
attempts to challenge and refashion the
cultural value system, the dominant social
paradigms and ideologies and the prevalent
social interpretations of reality. It does this
by stimulating awareness through publiciz¬
ing information, symbolic actions (such as
fasting), and through mobilization towards
consciousness-raising events and pro¬
grammes.
Each protagonist represents a certain
potential as well as certain deficiencies
when we think of their role regarding
hunger in the world today. The dynamics of
organizational politics frequently becomes
quite complex and various forms of sanc¬
tions come into play. It is precisely in such
a complex milieu of organizational politics
that new policies of solidarity and in¬
terdependence which would be effective in
overcoming hunger must be forged.
Some short-term measures are necessary
over the next six to ten years while long term
measures are being implemented. First the
earnings of poor countries. Both the
relative size of earnings as well as stability
are important if development planning is to
"The main obstacle to a truly effective
policy to overcome hunger is lack of
political will. There is a long way to go
before effective solidarity is forged".
Left, ceremonial seat of the Bamlleke peo¬
ple (United Republic of Cameroon).
have a solid basis. Various formulae are
possible but agreements such as the Euro¬
pean Economic Community's "Stabex"
should be expanded and improved to
counteract the vagaries of present markets
and secure those ends.
Second, borrowing. Private lending is
always on market terms. At present, of the
money going to developing countries, some
75 per cent goes to but fifteen countries.
The market finds the really poor countries
uninteresting. Public credit funds need to
be vastly increased by donations from the
well-off countries (the famed 0.7 per cent of
GNP goal) and concessional terms are call¬
ed for.
Thirdly, aid without political strings
must be increased. Aid may take the form
of commodities, outright financial grants as
well as the renegotiating of the terms of
loans and the outright cancellation of
debts. In addition crisis facilities need to be
established and strengthened in order to
deal with special periodic problems related
to exchange rates, food, energy and so
forth.
Lastly, accords should be drafted to co¬
ordinate the activities of transnational cor¬
porations with local development plans in
terms of licences, joint ventures and wholly
owned subsidiaries. What is needed is a fair
system of social accountability for private
business decisions which, after all, have
profound public effects.
All of the above measures are important
but the more telling issues are found in
long-term policy measures. There are many
possibilities but I restrict myself to three
general considerations. '
First, local and international priorities in
development must be refashioned. Some of
the more important issues are educating
people for development so that they

become active participants, cutting back the
waste of military expenditures, and grant¬
ing a priority in budgets and capital in¬
vestments to meeting needs over wants in
expenditures.
Secondly, restructuring of the economy.
I think that three issues must be addressed.
First, resource control. Unless resource
control (access to land, credit, etc.) is faced
up to no amount of "development" will
reach the poor. Rather the élites of the
periphery will continue to pursue their own
interests vis-à-vis the centre. Secondly, the
institutional framework must be transform¬
ed. This means that education should be
reworked in order to produce adequate
technology (which would also limit the
brain drain). In addition efforts must be
made to adapt to rather than suppress tradi¬
tional forms of organization and manage¬
ment (such as are found in customary pro¬
cedures in decision-making, informal
credit, marketing and so forth). Finally,
present patterns of input-output must be
overhauled. Production should be in view
of a market. The greatest market potential
is domestic and regional rather than in the
first world where markets, (for example,
for textiles), are often glutted. The develop¬
ment of a domestic market means har¬
monizing agriculture and industry and set¬
ting in place an incomes policy that lets the
poor make money. This means that strat¬
egies to produce growth must also produce
jobs; that is appropriate (intermediate,
labour intensive) technology must be used.
What is produced must be decided in terms
of markets (including incomes policy) as
well as comparative advantages in
production.
Thirdly, diversification is necessary to
reduce risks. It is important to diversify
what is produced so as not to be dependent
upon one or two commodities or industrial
products. Also trading partners must be
diversified so that markets do not collapse
when a recession hits one country, or con¬
sumption patterns change, or the country
turns to either domestic production or to
synthetics. Finally, it is important to diver¬
sify through regional (South-South) co¬
operation. In many places the single
Nation-State is not necessarily economical¬
ly viable nor can it realistically be assumed
that the industrialized countries will meet
all the demands of the poor in the Third
World.
The main obstacle to a truly effective
policy to overcome hunger is lack of
political will. There is a long way to go
before effective solidarity is forged. Yet the
picture is not altogether bleak for increas¬
ing numbers of people (albeit with quite dif¬
ferent motivational principles) are coming
to see the necessity of such actions as those
outlined above.
Paul Steidl-Meier

