The cultural roots
of literacy
by Marcos Guerra
COMMON sense dictates that the
features of a people's cultural iden¬
tity should be integrated into the
process of teaching them to become literate.
Why, then, has this principle not always
been understood? Why is it not
systematically and scrupulously applied
today?
At the present time both the Third World
countries and the industrialized countries
are equally preoccupied with the question
of educating and making literate their
adults and young people. A sound ap¬
proach would be to examine what has hap¬
pened in the recent past in order to deter¬
mine how many educational activities have
failed because of lack of respect for the
MARCOS GUERRA, from northeastern
Brazil, is a consultant on education and
development problems with Unesco and other
organizations of the United Nations system,
and with several European non-governmental
organizations. He has taken part in literacy
campaigns in Brazil and directed projects for
the training of supervisory staff in Niger and
the Ivory Coast.
cultural values of the populations with
which they were concerned. In a broader
perspective, how many political measures
and how many development projects have
suffered as a result of contempt for these
values?
All educational activities are, in our opi¬
nion, essentially cultural in the sense given
them by the Brazilian educator Paulo Freiré
(see article page 29). It is not enough simply
to respect cultural identity. We must
endeavour to integrate as fully as possible
into the educational process the values of
the culture, the civilization and the society
to which we have come to live and work.
This integration is essential not for educa¬
tional, economic, psychological or political
reasons, nor in order to save time
although each one of these reasons may be
justified but because these values are part
and parcel of the educational process,
which would be incomplete without them
and could foment resistance among the
learners.
If the requisite political commitment,
and coherent, realistic policies are forth
coming, it may reasonably be hoped that
some countries will be able to eradicate il¬
literacy before the end of this century or else
reduce it to an insignificant level. But it is
no secret that for millions of people in other
countries, inability to read and write will
aggravate the difficulties of their daily lives
and make it harder for them to be fully in¬
tegrated into the societies in which they live,
to achieve access to the services these
societies offer, and to share in the wealth,
privileges and responsibilities that are tradi¬
tionally reserved for an élite. Whether the
masses will have an opportunity to live
easier lives or whether they will be banished
to the fringe of society may hinge on the
choice of educational policies and the in¬
tegration of cultural values into these
policies.
With few exceptions the early literacy
programmes wrongly equated illiteracy
with lack of culture. Traces of this attitude
still survive but fortunately nowadays they
encounter another form of cultural
resistance which rules out the kind of
genocide of which Latin American civiliza-
Photo © Denis Fogelgesang, Metz, France
Pestles and mortars for grinding millet attract potential buyers at the market held during an an¬
nual festival at Touba in Senegal. Although in many cases they may be illiterate, market traders
and their customers in Third World countries often display dazzling capacities for totting up
prices at lightning speed.
> *.
m: '
fm
--
m'
. 1 **?
F JWW
Hfl fluB j m \


Strong incentives are needed to provide adults with the motivation to
undertake and persist in the considerable effort required to achieve
literacy. Such Incentives may take a variety of forms: cultural,
religious, economic or political. Below, patients register for vaccina¬
tion in northern Brazil. Bottom, young Tibetan monks learn to write in
the Buddhist monastery of Mamali, Himachal Pradesh, India.
Pieces of reed, bark and bit¬
ter herb entwine to form a
"message-knot", above,
which marked the conclu¬
sion of peace between two
peoples of New Caledonia.
The knot proclaims that
"here is thatch and bark for
you to rebuild your houses,
and there Is no longer any
bitterness between us". It Is
an example of the ways in
which oral civilizations use
non-written systems of
symbols for memorizing,
organizing and expressing
thought.
Phoio i Frmco.» Oupuv. P*ri»
Pholo Lemi*oud»
Ë Mulé« dB l'Homme. Pint


tions, among others, have been the victims.
Decisions relating to the language in
which literacy is taught, to the ways in
which written calculations are performed,
and to the choice of the methods and con¬
tent of cultural action are directly linked to
this respect for cultures and the integration
of their values. The choice of techniques
and materials and the definition of "sen¬
sitization" and post-literacy programmes
present opportunities to integrate or ex¬
clude important aspects of national
cultures. This means power-sharing: pro¬
grammes and policies should no longer be
defined by specialists alone but should
democratically bring in those who are
defending their culture.
Astonishing though it may seem, literacy
work in a given country almost always gives
rise to a vast network of simultaneous and
continuous action. It calls for-a degree of
assiduity and devotion often more impor¬
tant than the activities of a political party.
Young people and adults who meet to learn
together are often far more motivated than
when. they come into contact with other
public services, including medical dispen¬
saries. But this tightly-knit permanent net¬
work is only used in a downwards direction:
the message is transmitted, the programme
is followed, people learn to read and write.
They are transformed, and so is the leader
of their group. But the channels which
transmit information upwards, enabling
cultural values to emerge and express
themselves and enriching the process of ex¬
change, often function less well when they
cannot be easily quantified. Or else such
channels exist outside the field of action of
literacy work and do not always influence
the educational process itself.
It is also necessary to keep policies and
programmes relevant and up-to-date. In
revolutionary societies in the throes of
change we have come across avant-garde
militants carrying out literacy programmes
and using textbooks that have not been
modified in any way for almost ten years.
In Africa it is still often possible to find
literacy programmes into which notions of
cultural identity have not been integrated.
There are various reasons for this. Some are
straightforward, such as the fact that it is
only relatively recently that the importance
of these questions has come to be ap¬
preciated, or in any case that they were not
given sufficient consideration by specialists
when national policies were being prepared.
Some are more complex, such as those
relating to the major difficulty of working
out a coherent policy for the choice of the
language in which literacy is to be taught;
this difficulty arose from the necessity to
use a so-called language of national unity
(often that of the former colonial power) in¬
stead of one which might accentuate inter¬
nal differences and be harmful to national
unity and sovereignty.
In literacy work and in the education of
adults and young people, the question of
language is of paramount importance, not
only because it is an essential medium of ex¬
pression for a culture and a civilization but
also because it is an essential medium of
communication. The choice of a language
other than the mother tongue in which to
achieve literacy, if it is justified, makes it
necessary to develop other forms of cultural
expression which will not reinforce literacy
and its gains but which may strengthen
cultural identity. This choice imposes a
double task on illiterate people: literacy and
acculturation.-
As far as arithmetic is concerned, an at¬
tentive observer soon realizes that an il¬
literate person who is incapable of noting
down either the processes whereby he per¬
forms a calculation or even the final result
is nevertheless often capable of doing com¬
plicated sums. Even the casual visitor to
Third World countries can see people play¬
ing cards or traditional games in the streets,
or skilfully dealing at market with mer¬
chants who display astonishing gifts for
mental arithmetic. For some time
mathematicians and information scientists
have been taking an interest in popular
games played in the Third World, largely by
people who are illiterate yet can do
arithmetic at lightning speed.
The challenge facing us is to take into ac¬
count all these factors as well as the ex¬
perience and knowledge accumulated over
generations and exclusively transmitted by
the oral tradition and with the aid of certain
non-written materials. Any coherent
literacy and education policy for young
people and adults is bound to mobilize these
values and give them a place in the educa¬
tional process, to stimulate critical thinking
about them, and to foster a dialogue and
confrontation between them and new
values in our interdependent world.
The courage, perseverance and tenacity
of those who learn to read and write is well
known. Integrating the values of their
cultural identity can only stimulate their
work. But it is vitally important that the ob¬
jectives of educational policies and pro¬
grammes should be tailored, through a
democratic consensus, to the needs and
aspirations of illiterate people.
Marcos Guerra
Deep in thought as they ponder their next move, these two Kenyans are playing wari, a game of skill
played with pieces such as nuts or dry beans on a board divided into compartments. Wari is one of many
similar games found in different parts of the world. Generally known as máncala games, they have been
played for thousands of years in Egypt, spread through parts of Asia and Africa, and were taken to the
West Indies by African slaves.
