Half a million Gypsies
victims of the nazi terror
by Myriam Novitch
THE extermination of the Gypsies was
part of the programme of the nazi
party. However, official discrimi¬
nation against Gypsies as a group can be
traced back at least as far as 1899, when the
Bavarian police created a special Gypsy Af¬
fairs Section which received copies of ver¬
dicts delivered by the courts concerning of¬
fences committed by Gypsies. In 1929 this
Section became a National Centre, with
headquarters in Munich, and from then on
Gypsies were not allowed to move from one
place to another without permission from
the police. Gypsies aged over sixteen who
could not prove that they had a job faced a
sentence of two years' labour in a refor¬
matory institution.
After 1933, the year in which Hitler came
to power, these measures became even more
severe. Gypsies who could not prove that
they were of German nationality were
deported; others were interned as "asocial"
persons. Interest in their racial
characteristics began to grow. In 1936 Dr.
Hans Globke, one of the drafters of the
Nuremberg Laws, declared that "Gypsies
are of alien blood" (Artfremdes Blut).
Unable to deny that they were of Aryan
origin, Professor Hans F. Guenther
categorized them as Rassengemische, an in¬
determinate mixture of races.
The study of the racial characteristics of
Gypsies came to be admitted as a subject for
doctoral theses. Eva Justin, the assistant of
Dr. Ritter of the Health Ministry's Race
Research Division, declared when submit¬
ting her thesis that Gypsy blood was "very
dangerous for the purity of the German
race".
The situation of Gypsies was worsened
by a decree of 14 December 1937 which
declared them to be "inveterate criminals".
In late 1937 and in 1938 there were
widespread arrests, and a special section
was created for Gypsies in Buchenwald con¬
centration camp. Gypsy names appear in
the death lists of many camps including
Mauthausen, Gusen, Dautmergen, Natz-
weiler and Flossenburg. Many Gypsy
women were the victims of experiments by
SS doctors at Ravensbriick. A certain Dr.
Portschy submitted a memorandum to the
Führer proposing "forced labour and mass
sterilization of the Gypsies because they are
endangering the blood purity of the Ger¬
man peasantry".
In 1938 Himmler intervened personally,
ordering the transfer of the Gypsy Affairs
Centre from Munich to Berlin. In the same
year 300 sedentary Gypsies, the owners of
fields and vineyards, were arrested in the
village of Mannwörth.
Himmler stipulated that Gypsies should
be classified as follows: pure Gypsies (Z);
mixed race Gypsies of predominantly Gyp¬
sy blood (ZM + ); mixed race Gypsies of
predominantly Aryan blood (ZM-); and
mixed-race Gypsies with half-Gypsy, half-
Aryan blood (ZM).
In his study L'Allemagne et le génocide
the historian Joseph Billig identified three
methods of committing genocide: the sup¬
pression of fertility, deportation, and
homicide.
Gypsy women married to non-Gypsies
were sterilized in the hospital at Diisseldorf-
Lierenfeld. Some died as a result of being
sterilized while pregnant. In Ravensbriick
camp 120 Gypsy girls were sterilized by SS
doctors.
The deportation of 5,000 Gypsies from
Germany to the ghetto at Lodz in Poland
was an example of genocide by deportation.
The living conditions in the ghetto were so
inhuman that no community could have
survived.
But the Nazis' chosen method of
genocide was mass killing.
The decision to exterminate the Gypsies
is believed to have been taken in the Spring
of 1941, when the Einsatzgruppen or execu¬
tion squads were formed. First of all the
Gypsies had to be rounded up. Since
Himmler's decree of 8 December 1938 the
addresses of all Gypsies were known to the
police. A decree of 17 November 1939 for¬
bade Gypsies, on pain of internment in a
concentration camp, to leave their place of
residence.
Thirty thousand Gypsies deported to
Poland were destined to perish in the death
camps of Belzec, Treblinka, Sobibor and
Majdanek. Thousands of others were
deported from Belgium, The Netherlands,
and France, and died in Auschwitz.
In his memoirs, Höss, the commandant
of Auschwitz, revealed that the deportees
included people nearly a hundred years old,
pregnant women, and large numbers of
children. Some of the survivors of
Auschwitz, such as Kulka and Kraus in
their book The Death Factory, describe a
terrible massacre of Gypsies which took
place on the night of 31 July 1944.
In Poland and in the Soviet Union Gyp¬
sies were killed both in death camps and in
the open countryside. War between Ger¬
many and the USSR broke out on 22 June
1941. On the heels of the armies of Von
Leer, Von Bock, Von Rundstedt and other
generals marched the death squads of the
SS. The Baltic States, the Ukraine and the
Crimea were pitted with mass graves. At
Simviropol 800 men, women and children
were shot on the night of 24 December
1941. Wherever the Nazis passed, Gypsies
were arrested, deported, or murdered. In
Yugoslavia, executions of Jews and Gypsies
began in October 1941 in the forests of Jaj-
nice, where peasants still remember the
cries of children being driven in trucks to
the places of their execution.
It is difficult to estimate either the
number of Gypsies who were living in
Europe before the Second World War or
the number of those who survived. One
historian, Raoul Hilberg, has estimated
that there were 34,000 Gypsies in Germany,
but the number of survivors is unknown.
According to reports made by the Ein¬
satzgruppen responsible for the killings in
the Soviet Socialist Republics of Russia, the
Ukraine and the Crimea, there were
300,000 victims in those territories. Accord¬
ing to the Yugoslav authorities, 28,000
Gypsies were put to death in Serbia alone.
The number of victims in Poland is hard to
establish. The historian Joseph Tenenbaum
asserts that the Gypsies lost at least 500,000
people.
An ancient people, prolific and full of
vitality, the Gypsies tried to resist death but
the cruelty and might of their enemies
prevailed. Sometimes their love of music
brought them consolation in their martyr¬
dom. Starving and verminous, they
gathered in front of the vile huts of
Auschwitz to make music and encourage
the children to dance. Some of the younger
Gypsies tried to escape. In the camp diary
kept by Danuta Czech can be read the
names and dates of execution at the Wall of
Death of those who were recaptured.
Eyewitnesses have described the courage
displayed by the Gypsy partisans who
fought in the Nieswiez region of Poland.
According to some accounts, they carried
only knives as they flung themselves against
their heavily armed adversaries.
Forty years have passed since the
genocide of the Gypsies. These lines are no
more than a reminder of the terrible crime
committed against this group of human
beings.
MYRIAM NOVITCH, of Israel, is the director
of the Ghetto Fighters' Museum founded at
Lohamel Haghetaot kibbutz by a group of sur¬
vivors of the Warsaw ghetto. She has for 30
years been engaged on research into the nazi
genocide of the Jews and Gypsies.
24

®
During the Second World War the Gyp¬
sies were one of the groups to become
victims of the nazi extermination cam¬
paigns. Above, newly-arrived at a con¬
centration camp, these Gypsy prisoners
are still wearing their normal clothing.
Right, dressed In the sombre stripes of
prison garb, marked with the inverted
triangle to Indicate their classification as
Gypsies, these prisoners were photogra¬
phed at the Infamous Auschwitz concen¬
tration camp to which many Gypsies from
Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands and
France were deported.
Dated December 8, 1942, this letter con¬
cerns the transport of Gypsy prisoners to
Auschwitz. Written by an official of the
nazi criminal police of Brunn (Brno) dur¬
ing the nazi occupation of Czecho¬
slovakia, it Is addressed to his counter¬
part in Prague.
Imprisoned in the concentration camp at
Auschwitz, Dinah Gottlieb was ordered
by Dr. Mengele, a notorious SS doctor
who carried out hideous experiments
using the camp 's inmates as guinea-pigs,
to paint portraits of a number of Gypsy
prisoners. Of the twelve water-colours
she painted only seven have been
recovered, Including this portrait of a
Gypsygirl. Dinah Gottlieb survived her In¬
ternment and now lives in the USA.
nowcTOftATiumMtNALPouza
MSMNMJMHSmOft MOM
*rt.»r. m.aw/fai-.«.
ib ai*
frottkto» tikrialnt lpoiiKl
Erlalatld trait 1 on
Dan B.Daj.nfcar 1942.
la > r m k
BaérlfMi trnnapnrt dar zlfiunar-Vorliao4un<alisrtllnM Im Intuit*.
Uj« in imch.it».
Ti
In dar Aulaga »train dit /«riaiotanlaa* dar *l£fIf
«lata* T-Oaaantur 1942 Ina Inhalt alagar U ¿atabal ta fetl Katuâil
aUc*ll*f*rt »nrd«n,iorgali(t.
W* VoroaaíiniEanfcftliAít wnrt-.n In
T. Il1.19 4^ on 13.70 TJnr dar Da u tan han 5*údarnaTia nbargaaan.
//
S¿*&gjC ¿2i£+f±*L&***i* ¿VtoUjis &**
m^L¿^./t^
¡
-ttíe
25
