Birth of a notion
by Boleslaw Matuszewski
This text is extracted from A New Source ofHistory (The Creation
ofa Depository ofHistoric Cinematography), a pamphlet publish¬
ed in Paris in March 1898 by Boleslaw Matuszewski in which for
the first time the idea was launched of creating a cinema archive.
THE cinematographic film, in which a scene is composed of
a thousand images and which, projected from a source of
light onto a white sheet, makes the dead and the absent
arise and walk, this simple celluloid ribbon on which an image has
been produced, is not only a historical document but a slice of
history which has not vanished and which has no need of a genie
to resuscitate it. It is there, barely asleep and, like those elementary
organisms which have a latent life and reawaken after years have
gone by through the action of a little heat and humidity, all it needs
to awaken and relive the hours of the past is a little light passing
through a lens in the midst of darkness!...
What must be done is to give to this possibly privileged source of
History the same authority, the same official existence, the same
access as other archival sources which already exist...
All that will be necessary is to assign to cinematographic films
which have a historic character a section of a museum, a shelf in
a library, a cupboard in the archives. The official depot will be
either at the Bibliothèque Nationale or at the library of the Institut,
under the guardianship of one of the Academies which are concern-
Photo from a very early film, Cataracte du
Niagara ("Niagara Falls"), made in 1896 by
the French director Edwin Rousby.
ed with history, or at the Archives, or at the Museum of Versailles.
We shall choose and decide. Once the institution is in existence, free
or even purchased items will flow in. The price of the
"cinematographic reception apparatus" (camera) and of reels of
film, which was very high in the early days, is dropping rapidly and
coming within the means of ordinary amateur photographers.
Many of them, not counting the professionals, are starting to take
an interest in the cinematographic application of this art and ask
for nothing better than to contribute to the constitution of a
history. Those who will not give their collections will be happy to
bequeath them. A committee will accept or reject documents which
are on offer, after considering their historical value. The negatives
which it accepts will be sealed in cases, labelled and catalogued;
they will be the types (originals) which will not be touched. The
same committee will decide on the conditions of access to the
positives, and will keep in reserve those which, for special reasons,
will only be put before the public after a number of years have gone
by. The same practice is followed for certain archives. A curator of
the chosen establishment will take charge of this new collection,
which will initially be small, and an institution of the future will be
created. Paris will have its Depository ofHistoric Cinematography.
m
A shot from a Dutch documentary, Sergei
Eisenstein's Visit to Holland, made in 1929
when the Soviet director toured the
Netherlands. The film was discovered by
Jan de Vaal, director of The Netherlands
Film Museum. A duplicate negative, a fine
grain copy and projection prints were made
in the nick of timethe original nitrate print
has now completely decomposed.
