THE GYPSY
DESTINY
B
Y virtue of its endurance and tenacity, the Gypsy people
has succeeded in preserving, throughout its wanderings,
its authenticity and its personality.
Its nomadism has brought it into contact with the most
diverse nations and yet it has never dissolved, nor even become
diluted. Perhaps this is because it has not taken root physically,
in earth, but in something far more profound: in a conscience,
in social and human values. Hence its journeyings throughout
the world remain, through all its vicissitudes, a movement of
continuity and fidelity. For these two reasons, the history of
this people which is so original and, perhaps, by virtue of its
historic trajectory, the most international, is of particular in¬
terest to Unesco because it strikingly illustrates some of the
great principles on which Unesco's action is based.
Unesco seeks to encourage recognition of cultural identity for
all nations and for all communities, to promote relations bet¬
ween cultures, and to broaden as far as possible the dialogue
between civilizations. For Unesco there can be no such thing as
a culture of secondary importance. Whatever its political,
economic or numerical power, every people has the absolute
right to free itself from ethnic or linguistic discrimination of
whatever kind, to achieve recognition and respect for its own
values. No hierarchy can be established between majority
cultures and minority cultures, for the seemingly most humble
and least-known culture may enshrine truths which are
necessary to all the rest.
Thus universality and cultural specificity are for Unesco two
complementary notions. The destiny of the Gypsy people is ex
emplary, affirming as it does the permanence of its culture
through its place in different societies.
As an African, I cannot but add to these general considera¬
tions a number of more personal observations on the oral tradi¬
tion and the precious values of a nomad culture.
The oral tradition has made a strong contribution to the
vitality of African nations, preserving their soul and steadfastly
sustaining their dignity. The oral tradition which is at the heart
of the Gypsy culture may likewise have sheltered it from the
assaults of history. Preciously transmitted from generation to
generation along paths which recall the initiation methods com¬
mon to all traditional cultures, it has in large measure enabled
the Gypsies to remain true to themselves.
Nomadism, also widespread in the African Sahel, in close
proximity to farmers who are most deeply rooted in the soil, ex¬
ists in a relationship of mutual exchange and sometimes of sym¬
biosis with the sedentary communities and has, too, been a
guarantee of cultural authenticity and independence.
It can therefore be said, without fear of paradox, that the
Gypsies, "these wanderers over all the earth", are, in terms of
the ethical and aesthetic landmarks which guide them, one of
the most stable of peoples.
Thus, thanks to its fidelity to itself, this people crowned with
the halo of legend remains an authentic people, the subject of
its own history. Even if its way of life is destined to change,
there is no doubt that its tradition will last, a source of moral
values, a rule of life, an inexhaustible inspiration for a culture
which offers an outstandingly original contribution to the rest
of humanity.
