The political economy
of literacy training
by Herbert Gintis
HERBERT GINTIS, of the United States, is
professor of economics of education and of
political economy at the University of
Massachusetts and a former educational con¬
sultant with the World Bank. He is co-author,
with Samuel Bowles, of Schooling in
Capitalist America (Basic Books, 1976) which
has been translated into Spanish, French,
Italian, German, Japanese and Portuguese.
IT is well known that the question of
literacy training is an economic prob¬
lem: there are specific per unit costs
involved in literacy attainment, and there
are equally specific individual benefits, in
terms of higher labour productivity and
earning capacity, associated with such at¬
tainment. What is less often recognized,
however, is that the benefits of literacy
training are quite as often political as they
are economic. This is true in two quite
distinct yet complementary ways.
First, literacy must be considered a basic
right precisely because it is a virtual pre¬
requisite to political participation in social
life. The illiterate population of a country is
normally concentrated among social groups
and in demographic areas which have been
systematically deprived of political
resources and access to social power.
Historically, literacy has been a prime force
in the development of those forms of
popular consciousness, social solidarity,
and political awareness upon which the ef¬
fective exercise of political influence
depends.
Indeed, it is often an important point for
educational planners to understand that op
position to literacy programmes is quite as
likely to emanate from groups opposed to
the potential empowerment resulting from
their success, as from those opposed to the
implementation costs themselves.
Second, the social rewards that induce in¬
dividuals to acquire literacy and once ac¬
quired, to maintain and improve their levels
of literacy, are quite as often political as
economic. There are many groups and in¬
dividuals whose conditions of life render
the exercise of reading and writing skills of
minimal importance for the day-to-day
tasks of home and work. Yet for such in¬
dividuals and groups, literacy remains a
fundamental tool of participation in local
community, work, and national politics. It
follows that in many situations a pre¬
requisite for a successful literacy training
programme is the widespread existence of
popular representative and participatory
democratic forms, within which the exercise
of literacy becomes a socially meaningful
and rewarding act.
Literacy and popular democracy, then,
are to a greater extent than many planners
are willing to countenance, two faces of a
coin. When individuals are continually call-
15


ed upon to contribute to the making of deci¬
sions which affect their lives, and when
such decisions depend on the knowledge of
social conditions and the opinions of con¬
tending parties or interests, the develop¬
ment and exercise of literacy become of
paramount importance. When these oppor¬
tunities are absent, trie development of
cognitive skill may be of purely abstract
interest.
In short, the nature of political life facing
individuals and groups becomes a critical
ingredient in determining whether literacy
programmes will be implemented or, if im¬
plemented, will be of long-term success
particularly in situations where on-the-job
use of literacy is of less than overwhelming
importance. But what of the form of
literacy training programmes themselves?
Here again, it is all too common to treat the
methods of imparting cognitive skills as
though they were purely technical issues of
pedagogical method. Yet issues of politics
and power are always central to the learning
process.
The political aspects of literacy training
are more likely to be recognized in a pro¬
gressive society, which is so organized as to
be unthreatened by the full development in
its citizens of the personal capacities to con¬
trol their collective destinies, and which
does not fear the power and knowledge of
a literate citizenry. Thus the first step in the
development of effective literacy pro¬
grammes, I believe, is the weakening of
those backward and elitist forces which arc
threatened by the prospects of popular
power.
Effective literacy training, I suggest, re¬
quires the rejection of many standard no¬
tions in educational theory notions which
have well served élites, but are not well
geared to the needs of the many. For in¬
stance, education is often treated with the
model of the active teacher and the passive
learner. In this active/passive model, skills
are seen as passing from the initiator who
controls, to the receptor, who is controlled.
As such, educational institutions in general,
and literacy training programmes in par¬
ticular, are systematically exempted from
the general criteria of democratic participa¬
tion. The active/passive model in literacy
training often fails, then, for two inter¬
related reasons connected to the
undemocratic nature of the educational
process.
First, true learning occurs precisely when
individuals acquire a personal capacity by
exercising their personal control over their
environment. The reduction of the
learner especially the adult learner to a
passive instrument of the teacher, removes
from the educational encounter the most ef¬
fective basis of skill acquisition. Second,
the natural reaction of the learner to the
lack of power in the educational setting is to
oppose the will of the powerful. Thus not'
learning becomes a positive act of self-
assertion and the maintenance of personal
dignity. The political economy of learning,
by contrast, is based on the principle that
learning occurs most effectively, and with
the greatest positive acceptance on the part
of the learners, when the educational en¬
vironment empowers the learners, and
engages them in the active exercise of their
individual and collective powers.
How, finally, should literacy pro-
16
grammes be integrated into the social fabric
of people's lives? Education (literacy train¬
ing in particular) is often considered a
separate sphere of social life, and hence
should be provided in social settings distinct
from home, community, and work. This, I
believe, is a distinct error. Education is a
practice, not a place. Education is that
practice whose object is the personal
capacities of individuals, and whose project
is the full development of these capacities.
Like all other social practices, educational
practices take place everywhere.
The usual treatment of education is quite
otherwise. The most common view of
education is that learning takes place in
special institutions which prepare people
for other sets of social institutionssuch as
politics and work. But in fact education is
the practice involving the production of
people.
Where are people "produced"? The
answer, I believe, is that people are
producedand hence are educated in
each and every social environment in which
they participate. In particular, people are
produced in politics, and people are pro¬
duced in work. Politics does not simply pro¬
duce leaders and political decisionsit pro¬
duces educated citizens. The economy does
not simply produce goods and services it
produces people. In short, education is a
practice which is, whether consciously or
unconsciously, whether planned or
unplanned, an aspect of democratic
political development, and egalitarian
economic development.
Ignoring this fundamental point tends to
lead educational planners into two errors.
The first is to associate education with
children, since specialized educational in¬
stitutions are normally geared to the young.
Yet by this association, it is forgotten that
education must occur throughout life, and
that the economic and political benefits of
adult education are quite as significant as
those of childhood education. The second is
to think that the provision of such adult
education programmes as literacy training
must be thought of as co-operating with,
but lying essentially outside of the day-to¬
day institutions which govern politics, com¬
munity affairs, and economic production.
I would like to suggest that often the most
effective means of implementing literacy
training and other forms of adult cognitive
and occupational training is to integrate
such programmes into work-life and
community-life. Literacy programmes
should be a worker's right in agricultural
and industrial production, and provision
should be made during the work day for
literacy training as part of the worker's job
benefits. In addition, employers should be
urged to reorganize the division of labour
so as to draw upon the literacy skills of
workers as these skills manifest themselves
and develop, even in situations where the
immediate pay-off in higher productivity is
not evident. For the long-run benefits to.
society (and usually to productivity within
the industry itself) of such programmes are
significant.
In effect, recognizing that education is a
practice integrated into the fabric of daily
life, rather than being a specialized service
provided to individuals at specific points in
their lives, radically changes our notion of
the relationship of literacy training to post-
literacy programmes and vocational train¬
ing. One of the most vexing problems for
educational policy makers has been that of
the maintenance of literacy in the years that
follow the completion of successful literacy
training. I have already noted that, in the
absence of the proper mix of concrete
economic and political incentives, the
maintenance of literacy cannot be expected.
I wish merely to add that when literacy and
vocational training are integrated into com¬
munity and work, the importance of "post-
literacy" programmes recedes dramatical¬
ly. For the process of literacy becomes a
continuous part of the lives of individuals,
and in addition acquires a momentum by
virtue of the fact that learners themselves
are taking the initiative in the control of
their own education.
Herbert Gintis
'Literacy programmes should be a worker's right in agricultural and industrial produc¬
tion, and provision should be made during the work day for literacy training as part of
the worker's job benefits." Below, a tea plantation in Cameroon.
