The legacy of colonial art
by Damián Bayón
UNTIL the last third of the eighteenth
century, Spanish and Portuguese
colonial art in the New World was
dominated exclusively by religious themes. It
was also influenced to a large extent by art
trends in Europe.
Although forms of artistic expression p'ractis-
ed in some of the great pre-Columbian cultures
at the time of the Conquest were of real worth,
their techniques and range differed so widely
from the needs of the missionaries that any
degree of syncretism was scarcely possible.
Some collaboration did, however, begin to
take shape in Mexico, in painting far more than
in sculpture. Those among the indigenous
population who had a gift for drawing and the
use of colour were trained by friars who were
proficient in these subjects. As a result, a large
number of murals were executed in the early
monasteries, inspired by engravings and in
some cases by the illuminations of printed
books in the early Renaissance style.
European artists initially had to be "im¬
ported" for easel painting, and in turn they
trained local artists. The first European
painters to arrive in the Spanish colonies
naturally included Spaniards, but there were
also many Italians, Flemings and Germans,
some of whom were subjects of the Spanish
crown. Their work was marked by the prevail¬
ing styles of the period. At first it displayed a
certain archaic quality, a hint of Italian Man¬
nerism and its Spanish and Flemish
derivatives. By the late seventeenth century
the European schools of painting were taking
fifty to a hundred years to reach America. This
delay was gradually reduced and towards the
end of the eighteenth century and the begin¬
ning of the nineteenth, the rococo and
neo-classical styles appeared almost
simultaneously in the mother countries and in
the colonies.
In the sixteenth century three Italian painters
of a certain stature appeared in South America:
the Jesuit Bernardo Bitti (1548-1610) and the
laymen Matías Pérez de Alesio (1547-1628)
and Angelino Medoro (1565-1632). They were
important not only because of their own works,
which were influenced by the international
Mannerism of the day, but also because they
trained local-born artists such as the
Ecuadorian Fray Pedro Bedón and the
Panamanian Brother Hernando de la Cruz,
both of whom worked in Quito.
About the same time a Fleming named
Simón Pereyns (1558-1589) appeared in Mex¬
ico and soon became famous. He was followed
by a number of Spaniards including Baltasar
de Echave Orio (1548-1619) who was to create
a dynasty with his descendants Echave Ibia
(1583-1660) and Echave Rioja (1632-1682).
On the ceilings of two manor-houses at Tunja
in New Granada (now Colombia) are a number
of curious paintings which, although of no great
This statue of Hercules sup¬
porting a pillar in the church of
Our Lady of Mount Carmel, at
Sabara, Brazil, is the work of
Antonio Francisco Lisboa, O
Aleijadinho (the little cripple),
1730-1814, the most important
Ibero-American sculptorof the
colonial era.

The Holy Family, by Diego
Ouispe Tito (1611-1681), a
Peruvian artist of Indian
extraction, who was the
leader of the so-called
"Cuzco school". This
painting is now in the
church of La Merced, Cuz¬
co, Peru.
importance from a strictly artistic point of view,
suggest through their combination of
mythological and Christian themes an unusual
humanistic culture. Also based in Colombia
was the founder of another dynasty, Baltasar
de Figueroa. Born in Seville around 1600, he
was the father of Gaspar and the grandfather of
Baltasar de Vargas Figueroa, who is mainly
remembered through his pupil Gregorio Vás-
quez de Arce y Ceballos (1638-171 1), a highly
accomplished painter and undoubtedly the
most accomplished artist in New Granada dur¬
ing the colonial period.
In Ecuador, Father Bedón and Brother Her¬
nando de la Cruz were succeeded by at least
two other Important artists, Miguel de Santiago
(1626-1706) and Nicolás Javier de Goríbar
(1 665-1 740). The only outstanding figure of the
eighteenth century seems to have been
Manuel de Samaniego (1767-1824).
Seventeenth-century Peruvian art was mark¬
ed by the rivalry between Basilio de Santa Cruz
(died 1699), an academic painter and protégé
of Bishop Mollinado, and the far more original
Diego Quispe Tito (1611-1681). The latter, of
Indian stock, was the pioneer and chief
representative of the so-called "Cuzco
School", a seventeenth- and - eighteenth-
century movement whose anti-realism was
reflected in the free adaptation of the Flemish
engravings then, widely circulating in America.
Other characteristic features of the School
were a rejection of perspective, an insistence
on the frontal presentation of sacred figures,
and the use of arabesques applied to the can¬
vas in gold leaf, what is known professionally
as brocateado.
DAMIÁN BAYON, Argentine historian and art
critic, has worked with Unesco on a number of
occasions and has taught at several univer¬
sities. Among his published works are Artistas
Contemporáneos de América Latina (Unesco,
1981), The Changing Shape of Latin
American Architecture (co-author), and Latin
America in its Art, of which he was editor (see
inside back cover).
In Bolivia, the remarkable figure of Melchor
Pérez de Holguín (1665-1724) bestrides the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Although he had tried to imitate Zurbarán, he
became one of the most original of the colonial
painters.
Meanwhile, in Mexico, painting continued to
follow European trends. The country's most
notable painters between the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries were Sebastián de
Arteaga (1610-1 656), a Spanish disciple of Zur¬
barán who emigrated to Mexico, where he had
a powerful influence; José Juárez (161 5-1 660),
who may have studied with Arteaga but seems
more archaic than his master; and above all
Cristóbal de Villalpando (1645-1714), a painter
who recalls the Spanish painter Juan de
Valdés Leal. With another great master of
decoration, Juan Correa (died 1739) he
decorated the sacristy of the cathedral in Mex¬
ico City.
But the most important of all seems to have
been Miguel Cabrera (1 695-1 768), born in Oax¬
aca and therefore a Creole, who painted for the
famous church of Santa Prisca in Taxco and
produced, among other works, a well-known
portrait of the great Mexican poetess Sor
Juana Inés de la Cruz.
Portuguese-Brazilian colonial painting took a
completely different direction, eschewing the
easel in favour of the large-scale decoration of
wooden ceilings. This art form was deliberately
"perspectivist" and followed the example of
the great painter of "glorias", Father Pozzo,
who worked during the brilliant period of the
Italian seventeenth century. ^
Pulpit of the church of San Francisco, at
Quito, a city which is included in the World
Heritage List of Cultural and Natural Proper¬
ties. The façade of the church is considered
to be one of the finest in South America and
its interior decoration is among the best ex¬
amples of colonial religious art. The pulpit
dates from the mid-16th century. The
statues are polychrome and the niches and
columns, like the various altars of the
church, are covered in gold leaf.
15

^. Brazilian historians identify two periods in
this type of paintingthe Baroque and the
Rococo. The most outstanding exponent of the
former was José J. da Rocha (1 737-1 807), who
executed the paintings in the church of La Con¬
cepción de la Playa in the lower city of
Salvador, in the State of Bahia. His style is ar¬
chitectonic, favouring sombre colours which
heighten the dramatic character of his
subjects.
The Rococo is represented by a number of
artists of merit, outstanding amongst whom
was Manuel de Costa Athaide (1762-1837),
who was born in Mariana in Minas Gerais
State. He painted the admirable ceiling in the
exquisite little church of St. Francis of Assisi at
Ouro Preto. In this instance the painter's inten¬
tion is in perfect harmony with the dictates of
the Rococo style: the painting is less realistic,
more ethereal and undefined, and the colour
range is deliberately limited to pastel shades.
Ibero-American colonial sculpture obeys dif¬
ferent criteria. In both the Spanish and Por¬
tuguese territories, statuary, altar-pieces, choir
stalls and pulpits reveal unmistakably Penin¬
sular origins. Among those who travelled to
America in search of fortune in the new lands
were better sculptors than painters, and almost
from the outset they trained locally-born pupils.
At the beginning of the colonial period in
Mexico a somewhat crude form of sculpture
known as tequitoui ("tributary" in Náhuatl) was
produced by Indians who worked under the
supervision of Spanish monks and made carv¬
ings, predominantly of- atrial crosses, into
which they introduced materials or elements
characteristic of their ancestral culture. In cen¬
tral America as a whole and in the Caribbean,
the European impact was so complete and final
that it is impossible to distinguish between the
work of Spanish and indigenous sculptors.
The remarkable expressiveness of South
American statuary originated in Quito, where a
sculptural tradition was established which was
undoubtedly due to the creation by the first
Flemish Franciscans of the San Andrés School
of Arts and Crafts. The Quito image-carvers
This picture of Saint Luke and
the Virgin Mary is a Mexican
work dating from about 1850.
In style it is typical of Spanish-
American painting of the col¬
onial period, but the artist has
used fragments of feathers in¬
stead of pigments in the man¬
ner of the Aztecs and other
pre-Columbian peoples.
adopted types and poses derived from the An-
dalusian schools, but their use of colours was
influenced by the Castilian School, in the sense
that they produced a brilliant finish that con¬
trasted with the sombre finish practised in the
south of Spain.
The Quito sculptors form a coherent group.
All, or nearly all, of them were American born.
They included at least one mestizo and one
pure Indian. First of all there was Father Carlos
(approx. 1620-1680), who carved life-size
figures with a certain degree of realism and
was the teacher of José Olmos, known as
"Pampite" (active between 1650 and 1690),
who was also influenced by Martinez Montanes
and specialized in figures of Christ and
Calvaries. The brilliant mestizo Bernardo de
Legarda (died 1773) emerged somewhat later.
He was a highly accomplished artist, a sculptor
of altar-pieces, a gilder and image-maker who
invented an elegant type of figure called the
"Virgen Danzante" (Dancing Virgin),
sometimes carved on a reduced scale. Finally,
the work of the late eighteenth-century Indian
sculptor Manuel Chili, known as "Caspicara",
marks a contrast with the smiling gracefulness
of Legarda and includes the Descent from the
Cross, a sculpture of great pathos, in the
cathedral of Quito.
It is curious that central America, the Carib¬
bean, New Granada and Peru did not produce
the equals of the great Quito sculptors or their
Brazilian contemporaries. In those parts
sculpture was at its best in choir stalls and
altar-pieces rather than in statues. Two notable
examples in Mexico are the Spaniard Lorenzo
Rodriguez (1704-1774), creator of the
Metropolitan Sanctuary with its two exuberant
Baroque facades, and Jerónimo Balbas (who
worked between 1709 and 1761) and executed
the famous Altar-piece of the Kings in the
cathedral of Mexico City.
During the sixteenth and seventeenth cen¬
turies, examples of Portuguese art had a
strong influence in northeastern and central
Brazil. A notable feature of this early period in
Brazilian sculpture was that nearly all the
sculptors were lay brothers who worked for
their respective Orders. The Jesuits tended to
carve in wood whereas the Benedictines
modelled in clay, producing objects which they
painted in various colours and then baked in
ovens at a high temperature. There was one
notable exception, the Benedictine Father
Domingo de la Concepción (died 1717), who
carved directly in wood.
A number of interesting artists emerged in
the eighteenth .century. One of them was
Manuel Brito (active between 1726 and 1739),
who collaborated with his kinsman Francisco
Javier de Brito (died 1751) on the altar-pieces
of the splendid church of San Francisco de la
Penitencia in Rio de Janeiro.
Both of these artists influenced, from a
distance, the most important figure in colonial
sculpture in the whole of the Americas-
Antonio Francisco Lisboa (1730-1814), a
mulatto better known by his nickname O Alei-
jadinho (the cripple) because of a terrible infir¬
mity which deformed his hands. An ac¬
complished artist, O Aleijadhino was an ar¬
chitect, like his Portuguese father, and above
all a great sculptor capable of carving directly
in stone or wood.
Damián Bayón

Baroque splendours
of Latin America
Immediately after the Conquest, Spanish
missionaries began building churches
and convents In the architectural style of
their homeland, adapted to meet the ex¬
igencies of these new latitudes. Gradual¬
ly a new style evolved which, from the
17th century, was to culminate in the rich
ornamental profusion of Ibero-American
Baroque, In which the originality ofnative
artists found full and free expression. On
this page we present four examples of
this "Colonial" style. Top right, façade of
the church of La Merced, Antigua,
Guatemala. The outside of the church,
which dates from the 17th century, is
completely covered with decorative
relief-work, including garlands, twisted
fluting and geometric and figurative
designs. Right, the cathedral of Potosí,
Bolivia, built at the beginning of the 19th
century following the layout of the
cathedral of Havana. Bottom right, altar-
piece of the high altar of the mid-18th
century church of Santa Prisca, Taxco,
Mexico. Santa Prisca is a masterpiece of
' 'Churrigueresque "baroque art (inspired
by the art of the Spanish architect Chur-
riguera). Below, the Interior of the 18th
century church of Our Lady of Mount
Carmel, an excellent example of the
Brazilian baroque style sometimes also
termed "Rococo".
