F for a hungry world
by K. Antoine Dakouré
FOR years, the vast problem of hunger
in the world has been the focus of
lengthy debate in various organiz¬
ations at the governmental, non¬
governmental and international levels. A
world conference organized by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), held in 1974, exposed the
global scale of this drama and provided an
K. ANTOINE DAKOURÉ, of Upper Volta,
has held a number of senior posts in his coun¬
try's government, including those of Minister
of Agriculture, Minister of Planning and Rural
Development and Adviser to the President of
the Republic. President of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) in 1973 and Upper
Volta's ambassador to the European
Economic Community from 1981 to 1 983, he
was also a member of the Independent Brandt
Commission.
opportunity to identify its causes, to
analyse them in depth and to single out
those measures which, it was widely agreed,
could lead to the eradication of hunger
within a decade.
In a noteworthy study entitled
Agriculture: Toward 2000, published three
years ago, the FAO warned all nations of
the deteriorating situation and offered con¬
crete suggestions for controlling hunger ef¬
fectively. Today, however, it must be ad¬
mitted that the plight of the world's under¬
privileged is steadily worsening. Nearly 500
million human beings, stagnating in pover¬
ty, are under daily threat of famine. The
population of the most vulnerable countries
increases by 2.5 per cent a year, whereas the
annual increase in cereal production has
levelled out at 1 per cent. If current trends
continue, requirements for cereal aid,
which totalled 7.6 million tonnes in 1979,
will reach some 21 million tonnes by 1990.
Land resources are very seriously
depleted in many regions. Demographic
pressure, which is responsible for the in¬
creasing over-exploitation of arable land,
the destruction of plant cover and the
damaging effects of extensive grazing, is the
ultimate cause of accelerated desertifica
tion, whose consequences in the medium
term are just as harmful as a nuclear
holocaust. Our planet is threatened by
famine and yet, at the same time, we con¬
tinue to exhaust almost twenty million hec¬
tares of land every year.
Why does the problem seem insoluble
despite all indications that it has been
carefully and perspicaciously analysed?
There are undoubtedly many reasons, the
most serious of which, it would seem, is that
both the developing and the industrialized
nations lack the political courage needed to
implement the measures recommended.
"Even the best rural development projects
designed by experts and backed with all the
material, technical and financial resources
needed, are destined to fall if thefarmers in
whose interest they arepurported to be car¬
ried out do not feel sufficiently concerned
to offer their unreserved participation and
if they lack the assurance that the projects
are for their own benefit".
Below, Egyptian workers set to with a will.
s**fc
tw
. vir." ¥>**

Citizens of the industrialized nations only
become aware of hunger, of the tragedy af¬
flicting hundreds of millions of human be-
.ings every day, when it reaches catastrophic
proportions, as in the Sahel. Emergency aid
is mustered amid sweeping gestures of
human solidarity in response to these cries
of distress. Interest slackens once steps have
been taken and aid donors can again sleep
with a clear conscience. There is general ap¬
proval of the praiseworthy efforts and
perseverance of the non-governméntal
organizations, but what do these amount to
compared with the enormous potential still
lying dormant?
Governments and political parties should
do more to promote a more dynamic image
of development aid, too often seen as a sim¬
ple act of charity. Too few people seem to
understand that helping their neighbours
progress to the point where they can par¬
ticipate in mutually beneficial exchanges is
certainly one of the most effective ways of
safeguarding their own future. Helping to
increase the purchasing power of the less
fortunate countries would stimulate pro¬
duction and ease the strains of
immigration.
Unfortunately, such an evolution of the
"weaker partner" will remain virtually im¬
possible as long as international economic
relations are subject to the existing system
which was designed by the strong to satisfy
their own needs. The complex of subser¬
vience it induces among the less strong
results inexorably in tensions that threaten
world peace. A starving and impoverished
man is' easily driven to extremes precisely
because he has nothing to lose. As the
popular Turkish saying so aptly puts it: "If
you starve a lamb, he will become a wolf."
If no decisive steps are taken to reverse
current trends whereby the poor grow daily
poorer, social and political tensions, caused
by economic difficulties, exaggerated fur¬
ther by poverty, will certainly have harmful
repercussions on North-South relations.
It is the duty of all mankind to fight to
control poverty and limit its consequences,
for humanitarian reasons, of course, but
also, and above all, to achieve a state of
peace which all living creatures require if
they are to thrive.
The notion that the eradication of hunger
in the world is an international responsibili¬
ty is not new. Considerable efforts already
under way prove that this notion of respon¬
sibility is receiving increasing acceptance;
yet there is no doubt that the scourge of
hunger is still rife, particularly in the rural
areas of Africa, Latin America and the
Near and Far East.
What is to be done? Given the extreme
Red sorghum, used in making a local beer
called "dolo ", on sale at a market in Upper
Volta. The FAO's fertilizer programme is
helping subsistence farmers in Upper Volta
and other developing countries to increase
crop yields by as much as SO per cent.
Bags of maize from Zimbabwe being load-
ed into a Greek freighter chartered by the
World Food Programme (WFP) at the port
of Beira, Mozambique, for onward
transmission to Chad and Cape Verde. This
forms part of a WFP operation in which
cash from donor countries is used to buy
foodfrom an exporting developing country
for use as food aid in other developing
countries.
complexity and diversity of the peoples con¬
cerned, it is impossible to find a single solu¬
tion suited to all countries. However, as the
rural sector is usually the most vulnerable it
is on this sector that we shall concentrate
our attention.
National development plans have almost
always granted the highest priority to the
rural sector, with special emphasis on self-
sufficiency in food. Leaders quickly
become aware of the vanity of their nations'
desire to achieve independence and under¬
take development efforts while their
underdeveloped rural sectors are incapable
of satisfying basic needs and supporting ex¬
pansion in other sectors of the national
economy. Despite this realization, govern¬
ment policies have continued to under¬
estimate the importance of the measures
required.
It is unrealistic to attempt to increase
food production without first considering
all the steps needed to motivate and en¬
courage the main protagonists of
agricultural development. These steps de¬
pend upon political guidelines which only
the countries concerned can determine. At
this stage the developing nations' major
share of the responsibility can be gauged.
Without seeking to excuse either the
Western or Eastern industrialized nations
who rely on their might to influence the
Imports and exports of agricultural products, total developing and total developed
economies, 1977-1981
(figures in US$ thousand million).
Developed
economies
^^^^^^^^^
Imports
	
Exports
	
Developing
economies
Exports
Imports
250
200
150
100
1977 1978 1979 1980
50
1981
World trade in agricultural products is
dominated by the developed countries.
Nevertheless, those developing coun¬
tries that lack oil resources are heavily
dependent on agricultural commodities
for their export earnings. On average,
four out of every ten dollars earned from
exports by these countries come from
sales of agricultural, forest and fish pro¬
ducts. Unfortunately, export prices for
many of these commodities have declin¬
ed in real value while the cost and volume
of imports from the developed world
have risen. In 1981, the value of imports
by the developing countries as a whole
exceeded that of exports.
Source : FAO, Rome

I
\ Vi
decisions of the weaker nations, I do not ac¬
cept outside intervention as an explanation
of all our shortcomings in the area of
agricultural development.
The allocation of resources employed to
execute development plans, which we
ourselves decide, only rarely reflects the
priorities defined in these plans. Further¬
more, we vigorously condemn arms expen¬
ditures which swallow up some five hun¬
dred thousand million dollars every year, or
ten times more than the amount needed to
ensure that no human life be lost for lack of
nourishment, yet our contribution accounts
for 20 per cent of this sum. Many other ex¬
amples could be cited, but this is not the
main point at issue.
We must learn from experience and
systematically avoid repeating our past er¬
rors in order to build a better future. Self-
sufficiency in food is clearly the top priority
goal. Each country is drafting its strategies
according to specific social, economic,
cultural and political criteria. Secondary
goals and steps to be taken are also being
determined. Whilst the funds required
generally fall short of needs, the paucity of
material or financial resources is a doubtful
pretext for mediocre results, as we shall see
below. I shall use the following example to
highlight an observation I feel to be of para¬
mount importance before proposing not a
panacea, but rather a few factors that might
be considered in the quest for solutions.
At the beginning of the 1960s, a group of
experts on a field assignment drafted and
carried out a soil recovery project in the
Sahelian region of Upper Volta. Accurate
W
& aÉÊÂ
mim I^H
measurements and calculations showed that
the erosion caused by a torrential rainstorm
lasting about twenty minutes amounted to
some 14 tonnes of fine topsoil per hectare.
This calculation gave eloquent proof of the
interest of the project, for which farmers
were recruited to help dig small dikes along
contour lines to control rainfall. To the ex¬
perts the value of this laudable project was
evident. Unfortunately, however, the pro¬
moters failed to ensure that the farmers also
understood the advantages it offered them".
Because they were neither consulted nor
paid to maintain the dikes, the farmers soon
lost all interest in the "white man's
ditches". It was only some years later, when
those dikes that had not collapsed controll¬
ed the rainwater flow, bringing more water
to the wells and improving neighbouring
fields, that some of the farmers began to
understand the value of the project. Those
farmers who recognized the benefits to be
obtained requested no financing what-
. soever to repair or rebuild their dikes. *
This experience and many others observ¬
ed in the field provide proof that even the
best rural development projects, designed
by experts and backed with all the material,
technical and financial resources needed,
are destined to fail if the farmers in whose
interest they are purported to be carried out
do not feel sufficiently concerned to offer
their unreserved participation and if they
lack the assurance that the projects are for
their own benefit.
It is important, therefore, to seek
methods of approach that involve farmers
as much as possible rather than insisting on
taking decisions for them and imposing
solutions on them without taking the
precaution of soliciting their opinion. This
is an essential prerequisite to obtaining their .
collaboration. Without the farmers'
wholehearted involvement no profound
changes can take place. Their participation
cannot be obtained by presidential decree
or ministerial decision. Tangible, co¬
ordinated measures are required which will
progressively create a favourable environ¬
ment, working at a pace acceptable to the
farmers and not racing ahead at the speed
of technicians and politicians. The farmer
must be assured that the land he needs as
well as seeds, equipment and other inputs,
of adequate quality, will be made available
to him at the right time and in sufficient
quantity. Furthermore, he must have some
guarantee that, when production begins, he
will not be despoiled of the fruits of his
labour.
Such guarantees, which would certainly
help motivate farmers, imply the following
pre-conditions:
well prepared and carefully executed
agrarian reform to ensure equitable
distribution of farm land;
the restructuring of research methods at
. the national and regional levels in order to
adapt them to local conditions. The concept
of technology transfer must be seriously
revised because the methods currently used
to increase agricultural production,
developed in the North, rarely generate
similar results in the developing countries.
Agronomic research can only respond ade¬
quately to farmers' expectations to the ex-
7

tent that it can be adapted to help solve par¬
ticular local problems. Moreover, since
research entails investment beyond the
possibilities of individual countries, it can
only be truly effective as part of regional co¬
operation schemes;
the granting of tax relief to reduce initial
costs as well as the cost of production
factors;
the institution of an agricultural credit
scheme flexible enough to respond to
farmers' needs and possibly even help them
meet some of their social obligations. These
obligations, generally ignored by official
banking organizations, force farmers to ac¬
cept loans from speculators at exorbitant
rates of interest;
the introduction of measures to
discourage imports, for example, by raising
the price of imported food products;
a more rational organization of the col¬
lection, distribution and marketing of pro¬
duce which would guarantee farmers more
attractive profits.
Naturally, the social aspects of develop¬
ment, education, hygiene, health, culture,
balanced nutrition, the rational use of
water resources and nature conservation
must be given special attention. Of course,
it is most important to fight hunger by in¬
creasing agricultural production, but all
these factors have an undeniable impact on
trends in the rural sector for reasons so ob¬
vious that it is unnecessary to enumerate
them here.
As stressed in the study Agriculture:
Toward 2000, it should be possible to solve
the problem of hunger in the world by the
year 2000. Generally speaking, however,
while considerable emphasis has been plac¬
ed on all the sectoral areas that influence
programme success, I feel that the vital
question has yet to be answered: "What
concrete measures can be taken to create the
motivation essential to progress in the field
of agricultural production?" Unesco and
the FAO could undertake joint initiatives in
order to make a detailed examination of
this question with the appropriate organiza¬
tions in the countries concerned. If the
answer to this question could be found, we
Growing population pressure on limited
resources is one of the main causes of
emigration from the Andean highlands of
Latin America. For the first time in history
the downslope areas below the altiplanos
are being massively exploited and lack of
sound agriculturalpractice is leading to ac¬
celerated soil erosion. Above, a young
shepherdgirl in the Peruvian altiplano with
one of her flock of alpacas. A member of
the llama family, the alpaca is bred for its
valuable wool. Photo © idrc, Ottawa
Over-exploitation of resources is not con¬
fined to the land. Recently, this fisherman
(below) from the Island of Buad, near
Samar, in the Philippine archipelago, like
many of his fellow inshore fishermen,
found his livelihood threatened by the in¬
roads of large foreign trawlers. These
trawlers have now been banned from
fishing within six nautical miles of the
coast, but, as the world becomes more and
more reliant onfish as a supplement to land
crops, local, national and international
regulation offishing rights takes on increas¬
ing importance.
should be able to solve the problem of
hunger despite the modest funding
available.
As a first step, food aid, which enables us
to attend to the most urgent cases rapidly,
is a highly positive factor. It can 'help
stabilize food prices and encourage efforts
to increase the quantity and improve the
quality of agricultural production.
However, it must be restricted to these goals
alone and be used only to meet clearly
defined needs.
Beneficiaries and donors of food aid
must ensure that it does not become self-
perpetuating. A prolonged commitment
would constitute a long-term hindrance to
the development of local agricultural
production.
This reservation aside, nobody can deny
that well organized food aid is precious. It
could, however, become a formidable
weapon and a serious threat to peace if the
donor countries were to succumb to the
temptation to use it as a lever in interna¬
tional relations.
K. Antoine Dakourá
