Seieme fiction in the classroom
by Christo Boutzev
©
o
o
s.
££ «ytlRST, of necessity, come
thought, fantasy and fable.
-*- Then follow the scientific
calculations. Finally, thought is crown¬
ed by achievement". This is how
Konstantin Eduardovich Tsiolkovsky
(1857-1935), one of the pioneers of
space travel, defined the basic relation¬
ship that exists between science fiction
and scientific and technological
development.
In its wider sense of the creative, im¬
aginative dreaming that foreshadows
scientific achievement, science fiction,
like myth, reflects the ambition to
dominate nature which is as old as
mankind.
Indeed, dream and rational thought,
imagination and precise calculations,
are interwoven in the creation of even
the simplest tools or techniques, and it
is not always easy to know where one
ends and the other begins. For in¬
stance, those prehistoric cave drawings
whose force and realism excite our ad¬
miration can be interpreted in different
ways. Perhaps they were only fanciful
dreams, primitive "science fiction"
created by the imagination of pre¬
historic artists; perhaps they were
projects or plansfor the manufacture
of hunters' snares drawn up by
prehistoric engineers.
A project is often classed as science
fiction simply because its achievement
22
Illustration by Joe Petagno from Brad¬
bury's The Silver Locusts.
demands a higher level of technological
advance than society has attained.
Leonardo da Vinci designed a pro¬
totype flying machine four hundred
years before the first aeroplanes ap¬
peared. His contemporaries treated his
project as no more than a technical fan¬
tasy. Nobody could explain how the
propeller of this remote ancestor of the
helicopter would be driven, for -the
motor was not invented until much
later.
Until a few decades ago, this was true
of space flight. Because technological
development was not advanced
enough, it was impossible to produce
rockets possessing the requisite pro¬
pulsive power. But science fiction had
already foreseen the decisive role of the
rocket. Jules Verne had equipped his
moon ship with several auxiliary
rockets.
One of the major objectives of
technological development is, of
course, to perfect the means of produc¬
tion in order to increase productivity,
and at first sight this seems to be a pure¬
ly practical aim which has nothing to
do with fantasy or the imagination. But
this is a superficial view. In every
technical achievement there is an initial
stage of capital importance: the stage at
which, drawing on the maximum
available information, every, possible
solution is sought to a given problem,
thus allowing ideas to take form. At
this stage intuition, imagination and
fantasy are even more important than
purely technical competence. This kind
of imaginative freedom was exercised
in the invention of the wheel just as in
the construction of the Egyptian
pyramids or the first supersonic
aeroplane, and it will be equally
necessary for the manufacture of
tomorrow's micro-computers.
In the engineering sciences, the in¬
ventive process is much closer to the
procedure used in science fiction than is
generally realized. They are two similar
forms of human activity, each applied
to the search for new solutions
although, of course, in different con¬
texts and perspectives. The history of
technological progress includes many
examples where imagination, combin¬
ed with scientific knowledge, provided
the seeds of new ideas and original con¬
cepts. Analysis shows that to produce
any kind of machine that is to be com¬
mercially successful one must begin by
examining at least fifty to sixty original
ideas.
This is where science fiction can play
a decisive part in technological creativi¬
ty. Its essential role is not so much to
provide specific ideas or concrete solu¬
tions drawn from the author's imagina¬
tion, as to stimulate scientists and
CONTINUED PAGE 24

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 22
engineers in the search for truly
original solutions.
Unfortunately, insufficient attention
is given at all levels of education to the
need to develop the spirit of invention
and innovation. Perhaps one of the
most serious gaps in many education
systems is this undervaluation of im¬
agination and fantasy in the educa¬
tional process. The result is that pupils'
creative capacities are not sufficiently
encouraged at an age when the per¬
sonality is being formed. Worst of all,
some educational activities are so
organized that these capacities are
brutally stifled at birth.
Would it not be a good idea,
therefore, to introduce science fiction
into school programmes, thus giving
young minds an opportunity to become
familiar with the masterpieces of this
branch of literature in a systematic
way? It could also be introduced in an
appropriate form into schools of
engineering, especially since the time-
lag between science fiction and
technological reality is now being con¬
siderably reduced.
It should not be forgotten that works
of science fiction have often played a
prophetic role in technological
developments. The word "robot" was
coined in 1921 by the Czech writer
Karel Capek (1890-1938). Today
robots have moved out of the sphere of
science fiction and are operating entire
factories. Improving them exercises the
minds of science fiction writers as well
as of engineers. The same is true of
lasers. These all-powerful beams were
one of the favourite themes of science
fiction writers twenty years ago, and
they were still a mystery until quite
recently. Now, they are being used in
medicine and telecommunications.
Again, laboratories and research sta¬
tions, even technical workshops, are
now being installed in outer space
another subject beloved of science fic¬
tion. The heroes of the cosmos are no
ROBOTS
The term "robot", derived from the Czech
robota (work), was coined by the Czech
playwright Karel Capek in his play R.U.R.
(Rossum's Universal Robots), first perfor¬
med in Prague in 1921. The scene is set
in the future on a island where robots are
manufactured and sold as workers, ser¬
vants and soldiers. The word came to be
applied to any piece of apparatus which
was capable of some limited "thought"
process and could perform simple, re¬
petitive tasks previously undertaken by
humans.
Initially, science fiction writers' treatment
of the theme of robots reflected society's
unease, fear even, of rapid technological
advance. The early robots were often
depicted as menacing monsters that ten¬
ded to get out of their inventor's control
and go rampaging around in an orgy of
mindless killing. As society became more
accustomed to technological progress (the
first automatic traffic lights were originally
referred to as robots), so robots began to
be more sympathetically portrayed. This
change was reflected in American author
Isaac Asimov's famous Three Laws of
Robotics: (1) A robot may not injure a
human being or, through inaction, allow
a human being to come to harm. (2) A
robot must obey the orders given it by
human beings except where such orders
would conflict with the First Law. (3) A
robot must protect its own existence as
long as such protection does not conflict
with the First or Second Law.
In the real world robots have become
incredibly sophisticated, taking over from
longer characters out of science fiction
but scientists and engineers working in
the new space technologies.
But this does not mean that
everything predicted in science fiction
has already come to pass, or will
necessarily come true in the future.
Besides, such prophecies must not be
confused with scientific predictions
based on exact laws such as, for in¬
stance, the prediction of Dmitri
Ivanovich Mendeleyev (1834-1907)
concerning unknown chemical
elements, or the discovery in 1930 by
Clyde Tombaugh of the planet Pluto,
whose existence and position had been
forecast some fifty years earlier by the
American astronomer Percival Lowell.
Sometimes, scientific and tech¬
nological progress is so rapid that
science fiction can neither foresee nor
even keep up with the resultant tech¬
nical revolution, as was the case for in¬
formatics. Although the latter is
already operating in the service of
24

humans a wide range of monotonous,
repetitive, dirty or dangerous tasks. Bot¬
tom right, robots at work in a fully auto¬
mated automobile assembly plant in the
Federal Republic of Germany. Photos
right, close encounters of an educational
kind children meet robots face to face at
The Robot Exhibit: History, Fantasy and
Reality, an exhibition held earlier this year
at the American Craft Museum, II, New
York.
In more recent science fiction the introduc¬
tion of robots offers writers the opportu¬
nity to examine the practical, philosophi¬
cal and moral implications of artificial intel¬
ligence. In one of Asimov's stories, two
robots left unused on a shelf pass the time
in philosophical debate. They finally con¬
clude that robots conform more closely to
the definition of the word "man" than do
men themselves.
Some highly sophisticated programs now
being developed for computers seem to be
approaching the level of artificial intelli¬
gence. Left, Soviet chess grandmaster
Raphael Vaganian (second from right)
plays chess with a computer. Watching
him (extreme left) is Guillermo García,
chess champion of Cuba, who is waiting
to take on the winner. Trickery and clever
showmanship were the secret of Baron
Wolfgang von Kempelen's unbeatable
chess-playing automaton (above left)
which caused a sensation in Europe in
Napoleon's day. The complicated visible
mechanism was operated by an expert
chess-playing dwarf hidden inside the
machine.
science and technology, the themes it
suggests have not been exploited to any
great degree by authors of science
fiction.
This leap forward lends a certain
fantasy to the achievements of tech¬
nology. At the same time it reduces
futuristic literature to a level that is
closer to reality. Thus it is becoming in¬
creasingly difficult for the authors of
such works to find themes which depart
from known scientific and techno¬
logical facts. On the contrary, they
derive their inspiration increasingly
from these facts.
CHRISTO BOUTZEV, of Bulgaria, is a pro¬
gramme specialist in Unesco's Division of
Technological Research and Higher Educa¬
tion. A former professor of electro-technology
at the University of Sofia, he was for many
years senior specialist at the Bulgarian
Ministry of Education. He has published a
number of studies on educational problems. .
25
