Bridging the culture gap
by Jacqueline Charlemagne
Even among families that have adopted
the sedentary life of the town, young Gyp¬
sy girls, whose main ambition seems to
be to leave home and get married, are
obliged to spend much of their time at
household tasks and In looking after their
younger brothers and sisters. Among
nomadic families, Gypsy girls, like this
one (above) In a Gypsy encampment In
Greece, work even harder and longer at
these tasks.
THE wide diversity of the groups of
which the Gypsy people is composed
emerges strongly from the variety of
names given to them, none of which defines
them fully and precisely.
In France today the word Gitan is com¬
monly used to designate all Gypsy and
nomadic people, whereas the Gitans are ac¬
tually a highly specific ethnic group whose
migrations culminated in Spain and
southern France. Non-Gypsies, or gadje,
sometimes simply refer to these people
whose social organization is based on travel
as "travellers".
Apart from the Gypsies, who are
themselves divided into ethnic groups and
sub-groups (Rom, Manush or Sinti,
Gitans), there are the Yenish who are said to
have come from Germanic Europe, and
other groups which also lead a nomadic life
but which are difficult to categorize.
11

Home for a Gypsy is wherever he or she
happens to be, whether crossing the
marshlands of the Camargue, In southern
France, in a donkey-drawn traditional
caravan (far right), in a gleaming new
caravan fitted with all modern con¬
veniences on the outskirts of an English
town (centre right), sheltering from the
winter cold in a cave In Yugoslavia (op-
Various groups of Gypsies can also be
distinguished from one another by dif¬
ferences in their life-styles. In France,
where more than half the Gypsies are still
nomadic, some are great travellers, while
others restrict their movements to a region
or even to a département (county).
The Gypsies practise various trades, but
their activities remain traditional: tinning,
basket-making, collecting scrap metal,
music. In addition, they often have a
seasonal activity, such as grape-picking and
the harvesting of fruit and vegetables. The
travellers are also itinerant vendors, pedlars
and hawkers, shop-keepers and craftsmen.
Few of them are salaried workers.
Their living conditions also vary. The
caravan is the most common form of dwell¬
ing used by the travellers. As for those who
lead a sedentary life, most of them (apart
from a small minority who live like the sur¬
rounding population) are to be found in
temporary settlements established on the
outskirts of large cities, on waste land or in
shanty towns, their caravans immobilized.
Though most of these wanderers move
about by caravan, some use waggons. The
Rom also often travel by train. Other forms
of shelter are the tent (older even than the
caravan), the cave (as in Spain), and huts
made of branches. The travellers sometimes
buy houses but as a rule do not live in them.
Those who have become sedentary
sometimes live in deplorable conditionsin
shanty towns, old railway carriages, or in¬
salubrious huts. In central and eastern
Europe, where sedentary life is often com¬
pulsory, they concentrate together in streets
and districts.
These groups of people who left India
centuries ago and scattered throughout the
world have always maintained their identi¬
ty; but even more than the Gypsies' own
conscious efforts, the attitude of the people
among whom they lived has kept them
apart. What are the common traits which
make it possible to speak of a specific Gyp¬
sy identity? They are not to be found in the
Gypsies' life style, as we have seen, nor in
their dwellings, their travelling habits, their
dialect, their way of dressing, their rites.
Over and above these customs that vary
from group to group and from country to
country, the Gypsy feels a desire to be a
Gypsy in a non-Gypsy society and to adopt
forms of behaviour that stress his specifici¬
ty. More than a common "Gypsyness"
shared by all members of the group, a
culture gap separates Gypsies from the rest
of the community, whatever their country
or place of residence.
For centuries groups of Gypsies were
regarded merely as wanderers eking out a
posite page), In a shanty-town, or In a
prefabricated building in Avignon
specially provided for them by the local
authorities (right). Throughout their long
history the Gypsies have developed the
ability to adapt which has enabled them
to cope with the vicissitudes that face a
marginalized minority.
living from begging or larceny, or
sometimes as slaves fit to be worked to
death, as recorded in certain tales from
Hungary and Romania. The "Bohemians"
whose task it was to entertain noblemen
were treated somewhat better, but their
position was precarious and it was con¬
sidered compromising to mix with them.
The authorities viewed with suspicion these
wanderers on whom it was impossible to
keep a check.
The traditional activities of the itinerant
Gypsy pedlar, chairmender, sometimes a
kind of sorcerer were easier to practise in
rural communities before the twentieth cen¬
tury. Today, the development of transport
has encouraged sedentary trade by ensuring
the rapid supply of a wide variety of goods
at fixed prices established in advance. In
this context the Gypsies are reduced to
eking out a living on the fringes of society
and they regard this precarious existence as
a loss of their collective and individual
identity.
Despite official statements calling for
understanding between cultures, in¬
tolerance seems to be the rule, with the host
community jealously guarding its own
values as the Gypsies look to their past for
ways of resisting what they regard as the
destruction of their personality.
The Gypsies' legal status encourages this
feeling of insecurity. In France, special
travel documents were established by the
law of 3 January 1960: a circulation book
for those who have a regular professional
activity, and a circulation record for French
and other nationals who practise no regular
craft or trade or industrial activity and have
no regular income. The latter document has
to be presented to the authorities every
month. Moreover, persons with no fixed
place of residence have to register with a
local authority. The right to set up camp,
which in theory is freely recognized, is in
fact strictly regulated.
One thing emerges from all these regula¬
tions: the characteristics of the travelling
people that are perceived by sedentary
society are those which contrast with that
society, and the socio-cultural identity of
the Gypsies is never considered except when
it creates a problem for the community.
Elsewhere in western Europe, and in the
United States, legislators show a similar
concern for assimilating the Gypsies and
regulations regarding them are equally ar¬
bitrary. In Belgium, the concept of an "in¬
determinate nationality" deprives the Gyp¬
sies of many rights. In Spain, persecutions
have never ceased since the Pragmatic Sanc¬
tions enacted by the kings. In the Federal
Republic of Germany, the Gypsies have still
not been able to obtain the compensation
provided by law for the victims of Nazi
persecution. In the Nordic countries where,
for the same reasons as in the rest of
Europe, the Gypsies' living conditions are
not always favourable, a special effort has
been made by the authorities in the field of
literacy work and schooling.
In eastern Europe, since the advent of
socialism, the "social problem" of the
Gypsies has been solved through their
gradual adoption of sedentary life. But
special facilities have been granted to
enable them to preserve their cultural
heritage.
In many countries the Gypsies have been
forgotten by social policy-makers. Under
French law, for example, regular school at¬
tendance is obligatory for Gypsy or nomad
children, and the payment of family
allowances is linked to the child's record in
this respect. Compulsory education thus in¬
creases the Gypsy population's dependence
on national insurance benefits. The school¬
ing of Gypsy children leaves much to be
desired: the lack of suitably adapted pro¬
grammes and specially trained teachers, a
lack of interest on the part of parents who
fear a break with traditional values, and re¬
jection by the surrounding community have
led to illiteracy and a low level of scholastic
achievement among most of these children.
Housing also contributes to enclosing the
Gypsies in a separate system, even when
they have become sedentary. Families
relodged in low-rent housing units have
often lost their traditional social structure,
for in such a situation the clan can no longer
perform its controlling and socializing
functions and is no longer a focus for iden¬
tity. Traditional activities also change: it
has become more difficult for families to
find sufficient space to collect and sort
scrap metal, for example.
For nomadic families, the caravan has a
great cultural and symbolic importance.
Yet the law offers no facilities for caravan-
dwellers: credit establishments reject re¬
quests for loans, basing their refusal on the
lack of sufficient guarantees, for a caravan
is not regarded as a dwelling. Families
whose caravan has been damaged or is out
of commission and therefore unfit for the
road simply have to stop travelling. Lack of .
money makes it impossible for them to take
to the road again; all they can do is solve
their subsistence problems on a day to day '
basis in the sedentary conditions that have
been forced on them. Camping areas
created with the avowed purpose of pro¬
moting nomadism become a kind of ghetto
for families which find it hard to abandon
itinerant life.
12

Photo Joseph Koudelka © Magnum, Paris Photo H.W. Silvester <£> Rapho, Hans
j^bH
'ir
*
j
'^; 1 Ivfttf *"* «*3T
4 ^^
idfl
\.
fi
\i

^ How do young Gypsies face up to the
hard daily confrontation with the non-
Gypsy community? Failure at school, de¬
viance and a crisis of identity are the sorry
paths offered by a society which has shown
itself incapable of giving its most deprived
members a chance to overcome their
handicaps.
These young people show a growing
disaffection for school many of them do
not know how to read or write. After the
age of fourteen none of them continues in
school: the boys, at a loose end, become
great "consumers" of television pro¬
grammes, cassettes, and motor cycles, while
the girls are kept busy with household jobs
or looking after younger brothers and
sisters. To all intents and purposes they take
no part in the activities of the youth centres,
cultural associations and other organiza¬
tions serving the general community which
they regard as expressions of the dominant
culture.
When these young Gypsies are asked
about their plans for the future, the boys
answer "I want to pass my driving test" and
"travel", while the girls say they want to
"leave the family" and "get married".
These replies are indicative of the strong in¬
fluence still exercised by tradition, and a
desire to perpetuate tradition through
"family travel".
Indeed most young Gypsies feel strongly
that they belong to a cultural minority
whose values are as important as those of
the non-Gypsy community. This leads to a
certain pride which expresses itself in a nar¬
cissistic concern for dress. But the Gypsy
identity to which these young people cling is
no longer the same as that of their elders.
Though the general framework remains the
same, and the way of life and even the
language are preserved, relations imposed
by the social policy and increasingly coer¬
cive regulations of the dominant society in¬
evitably introduce alien elements. This
onslaught of contradictory influences
alienates them increasingly from their own
culture with the result that they are drawn
towards other underprivileged groups with
which it is possible to organize exchanges or
to become integrated.
Does this mean, as some people main¬
tain, that we are witnessing the last flicker-
ings of the Gypsies' centuries-old resistance
to assimilation? It may be so, unless we suc¬
ceed in finding a meeting place between the
two cultures, a way of reconciling two dif¬
ferent worlds, before the gap becomes too
wide to bridge.
Present trends which encourage par¬
ticularisms of all kinds and the publicity
given to statements by minority groups
have given rise to cultural demands such as
the rehabilitation of regional languages,
festivals and traditional costumes. As far as
the Gypsies are concerned, the growing
number of people of Gypsy origin showing
an interest in their past and their language,
as well as the large number of publications
on the Gypsy question and the interventions
of certain Gypsies in the press, on radio
and in public life in generalall this in¬
dicates beyond a shadow of a doubt that
"something is happening". Morever, the
growing number of social and cultural
associations created by the Gypsies
themselves is another example of the revival
of Gypsy self-awareness.
Associations with a political colouring,
such as the International Gypsy Commit¬
tee, are older still. It is not surprising that
the Gypsies should choose an international
context to try to acquire a more precise legal
status. Their main characteristic, mobility,
puts them in an uncertain position with
regard to national legislations, and they
have come to realize that an international
framework can enable them to assert their
rights and put an end to discrimination.
The meetings of the "Romano Con-
gresso" held during the last few years have
reasserted Romany identity, recalled the
Gypsies' Indian origin and called for the ex¬
tension to Gypsies of all the benefits of
social progress. Less well known is the at¬
tention being paid to the Gypsy community
by a number of international organizations.
The recommendation on the social situation
of nomads adopted by the Council of
Europe in 1975 is beginning to be widely
known and to serve as a legal basis for the
Gypsies' claims. Both the United Nations
and Unesco have also shown great interest
in the cultural and social problems of the
Gypsies and nomadic peoples.
"... the Gypsy identity to which these
young people cling Is no longer the same
as that of their elders..."
The Gypsies also believe in acting in¬
dependently. Some, striving to establish
their own means of cultural expression, are
challenging their rejection by the dominant
community and calling for equality and
justice. Others are searching for their
historical roots; one of their projects is to
raise monuments in memory of the victims
of Nazi persecution: For the Gypsies the
past lives on in the present. Centuries of op¬
pression have left their mark, and all too
often relations between them and non-
Gypsies are coloured by suspicion. The
Gypsies cannot forget; we must try to
understand them and establish a new
dialogue.
JACQUELINE CHARLEMAGNE, of France,
has devoted many years to the study of the
legal status of Gypsies in France. She is a
member of the French Centre de Recherches
Tsiganes (Centre for Gypsy Research) and of
the Union Nationale des Institutions Sociales
d'Action pour les Tsiganes (National Federa¬
tion of Institutions for Social Action for Gyp¬
sies), and a contributor to the magazine
Etudes Tsiganes (Gypsy Studies). Her book
Populations Nomades et Pauvreté (Nomad
Populations and Poverty), published this year,
is an analysis of the isolation and marginaliza-
tion experienced today by Gypsy families in
the European Economic Community.
" *^> "SES e3=sfeáíS6^
