What next?
A world panorama of back-up materials for new literates
by Adama Ouane
ONE of the basic problems involved
in the process of bringing people
to literacy is the production,
acquisition and proper utilization of
pedagogical material. This may be
printed matter or material based on the
modern communications media (radio,
television, audiovisual systems), or it
may be traditional (theatre, folklore,
various games and similar activities).
Some countries have also developed a
variety of structures to provide easier ac¬
cess to pedagogical materials (such as
libraries, exhibitions, fairs), or other
methods of helping the greatest number,
of people to draw the fullest possible
benefit from these materials (listening to
programmes in groups, study circles, ac-'
tivity groups).
Printed material can be divided into
two categories textbooks and other
reading manuals; and rural newspapers
and wall-magazines. The first category is
of particular concern to the developing
countries. The aim is to prevent regres¬
sion into illiteracy, to motivate the newly-
literate and to inculcate the habit of
reading, as well as to produce a sufficient
quantity of. reading matter on subjects
which meet their needs, tastes and
interests.
ADAMA OUANE, Malian specialist in
linguistics, is currently engaged on research at
the Unesco Institute for Education, Hamburg
(Fed. Rep. of Germany). Formerly assistant
director-general of the national directorate for
functional literacy and linguistics at Bamako,
he is the author of several studies and articles
mainly concerned with the use of national
languages in literacy campaigns.
12
Attractive reading materials must be available for the newly literate if
they are to maintain and develop their hard-won skills. In the Ivory
Coast, above, the visit of the mobile library or "bibliobus" with its
stock of publications in vernacular languages is an exciting event in
the life of the community.
The content of this material varies
widely. Some reading manuals are
graduated and structured to meet the
needs of various classes and levels. This
is particularly true of countries where
literacy programmes have been given a
distinctly academic orientation and
where links have been established bet¬
ween literacy programmes and out-of-
school education and the official educa¬
tion system. This is the case in Cuba and
Venezuela. It is also true for the com¬
plementary education programme in the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and the
part-time schools of the People's
Republic of China, two programmes
which are in effect parallel education
systems designed basically for rural
populations, workers and executives of
various levels. Their purpose is to provide
a second chance of acquiring an educa¬
tion for those who dropped out of the for¬
mal school system at an early age.
Complementary reading material is
vital to this strategy. In 1980 alone,
China produced 4,600 million copies of
21,000 publications for readers in rural
areas, but only a small proportion of this

torrent of reading matter was destined
for the newly-literate.
The United Republic of Tanzania has
produced a series of texts, graduated at
four levels of difficulty, for the newly-
literate, but these differ from and are in¬
dependent of the levels established in the
formal school system. The aim is to pro¬
vide manuals of increasing levels of dif¬
ficulty for some five million people of
whom about one million attend post-
literacy classes. There is a teacher's
guide to go with each type of manual.
Traditional oral literature, systematically
collected and transcribed, occupies an
important place in these reading
manuals.
Following the broad lines of its
education-for-development strategy, In¬
donesia has launched a vast
"Employment-oriented Learning Pro¬
gramme" and has set up a co-ordinated
out-of-school education programme
under the aegis of the Community Educa¬
tion Authority. In 1 977, the Authority in¬
itiated a new, detailed and all-embracing
literacy programme. The teaching
materials consist of a hundred innovative
publications containing basic teaching
and information concerning every aspect
of daily life and aimed at those who left
school early or never had the opportunity
of attending school.
In Brazil, the pedagogical material used
in the mass literacy campaign MOBRAL
(Movimento Brasiliero de Alfabetizaçao)
is known as "literature on a string",
because the manuals used are suspend¬
ed on strings from the walls of the in¬
struction centres. Most of these
manuals, prepared by specialists and put
into easily-read form appropriate for new
literates by professional writers, deal
with such subjects as agriculture, public
health matters and locally-used
technologies.
In Mali, the output of post-literacy
pedagogical materials is very varied.
Manuals are produced jointly by the Na¬
tional Functional Literacy and Applied
Linguistics Authority, other development
organizations and, where appropriate,
certain technical services, including
those concerned with public health,
agriculture, co-operation and water and
forest resources. In these manuals oral
tradition and local tales are given pride of
place.
Countries differ considerably in the
way in which they produce these reading
materials. In one group of countries,
among them notably the French-
speaking countries, they are produced in
a rather informal manner with a small
number of books being produced on a
series of specific subjects. The new
literates themselves take part in their
production, at times carrying out such
technical tasks as making roneo copies.
These manuals are not generally intend¬
ed for use in formal education and they
allow of a certain flexibility and in¬
dependence in the teaching method
adopted. In other countries reading
materials for the newly-literate form an
integral part of carefully developed post-
literacy courses. Although the contents
allow for individual use, they are clearly
intended to be taught, and this is why
these manuals are usually accompanied
by teachers' guides.
Two other methods of production are
widely used in Africa and Asia. They con¬
sist of collecting the abundant heritage
of traditional oral literature and of
writers' workshops which are organized
Below, an Indian health educator uses an illustrated wall-chart with ex¬
planatory texts when telling a village mother about the nutritious qualities
of leafy vegetables and fruits. Collaboration between writers and specialists
in such fields as health, agriculture and women's education is widely en¬
couraged in the production of educational materials for literacy and post-
literacy work.
in a variety of ways, ranging from gather¬
ings of writers to produce texts to more
or less formal on-the-job training ses¬
sions for editors. Most countries try to
seek out, encourage and stimulate in¬
dividual talent or collective creativity by
organizing regular literary competitions
for which prizes are awarded. In India, for
example, more than 800 works have
already been rewarded in this way.
In most multilingual African and Asian
countries, where the language used
within the family and in normal social life
is rarely the same as that used by the ad¬
ministration or in the official education
system, achieving literacy, generally in
the local language, means not only ac¬
quiring a means of communication but
also the adoption of new means of ex¬
pression. These languages often have
only recently been given a written form.
Becoming literate means making the leap
from an oral tradition, with all its specific
attributes, to the written word, with all
its inherent modes of perception and
thought.
It is easy, therefore, to understand the
persistent efforts which certain coun¬
tries make to maintain an economic,
social and cultural climate favourable to
the use of the written word. The aim is to
immerse new literates in an environment
in which they must permanently face the
challenge of the written word. The provi¬
sion of written material, however ag¬
gressive it may be, is not enough to
create this challenge; the newly-literate
must be involved in activities of a com¬
plexity such that they cannot fall back on
memory alone and are obliged to turn to
written communication.
Rural newspapers are both an impor¬
tant source of reading material and a
means of communication accessible to
the newly-literate and their value as a
vehicle for the spread of basic knowledge
and as an answer to the urgent need for
simple reading matter able to reflect the
many aspects of foreign and local news
has been quickly recognized.
In some countries, such as Upper
Volta, Indonesia, Mali and Senegal,
newspapers are produced only at na¬
tional level. Niger, on the other hand, has
developed a truly decentralized rural
press ranging from the national organ
Gangaa to regional publications such as
Jine Koy Yan.
In India, where some 8,000 weekly or
monthly newspapers are produced in
rural areas for the rural populations,
bulletins and monthly publications are
produced sporadically for the newly-
literate and those with limited reading
experience.
Wall-newspapers often meet the need
for a community newspaper. In many
villages a wall is painted black so that
news and information of interest to the
villagers can be chalked up. In Mozam¬
bique and in Thailand the central
blackboard, situated in the main square
of the village, black-painted walls or wall-
newspapers are-used for educative pur¬
poses and to inform new literates about
international, national and local events.
13

Printing methods are often rather
modest. One method which is catching
on is the use of the linograph for printing
village newspapers. This method is most
widely used in Niger where village
newspapers, which form the basis of the
rural press, are produced by the new
literates themselves. Aided by local
literacy instructors they form the
editorial committee and undertake every
stage in the production process from the
manufacture of the necessary materials
to the writing of articles.
Libraries also play an important role in
literacy campaigns. The distribution of
reading materials seems often to be an
almost insurmountable problem and the
rural library, whether well or poorly
stocked, permanently located or mobile,
is a vital instrument in post-literacy
follow-up. Each of the 2,000 districts of
the United Republic of Tanzania has at
least one rural library. At present there
are 2,781 rural libraries in all out of a
planned total of 8,000 to cover all the
villages in the country.
Although in India there is widespread
interest in village libraries, their impor¬
tance to the post-literacy strategy varies
from State to State. Many libraries fulfil
other cultural and social functions in ad¬
dition to providing reading facilities. They
also aid post-literacy follow-up by acting
as a meeting place for clubs, discussion
groups and radio listening circles.
Many of these libraries are mobile and
can be transferred from place to place by
bicycle, on horseback or in a librarian's
knapsack, by truck or by canoe. But the
stock available to these libraries rarely
exceeds a thousand books. As well as
this shortage of stock there is another
drawback; the books available tend to be
on "useful" subjects aimed at continuing
the learning process or the application of
knowledge to the solution of immediate
practical problems rather than the epics,
novels or other light reading that some in¬
quiries suggest new literates would
prefer to read.
However, the real problem is not one of
libraries or the way they function, the
quality of the materials or the service
given, but the lack of publications in the
languages used in literacy campaigns.
Many countries have therefore examined
the possibilities offered by the use of the
modern mass media to promote educa¬
tion and to consolidate the use of the
written word, bearing in mind that these
media should be used as a complement
to and in conjunction with printed
matter.
In Cuba a vast programme of post-
literacy follow-up, standardization of at¬
tainment levels and other links has been
initiated to enable the newly-literate
emerging from the mass literacy cam¬
paigns to become integrated into the
country's formal education system.
Radio and television have been given the
vital task of ensuring the continuing
education of workers and peasants and
are also being used to raise the
pedagogical and methodological levels of
thousands of non-professional teachers.
In Venezuela the most important
educational television programme, Fe y
Alegría (Faith and Joy), is conducted by
the Catholic Radiophonie Institute. This
programme reaches four of the country's
largest cities and there are plans to ex¬
tend it to reach others. It consists of four
courses at different levels and is aimed at
illiterates and those who have not com¬
pleted their primary education. Radio
programmes have also been integrated
into this system of tele-instruction.
In Brazil the MOBRAL literacy move¬
ment uses television, radio, films and
other modern technologies for its lifelong
education programme and other post-
literacy follow-up strategies. Among
these programmes mention should be
made of the Community Health Educa¬
tion Programme, which is broadcast by
300 radio stations in twenty-five States
and three Territories, and the Ap¬
propriate Technologies Programme,
which demonstrates by exhibitions,
radio and above all television the way in
which various techniques are invented
and applied in order to provide practical,
readily available solutions to the daily
problems facing the most disadvantaged
sections of the population.
Since it is impossible with these new
methods of communication to limit
reception to an individual or a specific
group, such as the newly-literate, some
countries are trying to organize the target
audiences more effectively by grouping
them around receivers that have been
given free of charge/for a nominal sum or
sold in the normal way to radio clubs and
listening and viewing groups. The objec¬
tive is to prolong, to channel and to
enhance the impact of a broadcast by en¬
suring that it is heard by those whom it
most concerns.
In the United Republic of Tanzania
7,000 radio receivers have been
distributed free of charge to listening
groups. In Mali there are 1 ,444 organized
listening groups, each with its own radio
receiver. In Upper Volta radio clubs have
been established for educational pur¬
poses at literacy centres where collective
listening sessions are organized.
In Latin America, and in Brazil, Cuba
and Venezuela in particular, classes by
radio offer an alternative method of entry
into the formal education system thanks
to the establishment of levels of
equivalence and the award of certificates
and diplomas to listeners who have pass¬
ed examinations in their subjects.
The pedagogical effectiveness of radio
and television can only be enhanced by
progress now being made in telematics
and video-recording. The paths that are
being opened up before us offer new op¬
portunities, unequal though these may
still be. It must be stressed that if the ob¬
jective is to create a climate favourable to
an interaction between education and
practical action, a strategy relating solely
to the provision of literacy materials will
not be enough. The objective can only be
attained by the combined application of
several strategies.
Adama Ouane
Children wait for the lesson to begin at an open-air school cinema in southern Morocco. Film, radio and TV are
being imaginatively used in many countries today to support and supplement more traditional methods of com¬
batting illiteracy.
14
J-i.
