The originality
THE great Peruvian writer José Maria
Arguedas asserted that "the popular
indigenous art of Peru is the purest
expression of the personality of the indigenous
Peruvian peoples, their creative genius and
their finest artistic traditions. Moreover, this art
in all its forms and varieties proves in a most in¬
teresting manner how the indigenous peoples
absorbed elements of Western culture, and
how those elements have been transformed
and adapted to the nature of our cultures".
The fusion with Spanish culture produced a
form of art that was particularly rich in Mexico
and Peru. This is because the most important
viceroyalties of the continent were established
MANUEL CHECA SOLARI is a Peruvian art
collector. His articles on Peruvian "high" art
and folk art have appeared in a number of pub¬
lications in Peru and Chile.
in those two countriesin the heartlands of the
two great empires of the Aztecs and the
Incaswhich had a centuries-old tradition of
craftsmanship. This tradition was rooted in the
old indigenous cultures and these were enrich¬
ed by the Spanish contribution.
In Peru the conquerors encountered a
number of different ethnic groups who had sur¬
vived within the Inca empire. For peoples who
had no knowledge of the wheel, the introduc¬
tion of the potter's wheel by the Spaniards
meant a revolution. It enabled local artists to
create new techniques and to produce works of
extraordinary beauty.
The rich quality of Peruvian handicrafts was
maintained during the early centuries of the
conquest, and was revealed in all its splendour
at the end of the eighteenth and beginning of
the nineteenth centuries. The Spanish element
was by then very diluted. It is at this'period that
we encounter the principal, or at least the best-
Small Peruvian retablo or
miniature "altar-piece" (each
side of the panel measures 13
cm) depicting a village
celebration beside a giant cac¬
tus.- Musicians are shown in
the background. Figures in
foreground are 3 cm high.
known, product of Peruvian craftsmanship
the "Pucará bull". As a symbol of strength and
courage the bull was, and still is, typically
Spanish, but it was adopted by indigenous
craftsmen and is now one of the most important
forms of popular art in Latin America.
As we know, the principal animals to be
found in the Andes in pre-Columbian times
were the llama, the vicuña, the alpaca and the
guanaco. Although these animals continued to
be modelled in a variety of materials, the figure
of the bull, which initially had a ceremonial
An engraved mate or gourd
(diameter 11 cm). A
popular celebration in a
public square Is depicted
in the detail shown here.
Musicians can be seen in
the midst of the crowd.
32

of Peruvian popular art by Manuel Checa Solari
significance, began to be established as
typically Peruvian. The "Pucará bull", which is
both ornamental and utilitarian, is provided
with a handle in the form of a ring on its back,
and is commonly used as a flower vase. Its
strong, vigorous appearance Is more sug¬
gestive of an ox. It is made of earthenware.in a
great variety of sizes and is always painted in
white and ochre, with a lock of hair on the
forehead and a kind of dewlap In the form of a
plait or garland, coloured green. The "Pucará
bull" is also manufactured in Quinua.
Equally well-known in Latin America are
retablos or miniature "altar-pieces". They
originated in the city of Ayacucho and are
made in the altiplano. They are inspired by
Spanish altar-pieces, and the treatment clearly
reveals a cultural and artistic fusion. They
usually depict religious scenes containing a
large number of figuresthe Bethlehem crib,
Christ's entry into Jerusalem, the Way of the
This "three-dimensional
painting ' ' of the square at Cuz¬
co is a variant of the retablos
produced by the folk artists of
Ayacucho, Peru. The sky is
painted on wood. The houses
with their corners and
balconies are of stucco, and
the human figures, like those
in the retablos, are made of a
mixture of plaster and cooked
potato and are painted and
varnished when dry.
Cross and processions with the Virgin. The
figures, which are sometimes no more than 1 or
2 centimetres high, reveal remarkable creative
and imaginative powers. They are made from a
mixture of plaster and the flour from boiled
potatoes, are painted and given a protective
coating of colourless enamel. But the subjects
depicted in these light wooden cases are not
always religious. Bullfights and cockfights are
also frequently represented, as are ingenious
and sometimes humorous models of hat
shops, grocery stores, taverns and other
places of popular fréquentation.
Another typical example of Peruvian crafts¬
manship is the so-called mate burilado. This is
a dried pumpkin decorated with a multitude of
human figures and a profusion of geometrical
patterns. Some mates burilados may possibly
tell a story, true or imaginary, but on account of
their circular form and the decoration without
beginning or end any attempt at interpretation
would be like trying to solve a riddle:
As can be easily imagined, technical ad¬
vances, like the oven in the case of the
"Pucará bulls", and greater commercialization
due to the growth of tourism, have somewhat
impaired the original purity, beauty, Ingenuity
and magic of popular art.
This decorated earthen¬
ware "Pucará bull" from
Peru stands just under 1 1
cm high.
33
