Brasilia: 'the capita
of hope'
by Briane Elisabeth Panitz Bica
NEXT year will mark the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the inauguration of
Brasilia and the twenty-eighth of
the beginning of its construction. This is not
a long time in the life of a city, but Brasilia's
presence in the history of Brazil goes back
more than a century. The idea of transfer¬
ring the capital to the central plateau was
first suggested in 1817, when José
Bonifacio de Andrade e Silva, known as the
"father of Brazilian independence", pro¬
posed what are now its permanent site and
name. From then on, the proposal was
periodically repeated, until it was finally
adopted by Juscelino Kubitschek during the
1956 Presidential election campaign.
As the most extensive and complete ap¬
plication of the principles of modern city
planning, Brasilia has made its own con¬
tribution to the history of urban develop¬
ment. It had its origins in an act of reason,
without any roots in Brazil's urban past,
without any link with the land on which it
was created. Each line traced on paper by
Lucio Costa, the pupil of Le Corbusier who
conceived Brasilia, was transformed into an
avenue traced by a tractor across the coun¬
tryside. The meeting of the two axes, "The
first act of someone who takes possession
of a site by tracing a cross on it", gave form
to the city "the capital of hope" towards
which flocked, from every corner of the
country, all those who, by participating in
the epic of its construction, were embarking
on the creation of a "new Brazil" which
would make their dreams of a better life
come true.
BRIANE ELISABETH PANITZ BICA is a
Brazilian architect who is actively involved in
the restoration and conservation of her coun¬
try's urban environment. She is currently co¬
ordinator of a working group for the preserva¬
tion of the Environmental and Cultural
Heritage of Brazil.
Through a dynamic of its own, the con¬
struction process of Brasilia adapted itself
to the future site. On the one hand there is
official Brasilia, seat of the central Govern¬
ment, and on the other its satellite towns
designed to house the mass of the less
privileged citizens. The former now has
300,000 inhabitants, and the seven satellite
towns have a total population of one
million, forming an aggregate which, by
reason of its size and urbanizing influence,
has overflowed towards the municipal cen¬
tres of the neighbouring States and has led
to the complex officially known as the Geo-
economic Region of Brasilia. The principles
of city planning applied in Brasilia have
also influenced the configuration of new
towns in other parts of Brazil and in other
countries.
While the city has been experiencing a
process of consolidation a sharp debate has
been going on between Brasilia's defenders
and its critics. Some point to its advantages
compared with other great cities the com¬
fort of living in its supermanzanas (com¬
plexes consisting of six-storey buildings,
shops, schools, a patio, church and a
spacious green area, situated along the ma¬
jor highway axis), the vast panoramic view
with a diaphanous sky and clouds forming
a backdrop to the plateau, the absence of
atmospheric, sonic and visual pollution, the
spacious green areas, the free flow of traffic
and ease of parking. Others criticize the
logic whiclj the city imposes on its in¬
habitants and point out its defects: an ex¬
cessive division of the city's activities into
different topographical sectors; the gigan¬
tism which predominates even in residential
districts; the long distances between
buildings which make it difficult for
pedestrians to get about the city, lead to an
excessive use of cars, and bring an element
of remoteness to personal relations; the
divisions of the city caused by high-speed
Memorial monument to
Juscelino Kubitschek, the
President of Brazil who took
the decision to build Brasilia
on the central Brazilian
plateau and designated it as
the nation's capital In 1960.
One of the reasons for the
creation of Brasilia may be
found in these words of
Juscelino Kubitschek: "Our
country, the fifth largest in the
world, has immense fertile
lands as empty as the Sahara,
while millions of Brazilians
cling to the crowded
shoreline."
motorways; the famous "lack of corners"
due to the fact that buildings are scattered
in such a way that there are no angles form¬
ed by street intersections; and the excessive
social stratification caused by the high cost
of living in Brasilia.
Apart from the pros and cons there can
be no doubt about the exceptional character
and quality of Brasilia as an achievement of
urban planning and architecture involving a
synthesis between the rationalistic ap¬
proach adopted by Lucio Costa and the ex¬
uberant architecture of Oscar Niemeyer,
who designed the most important buildings.
Brasilia is also notable for the fact that so
far it has succeeded in preserving its integ¬
rity almost completely in spite of dif¬
ficulties and the not always peaceful coex¬
istence between the interests of the federal
administration, for which the city was
created, and those of the local authorities
responsible for its functioning.
Brasilia's size and dynamism, together
with its- unity and physical homogeneity,
are a matter of surprise for visitors,
especially students of the urban process,
who find themselves in a laboratory where
theories which have been discussed all over
CONTINUED PAGE 28

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 21
the world have been given practical
expression.
Notwithstanding its uniqueness and the
careful attention paid to its conservation,
certain developments in Brasilia are causing
concern. The increase in land values in a
city with strictly defined physical limits is
leading to pressures that are difficult to
control by an administration which lacks
the necessary legal and procedural in¬
struments. There is no regulatory plan or
building code, and no clear-cut decision has
been taken to treat Brasilia as part of
Brazil's cultural heritage. As a result, cer¬
tain criteria laid down in Lucio Costa's pro¬
ject have not been observed, leading, for in¬
stance, to the grant of permits to increase
the height of buildings in certain parts of
the city and to build on land unsuited for
construction, and to the enlargement of
parking sites and changes in the highway
system.
On the other hand the city's inhabitants,
who come from the most varied and distant
parts of Brazil, are now beginning to exer¬
cise their civil rights as they come to form a
large, solidly established population, unlike
those residents who have no permanent
links with the city and move with each
change in the Federal Government.
Moreover, this fusion of cultures has been
followed by the emergence of the first
generation of Brasilia-born citizens, who
are full of enthusiasm for their city.
' Today, thirty years after it was founded,
it is clear that Brasilia must review the ways
in which it functions. Economic and social
conditionsTiave changed, and above all oil
is no longer a cheap source of energy. Ex¬
perience has also shown that excessive "sec-
torization" has not brought any real
benefits for the functioning of the city.
These are important problems and impor¬
tant measures are needed to solve them.
Since 1981 the Federal Government, the
Government of the Federal District and
Brasilia University have been trying jointly
to cope with this situation while at the same
time safeguarding the essential character of
the city. They are engaged in a unique
pioneering undertaking to find new ways of
preserving a city that is still developing and
that was envisaged as a model and synthesis
of Brazilian culture by Aloisio Magalhaes,
the man who inspired it.
The successful integration of Brasilia into
its natural environment required detailed
analysis, since the quality of the views from
the city to the horizon and to Lake Paraná
and, conversely, of the views of the city as
a whole from various observation points
depends on the quality of land use manage¬
ment. The exceptional location of the
Federal District must also be taken into ac¬
count. Affluents of three major
hydrographie basins of South America con¬
verge on this small territory, bringing
geomorphological evidence of their plant
and animal life, whose presence in the
Federal District must be preserved intact as
a source of information about the conti¬
nent's physical evolution.
Dominated by the sixteen
40-metre-high concrete pillars
of the cathedral of Brasilia, a
concrete disc provides
welcome shade from the
noonday sun.
Finally, the purpose of the Pilot Plan for
Brasilia is to determine which features
safeguard the city's character and which
tend to weaken it, in order that the former
may be strengthened and the latter cor¬
rected. A number of different procedures
have been used. Surveys have, for example,
been carried out among the resident
population in order to discover how they
see and use their city, and their criteria have
been compared with analyses made in the
field by specialists; models have been
prepared for visibility tests; a surveyor's
study has been made of the evolution of the
city since the original project was prepared;
documents dating from the time when the
city was built have been analysed. From
these and other undertakings a picture will
emerge to provide a basis for plans to
preserve the city's character.
This major operation will lead to a Plan
for the Protection of the Historical and
Cultural Heritage of Brasilia, which will in¬
clude legal norms and procedural guidelines
which, if adopted, will provide the Federal
Government, the State authorities and the
Federal District Government with the
technical means to protect and improve the
essential spirit of Brasilia.
The challenge made by Aloisio
Magalhaes must be translated into reality
and inspire the authorities, and generate a
continuing conservation process which
must not, however, stifle the evolution of a
city which is still far from having acquired
its final form. Brasilia today is at a
crossroads. It must choose between preserv¬
ing and strengthening its individuality or,
like so many cities which lack a character of
their own, become depersonalized. It would
be a pity if it were to abandon its undeniable
role as a heritage for the future. The deci¬
sion rests with its citizens and with the
authorities.
Briane Elisabeth Panitz Bica
Housing in this residential
district of Brasilia contrasts
sharply with the bold
"futuristic" architecture of
the public buildings in the cen¬
tre of the city, whose popula¬
tion has risen to 300,000 in 24
years. A million more persons
live in seven satellite towns.
