mß
SS
V

Where is Gypsy truth?
From as far back as I remember
I have roamed the world with my tent,
In search of love and affection
Justice and fortune.
I have aged with life,
I have not found true love,
I have not heard the just word.
Where is Gypsy truth?
Rasim Sedjic
V*



The sharing, caring family
by Rosa Taikon Janush
Left, visa check for Gypsies of Italian
origin leaving Sweden on their way to
France,
Above, Gypsy tent in the snows of
Sweden.
IN the early 1960s, my sister Katarina
Taikon and I set out, with the aid of
our husbands, Björn Langhammer
and Bernd Janush, to change the attitude of
society towards the Gypsy people which in
Sweden as elsewhere has been relegated to a
ghetto on the edge of society, without ac¬
cess to schooling or housing and deprived
of any kind of social security.
No one ever asked us why the Gypsy
people has always lived on the fringe of
society nor how this way of life has affected
the structure of the Gypsy family. Like
ostriches people buried their heads in the
sand. They did not want to see or hear; they
did not want to face the facts. It is so much
simpler and so much easier on the con¬
science to believe that the Gypsy people
consists of the "picturesque" survivors of a
nation that specialists who are no more than
charlatans dare to criticize with rash
judgments and prejudices, using such ex¬
pressions as "They don't want to live in
houses", "They must be as free as birds" or
"They are always happy, singing and
acting".
In point of fact, the conditions in which
the Gypsies live and their need to protect
themselves in an aggressive environment
have shaped the structure of the Gypsy
family. In her book Ziganare är vi ("We are
Gypsies") Katarina Taikon has written:
"From Greece, the Gypsies spread into dif¬
ferent parts of Europe. Some went to the
north, towards Moldavia and Wallachia,
which formed part of Romania, but many
were reduced to slavery... This slavery
lasted until the middle of the nineteenth
century. In 1845 the sale of 200 Gypsy
families belonging to a Romanian boyar
19

was advertised in the Bucharest
newspapers. In 1851 a list was published in
an official Moldavian newspaper giving the
names and description of 94 men, 85
women, 86 boys and 84 girls of 'Gypsy race'
who had been the property of the late
minister Alecu Sturdza and were actually
advertised as being for sale with a part of
his furniture".
Katarina Taikon goes on to draw up a
long list of the repressive measures taken
against the Gypsy people all over Europe,
from the fifteenth to the twentieth century.
When these atrocities are described to those
who bury their heads in the sand, they say,
"very well, but all that happened a long
time ago. What does it matter to Gypsies to¬
day?" I do not claim to belong to "history"
yet, but I should like to cite a passage from
the same book which refers to an official
survey dating from 1926, the year in which
I was born.
"In a report published in 1926, we find a
reference to 'the need to adopt effective
measures against the Gypsies.' The authors
of the report intended these measures to
'create special homes for the education of
the children of Gypsies'. 'According to the
law these children should be put in these
homes at a very early age and be brought up
according to the norms of society'."
You do not need to be a psychologist to
understand how such atrocities have af¬
fected a whole people. Since families were
bound up together, their survival depended
on the internal solidarity of the group and
the more the group was crushed by society
the more it had to strengthen its bonds.
The Gypsy people were forced to protect
themselves; they were compelled to
establish their own society within society
and to issue verbally their own laws and
moral rules which must be applied to the
letter.
We Gypsy children were taught to obey
our elders and to rely on them; their word
was our law. Since we were excluded from
schools and educational institutions, we
depended entirely on the knowledge they
could transmit to us. They applied to the ut¬
most of their ability the theories of Plato
"when they stressed the significance of
education in preserving society", although
they were illiterate themselves and had
never been to school. As for myself, I never
went to school until I was thirty-three years
old although I was born in Sweden and am
a Swedish citizen.
The principle of sharing which is follow¬
ed by Gypsies in their camps is the only
authentic form of democracy that I have
ever come across. The money earned by the
different members of the camp was shared
out equally without any reference to the
work each person had done. If a man fell ill
and could not work, he continued to receive
the same share as the others and his family
was taken care of. A family consisted not
only of father, mother, and children, it
might also include the elder sister or brother
of one of the parents, and the family assum¬
ed responsibility for them.
Often in a family, the maternal or pater¬
nal grandmother looked after the children
and these children were never left alone.
Her task was very important because she
had to bring up the child while its parents
were out working. If there were grown-up
Many Gypsies continue to exercise their
traditional crafts whilst making use of
modern tools and techniques. Above,
designs for Jewellery; top photo, a silver
belt buckle being worked by the author of
this article, Rosa Taikon Janush.
daughters in a family, the eldest had to
marry first since the family would have felt
dishonoured if she continued to live at
home.
The parents arranged the marriage of
young people. The father of a young man
would ask for the hand of the girl. The wed¬
ding would take place a few days later, for
kinsfolk and friends sometimes had to
come from far afield to attend the wedding.
The women vied with each other in prepar¬
ing the best meal. The guests were entertain¬
ed by the best singers and dancers. The
father of the bridegroom symbolically gave
a sum of money to obtain the bride, a prac¬
tice which was not exclusive to Gypsy socie¬
ty. The bride also had to be "pure", that is
virgin, and her purity had to be confirmed
by one of the oldest women of the camp
who, after the wedding night, inspected the
bed-sheets for "evidence" that the young
woman had been pure. When this rite had
been performed, a feast began that was as
important as the wedding itself.
Many non-Gypsies have asked us why
women should marry so young. This
custom, which still exists in India, is based
on a moral principle. Once marriageable
the girl will marry only once and she will
have to live with her husband all her life.
When young people get married, they live
with the parents of the bridegroom, for they
are still young and need practical and moral
advice and support. (Today it is often the
young people who choose their partners
themselves, and marriages may even be
dissolved).
When a child is born in the camp, no one
is admitted into the mother's tent or
caravan except her husband and the old
women. The mother is considered to be im¬
pure during the two weeks following the
birth of the child. She has her own dishes,
her own linen, her own washbasin, and her
own sheets. After the two weeks, all the ob¬
jects the woman has used are thrown away.
Many of these customs were simply a
product of the Gypsies' instinct for self-
preservation and their practical common
sense. The woman and her child had to be
presented to all who were living in the camp
and ran the risk of catching a disease.
Neither hospitals nör doctors took care of
Gypsies in the past and so it was very impor¬
tant for the woman to be protected by these
traditions.
When an elder fell ill and was at death's
door, everyone gathered to bid him
farewell, and above all to receive his bless¬
ing, as prescribed by Gypsy religion. Today
this custom may create problems for doc¬
tors and hospital staff when a member of a
Gypsy clan is hospitalized. Our traditions
lay down that one member of each family
must be present to receive this blessing but
as a rule there are usually ten members pre¬
sent from each family.
Unfortunately it is to be feared that the
price the Gypsies may have to pay in order
to live in more decent conditions, with ac¬
cess to housing, schooling and other forms
of education will be the loss of their many
fine traditions which are tending to disap¬
pear as young people adopt modern ideas
and laws instead of the conventions of their
own society. Nevertheless, the esteem, the
respect and the consideration shown to our
elders cannot disappear for they are the
core of our education.
In conclusion I should like to add that the
terrible injustices of which the Gypsies have
for centuries been the victims, with the
result that my generation and those which
preceded it were deprived of all civil rights,
might have continued in our country if,
around 1960, Katarina Taikon had not
decided to combat prejudice and racism in
all its forms. She wrote books and countless
newspaper articles, approached prime
ministers, the Government, Parliament and
all the political parties.
But it is hard to stamp out prejudices
from adult minds, and so Katarina decided
to speak to children instead. She wrote the
Katitzi stories to help young people to
understand a minority more fully. But she
paid dearly for her work for human rights
and was laid low with a heart attack. Since
1982 she has been in a coma.
Nevertheless, the great work she ac¬
complished in the last twenty years and the
sympathy she has shown to all, whether or
not they belong to her own people, will live
on in the Katitzi stories which have been
translated and read by children in many
countries.
Perhaps it will be possible that, thanks to
Katarina, the Gypsy people will become
better integrated into society and enrich it
by its art and culture.
ROSA TAIKON JANUSH was born in
Sweden into a family of Gypsy silversmiths.
Admitted for the first time to an educational
institution at the age of 33, she continued her
education at the Stockholm school of in¬
dustrial art and learned the craft of a modern
"sedentary metal engraver". Continuing the
family tradition of craftsmanship, she works
as a silversmith at Ytterhogdal, Sweden.
20
