Is crime
a universal concept?
by Henri Laborit
WHAT is culture? Is a "culti¬
vated" person more, or less like¬
ly, to become a criminal? Al¬
though any definition of a word limits, nar¬
rows and fossilizes its semantic content, I
would be inclined to define culture as the
sum total of the commonplaces, prejudices,
value judgments and conceptual auto¬
matisms to be found in a human group oc¬
cupying a particular place at a certain
period, and accumulated by experience in
the course of its history.
The fact is that a human group in a par¬
ticular geo-climatic area creates a set of
relationships between the individuals who
compose it, although it is unaware of the
many factors that enter into this creative
process. These relationships are achieved
through language and behaviour patterns
belonging to the group in question and
which in turn are conditioned by the geo-
climatic area in which they occur. These
relationships become institutionalized in
written laws, customs and concepts which
reflect automatisms that have been learned,
transmitted and reproduced from one
generation to the next.
A criminal is someone who transgresses
these laws. This amounts to saying that he
who is a criminal in one place will not
necessarily be one elsewhere. The criminal
is defined by the cultural code of behaviour.
In one place, the individual who expresses
opinions at variance with the State's
ideology is regarded as psychotic and
perverse and is locked up and treated with
drugs, whereas elsewhere the individual
whose behaviour does not conform to the
idea of property is regarded as delinquent
and perverse and is subjected to the same
kind of treatment. The only difference is in
the code and the scale of values.
Now, it is interesting to note that legally
the criminal is someone who attacks per¬
sons, but also goods, and that persons are
themselves generally regarded as goods or
private property.
HENRI LABORIT, French biologist and
essayist, is director of the Laboratoire
d'Eutonologie (the study of the overall
equilibrium of the human organism) at the
Boucicaut Hospital, Paris. Awarded the
American Public Health Association's Albert
Lasker prize for his contribution to research in
biology and chemotherapy, he is the editor of
the international magazine Aggressologie and
the author of some 20 books, some for the
specialist on basic research and others for a
wider lay audience, the latter including his
most recent work La Colombe Assassinée
(The Murdered Dove), 1983.
"Amongst animals (...) the dominating being no longer has occasion to be aggressive
and violent as long as his dominant status is not contested, because the dominated par¬
ties will have learned to their cost the rules of behaviour which must not be broken; they
will, as it were, have learned the 'culture' of the group or species. The hierarchies of
domination amongst men have been based on the same laws since the beginning of the
neolithic age." Above, head of an animal, probably a bear, from the lid of a clay vase
dating from the late Bronze Age in Hungary (2200-2100 BC). It was discovered near
Tiszafüred, in eastern Hungary.
The idea of property is never called into
question. It is accepted as forming part of
man's "essence", and this is done without
any attempts to ascertain its historical or
geographical origins or to consider what
mechanism in man's nervous system has
made it possible for the idea of property to
be given expression. And yet, certain
societies and "cultures" have never known
property and even today there are still a few
which are capable of ignoring it. It can be
proved by experiment that the idea of pro-^
25

perty is not innate or instinctive, but is
learnt. Indeed if it were instinctive, must
man not "control his instincts"? Perhaps,
but only if the latter are harmful to the iden¬
tity and cohesion of the group, in other
words if they do not conform to the code of
behaviour institutionalized by the domi¬
nant element.
It would take too long here to examine
the biological laws, complex but capable of
simplification, which regulate the activity
of a human nervous system in a social situa¬
tion. Suffice it to say that the sole function
of a nervous system is to permit action and
that, in man, thought only enables action to
be made more effective. A nervous system
thus permits an individual to control his liv¬
ing conditions in the space surrounding
him. If this space were empty, action would
be unnecessary. But it contains objects and
living beings, and an organism's contact
with these will be favourable or un¬
favourable to what may be called (with
great caution) the maintenance of its
biological "equilibrium". The sole raison
d'être of a being is to be, otherwise there
would be no beings. Therefore he learns
very quickly from experience that contact
with some of these objects and beings is
gratifying and that contact with others is
painful, dangerous and harmful to his well-
being. He will remember this experience
and will try to reproduce the gratifying ex¬
perience, whereas he will avoid disagreeable
experience or, if he cannot, will try to
destroy its cause. But if, within the same
space, another individual of the same
species who has himself had the same ex¬
perience wishes to enjoy the same objects
and the same beings, both of them will say
"they are mine" and a contest will take
place between them for the desired objects
or beings. Amongst animals, the stronger
one, or the one born of a dominant female,
will be more likely to assert his domination
and to seize the gratifying good.
The hierarchical scales of ascendancy will .
be established on this theme, which we have
presented in an extremely simplified form,
for it has many different modalities. The
dominating being will no longer have occa¬
sion to be aggressive and violent as long as
his dominant status is not contested,
because the dominated parties will have
learned to their cost the rules of behaviour
which must not be broken; they will have,
as it were, learned the "culture" of the
group or species.
"The concept of personal or group
ownership of gratifying goods,
which according to many
prehistorians arose about 6000
BC, was accompanied by the
emergence of criminality between
individuals and States, in other
words, war." Right, Cain Kills Abel
(1511), woodcut by Albrecht
Durer (1471-1538).
Photo © All Rights Reserved. National Gallery;
Melbourne
The hierarchies of domination amongst
men have been based on the same laws since
the beginning of the neolithic age, when
they settled on the land and agriculture and
animal husbandry enabled them to avoid
famine and, by laying up reserves of
beneficial goodsgrains and live
animals to have no further fears for their
immediate biological welfare. Then came
vocational specialization, and urban socie¬
ty, a more complex body than the primitive
clan, made its appearance. This transfor¬
mation took place over thousands of years
during which human groups that were
technically less developed but were compos¬
ed of hunters still skilled in the use of arms,
colonized these neolithic groups in order to
benefit from their technical advances.
The population growth resulting from
this "economic" evolution induced these
groups, which had become hierarchically
organized (chief, warriors, craftsmen,
farmers) to sally forth and conquer ter¬
ritories elsewhere which might increase
their resources. The concept of personal or
group ownership of gratifying goods, which
according to many prehistorians arose at
this stage of the history of man, i.e. about
6000 BC, was accompanied by the
emergence of criminality between in¬
dividuals and States, in other words, war.
Whenever the basic motivation is the im¬
mediate survival of the group in a hostile
environment, co-operation is more essential
than crime.
The human brain gave special features to
the creation of hierarchies and to the means
of establishing forms of domination.
Owing to certain associative cortical zones,
only the human species was capable of
associating previous experiences in an
original manner in an "imagined" context
and therefore of producing working
hypotheses and creating new forms by
transforming, first of all matter, then, more
recently, energy. Thus the species was able
to protect itself with ever greater efficacy
through a progressively better under¬
standing of the laws governing the in¬
animate world.
26

Photo © Roger Viollet, Paris. Royal Library, Windsor
"The essential means of establishing relations of domination amongst peoples was the
discovery of the principal laws governing the inanimate world, which led to the produc¬
tion of greater quantities and varieties of marketable goods and of more efficient arms
to conquer new territories for exploitation." Above, drawing by Leonardo da Vinci
(1452-1519) of a cannon being mounted on a gun carriage in a foundry yard.
"From the very beginning
men were plunged into an in¬
comprehensible, fearful world
for which they had no rules of
action. They have made
remarkable efforts to in¬
troduce some form of
coherent order into it, which
have resulted in the discovery
of fire and of the atom." Left,
Homo nuclearis, cartoon by
Oak.
Drawing Oak © Encre Libre, Paris
Spoken language, followed by writing,
both of which also resulted from the
phylogenic evolution of this "imagining"
brain, enabled the generations to transmit
their experiences in time and to accumulate
them, very slowly at the outset, then in an
ever more rapid and sophisticated manner,
up to the point where our modern means of
communication shrink time and therefore
also space.
"Cultures" were established and evolved
at the same speed as that of technical pro¬
gress. It was the latter that enabled
marketable goods to be created which could
be exchanged with other human groups at
ever greater distances in space. The essen¬
tial means of establishing relations of
domination amongst peoples was the
discovery of the principal laws governing
the inanimate world, which led to the pro¬
duction of greater quantities and varieties
of marketable goods and of more efficient
arms to conquer new territories for
exploitation.
At the group level, the aristocratic power
of the warrior was replaced by that of the
bourgeois who controlled the means of pro¬
duction and trade, which in turn gave way
to that of the technocrat who invents pro¬
ductive machinery and of the bureaucrat
who manages production relations.
Thus the means may have changed, but
the objective remains the same the
establishment of dominant positions in
order to obtain beneficial goods, of which
the ideal image which the individual forms
of himself is not the least. Only in the
physical sciences has progress been achiev¬
ed. As far as the living world, especially the
world that lives within us, is concerned, we
have not evolved since the beginning of the
neolithic period. Biology, especially that of
our nervous system, which expresses itself
in our modes of behaviour, is only in its
infancy.
During all this time, men were speaking.
From the very beginning they were plunged
into an incomprehensible, fearful world,
for they had no rules of action. They have
made remarkable efforts to introduce some
form of coherent order into it. Convinced
that they were subjects apart in this world
because of what they called their "reflective
conscience" and their belief in their liberty,
in order to hide the anxiety caused by lack
of information and which frustrated effec¬
tive action, they had to invent the laws and
rules which dictate their actions. These were
the myths, religions, moralities and State
laws.
Henceforth, since they no longer had to
ask themselves what they should do, their
anxiety was partly hidden. Nevertheless it
continued to be a fundamental anxiety, not
for their liberty which existed only in their
imagination but which validated respon¬
sibility, but rather anxiety due to their ig¬
norance, especially when confronted with
death.
Thus "cultures", infinite in variety and
number, fulfilled only one function in their
attempts to become established in
languages to co-ordinate the actions of in¬
dividuals within a human group, in other
words, to give permanent form to the struc¬
ture of the group. We have already shown
how and why, since neolithic times, in the
27

world's temperate zones, this structure had
always been a hierarchical structure of
domination. Nevertheless language was a
splendid means of communication and
therefore a remarkable means of action. By
and through language we could influence
the action of others in favour of our gratify¬
ing projects. Through language, inhibitions
to action could be dealt with, the anxiety
resulting from such inhibitions could be
eliminated and a biological equilibrium
established. As a result, that aggressiveness
between individuals, which is the only
resort open to those who cannot make
themselves heard, diminished.
If therefore, as world statistics show,
criminality between individuals has declin¬
ed considerably in recent centuries, con¬
trary to whafthe mass media try to make us
believe, it is perhaps because literacy and
the use of language have become so
generalized that, as the French sociologist
Jean-Michel Bessette has been able to
demonstrate on the basis of reliable
statistics, crime is now confined to those
who are incapable of expressing themselves,
or who can only give inadequate expression
to what they have to say.
But, whereas language is a means of ac¬
tion for the individual, for the social group
it is most frequently a pretext for violence.
Logical discourse has always provided
"good" reasons to defend a "good" cause
by war, genocide and torture. Language has
always made it possible to justify raison
d'état. When we pass from the inter-
individual level of organization to that of
the State, the purpose of language changes.
Now this intangible abstract structure
called the State is merely the legalized in¬
stitutionalization of the hierarchical rela¬
tionships of domination between the in¬
dividuals who compose it. The individual
may not infringe certain pre-established
rules in order to commit a murder, whereas
the State has every right to kill, either within
the group in order to preserve the rules
establishing the hierarchies of domination,
or outside it, against another State trying to
establish its domination over it or over
which it seeks to establish its own
domination.
Thus it seems that it is not culture or
criminality and the relationships between
them that should be studied, but the finality
of the social groups and the central nervous
mechanisms which enable individuals to
establish relationships between each other,
the establishment of forms of domination
in terms of this finality.
Probably the readiness with which the
mass media report interindividual crimes is
merely a response to the needs of States to
have their own crimes forgotten and to
create a state of anxiety which thrusts the
"citizen" into their arms. These arms are
the army and the police which protect per¬
sons and property according to a set of rules
that form the distinguishing features of a
"culture". The latter is always the culture
of the dominant elements, that is to say of
those who submit to the finality of the
system because they benefit from it.
The immigrant problem is an example.
Whenever their labour is needed to produce
goods, because machines have not yet com¬
pletely replaced man in his most "ther¬
modynamic" activities, they are welcome.
But when machines are invented which can
perform these mechanical tasks and this
leads to increased unemployment, these im¬
migrants take away from the citizen the re¬
maining mechanical tasks. They deprive
him of the benefit of remunerated work.
They must be got rid of. The cultural shock
which is often invoked thus seems to be
secondary.
Are our immigrants more criminally in¬
clined than we, the "natives", are? They
would seem to have every reason to be so
their inability to make full use of the same
language and therefore to influence others
through it, the fact that it is impossible for
them to have an ideal image of themselves
which could vie with that of the natives even
when the latter are at the bottom of the
social ladder and the resultant subjection,
not to laws or to a "culture", but primarily
to a form of domination that is reflected in
the native's attitude of exclusion and con¬
tempt. In a period of economic crisis, the
immigrant becomes a scapegoatsome¬
body has to be found outside the social
group, "somebody else", who can be made
responsible for its misfortunes.
As far as the number of victims is con¬
cerned, there is no comparison between
casual crimes and road accidents. The latter
are regarded as normal and, as it were,
"healthy", because they are a result of
economic development. It is the former
which receive attention, because they
enable individual members of the group to
see themselves as belonging to a chosen race
or elite. By banishing the criminal into
outer darkness, they ensure the cohesion of
the group through the flattering image
which each member of it has of himself
because he belongs to the group. As the
French author Fernand Gregh wrote,
"There are no wicked, there are only those
who suffer".
The innumerable factors of suffering in
the case of the criminal can all be put down
to a single biological lawthe inhibition of
his gratifying action. We think we have pro¬
duced sufficient experimental proofs in re¬
cent years that this reality embraces the
whole of pathology including that of
behaviour. Violence amongst individuals is
the violence of those who are not heard,
whose voice is lost in the background noise
of the socio-culture, those for whom the
ultimate form of violence may be suicide,
which is tolerated by the social group
because its forces usually arrive too late to
prevent it and it does not compromise the
cohesion of the group. But to prove this
statement our study must begin with the
molecule and end at the level of the species.
In fact, every expert who has studied
violence and described its "causes" has
done so only at the level of organization
covered by his speciality. The politician, the
economist, the sociologist, the an¬
thropologist, the psychologist, the
psychiatrist, the philosopher and in more
recent times the ethologist, the
behaviourist, the neuro-physiologist and
the biochemist have all provided excellent
explanatory reasons in an outmoded system
of linear causality. It is high time for these
studies to be combined into a coherent
"system" according to inclusive and in¬
cluded levels of organization, which must
have regard to the essential instrument of
expression of violence, namely, the human
nervous system, and to what we already
know about its biochemical, anatomical
and functional structure wherever this
structure is placed in a social situation. We
must even take the history of our species in¬
to consideration in our efforts to under¬
stand the problem. We must also avoid any
facile solution based on innateness, on an
"essence" of man, on instincts which are
always available, depending on the ideology
which inspires the speaker (i.e. the express¬
ion of the unconscious automatized in a
"culture") to serve as an alibi for State
violence or as an excuse or condemnation of
individual violence.
But in our opinion it is essential not to
mix the levels of organization. Each level
has its own structure which should not be
superimposed by analogy on to the over¬
lying or underlying level. Above all, the
structural and functional links which con¬
nect them must be identified, care being
taken not to turn words into tangible ob¬
jects. One can touch one's father, one's
brother, one's friends, but one cannot
touch the family, the State, the mother
country, because they are not things but
abstract concepts which personify a
structure.
Now a structure consists of all the rela¬
tionships existing between the elements of a
whole, and a relationship cannot be touch¬
ed. It is neither matter nor energy, it is in¬
formation which is given a form. Thus, a
nation may be understood as a structure or
a set of relationships uniting the individuals
who live in a given geoclimatic space and
who in the course of time have invented a
"culture", that is a language and a form of
behaviour which are effective within this
space. But instead of allowing this
"regional" structure to decide for itself
what type of economic, political and
cultural relationships it wants to have with
the encompassing system (regional self-
sufficiency is no longer conceivable
nowadays) why inflict upon it the rules of
behaviour of the encompassing system, the
State which, as we have already said, is the
expression of a hierarchical structure of
aristocratic, theocratic, bourgeois,
technocratic or bureaucratic domination?
Why teach black children that their
ancestors were the Gauls when the Bretons
are being forbidden to use Breton?
It does seem that one must be profoundly
regionalist in order to be truly interna¬
tionalist and a citizen of the world, just as
one must be profoundly individualist in
order to admit that one's neighbour is
different.
Henri Laborit
28
