SWITZE
A living film archive
by Freddy Buache
THE depositing of copies of films in
film archives should clearly be
subject to rules dictated by their
owners; the first implication of this is that
reels of film should not be allowed to leave
the premises of the institution. But it is
equally clear that the conservation of film
archives in total secrecy would lead to the
absurd situation in which, ultimately, no
one could claim to consult them for the pur¬
poses of historical research, and that ar¬
chivists would be acting as the guardians of
cemeteries, which is not their purpose.
Collecting works produced in the past
only makes sense if it is possible for contem¬
porary art to match itself against such
works with a view to preparing for the
future. A living film archive is thus a
meeting place where today's creators,
historians, theoreticians and students can
freely consult documents. Consequently it
is indispensable to provide them with easy
access to an accurate, detailed and com¬
prehensive catalogue. Access to the films
themselves should be under the constant
supervision of the staff responsible for the
archives.
The Cinémathèque Suisse has always
tried to reconcile, in a generous spirit of col¬
laboration, the requirements of research
students with respect for the wishes of
depositors. It takes steps to ensure that
there is never the slightest opportunity for
piracy, and gives an unqualified guarantee
FREDDY BUACHE, of Switzerland, is director
of the Swiss Cinémathèque. He is also the
supervising editor of a series of studies on film
history and theory published by L'Age
d'Homme publishers, Lausanne. He is the
author of studies on American cinema, Swiss
cinema, and Buñuel, which have been publish¬
ed in this series.
*^P^F**
mm
Pr?S»ir jaw -m?^
W m(m JLJbI Hol?' ^i
ail ft V 1 W JL1*"' _ . ^
to this effect to all who wish to entrust films
to it. It is proud to have regularly expanded
its activities for more than thirty-five years,
constantly improving its relations with pro¬
fessional circles without ever ceasing to play
its public service role. Our fundamental
task is to supervise the constitution (or
reconstitution) of the Swiss film heritage, a
priority field which makes a heavy claim on
our financial resources especially for mak¬
ing "safety negatives", drawing up a com¬
plete catalogue, and restoring films.
The Swiss actor Michel Simon in La Voca¬
tion d'André Carrel, the first film in his long
career. The film, made in 1925, was thought
to have disappeared, but the Swiss
Cinémathèque discovered a copy which was
in poor condition and had it restored. This is
an example of a film which belongs to a
private owner but which is nevertheless
preserved by a film archive.
LIFTING THE VEIL OF SECRECY
"M~yOR many years the film industry was hostile to collections
m~i of films, and the earliest film archives were constituted
JL independen tly offilm producers and often against their will,
in an attempt to stem the destruction of negatives and prints.
Catalogues of rescued films were kept secret so that holders of
rights would not exercise their rights and demand the restitution of
prints. Until I960 secrecy was the rule, and exchanges of informa¬
tion were limited to specific titles. Furthermore, the only catalogue
produced collectively in the International Federation of Film Ar¬
chives (FIAF) concerned silent films, for which sufficient historical
perspective seemed to have been achieved. A planned inventory of
talking films made between ¡929 and 1934 did not come out. The
files offilm archives remained shrouded in mystery.
But in the early 1960s one European archive, the Cinémathèque
Suisse, ventured to lift this veil ofsecrecy andpublished a complete
list of itsfeaturefilm holdings, whatever their origin. Nothing hap¬
pened; no claim or demand for restitution was made.
In the meantime, a new generation ofproducers, more interested
in the history of the cinema, had replaced the old tycoons and a
more trusting relationship had developed:
Many archivists have signed the deposit agreement proposed by
the International Federation of Film Producers Associations
(IFFPA);
Unless they have obtained express authorization to show them
elsewhere, they only show films on their own premises;
They help rights holders to trace prints and other materials;
As for the producers, who are today confronted with piracy,
they know that a copy held in afilm archive is protectedfrom illicit
exhibition. What once seemed to them a risk is now a safeguard.
Archivists now have nothing to fear if they circulate their files
and inventories. The old reflex for secrecy no longer has any
justification. A major obstacle has been removed.
29
