A touchstone
by Rafaralahy Bemananjara
THE island of Madagascar is a parti¬
cularly interesting example of a
"rice civilization". Known as vary
or vare, rice is the staple food of the island's
nine and a half million inhabitants and
holds pride of place in both their material
and spiritual life.
In the past, rice was one of the yardsticks
by reference to which the Malagasy situated
themselves in both time and space. The
basic unit employed in traditional systems
of measuring time was "the time it takes to
cook rice" (indray mahamasa-bary), a
period of between thirty minutes and one
hour, depending upon the fuel and the type
of cooking utensil used and the quantity of
rice cooked. The distance to a given place
would be described, for example, as being
"twice or three times the time it takes to
cook rice".
The growth cycle of rice was the
peasants' calendar. Sowing time, mamafy
ketsa, covered roughly the months of July



of time
and place
Winnowing rice near Antananarivo,
Madagascar. After the harvest the
sheaves ofrice are beaten against a stone
to separate the grain from the panicle, or
head. The grain Is then collected into
baskets. The winnowerplaces the basket
on his or her head and allows a stream of
grain to trickle through the outstretched
fingers of the hand; the husks and chaff
are blown away while the grains fall in a
heap on to a piece of matting.
and August, while the transplanting period,
manetsa vary, generally corresponded to
October and November. People commonly
spoke of events as occurring before, during
or after the mitera-bary (literally, "when
the rice gives birth"), that is, when the
grains of rice appeared, or mena vary, the
harvest period when the rice fields were
covered with a carpet of gold.
Rice also provided a standard for other
measurements, in particular large measures
of volume; the vary iray (literally, "a rice")
was roughly equivalent to 1.2 hectolitres,
and the most common measure, the
fahefabary or fahefany, was the equivalent
of half a dekalitre.
Composite names based on the word vary
(rice) were also used to designate units of
money. Shortly before the arrival of the
Europeans, and particularly during the first
tentative moves towards unification around
the end of the eighteenth century, markets
were established around the capital, An-
Wooden mortar from Majunga,
Madagascar, used for pounding rice.
Bamboo rice measure, 13.5 cm in height,
decorated with poker-work representa¬
tions of a horseman, a rowing-boat and a
palace. It comes from Fianarantsoa, a
large agricultural market-town on the
central plateau of Madagascar, to the
south of Antananarivo.
4 Towards the end of the 18th century in
Madagascar, foreign currency cut into
segments, like these pieces of silver
money found at Antananarivo, was used
as a means ofpayment. The value of each
segment depended upon its weight as
measured against the weight ofa grain of
rice. The smallest unit of currency was
the varifitoventy (the weight of seven
grains of rice).
36

tananarivo, and an attempt was made to
regularize exchange transactions. Foreign
currency cut into segments was used as a
means of payment, its value being deter¬
mined by weight. Here again the standard
adopted was a grain of rice. The variraiven-
ty ("a grain of rice") was the equivalent in
weight of the seven hundred and twentieth
part of a piastre and became the basis for
the denomination of monetary units. Thus
the smallest monetary unit used was the
varifitoventy (the weight of seven grains of
rice). The word variraiventy is still
employed but only in a particular negative
idiom tsy am-bariraiventy or tsy manam
bariraiventywhich mean, "without a
sou", or penniless.
The use of the word vary is not, however,
confined to quantifiable applications such
as measurements of time, place and weight,
and it often appears in idioms that express
value judgments on people or actions. To
express his appreciation of an act or gesture
a Malagasy would say: "That is truly rice
(vary) cooked in milk and topped with
honey", in other words, perfection itself,
the best the world has to offer.
One defect of ricethe fact that, when it
is fully grown, if it is blown over by the
wind it is unable to regain an upright
position was acknowledged by the
Malagasy of the past and is still embodied
in a popular expression. Someone who
gives rein to his vices is said to be "nivary
lavo" ("playing at fallen rice").
The single defect apart, the Malagasy see
many virtues in rice which they take as a
model on which to base their own conduct.
Rice itself is often personified. When the
stems swell, just before the heads form, the
rice is said to be "pregnant"; and when the
head breaks out, the rice is said to be "giv¬
ing birth". For the Malagasy, the growth
pattern of rice recalls that of man when
the heads first form, they stand erect with
the proud vigour of youth; they end by
bending under the weight of age and the
"fullness of years".
The symbiosis between rice and water has
always been taken as the symbol of undying
friendship or love: "May this friendship (or
love) be like that of rice and water; in the
fields they are always together and in the
house they are inseparable". Of marriage it
is said: "Love is like a young rice plant; if
it is not transplanted, it will never
blossom".
Many other popular sayings describe
human behaviour by reference to rice. Thus
to encourage each other to speak out at a
meeting, for example, people say: "Let us
be like rice, let everyone reveal what he has
in his heart".
During the long evenings around the fire,
rice is an inexhaustible source of discussion,
jokes and riddles such as this: "Of whom is
it true that you must take his life in order to
make him live the better?" Yes, you have
guessed it; the answer is the rice plant that
must be plucked from the seed bed to be
transplanted to the paddy field.
RAFARALAHY-BEMANANJARA, of
Madagascar, is head of his country's Institute
of Applied Linguistics. He has carried out
research into the problems of mother tongue
language teaching in Third World countries,
and has published a number of articles on the
development of African languages.
A versatile plant
Rice is one of the most adaptable
members of the plant kingdom. From its
original habitat in the hot, humid Tropics,
rice has spread throughout the world by
natural dispersal and human interven¬
tion. It is now cultivated in hot deserts
and in the cool climate ofhigh mountains.
In parts of Asia, Africa and Latin America
it is cultivated as a dry-land crop, while in
parts of Bangladesh, Burma, eastern In¬
dia, Thailand and Viet Nam floating rices
flourish in floodwaters that can be as
much as three metres deep. The two main
cultivated species are Oryza sativa, of
Asia, and Oryza glaberrima, of west
Africa. Archaeological data seem to show
that Oryza sativa ivas first domesticated
in Asia more than 7,000 years ago, and
that domestication of Oryza glaberrima in
Africa occurred somewhat later. It seems
probable that rice was cultivated in the
Niger basin around 1500 BC and in
Guinea about 400 years later; it is now
one of the principal crops cultivated in
the flood-plain areas of the Sokoto and
Niger basins. From top to bottom, trans¬
plantation of rice in Senegal, in France
and in Colombia.
'J
i
A
f
1
A
...A-'
..-":"*
âé\
"
1
««^.jifiiyMHiMÉMlÉtl
» -ter-** - Kj--- - > -, ''
1rs.
îndel©A.
l\ ^"TlV W VJ
HrrkpP*-
r \
'«S3 is>*|fiH
;
