The infinitelybig
by Dimitri V. Nanopoulos
Spiral nebula (M81), In Ursa Major.
UP to a few years ago, particle
physicists were mainly con¬
cerned with the structure of
matter and the fundamental laws of
nature at very small distances of the
order of 0.0000000000001 centimetres
(10"13) or smaller. At the same time,
astronomers and astrophysicists were
trying to understand the large-scale
structure of the Universe which involv¬
ed thinking in terms of distances
measured in light-years (the distance
that light, which travels at 300,000
kilometres per second, traverses in one
year). It is fair to say that the relations
between these two active branches of
physics were rather remote.
During the past few years, however,
the situation has changed dramatically;
the "Big Bang" theory of the origin of
the Universe (see article page 5) has
developed to the point where the first
fractions of a second of the birth of the
Universe have become the meeting
point of the infinitely big and the in¬
finitesimally small*.
In order to appreciate this point we
have to recall two fundamental prin¬
ciples of physics: first, that high
temperatures imply high energies for
the particles around; and second, ac¬
cording to the "Uncertainty Principle"
formulated by the famous German
physicist Werner Karl Heisenberg
(1901-1976) high energies are necessary
to probe very small distances.
* The layman tends to picture the Big Bang in
terms of a very dense lump of matter (which
scientists call a "singularity"), located in an in¬
finite void, suddenly exploding. Einstein,
however, has shown that both space and time
(which he called space-time) and matter were in¬
separable. The Big Bang, therefore, created not
just matter but space-time as well. There was
nothing, not even empty space, "outside"for the
Big Bang to explode into.
DIMITRI NANOPOULOS, of Greece, is a
specialist in theoretical particle physics and
cosmology and is a staff member of the
Theory Division of CERN (European Organiza¬
tion for Nuclear Research), Geneva. He is co¬
author of Grand Unification With and Without
Supersymmetry and Cosmological Implica¬
tions, to be published this year.
8
According to the Big Bang theory,
the very early Universe (say 10 35 of a
second after the Big Bang occurred)
was very hot, reaching temperatures
above 1028 degrees on the Kelvin (K)
scale. At these temperatures particles
had enough energy to interact at very
very small distances, say 1029 cen¬
timetres. Thus the very early Universe
acted like an enormous particle ac¬
celerator. Today, the fundamental con¬
stituents of matter are believed to be
quarks and leptons. Atoms, which at
one time were thought to be indivisible,
are made up of protons and neutrons
(known collectively as baryons) and
one member of the lepton family, the
electron; protons and neutrons are
made up of quarks.
These fundamental constituents of
matter interact with each other through
at least four fundamental forces: the
gravitational force, which, for in¬
stance, keeps the Earth going round the
Sun, the strong force, which keeps
quarks inside protons, the electro¬
magnetic force, that keeps the electron
going round the atomic nucleus, and
the weakforce, responsible for neutron
disintegration, otherwise known as
Beta-decay.
During the past few years, the world
of particle physics has enjoyed enor¬
mous progress towards simplification
and deeper understanding. Indeed, it
now seems that all the observed fun¬
damental interactions between these
various forces may well be simply dif
ferent faces of a single basic interaction
explicable by a basic unified theory.
Because we live in a Universe of large
distances (or low energy levels) it is dif¬
ficult for us to recognize this basic sym¬
metry at first glance; things look very
diverse. Yet as we examine shorter and
shorter distances (or higher and higher
energy levels), the diversity diminishes
and the symmetry becomes more ap¬
parent. The analogy of ice, water and
steam may help here. As we increase
the temperature and pass from ice to
water, particles possess more and more
freedom to move around and thus the
system increases its symmetry, which is
further increased when we pass from
water to steam.
The idea of unification is not new.
Einstein himself spent the last thirty
years of his life unsuccessfully at¬
tempting to formulate a simple,
definitive theory that would explain the
existence of all matter, all energy and
all the forces of the Universe. Right up
to his death, in 1955, Einstein con¬
tinued working to establish unity bet¬
ween the forces of gravity and of
electromagnetism.
It was, however, in the small-scale
realm of sub-atomic particles that the
next advance towards unification was
to be made. This is a world ruled by the
weakforce, which causes certain forms
of radioactive decay, and the strong
force, which holds quarks imprisoned
in protons and neutrons.

and the infinitesimally small
A hydrogen atom
The first step, the unification bet¬
ween electromagnetic and weak in¬
teractions, was first envisaged
theoretically in the 1960s and then pro¬
ven experimentally, only last year, in
the giant accelerator at CERN (The
European Organization for Nuclear
Research), in Geneva, with the
discovery of particles, named simply W
and Z particles, that carry the weak
force.
Because of similarities between the
mathematical formulae describing the
strong and the weak forces, physicists
began to suspect that they might both
be breakaways from a single unified
force that existed at the very earliest
phase of the Big Bang.
The next step in the unification pro¬
gramme therefore would be to explain
how the strong force fits into the pic¬
ture, and this is what is being attempted
in current theories known as "Grand
Unified Theories" (GUTs). The final
stage in the unification programme will
be to include gravity, but this need not
concern us here.
According to Grand Unified
Theories, the strong forces should
unite with weak forces at enormously
higher energies, around 1024 electron
volts. But although we now have at our
disposal particle accelerators which
enable us to probe the weak forces, it
would be impossible ever to get ac¬
celerators powerful enough to probe
the strong forces. So we have to be
smarter and look for indirect evidence
for grand unification.
Certain characteristics of GUTs are
very relevant to the early universe. One
of the most dramatic consequences of
GUTs is that they imply the instability
of matter. Whereas, prior to the
development of GUTs, protons, and
thus atoms and thus matter, were con¬
sidered to be absolutely stable, GUT in¬
teractions imply the decay of the pro¬
ton, just as weak interactions cause the
decay of the neutron. Eventually, it
seems, all the matter in the Universe as
we know it will be destroyed.
However, while the free neutron
lifetime is about fifteen minutes, the
proton lifetime is longer than 1030
years which is long enough to avoid im¬
mediate panic if we recall that the pre¬
sent age of the universe is merely 1010
years. For the first time "eternity" has
been given a quantitative measure of
the order of 1030 years. Experiments
are now being made to verify this for¬
midable GUT consequence.
What has all this intricate detail
about the world of sub-atomic particles
to do with cosmology? There is enough
experimental evidence to convince us
that standard Big Bang cosmological
theory may reflect' something close to
reality. Nevertheless, there are fun¬
damental unanswered questions within
Big Bang cosmology- _Why is the
Universe so homogeneous and
isotropic (the same everywhere and ex¬
panding uniformly in all directions)?
à M
- çi,VS«;i,*"'V3
w^áfáSí?'*^' '~nß$A
»^f
Why does the Universe, despite its
rather old age (1010 years), possess
such high mean energy density? Why is
it that there seems to exist much more
matter than anti-matter? How are the
density fluctuations created that even¬
tually act as seeds for the formation of
galaxies and other structures observed
in the Universe? A lot of these ques¬
tions are finding satisfactory answers
in grand unified theories.
In the first fiery instant of the Big
Bang the Universe was superhot and
superdense and a single unified force
prevailed. But, as it was expanding, it
cooled down and became less and less
dense, and, in a process called "sym¬
metry breaking", the single unified
force began to fragment.
It is reasonable to assume that, after
the Big Bang, all kinds of particles were
interacting frenetically with each other
in a state of what is called thermal
equilibrium. Given this "soup" of par¬
ticles, and assuming that grand unified
theories correctly describe their inter¬
actions, can we build up a picture
which corresponds to the observable
Universe? The answer is a cautious yes.
As the Universe expanded and cool¬
ed further it eventually reached what
physicists call the GUT transition
phase where the strong and weak forces
The principal tool used by physicists to
probe the secrets of the world of the In¬
finitesimally small Is the particle ac¬
celerator, or "atom smasher". Atom
smashers are huge machines In which
atomic particles are accelerated to fan¬
tastic speeds and made to collide with
other particles so that physicists can ex¬
amine the resulting sub-atomic debris. It
was In the atom smasher at CERN (the
European Organization for Atomic
Research), in Geneva, until last year the
world's most powerful accelerator in
which beams ofprotons and anti-protons
can be made to collide with a total energy
of 540 thousand million volts, that the W
and Z particles which carry the weak
force (see article) were recently
discovered. Left, aerial view of the
3,050-metre-long linear particle ac¬
celerator at Stanford, California.

Cosmic asymmetry
The fundamental constituents of matter
come in matched pairs. For every particle
there is an anti-particle of identical mass
but with a different electrical charge.
This symmetry between particles and
anti-particles, which meets the re¬
quirements of both the theory of relati¬
vity and of quantum physics, has been
fully verified experimentally. High-
energy collisions Induced in particle ac¬
celerators seem always to yield particles
and anti-particles (matter and anti¬
matter) in equal quantities. When we
move away from the laboratory,
however, we never seem to encounter
anti-matter. Our world is made of atoms
consisting of protons, neutrons and elec¬
trons, but never of their anti-particles.
Recent findings in cosmology and parti¬
cle physics, which have given rise to the
new Grand Unified Theories (see article),
offer an explanation of how this asym¬
metry between matter and anti-matter
came about. Above, diagram (1)
represents the universe at 10~3S of a se-
o
. °
o
û o
o o * . o
o
o
0 _ . o
"i c
j o
o a o o
° o
o
o
i
I
0 .
o o
O o ,
, o °
. o o
o ° * '
o . °
o
o
o
o
o <
o
o o
o o
(1) (2)
cond after the Big Bang. At this stage
there is symmetry between the
superheavy "X" particles (black dots)
produced by ultra-high energy collisions,
and their anti-particles (black circles).
Diagram (2) shows the universe from
10"34 to 10~4 of a second after the Big
Bang. Here the "X" particles have
decayed into less massive particles in a
manner that results in a minute im-
(3)
balance between protons (red dots) and
anti-protons (red circles). Diagram (3)
represents the universe from 10~3 of a
second after the Big Bang to the present.
Each encounter of a proton and an anti-
proton has led to the annihilation of both
and only the excess protons (one per
thousand million) remain. To this minute
imbalance we owe all the galaxies, stars,
planets and creatures of the universe.
split and grand unification was no
longer apparent. This happened when
the Universe was about 1035 of a
second old and had a temperature of
KFK.
This is a period of fundamental
cosmological importance since during
this transition phase a period of
supercooling the Universe experienc¬
ed a brief, hyper-explosive spurt of ex¬
ponential growth, a period in which the
Universe expanded at a very much
faster rate than during any other phase.
The advantage of this "inflationary
scenario" as it is called is that this sud¬
den, brief period of extremely rapid ex¬
pansion of the Universe provides a
solution to the problem of how parts of
the Universe, which would otherwise
have been too far apart to be in causal
contact with each other come to have
similar temperatures. Our large
Universe is very uniform because it has
been inflated from a tiny uniform seed.
The inflationary model solves the
problem of the high average energy
density of the Universe as well as pro¬
viding the correct form, qualitatively
and quantitatively, of the energy densi¬
ty perturbations needed for galaxy
formation.
The inflationary model also provides
the answer to another crucial problem.
How is it that more matter than anti¬
matter was produced from the Big
Bang?
Grand unified theories predict the
existence at the very high temperatures
of the very early phases of the Big Bang
of superheavy "X particles" which
decay into less massive particles and, in
so doing can produce an unequal mix-
10
ture of matter (baryons) and anti¬
matter (anti-baryons). At a time just
lO35 seconds after the Big Bang the
temperature had fallen to a level at
which no further X particles could be
made and a slight asymmetry (one un¬
paired baryon per thousand million
baryon/anti-baryon pairs) was locked
forever into the expanding Universe.
This small excess of matter over anti¬
matter the afterthought of creation
was sufficient to produce all the stars in
all the galaxies and all the atoms in our
own bodies. It is rather interesting that
the same forces that are responsible for
the creation of the world (matter/anti¬
matter asymmetry) are driving it to its
extinction (proton decay and thus mat¬
ter instability). That is the fate of our
Universe self-destruction .
Eventually the Universe left the GUT
transition phase and began to expand
and cool down at a slower, more con¬
ventional rate.
At this stage the particle physicists
step aside, leaving it to the astro¬
physicists to tell the story of how heavy
elements, stars, planets and galaxies
are made. Nevertheless, in journeying
further and further back towards the
Big Bang and probing more deeply into
the world of the infinitesimally small,
particle physicists are offering
astrophysicists a basis for a logical,
coherent explanation of the structure
of the Universe. Never before in the
history of physics has the symbiosis
between the infinitesimally small (the
microcosmos) and the infinitely big
(the macrocosmos) been happier or
more fruitful.
Dimltri V. Nanopoulos
