No science without fiction
by Alexander Kazantsev
SCIENCE fiction has its own rules.
Concerned as it is with the new
frontiers of science, it portrays
the latest scientific achievements and
sometimes even produces ideas which
science can exploit; for the role of
science fiction is not only to distract
and entertain, but to announce the
future, to foresee new scientific and
technical achievements, to prompt and
predict them.
Ivan Efremov, the eminent Soviet
scientist and science fiction writer, and
author of many famous novels and
tales, describes in his short story, A
Shadow of the Past (1945) how, when
old bare rocks were illuminated in a
certain way, a lifelike three-
dimensional image of a gigantic
dinosaur appeared. This caused a
public sensation, and in particular ex¬
cited the curiosity of Yuri Denisyuk, a
young scientist who is now a correspon¬
ding member of the Soviet Academy of
Sciences. According to him, it led to
discoveries in the field of holography
(see Unesco Courier, March 1981).
In the 1950s Soviet geologists
discovered diamonds in Yakutia exact¬
ly as Ivan Efremov had described in his
story The Pipe ofDiamonds (1945). As
a scientist Efremov was able to
substantiate his hypothesis concerning
the location of the diamond deposit,
and as an artist he showed how it could
be discovered.
There is no end to the scientific and
technical predictions of Jules Verne.
One has only to recall his Nautilus. Up
to a hundred of his "fantastic"
forecasts subsequently came true.
H.G. Wells, in the War of the
Worlds, and Alexei N. Tolstoy, in his
Hyperboloid of the Engineer Garin an¬
ticipated the invention of the laser
beam, which now promises unheard of
advances in science and technology
but also has unprecedented destructive
capacities.
Colour page
La Chute d'Icare (The Fall
of Icarus), by Marc
Chagall. Oil on canvas,
1974. Although modern
man has mastered the
skills of flight in powerful
machines, his dream of
flying under his own
power, like a bird, is a
persistent and alluring
myth.
Photo © Musée National d'Art Moderne.
Centre Georges Pompidou, Parts. ADAGP,
1984
In his story, Professor Dowell's
Head (1925) the Soviet science fiction
writer Alexander Bieliayev foretold the
possibility of transplanting human
organs. Several decades later the Soviet
scientist Sergei S. Bryuchonienko
amazed the world when he grafted the
head of one dog onto the trunk of
another. Now organ transplants take
place every other day. The world was
fascinated by the pioneering heart
transplants performed by Professor
Christiaan Barnard. Nowadays such
operations have become, if not com¬
monplace, at least frequent.
Alexander Bieliayev foretold
anabiosis (suspended animation) in his
story Neither Life nor Death (1926).
Another Soviet writer, Yuri Dolgushin,
was the first to evoke the possibility of
restoring the dying to life in his
Generator of Miracles (1939). Thus,
both these writers anticipated the now
well-known technique of reanimation.
A space-traveller sets out
for the kingdom of the
sun. Illustration from
Cyrano de Bergerac's
Histoire Comique des
Etats et des Empires du
Soleil.
13

A 4,500-year-old
terra-cotta statuette,
or Dogu, discovered
on the Japanese
Island of Hokkaido.
*&u^Sti
<
©
Right, this lidofa 1,300-year-old Mayan
sarcophagus, found in the Temple of
Inscriptions, Palenque, Mexico, Is seen
by writerErich Von Daniken as an Impor¬
tantpiece ofevidence for his theory that
ancient mythologies are really garbled
accounts of the doings of extra¬
terrestrial visitors to Earth. Parts of the
reproduction of the design on the sarco¬
phagus lid, as published by Von Dani¬
ken, are blacked out to enhance the
Impression of an astronaut In the semi-
reclining position adopted for rocket
take-off.
Ramses II offers wine to the Ibis-headed
ancient Egyptian divinity Thoth, patron
ofscience and of scribes. Carving from
the Great Temple of Abu Slmbel.
The doyen of American science fic¬
tion, Hugo Gernsback, described in his
novels the mechanism of a television set
at a time when such an invention was
not even thought of. He wrote about
many technical innovations which
subsequently became realities, as well
as atomic wars which are now threaten¬
ing all life on earth.
In one of his works written shortly
after the Second World War, the well-
known English science fiction writer
Arthur C. Clarke introduced the idea
of placing an artificial geostationary
satellite in orbit at an altitude of some
30,000 kilometres above the Earth,
which could be used for telecom¬
munications and the retransmission of
radio and television programmes.
Konstantin E. Tsiolkovsky's story
Beyond the Planet Earth, which was
published at the beginning of the cen¬
tury, contained so many scientifically
valid ideas that it provided a theoretical
basis for cosmonautics in both the
USSR and the USA.
But the most remarkable figure in
the domain of scientific forecasting is,
perhaps, that of Cyrano de Bergerac.
His Histoire Comique des Etats et Em¬
pires de la Lune and Histoire Comique
des Etats et Empires du Soleil, both
written over three hundred years ago,
are not only full of pungent wit but of
what his contemporaries regarded as
preposterous figments of a childlike
imagination. He proposed multi-stage
rockets for interplanetary flights,
spoke of weightlessness and parachute
descents, and claimed that the human
organism was composed of cells.
Moreover, several decades before
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek produced
his microscope and more than two cen¬
turies before the discoveries of Pasteur
and Mechnikov, on which the science
of microbiology is based, Cyrano de
Bergerac asserted the existence of
microbes in the blood and resistance to
them by antibodies. He designed lamps
in the form of luminous balloons (elec¬
tric bulbs?), extraordinary speaking
books attached to the ear and reciting
the text, starting with the chapter men¬
tally chosen by the hearer.
What is more, Cyrano assured his
readers that he had learned all these
things from the son of the Sun (an ex¬
traterrestrial?). He did not hesitate to
make this assertion at a time when the
burning of Giordano Bruno by the In¬
quisition for his heretical ideas about
14

EEf&V&ßkMRSsXiM
an infinite number of worlds in the
Universe was still fresh in men's minds.
As a scientist who has turned to
literature, I have devoted myself to
science fiction while continuing to be a
scientist and engineer. Some of the
ideas advanced by me several decades
ago are now being realized. For in¬
stance, that of using superconductivity
for the storage of energy (The Burning
Island, 1939) and of a floating sub¬
marine tunnel (The Arctic Bridge,
1941). At present no such tunnel passes
through the North Pole, but one is be¬
ing built by Japanese engineers bet¬
ween the islands of Honshu and Hok¬
kaido and, as we know, there is a pro¬
ject for a tunnel under the English
Channel.
In my story Explosion (1946) I put
forward the hypothesis that the enor¬
mous devastation over an area of 2,000
square kilometres in the Podkamen-
naya Tunguska river basin (Eastern
Siberia) in 1908 was not caused by a
falling meteorite but could have been
due to the crash of an extra-terrestrial
spaceship because of a breakdown. My
story excited the imaginations not only
of science fiction writers but also of
scientists, and although my hypothesis
is rejected by some people it also has its
supporters.
Palaeocosmonautics, which studies
the traces of contacts with extra¬
terrestrial beings in ancient times, at¬
tracts me as a science fiction writer not
only because of its romantic character,
but also because of its potential
demonstrability.
Certain scientists who have not
studied this question seriously never¬
theless maintain that there are no
proofs of actual extraterrestrial con¬
tacts in the past, and consequently they
consider it unethical to concern
themselves with this question. But this
is by no means correct. One has only to
consider the many arguments in sup¬
port of the hypothesis. True, there are
speculative "pseudo-proofs" with little
or no foundation, but genuine science
fiction is based exclusively on the pro¬
vability of the improbable.
The French scholar Henri Lhote
discovered at Tassili, in the Sahara, a
rock-drawing several thousands of
years old, which he jocularly named
"the great god Martian". A stone
sculpture of "the great god Martian"
dating from the same period was
discovered on the Japanese island of
Hokkaido, thousands of miles from
Africa. Nearby were uncovered a
number of terracotta statuettes or
dogu, which means "a loose overall
covering with hood" in other words,
what we would nowadays call a diver's
suit. Radiocarbon tests revealed that
they were 4,500 years old. This meant
that they had been made by the Ainu,
the predecessors of the Japanese.
But presumably their portraits were
not the only traces of themselves which
the visitors left behind. Legends and
traditions have survived. In Egypt, for
instance, the god Thoth was the patron
of science and scribes. Tradition has it
that he flew in from Sirius. According
to the ancient legends of the Dogons,
an African tribe of cattle-breeders, it
appears that Sirius was not a double
star, as was established in our time, but
a triple one. According to the Dogons,
the Universe emanated from a single
"egg", i.e. an atom which took part in
the original "Big Bang" a theory
subscribed to by many contemporary
astronomers. Does this not explain
why, in ancient Egypt, there was a
calendar linked to Sirius and its fifty-
year cycle or rotation period, and why
15

^^^^TZpHy**^.
s^rtb^e*"'**"^?^
Sketch taken from Exploration of Cosmic Space by Means of
Reaction Devices. 1 903
Original sketch of a space rocket by
Konstantin Eduardovich Tsiolkovsky
(1857-1935), the Soviet research scien¬
tist who pioneered the development of
rocket andspace research, published in
his major work on astronautics Explora¬
tion of Cosmic Space by Means of Reac¬
tion Devices (1903). The words in the
sketch read: above, "Liquid hydrogen",
below, "Liquid oxygen", right,
"Passengers".
references to certain principles of the
relativity theory as well as to the atomic
structure of matter and other facts of
contemporary knowledge, were
deciphered on the emerald tablets of
the god Thoth?
How can it be explained that the
masses of the pyramids of Cheops,
Chephren and Mycerinus have the
same inter-ratios as those of the planets
Earth, Venus and Mars? How can we
explain that the height of the pyramid
of Cheops is exactly a thousand million
times less (whatever unit of measure-
In 1908, a meteorite struck the earth near
Tunguska, in eastern Siberia, with an
impact energy equivalent to that of a
30-megaton H-bomb. The trunks of thou¬
sands of trees still lie today where they
fell toppled by the blast nearly eighty
years ago. In his story Explosion, the
author of this article speculated that the
disaster could equally well have been
caused by the crash of an extra¬
terrestrial spaceship; this theory has
aroused wide interest among science
fiction writers and scientists alike.
ment is used) than the average annual
distance between Earth and Sun? How
did the ancient Egyptians manage to
calculate these measurements without
the aid of optical instruments?
In the temple-pyramid of inscrip¬
tions of the Mayas in Mexico a sar¬
cophagus was found. The covering slab
bore the effigy of a man. His posture
resembled that of a cosmonaut at the
take-off of a rocket one foot placed
as if on a pedal and one hand as though
on an instrument panel. Some experts
in palaeocontacts think this Maya relief
depicts an apparatus of the rocket type.
When deciphered according to the
method of the Leningrad scientist Y.
Knorozov, the ornamentation proved
to consist of cosmic symbols.
Three masks were found in the sar¬
cophagus. They all had a common
characteristic the nose began above
the eyebrows. According to an¬
thropologists there is no ethnic group
in the world with this characteristic. In¬
cidentally, the Egyptian god Thoth
already mentioned was also called "the
big-nosed". There are representations
of him in the form of an ibis with a long
beak (nose!) starting above the
eyebrows. In ancient primitive
sculpture of Asian origin, humans are
also depicted with the nose starting
above the eyebrows. Does this not offer
food for speculation?
Long may speculation and fantasy
help to stimulate each one of us, for
man is the only creature gifted with im¬
agination and capable of conceiving
something which does not exist. His
mind can conquer time and space,
create things that never were, advance
the frontiers of science. There is no
science without fiction.
ALEXANDER KAZANTSEV, of the Soviet
Union, is one of the leading writers of science
fiction in the Russian language. The author of
a prize-winning scenario for the film Arenida,
his first novel, The Burning Island, ivas pub¬
lished in 1939. In 1981, he was awarded a
special prize by the Writers' Union of the Rus¬
sian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic for
his creative contribution to science fiction
over a period of forty-five years.
