A Portuguese^
slave-hunter.l
| Benin bronze]
m (1600).\
Photos © British Museum, London
The tom-tom warns
of the slaver's
approach.
Benin bronze
(1600).
The luckless
victims.
Photo © Almasy, Paris



The slave trade
by André Redros
THE Portuguese voyages of discovery,
and the encouragement given to negro
slave expeditions by Prince Henry the
Navigator (1394-1460), led to the introduction
of large numbers of black slaves from the west
coast of Africa into Spain and Portugal from the
early fifteenth century onwards. But it was the
discovery of the New World which really laun¬
ched the slave trade on a large scale. The
Spanish conquest, which started with San
Domingo (Hispaniola), soon extended to Porto
Rico, Jamaica and Cuba. The first slaves land¬
ed in the islands of the Caribbean were brought
from Spain and Portugal, but slaves were soon
being sent directly from the Guinea coast. They
were imported to work on the plantations and in
the copper mines.
On 12 February 1528 the first licence {asien¬
to) for regular trade in slaves was granted by
the King of Spain to Henry Ehinger and Jerome
Sayler, German citizens and agents of the
Weiser banking family who, with the Fuggers,
played a dominant role in the financial affairs of
Spain. Further asientos subsequently authoriz¬
ed Portuguese and Spanish traders to
transport slaves to the Caribbean from Seville,
Lisbon, the Canary Islands, the Cape Verde
Islands, Sao Tomé, Angola and Säo Jorge de
Mina.
This "legal" traffic did not prevent the
English and the Dutch from secretly supplying
black slaves to the Spanish colonists in San
Domingo and elsewhere in exchange for gold,
sugar and leather. The Spanish monopoly was
fairly broken after the rout of the Invincible Ar¬
mada in 1588 and the British occupation of
Jamaica. Sir Francis Drake and Sir John
Hawkins, the chief architects of the defeat of
the Armada, also became the prime movers in
the Company of Royal Adventurers, which was
founded with the approval and financial sup¬
port of Queen Elizabeth (1533-1603) and
engaged in the slave trade along the African
coast from Senegal as far as the river Gambia.
ANDRE KEDROS, is a Greek author who
writes in French. He has published a dozen
novels which have been translated into as
many languages and is also the author of a
History of the Greek Resistance (Robert Laf-
font publishers, Paris). Under the pseudonym
André Massepain he has published many
books for young children which have been
widely translated and have won a number of
awards.
30
The favourite refuge of these adventurers, who
were privateers and pirates rather than traders,
was the Caribbean island of Tortuga.
The Dutch in turn, having recovered their in¬
dependence at the end of the sixteenth century
and seized some of the Portuguese bases on
the African coast, entered the slave trade on a
large scale. Finally the French under Richelieu
and especially under Colbert, having occupied
the islands of Tortuga and San Domingo, seiz¬
ed their share of this very special kind of inter¬
national trade. The shipowners of Le Havre,
Dieppe, Rouen, Saint-Malo and later Bordeaux
bought slaves in Senegal, Cape Verde and
elsewhere and, like their English, Dutch and
Portuguese competitors, sold them in the ports
of the West Indies, Guiana, North America,
Venezuela, and Brazil. Since the native Indians
had been practically exterminated and also
because of the high death rate amongst the im¬
ported black slaves, the island colonies and
those of the American continent were
chronically short of manpower. It is estimated
that between 1666 and 1800 over ten million
black slaves were despatched to the colonies
in the New World.
The slave-traders followed a triangular route.
They set out from European ports with
shiploads of cheap wares which they generally
bartered for the black slaves they acquired at
the slave markets on the African coast and
loaded for re-sale at a substantial profit in the
New World. Afterwards they sailed back to their
home ports with cargoes of valuable colonial
products such as gold, sugar, tobacco, cotton,
and leather. Many writers maintain that not on¬
ly the growth of international trade but also the
industrialization of west European countries
(where, for instance, iron bars and pieces of
cotton were manufactured to be bartered for
slaves) was largely due to the slave trade.
Since ancient times it had become the prac¬
tice in Europe and Asia to enslave rather than
to exterminate prisoners of war. This was also
true on a smaller scale of Africa, where
prisoners taken during tribal wars and forced
into slavery were more or less integrated into
the communities which received them. But with
the growth of the Atlantic slave trade the
problem acquired a new dimension. Incited by
the lure of profit, many African tribal or village
chiefs who shared the spoils of the great
Songhai empire (early fifteenth-late sixteenth
century) fought each other incessantly with the
sole aim of taking prisoners whom they subse¬
quently sold on the big slave markets at Segu,
Bambarena, Khasso and Bambuk.
Local traders (mostly from the Sarakole, the
Mandingo and the Hausa tribes) conveyed
them from the markets to the European trading
posts on the coast. The privations and ill-
treatment to which they were subjected on the
journey were intended to stifle any ideas of
revolt. For fear of wild beasts the caravans
travelling to the French trading posts only took
the Galam route at the beginning of the rainy
season, and those who supplied the British did
not set out for the Gambia until the rivers were
fordable and the vegetation had been
destroyed by fire. The island of Gorée was for
long one of the principal "clearing camps" for
slaves despatched in these caravans.
The Arabs, and Muslims in general, engaged
intensively in the slave trade until the collapse
of the Songhai empire in 1592. This traffic
declined at the beginning of the seventeenth
century but made a vigorous recovery after¬
wards. Caravans took charge of the slaves in
the region extending from the land of the
Hausa to Lake Chad, then proceeded north¬
wards via Zinder and Agades. The Tuareg then
took them from Fezzan towards Tripolitania
and Ghudamis. At Ghudamis, the caravans
split up, some bound for Morocco, others for
Tunisia. These black slaves had to cross 3,000
kilometres of desert on foot. From Tunis, or
from Tripoli, they were despatched to the Le¬
vant and sold for the fourth or fifth time. The
principal centres of the slave trade in East
Africa were Mombasa, Zanzibar, Kilwa and
Bagamoyo. From these centres the Arab
traders penetrated the African continent as far
as the Congo and even Angola. During the
nineteenth century, as a result of slave revolts
(as in San Domingo) and anti-slavery legisla¬
tion, European involvement in the slave trade
tended to diminish or to become clandestine,
whereas during the same period the trade in¬
creased in East Africa.
Slavery in the strict sense of the term is today
considered to have been universally abolished.
At any rate it is universally condemned. Most
African peoples have achieved independence.
But the healing of the scars inflicted on them by
an ordeal which lasted for centuries is bound to
be a long and difficult process.
André Kedros
