Flamenco songs were a |
development from Spanish
ballads In which were com¬
bined Moorish and Castilian
influences. The early songs,
which were without musical
accompaniment, were im¬
bued with a rich expressivity
that the popular ballads
neverattained. It was not un¬
til the 19th century that the
guitar was introduced, to ac¬
company certain types of
song, bringing to flamenco,
through its extraordinary
range of rhythmic modula¬
tion, its undertones ofJoy, of
melancholy and of majesty.
Right, singer Camarón de la
Isla is accompanied by
guitarist Tomatito; both are
Gypsies from Andalusia.
28

FLAMENCO
L a taste of blood in the mouth'
by Felix Grande
THE history of the Spanish Gypsies is
that of a state of unbroken vigilance
that has lasted for five centuries.
It is the story of discord between a tradi¬
tionally nomadic people and a sedentary
society that is generally suspicious, often
authoritarian and sometimes cruel. It is the
story of a persistent sorrow which at the end
of the eighteenth century found expression
in flamenco, which grew out of the age-old
musical tradition of Andalusia to become
one of the most beautiful musical idioms,
full of grief and consolation, that has ever
been invented by the genius, the anguish
and the memory of men. In flamenco song,
in the music of the flamenco guitar, in the
precise, expressive rhythms of flamenco
dances, a voice of sadness and resistance
from a distant past brings echoes of the pain
and pride of a marginal existence trans¬
formed into a work of art.
In Spain, as elsewhere in the world,
Gypsies have not been left in peace.
©

One of the world's most famous Gypsy
communities lives In the Sacromonte
caves, Grenada, Spain. In the past, the
Gypsies of Grenada lived with the
Moorish minority In a sort of sympathetic
association of outcasts from society.
They provided the Inspiration for two
masterpieces by the Spanish poet
Federico García Lorca: Romancero
Gitano (Gypsy Ballads), 1928, and
Poemas del Cante Jondo (Poems from
Jondo Song), 1931. Right, Gypsies of
Sacromonte photographed at the beginn¬
ing of the century.
Marginalization and extermination (pro¬
portionately more Gypsies than Jews were
massacred by the Nazis) have left an indeli¬
ble mark on the collective memory of this
proud people, despised and persecuted all
over Europe since the fifteenth century, and
have inspired Gypsy communities to create
forms of music and dance which now form
part of Europe's musical heritage. The
spirited dances of Russia, the plaintive airs
of the Romanian violin, the melodies of the
Magyars, all owe some of their splendour to
the profound sense of rhythm and the
boundless sorrow of Gypsy communities.
But nowhere else in Europe did Gypsies
contribute to the creation of a music which,
in complexity, variety, beauty and com¬
municative power, can be compared with
flamenco. The human genius always owes a
debt to suffering. Flamenco, for which
Spain and above all Andalusia is world
famous, is the fruit of the ancient musical
tradition of Spain allied to the sorrows of
the Gypsies.
It is impossible today to say when this
sorrow began. It seems that some 5,000
years ago the Gypsies, whose culture was
already relatively advanced and who were
living amongst the mysterious Hindu peo¬
ple, were already forced by the caste system
of India to be nomads in their country of
origin. The Aryan and, later, Muslim in¬
vasions probably forced the Gypsies to
disperse in a double diaspora which lasted
for several centuries.
After centuries of wandering marked by
poverty, incomprehension and hope, the
first Gypsy tribes to reach the Iberian
peninsula entered Spain at the beginning of
the fifteenth century. In January 1425
Alfonso V of Aragon ordered the
authorities of his kingdom to place no
obstacle in the way of John of Little Egypt
or his people during the three months
following the signature of the order. This
safe-conduct, which was signed at
Saragossa and is now preserved in the
Aragon Crown Archives in Barcelona, is
the oldest surviving documentary evidence
for the arrival of the Gypsies in Spain. Four
months later, in May 1425, Alfonso issued
another safe-conduct to Thomas of Egypt
and his people, authorizing them to cross
and reside in his kingdom. On 19 June 1447,
Dona Maria de Castilla, deputizing for her
husband Alfonso V, issued a safe-conduct
in Barcelona in favour of Andrew "Duke of
Little Egypt", and of Peter, Martin and
Thomas, "Counts of Egypt", authorizing
them to travel throughout the land of
Spain.
Shortly afterwards, other groups joined
these first-comers and more safe-conducts
were issued. During a few short decades
these Gypsies would roam through the
Iberian lands with the blessing of the
authorities. Some claimed that they were on
a pilgrimage to Rome or Santiago de Com¬
postela. This produced a benevolent reac¬
tion from the authorities and ensured the
tolerance of the public. But the success of
the strategem was short-lived.
The titles of nobility had in fact been
forged or bought from obscure holders,
and the pilgrimages to Rome and Com¬
postela were pretexts to secure tolerance for
their presence in the heart of Christendom.
Pilgrimages, penitence, high-sounding
titles, glorification of the papacyall deep-
rooted features of European, and especially
Spanish, life at that time were merely a
cover to enable the Gypsies to travel the
highways and to pass discreetly through
towns and villages.
However, the true characteristics of the
Gypsies soon began to be viewed with a less
friendly eye. People found it hard to
understand why the Gypsies were always on
the move. Their submissiveness was found
to be feigned, their language strange, their
clothes exotic, their behaviour incom¬
prehensible and therefore disturbing.
Everything about them was strange,
frightening, alien. The intransigent Chris¬
tianity of those times could not tolerate
their magic and witchcraft. The pride of the
powerful could not accept their insubor¬
dination. The earthbound peasant, depen¬
dent on the whims of rain, sun and hail, was
alarmed by the nomadic habits of these peo¬
ple who were indifferent to the tyranny of
climate. Townsfolk and villagers alike were
amused by the trained bears, the dancing
goats and the fortune-telling, but these
skills made them think of the devil. And for
the wretched who toiled the year round in
order to pay exorbitant taxes, the mere theft
of a hen, a bedsheet or a donkey (legendary
Gypsy practices) verged on the scandalous
if not the heretical.
The honeymoon between these two pro¬
foundly antagonistic cultures, one seden¬
tary, one nomadic, was bound to come to
an end. One side carried the use of force,
the other of cunning, to extremes. This cun¬
ning caused the Gypsies to be rejected by
the culture of the settled majority, and this
rejection provoked in them a bristling, ag¬
gressive pride. The gulf thus opened could
only become deeper. Legal means were
adopted to bring the presence of Gypsies in
Spain to an end. Measures of expulsion
were followed by physical punishment,
mutilation and slavery. In January 1499
Ferdinand and Isabella signed a decree pro¬
hibiting Gypsies from pursuing a nomadic
existence (at the end of the fifteenth century
this was tantamount to depriving them of
their identity) and threatening violation
with banishment, whipping, mutilation of
the ears or lifelong slavery.
This decree was of historic significance: it
was the first of a series of anti-Gypsy laws
that were to remain in force for three cen¬
turies. From its promulgation until the
decree signed by Charles III on 19
September 1783 and entitled "Regulations
to curb and punish vagrancy and other ex¬
cesses committed by so-called Gypsies",
more than a hundred laws were passed
against Spanish Gypsies, condemning them
to hideous punishments. These penalties
were not always inflicted because the Gyp¬
sies had committed crimes of violence,
cattle-stealing or other infringements of the
laws of property. In many instances they
were imposed for mere disobedience, for
the presence of Gypsies in a village, for their
way of fleeing the town and settling in
uninhabited spots or at the roadside, for
using their own language or dress, for
fortune-telling, or for allegations of can¬
nibalism concocted against them by
superstitious or malicious individuals. The
reasons for punishing the Gypsies were thus
often ambiguous and sometimes non¬
existent, and could be reduced to resent¬
ment of a way of life that embodied
insubmission.
But there was nothing ambiguous about
the punishments, and the threats could not
be forgotten. The Gypsies were liable to
30

punishment for their nomadism, for their
language, for their customs, for their posi¬
tion as itinerant craftsmen, in a word for all
that they were. They risked the lash, a slow
death in the galleys, branding. One law
forced them to live in small towns, another
forbade them to live in small towns. One
law required them to live among non-
Gypsies, another required them to keep
away from non-Gypsies. They were liable
to prosecution if they bought or sold
livestock at fairs. They were prohibited
from living in towns where there was a law
court, so that they would not bring lawsuits
against non-Gypsy neighbours. One edict
condemned them to be transported to
America; another refused them permission
to travel there. One law sought to separate
male from female Gypsies in order to en¬
sure the extinction of this "infamous race" .
Another decreed that their children should
be taken away from them and placed in in¬
stitutions. Yet another allowed Gypsies to
be hunted down even inside churches; this
was at the beginning of the eighteenth cen¬
tury, during the reign of Philip V, when
even a non-Gypsy parricide could find tem¬
porary asylum in a place of worship. This
law was an exact replica of a measure
adopted earlier in the United Kingdom.
Several laws authorized constables to shoot
Gypsies on sight if they were caught outside
the quarters assigned to them. This persis¬
tent campaign lasted until the end of the
eighteenth century. It was then that the first
flamenco songs were heard in Andalusia.
During the nineteenth century these first
simple songs were enriched by astonishing
new forms and styles. At the beginning of
Photo of an Andaluslan Gypsy woman
taken at the beginning of the century.
By the 19th century the flamenco art of
the Gypsies of Andalusia had developed
Into a finely-balanced union of voice,
guitar and corporeal expression. Words,
music and dance combined to create a
unique art form Imbued with a solemn,
secret sensuality. Below, a Gypsy dancer
in a tavern In Grenada, Spain.
this century distinguished creative artists
such as Manuel de Falla and Federico Gar¬
cía Lorca championed this incomparable
art which is not only a unique form of ex¬
pression but an embodiment of the Gypsy
community, of Andalusia's social isolation,
and of the indomitable capacity of the
human spirit to transmute suffering into
imperishable forms of brotherhood. This
incomparable art form is also an act of
fidelity to the force of memory which helps
to shape the human conscience. Not long
ago an old Gypsy cantaora (singer) known
as Tia Añica la Piriñaca was asked what she
felt when she sang. She replied: "Cuando
canto a gusto me sabe la boca a sangre"
(When I sing as I like, I have a taste of blood
in the mouth). And when another old Gyp¬
sy singer, Manolito El de María, was asked
why he sang he said, "Because I remember
what I have lived".
FELIX GRANDE, Spanish poet, writer and
essayist, is editor of the magazine Cuadernos
Hispanoamericanos (Hispano-American
Notes), published in Madrid. He has been
awarded many literary prizes including the
Spanish National Poetry Prize and Cuba's
Casa de las Americas Prize. He is the author of
a number of books including Lugar Siniestro
este Mondo, Caballeros (This World is a
Sinister Place, my Masters) and two volumes
of essays entitled Memoria del Flamenco
(Flamenco Memories), 1980, on the drama
and popular culture of the Spanish Gypsies.
©
