by Isaac Asimov
I suppose that the question most fre¬
quently asked of prolific writers is
"Where do you get your ideas?"
If one is a prolific science fiction writer,
as I am, the question is likely to be
rephrased into, "Where do you get
your crazy ideas?".
The answer, in general, is a rather
simple one. I think, and think, and
think until something occurs to me. It's
by no means an easy task and if my
dear wife, Janet, comes upon me when
I happen to be lost in thought, her first
impression (even after years of ex¬
perience with me) is that I'm in dread¬
ful pain.
"What's wrong?" she cries out in
alarm.
"I'm thinking", I growl.
And yet sometimes, I must admit, an
idea is thrust upon me by the outside
world. On January 24, 1971, 1 attended
a science fiction convention and was in
the audience while two famous science
fiction writers were discussing writing
techniques. One thought that human
reactions were more important than
technological details, even in science
fiction (and I agree with him). "If you
have your motivations straight," he
said, "who cares about uh
plutonium-186".
I laughed at this for the speaker's
memory had betrayed him. There is no
such thing as plutonium-186, and there
can't be. It struck me, though, that I
might write a story in which
plutonium-186 ¿//é/ exist. It would come
from another universe, of course, one
in which the laws of nature were dif¬
ferent. Once here, the substance would
8
slowly absorb our laws of nature and
become more and more unstable. If we
could get an indefinite amount of such
material from the other Universe, we
could have a new and enormous source
of no-cost energy. Of course, I would
have to work out some serious
drawback which would involve all
Earth, perhaps all the Universe, in a
dreadful danger. Would people then be
willing to give up a source of cost-less
energy? More and more things
developed out of that one expression
"plutonium-186". I ended with a novel
called "The Gods Themselves",
published by Doubleday in 1972.
Once I actually dreamed a book. On
April 3, 1973, I awoke from a peculiar
dream and at once told it to Janet who,
as a psychiatrist, is professionally in¬
terested in dreams. I said, "I dreamed
I was preparing an anthology of old
science fiction stories I had read and
loved when I was a teen-ager and I was
re-reading them and loving them again.
What a shame to have to wake up."
Janet said, "Well, why don't you
prepare such an anthology?".
So I did, and I got to reread all the
old stories in real life (some of them
didn't hold up). The book was entitled
"Before the Golden Age" and was
published by Doubleday on April 3,
1974, the first anniversary of my
dream.
Last year I actually dreamed a
mystery. I had followed someone into a
restaurant and he disappeared before
my eyes. There was a couch in the
restaurant with its back to me, and I
finally found him, lying down on the
couch so that I could not see him from
the doorway. In my dream I said,
"What a wonderful idea,for a Black
Widower story!" (The Black Widower
stories are a series of mysteries that I've
been writing for over ten years.) When
I woke up I thought up a story around
that basic notion, called it "The
Redhead", wrote it, and sold it. It ap¬
peared in the October, 1984, issue of
Ellery Queen 's Mystery Magazine.
Sometimes, an editor deliberately
challenges me. On March 17, 1941,
John W. Campbell, editor of Astoun¬
ding Science Fiction handed me a
quotation from an essay by Ralph
Waldo Emerson: "If the stars should
appear one night in a thousand years,
how would men believe and adore; and
preserve for many generations the
remembrance of the City of God..."
"I want you to write a story about
this", said Campbell. "Explain why
the stars should only appear once in a
long time, and what effect the ap¬
pearance would have on an intelligent
race."
I wrote the story, called it
"Nightfall" and it appeared in the
September 1941 issue of the magazine.
It is still my most famous single short
story, and I wrote it when I was only
21.
These are exceptional cases,
however. In my hundreds of stories of
all lengths, I almost never had the help
of a chance comment, of a dream, of an
editorial suggestion, or of anything
else. As I said, it then becomes a matter
of hard thought.
CONTINUED PAGE 10

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 8
I might begin thinking of a scientific
development and wondering "What
if
In 1956, computers were much in the
news. The existing ones were crude in¬
deed compared to what we have now,
but already it was possible to speculate
over how far they could improve. I
began to speculate, "How far? How
far? Would it eventually be able to do
this? Do that? Surpass human beings,
perchance?" In my mind, at last, I
came to what seemed to me to be the
only possible conclusion. I promptly
wrote the story "The Last Question"
which appeared in the November,
1956, issue of Science Fiction Quarter¬
ly. Of all the stories I have written, this
one is my favourite.
Or I might think of the human angle
rather than the technological one.
What if computers became so common
and integral a part of the human scene
that people forgot how to do arithmetic
in their head or by use of pen and
paper; forgot even that it was possible
to do it without a computer? It didn't
take long to think of a satirical treat¬
ment of the question and I wrote "The
Feeling of Power", which appeared in
the February, 1958, issue of //.
As you see, for me a story starts with
a word, a phrase, a statement, a ques¬
tion. That acts like a seed out of which
the rest of the story grows; or, if you
prefer another metaphor, it acts as a
piece of grit about which the pearl
layers itself.
Very frequently, the seed I must
somehow originate makes up the end of
the story. Most of my stories are
mysteries in one fashion or another. A
good number of them, both novels and
short stories, are actual mysteries,
orthodox and old-fashioned
"whodunits". Some of my science fic¬
tion novels, though thoroughly science
fiction, are also straightforward
mysteries. Examples are "The Caves of
Steel" (Doubleday, 1954); "The Naked
Sun" (Doubleday, 1957); and the very
recent, "The Robots of Dawn"
(Doubleday, 1983).
Even those science fiction stories
that are not straightforward mysteries
have mystery elements to them. There
is very often something to be found or
uncovered, a particular person or place
or motivation, something.
In every case, I must think up the en¬
ding, the gimmick, the surprise that
will fool the reader.
Once I have my ending I'm home and
safe. The next step is to think up a place
to begin. In this connexion I always
remember something that John Camp¬
bell once told me. He said, "When you
start a story and find you are having
trouble, it is because you started too
soon. Start later in the narrative." I
therefore start as late as I conveniently
can. That does not take long to work
out.
Then, once I have my ending and my
beginning, I start to write. To be sure,
I don't have anything in between the
beginning and ending except, possibly,
some vague scraps of conversation in
my head. That doesn't matter; I rely on
making up the entire story even a
novel as complicated as "The Robots
of Dawn" as I go along. I stay always
one scene ahead of myself until, as I ap¬
proach the end, the last few scenes of
the book reveal themselves and that is
how I know I am approaching the end.
What happens if half-way through
I'm stuck? Well, that is very unlikely.
As long as I know what the ending will
be I have something to aim for,
whether I am writing a short story or a
novel, and as long as there is something
to aim for, I can't get totally lost.
The actual writing (once I know
where I'm going) always turns out to be
incredibly simple. I write as fast as I can
type and it is never necessary to make
more than a few minor revisions.
I don't actually visualize my stories;
I'm not very good at visualization. I
don't really picture my characters or
my scenes and I rarely describe
anything I don't absolutely have to.
But I do hear. The entire story reels
itself off in my head as I sit at the
typewriter or word-processor and, I
can hear it especially the dialogue. It
is as though something inside myself is
dictating and I am merely typing down
what I hear as fast as I can.
For that .reason, my stories and
novels tend to be more conversation
than action, more dialogue than
events. I am criticized for that
sometimes by people who (I can only
presume) know more about writing
than I do, and who therefore feel en¬
tirely free to castigate me for the lack of
action, description and characteriza¬
tion in my fiction.
But what can I do? I write as I write,
and I urge no one else to do as I do.
That is why, by the way, I approach
an article such as this one with a certain
reluctance. I have never taken courses
in writing, never read books on the sub¬
ject. I majored in chemistry and not in
English literature.
I am, then, clearly not an authority
in the subject. I don't pretend to know
how to write and I don't hold myself up
as a model to beginners in any way. In
fact, I think I should be considered a
horrible example for I feel that anyone
who tries to do what I do is bound to
make a mess of it.
Once again I do what I do simply
because that is all I know how to do.Ë
	 O
l*"1 	
(^^ytjiAA^^___,
"Look, just because my intelligence is artificial
doesn't mean my problems aren't real!"
Colour page
Bleu de Ciel by Wassily Kandinsky. Oil
on canvas, 100 x73 cm, 1940.
"Neither reason nor logic should be
excluded from problems ofart, but con¬
tinual correction by the' 'Irrational ' ' are
indispensable."
Kandinsky
L'Art Concret
©<
10
