Reports from
around the world
TT/^^ 's actuaHy being done to combat illiteracy? We
^/mf present below a number of specific examples, together
* * with relevant statistics, concerning the present state and
future prospects of literacy activities in major regions of the world.
The information provided comes either from communications ad¬
dressed directly to the Unesco Courier orfrom documents available
in the Unesco Secretariat. The text is illustrated by literacy cam¬
paign posters from each region (above, poster from .Suriname). In
boxes on double page overleaf three newly literate adults from
Canada, Ethiopia and the United Republic of Tanzania tell how
their lives were changed when they learned to read and write.
17

Ethiopia: The literacy campaign launched in 1976 is still
being vigorously pursued. With the encouragement of the
National Co-ordinating Committee, the campaign now in¬
volves all the people's organizations of the country, in¬
cluding agricultural workers' associations, citizens'
associations (Kebeles), as well as 984,700 volunteer
literacy workers (teachers, students and other volunteers).
14.1 million of the country's 22 million inhabitants over the
age of 10 have followed literacy courses; 8.35 million (59
per cent) of the 1 2.8 million taking the final test have reach¬
ed the required standard, with the result that the literacy
rate has now been raised to an estimated 90 per cent and
49 per cent for the urban and rural populations respectively
(in 1 974, only 7 per cent of all Ethiopians were able to read
and write). It should also be pointed out that the literacy
campaign has been carried out in the 1 5 major languages of
the country (out of a total of 80) which are spoken by 90 per
cent of the population.
The Central African Republic: Under difficult conditions
and on a more limited scale, a literacy campaign has been
launched for the rural population (more specifically, for
3,650 cotton-workers between the ages of 15 and 35
Now Ifeel great and self-confident..
NDUGU Rukia Okashi is a 53-year old farmer
living in Arusha, Tanzania. She grows maize,
beans and vegetables, has seven children and
became literate about ten years ago. She says :
There is a great difference in my present situation
when compared with the old days. A lot of changes
have taken place. When I was required to sign various
papers and documents I could only use the thumb
print and one never knew what exactly one was sign¬
ing. Consequently, you could sometimes suffer in¬
justices and exploitation. Now that I am literate no
one can ask me to sign just blindly, ¡first have to ask
what the whole business is all about, I read the papers
myself, and it is only after I am satisfied that I agree
to sign. If I don 7 agree with the contents of the
documents, I just don't sign. Whereas before one
could never refuse to sign a document: you were just
asked to put your thumb print. . .
Literacy has helped me in many other ways.
Through literacy I now know the nutrient values of
various foodsthose which build the body, those
which help us to prevent some diseases, and so on. I
know what a balanced diel is.
Formerly, when one walked through the streets one
couldn't read any signs. You may come across a
"danger" signboard but you continue to walk ahead
until someone shouts, "Mama, mama, mama, mama,
stop!" But these days, I can read all the sign-posts
such as "Don 7 pass here, Don't walk on the grass".
In travelling also, I used to ask the driver to let me get
down at a certain place, but sometimes the driver
would take you much further beyond your destina¬
tion. If such an incident occurs now, I shout and
protest.
So now I feel great and self-confident. I have the
ability to refuse or disagree whereas formerly I easily
became a victim of great injustices because I was
illiterate,
(Source: Convergence, International Council for Adult
Education, Toronto, Canada, Vol. X N° 3. 1977). '
enrolled in 61 literacy centres and taught by 122 literacy
workers). An interesting feature of this campaign is that
post-literacy stimulation to continue reading is provided in
the special supplements for the newly literate, contained in
the newspapers, Linga and Nzoni Kode.
Lesotho: Use of the rural press is a feature of post-literacy
work in Lesotho, with a special supplement in the
newspaper, Moithuti. Before the literacy campaign, out of a
population of 1 .2 million, about 55 per cent were literate.
Today, after six years of effort, 6,000 illiterate and 20,000
semi-literate persons have been helped to literacy. This
literacy campaign also reached 600 herdboys and young
girls as well as miners from Lesotho working in South Africa
and the inmates of the country's prisons. In collaboration
Poster from the Republic of Cape Verde
with the Lesotho Distance Teaching Centre, a multi-media
literacy training programme uses the facilities offered by
radio, the rural press and apprenticeship centres for the rural
and migrant populations. Lesotho's literacy campaign has
also had a certain impact, thanks to similarities of language,
in Botswana and Swaziland.
Mali: Concern with Post-literacy follow-upthe stage
which succeeds acquisition of the ability to read and
write is ensured in Mali by publication of the monthly
newspaper Kibaru ("The News"), with a circulation of
20,000.
United Republic of Tanzania: 8 rural newspapers, with a
total circulation of 450,000, both inform and teach the
newly-literate population; the best known of these, Elimu
Haina Mwisno ("Education Never Stops") has a circulation
of 100,000. Tanzania's large-scale literacy campaign has,
in the space of a few years, made it possible to reduce the
adult illiteracy rate from 75 per cent to 21 per cent. In addi-
18

When you can V read or write you are poor. . .
AT the age of thirty, Janice Taylor, of Pem¬
broke, Canada, was totally illiterate. She had
not continued her studies beyond the fifth
year because of adaptation problems and, unable to
read or write, had found herself virtually cut off from
normal social life.
One day she heard talk in her neighbourhood of
ALSO, an organization established to help illiterates.
At first I found it all very difficult, but I was deter¬
mined to continue because I wanted to go to college
and learn a trade. When you can 7 read or write, you
can 't get work, you are poor, you can 7 take pari in
many activities and sometimes you don 7 even under¬
stand what people are saying to you. You are not
aware of what is going on around you.
Since- last May, Janice has been the proud possessor
of a diploma of the Department of Trade and
Technology's Algonquin College and now specializes
in the repair of small mechanical and electrical equip¬
ment such as typewriters, radios and light fittings.
When ! started taking the course I was embarrassed
about my age and I was afraid that people would
laugh at me. ¡soon found that everybody else felt the
same.
(Source: Article by France Pilon in Le Droit, Ottawa, 9
September 1983).
tion to the newspapers mentioned above, a series of inter¬
connected and co-ordinated activities maintain and extend
the rudimentary skills in reading, writing and arithmetic of
the newly literate, and encourage the application of these
skills to problems encountered daily in personal and com¬
munity life. There are some 3,200 rural libraries, with an
average of 400 books each. Between 1976 and 1982, 52
Folk Development Colleges, functioning in a unique manner,
enabled 38,000 students to follow development-oriented
training courses.
Furthermore, special educational radio programmes have
reached an audience of millions, organized in listening
groups, with instruction in health, nutrition and other sub¬
jects. Lastly, correspondence courses designed particularly
for adults and future teachers, provide out-of-school educa¬
tion at the primary and secondary levels.
Angola: The entire population has been mobilized by an
efficiently organized campaign making use of radio, televi¬
sion and the press and run essentially by volunteer teachers,
especially young people. Teaching materials are produced in
six national languages as well as Portuguese.
The Syrian Arab Republic: In a particularly vigorous
literacy campaign launched in 1958, 10,766 courses have
been provided; 263,318 pupils have been enrolled;
130,000 have completed the course. A particularly
noteworthy achievement has been the mobilization as
literacy workers of a large number of citizens aged 18 or
over, who have themselves already received an education.
Kuwait: Before the launching of the literacy campaign in
1 981 , 32 per cent of the male population and 52 per cent
of the female population was illiterate; since then, 17,076
pupils have been taught to read and write. Teaching,
organized in eight-month courses and provided in 66 literacy
centres, is particularly intensive consisting of three hours of
classes each day, on five days per week. There is no shor¬
tage of teaching materials, and use is also made of wall-
newspapers, slides and films.
The Yemen Arab Republic: In 1975, 74 per cent of the
male and 97 per cent of the female population were il¬
literate. A recently launched literacy campaign aims to
teach some 700,000 people to read and write between
1982 and 1986.
Iraq: The national campaign for compulsory literacy laun¬
ched in 1 978, constitutes a significant effort in the struggle
to eliminate illiteracy, and at the same time is particularly
concerned with the provision of the education and training
that will enable the newly literate to play an active part in na¬
tional development.
Brazil: A mass literacy campaign, the Movimento
Brasiliero de Alfabetizacaö (MOBRAL), was launched as
long ago as 1967. The campaign is conducted through
1,141 literacy centres, and uses the facilities offered by
1,157 newspapers, 650 radio programmes and 1,414
public address systems. In association with the Programme
for Functional Literacy (PAF), MOBRAL has recently been
extended to provide cultural programmes, vocational train¬
ing and community health education as well as literacy
teaching. Self-instruction constitutes an interesting ele¬
ment of this latest enterprise; pupils who have already learnt
to read and write are taught to continue the learning process
on their own.
Ecuador: Significant progress has been made in the field
of literacy training. In 1974, there were 965,000 illiterates
in the country. Since then, 536,000 have been taught to
read and write. The number of literacy centres is a measure
of the scale of the undertaking courses are provided in
7,562 schools and also in premises built by the participants,
in clubs, community centres and even in private homes.
Suriname: A campaign entitled "Alfa 84", to be carried
out between August 1 984 and March 1 985, aims to reduce
to a negligible figure the illiteracy rate of 35 per cent ( 1 978)
in the 1 5 to 59 age range, i.e. 60,000 illiterates out of a total
population of 360,000. Today's illiterates include a con-^
// is like being reborn...
BIRKE is a 27-year-old woman from Sidamo
province, Ethiopia, who has just completed a
six-month literacy programme. She tells her
own story:
The very idea of sending a girl to school was
formerly considered immoral in our society. If there
was any opportunity at all for education, it was
always the boys who were given this privilege. A girl
was supposed to stay at home until the day ofher mar¬
riage. And once marriednot to the man of her
choice, but to the one who promised the biggest
amount of mine (dowry)her chances of going to
school became absolutely inexistent, fn fact in this
new phase of her life she had to face many other in¬
justices and hardships. Every day she would have to
go to the river tofetch water, collect woodfor thefire
and prepare the food; she looked after the cattle and
the household, and that was how she would live for
the rest of her life.
But times have changed. A small local reading cen¬
tre was set up in our village and those who had already
learnt to read would read out to the others what was
in the newspapers. When my turn came to attend a
literacy class I studied hard and in six months I was
able to read and write. Today whenever J get
newspapers I enjoy reading them- I have become
aware of things. It is like being reborn or like a blind
man who has regained his sight. I never thought this
would happen in my lifetime.
(Source : Communication Media and Education for
Development The Case of Ethiopia, by Fikre Mariam
Tsehai)


siderable number of former primary school pupils who aban¬
doned their studies prematurely. A particular problem is pos¬
ed by the fact that a total of 20 mother tongues are spoken
by the population. Only 40 per. cent of the population, most
of whom are already able to read and write; master the of¬
ficial language, Suriname Dutch. The organizers have
calculated that it will be necessary to mobilize some 22,000
literacy workers, including volunteers from women's
associations and youth organizations, trade unions,
agricultural workers' associations and religious institutions
as well as^professional teachers during "Alfa 84". The
Government estimates that the overall cost of this cam¬
paign will amount to some US$1 5,400,000, half of which,
it is hoped, will be provided through international co¬
operation.
The Dominican Republic: Thanks in part to assistance
from Unesco, the Organization of American States and the
Inter-American Bank, significant progress has been made in
a country with a million illiterates aged 1 5 or over. Since the
literacy campaign was launched in 1 982, 79,833 illiterates
have been taught to read and write in 1 2,523 basic educa¬
tion centres by 31 ,331 volunteer workers using 1 ,777,703
teaching manuals and other types of educational material.
Peru: In 1981, Peru had more than 1,700,000 illiterates,
or 1 7.4 per cent of the population over the age of 1 5. A total
of 499,000 adults have since been taught to read and write,
or are currently receiving literacy training. A special effort
has been made to distribute the necessary basic materials
free of charge: these include 274,000 primers and the same
numbers of writing manuals, 200,000 sets of instruction
cards and copies of an elementary arithmetic textbook not
to mention 2,000 oil lamps! A strategy for post-literacy
training is being implemented with the collaboration of
those responsible for other branches of education, in the
context of cultural projects and local or regional pro¬
grammes of vocational or continuing education.
20
A CATALUNYA SOM
300.000
ANALFABETS
n L_
fJP
,2.ñ %\ .1
fe
L'ANALFABETISME : UNA URGÈN
Posters from Catalonia (above),
the United Arab Emirates (below)
and Bangladesh (left).


Nicaragua: Launched in 1979, the literacy teaching cam¬
paign has reduced the illiteracy rate from 50 to 1 3 per cent.
Based on people's education collectives and community
education groups, the campaign recruited and trained
120,000 volunteer teachers who, in the space of five
months, taught more than 400,000 Nicaraguans to read
and write. Students in secondary schools are obliged by law
to spend six months participating as teachers in the adult
education programme.
Functional illiteracy has by no means disappeared in all
the industrialized countries of the world.
Canada: 856,060 Canadians (5.5 per cent of the popula¬
tion aged 1 5 or over) have failed to complete their primary
education and may be considered virtually illiterate. There
are considerable variations in the illiteracy rate in the dif¬
ferent provinces: 7.5 per cent in Quebec, 1 1 .9 per cent in
OKUMA YWg
BILDICÍNI ÖGRET
BiLMEDiGiNi ÖGREN
Poster from Turkey
Newfoundland and as much as 23.3 per cent in the Nor¬
thwest Territories. Although more than 70 million dollars
were spent on literacy teaching between 1979 and 1980,
the scale of the problem has only recently become fully ap¬
parent, as was seen in the importance attached to the
celebration of International Literacy Day on 8 September
1983, in Ottawa (see back cover). A special feature of
literacy work in Canada is that it is carried out not only by
the Department of the Ministry of Education responsible for
basic education for adults, but also by volunteer services (in
Quebec) and by a hundred or so officially-sponsored or
private bodies.
Poland: During the early post-war years, the illiteracy rate
was very high, but it was considerably reduced as a result
of the literacy and school enrolment campaign launched by
the Government in 1951. In 1981, 2.7 million Poles overthe
age of 15(10 per cent of this age group) had not completed
the full course of basic education. During the school year
1982-1983, however, only 0.34 per cent of children of
school age were not actually enrolled.
Turkey: Although it was launched comparatively recently
(1981), the national literacy campaign has already produced
substantial results 3,156,799 new literates. These in¬
clude a large number of women, agricultural workers and in¬
habitants of shanty-towns and destitute villages. Before the
campaign was launched 69 per cent of the population over
the age of 6 was literate; today the figure has risen to 74.8
per cent. For women the figure has risen from 53.8 per cent
to 61.2 per cent. Many of these new literates have con¬
tinued their studies to the level of the adult primary educa¬
tion certificate. Turkey hopes to eliminate illiteracy entirely
by 1995.
India: As might be expected in such a large country,
literacy activities have long been extremely decentralized.
Between 1961 and 1972, the movement for the develop¬
ment of the villages of Maharastra (Gram Shikshan Mohin)
completely eradicated adult illiteracy in 36,693 villages,
teaching almost 10 million adults, more than half of them
women, to read and write. The National Federation of Indian
Women has opened 1,500 literacy centres in impoverished
urban and rural areas in nine States. The Social Service
League of Bengal has trained 8,700 instructors who, bet¬
ween 1961 and 1974, in 320 sessions, taught 105,000 In¬
dians to read and write. In 1975, the Adult External Educa¬
tion Directorate of the Federal Ministry of Education and
Social Affairs launched a literacy programme for 300,000 il¬
literates. Lastly, in 1 978, the Federal Government launched
a large-scale Five-Year Adult Education Programme cover¬
ing 22 States and designed to provide literacy teaching for
1 00 million young people and adults between the ages of 1 5
and 35, special attention being paid to women in rural areas,
certain castes and tribes and the most disadvantaged
classes of the urban and rural populations.
The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam: In 1945, when the
literacy- campaign was launched, the illiteracy rate in a
population of 20 million was 95 per cent. Popular en¬
thusiasm was such that during the first year 2.5 million peo¬
ple were taught to read and write, and a further 10 million
in the nine years which followed. By 1 958, virtually the en¬
tire population between the ages of 1 2 and 50 was literate.
In the southern part of the country, the 4 million illiterates
remaining in 1975 had been taught to read and write by
1977. Today, efforts are being made to eliminate illiteracy
in the ethnic minorities, and to develop a comprehensive
system of complementary education.
China: The past 32 years have seen the transition to
literacy of 128 million people aged between 12 and 40, in
a country where, in 1 949, 80 per cent of the population was
illiterate. Today 90 per cent of the country's workers and
miners have attained an educational level equivalent to that
of pupils who have completed their primary school educa¬
tion. It is estimated that only some 5 to 7 per cent of the
people in this group remain illiterate. In the rural areas, 70
per cent of the younger generation of agricultural workers
have acquired basic reading and writing skills. In order to
maintain and perfect these skills, the local authorities pro¬
vide workers and peasants with secondary education out¬
side working hours.
Thailand: In 1981, some 14.5 per cent of the population
aged over 10 was illiterate, including a large proportion of
former primary school pupils who had completed four years
of education, but subsequently relapsed into illiteracy. In
the Fifth National Social and Economic Development Plan,
launched in 1982, the Government set as a target, the
reduction of the illiteracy rate to 10 per cent by 1986, by
which time, it is hoped, primary education will have become
universal. In addition, six specially-conceived extracur¬
ricular literacy programmes are currently being implemented
with the collaboration of volunteer teachers, students from
teacher training institutions and Buddhist monks. Several of
these programmes are designed for the country's larger
minority groups.
21
