-J~
BHARATA NATYAM
An ancient art reborn
Bharata Natyam is the modern name for the classical dance-
drama of Tamil Nadu in which a language of conventionalized
hand gestures and body movements is used to help the dancers
convey meaning and expression. Characters from the Hindu
epics, the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, are portrayed in
this intricate and graceful art which combines drama, music,
poetry, colour and rhythm.
Bharata Natyam is performed according to techniques which
are carefully laid down in the Natya Sastra, a remarkable San¬
skrit treatise covering all aspects of dance and drama which
was probably written around the beginning of the Christian era
by the sage Bharata. For many centuries the dances were per¬
formed exclusively in the precincts of the great temples by
female dancers known as devadasis ("servants of god") who
underwent years of training before they were ready to perform
in public. Many sculptures carved on temple walls, some dating
back to the tenth century AD, depict karanas (positions of
hands and feet described in the Natya Sastra) and testify to the
importance dance then held in religious life. It was through the
temple dancers that Bharata Natyam (then known as dasi at-
tam, the dance of the devadasi) survived to modern times. But
then the devadasi system fell into decline and disrepute and it
seemed that the dance tradition it had preserved for so long
would disappear into oblivion.
In the last fifty years, however, as part of a new con¬
sciousness of ancient Indian cultural traditions Bharata Natyam
has not only been saved from extinction but has experienced a
remarkable revival and achieved international renown. Rukmini
Devi is an outstanding figure in this revival. Born in 1 904, in the
1 930s she became the first woman from outside the devadasi
tradition to learn Bharata Natyam. With other major artists such
as the dancer Balasaraswathi she set out "to bring the spirit of
the temple to the stage", in a movement in which scholars and
creators sought to rediscover the pure forms of ancient
classical dance by studying ancient texts and temple friezes
and carvings and by consulting the survivors of the devadasi
tradition.
In 1936 Rukmini Devi founded an academy in Madras,
Kalakshetra ("Centre of Arts") to train promising artists and
teachers and since then students from many parts of the world
have been trained under her guidance in Bharata Natyam and
classical Carnatic music, as well as following courses in prin¬
ting, weaving, stage and costume design. "It is amazing to see
how limitless an art Bharata Natyam is", Rukmini Devi has writ¬
ten. "For, if one can depict the Mahabharata or the Ramayana
through Bharata Natyam, this means that one can express all
human emotion and thought through it, for these epics and the
other ancient stories portray every possible human
experience."
In Bharata Natyam the language of hand gestures (hastas) is so vast that the
dancer can express practically anything from abstract concepts to objects and ac¬
tions. One gesture may mean many different, unrelated things. On this page: (1)
serpent's head; (2) head of a wild animal; (3) recipient or bud of a flower; (4) open
lotus; (5) the figure 4; (6) bee; (7) to hold; a bird; (8) fear; the figure 5; (9) to eat;
the navel; (10) a bird.
Opposite page: Yamin Krishnamurti, a leading exponent of Bharata Natyam who
was trained at Kalakshetra, the international centre for dance and music establish¬
ed at Madras by Rukmini Devi.
Lt
1=
26

Photos © Sylvie Carnot, Paris Photo © Claude Sauvageot. Pari:
