The world their homeland
by François de Vaux de Foletier
FOR centuries the origins of the
Gypsies were shrouded in mystery.
Here today and gone tomorrow,
these bands of dark-skinned nomads with
strange habits aroused the curiosity of
sedentary populations, and many writers
constructed a variety of often far-fetched
hypotheses in an attempt to explain the
enigma.
In the nineteenth century, although scien¬
tific investigation had already provided the
answer, the most fantastic myths were still
being made.
This jumble of ingenious superstitions
and shaky hypotheses did not survive
serious study of the language of the Gyp¬
sies. As early as Renaissance times scholars
had some notions of this language, but they
did not connect it to any linguistic group
nor locate the area in which it originated. At
the end of the eighteenth century, however,
scholars were able to determine the origin
of the Gypsies on the basis of scientific
evidence.
Since then eminent linguists have con¬
firmed the analyses of these early scholars.
The grammar and vocabulary of the
language of the Gypsies are close to those of
Sanskrit and to such living languages as
Kashmiri, Hindi, Gujarati, Marathi and
Nepali.
Modern scholars no longer doubt that the
Gypsies originated in India, but many
problems concerning ethnic group, social
class, and the period of their earliest migra¬
tions still need to be elucidated.
Linguistics is the discipline best able to
locate the origin of the Gypsies, but an¬
thropology, medical science and ethnology
also have a contribution to make.
. Documentation on the period that may
be called "the prehistory of the Gypsies" is
extremely limited. The writers of ancient
India were only interested in gods and
kings, and paid scant attention to the
people known as the Zott, the Jat, the Luli,
the Nuri, or the Dom.
From the time of their first migrations
westwards we have somewhat more ac¬
curate information about the Gypsies,
primarily in the form of two Persian texts in
which legend and history are mingled.
Writing in the mid-tenth century AD, Ham-
za of Isfahan describes the arrival of 12,000
Zott musicians in Persia. The same story
was told half a century later by the Persian
chronicler and poet Ferdowsi, the author of
The Epic of the Kings.
The story may be to a large extent legend¬
ary, but it informs us that there were many
Gypsies from India in Persia; they were
already noted as musicians, allergic to
agriculture, inclined to nomadism and
somewhat given to pilfering.
These are the only ancient texts to speak
of the wanderings of the Gypsies across
Asia;'the story can be filled out by linguistic
evidence.
In Persia the Gypsies enriched their .
vocabulary with words which would later
be found in all the European dialects. Then,
according to the British linguist John
Sampson, they split into two branches.
Some continued on their way towards the
west and the southeast, the others headed
northwest. The latter journeyed through

«* MB» i
î-a'iÄ fl
Armenia (where they picked up a few words
which have been preserved as far away as
Wales but which were not known to the first
branch) and through the Caucasus where
they borrowed words from the Ossetes.
Finally they reached Europe and the
Byzantine world. From then on texts refer¬
ring to the Gypsies are more numerous,
especially the accounts of western travellers
on their way to the Holy Land.
In 1322 two Friars Minor, Simon Si-
meonis and Hugh the Enlightened, noted
the presence in Crete of people who were
considered to belong to the race of Ham;
they observed Greek Orthodox rites and
lived in low black tents like the Arabs or in
caves. In Greece they were known as
Atkinganos or Atsinganos, from the name
of a sect of musicians and fortune-tellers.
Modon, a fortified town and leading port
on the west coast of Morea, was an impor¬
tant port of call on the voyage from Venice
to Jaffa and the main centre where Gypsies
were observed by western travellers. "As
black as Ethiopians", they tended to be
metalsmiths and to live in huts. The place
was called "little Egypt" perhaps because,
like the Nile delta, it was a fertile area in the
midst of dry terrain. This is why the Gypsies
of Europe came to be known as Egyptians,
Gitans, or Gypsies. Their leaders would
often be called Dukes or Counts of Little
Egypt.
Greece was a source of new words for the
Gypsies but above all the presence of a host
of pilgrims from all the countries of
Christendom revealed to them new ways of
living. The Gypsies realized that pilgrims
enjoyed the status of privileged travellers
and when they took to the road again they
also succeeded in passing themselves off as
pilgrims.
After a long stay in Greece and such
neighbouring countries as the Romanian
According to a Hungarian saying "A
Gypsy without a horse is not a real
Gypsy". Throughout Europe, from the
Bosphorus to the Atlantic, Gypsies have
thrived on trading In horses. Even today,
for a Gypsy, a horse is not just a mount,
a beast ofburden ora commodity forsale,
but also a true friend. Above, a Gypsy
shows off his horse 's paces in the streets
of Appleby, In Westmorland, England,
during the annual horse fair, one of the
most famous In the world.
principalities and Serbia, many Gypsies
continued their journey westward. In pro¬
vinces which had been fought over, cap¬
tured and recaptured many times over by
Byzantine and Turkish armies, their situa¬
tion was not a comfortable one. Evidence
that this was so can be found in the ac¬
counts they produced later in their exodus,
when attempting to win the confidence of
the spiritual or temporal authorities. They
would tell how, after leaving Egypt, they
were at first pagan but were then converted
to Christianity, lapsing back into idolatry
before becoming Christian again under
pressure from monarchs; they were forced,
they said, to make a long pilgrimage
throughout the world.
In 1418 large bands passed through
Hungary and Germany, where the Emperor
Sigismund agreed to give them letters of
protection. They appeared in Westphalia,
in the free cities of the north, and on the
shores of the Baltic, then turned south
once again and travelled to Leipzig
and Frankfurt-am-Main before entering
Switzerland.
In 1419 they crossed the frontiers of what
is now France. It is known that they showed
passports from the Emperor and the Duke
of Savoy at Châtillon-en-Dombes on 22
August, at Macon two days later, and at
Sisteron on 1 October. Three years later
other groups visited the Low Countries,
provoking the astonishment of the citizens
of Arras. But there as at Macon it was ex¬
plained to them that they were on land
belonging to the king and that their imperial
letters of protection were of no value.
They now realized that if they were to
continue freely on their travels through the
Christian world they would need to prove
that they enjoyed a form of protection of
universal validitythat of the Pope. In
July 1492 Duke André passed through
Bologna and Forli with a large retinue,
declaring that he was on his way to see the
Pope.
However, neither the Roman chronicles
nor the Vatican archives contain any trace
of this visit to the capital of the Christian
world.
Nevertheless, on their return the Gypsies
described how they had been received by the
Pope, and presented letters from Martin V.
Were they authentic? Whether they were or
not, for more than a century the papal let¬
ters ensured for the Egyptian companies an
extremely favourable reception and enabled
them to go wherever they wished.
In August 1427, the Gypsies appeared for
the first time at the gates of Paris, then oc¬
cupied by the English. For three weeks they
encamped at La Chapelle-Saint-Denis,
where crowds of the curious flocked to see
them.
Certain untoward episodes took place; it
was said that purses disappeared while
crafty sorcerers were reading palms. The
bishop of Paris reprimanded the credulous
and superstitious faithful. The Egyptians
were forced to move on and took the road
to Pontoise.
Soon these companies had travelled the
length and breadth of France. Some of
them then crossed into Aragon and
Catalonia, maintaining that they were on

the pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela.
They traversed Castile and journeyed to
Andalusia where Gypsy counts and dukes
were splendidly treated by the former con¬
stable and chancellor of Castile, count
Miguel Lucas de Iranzo, in his castle at
Jaen.
Several authors have maintained without
the slightest evidence that the Gypsies
reached Andalusia from Egypt after sailing
along the coast of Africa. Yet the Spanish
Gypsies had no Arabic words in their
vocabulary, and their itinerary was fully in¬
dicated: on their arrival in Andalusia they
claimed the protection of the Pope, the
King of France and the King of Castile.
In Portugal the Ciganos are first men¬
tioned in literary texts at the beginning of
the sixteenth century. Around the same
time Egyptians were landing in Scotland
and England; the route they had taken is
not known. Perhaps they attracted less at¬
tention than they had on their early stays in
Germany, France and the Low Countries,
for since time immemorial there had been
tinkers in the British Isles whose way of life
was similar to that of the Gypsies.
The Egyptians who settled in Ireland had
a much harder time. The tinkers who were
already there in large numbers considered
the newcomers as rivals and did all they
could to repel them.
Count Antoine Gagino of Little Egypt
arrived in Denmark in 1505 on a Scottish
vessel. He had been expressly recommended
to King John of Denmark by James IV of
Scotland. On 29 September 1512, a Count
Antonius, who is almost certainly the same
person, solemnly entered Stockholm to the
great amazement of the inhabitants.
The first Egyptians to appear in Norway,
in 1544, did not enjoy the same
recommendations. They were prisoners
whom the English had got rid of by forcibly
embarking them. Just as their compatriots
had found an indigenous population of
tinkers in England and Scotland, the
Experts today are all agreed that the
Gypsies originated in the Indian sub¬
continent, although they are less sure of
the date (generally thought to be around
1000 AD) when they began their long
migration westwards. The Gypsies were
to spread across the whole ofEurope and
eventually throughout the entire world.
Below, the village of Kadlrpur (Pakistan),
near the left bank of the Indus river.
During their long sojourn In Greece,
where they lived In a region known as
"little Egypt" (hence the names, "Egyp¬
tians", "Gitans" and "Gypsies", by
which they became known in Europe), the
Gypsies noticed that the pilgrims whom
they saw passing through on their way to
the Holy Land enjoyed a special status as
privileged travellers. Later, as they
travelled westward, the Gypsies often
passed themselves off as pilgrims. Thus,
the first leaders from Little Egypt to set
out for Spain, In the 15th century,
declared that they were going on a
pilgrimage to Compostela. Above, the
cathedral shrine of Santiago de Com¬
postela, In north-western Spain; wood¬
cut dating from 1491 by the German artist
Michael Wohlgemuth (1434-1519).
Gypsies who landed in Norway came upon
the itinerant Fanter.
Some groups of Gypsies emigrated from
Sweden to Finland and Estonia. Around
the same time, the kingdom of Poland and
the Grand Duchy of Lithuania welcomed
the "mountain Gypsies" from Hungary
and the "plains Gypsies" from Germany.
Around 1501 Gypsy bands were travel¬
ling in the south of Russia; others were
crossing from Poland to the Ukraine. Final¬
ly, in 1721, the Gypsies of the Polish plain
reached Tobolsk, the capital of Siberia.
They declared their intention of going to
China, but the governor did not allow them
to continue their journey.
©
Over the centuries Gypsies have used a
variety ofcarts and tents for traveland ac¬
commodation, but It was not until the
middle of the 19th century, In England,
that the true caravan, or Vardo, first ap¬
peared. Although today many caravans
are motorized, the horse-drawn caravan
Is still In use In many countries. Between
about 1875 and 1920, an elaborate type of
living van, the "Reading Van", which
became very popular, was built In
England at Reading, In Berkshire. The
more luxurious vans, such as the model
depicted above, were richly ornamented
with decorative carvings.
Thus between the fifteenth and the eigh¬
teenth centuries all the countries of Europe
had received Gypsies. But although they
settled as far afield as the colonies of Africa
and America, they did not do so entirely of
their own volition.
Spain sent a number of Gypsies across
the Atlantic, followed by Portugal which,
from the end of the sixteenth century on¬
wards, deported large numbers of Ciganos
to Angola, to Sao Tomé, to Cape Verde,
and above all to Brazil.
In the seventeenth century, Gypsies were
sent from Scotland to Jamaica and Bar¬
bados to work on the plantations, and in the
eighteenth century to Virginia.
In the reign of Louis XIV, Gypsies con¬
demned to penal servitude were released on
the order of the king on condition that they
went to the "islands of America". Bohe¬
mians figured among the colonists recruited
by the Compagnie des Indes for the ex¬
ploitation of Louisiana. Like other col¬
onists they were given houses in New
Orleans. A century later their descendants
who had settled in Biloxi in Louisiana still
expressed themselves in French.
Since the beginning of the nineteenth cen¬
tury large numbers of Gypsy families have
freely emigrated from Europe to America.
They may be found in Canada, in Califor¬
nia, in the suburbs of New York and
Chicago, in Mexico, in central America and
further south, in Argentina and Chile. They
practise virtually the same occupations as
they do in Europe, follow the same rites,
and feel at home wherever they find
themselves, for the place where they happen
to be becomes their homeland.
FRANCOIS DE VAUX DE FOLETIER,
French archivist and historian, is a former
director of the archives of the Seine and of the
city of Paris. A student of Gypsy history, he
has also lived among Gypsies and accom¬
panied them on their pilgrimages. Among his
many published works on the Gypsies are
Mille Ans d'Histoire des Tsiganes (1970) and
Les Bohémiens au XIX» Siècle (1981). The
present article has been extracted from his
latest book. Le Monde des Tsiganes, publish¬
ed by Berger-Levrault, Paris, 1983.
