Trade links from Europe to Cathay
Economic relations between places
bordering the western Mediterranean
VENICE
GENOA
MARSEILLES
MOROCCO
TLEMCEN
Dates in italics indicate commercial agreements
signed between the authorities concerned. Other
dates refer to the principal episodes in these
relations (treaties, exchanges of ambassadors,
disputes, etc.)
Source: Jean Dévisse
1391/92
1356
1251
TRIPOLI
It Is known from Chi¬
nese sources that in
628, under the Tang
dynasty, official envoys
from Black Africa arriv¬
ed in China with per¬
fumes and ivory. They
are depicted in frescoes
in the decorated grot¬
toes (5th to 10th cen¬
tury) of Dunhuang, in
Kansu province, one of
the masterpieces of
Buddhist art. Among
the personages por¬
trayed in this mural,
evoking the "Lamenta¬
tion for Buddha in Nir¬
vana", scholars of the
Dunhuang Institute see
in the dark-skinned
figure with curiy hair (to
the right of the third row
from the bottom) the im¬
aginary representation
of an African.
From the twelfth to the sixteenth century, Africa
played a major role in intercontinental rela¬
tions, particularly in the Mediterranean region
and, via the Indian Ocean, with Asia.
The Mediterranean. Although there was some
trade in such products as nuts, pepper and
ivory, it was through the gold and slaves torn
from its bosom that the African presence
became most clearly visible in the Mediterra¬
nean economy. As early as the end of the tenth
century, Spanish Christians had begun to ob¬
tain gold from the south and gold continued to
flow towards north Africa until the end of the fif¬
teenth century. From the thirteenth century on¬
wards the profits accumulated. An active mer¬
chant class came into being in the great Chris¬
tian ports of the Mediterranean and in certain
large cities such as Milan and Florence. The
"thirst for gold" in an expanding Western
economy was to accelerate ihe search for the
gold routes to the interior of the African con¬
tinent and it is reasonable to assume that a by
no means negligible proportion of African gold
found its way into the European commercial
circuit.
Asia. According to ancient historians, intense
commercial activity already existed in the
twelfth century on the east African coast. This
trading activity expanded considerably during
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Ivory,
collected in the interior and much sought after
for the Muslim, Chinese and Indian markets,
hides, iron and gold constituted the most im¬
portant export products. Gold from the south,
exported through Sofala but marketed at Kilwa,
assumed a dominant place in this trade.
Ships brought various products to this coast:
cowrie shells, new plants, clothing and glass
beads. This was mainly a coastal trade carried
in ships which probably used Kilwa as their
home port. Muslim ships sailed from Mombasa
or Malindi to Asia every year and played an im¬
portant part in developing navigation tech¬
niques which improved considerably from the
thirteenth to the fifteenth century. African
sailors were employed on coasters and other
ships plying between Asia and Africa, at least
if certain paintings on manuscripts are to be
believed.
Over fifty towns, from Cape Gardafui to
Sofala, demonstrated the vitality of urban
development in the Swahili zone, even before
the arrival of the Arabs. One of the most
prosperous of these towns was Kilwa whose
four- and five-storey houses are described by
fifteenth-century Chinese sources.
The Chinese visited this coast of Africa in
force during the fifteenth century. There is
evidence too of the arrival of Africans in China,
possibly as early as the sixth or seventh cen¬
tury. Paintings of the T'ang era show Black
Africans in Buddhist grottoes and a thirteenth-
century compilation probably refers to Swahili
country. As early as 1402, a Korean map gave
an approximately correct outline of southern
Africa. In addition to the slave trade, Chinese
sources mention four major articles exported
from east Africa: gold, amber, yellow san¬
dalwood and ivory.
11
