Where do we stand in the war on hunger?
t
m
THE United Nations World Food Conference, held in Rome
in 1974, represented a bench-mark in thinking about
the global food system. The immediate threats of
famine in the Indian sub-continent and the African Sahel, coupl¬
ed with the drawdown of world reserves to their lowest levels
in twenty-five years and corresponding increases in food j
prices, shocked the international community into a mood of
serious concern and reappraisal.
The first and overriding assumption in the minds of many
delegates in 1974 was that the world was entering a period of
tight food supplies brought about by population growth,
without a cushion of large reserves, and that mass starvation
was a distinct possibility. Demand was in danger of outpacing
available supplies in the developing regions, especially in Asia.
At the same time, demand for grain and meat was expanding
in higher-income developing countries.
In these circumstances, the major food-producing countries
would not be able to produce enough grain to meet the demand;
nor did it appear likely that such large projected import re¬
quirements could even be transported, assuming foreign ex¬
change to pay for them. Moreover, since the balance of supply
and demand would at least be close, with little surplus, recur¬
rent food crises were more likely, given climatic variability and
man-made disruption. Therefore, new international
mechanisms were needed to ensure adequate food supplies.
The answer proposed to the world food problem was essen
¡ally increased agricultural production in the food-deficit
developing regions. Increased production would mean greater
food self-reliance and less dependence on trade. There was
reasonable confidence about the technical means to increase
production in the food-deficit regions, if sufficient priority and
resources to agriculture could be allocated and maintained.
Hence there was an implicit optimism at the World Food Con¬
ference, at least in the rhetoric, that with increased production
in food-deficit areas the worst aspects of hunger could be
eradicated in a decade and the threat of starvation could be vir¬
tually eliminated.
Great emphasis was placed on mobilizing the political will
necessary to keep food issues in the forefront. To maintain
political momentum, special follow-up and oversight bodies
were created, including the World Food Council, the FAO Com- 1
mittee on World Food Security, and the Committee on Food Aid
Policies and Programmes. There was also the feeling that inter¬
national agreements were needed in order to establish a system
of nationally-held food reserve capabilities and to ensure ade¬
quate food aid levels in times of emergencies and local produc¬
tion shortfalls. .
The fear of another period of rising prices prompted a concern
for expanding agricultural production to promote food self-
sufficiency ("zero imports") and for negotiating international
reserves and food aid agreements that could protect low-
income countries from natural or man-made disasters, high
prices, or political vulnerability due to dependence on large food
imports. Hence, food security was implicitly identified with
commercial food prices and physical availability and less with
demand and consumption issues regarding poor people or nutri¬
tionally vulnerable groups.
By 1 984 many of the assumptions emanating from the 1 974
Conference have proved to be ill-founded, or have developed in
circumstances different from those originally anticipated. No
This text has been taken from The World Food and Hunger Problem:
Changing Perspectives and Possibilities 1974-1984, an independent
assessment, presented to the World Food Council, on progress in
meeting food objectives since the 1974 World Food Conference. By
Walter P. Falcon (USA), CT. Kurien (India), Femando Monckeberg (Chile),
Achola P. Okeyo (Kenya), S.O. Olayide (Nigeria). Ferenc Rabar (Hungary),
Wouter Tims (The Netherlands)
'*\
doubt, the major assumption that has not been borne out was
that the world was entering a period of tight food supplies
globally, and hence rising prices. à . .
After a slow start in 1975, the years 1976, 1977 and 1978
witnessed a substantial recovery in cereal production and in the
levels of reserves held by the major grain producers. Total
world production fell below aggregate consumption in 1979
and 1980, with a resulting drawdown in reserves; but bumper
world production levels in 1981 and 1982 brought in record
surpluses and the lowest real market prices for cereals in 30
years.
Despite such variability in grain crop production perfor¬
mance, market adjustments were made fairly smoothly after
1 974, even without an effective International Wheat Agree¬
ment in place. Demand for grain-fed livestock grew rapidly in
the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and some middle-income
developing countries. During the decade, trade in coarse grains
increased fourfold, yet supplies proved more than ample to
handle this demand.
In the decade after the World Food Conference, the net addi¬
tion to global population has been approaching one billion peo¬
ple. Much of this increase has taken place in those countries or
regions known for acute food problems, but this has not led to
any strain on the world food situation. On the contrary, by
1 984 the world cereal situation was similar to that of the early
1970sample supplies at the global level, depressed grain
prices, and unmarketable production in North America and the
European Community, f . ', £
While the threat of rising international food prices has not
been borne out during the decade, international agricultural
trade has been marked by the disruptive influence of interna¬
tional market instability.
The decade has also witnessed a clearer understanding of the
nature and extent of malnutrition. The "hunger problem" is no
longer perceived to be one of starvation or protein deficiency,
but rather of chronic undernutrition, affecting a range of
vulnerable groups whose common bond is their poverty. As
called for in 1 974, the potential for mass famine has been large¬
ly eliminated given the willingness of a stricken country to ac¬
cept assistance. The international response process has made
notable improvements. Relief supplies, both domestic and in¬
ternational, have been mobilized for the large majority of
emergency situations during the decade, most of which were
local in character and the result of man-made disasters and en¬
suing refugee movements.
Despite these improvements, chronic hunger is still a stag¬
gering problem for tens of millions of people. Reaching them
as opposed to disaster or famine victims has proved to be a
much more intractable task than many imagined in 1974.
It is now realized that the hungry are closely linked to their
particular food- and labour-market conditions and to the impact
of changing technologies on their societies. Ironically, the
undernourished are often engaged in the production of food.
Overall, the focus of international concern about food and
hunger problems has slowly shifted from Asia to Africa. Asia,
as a whole, has made rapid strides in increasing agricultural pro¬
duction; and dependency on imported cereals has been reduc¬
ed, although Asia still has the largest absolute number of poor
and chronically undernourished. Africa, on the other hand,
seems to be living out the 1974 fears. Food production has
fallen well behind population needs, and external food supply
has become increasingly essential. The undernourished in
Africa are now a much higher percentage of total population in
that region than they are in Asia.
Finally it is recognized that overcoming hunger is ultimately
linked to viable employment opportunities and income genera¬
tion, whether in the countryside or in urban areas.
