From campflre to footlights
by Nikolai Slichenko
AN Oriental sage once said that to
know the truth one must go beyond
one's limits. We should never have
realized the validity of this maxim if we had
not crossed the borders of our country for
what was the first foreign tour of our
Romany theatre troupe, Romen. It was in
1982, and we were to perform in distant
Japan "We the Gypsies", one of the fifteen
plays in our repertoire. After playing for six
weeks to packed houses, sometimes to over
2,000 spectators, we realized that trans¬
lation of our dialogue and lyrics was not
necessary. The public called us back for en¬
cores many times, and the famous Japanese
singer Okada Yoshika said, "Their songs
resemble our traditional songs but differ
sharply in their passionate spirit".
What I value most in my people is their
ability to be themselves, everywhere and at
all times; their capacity to follow their
destiny along the many paths of history, to
draw new strength from one generation to
the next; their fight to preserve their vita¬
lity; their creative impulse and the poetry
with which they remember their ancestors.
Long ago on the banks of the Ganges
there lived a tribe of strong and handsome
men who had the gift of creating delight
through their songs, of arousing strong
emotions, laughter, and sometimes tears.
Their songs were sweet and harmonious,
their dancing supple and rhythmic. Did
they perhaps already know that the power
of their art would feed the irresistible long
ing which would drive them to seek their
fortune elsewhere?
Prosper Mérimée's spirited and reckless
Carmen, Victor Hugo's graceful
Esmeralda, Pushkin's rebellious Zemphira,
Tolstoy's voluptuous Masha the Gypsy,
Leskov's heroine Grushenka, the very in¬
carnation of beauty... were not produced
by their creator's imaginative genius. These
are real people, alive and warm, who came
out of their tents and their caravans and
strode directly into literature.
Although the first Gypsy choirs were
formed in Moscow in the eighteenth cen¬
tury, the true folk art of the Gypsies long re¬
mained unknown. Until the 1920s variety
theatres, restaurants and cabarets presented
26

E
©
«I A scene from "Life on Wheels", a three-
act musical Inspired by Gypsy life which
was staged by the Romen Gypsy theatre
troupe In Moscow over 50 years ago.
the extravagantly exotic charms of Gypsy
songs and dances, a pseudo-art which was
called "Tsiganchtchina". This was a slur
on the authenticity of Gypsy folk art and a
major threat to its survival.
It was decided to end this state of affairs.
The idea was born of creating a Gypsy
theatre which could perform the noble task
of becoming a focus of cultural activity and
education, and a source of inspiration for a
new life.
The experimental theatre was solemnly
inaugurated on 24 January 1931. At first it
faced many difficulties. Almost half the
performers were illiterate. Roles had to be
learned orally, by constant repetition.
Dramatic art in the strict sense was absent,
and the problem of creating a repertoire
was particularly acute.
The first productions, a variety show
called "Today and Tomorrow", and "Life
on Wheels", a musical drama based on a
work by Alexander Guermanov, contained
an appeal in favour of sedentarization, with
all that sedentarization had to offer in the
way of education, real participation in the
new life of society, and access to the values
of world culture. For the first time in their
history the Gypsies could describe on stage
in their mother tongue what was most im¬
portant in their lives.
A major theatrical event of both civic and
artistic importance was the staging of
Bodas de Sangre ("Blood Wedding") by
Federico García Lorca, an author endowed
with extraordinary poetic feeling for
everything that is truly of the people. The
play was directed by Mikhail Yanshin, an
outstanding actor with the Moscow Art
Theatre and pupil of Stanislavsky who
directed the Romen theatre for five years.
Under his leadership the theatre moved
away from ethnographic and exotic themes
and ventured into the realms of the mind
and reason.
Inspired by noble ideals, Bodas de Sangre
exalts the unique value of each individual
and his life, of his right to remain himself
until his dying breath. The production pro¬
vided a foretaste of the later brilliance of
Lialia Tchernaia, who played the role of the
fiancée, not only portraying the tragedy of
a woman who loses her beloved but also ex¬
pressing a philosophical idea rooted in folk
wisdomthat it is better "to bleed to
death" than to ignore the message of the
heart. This sublime tragedy by the great
Spanish poet was brought to life by the pas¬
sion inherent in the Gypsy vision of the
world. The actors learned the psychological
motivation of the characters with the help
of their colleagues at the Art Theatre. In
Garcia Lorca's work the originality of a
people was not expressed in a striving for
exotic effects; instead the people's true
character was summoned from the depths
of its history.
Russian and other classics began to ap¬
pear on the playbills: "Grushenka"
adapted from Leskov's Enchanted
Wanderer, "Makar Chudra" from Gorki;
"Olessia", from Kuprin; "Aza the Gyp¬
sy", from the Ukrainian writer Mikhail
Starits; Mérimée's Carmen; "The Little
Gypsy", adapted from Cervantes;
"Esmeralda", from Victor Hugo, and
many others.
The Gypsy theatre gave birth to a na¬
tional intelligentsia, whose first university it
was. It also provided a training ground for
dramatists and poets.
In our productions, the mystery of the
origins of my people and its destiny is sus¬
tained by humanism and goodness. We
refer to universal values: the vocation of
man, his responsibility in this beautiful but
fragile and threatened world; good and evil;
whatever is of ethical concern. There is
nothing new in this; any "theatre of ideas"
is concerned with these questions.
But our Gypsy theatre also has a special
mission. Of the millions of Gypsies all over
the world, the 200,000 Soviet Gypsies were
the first to have a professional theatre. This
confers on us a special responsibility for
strengthening awareness of our existence as
a people and safeguarding our artistic and
cultural identity.
I believe that an authentically Gypsy
theatre is not only a means of staging
dramatic performances but an instrument
for shaping the conscience of a people. It
creates a moral climate in which the Gypsy
not only questions himself about life in the
encampment or about his guitar but, like
Hamlet, asks the question "to be or not to
be?".
We try to combine the emotional ef¬
fusiveness of the past with the economy of
expression of modern art. As director and
actor I am not content to evoke an isolated
"The Brothers", byZota Tobolkln, Is the
story of two Gypsy brothers, the virtuous
Matvey and the unscrupulous Efim. In
this scene from the Romen theatre pro¬
duction Efim Is threatening to kill Masha,
who has come to teach the Gypsies to
read and write.
27

destiny, however exciting, swept along in
the great upheaval of history. Our era, so
rich in heroic poetry and faith in the ideals
of humanity, with all that we have won and
lost, is expressed in the poems of Anna
Akhmatova with their vibrant emotional in¬
tensity, in the verse of Sergei Essenin with
its boundless freedom, in the romantic
lyricism of Mikhail Svetlov. The poets com¬
ment on events. The burning passion of the
Gypsies gives them a symbolic splendour.
Our theatre seeks to be a dialogue bet¬
ween different nationalities, with the aid of
two Gypsy "languages": the language of
our times and the vocabulary of the past.
In "We the Gypsies" we have tried to
speak not of individuals but of a people. We
chose to stage a production in the form of
a folk festival, a kind of chronicle being
recorded in the presence of the audience
using dramatic techniques. We wanted to
communicate to the public through singing
and dancing the gaiety of a folklore imbued
with the most authentic inspiration.
The soul of this people plunges its roots
into its roving, which began with its exodus
from India when, according to legend, the
Gypsies had for some unknown reason
(perhaps because of the magic effects of
their art on the spectators or because of
their eternally rebellious nature) angered
God, who sent against them a wind so
strong that men, horses and wagons were all
scattered. When the storm abated the men
looked around them and could not believe
their eyes: they were in unknown places and
among unknown people, and no one knew
where their country was nor even if it had
ever existed...
This marked the start of their endless and
always dangerous roaming in search of the
unknown. But the bare feet were already
advancing along a path which would lead
this people to its maturity, make it an
organic part of the human community, and
lead it towards spiritual renewal. We invite
the public to share the dance of Esmeralda,
as brief and passionate as her life, amidst
the noisy crowds of medieval Paris. We
wish to transmit to our audiences some of
our knowledge of the irresistible force of
love, so well illustrated by the impetuous
Carmen. And the Russian Gypsy Masha,
after piercing the heart of Fedia Protassov
in Tolstoy's "Living Corpse", will sing her
ballad of eternally elusive perfection.
Lialia Tchernala, a legendary
figure in the Soviet theatre,
was the first Carmen in a
popular adaptation of Pros¬
per Mérimée 's story staged
by the Romen theatre during
the 1930s.
Audacity of thought, which is to a certain
degree acquired in the theatre, allows us to
stage a work by Tolstoy and with Fedia Pro¬
tassov to question ourselves about the
meaning of life, to recreate the pure and
eternal love of Kuprin's heroine Olessia,
and to evoke the implacable sadness of
Hemingway's masterpiece For Whom the
Bell Tolls.
It seems to me that the more artistic our
language is and the more human the sub¬
jects we treat, the more familiar, understan¬
dable and reliable will be the relationships
between human beings, so vital in today's
world when we run the risk of breaking
forever what Shakespeare called "the suc¬
cession of the ages".
NIKOLAI ALEKSEYEVICH SLICHENKO,
Soviet actor and singer, has played over sixty
roles in the Romen Gypsy theatre whose chief
stage director he has been since 1977. His
productions include Grouchenka, based on
Leskov's The Enchanted Traveller, and a
musical entitled We the Gypsies, written and
composed in collaboration with Rom Lebedev.
In 1980, he published in Moscow an
autobiographical work entitled Born by the
Campfire in which he tells the story of the life
and spiritual quest of the founders of the
Romen theatre group.
