FROM BiÄRTER TO BIG BUSINESS



The adventure of world trade
by A.J. Barbosa Lima Sobrinho
IT is difficult for anyone who has even
only a superficial idea of the complex
pattern of world trade today to con¬
ceive of its modest origins, which can be
traced back to Palaeolithic times, when
men ceased to get their food by hunting and
began to produce it themselves.
These small farmers produced a few com¬
modities for their sustenance and survival,
but there were many other things they lack¬
ed, and they realized at an early stage that
they could exchange what they had for
some of the things they needed. This led
them to produce surpluses with which they
could obtain the goods they lacked. This is
how barter originated.
Barter was initially practised between
neighbours, then at the level of villages and
ALEXANDRE BARBOSA LIMA SOBRINHO.
Brazilian politician, journalist and essayist, is a
member of the Brazilian Literary Academy and
president of the Brazilian Press Association.
He was governor of Pemambuco from 1948
to 1951 and has written many books and
articles on the political history of Brazil.
la:ger communities. The barter system had
to overcome many obstacles. It was, for in¬
stance, necessary to produce the articles
which were needed by the owners of other
goods.
Trade in the strict sense started in the
Mediterranean, in the valleys of the Nile,
the Jordan and Euphrates, along the coasts
of the Red Sea, the Dead Sea and the Gulf.
This extensive area in which Egypt, Arabia,
Palestine, Syria, Mesopotamia and Assyria
came into being in a sense constituted a
geopolitical and physical unit that was to in¬
fluence the destiny of its inhabitants.
Egypt played a leading role in this initial
stage of trade because of the wealth it deriv¬
ed from the fertilizing floods of the Nile.
She established regular relations with Asia.
Her caravans set out in search of the pro¬
ducts of Phoenicia, Syria and the Red Sea
area. The Bible tells us that the brothers of
Joseph transported the most precious ar¬
ticles to be found in their landbalsam and
honey, perfumes and myrrh, pistachios and
almonds. Egypt's imports included wood,
ivory, gold, wine and oil, and she exported
grain, textiles and manufactured articles,
especially arms. Trade took place overland
because the Egyptians were not great
sailors; it was still conducted on a barter
basis and sometimes consisted in the pay¬
ment of tribute by subject peoples.
Governments began to take an interest in
trade, encouraging and sometimes controll¬
ing it. Although money was still unknown,
barter operations between private traders
became easier and more frequent once they
had a fixed weight of metal gold or
silver as a common standard of reference.
Photo of the bazaar at Damascus (Syria) was
taken by the French photographer Félix
Bonfils (1825-1885). It belongs to a
remarkable collection of historical photos
on the Middle East in the possession of the
Semitic Museum of Harvard University. A
series ofposters on the history of the Middle
East, based on the photographic documen¬
tation of the Semitic Museum is currently
being published with the support of
Unesco's International Fund for the Promo¬
tion of Culture.
ykn A ¡Ail > rVL W- f / >rvï, ^> V*^"_*^
0B9^BBflËWi^&'
'-TVSJfa BEST* ft^^^ÉÉk^^^^B«^ Et
rrrf *
*"" -.**» * *'1^^*'
-- s -t. ta .* - ^ Ki^i-

The tip of a Chaldean stela
(gravestone) dating from the
time of Hammurabi (c.
1792-1750 BC), founder of the
first Babylonian empire.
Photo © Giraudon, Paris. Louvre Museum
An Athenian coin dating from
c. 480 BC is adorned with an
owl, the emblem of the protec¬
tress of Athens, the goddess
Athene.
Photo © Henri Stierlin, Geneva
A purple shell of Murex bran-
daris from Tyre (c. 1st century
AD). In Antiquity a deep crim¬
son colouring matter was
derived from this mollusc and
used for dyeing clothes. Pur¬
ple from Tyre was more highly
prized than any other.
Photo from Tyre through the Ages
©Dar el-Mashreq publishers, Beirut
The bronze she-wolf in the
Capitoline Museum, Rome, is
Etruscan work dating from the
5th century BC. According to
the legend Rome was founded
by Romulus and Remus, the
twin sons of a Vestal Virgin,
who were suckled by a wolf.
Photo © Alinari-Giraudon, Paris
This terracotta figurine un¬
earthed at Carthage is a typ¬
ical product of the potteries of
the Greek islands (6th century
BC). Bardo Museum, Tunis.
Photo Luc Joubert © Archéologie Vivante
Already used in the 12th century to
designate associations ofmerchants in Ger¬
many, England and northern France, the
term Hanse ivas later applied to leagues of
trading cities. In the 13th century Bruges
(see p. 16) played a central role in Hanseatic
trade. Above, seal of the Hanseatic town of
Elbing (today Elblag) on the Baltic coast of
Poland.
Babylon, then inhabited by the Semites,
also became an excellent market for pro¬
ducts from the south (Arabia), the west
(Syria) and even the east (Persia). These
commodities included precious metals,
wool, building materials and cereals, the
values of which fluctuated, as indicated in
the famous Code of Hammurabi, with a
tendency for priority to be given to silver.
This kind of trade did not affect the situa¬
tion of the mass of the people. Its chief pur¬
pose was to meet the demand for luxury
goods. Essential commodities did not come
from abroad but were obtained through
barter at local or regional fairs.
This was still the situation when the
Phoenicians came to dominate maritime
trade. Situated on a coastal strip of
Palestine which did not offer favourable
conditions for the survival of their cities of
Tyre, Sidon and Beirut, the Phoenicians
turned to the sea in search of wealth.
Despite the enormous difficulties in those
times of sailing in small vessels without
navigational aids, the Phoenicians
transformed the Mediterranean into a kind
of private sea and established small colonies
in the Mediterranean basin.
Under pressure from their neighbours,
and also because of internal dissensions, the
power of the Phoenicians gradually declin¬
ed, and was inherited by Carthage, a city
which the Phoenicians had founded in the
ninth century BC. The power of Carthage
grew to such an extent that it threatened the
dominant position of Rome, and the
famous words of the Roman statesman
Cato, "Carthage must be destroyed",
became a programme for the assertion of
Roman claims to world supremacy.
There is no evidence that the Phoenicians
had a money economy. In the fourth cen¬
tury BC, however, Carthage decided to
mint Spanish silver and Mauretanian gold
for trading purposes. Herodotus describes
how the Carthaginian traders went about
their business. On arrival at some point or
other on the coast "they would land their
wares, spread them out on the beach, and
then return to their vessels from which they
would release columns of smoke. Seeing
these, the natives would approach with
gold..."
Athens inherited the commercial
hegemony which the Phoenicians had exer¬
cised from Tyre, and held on to it for a long
time. The products of China and India
followed an arc-shaped route through Syria
to Athens, whose tanneries, foundries and
establishments producing arms and works
of art turned out the goods on which this
trade was based. Relations were developed
with the north in order to obtain timber for
ship-building. The slave market flourished
side by side with the trade in commodities.
Certain foodstuffs such as cereals, meat
and fish from the Black Sea were eventually
included in these commercial operations.
With the Mediterranean still the setting
for these exchanges, Greece made a con¬
tribution of inestimable value to the
development of trade by creating a money
economy. The coin made its appearance in
the middle of the seventh century BC,
facilitating barter and other forms of trade.
The glorious expansion of Athens, and of
Greece as a whole, was followed by the rise^

A nutmeg seller is depicted in
this detail from a 15th-century
French illuminated manuscript
(now at Modena, Italy) of a
treatise in which the Greek
physician Dioscorides (also
known as Pedanius, 1st cen¬
tury AD) details the properties
of some 700 plants. The
aromatic kernel of the fruit of
the nutmeg tree is still widely
used as a spice (see article
page 20 on the ' 'spice route ' ').
©
Silver sandals of a mummy
from Ancón, on the coast of
central Peru (1000-1400 AD).
^ of Rome, based on the force of its legions.
At the same time great cities such as Alexan¬
dria, Seleucia and Antioch, with more
pressing commercial needs, were starting to
emerge. Rome's impact was particularly
strong in the slave trade, and in the exten¬
sion of the tribute system to conquered
peoples.
The decline of Rome contributed to the
rise of feudalism. The conditions necessary
for the growth of trade disappeared. Trade
ebbed, threatened by serious dangers. Sea
traffic declined with the disappearance of
the powerful governments which had pro¬
tected and promoted it. Overland trade had
to follow routes which were no longer in the
state in which the Romans had left them.
There was a constant risk of attacks, many
of them carried out with the protection and
complicity of the feudal lords.
Hence the need arose to restore the foun¬
dations on which trade was based. In order
to ensure the necessary co-operation, the
traders formed associations such as the
Hanseatic League. This consolidated the
existence of a new social class the mer¬
chant class. Fairs, which had always been a
regional tradition, grew in importance, with
the collaboration of the feudal lords, who
realized the advantages to be gained from
their development. Seaborne trade was
fostered by the introduction of the com¬
pass. Under the patronage of the King of
Portugal's brother Henry the Navigator, a
training school for navigators was set up at
Sagres, and Christopher Columbus was to
obtain from the rulers of Castile the sup¬
port he needed for his hazardous voyage.
Taking the African route, Vasco de Gama
reached India, and setting out for the same
destination, Pedro Alvarez Cabrai reached
Brazil. This was the age of the great
discoveries which would complete the map
of the world; and exchanges with the newly
discovered lands infused fresh life into
trade.
Up to that time international trade was
. mainly concerned with luxury goods
spices such as pepper, cloves, cinnamon,
nutmeg, ginger and aloes; perfumes like
balsam, benzoin and camphor; scarce com-
6
modities like salt, precious stones,
diamonds, emeralds, rubies, sapphires;
pearls from the Indian Ocean, African
ivory, dyes for colouring cloth, rare silks
and brilliant purple.
With the discovery of America, gold and
silver began to reach Europe in unexpected
quantities from Mexico and Peru. Trade,
for so many centuries limited to barter,
could now rely upon sufficient quantities of
the metals required for minting coins under
a system of bimetallism, not without hesita¬
tion and controversy throughout the world.
Thanks to the ducat, and the new curren¬
cies minted by European States, trade ac¬
quired the facilities it needed for its expan¬
sion; owing to the intrinsic value of the
metal and the trustworthiness of the issuing
government, these currencies constituted a
measure of value and a means of exchange.
At the same time traders, who in Antiquity
had been treated as an inferior class, ac¬
quired a new status, forming a solid, power¬
ful bourgeoisie, and beginning to consider
themselves the equals of the ruling classes.
Commercial supremacy passed from
Spain and Portugal to England and
Holland, with France and Germany in con¬
stant competition. Then came the turn of
the United States. The Industrial Revolu¬
tion Jiad a multiplier effect on commercial
activity, creating new varieties of merchan¬
dise, increasing the volume of commercial
goods, and intensifying a struggle for com¬
mercial supremacy which sometimes led to
war. Companies such as the India Com¬
panies and other similar organizations
which flourished at this time, were
established or supported by the States and
began to organize trading monopolies.
The moment came when Britain won
mastery of the seas a position she held for
a long time and for which she equipped her
ports. She also increased her overland
trade, which after the invention of the
steam engine, was soon being carried by a
vast railway network. It was also during the
period of British preponderance that the
world entered the age of coal, which
strengthened Britain's dominance both of
the seas and of railways, which she financed
in many parts of the world for the export of
her manufactured goods.
The end of the nineteenth century saw the
invention of the internal combustion
engine, with the result that oil became an
essential commodity. Here too the British
were in a dominant position until the cost of
two world wars obliged them to share their
power with the United States. Thanks to the
power now exercised by its cartels, trusts
and consortia, this vast country, with its
enormous resources, has taken over the
position occupied by Britain in the nine¬
teenth century.
At the same time communications, an
essential auxiliary of commercial activity,
have progressed from the organization of
postal services (already a great advance) to
the invention of the submarine cable, radio,
the telephone and telex. Land and sea
transport use and benefit from air
transport. Now everything is so close that
the world seems to have shrunk.
A.J. Barbosa Lima Sobrinho
