Lumps of amber (translucent
fossil resin) often contain in¬
sects trapped when the resins
flowed from the trees millions
of years ago.
TFH O M T H E B A L T I C T Ö T H Et EVA NT



Forever amber
by Walter Raunig
LONG before regular long-distance
travel was possible in central and
northern Europe, close links existed
in the Near East, North Africa, India and
China between centres and areas of high
culture. These links and contacts were
mainly if not exclusively made possible by
the spirit of enterprise and daring of in¬
dependent merchants, and in spite of
numerous military conflicts were never
completely or permanently broken off.
They led to exchanges of goods and ideas
which in turn helped to stimulate and
develop cultural exchanges, indeed to a
large degree made such exchanges possible.
WALTER RAUNIG, Austrian ethnologist, is
director of the Staatliches Museum für
Volkerkunde, Munich. He is the author of a
number of books and articles on the cultural
history of the Near East, with particular em¬
phasis on ancient trade patterns.
From the middle of the third millennium
onwards the use of metals (copper, bronze,
iron) was accompanied by an intensifica¬
tion and extension of this trade, which
played a decisive role in the cultural history
of mankind.
In Europe, around 1800 BC, with the
transition from the Neolithic (in the later
stage of which copper was already being
used) to the Bronze Age there was also a
perceptible growth in trade. The increasing
use of wheeled vehicles from the middle of
the third millennium onwards played an im¬
portant role in this phenomenon.
Like salt, the highly prized ores used for
producing bronze and, later, iron were
found, mined and worked only in certain
places. Copper, bronze and iron were far
more convenient to use than stone, and a
demand soon arose for them and for ob¬
jects made from them for domestic use,
hunting, war and adornment. The inten¬
sification of trade in Europe also led to a
wider and more rapid distribution of other
commodities. Some of them were
transported and marketed along certain
routes and this led to the growth of trade-
routes such as the "tin road" (see page 10)
and the "salt road". One of these com¬
modities was the petrified wood resin
known as amber, which was greatly prized
in ancient times and still is to some extent
today.
Amber is formed when liquid resin is
buried under a layer of sand or mud, and
achieves a stable state. Deposits of amber
have been found in various parts of Europe,
Asia and America, but in western Europe
the word amber was long applied only to the
fossil resin found in the Baltic and North
Sea regions. Similar fossil resins from twen¬
ty million to 1 20 million years old , have also
been discovered elsewhere in the
Lebanon, -Siberia, Burma, Sidily and the
Dominican Republic. It mainly occurs in
smallish lumps and pieces; it can be crystal
clear or cloudy opaque; and because it often
contains animal or vegetable matter, drops
13

of water or air bubbles, it is of great interest
to zoologists and palaeontologists. Its col¬
our ranges from light yellow to dark brown;
but it may be reddish or even blue.
The use of amber can be traced back to
early historical times. In Europe it has been
used for at least 10,000 years in the
manufacture of ornaments, implements
and utensils, works of art, for medicinal
purposes (amulets) and as a perfume (when
burnt). Modern compressed amber, pro¬
duced from very small or waste pieces, is
used as gem material or for technical pur¬
poses as an insulator. For thousands of
years, long before the arrival of Europeans,
Asian and American amber was worked in
quarries and galleries by local craftsmen
and traded over extensive areas.
It was highly prized in ancient Rome to
which large quantities were brought from
all parts of the Empire to be fashioned into
gems and works of art. But its importance
declined towards the end of this period and
amber only came back into favour in the
Middle Ages when it was used for making
rosaries. A further revival began in the six-
teenth century and in the seventeenth and
eighteenth production flourished of a wide
variety of art objects, made either from
amber or from a combination of amber and
other precious materials. Imitation amber
objects made from mixtures of powdered
amber, synthetics, or artificially coloured
copal (a resin of recent geological origin)
are also found. These imitations are still
widely used in Africa, Tibet and elsewhere.
From earliest times this "stone" which
was so highly prized in many parts of the
world was transported and traded over long
distances. In Europe the biggest and most
important supplies of amber traded in early
times were found at Samland on the Baltic
coast and in smaller quantities on the North
Sea. The chief mining area was near Kalin¬
ingrad (formerly Königsberg). From there a
western branch of the ancient "amber
Thought by early man to be
sunlight solidifying on the
ocean waves, amber has
always been prized as a
material for gems and or¬
naments. Near right, 19th-
century Ethiopian necklace of
glass and amber beads with
decorative silver plaque (35
cm long); above, necklace
with amber pendant from Bur¬
ma (18 cm long); far right,
amber necklace from a Ger¬
manic tomb (400 AD) at
Bergheim in Bavaria (35 cm
long).
14
1
i
I
5

road" passed through the region of the
Lower Elbe and the Lower Rhine, then up
the Rhine through the Burgundian Gate or
along the Aare and the shores of Lake
Geneva to the Rhone, then following the
Rhone southwards as far as the famous
Greek port of Massilia (Marseilles). An im¬
portant eastern route ran from the Baltic
coast along the Vistula and through the ter¬
ritory of Kiev southeastwards to the Black
Sea. Here this Eastern amber route linked
up with the long and ancient overland con¬
nections to the Near East, central and east
Asia and India. But by far the most impor¬
tant amber route ran in Antiquity from the
North Sea or the Baltic across the Vistula,
through the Moravian Gate to Carnuntum,
on the Danube east of Vienna, then along
the edge of the eastern Alps and across them
southwards to the important trading centre
of Aquilea on the north Adriatic coast.
From earliest times small quantities of
amber were carried from northern Europe
by sea around the Iberian Peninsula to
Mediterranean centres of civilization and to
the Near East. However, the sea-borne
amber trade from the Adriatic and Black
Seas to southern Italy, Greece, north
Africa, the Levant and Egypt was more
important.
Even earlier there was a regular long¬
distance commercial traffic, by land or sea,
not only in the Near East, north Africa and
Europe but much further afield, from cen¬
tral, south, southeast and east Asia, as well
as from various parts of west and east
Africa. Thus precious amber reached nearly
every part of the ancient world, alongside a
wide variety of other goods traded over
huge distances, such as tin from Britain,
silver from Spain, incense from southern
Arabia, lapis Lazuli from Afghanistan,
ivory from Africa, furs from Siberia,
precious stones from India, and silk from
China. Some of the amber sold in Asia
came from Burma.
Exquisitely carved amber
miniature (9.5 cm high) deple¬
ting the homage of the
shepherds to the Infant Jesus.
It Is thought to have been pro¬
duced around 1650 in north¬
east Germany.
Photo © Bavarian National Museum,
Munich
A time-honoured form of tra¬
vel, ox-carts ply through rug¬
ged terrain In Anatolia, a
region In which some of the
oldest wheeled vehicles have
been found. One of man's
most Important technological
discoveries, dating from
around the 3rd millennium BC,
the wheeled vehicle played a
fundamental role In the deve¬
lopment of trade and travel.
Photo © Omnia, Berne
From about 3000 BC at the latest Egypt
was in contact with its neighbours to the
south, west and, somewhat later, east by
caravan routes. These links soon extended
eastwards as far as the Tigris and Euphrates
from where contacts were prolonged to
southern Arabia, India and the highlands
of central Asia. Traffic increased in
Ptolemaic and afterwards in Roman times,
together with sea-borne trade through the
Red Sea, the Indian Ocean and the seas of
southeast Asia as far as China, as well as by
the great overland routes. Two of these
great Asian overland links acquired special
importance for the commercial and cultural
history of mankind. One was the "incense
route" which led, on the one hand from the
ancient kingdoms of southern Arabia along
the western coast of the Peninsula to the
centres of the Levant, and on the other,
across the desert to the Gulf. The other was
the "silk road" which ran from thousands
of kilometres from Antioch (founded about
300 BC) to China dividing into branches
through Persia, Bactria, the Pamirs and the
Tarim Basin. Amber was amongst the many
goods and products carried along these
trade arteries which linked together coun¬
tries and centres of high culture.
Today, the once highly coveted fossilized
resin plays a very limited role in trade.
Despite still quite intensive and extensive
mininghighly mechanized by the use of
dredgers in the Baltic region, by hand in
narrow galleries in the Dominican Republic
as centuries ago (amber ceased to be ex¬
ported from Burma years ago)for all
practical purposes amber is now used and
only to a limited extentsolely in the pro¬
duction of insulators and mass-produced
ornaments and jewellery. Bui lovers of the
beautiful soft "stone" with its dull or ra¬
diant lustre can still be found in every part
of the world.
Walter Raunlg
