The life of spice
by Khoo Joo Ee
ACCORDING to sources from the
Mediterranean world, during the
Roman empire there was a "cinna¬
mon route" between southeast Asia and the
east African coast. The Roman author
Pliny recounts that cinnamon obtained in
Ethiopia in the first century AD was
brought across distant seas on rafts without
rudders, oars or sails. Sailed by Malayo-
Polynesians of southeast Asia, these rafts
were the ancestors of the double outrigger
boats still to be seen today along the East
African coast opposite Madagascar. Dur¬
ing the winter solstice the dominant east
winds would drive the rafts from gulf to
gulf well past the Maldive Islands, where
the northeast wind blowing off India would
take over and blow them towards the east
KHOO JOO EE, Malaysian art historian and ar¬
chaeologist, is curator of the Muzium Seni
Asia, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur. The
author of a thesis on cultural relations bet¬
ween China and Java of the Majapahit period,
she is involved in a number of projects on
traditional south-east Asian architecture.
African coast north of Madagascar. After
reaching the Red Sea, the cargoes would
take an overland route, passing from peo¬
ple to people until they eventually reached
the Nile valley. Arabian merchants con¬
trolled this coastal cinnamon trade.
At this time, roughly 2,000 years ago
(with the Roman empire at its apogee and
the Han Chinese empire firmly established),
the international trade of the central Asian
overland route reached southeast Asia via a
series of links. Around the second century
AD, however, the central Asian overland
route was disturbed, and southeast Asia
was drawn into international maritime
trade as a link between the Mediterranean,
West Asia and China. The volume of trade
was small: the region's early trading centres
were dependent on the fluctuations of the
international market. Both on the regional
and the international level, it was essentially
a luxury trade in aromatics, drugs, textiles
and metals. Spices from the eastern islands
of the Malay-Indonesian archipelago were
collected at Java for shipment to China.
The Chinese had no access to these islands
which would later be known to Westerners
as the Spice Islands, and recorded them
vaguely and en bloc as "Ocean Islands".
The trade in luxury goods from southeast
Asia to mainland Asia continued until
around the tenth century when Indian and
Chinese traders started to appear on the sea
route for the first time in large numbers.
Their intention was to cut out the mid¬
dlemen and to go right to the source of these
southeast Asian products, especially spices,
which were now in worldwide demand.
With the rise of new ports in southeast
China and the growing commercial and
military strength of south China from the
eleventh to the thirteenth century, Chinese,
Indian and Arab traders themselves
journeyed to southeast Asia in search of
goods, just as Europeans would do three
centuries later, instead of waiting at home
for the precious cargoes to be delivered.
Besides the usual trade in aromatics, drugs,
silks, Indian cotton and Chinese porcelain,
the foreign traders obtained an increased
flow of spices through the intermediary of
20

Peppers drying in the sun,
Andhra Pradesh, India.
The Traveller's Rescue by the
Roc. Illustration from a 14th-
century manuscript from Iraq,
the Ajaib al-Makhlukat.
the Javanese, who from around the thir¬
teenth to the fifteenth century controlled
the trade in spices collected from the eastern
archipelago.
At the European end, Marco Polo the
Venetian reported in 1292 that pepper and
ginger were imported from India, and in
1484 the Genoese Christopher Columbus
also dreamt of Indian spices. After the Por¬
tuguese discovery of the route to India via
the Cape of Good Hope, the spices which
arrived in Europe came largely from the
forest regions of the Malabar coast of west
India. But the spice trade also followed
various routes to the Middle East through
either the Gulf or the Red Sea.
The Malay-Indonesian archipelago was
also criss-crossed by trade-routes, and ships
from many countries took part. But all
routes led to the Strait of Malacca, to which
there was no safe alternative. The produce
of the archipelago was funnelled through
this natural channel because before the days
of steam, the seasonal reversals of winds
obliged sailing ships to pass back and forth
through this channel connecting India and
the archipelago. By the mid- fourteenth cen¬
tury, Malacca was already the collecting
centre of spices sent by Java from the Ban-
da Islands and the Moluccas, and the
distribution point for Indian textiles.
Malacca had developed into an interna¬
tional entrepot by the fifteenth century.
At the beginning of the sixteenth century,
the Spice Islands were still not known to
Europe. Then, after the discovery of the
new sea route to India where several Euro¬
pean "East India companies" became
established, the Portuguese made a spec¬
tacular entry into the Malay-Indonesian ar¬
chipelago. They captured Malacca in 1511,
penetrated the Spice Islands in the follow¬
ing two years, and broke Java's commercial
supremacy. As the Portuguese entered the
Asian sector of the trade in India, the Arab
and Indian merchants were eclipsed, and
after their conquest of Malacca, the Por-
This detail from an Atlas
drawn up by the French
navigator and cartographer
Guillaume Le Testu in 1556
depicts European merchants
in Java returning to their ships
laden with spices.
W^
tugúese monopolized the spice trade. By
1513, nutmeg from the Moluccas had
reached Lisbon via the port of Malacca.
The Portuguese monopoly also caused the
Malabar coast of India to be closed to the
other European companies in India. Thus,
both Asians and Europeans converged on
the southeast Asian archipelago. The
Spaniards, who were also established in the
Philippines, for the first time advanced
claims on the Spice Islands in 1522 follow¬
ing Magellan's voyage in search of a
western passage to the Spice Islands, but
reluctantly renounced them in 1529. In the
seventeenth century, the monopoly passed
into the hands of the Dutch and at the
height of the spice trade the Dutch even had
spice farms in the Moluccas and in the Ban-
da Islands. All the European powers
recognized the pivotal position of Malacca
which lay at the junction of the Indian,
China and Java seas as the chief emporium
of spices like the Golden Chersonese of an¬
cient Greek geography.
In the eighteenth century, a Frenchman
by the "spicey" name of Monsieur Pierre
Poivre ("Peter Pepper") took clove and
nutmeg plants to the Botanical Gardens in
France and from there "introduced" the
spice trees to French colonies in the Indian
Ocean such as Mauritius. Today, the
Moluccas are no longer the only spice-
growing region; Zanzibar and Madagascar
supply cloves to Europe and America for
flavouring food and for medicinal and den¬
tal preparations. The existence of a direct
sea route between the Malay-Indonesian ar¬
chipelago and the east African coast during
the Roman empire 2,000 years ago, gives
grounds for wondering whether the cultiva¬
tion of spices on the East African coast did
not begin before the eighteenth century.
Cloves, nutmeg and pepper, useful and
pleasant condiments, offered a road to
great wealth. The story of the spice trade is
a history of fierce struggle for supremacy in
the Spice Islands. The trade bred conquest,
rivalry and quarrels. Entrepreneurs of
many nations sailed across unknown seas in
search of spices, and discovered new coun¬
tries. Spices have influenced the destinies of
more countries than one; politics,
diplomacy and conquest have been spiced
with pepper, nutmeg and cloves. Empires
rose and fell but nothing ever arrested the
steady and growing flow of the spice trade,
which formed a solid link between the cen¬
turies and brought the Orient and the Occi¬
dent into permanent contact.
Khoo Joo Ee
21
