INDIA
It's never too late...
by Paramesh Krishnan Nair
Afew years ago, a well-known Indian
film pioneer told me that of the forty
odd films he had made he con¬
sidered that only two or three were worth
preserving in the National Film Archive of In¬
dia. This in a way reflects the attitude of most
of our film-makers to archival preservation of
their films.
The average film-maker in India does not
believe that what he is doing is of any
historical consequence, let alone of cultural
interest. For him, as for his colleagues
elsewhere, film-making is first and foremost
a commercial proposition meant for mass
consumption. His primary interest is to get
his investment back with a reasonable profit
within the shortest time span. Setting aside
one of the fifty odd prints made for the initial
release of a film would not cost him much
compared with his total production costs,
but his attitude would be: "Why should I
leave a new print lying idle in the Archive
vaults when it could be bringing in a good
return on the screens of local cinemas?"
The multi-theatre simultaneous release
craze means that the producer/distributor
has to make several prints from the original
picture and sound negative. He is not in the
least concerned that every time a new print
is made the useful life of the original
negative is reduced. In the Indian film in¬
dustry it is not customary to make inter-
negatives or inter-positives. The "Colour
PARAMESH KRISHNAN NAIR is director of
the National Film Archive of India. He has
taken part in a wide range of activities in India
and internationally to promote the safeguard
and protection of moving images and con¬
tributed, as a specialist, to the drafting of the
Unesco Recommendation. He has published a
number of studies and articles on aspects of
cinema.
Reverso Inter-negative" process is prac¬
tically unknown and all release copies are
printed from the original negatives. As a
result, a large number of original negatives
of highly successful films have been damag¬
ed beyond repair due to indiscriminate
duplication of positive prints, both 35mm
and 16mm.
In India the cinema has never been ac¬
corded high priority. To the intelligentsia and
educationists the cinema was something to
be looked down on with contempt and it was
often bracketed with social evils such as bet¬
ting, gambling, drinking and prostitution.
But the masses developed a passion for the
cinema, finding in it an instant escape
medium in which to forget the drudgery of
daily life. They patronized it so ardently that
the Indian cinema has by now become the
most prolific of all the national cinemas.
With a stupendous annual output of over
750 feature films, in fourteen major
languages, which find their outlet through
some ten thousand permanent cinema
houses throughout the country, the cinema
industry has become very much a part of the
Indian reality. Audiences have lived with it,
laughed with it, wept with it and virtually
grown up with it. It has shaped their lives,
their attitudes, values and consciousness.
Neverthless, its importance has only
recently been recognized. As a result,
although India started making films at the
turn of the century, at the same time as the
rest of the world, nobody thought we should
have a Film Archive to take care of our film
heritage. Even after independence, it took
us nearly seventeen years to start collecting
films in an organized manner. By that time
some sixty to seventy per cent of our pre-
independence output had vanished. Films of
that period were not available for love or
money. Their negatives had crumbled and
turned to powder, or after extraction of the
silver from the nitro-cellulose base, had
been turned into bangles and ladies'
handbags.
One such film was Alam Ara (1 931 , in Hin¬
di), the first Indian talkie, which is still not
traceable. When contacted two years before
his death, Ardeshir M. Irani, the maker of
this film and the man who brought sound to
Indian cinema, told us that he had kept some
reels of the film in his office at the Imperial
Studio (now Jyothi Studio). But his son
Shapoorji took us aside and confided: "The
old man still thinks the reels are lying around
in his office, but I know for certain that they
have been disposed of as junk. I myself did
it as they were creating a fire hazard". What
a pity! The man had no idea that he had
allowed one of the most important historical
records of the Indian cinema to be
destroyed.
Among the most important landmark films
of the Indian cinema that have thus vanished
into oblivion are:
Dhiren Ganguli's ß/7ef Ferat ("England
Returned"), 1921An early social satire on
anglicized Indians who blindly import
Western values into traditional Indian
society.
D.N. Sampat's Bhakta Vidur, 1921A folk
tale in which the film director himself played
the central role as a sensitive nationalist
leader; he wears modern dress whilst all the
other characters don suitable mythological
garb.
Baburao Painter's Saukari Pash ("The
Indian Shylock"), 1925A middle-class
peasant family's struggle against the ex¬
ploitation of a heartless money-lender.
»Balidan ("Sacrifice"), 1927Based on
Rabindranath Tagore's Bisarjan.
Imperial's Anarkali, 1928, directed by R.S.
ChoudhuryAn ill-fated romance between
22

4 Sairandhari (1933), by Ra-
jaram Vanakudre Shantaram,
was the first colour film made
in India. This superproduction
was an adaptation of the
Mahabharata epic. Shantaram
was one of the founders of the
Prabhat Studios, based in
Poona, and specialized In
films on social and
mythological themes.
Emperor Akbar's son, Prince Salim, and a
dancing girl, in which the title role was
played by the beautiful Sochana (Ruby
Meyers), the highest paid star of the Indian
screen of those days.
The same director's Khooda Ki Shaan
(Wrath), 1931The central character of this
film was a Gandhi-like figure.
Bhal G. Pendharkar's Shyam Sunder,
1932The first film in the Marathi language
to have a successful silver jubilee run.
Prabhat and V. Shantaram's Sairandhari,
1933The first colour film made in the
country (it was processed in Germany using
one of the early colour processes introduced
by Agfa)A costume spectacular from the
Mahabharata.
Sarvottam Badami's Griha Laxmi
("Educated Wife"), 1934.
Nandlal Jaswantlal's Indira M.A., 1934.
Mohan Bhavnani's Mill Mazdoor,
1934Based on Munshi Premchand's
powerful story about the rights of the work¬
ing class.
Devaki Bose's Seefa, 1934In this film
gods and goddesses were portrayed for the
first time as simple human beings without
their haloes or heavenly charisma.
Wadia Bros' Hunterwali, 1935In this film
Nadia, the fearless, brought a new image of
the liberated woman, in keeping with the
awakening national consciousness of the
times.
Sohrab Modi's Khoon Ka Khoon,
1935An adaptation of Shakespeare's
Hamlet.
Balayogini ("Child Widow"), 1936About
the sufferings of a widow and her daughter
in an orthodox Hindu society.
Saukari Pash ("The Indian
Shylock", 1925) was directed
by Baburao Painter, who had
founded the Marhastra Film
Studios at Kolhapur in 1919.
The Indian director R. V. Shan¬
taram played a starring role in
the film.
Shanta Apte played the role of
Radha, the god Krishna's
beloved girl cow-drover, In
Gopalkrishna (1937), directed
by Damle and Fatehlal.
Vinayak's Chaaya ("Holy Crime"),
1 936About man's inhumanity to his fellow
human beings, based on a story by V.S.
Khandekar.
... and many more.
No study of the Indian cinema would be
complete without having access to these
and many other films that are believed to
have been permanently lost. However,
"lost" films have turned up in the most unex¬
pected places and the film archivist keeps
on hoping that the film he is looking for will
one day be found. He hopes for miracles;
and miracles do sometimes happen.
The idea of establishing a national library
of films was first broached in 1 964, when the
Government of India instituted the National
Film Awards. But this was to be limited to
award winning films only. The concept of an
Archive as a repository of all national films of
permanent historical value did not
crystallize until some ten years later.
Why, it is often asked, should public
money be spent on preserving all the junk in
the way of cheap entertainment being made
by unscrupulous speculators? The question
becomes all the more pertinent in face of the
glut of films produced in India in recent
years. The archivist finds himself in the dif¬
ficult position of having to decide what to
keep and what to discard. Selection
becomes unavoidable. But such doubts will
persist as long as the cultural role of the
cinemaeven of escapist cinemais not
fully accepted. The task of the film archivist
becomes less taxing once there is a national
awareness of this important issue.
Thereafter what is required is the good-will
and co-operation of film-makers and well-
wishers.
Cinema and television are the most impor¬
tant cultural forces developed by man in the
twentieth century. The preservation of
cinema culture is a moral responsibility, a
duty we owe to future generations. We shall
be failing in our duty if we do not take care
of our film and television heritage.
Better late than never...
I Paramesh Krishnan Nair
23
