The bread (and butter) art of Ecuador
WHILE the arts of jewellery and pot¬
tery, of leatherwork and woodwork,
of metal and wool, are practised in I
virtually all the countries of Latin America, it I
seems that the figurines made from flour paste, I
popularly known as "bread figures", are found I
only in Ecuador, where they are produced 'in I
the little town of Calderón some fifteen I
kilometres north of Quito.
In decorating the figures, which reproduce I
elements from the environment and daily life, I
the creative artists of Calderón shun the easy I
temptation of realism. In a sense they yield to I
realism when they fashion human figures I
Indian men beside grazing sheep, Indian I
women sitting beside sacks of fruit in an im- 1
aginary market. But the animals they model I
belong to the world of plants as much as to the I
world of animals: llamas, horses, bulls, parrots, I
tortoises and even fish (which do not exist in I
the region) have big flowers, garlands of leaves I
and petals with edges like silk, instead of skin, I
hair, feathers, or scales. The colours, which I
are used indiscriminately, are those found in I
the dress of the local women: orange, green, I
scarlet, and the bluebetween navy blue and I
sky bluewhich the Indians call "colour of I
dawn".
The figures are the product of domestic and I
collective craftsmanship. At any hour of the day I
girls can be found sitting around rough and
ready tables in the inner patios of Calderón
houses, deftly moulding figures which are iden¬
tical except for some tiny detail, which may be
the result of skill, error or chance. The figures
are then lightly baked in an oven or dried in the
equatorial sun before being painted. Maybe
they are coloured by the same children, but in
some cases the mastery of relief or line
displayed in the eyebrows or lips of the tiny
faces or in the single eye of a llama seen in pro¬
file seem like the work of expert adults. Certain¬
ly the paste is prepared by the mother and it is
she, alone or with her husband, who sells the
figures to the public in an increasing number of
bigger and bigger shops.
The figures show that fondness for minute
detail which is a general characteristic of
popular Ecuadorian craftsmanship. Large
specimens measuring as much as twenty or
thirty centimetres in height are few and are
used to decorate walls (their backs being fitted
with a piece of wire or string for this purpose).
More commonly they measure a mere five or
six centimetres, are decorated nonetheless
with an extraordinary profusion of detail, and
are displayed on shelves or tables. Recently, in
response to market demand or in an attempt to
expand the market, production has begun of
tiny figures of Indians ("Cholas") and llamas
fastened to safety pins and sold as women's
brooches. In this instance, like that of mirror
frames decorated with flower motifs, this art is
in a sense utilitarian. However, unlike other
forms of craftsmanship the bread figures are
works of pure art created with no other end in
view than the pleasure to be derived from con¬
templating, admiring and living among them.
Calderón is little more than two rows of
houses, mostly workshops, storehouses and
shops where bread figures are sold, on each
side of a dusty road. The community lives from
Photos © Silvie Fischer, Nyon, Switzerland
"... Flowers, garlands of
leaves and petals like silk... "
.tourism. A major draw for the tourists, from
Ecuador and other countries, is the proximity of
the equator, which is marked at the base of an
obelisk (inside which a museum of popular arts
is being created) where visitors can be
photographed standing with one foot in the nor¬
thern hemisphere and one foot In the southern
A head and two feet peep out
from beneath a plant form
crowned by a rose in this
bread figure evoking a
tortoise.
hemisphere. Tourism has also brought a host
of posters and signs written in an English full of
touching spelling mistakes. It has also brought
the pressure of a different kind of demand
which has led to the recent appearance among
the bread figures of portrayals of Father
Christmas and Christmas trees. The Calderón
artists have long modelled crèches which are
authentic reproductions, touched with in¬
nocence and originality (the Virgin may be In¬
dian, one of the Magi may have no beard) of
those traditionally produced in some European
countries. Until recently it was also possible to
find clowns whose clothing was the finest ex¬
ample of the artists' consummate skill in depic¬
ting tiny details and of richness of colour.
The bread figures also differ from other
forms of traditional craftsmanship whose
origins it is difficult to pinpoint in time, in the
sense that they can be associated with a
specific date and historical period. The date is
1535, when the Flemish priest Fray Jodoco
Ricke brought the first ears of corn to Ecuador
and taught the people to use wooden ploughs.
The period began when the Calderón com¬
munity had sufficient bread to be able to use
some of its flour to fashion these figurines
whose ingenuous beauty is a joy for ever, like
that of any authentic work of art, although In
this case their lives are usually short. The
figurines are extremely fragile and in certain
regions, especially on the tropical coast, they
fall prey to the appetites of ravaging insects.
H Jorge Enrique Adoum
31
