The sacred and the profane
by Jacques Soustelle 


Two faces of Meso-American art
The Valley of Mexico has yielded a rich
harvest of terra-cotta figurines that are pro¬
bably linked with agrarian cults of the pre-
classical period (2000 BC - 300 AD) which
preceded the rise of the high Meso-
American civilizations. This double-headed
terra-cotta figurine, dating back to between
2000 and 1000 BC, symbolizes, perhaps, a
form ofdualism that was deeply rooted In In¬
digenous thought.
OUR Western civilization has broken
away from the sacred. For this
reason we have difficulty in under¬
standing the art of other cultures that have
never ceased to be firmly entrenched in their
religious concepts and their view of the
world, dominated by the traditional myths.
The notion of "art for art's sake" is
foreign to these civilizations. Their plastic
arts fulfil a specific function: conjuring up
the sacred world, providing the
iconography and the material framework
that ritual demands, and making visible and
palpable the symbols that constitute the
esoteric language of religion.
Nevertheless, important though the role
of the sacred may be, the profane is not
altogether lacking; but its purpose is mainly
to glorify the greatness of men, rather than
gods, of particular men: leaders in battle,
kings, high-ranking priests.
A glance at the remains of pre-
Columbian art in Mexico and Central
America, that "Meso-America" which for
three thousand years was one of the most
brilliant centres of world culture, reveals
both the predominance of the sacred and
the vitality of a "profane area" closely link¬
ed to the social and political structures of
the autochthonous States.
It should be" noted at the outset that our
knowledge is limited to only certain of the
pre-Columbian arts, though these are ad¬
mittedly very important and extremely rich:
sculpture, whether bas-reliefs or sculpture
in the round,' the carving of semi-precious
stones, murals, the illumination of
manuscripts, designs for fabrics and
ceramics. The magnificent gold jewels vir¬
tually all disappeared in the crucibles of the
conquerors. With two or three exceptions
the fragile masterpieces of the artists who
worked delicately and with infinite patience
on the mosaics of multi-coloured feathers
were destroyed. Even though we are well ac¬
quainted with Indian instruments such as
the two-toned teponaztli, the flutes and the
horns, we know practically nothing about
JACQUES SOUSTELLE, French ethnologist,
writer and politician, is a former government
minister and is currently director of studies at
the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences
Sociales, in Paris. A specialist in the pre- Col¬
umbian cultures of Mexico and Central
America, he is a member of the Mexican In¬
stitute of Culture and has been awarded the
international Alfonso Reyes prize. Notable
among his scientific works published in
English are The Daily Life of the Aztecs on the
Eve of the Spanish Conquest ¡Stanford
University Press, 1961) and The Four Suns
(1971). In May 1984 he was received as a
member of the Académie Française.

©
The most ancient of the Meso-
American civilizations was
that of the Olmecs, a people
who came to prominence
around 1000 BC on the coast
of the Gulf of Mexico. Rising
like an island, some 4.5
kilometres long, from a sea of
marshland, La Venta, in the
present-day State of Tabasco,
Mexico, was the first centre of
the Olmecs, whose language
and history are still shrouded
in mystery and whose in¬
fluence extended from the
Pacific coast to Guatemala,
over a period of some eight
centuries. The Olmecs in¬
vented a calendar and a form
of hieroglyphic writing, but
their civilization Is characteriz¬
ed above all by stone work and
statuarypyramids, temples,
stelae, altars, statues and
statuetteslinked to a half-
human, half-feline god. The
basic themes of Olmec art per¬
sisted for fifteen centuries in
Meso-American pre-Columbian
art in all its variations, from the
Aztecs to the Mayas. Photo
top left: carved in pale green
Jadeite and dating from bet¬
ween 500 and 100 BC, this
sculpture, 55 cm. high,
represents a man, probably a
priest, holding In his arms a
baby with feline features. It
was found at Las Limas in the
southern part of the State of
Veracruz. Top right, this stela,
at La Venta, carved In basalt
and known as "The Am¬
bassador", shows a man ad¬
vancing holding a flag. Above,
detail from another stela from
La Venta on which can be seen
a figure carrying a child, a fre¬
quently recurring theme on
the altars of this great
religious and ceremonial
Olmec centre. Even after the
decline of the Olmecs their In¬
fluence continued to be felt in
the Oaxaca region, as can be
seen, left, in this terra-cotta
masterpiece from Cuilapán,
known as "The Scribe".

^ Indian music, and are completely in the
dark regarding its melodies and rhythms:
the music that came over from Europe
engulfed everything.
Can the first tentative experiments of the
so-called "pre-classical" period be called
art? Indeed they can, for this "archaic
horizon" as it is often termed, corresponds
to the beginnings of agriculture and of the
peasant cults of the second millennium BC,
and its characteristics are recognizable
more or less everywhere from Central Mex¬
ico to Costa Rica. Terra-cotta figurines
predominate; they are very frequently
feminine figures that evoke our prehistoric
European "Venuses", with their ample
forms. They are probably minor deities of
the land, who were expected to make the
soil fertile and the harvests good. The
Valley of Mexico is particularly rich in
figurines of this kind.
This whole "pre-classical" period forms
an introduction to what were to be the
essentials: the high Meso-American civiliza¬
tions. The story starts somewhere around
1200 BC with the most ancient of them, the
Olmec civilization which for eight centuries
was to shed its brilliance over a region ex¬
tending from the coast of the Gulf of Mex¬
ico to the Pacific and Guatemala. It was
among the Olmecs, about whom we still
know very little, that took shape the
characteristic traits of Meso-America which
were in evidence right up to the time of the
Aztecs, nearly three thousand years later:
the paramount importance of the
ceremonial centres and consequently of
sacred art, the predominance of sculpture
and carving, stelae with bas-reliefs and
monolithic altars. The first elements of
hieroglyphic script and of the complex
calendar of Meso-America also date back
to the time of the Olmecs.
The most striking aspect of the art of the
Olmecs is their stone statuary. From the
beginning it dealt with the two major
themes mentioned earlier: the world of the
gods and the world of man. The first theme,
to give a few examples, includes the altars
of La Venta and of San Lorenzo whose bas-
reliefs show figures, gods or priests, bearing
in their arms a strange half-human, half-
feline child; the goddess of rain and of good
harvests displayed at Chalcatzingo; the
"baby jaguar" of Las Limas, a masterly
jade statuette, and the "were-jaguars" of
the Bliss Collection in the Dumbarton Oaks
Museum in Washington, D.C.
The theme of statesmen, chiefs and am¬
bassadors, is magnificently interpreted: the
colossal heads that characterize Olmec
culture would appear to be portraits. They
have individual traits and the helmets they
wear are decorated with glyphs no doubt
the names or the titles of these great men.
At La Venta, the famous stela known as
Copan, In present-day Hon¬
duras, was one of the great
religious centres of the Maya
civilization of the classical
period (300-900 AD). Copan is
famous for its sculptures in
the round and its magnificent
stelae. This grotesque-style
head is a detail from a
sculpture which is probably a
representation of the god of
storms. He carries a torch on
which is carved the glyph of
water.
"The Ambassador" tells of a historic fact:
the advancing man waving a flag is accom¬
panied by four hieroglyphic signs. Even
more celebrated is the "Uncle Sam" stela,
whose bas-reliefs show a "confrontation"
between a typical round-faced Olmec, and
an individual with angular traits: could it be
a political meeting between two chiefs of
different ethnic origins?
Thus as early as the first millennium BC,
Meso-American arts had assumed what was
essentially their definitive shape. This ob¬
viously does not mean that they remained
immutable and similar to one another dur¬
ing the whole period up to the Spanish Con¬
quest. Far from it! Each civilization and
each province developed its own styles.
However it cannot be denied that they all
share a "family resemblance". Whereas the
Olmec statuette, the Mayan bas-relief, the
painting of Teotihuacán or the Aztec statue
are all recognizable as such at the first
glance, all these works taken together are
closer to each other than those left behind
by the Andean civilizations from the
Chavin to the Tiahuanaco and the Mochica
to the Incas.
From the viewpoint of the plastic arts,
the history of Meso-America after the
Olmecs may be said to have two major
phases: the classical period, from the end of
the first millennium BC and the beginning
of the Christian era up to the tenth century,
and the post-classical period from the year
1000 to the beginning of the sixteenth cen¬
tury. The first phase encompasses the art of
Teotihuacán, of the "classical" Mayas,
Monte-Albán and Oaxaca, as. well as that of
the Gulf of Mexico (Veracruz). The second
includes the recent Mayas (Yucatán), the
Toltecs, the Mixtee culture of the Oaxaca
mountains, and that known as "Mixteca-
Puebla." which developed between the Oax
aca mountains and the plain of Cholula and
Tlaxcala, and finally the imperial civiliza¬
tion of the Aztecs.
Classical Mayan art, as it is to be found
in the metropolises such as Tikal, Palenque,
Yaxchilán, Copan and which was at its
height between the sixth and eighth cen¬
turies, can no doubt be considered the
apogee of American indigenous aesthetics.
Whether we consider the major bas-reliefs
such as those of Palenque (Panel of Slaves,
sarcophagus of the Temple of Inscriptions),
the stelae of Tikal and Copan, the lintels
and panels of Yaxchilán, or the precious
objects discovered in the tombs, such as
jade jewellery, engraved bones, or inscrip¬
tions in elegant lettering similar to arabes¬
ques, the Mayan style compels .recognition
through its unique combination of power
and grace. Gods, priests and mythological
or ritual scenes usually predominate, but in
Yaxchilán and Piedras Negras admirable
bas-reliefs recount the dynastic history of
the towns and exalt the glory of the kings.
At Bonampak the rare frescoes that escaped
destruction as a result of the corrosive ef¬
fect of the climate depict life in a medium-
sized Mayan principality, the ceremonies
and dances, the orchestras and
noblewomen, as well as violent scenes in
which proud warriors clad in jaguar pelts
and crowns of plumes play the leading
roles.
The' embellishments painted on the
polychrome vases of the high period also
tell us something about the classical Mayas,
their clothes and their ornaments, such as
the famous vase of Nebaj (in the British
Museum).
The Teotihuacán civilization on the high
central plateau was contemporary with the
classical Mayas and kept up steady relations
with them despite the great distances
separating them. Yet Teotihuacán art re¬
mained profoundly original. Its sculpture
was in the main secondary to its austere and
grandiose architecture: thus, for instance,
the magnificent temple of the Plumed Ser¬
pent, in the gigantic complex of the
"Citadel", is decorated with low and high
reliefs of the gods of rain and of vegetation.
Similarly, beautiful sculptures adorn the
columns of the recently discovered "Palace
of the Plumed Butterfly" (Quet-
zalpapalotl). A statue, or rather a
sculptured slab of monumental dimensions,
now in the Museum of Mexico City, por¬
trays a water goddess. Yet Teotihuacán art
is first and foremost the mural. This sacred
art, which is displayed in splendour on the
walls of the edifices of Atetelco and Tepan-
titla, presents the gods, the priests, the rites
and sometimes the faithful and the blessed
in Paradise. The face of the god of life-
giving rain appears as an almost obsessional
motif not only on the painted walls but also
on the ceramics, which are also painted in
fresco, a technique that was very
characteristic of this civilization.

The ancientpeoples of Mexico
and central America wrote on
stone, hide and paper. Their
writing was a combination of
pictographlc, ideographic and
phonetic elements. Right, part
of the Fejervary-Mayer Codex,
showing the four directions of
the universe. The Codex is in¬
scribed on buckskin and Is of
Mixtee origin. The Mixtees
were an ancient people whose
civilization (1200-1521) had
great artistic influence. The
upper part of the Codex
represents the "side of light";
the lowerpart is the "women's
side"; to the right is the "side
of the dead"; and to the left is
the "side of thorns",
associated with the god of
rain. The god of fire is
depicted in the centre.
Finally, the artists of Teotihuacán reviv¬
ed and brought to the highest degree of
perfection an art form that had been out¬
lined by the Olmecs: the portrayal of the
human face. These were no longer colossal
heads but funeral masks made from a hard
gemstone, and often inlaid with turquoise,
jade and mother-of-pearl, which were
carved and polished.
If one were to summarize in a few words
the art of the classical period in Oaxaca and
the Gulf region, it would be possible to
resort to schematic formulations: with
regard to the Zapotee art of Monte-Albán,
Mitla, Yagul, Monte Negro and other sites
in Oaxaca, the predominant form is
assuredly ceramics, modelled terra-cotta
for depicting the gods and sometimes
human beings, as in the case of the extreme¬
ly beautiful statuette of the "scribe"; but
the murals displayed in the funeral rooms
cannot be overlooked. Regarding the
coastal area in the present-day State of
Veracruz, the most distinctive trait is the
sculpture, the religious bas-reliefs at El Ta-
jin and above all the enigmatic objects
relating to the ritual ball game, known as
"yokes" and "palamate stones", with their
sophisticated workmanship and great
plastic beauty. However, the terra-cotta
statuettes and statues (some of which are
nearly two metres in height) which repre¬
sent either divinities or else priests or war¬
riors, are no less original.
Teotihuacán appears to have succumbed
to an assault from outside or to an internal
convulsion in the seventh century, and, at
the beginning of the tenth century,
building, sculpting and painting came to a
halt in the Mayan cities. Indeed, towards
the end of the first millennium AD, the
classical world was showing clear signs of
fatigue. Nevertheless, certain urban centres
escaped, so to speak, from the general
crisis. This was certainly the case with
©
regard to Xochicalco, on the western slopes
of the high plateau, with its beautiful,
typically Mayan bas-reliefs and its
hieroglyphics in the style of Monte-Albán.
Similarly, at the foot of the volcanoes
situated on the Puebla plateau, the ad¬
mirable and recently uncovered Cacaxtla
frescoes reflect the mythological concep¬
tions of a population that probably
originated from the Gúlf area and was
under Mayan influence, while certain
panels recount battle scenes and war
exploits.
Be that as it may, the ninth, tenth and
eleventh centuries witnessed the opening of
Mexico to large-scale migratory population
movements. The nomadic and warlike,
peoples of the northern steppes streamed in
successive waves towards the central
plateau. Some of them pressed forward to
Yucatán and Guatemala. The great city of
Tula, founded in the ninth century, took
over part of the heritage of Teotihuacán,
but the newcomers brought with them
cosmological conceptions and rites, par¬
ticularly human sacrifice and the doctrine
of cosmic war, which were reflected in art.
In Tula, the caryatids supporting the roof
of the great temple are enormous statues of
warriors standing stiffly under the weight
of their weapons, and wearing rigid crowns
made from eagle feathers. The bas-reliefs
have as their themes processions or military
marches, and eagles and jaguars devouring
human hearts. Macabre sculptures adorn
the tzompantli, where the skulls of the
sacrificial victims were piled up. The Plum¬
ed Serpent, formerly interpreted in
Teotihuacán as being the benevolent divini¬
ty of agricultural plenty, became in Tula a
god of the Morning Star, the archer-god
with the fearsome arrows.
Imposing and austere, Toltec art was the
reflection of a society dedicated to the study
of the stars and to war. Transposed to
Yucatán where it was engrafted onto
Mayan tradition, it evolved, became more
flexible and elegant, juxtaposed Mayan
motifs, such as the god of rain Chac, and
Toltec divinities, and blossomed into the
grandiose architecture of the Temple of
Warriors and the tlachtli court (a
ceremonial ball game) at Chichén-Itzá. This
hybrid art form was to enjoy two centuries
of dazzling brilliance. We owe it not only
the beautiful sculptures of the monuments,
but also interesting murals and magnificent
carvings, gold discs engraved with Toltec
motifs (for instance, scenes of human
sacrifice) with truly Mayan mastery.
In Oaxaca, the Mixtee mountain tribes
increased their pressure on the valleys and
by the eleventh century forced the Zapotees
to move eastwards, in the direction of
Tehuantepec. Once they had become the
masters of Monte-Albán and Mitla, the
Mixtees developed their own particular
style in art which reached its peak in the
creations of their goldsmiths and in the il¬
lumination of manuscripts. The gold and
turquoise jewels discovered in the Mixtee
tombs arouse our admiration. Although in¬
tended primarily as ornaments, they are
often of a religious or cosmological nature:
a pectoral has the symbols of the earth, the
sun and the cosmic tlachtli court; another
shows the god Xipe Totee; yet another a
conversion table for the Zapotee and Mix-
tec calendars. Mixtee manuscripts or
codices, with their polychrome illumina¬
tions and their pictographs, constitute a
veritable illustrated encyclopaedia, reflec¬
ting religious beliefs and rites and the
history of the aboriginal dynasties and cer¬
tain national heroes such as the legendary
chief "8-Deer". The style and colour range
of the illuminations, as well as the symbols
linked to the ritual calendar, are also found
in the murals.

The influence of Mixtee art played a very
important role in the artistic development
of Central Mexico. The culture known as
"Mixteca-Puebla" developed from the
mountains of Oaxaca up to Cholula and
made a substantial contribution to forming
the art of the valley of Mexico. Religious
codices of high aesthetic value and great
ideological interest such as the Borgia
Codex, the frescoes of Tizatlán (Tlaxcala),
and the polychrome ceramics of Cholula
belong to this cultural movement.
The Aztecs, the most recent arrivals in
Central America, did not enter the race for
hegemony until the beginning of the fif¬
teenth century. Having very rapidly gained
ascendancy first over their neighbours on
the central plateau, and then over the
greater part of Mexican territory from coast
to coast, they began assembling the mosaic
of cities and small and large States, into
which the country was divided, into a con¬
federation. At the same time they set
themselves the aim of achieving a religious
and artistic synthesis. The main roots of
Aztec art lie in Toltec tradition tempered by
Mixtee and "Mixteca-Puebla" influences.
The discoveries of recent years in the an¬
cient Great Temple of Mexico City show
that the Aztecs knew and appreciated the
masterpieces of the civilizations that had
preceded them: that of the Olmecs, of
Teotihuacán, or those whose cities they had
occupied such as Monte-Albán. Aztec art is
After a long period of eclipse, the Maya
civilization experienced a veritable
renaissance from the end of the 10th cen¬
tury, when the Toltecs arrived in the
Yucatán peninsula, to the 16th century. The
sacred city of Chicheo Itzá is a fine example
of the marriage of Maya techniques with the
art of the Toltec invaders. Below, the "Tem¬
ple of the Warriors" at Chicheo Itzá. The
forest of pillars to the right of the temple
once supported a corbelled vault roofa
specifically Maya techniquewhich rested
on wooden lintels. The roofing finally col¬
lapsed when the lintels rotted. This vast
hypostyle hall, known as the "Thousand
Columns" was an architectural triumph
covering a surface area ofover 1,300 square
metres.
The powerful, all-conquering
Aztecs founded their capital,
Tenochtitlán (Mexico City) in
the 14th century. Their
civilization attained a high
degree of development before
its brutal destruction by Cor¬
tés and his conquistadores at
the beginning of the 16th cen¬
tury. The themes of their
statuary were mostly religious
or cosmological. Above,
statuette (68 cm. high) of the
benevolent god of rain, Tlaloc,
carved in andésite and found
in the region of Mexico City.
thus an imperial art, that of a State attemp¬
ting to absorb and restructure the heritage
of an immense group of diverse peoples.
Although much of it was destroyed,
Aztec sculpture left behind innumerable
proofs of its technical perfection and the
power of its symbolism. Once again
religious and cosmological themes
predominate: the monumental and over¬
whelmingly symbolic statue of the earth
goddess Coatlicué; the stone disc depicting
the moon divinity Coyolxauhqui; the gigan¬
tic Aztec calendar that sums up a whole
view of the world and of time: the
Cihuateteo, the macabre and grimacing
company of deified women and demons of
the twilight; the benevolent Tlaloc, the god
of rain, and Xochipilli, god of youth and
flowers. Countless examples remain of
these impeccably worked representations of
the gods which caused their contemporaries
to say that the Aztecs were "the most pious
of men". However, profane subjects were
not forgotten. The famous "Stone of
Tizoc", with its bas-reliefs glorifies the ex¬
ploits of the emperor of that name
imaginary exploits, since according to the
chronicles, this sovereign was not in truth
the valorous warrior his propaganda would
have us believe. There are numerous sober
yet touching statues of maceualli (men of
the people) as well as many sculptures
depicting plants and animals, shaggy
coyotes and insects. Less flamboyant than
those of the Mayas, less rigid than those of
the Toltecs, the art forms which flourished
in Tenochtitlán when Cortés and his com¬
panions in adventure arrived there in the'
fateful year. 15 19 were the reflection both of
a long tradition and of profound creative
sensitivity.
The "minor" arts goldwork, jewellery,
stone-carving and featherwork were
greatly appreciated by the Aztecs and the
rare examples preserved today in museums
give us a tantalizing glimpse of the perfec¬
tion they must have attained. Was not
Quetzalcoatl, the benevolent Plumed Ser¬
pent, the civilizing hero and inventor of
writing and of the calendar, the protector of
artists par excellence?
Jacques Soustelle
