Illiteracy
in the
'Fourth World'
Rich countries become aware
of a disturbing trend
by Ali Hamadache
IT would be a mistake to assume that illiteracy is confined to the
Third World. Many countries which have provided universal
education for generations are today finding to their astonish¬
ment that they are having to face a problem which they thought
they had eliminated but which is spreading at an alarming rate, af¬
fecting even those countries which for decades have enjoyed a high
level of material prosperity.
The predicament of illiterates in industrialized countries is
doubtless more difficult than it is in the Third World and
sometimes assumes dramatic proportions. A North American or
Scandinavian adult who cannot write properly will suffer more in¬
tensely from isolation than someone similarly handicapped in a
country where the illiteracy rate is high. In some Third World coun¬
tries, moreover, a rich community life and an oral tradition develop
other ways of exercising the memory and organizing thought
through a different system of symbols, and this is a source of sup¬
port for the illiterate person.
In a society that is economically and technologically advanced,
where written communication predominates and where the printed
word, in particular, is ubiquitous, the person who is not conversant
with the fundamental technical skills of reading, writing and
arithmetic inevitably finds himself in a position of inferiority in a
number of everyday situations: in shops, public transport, at the
bank and the post office, in the exercise of civil rights and duties,
and even in access to employment. An illiterate unemployed person
will even avoid applying for work at an employment agency because
he is ashamed of his inability to complete the necessary forms. An
illiterate worker will find it difficult to play an active part in trade
union activities.
Illiterates are also handicapped when confronted with the com¬
plexities of life in industrially developed countries. Since they can¬
not read street signs, the names of underground stations, or bus and
tram destinations, they have difficulty in finding their bearings and
getting around in a city. They cannot compare labels in a big store;
they cannot calculate the price of the foodstuffs at the grocer's or
the butcher's. Having a child admitted to hospital, completing a
child allowance form and other administrative formalities all
dealings with the authorities, school and the law, in factrepresent
insurmountable obstacles to the illiterate.
The illiterate does not enjoy the respect of the society in which
ALI HAMADACHE, a specialist in literacy work, is a staff member of
Unesco's literacy, adult education and rural development division. A
former senior civil servant in Algeria (1962-1968) he has also served
as a literacy specialist in what is now the Lao People's Democratic
Republic and as an adviser with the Ivory Coast's TV education
programme.
22

i *
SEK- :,,
- ' _- *.. - ._
V9k^t}jiiäm
PPi^****-**-^ -^r » *
r*
y
«'
ai,
Although it is most widespread in the Third World, il¬
literacy is also a growing problem in some of the
world's richest countries where it is rampant among
the underprivileged sectors of society which have
been called the "Fourth World" and include residents
of dilapidated inner-city districts, migrant workers
and their families, and some low-income rural
populations.
he lives nor even that of his family. Children, who cannot be helped
with their school work by illiterate parents, will eventually look
down on them and even disobey them. Many illiterates feel a sense
of shame that often makes them wish to hide from others the fact
that they do not know how to read and write; this shame paralyzes
them when they are presented with an opportunity to learn to read
and write. Sometimes the intelligence of illiterate persons ceases to
be used, developed and kept alert; and the introduction of an ever
wider array of modern technology introduces new discrimination
against illiterates.
In the rich as well as the less affluent countries, illiteracy and
poverty are linked in such a way that each condition is sometimes
a cause, sometimes an effect, of the other. Illiteracy is closely
related to a number of factors that influence one another, including
low or non-existent income, poor-quality education or insufficient
time in school, poverty of cultural environment, poor health, and
insalubrious living conditions. It is particularly widespread among
those who are now referred to as the "Fourth World", that is the
most underprivileged categories of society, especially the poor liv¬
ing in marginal city districts, or on the outskirts of cities and in run¬
down areas, migrant workers and their families and certain
minorities or underprivileged groups. This category of the popula¬
tion mainly comprises those who are out of work, occasional
workers, workers confined to jobs that require few or no qualifica¬
tions, people living on social security, some rural populations
whose standard of living is particularly low, and where the child's
contribution to the family budget is sometimes more important
than its regular schooling... in short, all those who are at the bot¬
tom of the social and economic ladder.
Illiterate persons are over-represented among the unemployed
since, although a high level of education is not a guarantee of
employment in the present economic climate, it is nevertheless a
prerequisite for entry into a secure and well-paid profession. They
are also over-represented among prisoners, who suffer the conse¬
quences of illiteracy acutely because writing is for them an impor¬
tant means of communication with the outside world.
Most industrialized countries today admit more or less explicitly
that part of their adult population is illiterate. But even where the
existence of the problem is acknowledged very few studies have
been carried out with the appropriate means to estimate its extent,
and fewer still to analyse its causes.
The problem of illiteracy in industrialized countries is com¬
plicated by the "qualitative" aspect, mainly in reversion to il-^
23

Photo H.W. Silvester © Rapho, Paris
Comparing labels and prices in the supermarket is but one of many everyday activities
in the urban industrialized world which require mastery of the written and printed word.
literacy and in functional illiteracy which are difficult to evaluate
statistically by census alone. However, neither the absence of
statistical data on illiteracy nor a refusal to acknowledge its ex¬
istence can make the problem disappear.
Many industrialized countries which instituted compulsory
education long ago and which therefore consider the problem solv¬
ed have removed the question concerning illiteracy from their cen¬
sus forms. But even where a question on illiteracy still features on
a census form, it is not always easy to obtain reliable answers since
most illiterates try to conceal their deficiency for psychological
reasons as well as for practical considerations connected with their
employment prospects. "To be without work is hard, but to be
without work and not to know how to read and write is terrible and
shameful", said Mr. H., of Rastadt, in the Federal Republic of
Germany.
With a view to standardizing educational statistics at an interna¬
tional level, a recommendation of the tenth session of Unesco's
General Conference defined as illiterate any person "unable to
read, write and understand a short, simple statement of facts
relating to his daily life". In 1978 this recommendation was revised
with the following significant specification: "A person should be
considered 'functionally illiterate' who cannot engage in all those
activities in which literacy is required for effective functioning of
his group and community, and also for enabling him to continue
to use reading, writing and calculation for his own and the com¬
munity's development."
Nevertheless, the criteria of functionality differ widely from one
country to another. In one place it is enough to be able to read a
set of instructions or a poster; in another, anyone who cannot com¬
plete a complicated questionnaire or assimilate written instructions
of a fairly technical nature is considered illiterate. Somewhere else,
a person who has not completed five or even nine years of elemen¬
tary education is considered illiterate.
Given the different definitions of illiteracy in the countries under
review and the standards required by each society, figures can vary
substantially.
The estimates made by the Unesco Office of Statistics and up¬
dated in July 1982 using the latest available official surveys are bas¬
ed on the number of people who admit to being illiterate. Accor¬
ding to these estimates, in the industrialized countries (Europe [in¬
cluding the Soviet Union], the USA, Canada, Japan, South Africa,
Australia and New Zealand) in 1980 2.5 per cent of the adult
population aged fifteen and over, some 22.5 million people, can be
considered illiterate. It must be pointed out that these are mainly
older people, since only 3 per cent of them are in the 15-19 age
group, 20 per cent in the 20-44 age group and the vast majority 77
24
3X.MAMAHfl!EbMA-Ebl Tbl
rPAMOTHOM.nOMOMA-Ebl MHE !
In the Soviet Union the drive against illiteracy was
one of the priority tasks of the new régime after
the Revolution of 1917. "Woman! Learn to read
and write!" runs the top caption of this poster
dating from 1 923. Lower caption reads: "Oh, little
mother, if you were literate you could help me!"
per centare 45 and over. It is also clear that the quantitative
aspect of illiteracy varies considerably from one country to
another: a clear divide separates one group of countries, most of
which are in the Mediterranean basin, from the others. Southern
Europe has an overall illiteracy rate of 8.1 per cent, the rates in in¬
dividual countries varying from 4 to 20 per cent.
Another significant fact is that, in most countries, the rates of il¬
literacy among women are particularly high, often double and in
some cases triple the rate of illiteracy among men.
It is also certain that these estimates do not convey the full extent
of the problem, since they omit those who have reverted to il-

literacy: those who, through insufficient education or because they
did not go beyond the minimum level determined by the society
concerned, have certainly learned the basics of reading and writing
but have lost them either partly or totally because they have not us¬
ed them in their everyday life.
Functional illiteracy covers a variety of situations that are defin¬
ed by the economic, technological and cultural context of each
society and the level of basic knowledge each society requires. In
the United Kingdom, for example, the definition adopted by the
British Association of Settlements (BAS), which classes as illiteracy
a level below the standard of a nine-year-old child, revealed in 1979
that there were two million illiterates. In the English-speaking part
of Canada, the Canadian Association for Adult Education defined
functional illiteracy as "A level of instruction equal or inferior to
eight years of schooling", while in Quebec the definition is based
on less than five years. A study published by the Canadian National
Commission for Unesco in 1983 registered 5.5 per cent of Cana-
"All I remember of school is that everyone used to jeer
at my father when he came to fetch me", said a boy
interviewed during a recent survey on "Illiteracy and
Poverty in the Industrialized Countries" carried out,
with Unesco support, by the international movement
ATD Quart Monde. His words echo the widespread
sense of isolation and the family tensions which ac¬
company adult illiteracy in the industrialized world.
dians (850,000 people) as having less than five years' schooling and
as many as 28.4 per cent (4,400,000 people) with less than nine
years' schooling, and with a level of education that was considered
inferior to that required for adaptation to the complexity of in¬
dustrialized society. In Poland, after the literacy and education
campaign launched by the government in 1951 to reduce the high
rate of illiteracy, there were still, in 1981, 2.7 million Poles of 15
and over who had not had a complete basic education.
In the USA in 1970, a study published by the Louis Harris Poll
and financed by the National Reading Centre showed that 18.5
million Americans aged sixteen and over were functionally il¬
literate; the criteria used included ability to read a newspaper and
answer questions on its contents, to use a telephone directory, to
complete correctly various forms (applications for employment,
social security, a bank account, etc.), to write a cheque, and under
stand a bus timetable. A comparable study made by the University
of Texas from 1971 until 1976 used similar criteria, with an em¬
phasis on everyday life: tasks such as calculating a car's fuel con¬
sumption, giving the correct change and understanding the deduc¬
tions from a pay slip. The survey concluded that illiteracy among
English-speaking Americans was in the region of 15-20 per cent.
With 23 million people classified as functionally illiterate, it caught
the attention of the media and the American public. According to
the White House press service, the figure is increasing by 2.3 million
annually.
In France no survey has been conducted nationally, but some en¬
quiries have been carried out in recent years among sub-proletarian
groups. In the Essonne département outside Paris, for example, a
survey carried out in 1976 by the Departmental Union of Family
Associations and covering 6,000 families with which the authorities
were in regular contact showed that 47 per cent of the men and 51
per cent of the women were either illiterate or barely able to read
and write. An international social service organization, Aide à
toute détresse Quart Monde, has studied a sample of seventy-eight
sub-proletarian provincial families: 27 per cent of the men and 30
per cent of the women were classified as illiterate.
Another study carried out by Aide à toute détresse Quart Monde
and published by the European Commission revealed the existence
of illiteracy in certain urban areas of Belgium and Luxembourg: 5
per cent of Belgians in Liège and 5 per cent of the population of
Luxembourg, with 20 per cent illiteracy among the immigrants in
both cities. In Belgium the only reliable data are those collected by
the army during recruitment: in 1979 0.4 per cent could neither read
nor write and 15 per cent were unable to complete correctly an ap¬
plication for leave. In this category in France, 0.7-0.9 per cent of
conscripts can be considered as illiterate; 10-20 per cent in Denmark
and Sweden are totally or partially illiterate. Within a given country
the data obviously vary considerably from place to place, the
poorest areas being the worst affected. An extreme example is that
of two regions in Greece with different levels of economic develop¬
ment: Athens has an illiteracy rate of 7.6 per cent, and Thrace one
of 27.4 per cent. Spain affords another example: in the Burgos
region 2.5 per cent of adults are illiterate and in the Granada area,
13.5 per cent (1975 census). In the USA, 40 per cent of functionally
illiterate adults belong to the sector of the population whose income
is less than $5,000, whereas only 8 per cent earn $15,000 or more
(University of Texas survey). In France, statistics published in 1981
show that at the beginning of secondary education, after five years
of schooling, 55 per cent of the children of workers have already
repeated at least one class while only 15 per cent of the children of
people in higher management or in the professions are in the same
situation.
The causes of relapse into illiteracy are various. Unfavourable
environmental conditions produce situations which do not foster,
and even discourage, written communication in sectors of the
population. School is often blamed for failing to cultivate either the
taste for reading which makes reading a habit or the practice of
writing.
Other, admittedly less numerous, studies have also blamed the
tendency to watch a great deal of television, to the detriment of the
reading habit.
Few industrialized countries have a comprehensive literacy
education policy for their indigenous population and/or immigrant
workers; and only a few have set up the coherent organization re¬
quired for co-ordination of the necessary activities and resources.
The solution of this problem calls for political determination
which, in spite of mounting concern about the issue, has generally
been absent until how. Most programmes, whatever their scale,
have been launched by private organizations. In some cases they are
nationwide, but often they are local in scope and do not always en¬
joy official backing. The authorities would give higher priority to
the struggle against illiteracy if they were convinced of its impor¬
tance. This presupposes more effective identification of illiterates
and their environment, as well as a fuller understanding of the
causes of different forms of illiteracytotal illiteracy, recurrent il¬
literacy, functional illiteracy, or even "technological" illiteracy
in certain sectors of the population. Finally, it calls for political
decisions in the form of legislative, administrative and educational
measures and the mobilization of material, financial and human
resources.
Ali Hamadache
25
