Where there's a will.
Changing societies and motivation to learn
Above, women in Niger form a human chain to haul water from a well. Niger is one of the
world's 31 least developed countries. In 11 of these countries less than 10 per cent of the
female population is literate, and in 4 of them female literacy is less than 0.6 per cent. In all
of them illiterate women outnumber illiterate men.
MARCEL DE CLERCK, of Belgium, has had
a long career with Unesco as an educator and
a rural development specialist. He served as
regional adviser for adult education at
Unesco's Regional Office for Asia in Bangkok,
before assuming responsibility at Unesco
headquarters for the training of literacy
teaching personnel. He is the author of The
Operational Seminar: a Pioneering Method of
Training for Development (Unesco, 1976) and
L'Educateur et le Villageois, de l'éducation de
base à l'alphabétisation fonctionnelle ("The
Educator and the Villager, from basic educa¬
tion to functional literacy") which will be
published later this year.
by Marcel de Clerck
FROM the point of view of those who
direct literacy campaigns, to be il¬
literate in the twentieth century is a
scourge, and its eradication an act of social
justice. But what is the opinion of the il¬
literates themselves? Do they consider lear¬
ning to read and write as something impor¬
tant, necessary, or desirable? How will they
receive the literacy programme? Will they
rush en masse to the classes that are opened
for their benefit, or will they shun the
generous efforts of those who promote the
campaign? What motivations or situations
could possibly encourage illiterates to take
an interest in acquiring literacy?
The essential factor in any literacy opera¬
tion is the milieu in which it takes place.
Generally speaking, the rate of illiteracy of
a given community has a direct effect on the
attitudes and behaviour of its members in
regard to literacy training. Experience
proves that the attitudes towards literacy
training, and especially towards writing, of
individuals who belong to a milieu where il¬
literacy is still widespread can differ enor¬
mously from those encountered in a milieu
where illiteracy survives only as a residual
phenomenon. For ease of analysis, let us
consider four distinct milieux in regard to
illiteracy.
A pre-literate milieu, typified on the

With the aid of the International
Development Association
(IDA), an affiliate of the World
Bank, the Government of Mali
undertook between 1973 and
1978 the second phase of an
integrated rural development
programme called "Operation
Arachide". The programme
englobed the supply of equip¬
ment to farmers, agricultural
research, the improvement of
medical and veterinary ser¬
vices, and an expanded func¬
tional literacy programme.
Right, Malian villagers learn to
read and write in a village in the
Kita area.
Photo © Ray Witlin, World Bank/IDA
communications level by orality, and in
which recourse to oral communication
predominates almost exclusively in the
manifold relations of everyday life, is a
milieu in which life is lived as though
writing and the printed word did not exist.
The few literate individuals one encounters
behave as if they had never learned to read.
The illiteracy rate in a milieu of this type
can exceed 75 per cent. There are insuffi¬
cient motivations to awaken sustained in¬
terest in a rudimentary literacy programme
of the traditional type, considered as an end
in itself.
It would be wrong, however, to conclude
that a pre-literate milieu is impervious to
every kind of literacy programme. In Chad,
very high illiteracy rates have been observed
amongst the Sara of the Middle Chari83
per cent amongst men and 99 per cent
amongst women. Nevertheless the pro¬
gramme for teaching written arithmetic has
been extraordinarily successful both
amongst men and women. True, this educa¬
tion, limited to the teaching of counting and
addition, was aimed at enabling peasants to
market the cotton they produced. It enabl¬
ed them to check the weight and value of
their crops, in other words, to create a self-
managed market. There was no question of
a traditional literacy programme, which
had no interest for them, but of training
them to cope with a problem situation of
which they had direct experience.
The second milieu is predominantly il¬
literate but already includes a minority of
literates. Contrary to what happens in a
pre-literate milieu, the latter behave as
literates. A milieu of this type has an il¬
literacy rate which corresponds roughly to
between 50 and 75 per cent of the adult
population. Motivation in regard to literacy
training confined to the teaching of reading
and writing is still very poor.
While literacy training of the traditional
10
type has little lasting success in a milieu of
this kind, a literacy operation conceived as
a component part of structured action aim¬
ed at achieving socio-economic and
political changes in the interests of develop¬
ment has a good chance of succeeding if it
is well conducted, as is proved by the na¬
tional literacy campaign conducted in the
United Republic of Tanzania as part of the
Ujamaa programme, and which succeeded
in reducing the illiteracy rate of the adult
population from 67 per cent in 1967 to 39
per cent in 1976, since when it has continued
to decline. It is now reported to be lower
than 10 per cent.
The third case is that of a milieu which is
becoming literate. A majority of persons
practise reading and writing for private or
collective purposes. In theory the illiteracy
rate in such a milieu is between 25 per cent
and 50 per cent. The bulk of the illiterates
is normally composed of women and the
older generation. Motivation for becoming
literate varies.
In the village of Khanh Hân in Vietnam,
where we conducted an opinion poll about
literacy training in 1958 and where the
literacy rate was already nearly 70 per cent,
the few men who were still illiterate were
ashamed to be so. They dared not take part
in the public activities of their community
for fear of being mocked on account of
their ignorance. In this Vietnamese village,
illiterates behaved as though they were
mentally handicapped, social outcasts.
Finally there is the literate milieu with an
illiteracy rate of less than 25 per cent, where
it is normal to be able to read and write and
where this norm is recognized and accepted
by the vast majority of the people. Here, il¬
literacy is to be encountered only in small
groups of people on the fringe of society, or
amongst isolated individuals. In a milieu of
this type, where most communications are
conveyed by the written or printed word, il¬
literacy is tending to become an
anachronism. At every step the illiterate is
confronted by the imperative need to
master the alphabet. In San Salvador, the
capital of El Salvador, the literacy classes
were overcrowded and illiterates were oblig¬
ed to enter their names on waiting lists.
Some of them had to wait for nearly a year.
In 1970 only about ten of the world's
least developed countries had a
literacy rate of 20 per cent. By 1980,
19 of these countries had exceeded
this rate and in 1 0 of them over 40 per
cent of the population had achieved
literacy. Above, a schoolgirl from
Bangladesh.

The United Republic of Tan¬
zania's National Institute for
Productivity was established in
1965 with the aid of the Inter¬
national Labour Organization
(ILO) and the United Nations
Development Programme
(UNDP) to provide training
courses for management staff.
Left, trainee supervisors study
sisal stacking in a Dar es
Salaam warehouse.
Photo ILO. Geneva
'©
And yet it was a literacy course of the most
traditional type.
The illiteracy rate of a given milieu not
only indicates the numerical size of the
problem, it also provides valuable informa¬
tion for deciding which strategy to adopt
for its elimination. Obviously an 80 per cent
illiteracy rate calls for a different type of ac¬
tion than a rate of 20 or 15 per cent. Every
literacy campaign requires a policy, objec¬
tives, an approach, a time-table and even a
methodology which meet the specific needs
of the situation. Success depends on this
diversified approach to the problem in
terms of the milieu.
Illiteracy is, in fact, an element of
underdevelopment which cannot be dealt
with in isolation, as though it were indepen¬
dent of that complex phenomenon. Il¬
literacy is synonymous with the absence of
change. It is linked to the reproduction of
social models that repeat the past. Literacy
training is in itself a changethe transition
from an oral culture to one based on the
written word. But it is a change which oc¬
curs in a given society only after other
changes caused by forces that may be either
internal or external to the milieu, such as
national reconstruction, the setting-up of a
new society, the transition from a sub¬
sistence to a market economy all forms of
development action which imply a dynamic
of change.
In the eyes of the population literacy
training then becomes a significant,
motivating activity whose essential aim is
adaptation to the changes affecting society.
The success of the United Republic of Tan¬
zania's national literacy campaign is due to
the fact that it forms part of a much larger
campaign whose aim is to transform the
countryside in depth, to create Ujamaa
villages (still called development villages)
and democratically administered
communities.
Literacy, the key to progress, is at the
very centre of the Ujamaa concept. Every
citizen must be able to read, write and
count skills that are essential for awaken¬
ing a political conscience and stimulating
political participation as well as for increas¬
ing productivity. Familiarization with the
basic workings of society and civic and
socio-economic training appear as in¬
tegrated activities in the literacy process.
The creation of a new society, with the
structural changes and changes of mentality
that that implies, was also behind the
undeniable success of Ethiopia's national
literacy campaign. In 1974, that is, before
the revolution, 93 per cent of the popula¬
tion was illiterate. At the end of the third
stage of the campaign in 1980 the illiteracy
rate had fallen to 65 per cent, a spectacular
reduction.
In other countries, especially in Africa,
literacy action has been conceived and
planned as a component part of develop¬
ment programmes. In Mali, literacy as a
factor of adaptation to change is an integral
part of large-scale operations for the
organization and development of
agriculture (ground-nut, Ségou rice and
fishery programmes). Upper Volta- has
opted for a literacy programme that caters
from the start for village communities in¬
volved in specific rural development pro¬
jects. The hope is that, through this
strategy, special interest in literacy will
spread.
The examples cited above confirm that
the change which a society undergoes is a
prerequisite for a successful literacy "cam¬
paign or programme, especially in those
milieux which we have defined as pre-
literate or predominantly illiterate. But this
change, which we call development or
modernization, will only take place to the
extent that the population participates ac¬
tively in it.
The individual or group is both the
beneficiary and the ultimate target of every
development action, but he is also the deter¬
mining factor. However, very few rural
dwellers in Africa, Asia and Latin America
have completed their primary education.
The majority of those who have been lucky
enough to go to their village school have at-',
tended it for only three or four years. Most
Third World farmers are illiterate or semi- ;'
literate. They are hardly capable of reading
and understanding the directions for use of
fertilizers or insecticides. They have scarce¬
ly learned the most elementary arithmetic
such as the rule of three or the calculation
of percentages. How can they keep ac¬
counts or calculate the interest they will
have to pay on an agricultural credit loan?
Their low level of education, starting with
illiteracy, is a veritable "counter-
development" factor which blocks any real
possibility of continuous progress in the
agricultural sector from the start. One
might say that there is complete incom¬
patibility between this inadequate level of
education and development in the rural
sector.
This is where what has been called func¬
tional literacy training comes in, because it
fulfils a function that is related to specific
needs and problems. The aim of the func¬
tional literacy programme is to equip in¬
dividuals intellectually and to bring them to
a level where the knowledge acquired
becomes usable on both the social and
economic levels. In fact the objective of the
functional literacy programme is to adapt
the individual to change and to make him
responsible for change. We seem to be
faced with a kind of circular causality, the
two factorschange and literacybeing
interdependent, one determining the other.
In reality, people are not made literate, they
make themselves literate. Only when il¬
literates, both men and women, realize that
their ignorance of the written word or
number is a stumbling-block in their path to
greater progress will they become their own
most eager pupils. Marcel de Clerck
11
