Village
gods
and
heroes
This "Mother Goddess", some 3.5 metres in
height and dating from about 500 BC, was
discovered recently near a group of megalithic
dolmens. She is thought to be one of the fore¬
runners of the Srivatsa, or symbols of the god¬
dess of wealth, which began to appear in the
8th century AD. Similar mother goddess fer¬
tility figures have been found in many parts of
the world.
Potters enjoy a special status in Tamil Nadu. Unlike potters
in other parts of India they wear the "sacred thread" of the
"twice-born" (see caption page 13), which elsewhere is
reserved for higher castes, and they frequently act as unofficial
guardians of the smaller village temples. This hereditary task
enhances their standing in the community and gives them the
material advantage of a share in the offerings made to the gods
of meat, fruit and money. Although their main activity is the
making of pots and similar domestic utensils, Tamil potters are
famed for making the largest terra-cotta statues in the world.
Figures of horses, which can be as much as seven metres in
height, are much in demand as offerings, especially to the god
Ayanar. They are believed to serve as chargers for his warriors
when they make their nocturnal patrols to keep demons away
from the villages. Terra-cotta images of popular deities (wise
men or heroes) are also sometimes of monumental size,
although in recent years these have tended to be made of brick
and cement. Traditional methods are still used, however, for
small or medium-sized ex voto objects or statues offered to a
deity a statue of a child in thanks for its birth or recovery from
sickness; models of feet, hands or other limbs or parts of the
body, for recovery from injury or illness; even of animals (usual¬
ly cows and more rarely dogs and cats). The presentation of a
statue to a temple often involves the performance of quite com¬
plicated rites, but, even for the most humble votive offering,
the critical moment is the placing in position by the potter of the
eyes, the final, essential, life-giving gesture before installation
in the temple.

©
ALTHOUGH it is the monumental architecture of India's
classical temples which usually overwhelms the visitor,
it is the country's folk temples, several times greater
in number, that reflect the living faith of the people.
India's village temples owe their origin to a belief in the
various manifestations malevolent and benevolent of the
spirit of nature, and to a conviction that God dwells in all
animate and inanimate phenomena trees, rivers, mountains,
water-tanks, the sea, lightning and the wind.
They are also connected to the fertility cult so widely
prevalent throughout the ancient world. Faith in the Mother
Goddess led to the personification of every village settlement
in a grama devata, a village Goddess who protects the villagers,
decides their fate and guides them like a fond mother.
Another concept that has made an important contribution to
the development of village Gods is the worship of heroes who
laid down their lives for the sake of their country or community.
These heroes were commemorated and worshipped by the
erection of Hero Stones or Memorial Stones, thousands of
which are found in Tamil Nadu and other parts of India.
The erection of Hero Stones and the adoration of the dead
hero as the saviour spirit of the community may be considered
as an extension of the prehistoric cult of erecting megalithic
tombs. The Hero-Stones are in the form of a dolmen with three
upright slabs erected in the form of a small chamber and topped
by a cap-stone. The figure of the hero is carved on the back
slab, facing the front. The representation of the hero on the slab
takes various forms. The simplest shows him in the act of
fighting with a spear, a sword, or bow and arrow.
In a number of cases the event relating to the death of the
hero, the period and the people who erected the stone are
recorded in the local language. In Tamil Nadu over 600 inscrib¬
ed memorials dating from the fourth century A.D. almost until
the present day have recently been found.
It is necessary to know something about Hero Stones in order
to understand the social background of the village temples.
Often the Stones stand beneath shady trees in simple surroun¬
dings. Long swords, spears, or tridents are placed in front of
them, as well as terra-cotta horses painted in folk style. It was
believed that the spirit of a hero resided forever in each monu¬
ment, bestowing benefactions on the community. The spirit
was dreaded, loved, adored and worshipped and was con¬
sidered the saviour of the community.
Some regional as opposed to village deities found in Tamil
Nadu arose from the cult of a hero's death. One of them,
Maduraiviran, who is worshipped in central Tamil Nadu, was a
seventeenth-century hero who defended the country valiantly
and was later put to death by its ruler after a love affair. The
romantic element and the hero's tragic end at the hands of the
very ruler he had fought for created such an aura around him
that soon his spirit was recognized as a most powerful divinity
and his temple was found in every village. The most important
feature of his temple is the huge figure of a horse placed either
in front of him or carrying him. People believe that his spirit
ascends the horse after dusk, and goes around the village pro¬
tecting the people at night.
Another factor in the development of village temples was the
veneration of women who died in heroic circumstances. One

such death that was popular was that of the chaste wife who
committed sati, that is, she died voluntarily on her husband's
funeral pyre. Recorded evidence for such customs is available
from the beginning of the Christian era. The spirits of women
who die in such circumstances are said to be very powerful,
protecting the community and also severely punishing wrong¬
doers. Their figures are carved on stones, enshrined and adored
as Masati.
In all these instances of the worship of the dead as the village
gods, the offering consists of all types of food and other things
that had pleased the dead person while he was alive. Offerings
of animal flesh and liquor are quite common modes of worship.
Animal sacrifice is often misundersood and blown up out of pro¬
portion. It arises out of the eating habits of the people. The sim¬
ple concept behind this offering is that whatever one eats is
first ceremoniously offered to the deity. The cock, chicken and
goat are offered in the presence of the deity, cooked and then
consumed by the worshipper. There are some temples where
even specially prepared cigars are offered.
Festivals are conducted annually for the village gods or are
specially arranged either to ward off natural calamities,
epidemics or threats to the community which are of human
origin. They are celebrated with great pomp and show. The
presence of the deity is felt so powerfully that to utter a lie in
its presence, it is believed, brings calamity to the teller. Many
disputes, such as proof of adultery, repudiation of loans receiv¬
ed and other such matters are settled even to this day in the
village temple. In many villages in the interior there is no need
for civil or criminal courts to decide the nature of punishments.
The temple of the village god, the impersonal spirit that
permeates and rules the society is sufficient to take care of evil¬
doers.
The village deity wards off all diseases. If a person is affected
in any part of his body, or the whole, he prays to the deity for
a cure and offers a replica of the afflicted member made of
terra-cotta, wood or metal. Or a full terra-cotta figurine
representing a human form is made and placed with devotion
in front of the deity. For happy child birth, a terra-cotta figure
of a child in a cradle is offered. To ward off cattle diseases, large
or small clay figures are likewise placed in the temple. Several
hundred such terra-cotta figurines can be seen in front of many
village temples. And on all such occasions the folk artist (mainly
the village potter) is honoured with new cloth, garlands of
flowers, special food and money. In fact the cult of the village
god was mainly responsible for sustaining and fostering folk
arts.
The cult of the village gods has also been a fount of inspira¬
tion for folk music and dance. Several hundred folk ballads and
songs are connected with the adoration of village heroes, and
during festivals they are sung by village minstrels for hours
sometimes throughout the night. So spirited are these folk
songs that even people who are in their houses rush towards
the sound of the music in a trance and sometimes thousands of
people can be seen on these occasions, marching, singing and
dancing.
This expression of devotion often takes the form of walking
barefoot over fire, piercing one's body with decorated needles
or lances, or carrying firepots in one's arms. Both men and
women take part in such devotions.
The conservatism of the village folk is revealed in their forms
of dress, ornamentation and mode of singing, which can be
traced back several centuries. For example, in the Alagar
festival held in Madurai during March and April, several thou¬
sand villagers dress themselves in colourful costumes, and
wear dresses and ornaments similar to those that can be seen
in sixteenth-century paintings and sculptures. Another festival
in Farur attracts several thousand men, who dress as women
and move through the streets singing and dancing. In another
interesting festival, held in a suburb of Madras, several men and
women clad in neem leaves circumambulate the temple of the
village goddess several times. The fact that such customs-
referred to in literature at the beginning of the Christian era
have survived to this day, very near the capital of the State,
shows the powerful hold these faiths have over the people.
Sometimes such folk beliefs and customs are superimposed
on the classical temple. There is a celebrated temple at Alagar
Koil near Madurai where worship is performed by orthodox
Vishnavite Brahmins according to classical rites. In the en¬
trance tower of the temple is the figure of a folk god, "Karup-
pan of the steps". The Karuppan, the spirit of the hero who
guarded the temple and lost his life when defending it from rob¬
bers, is held in greater veneration by the village people than the
main classical deity, Vishnu. When the annual festival for
Vishnu is celebrated, several million people assemble to adore
both Vishnu and the Karappan. Such a superimposition of folk
customs, music and dance on classical temples can be observ¬
ed in many places and seems, at least for the casual spectator,
to abolish the dividing line between the folk temple and the
classical temple.
However, there is one essential difference between the
classical temple and the folk temple. In the former there is a
trained family of worshippers, the priests, who perform the
daily acts of worship and the rites of periodical festivals as
prescribed. In other words, there is an intermediary between
the devotee and the divine. The priest's presence is accepted
as a necessity; he can perform acts of worship while the rest
of the community pursues its daily tasks and goes to the temple
only when in need.
In the village temples communication between the devotee
and the deity is direct and so the feeling of attachment is more
intimate. The divine spirit is always present in the village temple
and anyone can go and worship directly. Whatever the offering,
or whatever the form in which it is made, the village god is
pleased. This is why the village temples remain so popular.
R. Nagaswamy
30
Erected in 625 AD
during the reign of the
Pallava ruler Mahen-
dra I, this hero stone
immortalizes a hero
who fell, his faithful
dog at his side,
defending his cow¬
shed against robbers.
The details of this in¬
cident and the name
of the hero and the
dog are inscribed at
the top of the stone in
ancient Tamil script.
Photo © State Department of
Archaeology, Tamil Nadu

Hindu harvest festival
Jean- Baptiste Fa'vre. Paris
Photos on this page show how Tamils in city and countryside
celebrate Pongal, one of the most important popular Hindu
festivals of the year. This four-day festival of thanksgiving to
nature takes its name from the Tamil word meaning "to boil"
and is held in the month of Thai (January-February) during the
season when rice and other cereals, sugar-cane, and turmeric
Ian essential ingredient in Tamil cooking) are harvested. On the
first day of Pongal, the puja or act of ceremonial worship is per¬
formed when rice is boiled in milk outdoors ¡n an earthenware
pot and is then symbolically offered to the sun-god along with
other oblations. Above, wearing traditional dress and markings,
husband and wife of a city brahmin family dispose of elegant
ritual utensils specially used for the puja. In the village, right,
where the ceremony is carried out more simply but with the
same devotion, the little girl is wearing a new dress and hair-
ribbon to mark the festive mood. In accordance with the ap¬
pointed ritual a turmeric plant has been tied around the pot in
which the rice will be boiled. The offerings include the two
sticks of sugar-cane in background and coconut and bananas in
the dish, A common feature of the puja, in addition to the offer
ings. is the kolam, the auspicious design which is traditionally
traced in white lime powder before the house in the early morn¬
ing after bathing. Above right, a highly elaborate kolam with
mazy floral and animal motifs being drawn for Pongal in a Pon-
dicherry street. On subsequent days of Pongal cows and bulls
are worshipped. Their horns are painted, they are decorated
with flowers, garlanded with bells, and offered the cooked
Pongal rice.
Photos John K Isaac
