WAS THERE A 'TIN ROAD'
ACROSS EUROPE 2,500 YEARS AGO?
by Hanni Schwab
DURING the sixth century BC the
Greeks used tin from Cornwall for
making bronzes. This precious
metal was transported by boat along the
Atlantic coast, through the Straits of
Gibraltar and across the Mediterranean to
Greece. Around the middle of the sixth cen¬
tury Carthage became an important sea
power, and in 540 concluded a treaty with
the Etruscans against the Greeks who were
then the dominant Mediterranean power.
In 535 the Greeks were defeated at the
HANNI SCHWAB, of Switzerland, is a pro¬
fessor at the University of Fribourg and a
member of the Swiss National Archaeology
Council. She is an expert on the Swiss
neolithic period, a subject on which she has
written numerous articles and studies.
Battle of Alalia and lost control of the
Mediterranean. They could no longer even
reach their colony of Massalia (Marseilles)
and were compelled to find a new overland
route across the Alps to transport their tin
from England. As far as possible they used
inland waterways, rivers and lakes, and the
points where their wagons were trans¬
shipped were the most critical stages in the
journey.
It may seem an exaggeration to describe
as a "tin route" a line on the map of Europe
of which only a few scattered points can be
traced. But these points, which represent
the sites of discoveries in France, Mont
Lassois and Vix, Bragny-sur-Saône, the
fortified camp at Salins-les-Bains;
Châtillon-sur-Glâne in Switzerlandare so
important and have so many features in
common that they can be related to one
another. Archaeological finds dating from
the late sixth and the early fifth century BC
which have been unearthed along the route
include objects imported from Greece and
Phocaea, as well as from the region of
Marseilles. All these sites, which are located
between the upper reaches of the Seine and
A major centre in the trade between nor¬
thern and southern Europe some 2,500
years ago, Heuneburg is today a deserted
flat-topped hill overlooking the stripling
Danube (bottom ofphoto) southwest of Ulm
in the Federal Republic of Germany. Right,
reconstituted amphora and amphora
fragments unearthed at Heuneburg were
manufactured in the Marseilles region.
i-^4
^*í*^*^^*
PIN "i
t*fc(
-#-

England
Cornwall
Right, specimens of pottery which, with
other objects unearthed in recent years at
Châtillon-sur-Glâne near Fribourg in
Switzerland indicate that this fortified site
may have played an important commercial
role in early Iron Age Europe. The finds are
strikingly similar in type to material
discovered at other fortified markets and
staging posts along the trade route between
the east Mediterranean basin and the British
Isles, Salins-les-Bains and Mont Lassois in
France (see map). Above, fragment of Attic,
black-figure pottery. Below, a piece of imita¬
tion Phocaean ware. Phocaea was the
mother city of several Greek colonies in¬
cluding Massilia (Marseilles). At the end of
the 6th century BC Marseilles craftsmen
were producing imitation Phocaean pottery
for the European market. The discovery of
examples of this "pseudo-Phocaean" ware
at Châtillon-sur-Glâne suggests that in an¬
cient times the site was linked by trade not
only with the east Mediterranean but with
the south ofFrance, along a route which has
not yet been fully identified.
Map shows commercial arteries linking the
Mediterranean to northern Europe around
the late 6th century BC. In the absence of
good roads, rivers and lakes assumed great
importance as vectors of trade. A number of
the sites now being investigated by ar¬
chaeologists seeking to retrace ancient
European trade routes are located at loading
and unloading points where rivers ceased to
be navigable and cargoes had to be trans¬
ferred from boat to wagon and vice versa.
the Great Saint Bernard Pass, were oc¬
cupied at the same period (around 540) and
abandoned at the same time (about 480).
They were trading posts where tin and
other commodities must have been trans¬
shipped from one form of transport to
another. Since the risk of theft was always
greater at the moment of transshipment
than during transport by boat, chariot or on
the backs of animals, it was essential to en¬
sure that transshipment took place in condi¬
tions of security. This security was provided
in the late Hallstatt period by local lords.
[The Hallstatt period, which takes its name
from an archaeological site in Austria,
refers to the late Bronze and early Iron Ages
in central and western Europe, beginning
about 3,000 years ago and ending around
500 BC]
An important lordly fortification of this
type has been discovered at Heuneburg on
the Upper Danube and has been
systematically explored over some thirty
years.
Most of these transshipment points were
located at places where rivers cease to be
navigable for vessels of a certain size. The
Danube is navigable as far as Heuneburg;
the Seine as far as Vix, near Châtillon-sur-
Seine; and the Sarine as far as Au Port, near
Châtillon-sur-Glâne (see map). Bragny-sur-
Saône, on the other hand, lies at the junc¬
tion of the Saône and the Doubs, both of
which are still navigable further upstream.
The Loue, which forms an eastward exten¬
sion of the Doubs towards the Jura Massif,
is navigable as far as Port Lesney, near
Salins-les-Bains.
Objects from the Marseilles region,
mainly wine jars, have also been discovered
at Heuneburg. A commercial highway link¬
ing the Marseilles region with that of the
Upper Danube doubtless crossed the Swiss
plateau. Yverdon, La Tène, and Uetliberg,
near Zürich, lay on this route from Geneva
to the Rhine. The fortified site of Châtillon-
sur-Glâne, which was recently discovered in
the Sarine valley, lies off this direct axis bet¬
ween Lake Geneva and the Rhine. It also
lies away from the region of the three Jura
lakes and the lower valley of the Aare. This
site is not, therefore, directly related to the
trade route connecting Marseilles and the
Heuneburg. The question arises, therefore,
whether the site at Châtillon-sur-Glâne was
situated on a trade route which ran from
France to Greece via the Great Saint Ber¬
nard Pass.
The valley of the Sarine provides the
most direct access to the Great Saint-
Bernard from the Swiss plateau, since there
was no passage by land along the north
shore of Lake Geneva in prehistoric and
protohistoric times. The rocks which
plunge into the lake would have made such
a passage impossible. Were it not for this
rocky barrier near the Castle of Chillón,
south of Montreux, the easiest and most
direct route between Salins and Pontarlier
to the Great Saint Bernard would have been
by the Col de la Jougne, Orbe, the north
shore of Lake Geneva and the Lower
Valais. In prehistoric and protohistoric
times this barrier made necessary a detour I
11

the Val de Travers, the region of
the three lakes on the western Swiss plateau,
the valley of the Sarine and the Col des
Mosses to the Valais. Hence the location of
Châtillon-sur-Glâne away from the impor¬
tant routes of more recent origin.
The site was discovered in 1974 by an
amateur archaeologist. The presence of At¬
tic potsherds decorated with black figures,
and of bronze fibulae brooches or
clasps from the late Hallstatt period,
enable us to date the site, which was pro¬
tected by an earthen rampart and moat at
the end of the First Iron Age. A series of
very limited exploratory excavations con¬
firmed the hypothesis that it was a late
Hallstatt princely fortification. This con¬
clusion is strengthened by the surrounding
ring of large burial mounds, the biggest of
which, in the forest of Moncor, measures 85
metres in diameter and is 10 metres high.
The archaeological material unearthed at
Châtillon-sur-Glâne includes a large
number of imported articles such as
fragments of Massalian, pseudo-Phocaean
and pseudo-Ionian wine-jars. There are
also some forty fragments of Attic pottery
decorated with black figures, which was
manufactured in Greece, as well as
fragments of Etruscan vases and vessels
from the Este region of northern Italy. A
large quantity of local wheel-turned pottery
has also been found, as well as iron and
bronze objects which testify to the presence
of craftsmen's workshops inside the fort¬
ifications. Hallstattian sites, mainly burial
mounds, are very frequent on both sides of
the Sarine, and also in the upper valley of
the river. There is a fortified site on the hill
of the Bois d'Everdes, northeast of Bulle, at
the base of which rises a thirteen-metre-
high mound which, like the fortification,
has not yet been excavated. Further up the
valley of the Sarine, at Grandvillars, several
burial mounds from the Hallstatt period
were destroyed in the last century.
The fortified site on Mont Lassois has
been partially examined during several ex¬
ploratory excavations. Much interesting
material has beerl discovered there and been
preserved, some of it in the museum at
Châtillon-sur-Seine. Of particular impor¬
tance are the Attic potsherds with black
figures imported from Greece, and many
fragments of Massalian amphorae.
The archaeologist who explored the site,
René Joffroy, made a surprising discovery
in 1952 when he excavated the princely
tomb of Vix at the foot of Mont Lassois.
This, the richest known tomb from the
12
Black-figure Attic bowl is one
of many rich Greek finds
unearthed in the tomb of a
Celtic princess (late 6th cen¬
tury BC) at Vix near the hill-fort
of Mont Lassois in France (see
map previous page).
Photo © Giraudon, Paris
The magnificent bronze crater
(mixing bowl or vase)
discovered 30 years ago at Vix
is the most spectacular piece
of material evidence for in¬
tense economic activity bet¬
ween northern Europe and the
Greek world 2,500 years ago.
It stands 1.64 metres high and
weighs 208 kilos, and is of
Greek workmanship. The
"Vase of Vix", below, is now
preserved in the Museum at
Châtillon-sur-Seine, a few
kilometres from the place
where it was found.
Photo © Giraudon, Paris
Hallstatt period, contained a massive
bronze bowl imported from Greece, a
diadem in solid gold, silver cups, a bronze
jug of Etruscan origin, a black figure Attic
cup and a chariot decorated with open¬
work bronze plates.
The fortified site at Salins-les-Bains in
the French Jura was discovered at the end
of the last century and partly explored by
Maurice Piroutet and Joseph Déchelette.
Many specialists were surprised that im¬
ported Greek pottery should have been
discovered in the Jura. It was accepted that
the settlement had relations with the
Phocaean colony at Marseilles. The objects
discovered had affinities with those found
on Mont Lassois and at Châtillon-sur-
Glâne. They differ from the latter only
through the presence of Greek pottery with
red figures.
The site of Bragny-sur-Saône, which
dates from the end of the Hallstatt period,
was discovered in 1968. Since then several
rescue excavations have been carried out in
this locality which have resulted in a series
of remarkable discoveries. These include
fibulae identical in form to those found in
the settlements mentioned above. There are
also Attic potsherds with black figures, and
pseudo-Phocaean potsherds. Workshops
for the smelting of iron have also been
discovered. No fortifications, which would
have been present if it were the seat of a
prince, have so far been found at Bragny.
But it could have been a site in open country
which constituted an extension of a for¬
tified place, similar to that discovered near
the fortification at Heuneburg. At Bois-de-
Châtillon, near Fribourg in Switzerland,
scattered finds, including iron and copper
slag, suggest the presence of workshops in
a dwelling outside the rampart and moat.
For the moment we do not know for sure
whether the rulers of the princely sites
where transshipments were supervised were
local notables who were rewarded with
gifts, or Greek colonists whose task was to
ensure free passage through the different
regions. It can be said, however, that rela¬
tions between the lords of the princely sites
and the local leaders were excellent, as
testified by the great quantity of imported
objects found in the tombs.
The hypothesis of a tin route which we
have put forward here is based on evidence
that is far from complete. It remains for
future investigators to confirm it through
further excavations and discoveries.
Hanni Schwab
