The video grapevine by ítalo Manzi
OVER the past three years, film
enthusiasts throughout the world
have acquired a new passion. As
happens with many literary and artistic
movements, a number of individuals, quite
independently and spontaneously felt a
need whose fulfilment was to become a
world-wide phenomenon.
It all started with an apparatus invented
by the Japanese the video-recorder. As
everyone knows, video-recorders enable
one to record a television programme in
one's absence and to view a programme or
a film again or at a more convenient time.
From the moment the video-recorder ap¬
peared on the market, new and hitherto un¬
dreamed of possibilities were opened up for
the film enthusiast.
Without wishing to underrate the
achievements of preceding or succeeding
decades, it is probably true to say that the
period that most interests film enthusiasts is
that of the 1940s and 1950s. Apart from
films of certain specific directors, or those
that can be classified in "cycles" or
"festivals", art cinemas are usually reluc-
ITALO MANZI, Argentine film critic, has
published a number of books and articles in
Argentina and elsewhere. He was formerly
director of foreign language studies at the
Faculty of Psychology of the university of
Buenos Aires and is currently working with
Unesco in Paris.
tant to show "ordinary" films of that
period because they are considered
wrongly to be of little importance. Some
of them are, in fact, exceptional produc¬
tions that have been unjustifiably forgot¬
ten; all of them, however, are typical of an
epoch and have a special flavour of their
own.
Thanks to national television services,
which do not have the same "scrupulous"
approach as the art cinemas, and to ex¬
changes amongst collectors in different
countries, the film enthusiast can now not
only view but also own copies of these films
which, up to three years ago, he could never
even hope to see.
Film enthusiasts are now running short
of space to house their collections, which
are growing at an alarming rate. An increas¬
ingly complex and fascinating traffic in
cassettes of films has begun in many coun¬
tries which is conducted either by mail or
with the help of well-disposed friends who
travel. Although this may appear to be in
breach of copyright, the fact is that collec¬
tors derive no monetary advantage from the
cassettes since they only view them in
private and exchange them with fellow
collectors.
Let us take a typical example. Mr. X,
who lives in Paris, owns two video-
recorders. In addition to recording
whatever interests him on French television,
he has friends in Barcelona, Berlin, London
and Buenos Aires who send him recordings
made from their local television pro¬
grammes. But Mr. X is, in turn a friend of
Mr. Y, who has friends who are doing the
same thing in Rome, Vienna and Brussels.
Mr. Z, on the other hand, has friends in
Finland. Someone else who lives in Brazil
knows somebody who records for him what
interests him on Rome television, but
before they are despatched to Rio the
cassettes make a stop in Paris at the home
of Mr. X who copies what interests him op
his friends Y and Z, who in turn have
friends who... and so on ad infinitum.
People have always collected 16mm
films, but never on a massive scale. Now,
thanks to this new video-recording hobby,
countless films, which for decades were
nowhere to be seen and which otherwise
would have been lost, are circulating again.
In this way also an entire cinematic tradi¬
tion can be rescued from oblivion and be
subjected to a new appraisal.
This is what has happened to a fringe
cinema such as that of Argentina. For more
than a decade, from about 1936 to 1946, the
Argentine cinema was the most popular in
the Spanish-speaking world. Outside that
area it was known through a number of
post- 1950 films such as those of Leopoldo
Torre-Nilsson and a few others that won
prizes at international festivals. Carlos
Gardel's films are also known, but none of
them is truly Argentine since they were
made in Paris or New York.
During the golden decade of the Argen¬
tine cinema Buenos Aires was the capital of
the Spanish-speaking world. Its streets,
parks and places of entertainment knew no
frontiers. The fashions, speech and
sophistication of Buenos Aires, made
known by Argentine film stars, were im¬
itated in the other Spanish-speaking coun¬
tries. The picture thus conveyed, although
by no means false, was incomplete, since
nothing was shown of life in certain social
classes.
Nedda Francy, a blonde of the Marlene
Dietrich type, paraded her charms in Monte
Criollo and Palermo. Mecha Ortiz, the
The Argentine actress Imperio Argentina,
one of the great stars of the first half of the
century, with Spanish actor Miguel Ligero in
the Spanish film La Hermana San Sulpicio
(1934) directed by Florian Rey. Once
thought to have disappeared, La Hermana
San Sulpicio has recently been shown on
television thanks to a copy preserved by a
film enthusiast.

The young Eva Duarte in La
Pródiga, directed by Mario
Soffici in 1945. Forgotten for
almost 40 years the film is only
now being shown for the first
time. It was made shortly
before Eva Duarte became Eva
Perón when she married the
President of the Argentine
Republic, who apparently
refused to allow his wife to ap¬
pear on the cinema screen.
Not even photos were publish¬
ed of Eva as an actress.
Argentine Garbo with the inimitable voice,
made her mark on the Spanish-speaking
world in such films as Los Muchachos de
Antes no Usaban Gomina, Safo and El
Cante del Cisne. There were also Mirtha
Legrand, Amelia Bence, Paula Singerman
and the great comic actresses Nini Marshall
and Olinda Bozán.
But the actress who perhaps achieved the
greatest and most lasting fame was Libertad
Lamarque who immortalized so many
tangos in Besos Brujos, Ayúdame a Vivir
and Madreselva. After a quarrel with the
supporting actress in La Cabalgata del Cir¬
co (1943), who was none other than Eva
Duartesoon to become Evita Perónshe
was obliged to emigrate to Mexico where,
initially directed by Bunuel (in the excellent
Gran Casino, so belittled by "serious"
historians of the cinema) and then appear¬
ing in tear-jerking melodramas, she won
new laurels that have lost none of their
freshness, since she is now pursuing a suc¬
cessful career in her native country.
Then there are the actors. José Gola,
Roberto Airaldi, Hugo del Carril and Juan
Carlos Thorny must be counted among the
matinee idols, and Enrique Muiño, Enrique
Serrano and Elias Alippi among the
character actors.
Many of these films were, of course,
"potboilers", but there were also more im¬
portant works which marked their epoch
and have lost none of their quality with the
passage of time: Viento Norte (Mario Sof¬
fici, 1937), Asi es la Vida (Francisco Mu-
jica, 1939), Prisioneros de la Tierra (Mario
Soffici, 1939), Crimen a las Tres (Luis
Saslavsky, 1935), La Guerra Gaucha (Lucas
Demare, 1942), and so on.
Thanks to the video-recorder, students
and enthusiasts have been able to recover
and preserve many products of a cinema,
which in those days had an average output
of fifty films a year. They have also been
able to follow the careers of such interesting
and creative directors as Luis Saslavsky,
Alberto de Zavalía, Francisco Mujic and
Mario Soffici, as well as of some foreign
directors such as Pierre Chenal who spent a
large part of his career in Argentina where
he produced at least two of his best films
El Muerto Falta a la Cita, a thriller that was
very modern for its time (1944), and Todo
un Hombre, based on the novel by Miguel
de Unamuno (1943).
Similarly it is possible to follow the
careers of a large number of non-Spanish-
speaking actors, who appeared in many
films during those years of plenty, in¬
cluding Emma Gramática (two films),
A ä
W
^PT^ Jr M L^bbWJ
H W
Florence Marly (three films), June Marlowe
(five films) and Rachel Bérendt.
Before we leave the Argentine cinema we
should mention two examples of rescued
films which have been of unusual
significance. The first was not an Argentine
but a Spanish film the version of La Her¬
mana San Sulpicio directed by Florian Rey
in 1934although the story began in
Argentina where the star of the film, Im¬
perio Argentina, one of the international
cinema's most authentic superstars, was
born.
Until a year ago, to own a film in which
this actress appeared was a film enthusiast's
dream. A cassette of the film in question,
recorded in Argentina, where the film had
been shown on television, was circulating in
Paris. Shortly afterwards, in June 1983,
Spanish television decided to broadcast a
film cycle, in the presence of the actress
herself, which would include all her
available films. Nine of them were collected
including two made in Argentina, the Ger¬
man film Carmen, la de Triana, made in
Berlin in 1938, and La Tosca (Italy, 1940),
in which Imperio, supported by Rossano
Brazzi and Michel Simon, was directed by
Jean Renoir assisted by Luchino Visconti.
Poster for Mario Soffid's
Viento Norte (1937), a key
work in the history of the
Argentine cinema.
Photos & Cinemateca Argentina, Buenos Aires
It was also planned to include La Her¬
mana San Sulpicio in the series. Only one
16mm copy of the film survives and it is
owned by a Buenos Aires collector who had
lent it from time to time to Argentine televi¬
sion and had promised to lend it to the
Spaniards. But at the last minute he had
misgivings about sending it overseas. Short¬
ly before, the Paris enthusiast mentioned
earlier had made a copy of the film which he
sent to a Madrid enthusiast in exchange for
a cassette of another film of the same ac¬
tress. The Spaniard lent his cassette to the
television service and the public were able to
become acquainted, or to renew acquain¬
tance, with a delightful, subtly and
unusually irreverent film based on the novel
by Armando Palacio Valdés.
In our second example the rescue of the
film was not due to video-recording (pirate
copies are said to be on sale in London but
this has proved impossible to verify) but to
more complex reasons of a political nature.
The film in question was La Pródiga, made
by Mario Soffici in 1945 and starring Eva
Duarte. She had already played secondary
roles in a number of films and a bigger role
in La Cabalgata del Circo, but this was the
first time she had played the leading role in
a big-budget film, based on a famous work
by Alarcón.
The filming took place at a time of
political unrest (Eva's marriage to Perón
and the Iatter's nomination as President).
Obviously the film could not be screened.
Photographs of the actress in this film were
never seen and people even came to doubt
whether it had ever been completed. It was
also said that all copies had been destroyed.
Now, forty years later, the film is going
to be screened. Apparently one of the pro¬
ducers saved a copy which lay in a safe in
Uruguay awaiting the day of its resurrec¬
tion. Film enthusiasts in search of rare
items are now anxiously looking out for a
cassette of La Pródiga which, after the suc¬
cess of the opera Evita, and all that has been
written about this controversial personali¬
ty, will enable us freely to see the real Evita.
H ítalo Manzi
21
