
Armando Reverón: a lustfor light
by Juan Calzadilla
FOR Latin Americans of yesterday,
the only conceivable tradition to
which the work of an artist seeking
recognition could be related was that of
European art and, more specifically, of
modern European art. This was a field in
which everything was alien to us, but we
were quick to assimilate. Techniques, tools,
industrial materials -and concepts were
taken, and sometimes snatched, from Euro¬
pean art by our artists and academies and
applied unchanged, except for the visual
content, i.e. the subjects, as part of the ar¬
tist's search for a place of some kind (even
at the cost of losing a kind of hallmark of
Latin Americanism) within the chronology
of international art. Our modernity was
based on offshoots of Impressionism and
on what Herbert Read aptly called "the
tyranny of the eye" which the Renaissance
imposed upon all modern European (and
by extension Latin American) art.
If the work of the Venezuelan artist Ar¬
mando Reverón (1889-1954) is considered
against this historical background it can be
seen to represent a revolt against the Im¬
pressionist tradition in which a whole
generation of artists were brought up and in
which Reverón himself was trained. It is on¬
ly in his early works, produced between
1908 and 1920, that there is a point of view
familiar to an eye unaccustomed to the light
of the tropics.
In accordance -with tradition, Reverón
accepted the rules of the game by com¬
pleting his youthful studies at Caracas
Academy where he acquired the conven¬
tional knowledge which, talented as he was,
and capable of taking all kinds of risks, he
exploited in the remarkable achievements
of his first period, which lasted until about
1920.
JUAN CALZADILLA, Venezuelan poet, art
critic, and university teacher, is a long-serving
member of his country's museographical ser¬
vice. He is the author of a number of books in¬
cluding a major bibliography on the arts of
Venezuela and a catalogue raisonné of the
work of Armando Reverón.
' if ;>
Self-Portrait with Dolls (1950).
Pencil, charcoal and pastel on
paper, by Armando Reverón
11889-1954).
A journey to Spain and to Paris led him
to reflect on the deterministic influence of
Europe on a dependent culture like ours, in¬
capable of creating its own models (how far
is this still true?). From this time
(1915-1916) onwards, Reverón became
obsessed with the idea of Creating an art
outside the official framework, rejecting
conventional doctrines, traditional ethics,
and standardized habits of interpretation
which had taught people to assess values by
reference to European models ("Ah, he is
not as good as Monet, but you can see that
he has seen Monet!").
Reverón realized that the basis for this
revolt lay, if not in change of social
structures which was a lot to ask for at
least in a change in the pattern for in
dividual behaviour. A deep-rooted need to
isolate himself and to draw close to nature
led him to settle in a spot (half desert at that
time) on the coast near Caracas. Here he liv¬
ed in contact with nature a life that was
simplified to such primitive extremes that
eventually his physical resistance broke
down, leading to madness; here, between
1952 and 1953 he accomplished powerful
works, both concentrated and boundless,
skilful and yet dense, which seem to have
been torn from the light which served as his
central figure rather than an object (the in¬
candescent light of our environment seen
face to face and created on a stage
dramatized by the deep reflection of the
energy hidden in matter, in continuous
movement).
