food
FIRST
by Paul Lunven
IT is generally accepted that the problem
of hunger and malnutrition can only
be solved by tackling the root causes,
that is to say, by improving the economic
and social conditions of the poorest classes
of the population. Malnutrition, which is
particularly widespread in rural areas but is
also to be found in towns, is always directly
linked to the development of agriculture. In
developing countries which lack mineral
resources, agriculture is the chief source of
income and employment, an important sup¬
plier of food to both town and countryside,
and an essential contributor to the foreign
trade balance. Responsibility for improving
a country's nutritional situation falls,
therefore, to those in charge of agricultural
planning.
Despite the considerable efforts which
have been made in developing countries to
stimulate agricultural production and rural
development, a large proportion of the
population, especially children, still suffer
from malnutrition. Although significant
progress has been made in productivity, it
has not led to a perceptible improvement in
food consumption and nutritional levels.
According to FAO estimates, about a
quarter of the total population in develop¬
ing countries (excluding Asian countries
with centrally planned economies) do not
have access to a diet which meets the
minimum energy needs of a human being.
Since the vast majority of the
malnourished are from poor rural families,
farm labourers and small subsistence
farmers, it can fairly be concluded that any
significant reduction in the prevailing
malnutrition can be achieved only insofar
as agricultural policies and projects include
food and nutritional objectives. Conse¬
quently, it must be ensured that the ultimate
beneficiaries of development are the most
needy and that the benefits of development
are primarily applied to eliminating the
most glaring deficiencies.
To ensure the future prosperity of the
populations concerned, and to achieve a
general improvement in nutrition and food
consumption, there must be both a reorien¬
tation and a better utilization of existing
resources, in addition to ad hoc nutritional
PAUL LUNVEN is Director of the Food Policy
and Nutrition Division of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), in Rome.
A down-to-earth approach
to nutrition
and rural development
action of the traditional type such as educa¬
tion and supplementary feeding.
Reorientation of agricultural production
in order to provide for target groups (cer¬
tain categories of persons within families
and certain categories of families within
communities) is one of the most important
aspects of development and one of the
most difficult to achieve. It often comes up
against political opposition or ad¬
ministrative obstacles. It is necessary to
ascertain the activities of the needy groups
to be assisted, the kinds of food they eat
and the ways in which they provide for their
food needs, especially during periods when
supplies are difficult to obtain. For in¬
stance, the poor generally consume a high
proportion of cereals and tubers such as
manioc or sweet potatoes, whereas the well-
off consume a higher proportion of oils
(which provide a large amount of energy)
and meat.
Well-off consumers do not suffer from
the alternation of the seasons. On the other
hand poor farmers, in addition to looking
after their own farms, have to work outside
during peak periods. Their wives have to do
a bigger share of the farm work and there is
a danger that the subsistence of the family
may become largely dependent on the fruit
of the woman's labours. The children are
then called upon to help in the fields. In ad¬
dition to all the problems due to uncertainty
of food supplies and the low level of their
incomes compared to the hours of work
they put in, the poor have to cope with
indebtedness, illness and a high rate of in¬
fant mortality.
For all these reasons the FAO and other
United Nations agencies have for several
years been studying the processes which
link the food consumption of low-income
rural populations to agricultural invest¬
ment, in order to measure their impact and
identify the mechanisms which would
enable agricultural planners to take account
of food and nutritional considerations in
agricultural development work at the pro¬
ject level.
In overall terms it is conceivable that,
despite apparently adequate supplies of
food at the national level, pockets of
malnutrition may persist because of in¬
equalities in the distribution of income. But
it is surprising that, in spite of the con¬
siderable means applied, well-intentioned
aims, and possibilities for permanent super¬
vision of the food chain from production to
consumption, projects explicitly aimed at
raising the living standards of the rural poor
do not succeed in improving the food situa-
it
à
16

Among thepoor in the developing countries
children are expected to make a contribu¬
tion to the family budget. This young girl
from Bangladesh is fashioning cow-dung
into briquettes for use as fuel.
tion of the most needy to any significant
degree.
It is necessary, therefore, above all to en¬
sure that projects do not entail negative
nutritional effects for the most deprived
groups because of the way in which they are
formulated or executed.
This has happened in the past in the case
of projects which were concentrated on par¬
ticular groups of producers or particular
agricultural products. The poor were com¬
pletely excluded from these projects. Sub¬
sistence food production was completely ig¬
nored, or even eliminated, in the concentra¬
tion of resources.
Other projects have had negative effects
on wages, prices and employment, with the
result that the purchasing power of the poor
declined. When it is considered that up to 80
per cent of their income may be spent on
food, it can be seen what effect a decline in
income can have, because the remaining 20
per cent cannot be squeezed.
It is true that the . negative effects of
development projects on family nutrition
are quite unintentional, and that their real
causes are difficult to identify. When by
chance an assessment reveals a deteriora¬
tion in the situation,- it is commonly at¬
tributed to such factors as backwardness,
ignorance, and traditions. The nutritionist
and the sociologist, for their part, strongly
criticize the very nature of the project
without offering a satisfactory explanation
or an alternative solution. A typical case is
the introduction of cash crops into regions
previously devoted to mixed subsistence
farming. This has often been blamed for a
recrudescence of malnutrition despite an
apparent improvement in living standards.
Nowadays agricultural planners are
aware of the dangers which a sharp transi¬
tion from a subsistence to a market
economy can have for small farmers who
suddenly find themselves obliged to pur¬
chase a large proportion of the food re¬
quired by the family. Certain measures of a
general nature are, therefore, taken in
regard to supplies and prices, in order to
avoid a sudden deterioration in the family's
food supplies. But this is not enough. For
instance, one of the things overlooked in
plans is the woman's role in supplying the
' family's food, for women are always
regarded as consumers, not producers. But
recent FAO studies show that women con¬
tribute as much as 60 per cent of the family
food supply and that they are almost ex¬
clusively both the producers and preservers
17

of what are commonly called secondary
crops.
By eliminating the plots devoted to these
crops, or increasing the demand for the
female labour necessary to maintain them,
the introduction of cash crops has a
negative effect on the family's food supply
(and the preservation of indigenous plant
varieties) despite a substantial increase in
cash income. This effect will doubtless be
attributed to the woman's lack of education
and her consequent inability to manage a
budget, whereas- the prime reason is ig¬
norance of her essential role in keeping the
family Jcitchen supplied.
Indeed, this explains the failure of so
many well-intentioned, carefully planned
development projects. After a certain time
the "beneficiaries", seeing their food situa¬
tion deteriorate, either emigrate or go back
to traditional subsistence crops.
It can therefore be said that, in general,
agricultural and rural development projects
whose primary concern is to increase pro-
. 18
duction rates and incomes can have unfor¬
tunate results on the nutritional level for the
populations concerned. Some of the causes
are the preferential allocation of
agricultural credit for cash crops to the
detriment of food crops; a decline in food
production on the lands affected by the pro¬
ject because of a growing scarcity in the
amount of land available and because of the
demand for labour; an increase in the prices
of purchased foodstuffs due to speculation
and archaic marketing systems; .the appeal
of commercial products with a low nutri¬
tional value, such as carbonated beverages.
To this must be added the fact that it is
always the poor farmer who directly or in¬
directly finances the subsidies on produci
of mass consumption in the towns.
These facts are now known an
documented, but it is nevertheless quite ce:
tain that governments whose main soun
of hard currency is commercial agriculture
cannot be expected to sacrifice the latter to
meeting the nutritional needs of low-level
income groups. This is why the FAO h,
-
:
ce
a
A woman's work... ?»
uj as
Women play a crucial role in the produc¬
tion, storage andprocessing offood in most
societies. They make up one third of the
work force in the developing countries.
Women often have well-defined specializa¬
tions infoodproduction and are increasing¬
ly becoming the principal farmers and
breadwinners in countries where men
migrate in search of work, or where divorce
and separation are common. Yet this in¬
creased burden of work is not accompanied
by a greater share in the taking ofdécisions.
Chores such as the collection of wood and
the drawing of water are usually left to the
women and despite their importance to
agricultural production they face severe
handicaps. The excess burden of work on
women (the "double day" of farmwork
plus housework) also acts as a stimulus to
have many children so thai they can help
out with the chores from an early age. Fur¬
thermore, development policies often tend
to favour increased production of cash
crops (the man's domain) to the detriment
ofsubsistencefood crops which are usually
the woman 's responsibility, so that family
nutrition suffers. All this means an extra
burden on women, with longer journeys to
work on more marginal land and often ad¬
ditional unpaid work on their husbands'
crops. Top left, a Kababish nomad woman
of the Sudan offers drinking water to her
children. Above, women at work in a tobac¬
co field in Zimbabwe. Above right, in the
Sahel, a Senegalese woman feeds her baby.
Research has shown that mother's milk is
not only more healthy and nutritive than
other babyfoods but also immunizes the in¬
fant and helps him or her to resist infection.

taken steps to develop agricultural planning
methods which not only identify and
eliminate the causes of deterioration in
food supplies but benefit from the impetus
given by investment in deprived areas, in
order to ensure that the living standards of
the population, and especially their food
supplies, are preserved in terms of quality
and improved in quantity.
In the context of this approach the
economist must ask whether the project en¬
visaged, irrespective of whether it concerns
a food or an industrial crop, will lead to an
increase or a decline in the amount of food
available in the country; whether food
prices will remain stable or will increase,
and whether one or other of these factors
will have negative effects on nutrition.
These questions may seem simple, but the
answers are not, especially if production
targets are considered to be imperative and
must not be sacrificed.
Many experts are at present considering
how to assist the agricultural planner by
supplying him with the tools which will
enable him to achieve the ideal compromise
between economic and social development.
This work is only in its early stages, but
initial results seem to confirm that
agricultural and rural development projects
offer encouraging prospects for improving
the food and nutritional situation in
developing countries.
Of course, if we recall the resolution
adopted by the World Food Conference
just ten years ago that "all governments
must ensure that by 1984 no man, woman
or child will go to bed with an empty
stomach", we cannot but deplore the
meagre results obtained during this period.
It is not the purpose of this article to dwell
upon the impact of the world crisis and
over-armament on the poor in developing
countries. However it can be said that the
essentially economic view of the campaign
against hunger and mulnutrition which
prevailed until recently is slowly changing.
The days are over when the only criteria
of success were an increase in production
and an improvement in national income.
While these are still prime objectives of
agricultural and rural development, the fact
remains that today, despite all the inade¬
quacies of which we are aware, man is no
longer regarded only as an agent of
development, but as its first and ultimate
objective.
Paul Lunven
World Food Day
In 1979 the 147 nations represented in the
Conference of the Food and Agriculture
Organization ofthe UnitedNations decided
to establish World Food Day on the an¬
niversary of the founding of the FAO, 16
October 1945. The purpose of the Day,
which has been observed annually since
1981, is to heighten public awareness of the
nature and dimensions of worldfoodprob¬
lems and to develop a sense ofnational and
international solidarity in the struggle
against hunger, malnutrition and poverty.
In 1983, the third World Food Day was
celebrated in over 140 countries by a wide
array of activities ranging from art and
essay competitions, to seminars on food
problems and fund-raising appeals in
favour of agricultural development pro¬
jects. Left, a painting by 11-year-old Tuni¬
sian schoolboy Riadh Rouissi, won first
prize in an art competition on "worldfood
security", theme of the third World Food
Day. Over a thousand children took part in
the competition, which was organized by
the magazine Jeune Afrique with the col¬
laboration of FAO.
