RICE
IN MYTH AND LEGEND
by Obayashi Taryo
ALTHOUGH they have different
histories, cultures and societies,
all the countries of east and south¬
east Asia have rice as a common
denominator. It is not simply that these
peoples cultivate rice; they all have
customs, rituals and myths concerning rice
which serve as threads to bind them
together. Rice culture is extremely impor¬
tant as the common inheritance of these
regions.
Myths concerning the origin of rice take
many forms. Some have points in common
with myths related to other crops. One of
these, which is widely current in such parts
of the region as Indonesia and Malaysia,
tells how crops originated from the corpse
of a murdered god or human being. Myths
of this kind often relate that other crops
originated at the same time as rice. In Java,
according to some versions, fruit-bearing
plants originated from the corpse of a
young girl; dry land rice from the navel;
coconut palms from the head and genitals;
www --;:, j'j
Above and below, harvest folk dances
in the State of Gujarat, northwest India.
ripened fruit dangled from both hands, and
fruit originated from the legs and ripened in
the ground. Among the Manggarai people
of Flores Island, it is said that rice and
maize originated from the corpse of a
murdered child. According to the Japanese
classic Kojiki ("Record of ancient mat¬
ters"), compiled in 712 AD, Susanoo slew
the food goddess Ohogetsu-hime.
Silkworms came from her head, rice seeds
from both eyes, millet from both ears, red
beans from her nose, wheat from her
genitals, and soybeans from her buttocks.
Many mountain peoples of the southeast
Asian mainland and islands sacrifice
domestic animals such as water buffalo and
pigs as an agricultural ritual. Some plain-
dwelling peoples of the region, such as the
Lao of Laos, also sacrifice water buffalo.
The motives underlying this practice are
varied. It is believed that the flesh of the
animal is presented to the gods in exchange
for the gods' gift of an abundant rice
harvest. It is also thought that magical
power (mana) contained in animal blood
promotes the growth of plants.
Given the view that death is a premise of
life, animal sacrifice has points in common
with myths that relate the origin of crops
from corpses. In the southeast Asian
islands, myth and sacrifice frequently ac¬
company one another. Yet, on the
mainland, despite the fact that animal
sacrifice is widespread, myths which relate
the origin of rice from corpses hardly ap¬
pear at all.
\nother important form of rice cultiva¬
tion myth refers to the stealing of crop
seeds. These myths are found not only in
east and southeast Asia but are also
widespread among the agricultural peoples
of Africa and the Americas. Furthermore,
these myths are not exclusively tied to rice

In a Burmese village, a sheaf of rice is of¬
fered to the guardian spirit of the com¬
munity. The miniature horses are
vehicles in which the spirit is believed to
ride.
In a rice-field in Java (Indonesia) a woman
binds into a sheaf the first heads of rice to
be harvested. Next she will dress the
sheaf in cotton print cloth and carry it
home in her arms as if it were a baby.
cultivation but are also applied to the
cultivation of sorghum in Africa and to
maize in America. In Samoa, taro origin
myths also take this form. In parts of east
Asia, amongst the mountain people of
Taiwan, for example, this stealing motif is
found in myths concerning the origins of
millet.
It is said that the ancestors of the Miao
people of Sichuan, China, did not have the
necessary seed to sow their fields. They set
free a green bird which then flew up to the
rice granary of the heaven god and returned
with the heavenly rice seed and tare. A myth
of the Minahassa region of Sulawesi (In¬
donesia) recounts how a man went up to
heaven and returned to earth with unhulled
rice concealed in a wound in his leg.
A conspicuous feature of the rice cultiva¬
tion rituals of east and southeast Asia is the
frequent appearance of the concept of a rice
soul. The Lamet, slash-and-burn rice
cultivators of Laos, constitute a represen¬
tative example of ancient rice cultivation
rituals which are accompanied by this idea.
They perform rituals which include strict
taboos at each point in the cultivation pro¬
cess, and their concept of the rice soul is
similar to those of many of the peoples in¬
habiting the islands of southeast Asia.
The rice soul is especially important at
harvest-time. The cutting proceeds in such
a way that the rice soul does not escape but
is sent away to the corner of the field. It flies
from field to field, finally arriving at a
sacred field near the hut. This sacred field
is sown before the other fields and
harvested after them. In the other fields, the
kernel of rice is simply squeezed in one's
hand and the unhulled rice is removed. In
the sacred field, however, the rice stalk is
gently cut and bundled in sheaves which
contain the rice soul. From these sheaves
the unhulled rice is taken. It is then used to
sow the sacred field the following year. If
the rice soul escapes, then the rice will not
bear fruit.
Rice cultivation taboos and the concept
of a rice soul are widely found in the archaic
forms of southeast Asian rice cultivation
rituals. In Japan these features are found
notably in the Amami Islands. They are not
at all prevalent in northern Japan, however.
One special characteristic of the rice soul
concept of many peoples is the extreme sen¬
sitivity and susceptibility to injury of the
rice soul. It will quickly flee if injured. This
idea extends as far west as the Munda
people of central India.
In Japan, one example of the rice soul
concept is found in the eighth-century
Bungo fudoki ("Gazetteer of Bungo Pro¬
vince, Kyushu"). It tells the story of an area
called Tano, which in olden times was
broad and fertile. The farmers of this
district developed many rice paddies on this
land which bore an abundant crop. The
farmers made mochi (see article page 20)
and used them as targets for their arrows.
The injured mochi turned into a white bird
and flew to the south. During that year the
farmers died and their fields went to rack
and ruin.
The idea of the fleeing rice soul is also
found among the Khmer, a wet rice
cultivating people. They tell the following
myth: in ancient times, when rice ripened, it
fle\v through the sky and came to rest in a
granary. Thus it did not have to be
harvested. But on one occasion, a young
husband and wife living near the granary
made an unpleasant noise which startled the
god of rice. They then uttered indiscreet
words which offended the god. The god
fled into a narrow opening in a mountain.
Because of the absence of the god of rice,
the people throughout the land starved.
They tried various means of bringing the
god back, but in vain. Finally, someone was
chosen to serve as an envoy to persuade the
god to return, and after many difficulties he
accomplished his mission.
A variety of animals appear in rice
cultivation myths. A legend in which a
crane is the bearer of rice is extremely
widespread in Japan. Myths concerning
some kind of rice-bearing bird are also
prevalent on the mainland and islands of
southeast Asia, and tales citing dogs as the
bearers of rice are found from south China
to Assam. One such legend, from the Han
Chinese of Sichuan, speaks of the after¬
math of a great flood. The survivors of this
flood were without crops and in a state of
desperation. They noticed a dog crawling
out of the flooded fields, and from the rice
CONTINUED PAGE 13
Colour page
Above, a field of rice ripens under a stormy
Nepalese sky. Originally cultivated in the
humid tropics as a semi-aquatic plant, rice
can grow in a diversity of climates ranging
from the hot deserts of Pakistan,' Iran and
Egypt to the high mountains of India and
Nepal.
Photo Marc Riboud © Magnum, Paris
Below, Thai workers bagging rice in a river¬
side godown (warehouse) in Bangkok.
Photo Mike Yamashita © Rapho, Paris
10



On New Year's Day, the chief of a Lisu
village in northwest Thailandscatters rice
on the assembled villagers, thereby
bestowing on them the spiritual virtues
traditionally associated with rice.
Colour page
Above, two Harijan women, with their
children, outside their house which they
have decorated with rice paste to welcome
Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth. The
design represents sprays of rice with
flowers.
Photo © Prafulla Mohanti, Nanpur, India
Below left, legend has it that the first rice to
be brought to Japan was a red variety, and
even today a red variety of rice is still
cultivated in sacredpaddy fields belonging
to the Takuzu Shrine, in Tsushima, and the
Homan Shrine, in Tanegashima. Photo
shows a scene from a famous ritual con¬
nected with the red rice of Tsushima. In the
village of Tsutsu, in Tsushima, there are 15
old families who take it in turns to cultivate
the sacred red rice and to elect one of their
number as leader of the ritual. Each year, a
tanemomidawara, an elaborate rice bale, is
woven from the first red rice to be
harvested and is hung up in the house of
the leader of the ritual. In the middle of the
night of the 10th day of the first month of
the old calendar, the tanemomidawara is
taken down, covered with a ceremonial
robe, and carried in procession from the
house of the leader of the ritual for the
previous year to the house of the new
leader. The villagers line the route and
kneel to worship the sacred object as it
passes preceded by a torch-bearer.
Below right, rice cakes made from red and
white rice.
Photos © The Asian Cultural Centre for Unesco, Tokyo
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 10
seed that clung to the dog's tail they were
able to begin rice cultivation. Their feelings
of gratitude to this dog led them to give it
a portion of the first meal after the harvest.
In east and southeast Asia the connexion
between the rice soul and the gods varies
widely. In Java, for example, the female
deity of rice (sri) is contrasted with the male
deity wisnu or sedana. At harvest time these
two gods are thought of as bride and
groom. Consequently, when the rice buds
appear it is thought that the rice is pregnant.
When the rice is harvested, the rice goddess
and her husband are transported to the rice
granary. They enjoy their honeymoon night
without being disturbed. Thus a new fertile
crop is prepared for. In contrast to this, in
Thailand, the rice deity goes to a shed and
is requested to remain there until the
following year.
Among the Muong people of Viet Nam,
rice is given to the ancestors as well as to the
honoured spirits at the time of the New
Year festival (let). Afterwards the rice is not
only eaten but is also offered to the rice
itself. Thus the rice becomes doubly sacred.
All the gods such as the god of rice, the
rice soul, and the god of the fields figure
largely in these legends. In Japan the gods
connected with rice cultivation are usually
gods who do not always remain in the
fields. They come to the fields only when
the rice is growing. Gods of the mountain
become gods of the field in spring, when
they come down to the rice paddies. In
autumn, after the harvest, they once again
become mountain gods and return to the
mountains for the winter.
This conception of the seasonal comings
and goings of the field gods is important in
understanding Japanese rice cultivation
beliefs. Although I have not come across a
similar concept elsewhere in east and
southeast Asia, in Laos there is the idea that
the spirit of snakes dwells in the fields and
puddles during the rainy season and moves
to the rivers in the dry season.
But times are changing. In east and
southeast Asia rice cultivation rituals which
have been performed in many areas and the
widespread legends about the origin of rice
cultivation are gradually disappearing with
the advance of modernization and changes
in farming techniques. The death of an
elder means the loss of a legend and the
discontinuation of one more annual event.
It is the important task of anthropologists
and folklorists in these regions to record the
abundant content of these rice cultures and
transmit them to future generations.
OBAYASHI TARYO is professor of cultural
anthropology at the University of Tokyo. A
specialist in the cultural history of east and
southeast Asia, he is the author of several
books on mythology, ethnography, and an¬
cient Japanese cultural history. Professor
Obayashi was a participant in the research
project for Studies of Rice Cultivation gnd its
Cultural Aspects in Asia, organized between
1978 and 1983 by the Centre for East Asian
Cultural Studies, Tokyo, with the assistance
of Unesco.
13
