WANTED!
The search is on for the world's missing films
by Sam Kula
THE statistics on "lost" filmsmore than half the films
produced before 1930 are not known to have survived
indicate the magnitude of the loss, but they do not convey
the sense of what has been lost, the diminishment of the world's
cultural heritage that resulted from sixty years of neglect, accident
and acts of vandalism.
The losses occurred with equal severity in every type of film¬
making, fiction and non-fiction, film as documentary record and film
as artistic expression. The loss is equally tragic whatever the intent
of the film-maker, but perhaps the loss that is most poignant, most
affecting, is the feature film. These were films seen by millions, a vital
part of the popular culture, and their total disappearance is almost
a personal loss for everyone who shares that culture.
Several months ago the members of the International Federation
of Film Archives (FIAF) were asked to nominate one title "not known
to have survived" in any country, as either representative of the
"lost" films in their country, or as a particularly significant loss due
to its historic role in the national production, or because of the impor¬
tance of the film-makers. The members were also asked to send a
still from the film, or a photograph of a poster if no still survived, and
some of the choices may have been based on the fact that the ar¬
chives held a good quality still, rather than on the relative historical
or cultural significance of one film among several possibilities.
The films represented on this and the two following pagesall
recorded as missingillustrate that losses have occurred in every
sector of the industry. Neither the size of the budget, the scale of the
production, the celebrity of the stars, nor the reputation of the direc¬
tor appear to have guaranteed that a film would survive. The losses
include both huge commercial successes and artistic successes that
apparently failed to find an audience in their day.
What is particularly frustrating is that so many "firsts" have ap¬
parently been lost. Films which marked the beginnings of serious
film-making in a country, or which film historians now recognize as
milestones in the development of the art of the cinema. That frustra¬
tion, and the hope that the films have survived, is worldwide.
SAM KULA is director of Canada's National Film, Television and Sound
Archives.
India, for example, is still searching for Alam Ara (1931), the first
sound film produced in that country; Argentina has nominated El
Apóstol (1917) among the many critical losses in that country,
because it is the first feature length animated film known to have
been produced anywhere in the world; Canada still believes that
Evangeline (191 3), the first feature film produced in that country still
lives, somewhereafter all film that was buried in the permafrost of
the Yukon Territory for almost fifty years (the Dawson City Collec¬
tion) was recently discovered and restored; New Zealand would
dearly love to recover The Birth of New Zealand (1921), not only the
first feature film produced in New Zealand, but an extremely impor¬
tant historical document as well; Australia has not yet given up hope
that The Story of the Kelly Gang (1906), arguably the first feature
length film ever produced anywhere in the world, has survived,
despite the fact that "The Last Film Search", the systematic search
throughout Australia for surviving nitrate film that was launched laót
year (more than 300,000 feet have been recovered), has not yet
unearthed a print; and Sweden is firmly convinced that a film such
as De Landsflyktige (1921), by a director with the international
reputation of Mauritz Stiller, a film sold to thirty-two foreign countries,
still exists, probably under a name that was arbitrarily assigned by
the local distributor (it was called In Self Defense in the USA, Guard¬
ed Lips in the UK).
The phrase "not known to have survived" rather than the more
dramatic "lost" is a necessary qualification since there is no com¬
prehensive world-wide catalogue or inventory of films held by ar¬
chives, and there are thousands of films of all ages still in the vaults
of producers, distributors and laboratories throughout the world. In
addition films are continually being recovered from the attics and
basements of film-makers and their descendants, or discovered in
other archives where they have been hiding under assumed names.
If publication of these stills, therefore, results in someone coming
forward with a copy of a film proclaimed as "lost", the members of
FIAF will be delighted. The search continues in every country with
an established moving image archive. It is a race against time for
films produced before 1 950, films of the nitrate era, and if this article
can lead to the discovery and restoration of just one of these "lost"
films, the collaborative effort that this article represents will be judg¬
ed to have been well worthwhile.
Der Golem, Ger¬
many 1914. Direct¬
ed by Heinrich
Gateen.
Paul Wegener in
the title role in the
first version of the
story, scripted by
Wegener and the
director.
17

.retí! ¡g RJI
« T^ir
V '
~t'.
n
Alam Ara, /nd/'a
7931. Directed by
Ardeshir M. Irani.
India 's first sound
film was a romantic
drama with music,
revolving around
the King of Kumar-
pur and his two
queens.
Photo National Film
Archive of India, PoOna
Evangeline, Canada
1913. Directed by
E.P. Sullivan and
W.H. Cavanaugh.
Believed to be the
first feature-length
dramatic film pro¬
duced in North
America, Evange¬
line deals with the
expulsion of the
Acadians from Nova
Scotia by the British
in 1755.
Photo ( National Film,
Television and Sound At
chives/Public Archives of
Canada, Ottawa
13 aüátllurrifiriü
Barro Humano, Brazil 1929. Directed by
Adhemar Gonzaga.
Gracia Morena starred in this social
drama regarded as an important
historical and cultural document, as
significant for its portrayal of life at that
time as it was in the evolution of the
Brazilian cinema.
i	 ,-v;i "H .i,'
ff 1 ' ' *
Death of Dan Kelly & Steve Hart
The Story of the Kelly Gang, Australia
1906. Directed by Charles Tait.
The first Australian feature film was
based on fact and helped to establish the
bushranging mythology as an important
element in Australian popular culture.
Photo © National Film Archives/National Library
of Australia, Canberra
"*,
The Greatest Thing in Life, USA 1918.
Directed by D. W. Griffith.
Any film by Griffith is a vital link in the
evolution of film technique. Lillian Gish
(above) who played the leading role op¬
posite Robert Harron, insists that this
was one of the best films Griffith ever
directed.
El Apóstol, Argentina 1917. Directed by
Angel Ducaud.
Produced by Federico Valle, El
Apóstol is thought to be the first feature-
length animated film in the history of
cinema.
ê *
! C^
f^V^-
V^^AV^i
_u, fljTJfl^
Sk^>^V
\ ® Jf\
^ ^

De Landsflyktige
("The Exiles "),
Sweden 1921.
Directed by Mauritz
Stiller.
Despite its con¬
siderable interna¬
tional successthe
film was sold to 32
countriesno copy
is known to have
survived.
Photu Cinnmaleket.
Sven ska Filntin$tilulel.
Stockholm
- CHOU T1ATÄ0
WELTO^
Sàtit 5 H lÜFtttE rj« '
*LAr-
Hll'lllllll lllllilll
bll. br lr.:-: fa ,
¿ml LV 4
-.* (
11 FUSUCO
m Revolución Zapatista, Mexico
1914.
This programme is the only
trace known to have survived
of this historically important
feature-length documentary
on the career of Emiliano
Zapata and the Mexican
revolution of 1910.
Photo Cmetucj Nacional, Mnxico Cil y
FT
Napasta, Romania 1928.
Directed by Ghità Popescu.
Ecaterina Nitulescu
Sahigian featured in this film
based on a play by Ion Luca
Caragiale.
Photo Archiva N.iMonal.a de Fl
Bucarest
Fager er lien ("Beautiful is the Mountain), Norway 1925. Directed
by Harry I varson.
This romantic drama featured Aase Bye and Olafr Havrevold, two
leading actors with the National Theatre of Norway. Photo also
shows Oscar Larsen in the role of the grandfather.
Phoio '. fvors* Filminstiiutt,
Sachta Pohfbenych Idei ("The Shaft of Buried Ideas"),
Czechoslovakia 1921. Directed by Rudolf Myzet.
A drama set in the Ostrava mines in 1918. The screenwriter, A.L.
Havel, incorporated the poetry of Petr Bezruc into the intertitles.
Pholo Filmovy Archivi'Czesfcoslovensky Filmoby Ustav. Prague
The Birth of New
Zealand, New Zealand
1921. Directed by Harr¬
ington Reynolds.
All that is known to
have survived of this
historic panorama of
European settlement in
New Zealand is this
original handbill.
ilm Vivid Pares of New Zealand's, earty History Revealed on
th r Vrrvn In a Sarins uf FasrLnatinff inrj Exquisito Scmibr.
THE COLOSSAL HISTORICAL FILM CLASSIC
The Birth of New
Zealand.
SEW ZEALAND ClHtHA L NTE It PR I i. ts LTD.
W11U «linutuL *lt*BEiqii lu
dtmlv Mnu Rarirdlaii oí
044 Flit OF IHII« Wr-UNBB.lt UNO HHtAlIMEhT!
- .-lli 11.I-*. h.|ii. nun ..r 1he TfqjU I ribn ..liui
i i r V i ain . \t* .'
G0CT9 OWN CuUSTKY.
/
1
U
