In search of
new economic structures
by François Perroux
THE loose combination and ill-
determined succession of events
and situations which we term
general crisis, is, we feel, inexplicable
in terms of traditional concepts.
In the 1960s the major Western
economy and certain others were at
grips with a certain fall in productivity
and perturbed by a growing perception
of the formidable nature of Japanese
competition.
These circumstances, accompanied
by other internal and external dif¬
ficulties, heralded the decision of
August 1971 which ended the gold
convertibility of the dollar and ag¬
gravated the damage caused by
floating exchange rates, amidst condi¬
tions which were highly inimical to this
policy and dangerous for the medium-
sized and small nations. The United
FRANÇOIS PERROUX, French economist,
is emeritus professor of the Collège de France,
a corresponding member of the British
Academy, an honorary member of the
American Economic Association and founder
of the Institut de Sciences Mathématiques et
Economiques Appliquées. The latest of his
many books has recently been published in
English by Unesco and Croom Helm Ltd.,
under the title A New Concept of Develop¬
ment (see inside back cover).
States and the industrialized market-
economy countries experienced per¬
sistent, high, and increasing
unemployment, very high inflation, ex¬
orbitant international liquidity and a
slowdown in the growth of their gross
national product (GNP). Towards the
end of the 1970s inflation began to
slacken off; this had a moderating ef¬
fect on prices but did not reduce
unemployment or provoke an upturn in
the growth of GNP.
After enjoying two decades of pros¬
perity (1945-1968), combined growth
and development, the industrialized
market-economy countries went on to
experience fifteen years (1968-1983)
of slow and in some cases negative
growth punctuated by hard shocks due
to rises in the price of oil (1973 and
1979) and to cessation of debt
repayments at the end of the 1970s.
The observable trends of the crisis
we are experiencing today may be
hypothetically envisaged in terms of,
the content and effects of the two
motors of contemporary change: in¬
dustry and finance, industrialization
and financing.
Industry is a structure and has a
structuring power. It is simply a com
bination of fixed assets and trading
capital coupled with teams of human
agents organized hierarchically. By vir¬
tue of its two facets as an apparatus of
things and as an organization of per¬
sons, it is a continuing phenomenon.
The sciences and technologies that it
incorporates endow it with a relative
superiority over the rest of the
economy, above all over agriculture,
which it can carry along in its wake
and, to" a certain extent, shape. It
wields this influence through its
capacity to bring down prices, to
widen flows, and through the informa¬
tion it disseminates. The industrial ap¬
paratus is a motor of, and currently the
major centre of, innovation. Industry is
concentrated and consists largely of
oligopolies and groups.
Finance is understood here as a
mass of financial capital, of debts fall¬
ing due at different periods, which are
in the power of a small number of
public or private decision-makers:
banks, financial intermediaries, public
centres of credit distribution. The nor¬
mal functioning of the economy
presupposes finance to launch the pro¬
ductive machine and keep it turning.
Credit launches and maintains the vast
industrial machine and its changing
Photo © 1983 ADAGP, Paris. Paul Klee Foundation, Museum of Fine Arts, Bern
"It is clear that true competition ceases to exist once a certain level of inequality between in¬
dividuals or between structured human groups such as nations has been passed." Engraving
by the Swiss artist Paul Klee (1879-1940) entitled Two men meet, each presuming the other
to be of higher rank.
19

-<ïf-
*PW¡fa
--¡sp-.
Photo © Ed. van der Elsken, Netherlands
In November 1 982, Scott Walther, aged 48, one of the 1 1 million unemployed in the United States, set out from Bay City, Michigan,
with his handcart, on a five-month "walk for work" which was to take him over 3,000 kilometres to California.
20

ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
million THE EMPLOYMENT GAP, 1960-1982
360 r
350
*>
cPj
/
A Tr eU nemployed
^
A
K%
*"
A
340
330
320
310
300
290
280
270
260
0
1960
"The observable trends of the
crisis we are experiencing today
may be hypothetically envisaged
in terms of the content and effects
of the two motors of contem¬
porary change: industry and
finance, industrialization and
financing."
Photo Paolo Koch © Rapho, Paris
62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82
Source: O.E. CD., Paris
structure, as new industries stimulate
or replace the old. Finance, like produc¬
tion, is dominated by oligopolies.
Industry constitutes the major and
persistent inequality between the
developing countries, diverse though
they are, and those countries which
have long been developed. Here lies
the problem; it is here that reform
would be useful, if only the problem is
properly perceived and the structuring
power of industry is understood and
turned to the benefit of the
community.
The structures in the developing
countries, though they may differ from
one another in type and degree, have
all been imposed or strongly influenced
by those countries, for which
developed industry regularly produced
machines and arms. Emotional though
they often are, acts of rejection today
have a solid economic basis which pro¬
vokes these long-repressed revolts
which help fuel the world crisis.
There can be no justifiable balance of
supply and demand with a partner who
is compelled to squander his human
resources, who is ill equipped to
deploy investment or innovation in a
beneficial way, and who negotiates
from a position of lasting dependence.
The profound inequality of structures
creates forms of domination which are
just as unacceptable as the overt col¬
onialism of yesterday.
Furthermore, the balance of supply
21

and demand at world level is unat¬
tainable when a vast part of the world
cannot formulate a sustained and
growing demand nor obtain counter¬
parts in international trade freely and
normally. Insufficiency of effective de¬
mand, met by a nation's means of pro¬
duction, cannot be replaced over a
long period and overall by aid or tied
loans.
Finally, it is clear that true competi¬
tion ceases to exist once a certain level
of inequality between individuals or
between structured human groups
such as nations has been passed. In
small countries there is good reason to
wonder whether the highly intensive
competition is between countries or
between industries, some of which
choose to be based in countries
without making common cause with
the rest of its economy and its
population.
Flaws in the relationship between in¬
dustry and agriculture, between bran¬
ches of industry and branches of
agriculture, are at the heart of the
structural crisis of our time. By virtue
of their technical, organizational, infor¬
mational and financial superiority, in¬
dustries dominate agriculture and in a
sense take it over. In the industrialized
countries the success of the agro-food
industry suggests that this inequality is
being corrected, although there is still
room for improvement. But a trend
reversal which will restore to the
developing countries their capacity to
produce food to satisfy domestic de¬
mand, by reducing the emphasis on
export-directed agriculture or redirec¬
ting it, is a necessary task which is
bound to take a long time. It calls for a
restructuring which conflicts with the
immediate interests of the established
industries.
Perhaps the best economic basis for
a major readjustment in the relations
between industry and agriculture
would be through regional groupings of
nations rather than through individual
nations. The experience of Latin
America and West Africa has shown
that short-sighted and ill-considered
nationalism stands in the way of the
general welfare.
The countries of Western Europe
mark time as they try to hammer out a
common policy in which the stumbling
block is the relative importance of
agriculture in certain countries, in con¬
trast with the industries of their
neighbours, which have deliberately
sacrificed their agricultural activities.
Major joint undertakings, coproduc¬
tions and concerted exports bring
substantial opportunities for overcom¬
ing inequalities in the relationship bet¬
ween agriculture and industry. These
preliminary experiments ought to lead
to a joint effort to establish agro-
industrial areas where, through con¬
certed action, powerful plurinational
industrial groups would encourage
agriculture (whether backward or mak¬
ing technical progress) to produce
commodities for export to the less
developed countries of the East and to
African and Asian countries wanting
food products that have been process¬
ed to a greater or lesser degree.
An enlightened strategy should
dovetail with this trend. Such a
strategy will be preferable to a gran¬
diose programme of transfers and in¬
dustrial sharing whereby labour-
intensive industries would be allotted
to the developing countries and
capital:intensive industries based on
extensive scientific and technical
knowledge would remain in the in¬
dustrially developed countries. In spite
of the revolutionary trappings of such a
"Flaws in the relationship between industry and agriculture (...) are
at the heart of the structural crisis of our time. By virtue of their
technical, organizational, informational and financial superiority, in¬
dustries dominate agriculture and in a sense take it over. In the in¬
dustrialized countries the success of the agro-food industry suggests
that this inequality is being corrected, although there is still room for
improvement." Right, grain elevators on the Canadian prairies.
Above, a farmer tends his crop in Upper Volta. ,
22

programme, it seems to us to be
dangerously conservative. It tends to
create and maintain a kind of institu¬
tionalized preference which benefits
the industrialized countries. High-
technology and highly-capitalized in¬
dustries are most likely in the long run
to dominate labour-intensive in¬
dustries. This is certainly not the inten¬
tion of those who advocate such a
system, but the inequality of vast
groups, globally and doctrinally
specialized, may aggravate or
perpetuate domination by those who
possess industries based on the latest
technologies. In point of fact, the
developing countries are striving to
create, as far as their means permit,
complex industries. For the develop¬
ment of their national economies, they
are certainly right.
In addition to the advantages of in¬
ternal development, this option, if
followed successfully, provides an op¬
portunity to become competitive with
the industrially developed countries in
selected fields through inventive
specialization and by drawing benefit
from their relatively low wage-levels.
Certain developing countries have
received, as a result of outside invest
ment and the activities of the multi¬
nationals, a structure which does not
meet the fundamental needs and
aspirations of their people. A long-term
strategy would permit or encourage an
autochthonous industrialization which
would correct these deviations
without recourse to protectionism or
blinkered nationalism; it would restruc¬
ture them in accordance with the
wishes of those who are most closely
concerned.
Other developing countries have
been purely and simply colonized: their
policy of independence can only be
asserted by an industrialization
strategy which provides them with a
weight in international negotiations
which neither their new juridical status
nor the numbers of votes in interna¬
tional organizations could give them.
The current crisis springs from struc¬
tural inequalities; efforts to overcome
it call for new structures on a world
scale. Efforts in this direction go
beyond spontaneous market forces
and the intercompatibility of markets,
implying functional and regional
organizations and the search for an
overall organization which can ar¬
ticulate them with a view to economic
efficiency and social quality.
Finance too is structured. Except for
the specialized public institutions,
financial organisms are oligopolies. In
the United Kingdom there are the Big
Five; in France, the Big Three (formerly
the Big Seven). These monopolistic
enterprises engage in sharp competi¬
tion or form relatively stable
agreements with each other and in
relation to economic monopolies.
Within a given nation and at world
level, the money market evokes a
meeting of giants and makes nonsense
of the ¡mage of tiny units obediently
following the "neutral" law of prices
and interest.
With the exception of the oil-
producing countries, financial power is
in the hands of the industrialized coun¬
tries. It is exercised in the case of self-
financing, the incurring of debts to the
banking system and the issue of long-
term loans. Thus we should forget the
idea of a reservoir of money or quasi-
money responding obediently and in¬
evitably to undifferentiated market
demands. In this field too, the real
situation is that of Adam Smith's
"tacit coalition of masters"; it con¬
tinually exercises pressure on the
.<

behaviour of the Small, whether they
be businesses or nations.
In the commodity trade, the law of
compared anticipated costs product by
product, supplies a solution which is
correct in abstract terms. The trouble
is that here too the struggle between
monopolies and their groups is the
general rule, and it is practically im¬
possible to forecast future compared
costs. Those who hold financial power
are liable to make mistakes, the effects
of which are aggravated by the extent
of concentrated supply of and demand
for credit and by the spreading out over
a long period of commitments and
dates at which payments are due. As
the defects which occur at one point
are propagated through banking and
financial networks, which are highly
complex, always sensitive and
become nervous as soon as the first
signs of difficulty arise, the germs of
financial crises appear to be inherent in
developed and innovative industrial
systems. The importance of major
enterprises and nations leads to a call
to reason; their collapse would be a
disaster for everyone.
The instability of financial capital
and its last-minute rescue raise serious
questions.
When a developing country is
criticized for its over ambitious plans,
who is really being blamed? The coun¬
try itself as a whole, or the multina
tional companies and financial groups
which have established themselves in
it? The tax for economic recovery will
fall on all the citizens, but did their legal
representatives play an effective role
in taking the decisions which are
criticized?
On the other hand the disasters of
the financial crisis are avoided because
the money, the currency, and quasi
currency were available. Why and by
whose decision are they only brought
into play as a last resort? Would the
general interest not be better served by
prompt action? Is it politically desirable
to give the impression that finance on¬
ly comes out into the open when and
how it chooses?
Constant experience shows that to¬
day's changing financial situation is
largely in the hands of Central Banks
and Governments which decide on a
budget deficit. The economic brakes
which date from the end of the nine¬
teenth century have so far slackened
that they have lost most of their
effectiveness.
The cumulative effects are wide¬
spread. The key currency (by definition
it is always to some extent dominant),
today the dollar, reaches levels which
cannot be explained in terms of com¬
mercial exchanges, while its fluctua¬
tions are connected with speculative
capital movements sheltered by the
principle of non-intervention.
The excessively high interest rates in
the United States and the gloomy pro¬
cession of rates which follow in their
wake can only be explained in terms of
anticipations which are totally alien to
classical norms. When the community
expects an increase in money supply,
high interest rates may increase de¬
mand for bank finance instead of
reducing it.
The burden of indebtedness on
financial costs and the reduction of
gross anticipated profit margins
reduce the growth rate and, in the
worst cases, involve the liquidation of
assets. There is nothing mechanical or
automatic about these linkages, no
more than there is in debt repayment,
the positive effects of which may
herald an economically justified in¬
crease in product. But the resulting
contagious and cumulative difficulties
of payment may call for intervention by
the Central Bank and the Treasury.
The amount of distress caused by
these sequences of events varies
widely between the developing coun¬
tries and the developed countries. The
cyclical movements of the last century
showed that it is always the unprivileg¬
ed classes which bear the brunt of
recessions and contractions. Is it false
to extend such an observation to the
nations of the world?
François Perroux
"A trend reversal which will restore to the developing countries their capacity to produce food to satisfy domestic demand, by reduc¬
ing the emphasis on export-directed agriculture or redirecting it, is a necessary task which is bound to take a long time. It calls for.
a restructuring which conflicts with the immediate interests of the established industries," Peanuts ready for export, Kano, Nigeria.
24
