Castles in the air
Haiti's painters of high spirits by René Depestre
IT all began one April day in 1943. The
English teacher during our final year
at the Lycée Pétion was a North
American of Dutch origin, DeWitt Peters.
He was mild-mannered, genial, competent.
Every now and then a cloud of sadness and
nostalgia would suddenly pass across his
mocking eyes. He would stop teaching and
talk to us about his dreams. The last time he
did so he announced to his young pupils and
friends that he was going to give up teaching
and devote all his energies to painting. Had
he taken leave of his senses? He was tired of
being a Sunday painter, and a full-time
painter was taking possession of his hands
like a loa (a supernatural being a god or
demon, spirit or genie) in the head of an
adept of voodoo. Those of us who liked him
were saddened by his departure, and found
it hard to get down to our English studies
again.
A year later, in May 1944, the Centre
d'Art Haïtien at Port-au-Prince, directed
by the same DeWitt Peters, held its first ex¬
hibition. One of the most exuberant
movements in twentieth-century art was
beginning to grow.
To the unknowns who came to his studio,
Peters offered a working space, canvas or
paper, brushes and tubes of colour. In addi¬
tion to these tools and materials he also
gave technical advice: academic notions of
drawing, and the application of the seven
"souls" of the rainbow.
The men who came to Peters tended to be
cobblers, barbers, taxi-drivers, fishing-boat
builders, house-painters, tailors, voodoo
priests, servants, hawkers. Those who had
already handled a paintbrush (like the
housepainter Hector Hyppolite, one of the
first masters of the movement) had done so
to decorate doors, trunks, windows, trucks,
domestic objects and objects used in
voodoo ritual.
These men who had come straight from
the itinerant mysteries of Haitian reality
would in the next few years hurl a dazzling
system of pictorial forms at the face of the
world. Loa took over painting as such gods
as Baron Samedi, Dambalah Ouédo,
Agoué, Ogou Badagris, Shango and Erzuli
Fréda-Dahomin, a thousand leagues away
from the Italian Renaissance, Cézanne and
RENE DEPESTRE, Haitian author, has publish¬
ed several volumes of poems, essays and fic¬
tion including Un Arc-en-ciel pour l'Occident
Chrétien (published in English as A Rainbow
for the Christian West, University of
Massachusetts Press, 1977) and Poète à
Cuba, (Poet in Cuba). He has collaborated on
two collective works produced by Unesco,
Africa en América Latina ("Africa in Latin
America") and América Latina en sus Ideas
¡"Latin America in its Ideas").
36
Heaven and Earth
(1959) by the Haitian
painter Préfète Duf-
faut. Usually con¬
structed from rising
columns ofmatter in
a state of flux, Duf-
faut's landscapes
are inspired by the
town of Jacmel,
where he was born.
Picasso, gave the popular surrealism of the
Haitians the chance to express itself.
The imaginations of Hector Hyppolite,
Philomé Obin, Rigaud Benoît, Wilson
Bigaud, Castera Bazile, Préfète Duffaut,
Louverture Poisson, Jasmin Joseph,
Micius Stephane and a dozen more began to
transform into painting the dream-world in
which Haiti is rooted. The forms thus set
free experienced frenzy, ecstasy, unbridled
fantasy, universal generosity, and a
fulgurating harmony with new climates of a
literally bedazzled collective imagination.
Then, working with phantasmagoric
patience, a whole people of artists made a
fantastic inventory, of breath-taking lyrical
freshness, of the slightest details of the Hai¬
tian reality and dream. Other masters join¬
ed the ranks of those named above: J.E.
Gourgue, Antonio Joseph, Casimir
Laurent, Senèque Obin, André Pierre,
Dieudonné Cédor, Gérard Valcin, Robert
St. Brice. And other hands, from all over
Haiti, which were enduring the terrible
works and days of a crucified people, join¬
ed in this rebellious exuberance of a lust for
life as rich in thermal energy as the sun
itself.
It is a movement in the full, dynamic
sense of the term; even the tap-tap (buses)
which drive on the country's rough roads
have not escaped the painterly frenzy of
those who use them. The itinerant gods
watch over every crossroads as biblical
scenes mingle with scenes from a desperate
everyday life. In Haiti the imaginary has
tap-tap wheels, it performs feats of
acrobacy in joining the two extremes of a
possessed and a possessing reality, a fren¬
zied reality, a reality best not met on a dark
night. The Haitian painters, however,
courageously set forth to meet it and to cast
in its teeth the strokes of a brush moistened
with tenderness and beauty. In this way a
masked world withstands the daily assaults
of poverty and the difficulty of being Hai¬
tian in one's native Haiti or anywhere else.
The mad gods of painting still drive too'fast
on Haiti's dusty roads. Where are the
"naive painters" in this wild light?
Assuredly there has never been a "naive"
phenomenon in Haiti. It was as a result of
a dubious tourist craze that the label of
"naivety" was tied to the creative
phenomenon which possesses the Haitian
visual imagination. To celebrate this Hai¬
tian renaissance as a poet, I humbly follow
the example of Apollinaire as he con¬
templated the paintings of the Douanier
Rousseau. Masters of the marvellous in
Haiti, great itinerant loas of joy and pain,
I invite the world to watch "your baggage
pass freely through the gate of heaven".
