West Africa's
THE results of archaeological excavations
carried out in 1977 and 1981 on an an¬
cient site near the city of Jenné, in Mali,
have contradicted previous assumptions about
the history of west Africa by pushing back the
date of the emergence of this city which
became one of the region's most prosperous
trading centres, by almost a thousand years.
The archaeological site of Jenné-jeno ("an¬
cient Jenné" in the local Songhay language)
lies three kilometres south of the modern city of
Jenné, on a floodplain of the inland Niger Delta
rich in fish, cereals (especially rice and millet),
and livestock.
Food has for centuries been produced in
abundance in the hinterland, supplying the
population of Timbuktu further north, to which
Jenné is linked by500 kilometres of navigable
riverway. The gold trade route originating in the
forested region of West Africa passed through
the two cities and then crossed the Sahara to
north Africa.
Until the excavations, directed by two
American archaeologists, husband-and-wife
Roderick J. Mcintosh and Susan Keech Mcin¬
tosh, it was generally accepted that Jenné had
developed simultaneously with Timbuktu
(founded around 1100) in the mid-thirteenth
century as an artifact of the trans-Saharan
trade which brought urbanism to west Africa.
However, excavations carried out on the
main site, a thirty-three-hectare artificial
mound formed of ruins of buildings and the
debris of human occupation, and an extensive
reconnaissance of sites in a surrounding area
of 1,100 square kilometres, have revealed that
a settlement already existed at Jenné-jeno as
early as the third century BC and was inhabited
by a population which made iron and practised
trade. By 800 AD Jenné-jeno had become a
prosperous cosmopolitan centre with a popula¬
tion of some 10,000 people.
In the course of the centuries the city's trade
expanded and diversified. Jenné-jeno im¬
ported from far away stone, iron ore, copper
from the Sahara and, around 600-800 AD, gold.
In return for these goods, the rich city had
various products and foodstuffs to barter,
notably rice (African rice, Oryza glaberrima,
was cultivated at Jenné-jeno as early as the
first century AD), fish, and fish oil.
The key to the city's success was a combina¬
tion of food production and craftsmanship. By
the year 50 AD the settlement extended over
twelve hectares. In 300 AD it had expanded to
some twenty-five hectares, and around 750 it
covered thirty-three hectares and was girded
by a wall some two kilometres long, 3.6 metres
wide and four metres or more high.
At the height of its development, between
750 and 1 1 50, it is thought that Jenné-jeno and
its nearby satellite villages may have had
almost 20,000 inhabitants, and that the density
of settlement in its hinterland may have been
ten times higher than today.
i

oldest metropolis
The city's decline is thought to have begun
around 1200. The fact that it was abandoned
around 1400 for the site of present-day Jenné
may perhaps be explained by the desire of a
new Muslim trading élite to change their
capital.
The discoveries at Jenné-jeno, along with
others such as the eighth-century "bronzes"
from Igbo-Ukwu in Nigeria open up major new
historical perspectives. It is now known that
long-distance trade and urbanism existed in
west Africa in the first millennium AD. It is also
established that Jenné-jeno played a central
role in the creation of the great trade-routes
between the Sahara and the Niger Bend and
was not, as was previously believed, a later off¬
shoot of the trans-Saharan salt and gold trade.
The early urban settlements of the inland Niger
Delta are thus seen to rank among the world's
great known civilizations.
Terra-cotta Cooking pot -
statuette
Close-packed buildings of modern Jenné
(centre left in air photo) rise from the
floodplain of the Inland Niger Delta in Mali.
Three kilometres away on a long elliptical
mound (upper right) is the site of ancient
Jenné ("Jenné-jeno"). Left, some ofthe ob¬
jects which have been unearthed by ar¬
chaeologists since 1977 and which chart the
rise ofJenné-jeno centuries before cities were
thought to exist in west Africa. Inset below,
as cattle amble by, workers excavate the cir¬
cular foundations of a mud-brick house.
O
Bracelet White-on-red pot
White-on-red-bowl
Fishhook
