's
may not be absorbed into the blood and
does not reach the body cells if the weaning
diet is lacking in fat. Palm oil, cottonseed
oil and other food oils locally available can
be used to mix the staple food which is the
basis of the weaning diet for the baby.
Rickets is caused by a shortage of
Vitamin D, together with a poor diet, so
that there is not enough calcium present in
the blood stream for calcification of the
bones. If the bones are not proRerly
calcified then they remain soft and when the
baby begins to walk the leg bones bend
under his weight. Rickets again is a child's
disease and is highly endemic in some
regions of the world. Cases of rickets are
not usually fatal but the deformities can be
permanent. Bow legs or knock knees are
only one symptom of rickets. Vitamin D
can be supplied from such foods as fatty
fish and eggs. It can also be made in the skin
under the influence of ultra violet light
from sunshine. Exposure of the child's
body and limbs to afternoon sun in the
tropics can heal and prevent symptoms of
rickets. Milk powder and baby foods, as
well as margarine, enriched with Vitamin D
should be utilized.
Endemic goitre is a widespread disease
and has been reported from all areas of the
world. It appears in early childhood and
progresses into adolescence and sometimes
adulthood. Women of childbearing age are
of particular concern. Goitre is caused in
some areas by a deficiency of iodine in the
soil and water. Iodized salt has been proved
successful in eliminating goitre in different
regions. The total population under risk is
estimated at 400 million.
Nutritional anaemia caused by iron defi¬
ciency is probably the most common form
of specific nutritional deficiency ; in the
world today. It affects mainly young
children and women of child-bearing age.
Evidence also suggests that nutritional
anaemia adversely affects the productivity
of workers. Iron is needed to form blood.
People who suffer from anaemia cannot
supply enough oxygen to their tissues. They
are lethargic, sluggish and easily fatigued.
They lack concentration, get out of breath
on even slight exertion and lack vitality.
Anaemia occurs when there is a prolonged
loss of blood, or failure of absorption or a
dietary shortage over a very long period.
Suckling anaemia has been known in
many parts of the world. Babies in tropical
areas may have a low haemoglobin count as
early as three months of age. Normally the
baby receives enough iron from the mother
for the first six months of life, but if the
mother has suffered from iron deficiency in
the last months of pregnancy, the baby does
not get its full quota. Poor absorption of
iron may account for some of the deficien¬
cy. Frequent attacks of malaria and
parasitic' diseases will cause a temporary
anaemia. This will pass if the child is receiv¬
ing enough protein and iron in the diet.
Anaemia due to deficiency of folic acid
may also occur. It is less frequent and usual¬
ly combined with iron deficiency. It is
generally associated with pregnancy. Folic
acid is a problem nutrient. There are very
heavy demands by the body for this vitamin
during pregnancy when the diet has to pro¬
vide four to eight times as much as the nor¬
mal quantity required. Folic acid is a water
soluble vitamin of the B complex and is
needed for blood cell formation as well as
protein production in the body. It also con¬
tributes to the formation of the material of
which chromosomes, the genetic
mechanism of cells, are composed. Good
sources of folic acid are: yeast, liver,
spinach and lettuce. Poor sources which
nevertheless make some contribution to the
diet are milk, poultry, eggs and meat. A
larger consumption of animal products is
needed, and a decrease in the infestation
rates with parasites that cause loss of iron
from the food and system.
Described by UNICEF (the United Nations
Children's Fund) as "potentially the
greatest medical breakthrough of this cen¬
tury", oral rehydration therapy (ORT) is a
simple cure that can save the lives of most
of the 5 million children who now die each
year from the dehydration caused by diar¬
rhoea. Whereas previously the only effec¬
tive treatment for dehydration was the in¬
travenous feeding of a saline solution, a
child can now be rehydrated by drinking a
solution of salts, sugar and water ad¬
ministered at home. So far 34 developing
countries have openedfactories to produce
oral rehydration salts, and total world pro¬
duction is running at approximately 80
million sqchets a year. However, says
UNICEF, "ORT will not came anywhere
near its dramatic potential for saving life
and health unless it is also promoted
through the primary schools and colleges;
through the churches and the temples;
through the women 's nutrition classes and
the workplace;... and through every other
channel which can reach out to help link
present kno wledge to people 's needs. ' ' Fac¬
ing page, a children 's ward in Amman, Jor¬
dan. Above, a child before and after treat¬
ment at the UNRWA (United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees In the Near East) Khan Younts
Rehydration Nutrition Centre, Gaza Strip.
15
