CUBA
A people in itspictures
by Manuel Pereira
CUBA'S film archive (Cinemateca) was created in 1960 with
the purpose of selecting, locating, acquiring, classifying
and conserving all forms of material relevant to knowledge
and study of the cinema from its origins until today.
Before the creation of the Cinemateca, no Cuban institution was
consistently concerned with collecting and protecting film material,
with the exception of the University of Havana's department of
cinematography which, in spite of its slender economic and
technical means, managed to salvage a number of interesting films.
The indifference of official circles towards the conservation of
films has had disastrous results. To take one example, almost all the
films produced in Cuba during the silent era (approximately 70
short and feature-length films) have been lost forever; only five
have survived, three of them incomplete. Over a third of the films
produced in the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s have also disappeared.
The Cinemateca already has a major collection of over 6,000
films, including works by the most outstanding directors in the
MANUEL PEREIRA is a Cuban novelist and journalist. His novels El
Comandante Veneno and El Ruso have been translated into a number
of languages. He is also a film critic and screenwriter and has been
editor-in-chief and deputy director of Cine Cubano magazine.
history of the cinema as well as all the films made in Cuba since
1959, the year which saw the birth of the Cuban film industry (the
Cuban Institute of Cinematographical Arts and Industries,
ICAIC).
One of the most important and least known tasks of the
Cinemateca is the conservation of film stock. In order to protect ar¬
chive films and to keep them available for projection, the
Cinemateca makes duplicate copies of films of which it only has a
positive. (This is the case with most "old" films). As a result of its
film stock restoration and salvage programme, over 200 acetate
copies had been made by 1972. Films which were originally on
nitrate stock have also been transferred to safety (acetate) stock;
over a third of these are films made in Cuba before 1959.
The work of the Cinemateca's conservation department, the con¬
tinual updating of its collection, constitutes a complex task ranging
from restoration and reconstruction and including the transferral
of images (and sound) to new supports. This is the only way to
preserve these precious materials which form part of the national
and international cultural heritage.
In addition to this, as the director of the Cinemateca, Hector
Garcia Mesa, explained to me, "it is also necessary to add Spanish
titles to silent films which still have their original titles in different
languages."
The Cinemateca is currently in the final stages of transferring to
safety film the relatively few films which are still on inflammable
nitrate stock. Another urgent task is the transposition onto new
colour stock of film whose colour is considered to be rapidly,
decomposing.
The Cinemateca also makes sure that its holdings of black and
white, colour, and nitrate films are properly air-conditioned, using
control systems which meet international technical standards.
Through systematic checking, airing, and physical examination of
the films, it is possible to detect signs of decomposition in time for
the films to be copied as a matter of urgency in the case of single
copies or copies of which there is no negative or duplicate negative.
A shot from Lucia (directed by Humberto
Solas, 1967), an outstanding production of
the powerful Cuban cinema which has
emerged since the Revolution.
2S
