China's 7,000-year-old crop
by Hu Baoxin and Chang Shujia
PADDY rice cultivation has a long
history in China. A passage from
The Book of Songs, which
describes how "dates are gathered in
August and rice harvested in October to
make wines for the spring to celebrate
your enjoyment of longevity", testifies
that as early as 3,000 years ago under
the Western Zhou Dynasty, Chinese peo¬
ple in Shaanxi province harvested rice
and made rice wine. But the cultivation of
paddy rice can be traced much further
back. Excavations in 1973-1974 in
Hemudu village of Yuyao county, Zhe-
jiang province, revealed that indica rice
grown in the area of Hangzhou Bay has a
history of at least 7,000 years.
A high level of intensive paddy rice
cultivation was achieved under the Han
Dynasty (202 BC to 220 AD). Records of
the transplantation of paddy rice can be
found in the Simin Yueling (Farmer's
Almanac) written during this period, and
by the 6th century, a number of out¬
standing, comprehensive, theoretical
works on paddy rice cultivation had been
written.
According to Li Bozhong, "the tech¬
nique of rice-wheat multiple cropping
was introduced in a few of the most
developed districts approximately during
the reign of the Emperor Gaozong and
Empress Wu (650-704) during the Tang
Dynasty (61 8 to 906 AD). It was general¬
ly adopted during the early and middle
Tang Dynasty, mainly in the Changjiang
Delta, the Chengdu Plain and along both
banks of the Changjiang River".
From the middle of the Tang Dynasty
period, the Huanghe River Valley suf¬
fered from continuous wars and the
feudal rulers depended more and more on
revenues in kind from the south to defray
their huge State expenditures. The point
was reached when nine-tenths of the
revenues collected from the whole coun¬
try came from the area south of the
Changjiang River. Since, ¡n the area
south of the Changjiang, it costs twenty
to thirty per cent less to cultivate a paddy
field than an equivalent area of dry land
crop, the peasants tended to grow more
paddy rice so as to increase their income.
Under the feudal system, exploitation
of tenants by the landlords was extreme¬
ly severe. Su Shi, a great writer of the
Song Dynasty (960 to 1 279 AD) describ¬
ed how "income was divided into two
halves between the landlord and the
tenants". Rent was mainly collected in
18
kind, but by the end of the feudal period,
money rent was also being collected and
payment was being made in silver.
However, the basis of the rent was still in
kind as the sum of silver to be collected
would be the price of a fixed amount of
grain sold on the market.
Rice is thought of as having always
been the principal food of the Asian
people. Although this is basically true to¬
day, during the long period of feudal rule
in China, only the rich and middle-class
families could afford to eat rice daily. The
peasants who did the tilling were obliged
to eke out a bare existence on wheat,
barley, miscellaneous grains, potatoes
and taros.
Following the reclamation of the
Changjiang River valley, new farming
techniques including the use of ploughs,
harrows and earth-breakers, and new
cultivation techniques with emphasis
on the raising of healthy rice seedlings
were gradually introduced. Great im¬
provements were made in farming im¬
plements. Crooked shaft ploughs, earth-
breakers and earth-cutters were in¬
vented. Irrigation implements using
water-power to raise water automatical¬
ly, such as waterwheels, dragon-bone
water lifts and windmill water carriers,
came into widespread use.
Many large-scale irrigation projects
were undertaken, such as the famous
Dujiang Yan Weir in Sichuan Province,
the Ling Qu Canal in Guangxi Province,
the Zhengguo Qu Canal in Shaanxi pro¬
vince, and the Zhangshui Qu Canal in
Linzhang county, Hebei province. In
the south, many small-scale irrigation
systems were built. To increase the
sources of fertilizer, many methods of
collecting and making composts were
devised, involving the use of dung from
cattle-sheds, the rotting of various
organic substances, the fermentation of
cake manure, and the burning and baking
of dung.
Many varieties of improved strains of
paddy rice were bred and selected. The
method of selecting fine ears for
breeding was first used under the
Western Han Dynasty (202 BC to 9 AD)
and is still employed by peasants today.
For example in the 1940s Chen
Yongkang, a well-known rice-grower of
Songjiang county, Jiangsu province,
succeeded in breeding a species of
Japónica known as Lao Lai Qing which
produced record yields.
China also introduced advanced tech¬
niques and fine rice strains from foreign
countries. For instance, Zhan Cheng rice,
which was introduced from Viet Nam,
was widespread in Fujian province as
early as in the Northern Song Dynasty
(960 to 1126 AD), and eventually
established its superiority among the
broad masses of rice producers in South
China. Its outstanding resistance to
drought earned it the nickname of the
"drought-defeating" rice. Another
Han dynasty wooden rice seeder, dating
from the first century BC.

A series of 18th-century Chinese engrav¬
ings illustrating the stages in the produc¬
tion of rice: (1) water is Introduced into
the paddy field which is then harrowed to
mix the water into the sun-baked topsoil;
(2) rice seedlings are transplanted from
the seed beds to the paddy field; (3) the
water level is raised as the plants grow;
(4) harvesting the crop; (5) sheaves are
stacked in ricks; (6) threshing is often car¬
ried out on flooring of bamboo slats; (7)
rice is ground to remove the hulls.
popular feature was its short growth
duration, which meant that it could be
harvested before the onset of the con¬
tinuous heavy rains of autumn.
Large-scale planting of paddy rice
brought continuous increases in food
production in southern China. In the
lower reaches of the Changjiang River
and the Taihu Lake Valley, two crops of
rice could be harvested a year. Rice pro¬
duction in Suzhou and Huzhou in the
Taihu Lake Valley was of national impor¬
tance. In the words of a popular saying.
"A good harvest in Suzhou and Huzhou
feeds the whole country."
Rice soon acquired a dominant position
among cereals, and it became a regular
practice to ship large quantities of grains,
principally rice, from the south to the
north, setting the pattern of food supply
which continued for hundreds of years.
The spread of the practice of growing
double or even triple crops of rice annual¬
ly further strengthened the leading posi¬
tion of rice among the grain crops. The
rice-producing region in south China
became increasingly important to the
national economy.
Rice was used in many ways. Besides
serving as the main staple food, it was
also used to make a great variety of pro¬
ducts such as wines, cakes, pastries,
and rice flour. According to the book
Anecdotes of Wulin (Hangzhou) written
by Sishui Qianfu during the Southern
Song Dynasty period (1127 to 1279
AD), a great many kinds of wines and
pastries were found in Hangzhou at that
time. About twenty kinds of pastries and
nine kinds of rice gruels were listed.
There were also special kitchens for mak¬
ing dumplings. In the Records of Grain
Dreams written by Wu Zimu, detailed
lists were made of the kinds of rice and
assortments of pastries and cakes and
dumplings on sale at the rice shops. The
varieties of wines and vinegars made
from glutinous rice numbered in the
hundreds.
Chinese medical scholars believed
paddy rice was capable of "replenishing
the body and nourishing energy" and "of
consolidating energy and producing
saliva". Indeed, the nutrient and medical
value of paddy rice is also very well-
known. Paddy rice contains the amino
acid lysine, which is very high in nutritive
value, and the protein content of rice
compares favourably with that of other
cereals. In administering medical treat
ment, our ancestors often added rice to
their prescriptions with a view to "pro¬
tecting the stomach, supporting the
good and removing the evil within the
body."
During the period of convalescence
after a serious illness, when stomach
energy is still impaired and is awaiting
rehabilitation, light soft foods like rice
soup or porridge should be taken.
For several thousand years, grain has
been the main element in the dietary
structure of the Chinese people. Today,
material civilization is being highly
developed. Western eating habits and
new conceptions of nutrition have been
introduced into China. The controversy
as to whether to take rice as a "major" or
"minor" item of diet has arisen in
Chinese academic circles. However,
looking at the issue from a historical
point of view, no matter what great
changes the development of science and
technology may bring to the dietetic
structure of the people in the next cen¬
tury, the prosperity of the Chinese peo¬
ple, the world's most populous nation, is
inseparable from the contribution made
by the agricultural produce which is their
principal food.
HU BAOXIN and CHANG SHUJIA are
agronomists with the Bureau of Agriculture of
China's Ministry of Agriculture, Animal
Husbandry and Fishery.
On a co-operative farm of the commune
of Mar Lu, near Shanghai, the rice crop is
harvested with a specially designed,
Chinese-built mechanical reaper.
