The Gypsies of Brazil
by Atico Vilas-Boas da Mota
ALTHOUGH there have been
Gypsies in Brazil since the sixteenth
century, they have not been exten¬
sively studied. Their history can, however,
be retraced through the work of early
scholars which reveals that they were pre¬
sent at some of the most important stages in
the formation of the Brazilian nation. It is
known that some Gypsies belonged to the
bandeiras, groups of adventurers and ex¬
plorers from the region of Sao Paulo who
trekked inland in search of gold and
precious stones. Gypsies were also involved
in the black slave trade: a nineteenth-
century engraving by the French artist Jean-
Baptiste Debret, court painter of Emperor
Pedro I of Brazil, shows the residence of a
rich Gypsy slave trader at Rio de Janeiro.
In 1808, when King John VI of Portugal
and his family took flight from the invading
French army and settled in Brazil, there
were already large Gypsy communities in
Bahia, Pernambuco, Rio de Janeiro and
Minas Gerais. Contemporary accounts
describe how for want of an official dance
troupe the organizers of the royal welcome
recruited Gypsies to dance at the palace,
and how in spite of their services many of
the dancers had to vacate their dwellings the
next day to provide lodgings for the Por¬
tuguese exiles.
The presence of Gypsies in Brazil was due
initially to their systematic persecution by
the Inquisition, which regarded them as
socially undesirable heretics and sorcerers.
Transportation to Brazil was one of the
severe punishments meted out to them, and
the first transported Gypsy to land on
Brazilian soil, Antonio de Torres, arrived in
1574. Throughout the colonial period the
activities and residence of Gypsies were
regulated, and measures were taken relating
to the use of their language and their dress.
According to specialists, the Gypsies who
settled in Brazil between the sixteenth and
the nineteenth century belong to two major
groups, the Brazilian Gypsies from Por¬
tugal, or Calones, and the Rom, Gypsies
from elsewhere than the Iberian peninsula
who arrived in Brazil after the country
became politically independent in 1 822. The
Gypsies who have settled in Brazil in the
twentieth century have come mainly from
the Balkan peninsula or from central
Europe. Many came via Mexico; others ar¬
rived in the Rio de la Plata region before
spreading to Brazil and neighbouring coun¬
tries; others landed directly at Brazilian
ports.
The Calones have preserved certain of
their domestic customs but in practice these
are difficult to investigate since most
Calones tend to conceal their Gypsy
origins. In Rio de Janeiro they pass
themselves off as Portuguese immigrants,
and many of them are engaged in small- or
large-scale trade, work in bars, shops and
hotels, or drive taxis. The Rom tend to ped¬
dle such articles as bedspreads, carpets and
cloth, deal in used cars, or repair cookers
and cooking pots in hospitals, hotels and
barracks. They are renowned for their skill
as coppersmiths.
Most of Brazil's Gypsies belong to the
following groups: the Kalderash, who con¬
sider themselves aristocrats and the true
guardians of the Gypsy identity; the Mac-
waia (pronounced Matchuaia) who are in¬
clined to abandon nomadism and live a
"crypto-Gypsy" life and are thus tending
to lose their identity; the Rudari, most of
whom are from Romania, live and prosper
in Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro; the
Horahané who originally came from Greece
32

< Families of Ciganos cavaleiros, Gypsies
who travel on horseback, are found In the
Brazilian Interior. It is not known whether
they have always used this mode of
transport or whether they had to give up
their traditional waggons because of the
nature of the terrain or when they Joined
the bandeirantes, groups of explorers
and adventurers.
Celebration of a wedding, in central
Brazil, between members of two famous
Gypsy groupsthe Kalderash and the
Macwaia. The Kalderash consider
themselves to be the true guardians of
the Gypsy identity, while the Mawaia have
tended to abandon the nomadic life.
Gypsies probably arrived in South
America at the same time as the first
Spanish and Portuguese colonists. Later
in the colonial period, Mexico City and
Lima became major bullfighting centres
and attracted, as well as bull-fighters and
their retinues, Gypsy musicians and
dancers who later moved on to
neighbouring countries. The Gypsies,
seen with Cuban dancers in the photo
below taken in Havana in 1918, may have
come from Mexico.
The voluntary emigration of European
Gypsies across the Atlantic began in the
19th century. They largely gravitated to
central and southern America, but some
groups settled in Canada and the United
States, including Alaska, and seem to
have adopted a sedentary way of life.
Photo below right shows a family of Gyp¬
sies in the United States during a halt on
their annual pilgrimage to Sainte-Anne-
de-Beaupré in Canada.
and Turkey and are mostly hawkers; and
the Lovara whose culture is in marked
decline and who pass themselves off as
Italian immigrants.
The exact number of Gypsies living in
Brazil today is not known. It has been
estimated at 60,000 but some believe that
the true figure is over 100,000. The
Brazilian Institute of Geography and
Statistics has no reliable data, for the Gyp¬
sies usually claim in censuses either that
they are Brazilian or that they belong to
other nationalities. They all speak at least
three languages: Romani (their own
language, which they call Romanes), Por¬
tuguese, and Spanish.
Those who have remained more or less
faithful to their cultural patterns are almost
without exception illiterate. The "crypto-
Gypsies" on the other hand take pride in
achieving literacy and in making a career in
one of the libérai professions. Among them
are law graduates, medical doctors, dentists
and athletes, as well as radio singers, TV
performers and footballers although they
do not always admit their origins.
The gayos (gadje, or non-Gypsies) know
little about Gypsy life and cannot under¬
stand the Gypsy way of looking at the
world. A wall of mutual ignorance divides
Gypsy from gadje; as long as there is no at¬
tempt to bring them together, each will con¬
tinue to reject the other, and the prejudices
which surround the Gypsy culture will
persist.
Press campaigns have been launched and
approaches made to international organiza¬
tions to promote the idea of a "Gypsy
Statute" based on three fundamental prin¬
ciples: (1) the right to camp in every
Brazilian commune, so that the nomads do
not always come into conflict with
municipal authorities; (2) the right to
medical care and especially vaccination;
and (3) the opportunity to become literate
in Romani and in Portuguese so that they
can safeguard their culture by preserving
their language. It is clear that for nomads
the best educational system is seasonal
schooling.
Thus the Gypsies have been present
throughout the historical, and cultural
evolution of Brazil. Although few studies
have so far been devoted to them, it is im¬
possible to understand Brazilian culture as
a whole without taking into account the
contribution of the Gypsies in the arts,
literature, toponymy, customs, in the tradi¬
tional life of the country.
ATICO VILAS-BOAS DA MOTA, of Brazil,
is professor of oral literature and Ibero-
American folklore at the Federal University of
Goiâs. He is a specialist on popular cultures
and on questions relating to the Gypsies and
other ethnic minorities. A member of the
Centre d'Etudes Tsiganes (Centre of Gypsy
Studies) in Paris, he is the author of a "Con¬
tribution to the History of Gypsology in
Brazil".
11
