The metamorphosis of Cairo
by Hassan Fathy
A seminar dealing with one of the most
pressing problems facing countries in the
developing world todaythe rapid growth
of cities was held in Cairo from 11 to 15
November 1984. The five-day seminar, en¬
titled The Expanding Metropolis: Coping
with the Urban Growth of Cairo, was the
ninth international seminar sponsored by
the Aga Khan Award for Architecture. The
Award was established in 1976 "to en¬
courage an awareness of the strength and
diversity of Islamic culture which, when
combined with an enlightened use of
modern technology, will result in buildings
more appropriate for the Islamic world of
tomorrow". The article below is based on
the keynote address to the seminar by the
Egyptian architect Dr. Hassan Fathy,
himself a laureate of the Award in 1980.
The full proceedings of the seminar are to
be published later this year as part of the
Award series Architectural Transformation
in the Islamic World.
Street scene Zone 2
' (see article page 22).
THE Cairo of the future is an intrigu¬
ing and enlightening subject of
research. Suffering as it does today
from most of the urban disorders typical of
many other Arab cities, Cairo constitutes
an ideal target for a case study.
At present Cairo is facing enormous
problems in almost all areas of urban con¬
cern: congestion, shortage of housing, in¬
adequate transport, entire lack of an ade¬
quate centre, lack of well-located public ser¬
vice buildings, and so on. Above all it is suf¬
fering from the problem of alienation and
loss of identity in town planning and ar¬
chitecture caused by borrowing models
from the West which do not fit, thus inter¬
rupting the natural urban development
stemming from the environment.
Existing over-population, which is ex¬
pected to intensify in the near future, re¬
quires the fashioning of a new Cairo that is
an outgrowth of the present city with the
addition of an area almost equal to its pre¬
sent size. This at once raises several essential
questions. To start with, where will this
Cairo be located geographically? What
town-planning system should be adopted?
What style of architecture should it have?
The site of the historical city has changed
several times. At the beginning of the
Islamic period, Fustat, the seed from which
contemporary Cairo grew, was founded by
Amr ibn al-'As, who built his palace and
mosque there in 643.
Some two centuries later, Ahmad ibn
Tulun found the palace much too small for
the proper functioning of the administra¬
tion and his large number of followers. So
in 872 he built himself a large palace in a
new quarter, at the foot of the hill on which
the Citadel was later built, and distributed
all the land surrounding it among his of¬
ficers and courtiers. This new quarter was
called al-Qatai, which means distributed
plots, and it extended from the palace to the
river. In 875 ibn Tulun built the famous
mosque that bears his name.
Finally, in 971, after the successful inva¬
sion of Egypt by the Fatimids, the vic¬
torious commander, General Jawhar,
founded a walled city further to the north
for the Fatimid Caliph al-Muizz. When the
Caliph arrived to make it the capital of his
dynasty, the city was given the name it has
retained tö this day, al-Qahirah ("the Vic¬
torious"), or Cairo.
The city covered an area of some 1 50 hec¬
tares, but within a short space of time, dur¬
ing the reign of Caliph al-Hakim, the
population had increased to 100,000 and
the city was extended to the north and the
south.
Medieval Cairo attained its apogee dur¬
ing the Mamluk era. By the mid-fourteenth
century it had a population of some 500,000
and was the greatest city in all Africa,
Europe and the Levant and the centre of
Islamic learning.
Modern urban growth began during the
nineteenth century. Gradually, as the river
was brought under control and the riverside
marshes were drained, the city spread
towards the west until today it completely
occupies the area between the Citadel and
the river, with modern quarters in Euro¬
pean style attracting the centre of the city
from Muski to al-Khadra to Qasr an-Nil.
Bridges were built and urbanization spread
to the western bank of the river and the
quarters of Zamalek, al-Awqaf and
Madinat al-Muhandisin (City of Engineers)
and others were constructed, extending the
built-up area to the western desert thus en¬
croaching on the green area which used to
provide Cairo with vegetables.
As the population grew, the quarters
began to extend to the north and the south
and the city assumed a very elongated
shape. In addition, the centre moved
westwards at right angles to the main line of
growth so that the form of the city ceased to
represent the optimum configuration for
the efficient functioning of the city, causing
chaos and congestion.
Housing did not spread eastwards
because of the Muqattam Hills and the
military barracks, so the area adjacent to
the city on its eastern border and extending
to the Suez Canal remained unoccupied and
could provide a site for the Cairo of the
future. The best solution would be to site
the Cairo of the future to the east with its
linear centre extending lengthwise between
the old and the new Cairos.
Nasr City, a new town begun in 1958 and
situated to the east, gives an indication of
the feasibility of the idea. The Saleh Salem
road, which leads out to the airport, could
have formed the linear centre if it had been
designed sufficiently wide to allow for
public service buildings, "commercial
buildings, fast and slow communications
roads, car parks and so on. Unfortunately
it was designed as an ordinary street. When
Nasr City was built, chaotic building occur¬
red to the east of the street in the area which
is supposed to contain the Cairo of the
future and its linear centre.
Furthermore, Nasr City was not designed
as an integral part of the future Cairo. The
situation urgently demands the drawing up
of plans for the future Cairo in this
geographical area, the definition of its ar¬
chitectural style and a decision to stop the
construction of any building which does not
meet the requirements of the site or its ar¬
chitectural pattern.
The planning of the future Cairo should
be based on a system of quarters graduated
in size in an organized manner and
ecologically balanced so that every quarter,
from the smallest to the largest, is provided
20

r^ rr -m. ,-^^>
L j. » _ aJ _ *	 ,-
^^
to^
!teii
.**/
©
f '-- *<
-OF,
...»
with the services appropriate to the number
of inhabitants. We could adopt the concept
of a city of graduated communities. Com¬
munity Class One would be a street for
about a hundred people; Community Class
Two would be for five hundred people and
would require a grocery store and a
children's play area. Community Class
Three, for one thousand people, would
need an elementary school. Community
Class Four, with between five and ten thou¬
sand people would be a village requiring a
secondary school, a market and public ser¬
vice buildings such as banks and post and
telegraph offices, etc.
Based on a density of one hundred people
to 4,000 square metres, a Community Class
Four would require a square plot measuring
some 360,000 square metres. An area of this
size would enable the majority of the
inhabitantssecondary and primary
schoolchildren, housewives, people going
to sports meetings and social gatherings
to walk from their homes to their destina¬
tions, thus reducing automobile traffic
within the quarter by no less than eighty per
cent.
Community Class Four is followed by
Community Class Five, for 50,000 people,
and Class Six, for one million and more
from Metropolis to Megalopolis.
Modern urban planning attempts to
separate heavy automobile traffic and
pedestrians. This problem can be solved by
having a ring road for cars around the
residential quarter with cul-de-sac streets
penetrating the housing area, serving just
the inhabitants of the street, with a park in
the centre surrounded by the houses.
To respect the human scale in the Cairo
of the future we can use the Community
Class Four as the basic unit. To ensure that
man doesnot lose his sense of belonging to
Built around 1 1 70 AD/566AH by Salah ad-
Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub, founder of the
Ayyubid dynasty, the Citadel dominates
historic Cairo from its site on a spur of the
Muqattam Hills. Important features of the
Citadel are its walls and towers and the
Mamluk mosque of Nasr Mohammed.
his quarter the streets have to meander, with
closed vistas no longer than fifty metres, as
in traditional Arab cities. In this way the
streets, like the traditional Arab courtyard,
will act as temperature regulators, and the
architecture of the houses will be variegated
to allow the owner individual expression
while at the same time respecting the
aesthetic factor. This variegation will give
the closed vista area the rhythm of a move¬
ment in a sonata.
Architecture is said to be one of the most
important elements of culture. Culture can
be defined as the resultant of the interaction
between the intelligence of man and his en¬
vironment in satisfying his needs, both
spiritual and material. The artistic value of
any project depends on the answer to the
question: "Is it for man, the psycho-
biological man, or is it for some other pur¬
pose." If it is for man, then it can be
discussed. If it is for any other purpose,
political or economic, for example, then
decisions can be taken without discussion.
With regard to the Cairo of the future, we
have to define the man for whom we are
planning and designing it and what his
spiritual and physical needs in housing are
so far as architectural design and town plan¬
ning are concerned. This requires special
research. Concerning culture and Arab
civilization, we need to cope with the
problem of alienation which dominates the
Arab countries in the field of urbanization.
In modern Arab cities, the Arab has
adopted an alien style in planning and ar¬
chitecture which could never have
developed if he were reacting personally to
his natural environment and respecting his
cultural heritage. This problem of aliena¬
tion was imposed upon us in the past from
outside by foreign rulers and by the impact
of the historical, cultural and economic
changes resulting from the industrial
revolution in Europe.
There is one most striking example of
alienation in architectural design and plan¬
ning in the modern Arab city. This is the
replacement of introversion in the design of
the Arab house, in which the living-rooms
open on to the courtyard with its marble
fountain, trees and aromatic flowers acting
as a temperature regulator and protecting
the intimacy that characterizes Arab family
life, by extroversion, in which the living-
rooms open on to the street with its black
asphalt, exhaust fumes and noise.
The Cairo of the future can become a
triumph of man's artistry, ranking with the
world's finest examples of townscapes. If
the characteristics of the contemporary city
and the Arab identity can be combined in
the Cairo of the future, it could become a
model for Arab and Islamic countries.
HASSAN FATHY, Egyptian architect and
town-planner, has devoted his life to the
development of low-cost housing techniques
suited to the needs of the Third World. In 1946
he began work on the New Village of Gourna,
near Luxor, Egypt, where his graceful, earth-
built housing units, inspired by local traditional
styles, broke new ground. His views on ar¬
chitecture, on low-cost housing and co¬
operative building are contained in his book
Gourna, a Tale of Two Villages.
21
