Erosion,
drought and deserts
When man is careless, water can be a destroyer
SOIL is a country's most precious
natural resource, aptly described
as "the bridge between the in¬
animate and the living". It consists of
weathered and decomposed bedrock,
water, air, organic material formed from
plant and animal decay, and thousands of
different life forms, mainly micro¬
organisms and insects. All play their part
in maintaining the complex ecology of a
healthy soil.
Although soil erosion does occur
naturally, the process is slow. Man has in¬
creased the rate of natural erosion by at
least 2.5 times and, over the centuries,
has destroyed an estimated 2,000 million
hectares of land. There is good evidence
that past civilizations, in the Mediterra¬
nean and in Central America, collapsed
as a result of soil erosion following the cut¬
ting of forests on steep slopes and other
destructive practices.
Soil erosion occurs primarily when land
is exposed to the action of wind and rain.
Unprotected by a cover of vegetation, and
the binding action of roots, each raindrop
hits the naked soil with the impact of a
bullet. Soil particles are loosened, wash¬
ed down the slope of the land, and either
end up in the valley below or are washed
out to sea by streams and rivers.
Water erosion is the commonest form of
erosion. It is causing massive damage in
nearly all developing countries. It is found
where steep land is being unwisely farm¬
ed and where gently sloping land is left ex¬
posed to the effects of heavy rain for any
length of time.
Worldwide, about 25,000 million tonnes
of soil are being washed away each year,
ending up in the rivers and finally the
oceans. According to a study carried out
by the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO) and the
United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) an estimated 11.6 per cent of
Africa north of the equator and 17.1 per
cent of the Near East are subject to water
erosion. So are 90 million of India's 297
million hectares.
Water erosion causes two sets of prob¬
lems: an "on-site" loss of agricultural pro¬
ductivity; and a downstream movement of
sediment, causing flooding, a loss of river
navigability and the silting up of
reservoirs.
While heavy rainfall, prolonged drought
or high winds may be the direct cause of
soil erosion, they are not the real problem.
A landscape can remain stable under all
these conditions, whether it is in a natural
state or being sensibly farmed. Erosion
occurs when farming practices are used
which fail to take account of the ease with
which soils can be washed or blown away.
For example, over-stocking and over¬
grazing have caused untold damage in
much of Africa and Asia in the past few
decades. In arid areas, soil is compacted
around water holes, the vegetation is
stripped and dies, and erosion sets in.
Too often the land ends up as desert, the
intimate result of soil erosion and
degradation. If erosion is the sickness of a
land, desertification is its death.
Today, desertification is threatening
about 3,200 million hectares of land; the
livelihoods of the 700 million people who
depend on that land are at stake.
About 30 per cent of the world's ex¬
ploitable soils are still under shifting
cultivation in Africa, Asia and Latin
America. The technique is practised by
more than 30 million people in Africa
alone. Formerly, this use of land served to
conserve fertility, as it allowed a long
fallow period during which soil fertility
would build up to its previous level. Today,
population pressure and the struggle for
improved yields are cutting the fallow
period back to virtually nothing. Under
such conditions, the forest soils soon lose
their fertility and begin to erode. Essential¬
ly, this is because the land is being farmed
beyond its capability.
Nearly always, it is exposed land which
erodes while land covered in vegetation is
stable. The process often starts high in a
watershed, on the steep slopes which are
traditionally forested. But over the past
few decades, there has been mounting
pressure on fuelwood resources. Rural
people have been forced to travel further
and further to find their energy supplies,
and to cut wood from higher and steeper
ground. Many tropical forests have also
been cleared for agricultural develop¬
ment. Between 1975 and 1980, 37 million
hectares of forest were destroyed in
Africa, 1 2.2 million in Asia and 1 8.4 million
in Central and South America.
In some countries, an increasingly
critical balance of payments situation has
forced governments to plant more and
more cash crops. If no more arable land is
available, the new crops have to be
planted in marginal land, previously
pasture, which is brought under the
plough for the first time. Much of the thin
soil may be lost in the first heavy rain
which occurs when the field surface is still
bare. During a short storm in the United
Republic of Tanzania a few years ago,
scientists found that a field they were
studying lost 5 centimetres of topsoil over
its whole surface in just a few hours; rills
had cut down to a depth of 1 5 centimetres.
The problems of soil conservation are
closely connected to those of rural
development and rural poverty. A farmer
who has to struggle to grow even enough
food to feed his family cannot devote
weeks or months to terracing his land or
learning new farming techniques. It
follows that successful rural development
is an essential precursor to eliminating
soil erosion.
Text, drawings and photos adapted from Pro¬
tect and Produce: soil conservation for
development, published by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations.

Sheet erosion...
... is the more or less uniform
erosion of the whole surface of a
field. The roots ofplants, tree
roots and fence posts are
increasingly exposed
Rill erosion...
... is the accentuation of
natural depressions caused by
surface run-off. While normal
cultivation often hides the
damage, much fertile soil is still
lost
Gully erosion...
... causes deep fissures in
otherwise cultivable land. If left
unchecked, gullies cal their way
progressively back into the hill
Streambank erosion.
... converts deep, fast-flowing
streams into wide and sluggish
meandering watercourses with
extensive mud banks. It can
cause serious loss of cultivable
land
