
African archives
and the oral tradition
by Ali A. Mazrui
HOW important are archives for
Africa? Do we not have more
serious problems of malnutri¬
tion, ignorance, disease, political instabili¬
ty, and general underdevelopment?
Let me answer the question indirectly. In
one of the Sherlock Holmes stories by Sir
Arthur Conan Doyle there is a reference to
the dog that did not bark. The importance
of the evidence was negative. If the dog on
guard had not barked, the intruder must
have been someone familiar to the dog. The
dog's silence was the devastating piece of
evidence, the telling clue.
My concern in this essay is with the
historical importance of something equally
negative the comparative weakness of the
archival tradition in Africa and its
devastating consequences for the history of
our people. Africa was silent about its
history; the African archival dog did not
bark at crucial moments. This had serious
consequences for Africa's place in interna¬
tional stratification.
The archival tradition may be defined,
quite simply, as a cultural preoccupation
with keeping records, a tradition of captur¬
ing the past through preserved documenta¬
tion. This means much more than
establishing national archives; it means a
particular propensity for recording the
dates of births and marriages, collecting
maps, preserving love letters, and keeping
household accounts, as well as documen¬
ting treaties, contracts and the like. Because
the archival tradition was weak in Africa,
the scientific tradition became weak, our
languages atrophied and so did philosoph¬
ical tradition with ghastly consequences
for our peoples across the centuries.
Why was the archival tradition weak in
Africa? Firstly because most indigenous
African cultures refuse to regard the past as
a bygone or the present as transient. The
ancestors are still with us and we ourselves
In Africa the cultural heritage Is largely
sustained by the oral tradition, which
Unesco has systematically studied and
encouraged In many ways. In Mall, In
1983, the Organization launched a pilot
rural "audiotheque" experiment with
several original features. The com¬
munities concerned are given copies of
the recordings they make as well as
equipment enabling them to listen In and
make other recordings whenever they
wish. Left, villagers of Mana listen to a
recording.
will be ancestors. If the present is not tran¬
sient why bother to record it?
A related reason for the weakness of the
archival tradition in African cultures is the
weakness of the calendar tradition (in¬
cluding the tradition of the clock). Many of
my fellow students in Mombasa, Kenya, in
the 1940s did not know when they were
born. The first president of my country,
President Jomo Kenyatta, did not know
when he was born.
There is a Gregorian calendar, an Islamic
calendar, an Indian calendar, a Chinese
calendar but no African calendar apart
from the revised Orthodox Christian calen¬
dar of Ethiopia.
The third reason for the weakness of the
archival tradition in Africa is the weakness
of the written word. Many African societies
have only come to know the written word
during the last century.
This is not to say that Africa is uniform.
Quite apart from other differences the con¬
tinent as a whole operates within a triple
heritage of culture. This triple heritage con¬
sists of indigenous, Islamic and Western
traditions.
Modern archives are mainly Western in
conception, and they are also Islamic to
some extent. But can they be indigenized?
Or are they inevitably part of the imported
sections of Africa's triple heritage?
To the extent that archives until recently
have been viewed almost entirely as collec¬
tions of written records, the indigenous
aspects of ,the triple heritage have not been
viewed as archival material. Muslim Africa
has been better endowed with written
records than non-Muslim indigenous
Africa. These records in Islamic societies
have sometimes been in the Arabic
language, but they have also sometimes
been in African languages using the Arabic
script.
But what is a document? Here we are
mainly concerned with the written word.
But there are five categories of documenta¬
tion in all:
Material documentation such as ar¬
chaeological evidence, from pottery to
Great Zimbabwe, from skeletons to coins.
Written documentation: a mystical
reverence for the symbols of literacy has
conditioned our view of what constitutes ar¬
chival relevance itself.
Pictorial documentation, including
painting or carving on rocks.
Sound documentation, which is in some
ways the newest form of archival record.
But the oldest form of documentation is
the raw memory of man, a capacity to
"recollect in tranquillity".
Two concepts are useful in approaching
the question of archives in Africa, the con¬
cept of documentary deficit and the concept
of primordial surplus. Documentary deficit
concerns an -apparent excess of silence in
African historiography, a shortage of
recognized documentation in the written
and material fields.
Primordial surplus can take a variety of
forms. Here I am particularly concerned
with a surplus of allegiance to primordial
identities, a commitment to ethnicity or
religious sectarianism.
The problem of documentation has af¬
fected Africa in two very complex ways.
One is the crisis of documentary deficit in
the material and written remains; the other
is the crisis of primordial surplus in the area
of raw human memory. The past is strongly
with us. Materially, Africa has had relative¬
ly few stone monuments, few hard
documents of the past. Great Zimbabwe is
striking partly because of its very
uniqueness.
But the crisis of the documentary deficit
also extends to the area of written remains.
Among the great cultures of the world,
African civilizations have had less written
records than average. For a long time this
literary deficit resulted in the assumption
that Africa was a continent without history.
Did this negative cultural image condemn
Africans to centuries of marginality and
servitude? Was the slave trade partly a case
of cross-cultural images? Was colonialism
partly a product of cultural perceptions of
racial hierarchy? Did Africa's documentary
deficit sentence the continent to the lowest
stratum in the ranking order of global
privilege?
Why did Europeans pick on Africans to
enslave? Why did they not enslave Arabs or
south Asians? Partly because the cultural
distance between Europeans and Africans
was deemed to be particularly wide. It was
partly the absence of castles, cathedrals and
written contracts in Africa which made the
civilizational gap appear so wide.
Africa's crisis of documentary deficit had
a good deal to do with the origins of racism.
Civilizations were often evaluated in terms
of either concrete remains or written»»
13

Mansa Musa (prob. d. 1332), one of the
most prestigious rulers of the Mall Em¬
pire, is depicted In this detail from a map
of Africa by Johanes Viladestes (1428).
The map Is one of a number of Important
early modern maps produced at Majorca
in the 14th and 15th centuries.
records. Most of Black Africa seemed to
have neither.
The crisis of documentary deficit had
related implications for science and
philosophy. The absence of the written
word deprived much of Africa of the boun¬
ty of cumulative heresy. Africa's oral tradi¬
tion was a tradition which tended to
transmit consensus rather than dissent,
what was agreed upon rather than what was
rejected by the establishment.
Where were Africa's Platos and Lockes,
Rousseaus and Lenins? Most of them lie in
the graveyard of consensus, in the cemetery
of the oral tradition. Brilliant Africans fail¬
ed to surface above village life, genius was
too steeped in the oral non-literate legacy of
rural Africa.
Who would ever have heard of Karl Marx
in the twentieth century if he had operated
in a completely oral tradition in nineteenth-
century Europe? The written word was
needed to preserve Karl Marx's heresies in
his own formulation.
But while the oral tradition is an illustra¬
tion of documentary deficit in material and
written remains, it may also illustrate the
dynamism of raw human memory in
Africa.
The question which arises in the twentieth
century is whether that raw human memory
is a case of surplus primordial documenta¬
tion! Is there too much raw documenta¬
tion? Are ordinary Africans remembering
too much of their origins and their past? Is
the past too present among us? Is the pre¬
sent refusing to be transient and
temporary?
In the second half of the twentieth cen¬
tury the most obstinate aspect of primordial
surplus is the resilience of ethnic identity.
The great majority of Africans refuse to
forget their primordial origins, be they
Baganda or Acholi, Luo or Kikuyu, Shona
or Ndebele, Hausa, Yoruba or Ibo. The
resilience of ethnic identity is a resilience of
documentation at the level of raw human
memory, for better or for worse. Ethnicity
is an archive, stacked with documents of the
annals of the "tribe", the records of com¬
munity, the memory of collective identity.
This situation has had repercussions in
the post-colonial period. Surplus ethnic
identity has outweighed deficit class con¬
sciousness in Africa. A Hausa peasant is a
Hausa first and a peasant second when the
political chips are down.
Deficit class consciousness in Africa was
compounded by deficit literary documenta¬
tion. Why is it that it is a socio-linguistic im¬
possibility for an African to be a
sophisticated Marxist without being at the
same time highly Westernized? One cannot
be a sophisticated Marxist without exposure
to the works of Marx, Engels, Lenin, and
other ideological founding fathers. But
these works are not available in African in¬
digenous languages ("vernaculars"). Ac¬
cess to sophisticated Marxism must
therefore be through a sophisticated com¬
mand of a European language. A non-
Westernized African Marxist is for the time
being a contradiction in terms.
In the origins of European socialism,
history was used as evidence against the
past. That is what Marx and Engels meant
by viewing all events as an agony of class
struggle. In contrast, some African
socialists have tended to view history as
evidence in favour of the past. Tradition
has been seen as primordial collectivism,
concern for the disadvantaged and univer¬
sal hospitality.
European use of written archives resulted
in a view of socialism as an interruption,
sometimes as a drastic revolution, designed
as a fundamental departure from the past.
On the other hand, African socialism in
some countries has emerged as a doctrine of
continuity, a link with ancient life-styles.
While European socialism has proclaim¬
ed a negation of the European past, African
socialism has often proclaimed a reaffirma¬
tion of African ancestors. While Karl Marx
at the British Museum was using archives as
allies in social revolution, African socialists
later looked for archives to vindicate
cultural revivalism.
Zimbabwe: history on tape
IN rural Zimbabwe as in other African countries where the oral
tradition is strong, when meetings are held to settle
succession disputes and the affairs of the community, the
successful claimants are often those who support their case with
the fullest genealogical and historical details. In recent years
such gatherings have attracted, in addition to those directly con¬
cerned with their outcome, observer-historians from the National
Archives of Zimbabwe, which since 1977 has been carrying out
a wide-ranging project for recording and preserving the coun¬
try's oral history and traditions. The meetings not only often pro¬
vide a gold mine of information in themselves; they also put the
historians who attend them on the track of prospective infor¬
mants who can be interviewed later on.
The reasoning behind the Oral History Programme is that the
oral traditions of pre-literate people serve the same purposes as
archives and museums in literate societies. The task of preserv¬
ing this material is all the more urgent since accelerating moder¬
nization is sweeping away traditional history and lore and many
valuable reminiscences will be lost forever if they are not record¬
ed by the present generation. The Zimbabwe programme is be¬
ing carried out in the country's three major languages, Shona,
Ndebele and English. Historians tape free-ranging interviews in
these languages with informants located in a variety of ways, in¬
cluding publicity given to the programme by the radio and the
local press. The interviews are then transcribed, translated and
edited by the historians before being catalogued and indexed by
the librarian who makes the information available to the public.
In this way a data bank of material has been assembled, ranging
from genealogies, narratives, parables, stories, myths and
legends, to songs, poems and ritual dialogue.
14

But it is not just ideology and philosophy
which pose questions about continuity and
change. Science also needs a built-in prin¬
ciple of instabilitya readiness to be
challenged by heresy.
African science and technology were too
stable. Major paradigm shifts were too
rare. When it is too stable, science becomes
stagnant. But was not African science
unstable in another sense? Since it was
taught through the oral tradition, was it not
subject to variation from mouth to mouth?
The answer is yes. Science passed through
word of mouth is vulnerable; but this is the
instability of imprecision rather than the in¬
stability of careful revision.
Those African languages which were not
written were also unstable. They changed
too fast. It is harder to understand a
nineteenth-century African poem even in
Kiswahili than to understand a nineteenth-
century English poem. Many Africans are
more eager to learn the imperial European
languages than to protect indigenous
languages. Linguistic patriotism is weak
partly because of the weakness of the ar¬
chival tradition.
What then is the new archival order for
Africa? In his Ode on Intimations of
Immortality the English poet William
Wordsworth talked about the child being
father to the man. In the West the national
archive was the child of the archival tradi¬
tion. The national archive was a conse¬
quence of a pre-existent cultural preoccupa¬
tion with record-keeping. In Africa the na¬
tional archive may have to father the ar¬
chival tradition or at least help that tradi¬
tion become strong.
More than dusty documents are at stake.
We must stop believing that the present is
not temporary, that the past is still with us
even if we do nothing to preserve its
records. We must learn to keep accounts,
record births, marriages and deaths, keep
picture albums, and protect contracts.
Perhaps above all, we need not only to
respect intellectual heresies, but also to
create a climate where they do not perish in¬
to unrecorded oblivion. A new archival
order in Africa could help change the conti¬
nent fundamentally. And a world with a
fundamentally different Africa cannot but
be a fundamentally different world.
ALI MAZRUI, of Kenya, is Research Pro¬
fessor at the University of Jos in Nigeria and
Professor of Political Science and of Afro-
American and African Studies at the Univer¬
sity of Michigan, Ann Arbor. He is the author
of A World Federation of Cultures: An African
Perspective (1976), Africa's International
Relations 11977) and Political Values and the
Educated Class in Africa (1978). The present
text has been extracted from a paper
presented by Prof. Mazrui at the Seventh Bien¬
nial Conference and Seminar of the East and
Central African Regional Branch of the Inter¬
national Council on Archives, held in Harare,
Zimbabwe, in 1982.
In 1981 the Jamaican Government took
steps to create a Cultural Heritage
"Memory Bank" dedicated to the
documentation and preservation of tradi¬
tional forms of culture such as dances
and rituals, and the experiences and
knowledge possessed by many elderly
persons. In 1982 the project received the
support of Unesco's International Fund
for the Promotion of Culture. Above, a
farmer (right) explains how cassava Is
cultivated. Beside him sits the Memory
Bank interviewer with three other farmers
listening Intently.
The episcopal conference of Chile, with
the aid of Unesco 's International Fund for
the Promotion of Culture, Is engaged on a
programme designed to collect, record
andpublish traditionalpeasant songs and
to hold festivals at which these songs are
performed, thereby preserving one of the
oldest forms ofpopular literature In Latin
America. Below, the Chilean singer
Manuel Gallardo.
15
