Caramba!
by Severo Sarduy
Drawing and caption by Victor Hugo. The
caption reads: "Downgraded bird whose
cacklings have compromised the witch."
OF Victor Hugo what endures
beyond a name bracketed between
two dates, two bisyllabic praenomi-
na click-clacking like a baby's rattle or like
tiny cymbals in the hands of a derisive
deity? What remains of the enfant sublime,
the golden boy with the quizzical look and
the impeccable silk waistcoat, or of the
Homeric patriarch dandling on his knee two
chubby-cheeked children stiff as mechanic¬
al dolls?
Technical mastery? The greatest books
are not necessarily those that contain the
most spectacular writing. Technical virtuos¬
ity is not a highly rated commodity today.
A humanistic, libertarian approach? To¬
day power is but an effect of language as
we all know, national anthems have been
written that draw on the very vocabulary
that Hugo used, laced, of course, with other
ingredients, that are worthy of the comic
operatics of the zarzuela, strident back¬
ground music to drown the screams of the
tortured.
Upon reflection, one thing endures not
technical prowess, not lyrical power, but
the almost tangible vigour of revolt, the
carnal violence of provocation.
For Hugo's grandiloquence is akin to
anger, to blasphemy, to the climactic coital
cry. Language becomes flesh (sparkle gives
way to an abrasiveness that matches that of
Paul Claudel), idealist babblings become
trenchant talk (a ferocious torrent worthy
of Céline) and the lusty thrust of history
impregnates the text. True, Victor Hugo
nourished the fine sentiments of a whole
generation of the bourgeoisie; but it is also
true that his words were a liberating, disillu¬
sioning leaven, like those of Lucretius, eat¬
ing away at what it seemed to sustain.
Such subversive force no longer exists.
We are all, without exception, moribund,
managerial, institutionalized writers.
Caramba! What a pity!
SEVERO SARDUY, a Cuban writer who lives in
France, is the author of a number of novels,
poems and essays. His works include Cobra
(1972) and Barroco (Baroque, 1972). A new
novel Colibri (Humming-bird) is to be published
in 1986.
©
37
