by Eduardo Khaliffé
THE fact that every generation asks
its parents about the meaning of life
is nothing new. It is not unusual for
young people to ask whatever questions are
necessary until they have passed through all
the physical, emotional and intellectual
stages involved in growing up. Youth is very
old, and whether or not it realizes that its
qualities have persisted down the centuries,
it is eternally condemned to rechart its own
course under a crossfire of myths, norms
and sanctions. As it makes its way into the
social arena of its time, it illustrates the
eternal polarity of humankind the
simultaneous existence of the old and the
new, sharing a moment in time and place in
the cycle of evolution.
As a rule, however, society tolerates the
rhetorical profanation of its conventions
as part of a ritual devoid of faith. Taking
refuge in "common sense" ("we were all
young once"), it grants its young people a
brief margin of tolerance while seeking ex¬
planations for their behaviour. In fact,
adult society prefers to believe in the
biblical maxim that "what will be will be,
what has been done will be done again, and
there is nothing new under the sun".
As the Italian film-maker and writer Pier
Paolo Pasolini once wrote, youth possesses
a "readiness to believe" which strictly
speaking lies in its inclination not to believe,
in its desire to challenge and contradict the
biblical prophecy, in its eagerness to rebel
against the squandering of its energy and
the restriction of its action and thought to a
social routine that admits no change.
These attitudes led to the extraordinary
revolt which took the West by surprise in
the late 1960s and early 1970s, when
political thought rediscovered its kinship
with poetry, as shown by the passionate
slogans scrawled on the walls of Paris and
the flowers planted in the barrels of guns.
Few attempts have been made to identify
the source and explain the widespread im¬
pact of this movement. But there is no
doubt that the events of May 1968 in Paris,
and the demonstrations at Kent State
University and on Tlatelolco square in Mex¬
ico City (important manifestations of a
more general movement) helped to create in
young people a universal awareness of their
existence, a feeling that they belonged to the
same tremor of renewal that shook the
organs of power not only in the capitals of
the industrialized world but also in the poor
and dependent countries.
Looking back today, many people pro¬
bably remember those days with the feeling
that they had worshipped an illusion. But it
was an illusion that set off a social alarm
bell and mobilized vast intellectual and
material resources, in some cases to inter¬
pret the syndrome of revolt, and in others to
exorcise it by violence.
In Latin America events often ended in
bloodshed. Writing in 1969 about young
people, the Mexican author Octavio Paz
said, "Society mimics them and by mimick¬
ing them it exorcises them. For a few weeks
it abdicates its authority, giving free rein to
the blasphemies and sacrileges of the


In search of
"Youth is very old and whether or not it
realizes that its qualities have persisted
down the centuries, it is eternally con¬
demned to rechart Its own course, under
a crossfire of myths, norms and sanc¬
tions". Young people today are creating
and affirming their own values vis-à-vis
adult society, joinedbya sense ofbelong¬
ing to a vast group with a shared sensi¬
bility, tastes and ways of living.
Demographically speaking, today's is a
youthful world, for young people con-
"

the present
stitute 45% of world population. In 1975
there were 730 million people between
the ages of 15 and 24. This figure is ex¬
pected to rise to 1, 180 million by the year
2000an Increase of 60% in 25years. It is
estimated that the number of young peo¬
ple In the developing countries will In¬
crease by 80% between now and the end
of the century, as against 5% in the in¬
dustrialized countries. Below, a crowd of
young people during a mass meeting in
Italy.
w&BS$t3X&
young, then it reasserts itself more
thoroughly in ruthless repression".
Supported by political doctrines or issu¬
ing a challenge to orthodoxy, the youth
movement aimed to give new life to certain
elementary truths by rescuing them from
the mechanistic rationality of established
authority. It looked for certainties which, in
face of the intolerable pressures of the pre¬
sent, are axiomatic for perceptive humani¬
ty: the struggle against war and the rejection
of all unjustified forms of violence.
This appeal to conscience was made with
the lucidity of the emotions rather than with
practical clearsightedness. Subsequently,
with ill-concealed contempt, political
theory and sociology passed the buck to
other disciplines such as psychology and
education. Hope and the spirit of transcen¬
dent excitement died, and were replaced by
a purely psychological interest, sometimes
not devoid of precision and honesty, in the
rebellious masses, their rowdy behaviour,
their group attitudes, their iconoclastic
ideas, their ego, their superego, their ideal
self. Much of this interest was prompted by
a desire to convert the social styles of young
people into consumer goods. Think of the
sophistication of the "youth" industry
films, records, clothing which has
developed since the years of revolt. Teenage
violence, drug use by the young, the conflict
between the generations, all fuelled the
curiosity of the news media, and many of
this generation of young people ended up
on the psychiatrist's couch.
Then came the creation of cultural codes,
fashions and social habits which are pale
copies of the spirit of "disobedient" youth,
although the relationship is not
acknowledged. But this is not an attempt to
compare the young of that time with those
of today in the expansive cultures of the
West.
It is pointless to speculate about the dif¬
ferences between the "beat generation"
and the generation of "Saturday night
fever", or to review young people's forms
of expression, whether authentic or not, in
the societies of Europe and North America.
This is a very complex situation which we
tend to simplify through a mixture of ig¬
norance and confusion, obscure com¬
ponents of our own way of life.
We must accept the mounting influx into
Latin America of goods produced for the
youth market by the powerful commercial
forces of the industrialized countries. This
penetration revives in us the painful convic¬
tion that we were born in a second-rate con¬
tinent, at the same time possessing the
customs and inner thoughts of another
culture and language. A sense of internal
exile has grown in us, haunting the empty

spaces of our consciousness. This terrible
dichotomy is nothing new, for Latin
America is an amalgam of divisions. If we
look at our hybrid continent we find what
the Mexican philosopher and writer
Leopoldo Zea has called "the source of all
its ambiguity and ambivalence". We find a
Latin American "who is equally ill at ease
with his father's people and his mother's.
Rejected by one group, he is ashamed to
belong to the other".
Here comics compete with ancient
legends. The culture of the future and the
culture of the past, the tormentor and his
victim rub shoulders on the street. To
whom, then, do we refer when we speak of
the young? Here, as in so many other fields,
our diversity betrays us. For if we agree to
be this multiple species, what right do we
have to speak of youth as a single entity in
Latin America?
We can always repeat that ours is a young
continent. The extraordinary thing is that
the origins of its culture and history are so
far-flung and so varied. For instance, we
never cease to be surprised on discovering
our remotest pastthe delicately
reconstituted objects of pottery and bone,
the carvings and paintings through which
their authors have triumphed over time. We
are familiar with cities built over the re¬
mains of colonial cities which themselves
stood on the ruins of Amerindian set¬
tlements, traces of which survive in the
"On a continent where entire generations
are condemned to unemployment, ig¬
norance and all the other symptoms of
underdevelopment and poverty, there is
no alternative but to fight to conquer the
present, especially when the boundary
between childhood and youth is steadily
fading. Who could tell the exact age of the
millions of child workers In Latin America
today?" Left, a youth dressed as a miner
at a folk festival in Chile.
"We Latin Americans... are 'young' in the
sense that we are subject to the tutelage
ofan 'adult' world dedicated to the task of
'guiding' our economic, cultural and
political destiny..." "Young Latin
Americans have always been required to
be 'the country's future'. In other words,
we spend one half of our lives represen¬
ting the future and the other bearing the
weight of the past." Below, young
women from a shanty-town, Santiago de
Chile.

form of societies whose existence is
tolerated because of the inertia of the
system.
The urgent demand for a hearing voiced
by the young is that of a whole continent ex¬
pressing the primordial truths of its ex¬
istence in defiance of the powers opposed to
it. This insistence on expression has been
dearly bought throughout our history, for
Latin America is a continent of violence.
Rarely has the silence of so many succeeded
in denouncing the cruelty and ferocity en¬
dured by a people as have the silenced
voices of the thousands who disappeared
under Latin American dictatorships
whole generations of young people
obliterated from their time by imprison¬
ment and exile.
We Latin Americans do not have the con¬
trol of our destiny that would enable us to
avoid courses that are harmful to us and
choose those that suit us. To this extent we
are "young", in the sense that we are sub¬
ject to the tutelage of an "adult" world
dedicated to the task of "guiding" our
economic, cultural and political destiny.
Even for its people, Latin America is still El
Dorado, a dream created and pursued by
other worlds which conquer it and then
deny its existence. "America's specific Uto¬
pian future has not been given expression,"
says the Argentine essayist Horacio Cerutti,
"simply because America has no future
or what amounts to the same thing it is
pure future with no present". What does
this present mean for us?
Latin America, it is said, "is a land of
hope and promise". Thus we are granted
the dubious destiny of crossing an expanse
of time without definition, of involvement
in a cycle of events that is never completed,
of sowing our seed in an instant that is a fic¬
tion of the present.
Young Latin Americans have always
been required to be "the country's future".
In other words, we spend one half of our
lives representing the future, and the other
bearing the weight of the past.
It is natural that young people should
associate themselves with the defence of
life. This gives them an identity as a group,
although it is not enough to transform them
into "agents of history". Nevertheless, on a
continent where entire generations are con¬
demned to unemployment, ignorance and
all the other symptoms of under¬
development and poverty, there is no alter¬
native but to fight to conquer the present,
especially when the boundary between
childhood and youth is steadily fading.
Who could tell the age of the millions of
child workers in Latin America today?
The young people of Latin America have
not faltered in the struggle to recover the
present. They are espousing universal
values while discovering their own identity,
and are imaginatively conscious of the
historical and cultural depth of their past.
In their hands culture is a feast at which
they simultaneously create and com¬
memorate. The cultural and social expres¬
sions of this sense of purpose have ceased to
be marginal and are becoming progressively
stronger.
Young people are emerging from the
cultural isolation in which they awaited the
moment when society would allow it to take
possession of its heritage. They are flinging
themselves into every collective movement
which enables them to live fully in their
time.
EDUARDO KHALIFFE, a young Ecuadorian
journalist, has produced a series of television
programmes entitled "Identidad" on his coun¬
try's traditional cultural values. He has taken
part in programmes produced by the Andine
television service created by the Cartagena
Agreement, to which Venezuela, Colombia,
Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia are parties.
"We must accept the mounting influx into
Latin America of goods produced for the
youth market by the powerful commercial
forces of the industrialized countries".
This penetration "revives in us the pain¬
ful conviction that we were born in a
'second-rate' continent, at the same time
possessing the customs and inner
thoughts of another culture and
language". Above, U.S. pop star Michael
Jackson, the idol of millions of young
people in Latin America and elsewhere,
during a concert.
