Unesco and cooperation
in the Mediterranean
ALTHOUGH the Mediterranean re¬
gion straddles three continents and
englobes many different countries,
Unesco recognized the specific nature of its
problems early on and has made a growing
contribution to solving them.
The major work carried out by Unesco in
the study and development of arid zones
began around the Mediterranean. The idea
of an action programme in this field was
adopted at Unesco's third General Con¬
ference, held in Beirut in 1948. The first
international symposium on arid zone hyd¬
rology was held at Ankara in 1 952, and this
important scientific meeting was followed
by many others, including symposia on
plant ecology (Montpellier, 1953); on the
protection of nature in the Near East
(Beirut, 1954); on plant-water relationships
(Madrid, 1959); on climatic change (Rome,
1961); and on land use in a Mediterranean
climate (Heraklion, 1962).
Studies carried out over more than four
years led to the publication in 1963 by
Unesco, in collaboration with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Na¬
tions (FAO) of a Bioclimatic Map of the
Mediterranean Zone. This was followed in
1 969 by a Vegetation Map of the Mediterra¬
nean Region, which is still the best basis for
assessing the region's highly distinctive
ecological conditions.
The tradition of these activities is today
Islands abound In the Mediterranean, from
the small and the medium-sized (such as
Malta and the Islands of the Aegean), to
such large islands as the Balearles, Corsi¬
ca, Sardinia, Sicily, Crete and Cyprus. On
some of them, landscapes and regional
ways of life have been better preserved
than on the continental landmass, and
form a field for study and conservation in
which Unesco Is active. In 1980, for exam¬
ple, the Director-General of Unesco, Mr.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, launched an In¬
ternational campaign to safeguard the
sites and monuments of Malta. Opposite
page below, the citadel of Victoria on the
Maltese Island of Gozo. Opposite page
above, the ruins of the odeion (theatre) at
one of the oldest cities in the Mediterra¬
nean, Paphos in southwest Cyprus.
being maintained by Unesco's interdisci¬
plinary research programme on Man and
the Biosphere (MAB). This programme,
launched in 1971, broadens the range of
Unesco's Mediterranean activities, which
reflect the strong determination of all
Mediterranean countries to cooperate in
safeguarding their common heritage.
The Mediterranean region is a privileged
area for certain major research themes of
the MAB programme, whose ultimate
objective is to provide a scientific basis for
the rational management of natu rar re¬
sources and lasting harmony in the rela¬
tionship between man and his environ- x
ment. Mechanisms for concerted action by
Mediterranean countries have been elabo¬
rated at a number of meetings held in con¬
nexion with the implementation of the MAB
programme. One of the most important of
these meetings was the MAB Mediterra¬
nean Scientific Conference, which was
held at Montpellier in 1976 and was
attended by all MAB national committees
from countries bordering the
Mediterranean. A number of subjects of
common interest were examined, including
the effects of fire on Mediterranean eco¬
systems, the impact of grazing in marginal
zones, management methods for deltas
and irrigated zones, the development of
catchment areas and the fight against
erosion.
One major MAB research theme con¬
cerning the Mediterranean is a project relat¬
ing to the ecological effects of human activi¬
ties on lakes, streams, deltas, estuaries
and especially coastal areas, where the
combined effects of tourism, urbanization
and industry often cause considerable
damage.
Other MAB studies are aimed at deter¬
mining the optimum social, economic and
environmental conditions for the balanced
development of ecosystems on the smaller
Mediterranean islands, given their fragility
and marginal nature. Integrated manage¬
ment exercises have been carried out on
the islands of Skiathos and Skopelos
(Greece), Salina (Italy) and Kerkennah
(Tunisia). A development plan is being pre¬
pared for the Greek island of Chalki and an
intersectoral model programmed on a mic¬
ro-computer has been worked out for the
Maltese island of Gozo.
One activity stemming from this project
has been the establishment on a number of
smaller islands of simple experimental sta¬
tions operated by the local authorities. The
role of the stations is to make concrete
proposals for the wise use of available
natural and human resources and to de¬
velop techniques for, notably, energy pro¬
duction, the treatment and recycling of
waste, and aquaculture.
An international symposium on develop¬
ment problems in the smaller Mediterra¬
nean Islands, held in Ibiza and Formentera
(Balearic Islands) in October 1 985 has led
to wider cooperation in this field between
the countries concerned.
The MAB programme in the Mediterra¬
nean region currently includes about a
dozen country projects in such fields as
forest ecosystems, the development of
coastal areas, the desert ecosystems of
North Africa, the study of parasites affect¬
ing agricultural systems in delta regions,
and regional exchanges of ecological infor¬
mation.
Through its Intergovernmental Océano¬
graphie Commission (IOC), Unesco plays
an active role in the Action Plan for the
Mediterranean launched by the Mediterra¬
nean countries in 1975 under the auspices
of the United Nations Environment Pro¬
gramme (UNEP). Its work includes carrying
out pilot projects on the continuous moni¬
toring of oil and hydrocarbon pollution and
on the coastal transport of pollutants;
studying the role of sediments in pollution;
measuring the contribution of rivers to pol¬
lution; modelling marine ecosystems; and
organizing reference collections of
Mediterranean marine flora and fauna.
Other interesting examples of coopera¬
tion between Mediterranean countries
could be cited, notably as part of Unesco's
International Geological Correlation Pro¬
gramme through which, in collaboration
with the International Union of Geological
Sciences, studies are being made of the
desiccation of the Mediterranean during the
Miocene and Pliocene eras, the strati-
graphical . correlation of the
Mediterranean's ancestor, the Tethys, dur¬
ing the Neogene era, and the analysis of
sea-levels in order to forecast short-term
variations in them.
The Mediterranean region where, broad-
21

ly speaking, the African tectonic plate col¬
lides with the Eurasian plates, is a zone of
intensive seismic activity marked by re¬
latively frequent and serious earthquakes.
Under Unesco's auspices, cooperation has
been instituted for studying the probable
location of earthquakes and precautions
that could limit their effects. A programme
for the reduction of seismic risks in the Arab
region is currently being carried out with the
financial support of the Arab Fund for Eco¬
nomic and Social Development and the
Islamic Development Bank. Unesco's
assistance has also been sought by the
French Geological and Mining Research
Bureau for the preparation of a seis-
motectonic map of the Mediterranean
basin. The Mediterranean is also one of the
three major regions which are the subject of
a joint Unesco-UNEP study on theestab-
lishment of a volcanic eruption alert
system.
The ancient city of Tyre (Lebanon) is an
archaeological site of major importance.
In 1979, the United Nations Security Coun¬
cil declared Tyre to be an endangeredpart
ofthe worldheritage, and in 1980 Unesco's
Executive Board appealed for it to be pre¬
served. In 1982 the Director-General of
Unesco again intervened on behalfof this
prestigious site, In the protection of which
a non-governmental organization, the In¬
ternational Association to Save Tyre, Is
playing a leading part. Below, remains of
Greek columns at Tyre.
In the cultural field, Unesco has spon¬
sored research into the renovation of his¬
toric sites in the Mediterranean, notably the
historic centres of Kastoria in Greece and
Palermo and Otranto in Italy. It is also active
in the preservation of the Casbah of Algiers,
in the establishment of national museums
in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and in Egypt
(Aswan and Cairo), and in the protection of
the archaeological site of Jerash in Jordan.
Major international campaigns have also
been launched by Unesco to save a num¬
ber of prestigious sites in the
Mediterranean, including the Medina of Fez
(Morocco), the Medina of Tunis and the
ruins of Carthage (Tunisia), the Acropolis of
Athens (Greece), historic sites and build¬
ings in Malta, monuments and sites in Mon¬
tenegro damaged in the 1979 earthquake,
the historic quarters of Istanbul (Turkey)
and the archaeological site of Tyre (Leba¬
non). Since it was ravaged by severe flood¬
ing in 1 966, the city of Venice has been the
focus of an interdisciplinary campaign to
save not only the city itself and its monu¬
ments but all the lagoons on which it
depends.
As part of its programme on intercultural
studies, Unesco pays special attention to
the Mediterranean area as a cultural cross¬
roads. A series of specialist meetings on
Mediterranean cultures began in Malta in
1978. In accordance with a recommenda¬
tion of the World Conference on Cultural
Policies (MONDIACULT) held in Mexico
City, the establishment of a Liaison Office
for Mediterranean Cultures was envisaged
in 1982. In addition, several Mediterranean
countries have undertaken to establish a
number of specialized Mediterranean cen
tres Handicrafts Centre in France, a
Submarine Archaeology Centre in Athens,
a Community of Mediterranean Universi¬
ties at Bari (see page 40), a Centre of
Andalusian Studies in Beirut, a Plastic Arts
Centre in Tangiers, and an Architecture
and Town-Planning Centre in Istanbul.
These centres, whose activities will be
coordinated and supported by Unesco,
should provide an efficient structure for the
promotion of intercultural studies in the
Mediterranean region.
Cooperation between the States with a
Mediterranean seaboard is thus institu¬
tionalized in many fields. It is to be hoped
that in spite of, or perhaps because of, past
conflicts, perception of their geographical
solidarity, economic complementarity and
cultural affinities will encourage the
Mediterranean countries to extend their
cooperation to other fields within the com¬
petence of Unesco and of other United
Nations bodies.
22
