The world's
urban
-ry^ >^^
The problems and the future of the great
metropolitan areas of the world were
discussed by 800 participants at an interna¬
tional symposium, Metropolis 84, organiz¬
ed by the Regional Council of the Ile-de-
France and held in Paris from 10 to 12 Oc¬
tober 1984. The report on the proceedings
of the symposium, on which this article is
based, has been published in Les Cahiers de
lal.A. U.R.I.F. (Institut d'Aménagement et
d'Urbanisme de la Région d'Ile de France),
Paris (N° 74). It covers the four main
themes of the symposium: demography and
town planning, economic and technological
change, transport, and culture and
environment.
~m
%m** .
JnßtR
dm -
A . S/#
iv:
ft
IROM 1900 to 1975, the number of
cities with a million inhabitants in¬
creased tenfold and that of cities
with over five million inhabitants
multiplied by twenty. During the same
period, the total population of the twenty-
five largest cities more than quadrupled and
will be multiplied eight to ten times by the
year 2000. Their average size will pass from
two to sixteen million inhabitants and they
will include about six per cent of the world's
population and twelve per cent of its urban
population. In the year 2000 more than half
of the twenty-five cities with more than ten
million inhabitants and nearly half the cities
with over four million inhabitants will be
located in Asia.
The universalization of urbanism is a new
fact. Before the year 2000, for the first time
in the history of humanity, the world will
have more town dwellers than country
dwellers. If conurbations with over one
million inhabitants are included,
metropolitan areas will assemble sixty per
cent of the urban population, or over 1,500
million individuals.
This change will be accompanied by a
swing in the relative importance of
metropolitan areas. Those' in the in¬
dustrialized countries are stagnating and
regressing (London, for example, has lost
two million people in forty years) and those
in the Third World are rapidly expanding.
In 1975 there were 262 million people in the
metropolitan areas of the developed coun-
1-
By the year 2000, for the first time in
history, more people will be living in
towns and cities than in rural areas. Most
urban dwellers (over 1.5 thousand million
persons) will be living in conurbations of
overone million inhabitants. Demographic
pressure on cities bursting at their seams
is illustrated in this photo of a Tokyo
crowd. In 1980 the 28.7 million in¬
habitants of the Tokyo Metropolitan
Region represented one quarter of
Japan's entire population.

explosion
tries as against 244 million in those of the
Third World. In the year 2000 Third World
metropolitan areas will have 914 million
people, more than double the 444 million
forecast for the industrialized countries.
This demographic and urban evolution is
taking place in the context of an economic
crisis and the imbalance in population
distribution will be accompanied by an in¬
creasing gap in the distribution of wealth.
All this will occur in a world brought closer
together by improved transport facilities,
the multiplication of commercial exchanges
and the increasing openness of boundaries
and cultures to the spread of information.
The increase in the mobility of mankind
is inescapable from one country to
another, from one continent to another,
under the attraction of the real or imagined
opportunities offered by metropolitan areas
beyond the barriers of the frontiers of to¬
day. California's powerful magnetic appeal
to the people of Latin America is perhaps
premonitory.
In the metropolitan areas of developed
countries with low growth or falling
populations, the problem today is one of
reviving activity, preserving and
highlighting the cultural heritage, pre¬
venting the depreciation of certain districts
before they are transformed into ghettos,
and making the best possible use of existing
infrastructures.
The metropolitan areas of the developing
countries, on the other hand, are seeking to
control their demographic growth, to
organize urban extensions, to make good
their lack of facilities and services and to
make productive use of the available labour
force.
Those responsible for the metropolitan
areas in developing countries are faced with
problems of alarmingly rapid growth. The
urban conurbations in these countries have
average growth rates of between five per
cent and seven per cent per annum which
means that they double every fifteen years.
Each year additions to their populations
can be counted in hundreds of thousands
(350,000 in Cairo, 300,000 in Bangkok,
750,000 in Mexico City) and the areas of
agricultural land lost in thousands of hec-
Long a problem in countries that first
used the automobile on a large scale, ur¬
ban traffic congestion is now a growing
cause for concern in many Third World
cities as well. Monumental traffic jams
occur regularly in such cities as Lagos,
Bangkokand Säo Paulo (right). Handicap¬
ped by insufficient infrastructures to
meet current needs, cities in the develop¬
ing world are today facing massive and
ever-mounting demands for public
transport by low-income users.

tares, often in the richest agricultural areas
in the country.
The evidence is that this rapid growth is
going to continue for several years. The
rural population today is still very con¬
siderable. Its birth rate is greater than that
in the cities and generates demographic
growth far superior to that which
agriculture can absorb (1.5 per cent per an¬
num according to the experts). While, for
cultural reasons, the birth rate is lower in
the cities, the mortality rate there is lower
still. As a result the normal growth of the
urban population is more rapid than that of
the rural population, as witness the ex¬
amples of Mexico, India and China.
Faced with this problem a number of
countries and metropolitan areas are doing
their best to control metropolitan growth in
a variety of ways: demographic policies and
national encouragement to decrease the
birth rate China provides the most strik¬
ing example, promotion of agricultural ac¬
tivities and development of related activities
in small rural towns, development of
medium-sized towns, etc. Nevertheless, it is
generally agreed that metropolitan growth
will remain, for several decades, at a level
close to that being experienced today.
Those responsible for metropolitan areas in
the Third World will therefore have to make
provision for the reception of these huge in¬
flows of new inhabitants.
A variety of often complementary solu¬
tions have been adopted: the creation of
development zones, new districts, new
towns; the extension of infrastructural net¬
works, prefabricated or do-it-yourself
housing, etc. However, the speed at which
such operations can be undertaken does not
match the rapidity of population growth. In
addition there is the problem of the poverty
of the newcomers which is intensified by the
current crisis. It is everywhere evident that
economic development and therefore
employment are not progressing fast
enough to meet their needs. The difficulties
of employment and poverty in the metropo¬
litan areas of the Third World are reflected
in the anxiety of the worker whose budget is
whittled away by accommodation costs and
the anguish of those who know that their
accommodation is only temporary.
Employment is the number one
challenge. Yet at the same time it offers a
way towards a solution to all the problems
described above, whether in the
metropolitan areas or elsewhere.
In addition there is the high cost of ur¬
banization in the large conurbations. In
developing countries, national resources are
limited. It is not easy to define an urban
policy that allows satisfactory development
of metropolitan areas without signing away
the economic and social development of the
country as a whole.
Throughout this century, the metropo¬
litan areas of the developed countries have
witnessed periods of rapid growth which
those in charge have usually tried to halt by
various methods. The situation today is
very different and although some conurba¬
tions (such as Los Angeles, Moscow and
Madrid) are still expanding, others appear
to have stable (Ile-de-France; the ,
Randstad the urban circle in the
Netherlands comprising Rotterdam, The
Hague, Leiden, Haarlem, Amsterdam,
CONTINUED PAGE 29
26
New *«*
SSO Paulo
20-30 tu
no de JaneUo
15-20 m-
r
2025
He*
York
Sao
Paulo
*. 16 m-
ftue"03 Ai m.
1984
Metropolitan areas In developing coun¬
tries are confronted with demographic in¬
creases on a scale never before known.
Below, modern housing in Abidjan,
capital of Ivory Coast. The city's popula¬
tion, estimated at 2 million in 1982, is
doubling every 7 years.

The world's urban explosion
*a,5*b
A*
'//'?V,0>
/n the year2025 there will be ninety-three
metropolitan areas with populations
greater than five million, according to
current United Nations projections.
Dotted lines: Metropolitan areas in
developed regions
Solid lines: Metropolitan areas in
developing regions
1984
Thirty-four metropolitan areas with
populations greater than five million
Map and graphs courtesy of National Geographic magazine,
Washington, D.C.
Graphs by National Geographic Society Computer Map
Laboratory.
Map by Daniela Collins, based on United Nations Population
Division data.
Research: Susan B. Malcolm and Barbara W. McDonnell
Developed Developing Regions
Population in thousand millions
Schematic presentation above shows
demographic growth patterns in in¬
dustrialized countries (on left) and in
developing countries (on right). Blocks
show the proportion of urban dwellers (in
grey) to rural dwellers (in green). In the in¬
dustrialized countries the percentage of
urban dwellers has risen spectacularly
but total population has nearly stabilized
and will probably rise only slightly from
1.2 thousand million today to 1.4 thou¬
sand million in 2025. In Third World coun¬
tries numbers will nearly double to 6.8
thousand million, largely in urban areas.
27

Mats and sacking provide scanty cover
for these migrants squatting In front of
high-rise flats In Bombay. Like many
burgeoning Third World cities, Bombay is
facing a critical shortage of housing com¬
bined with an old, insanitarystock: 84 per
cent of dwellings have only one room and
52 per cent of them accommodate 6 per¬
sons or more. It has been estimated that
even the cheapest social housing Is only
accessible to the wealthiest 40 percent of
the population. Every day, 500 new im¬
migrants arrive In the city. At this rate, ac¬
cording to United Nations forecasts, over
1 7million persons will be living In Greater
Bombay by the year 2000.
Domes and spires of the cathedral of St.
Basil the Beatified rise above Red Square
In central Moscow. The Moscow conurba¬
tion comprises the city of Moscow (cur¬
rent population 8.3 million) and a subur¬
banzone (population 4.2 million). The city
Is developing on the basis ofmasterplans
drawn up for a period of from 20 to 25
years. Population growth averages
90,000 persons per year, but the rate of
Increase Is declining In connexion with
restrictions on the creation of new
employment zones.
Decentralization and the promotion of
greater social participation In city
management are among the major
challenges facing the world's great
metropolitan areas today. Left, view of
the National Autonomous University of
Mexico In Mexico City which Is currently
growing at the staggering rate of 750,000
persons each year.
28

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 26
Hilversum, and Utrecht) or decreasing
(London, New York, Brussels) population
figures. The desired limitation has been
achieved, yet there remains a certain
dissatisfaction.
This stems from the fact that, even when
the populations of the conurbations are no
longer increasing or are even decreasing, the
space occupied continues to grow up to the
very limit of what is acceptable in the
economic context of today, particularly
with respect to networks and facilities.
At the same time, due to the effect of the
economic crisis, qualitative problems are
multiplying: socio-professional changes
connected with developments taking place
in industry, increasing impoverishment of
large sectors of the metropolitan popula¬
tion and the development of social
problems, delinquency, drug addiction, and
criminality. The increase in the number of
the impoverished is a sign of the poor health
of society as a whole. In the towns these
vulnerable population groups are concen¬
trated in particular areas, emphasizing the
social stratification.
Experience acquired over the last fifty
years, however, has made possible the
elaboration of a generally accepted "urban
technique" which is being put into practice
in most countries in various forms. Its main
elements are:
Polycentrism. It has become clear that
the organization of an urban area must be
based on a hierarchical system of centres
each dispensing services to the inhabitants.
The Ile-de-France, Los Angeles, Randstad
and London provide good examples of this;
The notion of discontinuity. Green belts
can halt the blanket urbanization that is
now everywhere rejected. Varied examples
are provided by Montreal, Los Angeles,
Moscow, Brussels, Copenhagen, the Ile-de-
France and Randstad;
Urban renewal. This appears to be an
essential factor in improved integration of
inhabitants;
The optimization of town planning
operations. The scale of these operations
has been considerably reduced, allowing
forms of intervention to become more sub¬
tle and therefore better adapted, more
human and better integrated into the urban
framework;
Energy conservation. After the crisis of
the 1970s concern for energy conservation
modified town planning perspectives. Too
much dispersion is costly in energy. Linear
development, overspill areas and the group¬
ing of services have become the guiding
themes of present-day town planning.
Experience has exposed the great com¬
plexity of metropolitan phenomena. The
After experiencing periods of rapid
growth earlier this century many conur¬
bations In the Industrialized countries to¬
day appear to have stable or falling
population figures. London, right, Is one
major city which Is experiencing
demographic decline. Greater London
has lost some two million people In 40
years (8.6 million In 1939, 6.7 million In
1981). Forecasts Indicate that this
depopulation will continue but at a more
moderate rate.
large metropolis is neither a static organism
nor an isolated fortress. It is involved in
multiple exchanges with the surrounding
regions. Even when it is experiencing a net
loss of inhabitants it continues to receive
newcomers in their tens, hundreds or
thousands. Intensive and permanent ex¬
changes take place in its midst: while
population is diminishing in some parts of
a conurbationoften the city centrein
other parts it is increasing. This is why ur¬
ban extension and the replanning of city
centres are often problems which must be
tackled simultaneously.
Are common solutions appropriate given
the diversity of the situations? The
demographic, social, economic and cultural
differences between the continents are ob¬
vious. Moreover, each concrete situation is
the product of a particular geographical
and historical setting and therefore unique.
Everywhere the metropolitan area is
emerging as the most suitable level for
reflection and action. Even though the
outlines of the metropolitan area remain
unclear and changing, and it has to work in
collaboration with local, regional, federal
and national communities, the urban region
must clearly be considered as a whole.
The technical, cultural and financial
feasibility of different urban policies is a
key factor. Experience throughout the
world shows that what makes the difference
between success and failure is not the town
planning or aesthetic aspects of the pro¬
jects, that is to say their intrinsic qualities,
but their appropriateness to the local
technical, administrative and financial con¬
text. Immense progress remains to be made
in this area and is all the more necessary in
view of the economic crisis and the weak
financial situation of the Third World ur¬
ban populations.
This is why the participation of citizens in
town planning choices is being widely ad¬
vocated. The fast pace of growth, the
cultural diversity, the size of the popula¬
tions in question, the complexity of the pro¬
cedures, are all obstacles to be overcome in
order to ensure a genuine citizen
participation and the best chance of suc¬
cess for future projects.
