The following article reviews some of
the main trends in international
migration and in policies relating to
them in the decade following 1974 when
a World Population Plan of Action was
adopted at the World Population
Conference organized by the United
Nations and held in Bucharest
(Romania). It focuses attention on
migrations of labour, illegal or
undocumented migration, refugee
movements and migration for permanent
resettlement. The article has been
extracted from a United Nations study
prepared in connexion with the
International Conference on Population,
1984.
IN Europe the virtual stoppage of the
recruitment of foreign workers by the
industrialized market-economy coun¬
tries, which was only incipient in 1974, has
continued, leading to a net reduction in
the size of the foreign labour force still
present in the main labour-importing coun¬
tries, from some 6.5 million foreign work¬
ers in 1974 to 6.2 million around 1980.
Since in many of the receiving countries
of Europe children born of foreign parents
are considered non-nationals, even in the
absence of net immigration an increase in
the foreign population would be expected
because of natural increase. Yet the net
gain recorded falls short of natural
increase, implying that net emigration has
occurred, probably in the form of return
migration to the countries of origin.
At present, most of the receiving coun¬
tries still claim not to be countries of immi¬
gration for permanent resettlement. Their
policies are aimed, inter alia, at stabilizing
the size of the foreign population in their
territories and at ensuring a certain degree
of integration between the foreign minor¬
ities and the national majority, while at
the same time allowing the former to keep
their cultural identity.
Stabilization is to be achieved by pro¬
moting the voluntary return to the sending
countries of foreign workers and their
dependents and by the naturalization of
those who are well adapted to their new
environment. Integration is to be pro¬
moted, inter alia, by ensuring parity
between foreigners and nationals in such
fields as terms of employment, social and
health services, and housing, by providing
special training (notably in the local lan¬
guage) for workers and their dependents,
by combatting discrimination and pre¬
judice against foreigners and by creating
an environment conducive to the normal
development of family life.
Hence, measures related to family re¬
union and to the education, training and
employment opportunities of dependents
of foreign workers are key elements in the
promotion of integration. Yet, although
immigration for the purpose of family re¬
unification is allowed by all the former
labour-importing countries, it is still sub¬
ject to a number of restrictions and, in
general, work permits for spouses and
older children are not easily available.



Migrant workers: a
In contrast with the evolution of immi¬
gration in Europe since 1974, the oil-
exporting countries of Western Asia and
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya continued to
admit sizeable numbers of foreign workers
at least up to 1980. It has been estimated
that between 1975 and 1980 the total num¬
ber of foreign workers in the main labour-
importing countries of the region increased
from 1.8 to 2.8 million. The total foreign
population in those countries was esti¬
mated to be 3.5 million in 1975 and is likely
to have increased less rapidly than the
number of foreign workers since then.
Given the relatively small size of the
national populations of the Western Asian
labour-importing countries, although the
total number of foreign workers present
in their territories is smaller than that in
Europe, it often constitutes a very large
proportion of the local labour force. Partly
for this reason, in recent years the receiving
countries have tended to adopt measures
that regulate immigration and labour
recruitment more strictly, that discourage
the immigration of family dependents and
that enforce, as much as possible, the rota¬
tion of labour. These measures include the
promotion of such novel labour-importing
mechanisms as the so-called "turn-key
project" by which a foreign company, con¬
tracted to carry out a certain project, pro¬
vides every input, including the manpower.
Lastly, although data for more recent
periods are not yet available, it is likely
that the oil glut experienced by the world
economy since 1982 and the ensuing
decline in oil prices may have had a neg¬
ative effect on immigration levels to West¬
ern Asia.

Day and Night (1938), a woodcut by the
Dutch artist M.C. Escher (1898-1972)



world phenomenon
In Africa, available evidence suggests
that seasonal migration is relatively more
common in Western Africa than in other
sub-regions and that the Ivory Coast, the
Gambia and Senegal continue to attract
migrants from neighbouring countries,
among which Chad, Ghana, Mali, Togo
and Burkina Faso appear to be the main
sources of emigrants.
Labour migration is also characteristic
of the southern region, where short-term
movements (of six to eighteen months
duration) of young males to the mines and
industrial complexes of South Africa (and
until the mid-1970s to Zambia and Zim¬
babwe) predominate. Yet the level of
labour migration to South Africa has
declined substantially during the last dec¬
ade, falling from an annual intake of some
300,000 foreign workers in 1970 to less than
200,000 in 1981. Foreign workers in South
Africa are recruited under agreements
between the employing organization and the
Governments of supplying countries, their
repatriation is assured upon completion of
the contract period, and while in the Repub¬
lic they are forbidden to change place of
residence or employment.
In terms of policies, few African coun¬
tries have recognized explicitly a need for
foreign labour and even less have adopted
measures to promote actively the immi¬
gration of foreign workers. In fact, many
countries have expressed the desire to
become self-sufficient in terms of labour
needs, especially in regard to skilled per¬
sonnel. Yet, as long as needed skills remain
scarce, most countries are willing to allow
the temporary presence of foreigners hav¬
ing those skills.
Although Canada and the United States
are better known as countries admitting
permanent immigrants than as importers
of foreign labour, they nevertheless admit
considerable numbers of persons for tem¬
porary employment. Thus, during 1976-
1979, the United States admitted an annual
average of some 91,000 temporary work¬
ers, trainees and exchange visitors (a figure
that excludes all immigrants admitted as
permanent residents) and in 1981 Canada
reported that it had granted about 113,000
work permits, 84,000 valid for less than
a year.
In other parts of the continent, legally
sanctioned labour migration is the excep¬
tion rather than the rule. Very few coun¬
tries have policies that actively promote
the immigration of labour. During the
1970s, Venezuela admitted a significant
number of migrants for employment, while
the Dominican Republic served as host to
many temporary workers from neigh¬
bouring Haiti. Yet, most of these legally
sanctioned flows were accompanied by par¬
allel flows of clandestine migration.
No region of the world is exempt from
illegal or undocumented immigration. Eco¬
nomic disparities between countries, cou¬
pled with the general tendency of receiving
States to restrict the possibilities for legal
migration have often given rise to migra¬
tion flows that are not legally sanctioned
by the receiving countries. In the context
of the existing world order, where only
relatively few countries still encourage or
allow immigration, illegal movements are
likely to continue.
In the Americas, labour migration flows
of considerable magnitude occur, largely
without the explicit approval of the receiv¬
ing States. Illegal or undocumented migra¬
tion is typical of this region. Although
there is little solid evidence on the mag¬
nitude of these flows, it seems likely that
they have increased during the past dec¬
ade. Countries such as Argentina, Canada,
Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Pan¬
ama, Venezuela and the United States
have all been known to be the destination
of sizeable numbers of undocumented
migrants who originate in an ever more
varied set of countries.
The policies adopted by countries in this
region to cope with illegal immigration
cover the full range from laissez-faire to

} the adoption of regularization drives that
aim at legalizing the status of the migrants
concerned. Deportation or the "voluntary
return" of illegal migrants is the typical
mechanism used to control migration,
although some countries have also adopted
stricter border controls or stiffer employ¬
ers' sanctions to deter the further illegal
influx of migrants for employment.
Undocumented immigrants are also
common in Europe, where the restrictive
admission policies adopted since 1973 have
led many job seekers either to enter a coun¬
try illegally or to enter it legally and accept
employment illegally. In order to control
illegal immigration and prevent its con¬
tinued increase, the former labour-import¬
ing countries have resorted to a wide vari¬
ety of measures, including more careful
border controls, stricter admission require¬
ments, steeper penalties for traffickers and
employers of illegal immigrants, and regu¬
larization schemes.
It is now impossible to assess reliably
either the success of these measures or the
current size of the illegal population. It
must be noted, however, that immigrants
whose status is not legal are not only pres¬
ent in the former labour-importing coun¬
tries, but also in the traditional countries
of emigration. Thus, Greece, Italy and
Spain have reported that they are hosting
substantial illegal populations, a situation
that aggravates the problems these nations
face in reintegrating their own returning
citizens.
Undocumented aliens are also known
to exist in many of the labour-importing
countries of Western Asia, where migrants
have been attracted by better economic
opportunities. In other parts of Asia, eco¬
nomically prosperous States or areas, such
as Hong Kong and Singapore, have also
acted as magnets for illegal flows, while
in certain regions of India economic and
political motivations have led to the exist¬
ence of large populations of migrants
whose legal status is now clear.
In Africa, the relatively recent estab¬
lishment of sovereign States whose bound¬
aries do not always coincide with tradi¬
tional ethnic divisions has often led to
undocumented flows of persons arising
from what used to be traditionally
unimpeded population movements. In gen¬
eral, policy responses to these movements
have been liberal and migrants have been
able to stay and work in the receiving coun¬
try. However, in recent years some States
have resorted to deportation measures that
often contravene basic human rights.
The importance of refugee movements
has increased considerably during the past
decade, partly because of the growing
number of both countries and persons
involved and partly owing to the political
ramifications of these movements. While
in 1974 the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) reported that there were
slightly more than 1.8 million refugees in
the world (excluding Palestinians), by the
end of 1981 this number had risen to nearly
6.8 million (again not counting the nearly
1.9 million Palestinians overseen by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA)).
Given the nature of refugee movements,
the figures quoted are only approximate,
but they nevertheless indicate orders of
magnitude. In fact, the 1981 figure
excludes nearly two million refugees who
have been permanently resettled in third
asylum countries and the many others who
have been successfully repatriated to their
home countries. Despite the considerable
effort made by developed countries in
resettling refugees, the vast majority are
still being hosted by developing countries
which are commonly the countries of first
asylum. In Africa alone, the number of
refugees increased from one to nearly three
million between 1974 and 1981, while in
Southeastern Asia by the end of 1981 there
still remained about 3 million refugees
awaiting resettlement in third countries.
In general, the policies adopted by Gov¬
ernments to deal with refugees have been
strongly shaped by humanitarian consid¬
erations. In response to the growing num¬
ber of refugees world-wide, many devel¬
oped countries have made special efforts
to increase their refugee intake. However,
since most of these countries have rarely
received direct refugee arrivals, their posi¬
tion as third countries of asylum has
allowed them to select refugees for admis¬
sion, with the result that the criteria on
family reunification and skills used in the
selection have been detrimental to the
resettlement chances of the vast majority
of refugees who lack family ties in the
developed world and are mostly unskilled.
Countries receiving large numbers of
refugees directly have resorted mainly to
two types of strategy: (a) the creation of
"temporary" refugee camps whose basic
necessities are satisfied with the help of
the international community and (b) the
Major International Labour Migration Flows of the Past 20 Years
Path of major migration flow
Major receiving countries
Note: All flows are continuing at substantial levels except flows into Europe,
Ghana, and Nigeria.
Source: Population Reports, September-October 1983, The Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, USA

resettlement of refugees in rural areas
where they are provided with land and are
encouraged to become self-sufficient.
International aid has also been sought in
the latter case so as to integrate the refugee
in the overall development process. Reset¬
tlement strategies have been common in
Africa, while temporary refugee camps are
typical of Southeastern Asia, a region that
has been the main source of refugees for
resettlement in third countries.
The role played by the United Nations
system in providing aid, safeguarding the
physical safety and basic rights of refugees,
and working towards permanent solutions
to their plight cannot be overstressed.
UNHCR has been successful not only in
eliciting support for resettlement pro¬
grammes, but also in aiding the many thou¬
sands of refugees for whom voluntary repa¬
triation has been possible. The support of
the international community for the activ¬
ities of the United Nations system in regard
to refugees testifies to the importance of
these activities and highlights their con¬
tinued necessity.
Finally, regarding migration for per¬
manent resettlement, mention must be
made of the recent trends in migration to
and from the traditional countries of'immi
gration: Australia, Canada, New Zealand
and the United States. During the decade
1971-1981, only in the United States did
immigration levels grow steadily (largely
because of the admission towards the end
of the decade of sizeable numbers of ref¬
ugees, an immigration category that is not
yet subject to quotas).
The recent adoption by Australia, Can¬
ada and New Zealand of new immigration
laws that allow a better adaptation of immi¬
gration levels to national needs led to a
reduction in the number of admissions, in
spite of the larger intake of refugees that
they all approved. In fact, the data on
emigration from New Zealand reveal that
the country experienced a negative migra¬
tion rate during 1976-1980. These devel¬
opments suggest that, in terms of the tra¬
ditional countries of migration, the number
of places available for future migrants are
not likely to increase.
The decisive moment between past and
future, unemployment and work, hope
and fear
Source : Review andAppraisalof the World Population
Plan ofAction, United Nations document E/CONF.76/
PC/10, 2 December 1983.
7
