Villagers search for snails along a drain¬
age ditch at Dongfeng, near Shanghai.
Since the early 1970s, such ditches have
been dug deeper to prevent the fields
from becoming waterlogged, a situation
in which the disease-bearing snails
flourish.


The deadly snails ofDongfeng
How a Chinese community vanquished
schistosomiasis
DURING the last decade living condi¬
tions have changed dramatically
for the 400 families of Dongfeng,
near Wuxi city in South China.
In Dongfeng (literally, East Wind), as in
all the rural areas of Wuxi county, the
village roads have been paved and the old,
single-storey brick houses are being replac¬
ed by two and three-storey houses with tiled
roofs. As family incomes rise, the villagers
are acquiring a range of consumer goods:
hi-fis, television, washing machines and
cameras.
The other significant change is not so
easily apparent to a visitor. There are no
snails in Dongfeng now. And since 1972
there has not been a single new case of snail
fever, a debilitating disease which has af¬
flicted China since the time of the Hans,
2,000 years ago.
Medically called schistosomiasis (or
bilharzia), its symptoms include fever, liver
pains, blisters on the skin, and blood in the
by Zhang Bihua
faeces and urine. It is caused by the
schistosome, a parasitic worm, which
spendspart of its complex life cycle in fresh
water, part inside a particular species of
snail and part in the human body (see
diagram). People pick up the disease by
wading or bathing in an infected canal, lake
or pond.
The Wuxi area is criss-crossed by rivers
and canals, and it is bordered on the south
by Lake Tai, one of China's biggest lakes.
The city gets its water from the Grand
Canal which carries water from the Yangtze
River to Lake Tai, branching on its way into
the villages built on its banks. The fertile
soil, moderate climate, and the abundance
of water has made this a very productive
and prosperous area: a "Land of Fish and
Rice".
However, the water is a mixed blessing,
for it has also brought the schistosome,
snails and disease. Early post-Liberation
(1949) statistics show that snail fever af¬
fected 100 million people in 11 provinces
(including Jiangsu where Dongfeng is)
south of, and along, the Yangtze River.
The Dongfeng brigade is part of the
Luyuan commune in the suburbs north of
Wuxi city. Here the Grand Canal flows
through five branches of the Liangqi River
into a spider's web of waterwaysthe very
best environment for the schistosome and
its host, the snail.
Though Dongfeng was not as badly af¬
fected as many other areas, its people were
exposed to the "swollen belly disease"
every time they collected water from the
Liangqi the only source for drinking and
all other domestic purposes. The brigade
had two old community wells, but there
were no household wells.
Children sometimes used to defecate in
the fields, and the adults used bucket
latrines which were also emptied out in the
fields. The buckets were washed in the same
river from which they got their water, and
this helped spread the schistosome eggs.
31

But the peasants of Dongfeng had no
idea why their stomachs swelled or how
they caught "the disease of laziness", as
they called it. They knew it made them
feeble and unable to work. If the pain were
too great they would pierce their abdomens
to release the accumulated fluid.
It took Dongfeng more than 20 years to
get the better of the scourge that its waters
brought. How was it done? First came the
national programme to eradicate snail
fever, emphasizing preventive measures
such as destroying the snails and their
habitat, and strictly controlling water usage
and nightsoil disposal. A special group was
set up at every level, from the central Health
Ministry at Beijing, down through county
and province to the brigade.
The campaign to rid Dongfeng brigade of
snails began, as part of this national pro¬
gramme, in the 1950s, but it took many
years to get fully organized.
The brigade collectively owns all the land
and all the otherresources, and also con¬
trols all the finances. A percentage of its
total annual income is accumulated in a
community welfare fund, which supports
co-operative medical care. Money for the
anti-snail campaign came from this fund.
It was only in 1972 that the Dongfeng
campaign gathered momentum when a
four-member anti-schistosome group was
formed to lead the work. All four were
recognized local leaders the Communist
Party secretary, two heads of the brigade
production teams, and a "barefoot" doc¬
tor. (The barefoot doctor, crucial to
China's rural medical system, is not a
medical graduate but a middle school-
educated peasant).
In 1972, 27-year-old Su Guiying was the
brigade's barefoot doctor working on the
campaign. As a child Su had seen people in
her village suffer from schistosomiasis. "I
vowed that one day I would become a doc¬
tor and relieve their pain", she says. In the
1960s she trained as a barefoot doctor and
devoted herself completely to helping snail
fever patients.
To qualify as a barefoot doctor Su had to
take a four-month training course in Wuxi
city, which included elementary phar¬
macology, the diagnosis and treatment of
common illnesses such as influenza and
diarrhoea, and midwifery. For the anti-
snail campaign she had to take a brief addi¬
tional course on the disease, learn about the
ecology of the snail and the basics of testing
stools.
The Party secretary and the two brigade
heads in the anti-snail group were also
trained on the non-medical aspects. The en¬
tire group watched films about the disease,
examined the larvae and the eggs of the
worm, and even dissected an infected rabbit
to see how the victims suffered. All this
knowledge had to be disseminated to the
people of Dongfeng.
Lu Guomin, a doctor at the Wuxi city
centre, says they soon found it was more ef¬
ficient for peasants to spread the informa¬
tion among themselves than for profes¬
sionals to carry the message from village to
village.
But this required a tremendous publicity
effort. Posters and slogans were hung on
walls, blackboards were used to carry
cartoons and short articles on snail fever.
And during work breaks in the fields,
loudspeakers constantly broadcast basic in¬
formation about the disease. In the even¬
ings, amateur actors performed skits and
sang ballads to get the message home.
Mass participation was vital to the cam¬
paign. Su says propaganda is essential to
pave the way for such mass participation,
but believes that patience is the key.
All the hard work paid off. In the early
1970s at least one person in each of the
brigade's then 300 households was affected.
But in 1975, three years after the campaign
got properly organized, there were only 18
remaining cases.
The improved health conditions were the
result of three major activities of the cam¬
paign. These were:
the elimination of snails;
building new channels for irrigation,
drainage and transport;
Waterborne Diseases
THE World Health Organization has estimated that 80 per
cent of all sickness and disease in the world is attributable
to inadequate water or sanitation. This includes the effects
of drinking contaminated water, water acting as a breeding
ground for carriers of disease, and disease caused by lack of
washing.
Five types of disease are related to water and sanitation:
Waterborne diseases spread by drinking (or washing food,
utensils, hands or face in) contaminated water. They include
typhoid, cholera, dysentery, gastro-enteritis (diarrhoea) and,
where pollution is exceptionally severe, infective hepatitis.
Water-washed infections of the skin and eyes spread by inade¬
quate water for personal washing. They include trachoma,
scabies, yaws, leprosy, conjunctivitis, skin sepsis and ulcers.
Water-based diseases, so called because the vector (carrier) is
an invertebrate aquatic organism. The most important are
schistosomiasis and the guinea worm.
Diseases with water-related insect vectors. Mosquitoes (car¬
riers of malaria, filariasis, yellow fever) and blackflies (carriers of
river blindness) need water for breeding. Certain tse-tse fly vec¬
tors of sleeping sickness usually bite near water.
Infections primarily caused because of defective sanitation,
such as hookworm.
DIARRHOEA directly kills 6 million children in developing
countries each year, and contributes to the death of up to 18
million people. Victims often die of dehydration. Survivors are
weakened and easy prey to other diseases. In unsanitary condi¬
tions the disease easily passes from child to child. The cure is
rehydration, the replacement of lost fluid and salts by weak sugar
and salt solution taken either orally or by intravenous drip.
TRACHOMA is a virus infection of the outer parts of the eye,
eventually causing build-up of scar tissue over the eye and blind¬
ness if untreated. Spread by flies and touch. 500 million people
infected world-wide.
SCHISTOSOMIASIS (bilharzia, or snail fever) is caused by a
parasite spread by freshwater snails (see article). It is today a
cause of misery and debility for 200 million people in Africa, the
Middle East, parts of Latin America and southeast Asia. Infec¬
tious schistosome larvae penetrate the skin when a person
swims or wades in water. The larvae migrate to the blood stream
where they become adult worms. Eggs leave the body via faeces
or urine. Symptoms include fever, painful liver, blisters on skin
and blood in faeces and urine. Ironically schistosomiasis has
spread dramatically because of the spread of irrigation canals
and dams which provide a suitable habitat for the snails and their
parasite.
RIVER BLINDNESS (onchocerciasis) is caused by minute
worms carried from person to person when bitten by small black
flies that breed in fast flowing water. Worms spread inside body
often to eyes where damage and scarring eventually cause blind¬
ness. An estimated 30 million people are affected.
MALARIA, common in many of the hot, tropical parts of the
world, is carried from person to person by carrier mosquitoes.
Almost any amount of water is sufficient for the mosquitoes to lay
their eggs. Each year it is estimated that 800 million people suffer
from the fevers of malaria.
32

Above, photo taken with an electron
scanning microscope of the parasitic
worm that causes schistosomiasis or bil¬
harzia. Right, the anopheline mosquito
which transmits malaria.
The life cycle of the schistosome, the
parasitic worm which causes schistoso¬
miasis, also known as "swollen belly
disease" or snail fever.
s".
So
Q>
1. Fluke escapes from snail
2. Enters water
3. Fluke penetrates human skin
4. Young flukes mature in blood vessels
of lungs
5. Adults reach the small intestine
6. Eggs are laid and move through tissue
to intestinethey are passed out with
waste
7. Mature egg when passed reaches
water and hatches almost Immediately
8. Larva seeks out an appropriate snail
o
X :
5
©

changing methods of water supply and
nightsoil disposal.
In each of the three activities, there was
a combination of government support,
community action and motivation from
local leaders.
Some work had been done to destroy
snails in Dongfeng during the early years of
China's anti-snail campaign during the
1950s and the 1960s. Like many other local
leaders, Yang Zoji, an agricultural tech¬
nician, had also suffered from snail fever.
He says that in the early days of the cam¬
paign they used boats to search the river
banks for snails. The snails were Caught and
killed by immersing them in boiling water
on a stove on the boat. This was a slow and
laborious process because of the number of
small rivers.
The snails could have been poisoned with
chemicals but these were too expensive.
Yang calculates that a tonne of imported
chemicals cost the equivalent of four tonnes
of rice.
By the early 1970s, the methods changed.
An "army" of sharp-eyed village children,
armed only with a pamphlet picturing dif¬
ferent kinds of snails, searched the irriga¬
tion channels and the drainage ditches for
the particular snail species which causes
schistosomiasis.
Within two months, the people of
Dongfeng dug new ditches and used the
fresh earth to fill the old ones (totalling 18
kilometres), effectively killing the snails by
burying them. "No sophisticated technique
was required and it didn't cost us anything
except for our muscle-power, as we fought
with our own spades and rakes", Yang
remarks.
The new channels and ditches, which
were straighter and deeper than the old
ones, were necessary to prevent the fields
from getting waterlogged (a favourable en¬
vironment for the snail). But this involved
changing the contours of the fields. Many
in the brigade were initially opposed to this:
they thought it would just be a waste of
labour.
Yang recalls that an old man complained
that a new ditch, which ran alongside the
graves of his ancestors, affected the direc¬
tion of the wind and altered the flow of the
water. He believed this had brought bad
luck to the family and made his grandson
Two Thai villagers slake their thirst with
water from a tap Installed by UNICEF (the
United Nations Children's Fund).
ill. Su treated and cured the child and that
helped people accept the changes.
Dongfeng also used the east-west branch
of the river to transport goods to Wuxi city.
Wang suggested constructing a new north-
south channel which would halve the travel
time of three and a half hours, and help
clear the river of snails. The residents of
Dongfeng contributed their labour, work¬
ing often by gaslight at night.
The campaign's third area of activity,
water supply and sanitation, was perhaps
the most difficult. The peasants had always
used the contaminated river water for
drinking. A strict ban was imposed on
washing the latrine buckets in the river and
on collecting drinking water from it. The
brigade dug several public wells, and each
household was also asked to dig its own
shallow well.
It took a couple two days to dig a well
three metres deep and line it with bricks.
They needed 300 bricks and 50 kilograms of
cement and sand, and the brigade supplied
half of this.
Lu Wenying, the health worker,
distributes chemicals to each household to
purify the water. A plastic tube with two
holes is filled with solid bleach (sodium
hypochlorite), and is lowered into the
water. This lets in the water slowly and
releases chlorine, a much safer method of
purification than immersing the chemical
powder directly in the water as used to be
done.
A special three-chambered pit was in¬
troduced for disposing of nightsoil. The
faeces are fermented in the first chamber
for 15 days, during which time 90 per cent
of the schistosome eggs settle at the bottom
of the chamber. The fermented mixture
then flows into the second chamber, and the
process is repeated. When this chamber too
is filled the mixture flows into the last
chamber, from which it is removed. The
final product is good quality fertilizer, high
in nitrogen content and without any
schistosome eggs. .
Snail fever has now been eliminated in
Dongfeng. But preventive measures con¬
tinue. Snail searches are made in the spring
and autumn, when snails are active. A
reward of 20 yuan (US$40) has now been in¬
troduced for reporting a snail. (When the
work was at its peak, however, no monetary
incentives were given).
Better water supply and nightsoil
disposal have also helped to improve the
health of the people. Better irrigation has
increased the production of vegetables and
other crops. Individual incomes have risen.
Joint community effort and government
support has helped Dongfeng eradicate the
bloodsucking worm. Lu Wenying sums up
the success of the Dongfeng campaign with
an old Chinese saying: "Two chopsticks are
easily broken but not a bundle".
ZHANG BIHUA, of China, is a journalist
working at China Features, Beijing.
This article is based on a longer study first
published in Who Puts the Water in the Taps,
a paperback book published by Earthscan,
London.
