That first
©
A survey o/"The situation; the attitudes and life styles of
young industrial workers" was recently undertaken by the
International Councilfor Social Sciences at Unesco 's request
and with itsfinancial backing. The survey covered six coun¬
tries of varying degrees of industrialization: relatively in¬
dustrialized (Hungary and Spain), intermediate (India and
Uruguay), recently becoming industrialized (Senegal and
Algeria). Some six hundred young people from four con¬
tinents were interviewedfor the survey on whosefindings the
article below is based.
FOR young people today, getting
their first job means not only the
assurance of an income still, asjn^
the past, an overriding motivation tjt '
also the assertion of their personal identity,
a way of proving that they "exisf'through
the exercise of what they view as a creative
activity.
They are aware that in getting their first
job they acquire a new social status and a
new life style which differs from that of a
student still dependent upon his family and
even more so from that of the unemployed
for whom life is a matter of privation and
bare survival. In other words, they realize
that becoming employed is the natural con¬
clusion of a long period of apprenticeship
for entry into society, the preparation for
which both in the home and at school has
basically been a preparation for work.
This hoped-for incorporation into the
world of work is no easy matter. Not only
8
are employment opportunities rare (in all
the countries surveyed except Hungary), it
is also virtually impossible for most young
people to find the kind of work for which
they have been trained and to which they
aspire. Those who are lucky enough to find
their first job quickly, because they are
assumed to lack professional experience
and skills, are often subject to various kinds
of overt or covert discrimination, even
though they may be doing exactly the same
tasks as older or longer-serving employees.
Thus the search for a job is a difficult and
chancy undertaking which is not always
crowned with success. Having just left
school or technical institute, where they had
their place and a task to fulfil and where
they were known and esteemed by their col¬
leagues, those young people who do not
land that first job they were so eagerly look¬
ing forward to have to face up for the first
time to unemployment, a situation for

which neither family nor school has
prepared them. This unemployment and the
marginalization that goes with it brings on
a period of crisis and a questioning of the
social and cultural values previously
assimilated.
A "baptism of fire" of this sort is a fairly
common experience among young boys and
girls in the countries covered by the survey,
although it varies, of course, according to
the nature of the obstacles encountered, the
type of society and family to which they
belong, as well as to the age, sex and
temperament of the individual concerned.
In this respect, the survey indicates that the
categories of young people most affected
are girls, younger youths and those with
little or no schooling.
In some cases, finding employment may
depend more . on chance, family cir¬
cumstances and contacts than on personal
qualifications. In others, possession of a
diploma or sound practical experience may
offer the key to a job. Except in Hungary,
where formal education seems to be a sure
road to employment (although not
necessarily in the kind of job desired), in all
the countries surveyed the links between
education and employment are often in¬
direct and uncertain.
In Spain, for example, the findings of the
survey reveal a gap between the educational
system and the needs of the economy and
the labour market. In Uruguay, most of the
young people interviewed thought that for¬
mal education had been of little or no use to
them either in obtaining a job or in perfor¬
ming tasks assigned to them. Nevertheless,
they considered their studies useful from
the point of view of personal development,
status and social contacts and felt that they
might later facilitate promotion and ad¬
vancement, for example, from manual
worker to office employee.
Of the six countries surveyed, Hungary
appears to be a case apart and, generally
speaking, stands out in marked contrast to
the others. Development of secondary and
higher education in Hungary seems to have
outpaced the evolution of the labour
market and, although there is no unemploy¬
ment, young people of both sexes are often
over-qualified for the work they do. This
results in a certain tension between the
world of education and that of labour, since
the former is relatively homogeneous and
there is a tendency for educational levels to
rise, whereas wide differences persist in the
labour market as regards types of job and
the degree of personal satisfaction that they
offer.
The phenomenon of "over-
qualification" also appears to be very
significant in India and Senegal, where a
high proportion of the young people inter¬
viewed said that the education they had
received was above the level needed for the
work they were doing or, in the case of
those who were unemployed, of the jobs
available. This state of affairs is more
prevalent in the large urban centres, where
improvements in the education system are
more in evidence. In the cities, semi-
qualified young people are increasingly
entering the "informal" sector of the
economy, which is growing and spreading
to the city outskirts.
Unlike general education, specialized
training for a specific job facilitates obtain¬
ing employment and the desired level of
wages. In this respect, boys seem to be in a
more favourable position than girls. In
Hungary, for instance, most of the students
in technical schools are boys, whereas in
secondary schools the girls are in the ma¬
jority. As a result, the girls have a higher
level of general education, but the boys are
better placed for getting employment.
Facilities for obtaining technical training
vary, sometimes quite widely, from one
country to another. In Hungary, for exam¬
ple, technical training is only obtainable in
specialized schools, whereas in Uruguay
many young people get their technical train¬
ing "on. the job", in work centres where
they enter as apprentices, or in the family,
where skills are transmitted to them by their
parents. These differences have evident
consequences from both the legal and the
employment point of view. As a general
rule, young workers in the industrialized
countries (in this case Hungary) are legally
and socially better protected than their
counterparts in the developing world who
acquire their training empirically.
It is harder for adolescents than for
adults to find permanent employment. Ac¬
cording to those interviewed, there are
several reasons for this. Many employers
are reluctant to employ young people
because they think that they are more
accident-prone or that they will reduce the ^

WORLD DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
1960 Mm
Á
DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
1982
Enrolment at 1 st level / 2nd level / 3rd level / 1 st level .' 2nd level . 3rd level ' ' 1 st level / 2nd level / 3rd level
Changes in the educational pyramid by sex between 1960
and 1982 by regions (male first level enrolment = 100)
Source: A Summary
Statistical Review of
Education in the World,
1960-1982, Unesco
rate of output; others want to avoid addi¬
tional training costs or fear the interrup¬
tions caused by absences for military ser¬
vice, in the case of boys, and by pregnan¬
cies, in the case of girls; finally, young
workers are often considered to be more
recalcitrant and more likely to make trouble
than adults or immigrant workers.
Because of these prejudices, many young
people work without permanent contracts
or any social security protection and in
practice become part of a "parallel" or
"underground" economy. In Spain, for in¬
stance, as in other countries among those
surveyed, they often obtain poorly paid
part-time or seasonal employment, or else
they work in small family businesses or sub¬
sistence enterprises where sometimes no
wages are paid at all. Training courses
within these enterprises are the exception

rather than the rule, and when they do exist
they are rarely as good or as effective as
they appear on paper.
The situation is even more difficult for
girls. As the surveys on Spain and India in¬
dicate, they are subject to more frequent
and more serious discrimination than are
the boys. In their replies, young people of
both sexes agreed that girls are regarded by
employers as less capable than boys even
when they have the same or better qualifica¬
tions. In practice the girls are given the most
lowly tasks, receive lower wages and have
much more limited career prospects than
their male colleagues. In addition, as
emerged clearly from the survey on Spain,
both the initial securing of a job and the
possibility of promotion depend very large¬
ly on a girl's physical attractiveness.
Most of the young people interviewed, ir¬
respective of sex, had a very positive at¬
titude to entry into the world of work.
Nevertheless, the initial motivation and en¬
thusiasm tends to give way to scepticism
and apathy, and anxiety and tension grow
with the increasing difficulty of finding the
first job.
Many young people reported that, after
several unsuccessful attempts to obtain a
job, they had to resign themselves to tem¬
porary or permanent unemployment. In the
cases of Senegal and Algeria, the survey
clearly shows that a very low level of school¬
ing and lack of vocational training almost
inevitably leads to unemployment, especial¬
ly in times of economic recession. In
Algeria, for example, most of the young
unemployed have had no vocational train¬
ing and were educated only to primary level.
Uneducated and without work, these
young people find themselves doubly re¬
jected. In these conditions the struggle for
survival is even more difficult, since what is
at stake is not only material subsistence, but
also the need to establish a new personal
identity. One of the conclusions reached by
the authors of the survey concerning the
situation in Algeria is worth quoting here:
"Without seeking to establish a clear con¬
nexion between unemployment, lack of
schooling and juvenile delinquency, it is
notable that juveniles make up sixty per
cent of the prison population (and thirty-
seven per cent of the active population)".
10

For young people today, therefore,
employment almost everywhere is an ex¬
perience fraught with uncertainty and in¬
security. Only a few can be sure of enjoying
fixed, long-term contracts of employment
and the benefits of social security. As a
result, rather than accept employment on
onerous or unjust terms, many of them
either take the risk of setting up small
businesses of their own in the "informal"
or "underground" sector of the economy,
or they emigrate in the hope of doing better
elsewhere.
The survey also shows that, in times of
economic difficulty, the girls and younger
boys are the first to be laid off, in most
cases, especially in the developing coun¬
tries, without any form of compensation or
allowances.
There are also marked differences in
regard to stability of employment between
large and small enterprises. Young workers
in large firms usually have permanent con¬
tracts and social security, whereas most of
those working in small firms have neither.
Moreover, in several of the countries
surveyed, young workers commonly work
longer hours than their adult colleagues,
since regulations to protect them are either
non-existent or are not enforced.
Wage levels are often so low as to prevent
young people from leading decent, indepen¬
dent lives. Remuneration is frequently
below the level to which their professional
qualifications entitle them and this is a
source of great discontent. Furthermore,
working conditions for young people are
often oppressive and unhealthy and they are
frequently allotted the most unpleasant and
dangerous tasks which increases the risk of
work accidents.
Opportunities for promotion for the
young are very rare and they feel the weight
of the old-established hierarchical struc¬
tures that exist within most businesses bear¬
ing down upon them in a way that deprives
them of their rights and offends their sense
of dignity. In this respect, as in all others, it
is the girls who suffer most.
An unemployed Portuguese youth seeks
information and guidance from an official
of the French National Employment
Agency.
Will there be enough jobs?
The need for new jobs grows each year.
The number of job-seekers each year is determin¬
ed by the number of births 15 to 20 years earlier.
Thus today's birth rate determines the number of
jobs needed in the years 2000 to 2005.
Projected increase in the youth population in
urban and rural areas ¡970 to 2000.
Urban Rural
All developing
countries 	 200 % 34 "In
Africa 	 364 % 83 %
South Asia 	 233 % 54 %
Latin America 	 160 % 13 %
Source: UN Population Division Assessment 1980, Unicef
News.
Where will they be?
Population, ages 15-24,
World
1985 BaTaTaTa1
2000 «a*aHMML*aaan
2025 ««^b^b^bIbb^bV
Africa
1985 CJ
2000 ^Bj
2025 «a*a*a*a*a*a*a*aL>
Asia
1 985 «ab^bVbVKJ
2000 "Ab^bb^b^HbMJ
2025 fa*B^BB^aHHK
Latin America
1985 O
2000 tSJ
2025
D 940 million
1.100 million
b^b^HJ 1 .300 million
105 million
1 70 million
341 million
583 million
627 million
.) 679 million
82 million
105 million
129 million
Source: UN Population Division Assessment 1982, Unicef
News.
Where will they work?
Per cent of labour force in agriculture, 1980
Most of the world's population is rural and
agricultural. Even though large numbers of
youth live in the world's cities, many still turn to
agriculture for employment.
But for those who do there will be no guarantee
of steady work. Many will be lucky to find
seasonal jobs. In Bangladesh, for example, 80
per cent of the population is rural and half of
those are landless dependent for work on the
seasonal needs of those who own land.
Source: World Bank/World Development Report 1984,
Unicef News.
