A UNESCO COURIER INTERNATIONAL SURVEY
The voice of youth
from every continent
The Unesco Courier recently sent a questionnaire to
Unesco Clubs, Non-Governmental Organizations,
Unesco Associated Schools and a variety of other in¬
stitutions and associations in many parts of the world
in order to find out at first hand about young people 's
ideas, aspirations and fears.
We received 1,050 replies from 41 countries and ter¬
ritories representing every continent: Austria, Argen¬
tina, Bangladesh, Belgium, Chad, Czechoslovakia,
Denmark, Egypt, Ecuador, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many, France, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Hong Kong,
Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kenya, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, the Philippines,
Puerto Rico, Spain, Switzerland, Tunisia, the United
Kingdom, the United States, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
1 . What is the problem of most concern to all young people
today?
2. Which of the following problems do you think are most impor¬
tant? Money, the future, sex education, studies and educational
guidance, leisure activities, work, fashion, politics, International
problems, social problems, scientific and technological pro¬
gress, relations with adults, relations of young people among
themselves, values.
3. Which of the international problems listed here do you think
are most Important and why? Aid to developing countries, getting
to know young people in other countries, the destruction of
nuclear arsenals, the eradication of racism, the war on hunger,
the need for contacts with other countries, world peace, friend¬
ship between peoples.
4. Politics. What does the word politics mean to you? Are you
willing to take part in public life? If so, how?
5. Studies and educational guidance. Do you think it is possi¬
ble to find solutions to these problems: world illiteracy, the
democratization of education, educational and vocational
guidance.
6. The future. What is your role and place in society today?
What does It offer you? What do you feel about your future? What
lies in store for those without educational qualifications?
7. Sex education. Are you for or against? Should it be provided
in the family or at school?
8. Money. Adults say that you don't know the value of money.
Are they right or wrong? Are you just consumers or are you pro¬
ducers too?
9. The relations of young people among themselves. Do you
experience any difficulties in your contact with others? Do you
feel the need for a youth centre where you could meet and take
part in activities that interest you? Do you feel there is a need for
youth organizers?
10. Work. What do you expect from your work? Is it an obstacle
to fulfilment? Are you working or unemployed? Did you become
unemployed before ever having a job?
11. Relations with adults. When the authority of the family
disappears, what is left? Have the role and importance of the
family been reduced? What are the consequences for the
elderly?
1 2. Social problems. Do you think these are adults' problems or
do you feel concerned yourself? If you do, which do you think is
the most important problem? Delinquency, drugs, equality of the
sexes, maladjusted children, young people living in rural areas,
housing, the elderly, human problems, relations between the
working class and the middle class.
13. Scientific and technological progress. What do you think
about the application of scientific and technological progress in
today's world?
14. Leisure activities. What are your favourite leisure activities?
The arts, reading, cinema or television, sport. Do you organize
them alone or in a group?
15. Fashion. Does it mean being up-to-date, "in the swim"? Is
it a form of progress?
16. It is often said that young people have no ideas, only aspira¬
tions? Is this true?

THE outcome of any survey, clearly, is largely predetermin¬
ed by the nature of the questions asked. In presenting the
results, we have opted for a "global" approach in record¬
ing the 1,000 replies without reference to the Inherent dif¬
ferences of each country. Hence there are big differences in the
priority given to different problems.
For example, young people in the Socialist countries stated
that there Is no unemployment in their countries and that those
without educational qualifications have an equal right to work.
This necessarily affected their replies to several other questions,
including their overwhelming choice of peace (in answer to the
first question), whereas young people from other parts of Europe
are primarily preoccupied with questions of work, unemploy¬
ment, the future.
Analysis of the replies leads to the following conclusions.
1. What is the problem of most concern to all young people
today?
Many did not answer this question. Of those who did so, 50%
chose problems of war and peace, 30% unemployment and
work, 10% the future, and 10% various other problems including
drugs, hunger and the quality of life.
2. Which of the following problems do you think are most im¬
portant? Money, the future, sex education, studies and
educational guidance, leisure activities, work, fashion,
politics, international problems, social problems, scientific
and technological progress, relations with adults, relations
of young people among themselves, values.
The most widely chosen top-priority problem was that of the
future (57%)the young people's own future. In second place
came studies, a problem directly related to the first, followed by
values, social problems and money. The relations of young peo¬
ple among themselves, progress, politics, relations with adults,
sex education and fashion were far down the field. Close scrutiny
of the answers to this question casts doubt on the priority given
to problems of peace and disarmament In the replies to the first
question.
3. International problems. Which of those listed here do you
think are most important and why? Aid to developing coun¬
tries, getting to know young people in other countries, the
destruction of nuclear arsenals, the eradication of racism,
the war on hunger, the need for contacts with other coun¬
tries, world peace, friendship between peoples.
85% of the votes went to world peace. This choice was closely
followed (and qualified) by the war on hunger, the destruction of
nuclear arsenals, the eradication of racism, and aid to develop¬
ing countries. But the desire to get to know young people in other
countries, the need for contacts and friendship between peoples
seemed to be considered far less important.
4. Politics. What does the word politics mean to you? Are
you willing to take part in public life? If so, how?
Politics seems to attract little interest. 30% of those polled did
not answer this question and only 2 out of 1,000 declared that
they held serious political opinions. 24% considered politics to
be useless if not dangerous, 21 % considered It to be the product
of an ideology without specifying which, 16% gave a stereotyped
definition, 2% gave answers that were beside the point, and only
7% thought politics could be useful.
The possibility of taking part in public life aroused even more
significant reactions: 50% did not reply, 17% categorically
replied no, and 33% replied by a "yes, but..." which they clearly
explained: yes, they wanted to take part, but through teaching,
help to individuals or countries, medical and social actions,
voting, and a desire to "reconstruct".
5. Studies and educationalguidance. Do you think it is possi¬
ble to find solutions to these problems: world illiteracy, the
democratization of education, educational and vocational
guidance?
Young people think that solutions to these problems can be
found. But they feel it is easier to solve the illiteracy problem and
to speed up the democratization of education than to solve
problems of education and above all vocational guidance and
counselling. In many cases they believe that these are questions
for adults.
6. The future. What is your role and place in society today?
What does it offer you? What do you feel about your future?
What lies in store for those without educational
qualifications?
Many did not answer this question. Some gave quite long
answers, expressing their anxieties and hopes for the future.
Regarding the first part of the question, 90% thought they
occupied their rightful place in society, I.e. as schoolchildren or
students; some went so far as to say that they were "their
parents' responsibility".
Only slightly more than 50% answered the second part of the
question. 40% believe that society helps them, gives them moral
support and the means to pursue their studies. 40% consider on
the contrary that society is a source of difficulties, 10% consider
that it has little or nothing to offer, and 10% just hope. In several
cases, the word vocation was described as unrealistic or old-
fashioned.
On the third point, 71 % of young people replied that the future
of the unqualified was very precarious, 10% thought that there
was no future for them, and 6% that only the toughest and most
degrading jobs are open to them.
7. Sex education. Are you for or against? Should it be provid¬
ed in the family or at school?
Only 10% did not answer this question. Perhaps these absten¬
tions and a large number of the noes can be explained by
religious or cultural prohibitions. 88% were in favour of sex
education and only 1 2% against. 1 9% would like it to be provided
14

World peace is the international problem
of most concern to young people today,
as symbolized, left, by the hundreds of
doves flourished by participants at the
11th World Youth Festival held in Havana,
Cuba, in July-August 1978. The Festival
was organized by the World Federation of
Democratic Youth, a movement created
after World War II to ' 'fight for the unity of
youth... and for a just and lasting peace ' '.
The Federation now has 270 member
youth organizations from 112 countries.
The 12th World Youth Festival, co¬
inciding with International Youth Year,
will be held in Moscow this summer.
The hopes and anxieties which thoughts
of their future prospects arouse in young
people invariably lead back to their
studies. The young are unanimous In
thinking that lackofeducational qualifica¬
tions is a severe handicap in life. Below,
an experiment in computer-assisted Latin
teaching at the Lycée Ampère, Lyons,
France.
by the family, 13% by the school, 46% by both family and school.
The others would like it to be done elsewhere, but did not say
where.
8. Money. Adults say that you don't know the value of
money. Are they right or wrong? Are you just consumers or
are you producers too?
38% admitted that they didn't know the value of money, 43%
said on the other hand that the reproach was unjustified and that
they knew the value of money very well because they had learn¬
ed how to earn their living. Some thought the reproach to a cer¬
tain extent justified, but that when adults were young they were
just as ignorant of the value of money because they had too much
of it and were thus encouraged to spend too much. 73% con¬
sidered themselves, often most unwillingly, as consumers, 22%
as consumers and producers, and 5% said they were producers.
9. The relations of young people among themselves. Do you
experience any difficulties in your contact with others? Do
you feel the need for a youth centre where you could meet
and take part in activities that interest you? Do you feel there
is a need for youth organizers?
65% claimed to have no difficulties. 35% confessed that they
encountered psychological obstacles. On the question of youth
centres, the negative replies came largely from developed coun¬
tries and the positive replies from developing countries. 65% of
those polled would like to have a place to meet. The presence of
organizers was only considered desirable by 33% of the young
people, especially those from developing countries, 61% con¬
sidered them unnecessary, 6% were not sure.
10. Work. What do you expect from your work? Is it an
obstacle to fulfilment? Are you working or unemployed? Did
you become unemployed before ever having a job?
Many did not reply to this question (which received 630 replies
in the 1,000 questionnaires received). 80% of those who
answered expected fulfilment and happiness from their jobs,
10% expected money, 9% hoped or wished to be able to help
others through their job, 1% expected nothing positive at all.
21 % thought that a job was a factor in fulfilment, 30% thought

Young people do not think that the world
illiteracy problem Is insoluble. Many of
them want to take part in public life
through doing some form of educational
work. Above, literacy session in a refugee
camp in El Salvador.
it could have a disturbing impact when it was unsuitable or did
not provide satisfaction, when the pace was too quick or when It
did not leave enough leisure time. The overwhelming majority felt
unable to answer this question today. As for the final point, 93%
said they were students or schoolchildren, 4% were at work, 3%
unemployed.
11. Relations with adults. When the authority of the family
disappears, what is left? Have the role and importance of the
family been reduced? What are the consequences for the
elderly?
Only 43% gave replies, most of them fairly short, to this ques¬
tion. 33% of those who answered thought that nothing was left
when family authority had disappeared; 26% believed that in¬
dividual liberty was left; 21% considered that respect and
sometimes friendship were left; 1 0% simply stated that authority
had disappeared, and 10% added that this was a good thing.
In addition, 62% considered that the role of the family had
been reduced, and 32% believed the opposite. The others were
undecided.
On the third point (answered in less than 40% of the question¬
naires returned), 78% believed that the consequences for the
elderly were serious (neglect, being put in a "home", distance,
material or moral difficulties), 10% thought it had no effect on
their situation, 5% thought it meant more freedom for them, 7%
gave irrelevant replies.
12. Socialproblems. Do you think these are adults' problems
or do you feel concerned yourself? If you do, which do you
think is the most important problem? Delinquency, drugs,
equality of the sexes, maladjusted children, young people
living in rural areas, housing, the elderly, human problems,
relations between the working class and the middle class.
Human problems were considered the most important (20%),
followed by delinquency (15%), housing (13%), equality between
the sexes (12%), maladjusted children (12%), drugs (12%), rela-
16

tions between the working class and the middle class (5%), and
young people living in rural areas (1%).
1 3. Scientific and technologicalprogress. What do you think
about the application of scientific and technological pro¬
gress in today's world?
No one believed that scientific progress was entirely positive.
15% were against any form of progress, 6% accused it of caus¬
ing all kinds of harm (war, the atomic bomb, pollution, unemploy¬
ment), 79% were in favour of progress, especially in medical
research; they were very sceptical about all the other applica¬
tions of science and technology.
14. Leisure activities. What are your favourite leisure ac¬
tivities? The arts, reading, cinema or television, sport. Do
you organize them alone or in a group?
Sport came first (57%), followed by reading, then cinema and
television. The arts, including music, came far behind.
43% practiced hobbies In groups, 40% alone or in a group,
depending on the activity, 17% preferred to be alone.
15. Fashion. Does it mean being up-to-date, "in the swim"?
Is it a form of progress?
51 % thought that fashion meant "being up-to-date". For 28%
it meant "being in the swim", and only 20% believed that it was
a form of progress. For some, following the fashion was a sign
of personality and freedom; for others, it was a form of slavery,
and a form of consumption like any other.
16. It is often said that young people have no ideas, only
aspirations? Is this true?
1 % were not sure. 1 1 % said that adults are right. On the other
hand, 88% declared that they had ideas, aspirations, and many
other things that adults lack, and that in many cases they even
had more ideas, sometimes amounting to genius, than adults.
But they felt that society, constructed by and for adults,
prevented them from voicing their ideas and from putting them
into effect.
According to the results of the Unesco
Courier survey, most young people prac¬
tice a sport, mainly in groups, during their
leisure time. Above, a cycle race in the
Federal Republic of Germany.
