Shaka
by Mazisi Kunene
IN the African world the family is an
all-inclusive social phenomenon
involving a large number of individuals
who may be linked by a common ancestry.
The ideals that are celebrated within such
a large family unit are those that emphasize
continuity, participatory activities and ful¬
filment through wider circles of relations.
The implication of these factors on the
nature of the literary idiom and form can¬
not be over-emphasized. They mean that
literature, as a social product, must be
celebratory and public, and above all focus
on group participation and performance.
Literature, if it is to be meaningful in such
a society, must utilize the oral language
and group action (drama, song, mime,
dance) to heighten its meaning.
Looking at Zulu literature in particular,
it is important also to emphasize that the
heroic poem or epic is integrally linked to
events as they happen in society. Its focus
is on the extent to which such events exem¬
plify the social ethic. The very process of
selecting what to celebrate is a serious one
which engages the poet's integrity and
intellectual perception. The poet in this
sense is viewed as a thinker, as the high
priest whose status is inviolable.
His poetic statement must incorporate
the highest social truths. He not only
reports events, but, after careful selection,
uses them to affirm the ideals of the society.
There is nothing deeply personal in his
praise for the hero. His statements of
approval or disapproval celebrate the per¬
manence of the social order. He is a per¬
former whose utterances must always be
directed at a public audience, a philoso¬
pher who must link the particular with the
universal, and a historian whose know¬
ledge of detail must be attested by a highly
attentive and critical audience.
What political factors led to the major
heroic period that brought about the
flowering of the Zulu heroic epic?
From about the middle of the seven¬
teenth century, the African peoples in
southern Africa went through a period of
extensive land crisis. This was due to pop¬
ulation growth which led to crowding in
that part of the continent, to the mounting
pressure arising from colonial wars and
slave raids by the Portuguese and the
Boers, and to the fact that the economic
life of the African people centred on ani¬
mal husbandry and agriculture. The impact



the Great
The legendary exploits of Shaka (1786-
1828), founder of the Zulu empire, gave
rise to a number ofepicpoems which rank
among the finest in the literature ofsouth¬
ern Africa and are still a source of inspi¬
ration to many African writers. In his dra¬
matic poem Shaka, which he dedicated
to "the Bantu martyrs of South Africa",
the philosopher-poet and former Presi¬
dent of Senegal, Leopold Sedar Senghor,
put these words into the mouth of the
famed warrior-chief:
"It is not hate to love one's people.
I say there is no peace under arms, v
no peace under oppression,
No brotherhood without equality. I
wanted all men to be brothers."
Above, Shaka portrayed by the Sene¬
galese artist Alpha Diallo.
of these factors was to destabilize the whole
region. It was a period during which many
national States emerged, each boasting an
heroic leadership by a particular individual
or family. One of these was the Zulu State.
At first it was a small State, often forced
to pay tribute to more powerful States such
as the Ndwandwe. At other times it was
part of a loose confederacy. Its decisive
period came with the emergence of Shaka
as its political leader. Through outstanding
military genius and astute political
leadership, he subdued and integrated
many once-powerful States within just over
a decade, from 1815 to 1828.
Shaka not only initiated unique styles
and methods of warfare, he also evolved
a type of leadership that sought to reinstate
the social law, which had been violated
by selfish leadership. This social law was,
according to Zulu thought, embodied in
the Sacred Codes of the Ancestors.
Shaka's leadership was patterned on the
idea of service in which the leader himself
took equal risks with the rest of the pop¬
ulation. One of the greatest doctrines that
characterized the Zulu State became that
of selflessness in rendering service to the
community. This was coupled with the
notion of merit as a criterion for leadership
at all levels.
An analysis of the impact and the influ¬
ence of the Shakan epic is inevitably an
analysis of the transformation of Zulu soci¬
ety and its affirmation of the Law of Self¬
lessness. While in other societies this may
be viewed in moral terms, in Zulu society,
influenced by Shaka's ideas, it became a
law. Punishment for disobedience of this
law ranged from ostracism by the com¬
munity to, in extreme cases, death.
It is natural that the Shakan heroic epic
should have celebrated these virtues. The
celebration was woven around a specific
series of events; it ceased to be a didactic
and moralistic statement. The poetic style
underwent a dramatic change to convey
a sense of urgency. A new technique
evolved that was deeply concerned with
projecting the social message. The very
selection of metaphors and symbols is tes¬
timony of a society concerned with high
achievements and high goals. Courage and
initiative were relevant not only to wartime
situations but to all social occasions.
Thus the first part of the Shakan heroic
epic is a cosmic address to all forces, real
and imaginary. The hero is depicted as
breaking through all obstacles. He is pos¬
sessed with the spirit of his forefathers,
symbolized in Ndaba. He is the will of the
Ancestral powers. He is ferocious in battle;
he has subdued nation after nation. He
has attained his fame, the poet says,
through his wisdom and his skill on the
battlefield.
Wild one! Restless power, son of Ndaba
You who were the whirlwind of the Mbe-
lebele brigade
Who raged among the vast villages ofmen
Until morning they tumbled down one
after another.
You whosefame spread effortlessly, great
son of Menzi!
Shaka the Invincible, who is not subdued
like water
Great battleaxe that flashed over others
by its sharpness
Shaka! I fear to call you by name
Because you were the ruler
Who counted multiple feats of battle
Whistler who responded like a lion
You prepared for battle in the thick of
the forest
You were the madman who was the spec¬
tacle in the eyes of men! ^
19

Descendants of the Nguni people, the
Zulus were given their name by their war¬
rior-king Shaka. In a famous book on
Shaka, the well-known author Thomas
Mofólo (1877-1948), of Lesotho, who
wrote in the Sotho language (belonging
to the Bantu linguistic group), recounts
thata soothsayer suggested to Shaka that
he should rename his clan. Looking up
to the stormy sky above him, Shaka cried
out " Zulu! Amazulu!" (The sky! The clan
of the sky!). Then he spoke to his men,
saying: "Today you have vanquished all
your enemies and this is why I have cho¬
sen for you a worthy name. " Left, a kraal,
or village, similar to those in which Shaka
and his contemporaries would have lived.
A kraal usually houses a familygroup and
consists of a number of huts arranged
in a circle around an enclosure for cattle.
In the elaborate poetic restatement and
dramatization of Shaka's life the numerous
episodes are carefully selected for their
national and public significance. They
serve not only as points of historical ref¬
erence but also as affirmations of com¬
mitment to public service. The leader has
acquired the right to leadership, not by
virtue of his birth, but through communally
approved social actions.
Throughout the epic there is no ref¬
erence to Shaka's personal appearance.
Instead, events assume a primary symbolic
significance; their meaning, scope and vari¬
ety are built up in a series of dramatic
statements. Whereas pre-Shakan poetry
had concentrated on the person of the
leader, the poetry of the Shakan period
ignores the leader and concentrates on the
event. Persons are only mentioned in order
to stress socially significant events.
It is unfortunate in a sense that
evaluation of this great heroic epic is today
based purely on recorded material. The
heroic epic of the Shakan era was never
meant to be read but to be verbalized,
acted, dramatized and heightened in
meaning through public performance. The
highly skilled use of ideophonic sounds,
for instance, is lost on the silent page. What
we read therefore is only a skeletal part
of the epic. Besides, the epic must be per¬
formed before an active and appreciative
audience; its "private" form cannot fully
convey its public meanings.
It should not be assumed that the Shakan
heroic epic is a piece of archaic literature.
Ever since its inception it has exercised
enormous influence on Zulu literature.
Virtually every African child in South
Africa is taught to recite one or more
excerpts from it, and by virtue of its highly
sophisticated style, it has influenced the
compactness of the Zulu poetic idiom and
guaranteed that performance of the heroic
poem shall not die. Many public gatherings
in modern South Africa feature perform¬
ances by poets who model their public mes
sages on the heroic epic of the Shakan
period.
Since the advent of Christianity, some
communities have taken to public dram¬
atizations of the achievements of Jesus
Christ, which are invariably modelled on
A military genius of the highest order,
Shaka created the powerful fighting
machine that would later offer stern
resistance to colonial occupation. He
divided the army into regiments based on
age groups and distinguished by special
markings on their shields and various
combinations of headdress and orna¬
mentation. His soldiers went barefoot,
"because sandals prevented them from
marching fast" (Mofólo); they were
equipped with large shields and armed
with shortstabbing assegais which meant
that they had to fight at close quarters.
the Shakan epic. This is not to say that
before the Shakan epic there was no pow¬
erful Zulu heroic poetry; there was. But
never had there been a heroic epic as elab¬
orate, as powerful, as idiomatically com¬
plex or as intrinsically geared to the public
event. The Shakan epic has permeated all
subsequent poetry to the present day. Its
impact has even been felt in poetry com¬
posed for children. All Zulu literature
since that time has specifically focussed on
the event rather than the individual.
Many Zulu poets whose works today are
in written form have taken the great heroic
verses of the Shakan period as their model.
The influence of these verses on the work
of Vilakazi, the outstanding modern Zulu
poet, is particularly evident in his suc¬
cessful volume Amal'ezulu. My own epic,
Emperor Shaka the Great, was deeply influ¬
enced by the idiom and style of the Shakan
epic. Indeed, I consider Magolwane and
Mshongweni, the great Zulu poets of the
Shakan era, as my true masters. The com¬
bination of the Shakan heroic idiom with
the discipline of converting oral literature
into written form has created a new and
original challenge to a type of poetry that
had become precise and technically cor¬
rect, but dead.
-X^* &$
MAZISI KUNENE, of South Africa, is a pro¬
fessor in the Department of Linguistics at the
University of California Los Angeles (UCLA)
where he teaches African literature and African
languages. He has written several volumes of
poetry in his mother tongue, Zulu, many of which
remain unpublished owing to the situation in
his country. His published works include the epic
poem Emperor Shaka the Great (1979) and two
anthologies, Zulu Poems and Ancestors and
the Sacred Mountain (1980). He was for many
years an African National Congress repre¬
sentative in Europe and the Americas.
20
