The forgotten resistance
The story of resistance to Hitler within Nazi Germany has been
largely forgotten. For most people internal German resistance
was limited to the unsuccessful bomb plot of 20 July 1944. Yet
by 1937 opposition to Hitler was beginning to build up even
among those who had at first supported him. Among the first
resisters were such men as Carl Goerdeler, the mayor of Leipzig,
who broke with the Nazis in 1936 over their anti-semitism, and
Ulrich von Hassell, former German ambassador in Rome whp left
the diplomatic service early In 1938.
As William Shirer writes in his history of Nazi Germany, The
Rise and Fall of the Third Reich:
"There were others, lesser known and mostly younger, who
had opposed the Nazis from the beginning and who gradually
came together to form various resistance circles. One of the
leading intellects of one group was Ewald von Kleist, a
gentleman farmer and a descendant of the greatpoet. He worked
closely with Ernst Niekisch, a former Social Democrat and editor
of Widerstand (Resistance), and with Fabian von Schlabrendorff,
a young lawyer (...) There were former trade-union leaders such
as Julius Leber, Jakob Kaiser and Wilhelm Leuschner. Two
Gestapo officials, Artur Nebe, the head of the criminalpolice, and
Bernd Gisevius, a young career police officer, became valuable
aides as the conspiracies developed (...)"
Other well known opponents of the Nazi regime included
Count Helmuth von Moltke, who later formed the "Kreisau Cir¬
cle" resistance group, Count Albrecht Bernstorff, Freiherr Karl
Ludwig von Guttenberg, editor of a Catholic monthly, and the
eminent Protestant clergyman Pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer.
The first important military recruit to the resistance was no less
a person than the Chief of the Army General Staff, General Lud¬
wig Beck. On 18 August 1938, unable to persuade Hitler to give
up his plans for action against Czechoslovakia, which he believ
ed would lead to a general war in Europe, he resigned as Chief
of the General Staff but continued to work with the resistance.
Other high-ranking officers were won over, including Genera!
Erwin von Witzleben, commander of the Berlin military district,
General Franz Haider, who had replaced Beck as Chief of Staff,
General Count Erich von Brockdorff-Ahlefeld, commander of the
Potsdam garrison, and General Erich Hoepner, commander of
an armoured division. The conspirators planned to seize Hitler as
soon as he gave the final order to attack Czechoslovakia. The
plot collapsed when news came through of the signing of the
Munich agreement on 29 September.
The resisters did not give up. By 1941 many more top German
officers, among them notably General Henning von Tresckow,
had become disillusioned with Hitler. Plans were made to arrest
Hitler but these were thwarted by the Fuehrer's tight security ar¬
rangements. Assassination seemed to offer the only solution.
In 1943, von Tresckow organized a number of assassination
attempts. On 13 March, a bomb disguised as two bottles of
brandy was placed on the aircraft taking Hitler back to Germany
from a conference in Smolensk, but the detonator failed to fire.
Following this setback, Colonel Freiherr von Gersdorff
courageously volunteered to undertake a suicide mission. With
two bombs with ten-minute fuses concealed in his greatcoat he
went to a Heroes Memorial Ceremony held on 21 March attended
by Hitler, Goering and Himmler. His plan was to stay as close to
Hitler as possible and to blow up both the Fuehrer and himself.
Hitler was scheduled to spend half an hour at the ceremony, but
he left after only eight minutes. A number of other suicide bomb
attempts were made later but all of them were thwarted, in¬
cluding a first attempt, on 26 December 1943, by Klaus Philip
Schenk, Count von Stauffenberg.
16

Losses
in World War II
Von Stauffenberg'was to be the hero of the famous, and almost
successful, bomb plot of July 1 944. Although by then the war was
clearly lost, the plotters were inspired to go ahead with this last
desperate attempt by a stirring message from General von
Tresckow:
"We must prove to the world and to future generations that the
men of the German Resistance Movement dared to take the
decisive step and to hazard their lives upon it. Compared with
this objective, nothing else matters. "
As all the world now knows, the attempt failed by a
hairsbreadth. Hitler's riposte was swift and devastating. Some
7,000 arrests were made and 4,980 victims met horrific deaths
to slake the Fuehrer's thirst for vengeance.
Many others committed suicide rather than face the horrors of
trial and execution by the "People's Court". Among them was
General Henning von Tresckow. The day after the failure of the
bomb plot he drove away from his headquarters on the Eastern
front and blew himself up with a hand grenade. His last words to
his aides constitute a fitting epitaph to all those Germans who
died resisting the inhuman Nazi machine:
"Now they will fall upon us and cover us with abuse. But I am
convinced, now as much as ever, that we have done the right
thing. I believe Hitler to be the arch-enemy, not only of Germany,
but indeed of the entire world. In a few hours time I shall stand
before God and answer for both my actions and the things I
neglected to do. I think I can with a clear conscience stand by all
I have done in the battle against Hitler. A man's moral worth is
established only at the point where he is prepared to give his life
for his convictions. "
"The work of a thousand years is nothing but rubble".
This was how Carl Goerdeler described the bombed areas of
western Germany in a letter to Field-Marshal von Kluge in July
1943 in which the former mayor of Leipzig begged the Field-
Marshal to join the German resistance in its efforts to eliminate
Hitler. Photos show the ruins of the Reichstag building, Berlin
(below), devastated Dresden (far left) and Hamburg (centre).
