The Gulf States
A delicate balance
by Elisabeth Longuenesse THE demographic situation in the
Gulf States (the six members of the
Gulf Co-operation Council Saudi
Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain, United
Arab Emirates, Oman) is unique: in 1980,
of a total population of some thirteen mil¬
lion, it was estimated that over four million
were foreigners, while of a total working
population of some four million three
hundred thousand, about two million five
hundred thousand were foreign workers.
Whereas in Saudi Arabia, which is the
largest of the Gulf States and whose pop¬
ulation constitutes two thirds of the total,
non-Saudi workers accounted for less than
50 per cent of the total working population
in 1980, the proportion of foreigners in the
small Gulf Emirates has reached such lev¬
els that social and cultural imbalances are
getting out of hand. In Qatar 85 per cent
and in the United Arab Emirates 90 per
cent of workers are foreign and three-quar-
26

Philippine workers on a construction site
in Riyadh, the capital of Saudi Arabia.
ters of the total population are non-citi¬
zens. In Kuwait over 75 per cent of the
workers and nearly 60 per cent of the pop¬
ulation are non-Kuwaiti.
The situation in Oman and Bahrain
seems to be better balanced. This is
because Oman still has a large rural pop¬
ulation, whilst there has been a relative
decline in immigration to Bahrain, al¬
though this trend is now being reversed.
Since the policy of importing labour
from abroad is of relatively recent origin,
most of these workers are unaccompanied
men and this strong male predominance
has given rise to a very serious population
imbalance. Only in Kuwait and Bahrain,
where immigration has a longer history,
has a better balance been achieved thanks
to the gradual arrival of families and the
subsequent creation of families on the spot.
The immigrants can be divided into three
main cultural groups: the Europeans, who
form a privileged minority and whom we
mention only for the record, the Arabs,
still by far the most numerous, and the
Asians, who have been constantly growing
in number since the mid-1970s.
Unlike immigrant workers in Western
Europe, those in the Gulf States are to
be found in all branches of activity and
at all levels of skill. This is true for all
nationalities, although the pattern of qual¬
ifications is not the same for all of them.
The employment of indigenous workers is
marginal in virtually all sectors except the
administration.
The conditions under which immigration
takes place vary considerably. Strictly
speaking, the prospective immigrant must
have an employment contract before an
entry visa can be granted, unless he man¬
ages to get a job while visiting relations.
There is, however, a lot of illegal immi¬
gration and the status of illegal immigrants
is very precarious. They are at the mercy
of the expulsion measures which the
authorities apply from time to time, but
since they provide a margin of flexibility
for the labour market they are usually tol¬
erated in practice. Owing to the absence "
of local manpower, to the obligation for
a foreigner to have a work permit before
entry, to the fact that foreigners cannot
easily change jobs, and to the prohibition
on foreigners remaining in the country if
they become unemployed, the labour mar¬
ket is extremely rigid.
Apart from illegal immigration there is
another practice which helps to ensure a
supply of marginal, day-to-day manpower.
This consists of the importation of workers ,
quite legally, by someone who is himself
the owner of one or more small businesses.
If he succeeds in obtaining entry visas for
workers in excess of his own needs, he
either throws them on the labour market
to fend for themselves or hires them out
to other employers on a daily basis, retain¬
ing a percentage of their wages for himself.
Foreign workers have no means of
organizing to defend their rights. Trade
unions are forbidden except in Kuwait and
Bahrain where foreigners have the right
to join a union after five years with the
same employer but are not allowed to take
part in elections. So the worker has no
recourse against any possible exploitation,
particularly since in many instances he will
have incurred heavy debts to gain entry
into the country in the first place. Even
if he obtains regular employment it may
be several months before he can save any
money to send to his family.
The vast majority of immigrants remain
on the fringe of society, housed, at worst,
under canvas on the outskirts of towns and,
at best, in collective apartments. More
often they live crowded into dilapidated
UA
0.
©
This group of four teachers in the court¬
yard ofa SaudiArabian school comprises
an Egyptian, a Jordanian, a Palestinian
and a Syrian.
houses in old quarters that have been aban¬
doned by the indigenous inhabitants.
Nearly a third of foreigners resident in
Kuwait were born there, but only 16 per
cent have been living there for more than
ten years, since the majority of the second
generation consists of youngsters less than
ten years old. Already in 1975, 126,500
of the 234,000 children attending school
in Kuwait were foreign. Nevertheless, the
existence of a core, albeit still small, of
older, well-established immigrants has had
an integrating influence on the newer
arrivals.
Life is certainly easier for the worker
who is accompanied by his family, but he
is liable to be more severely affected by
any discrimination to which he may be
subjected. Certainly, he enjoys some of
the advantages of an oil-rich society such
as free medical care and free schooling for
his children (provided that they were born
in Kuwait or their parents have been living
there since 1970 and, above all, that they
don't fall behind in their studies). How¬
ever, scarcity of services and the priority
given to Kuwaiti citizens often oblige the
foreign worker to have recourse to the
private sector. In many cases he is saddled
with an exorbitant rent while access to
subsidized housing or house ownership on
easy terms and grants and allowances of
various kinds are reserved to citizens who
also receive higher wages for similar work.
These frustrations contribute to the
building up of a climate of tension which
may develop into mutual hostility. Asian
immigrants seem to provoke most of the
negative reactions, at least in the press
which blames them for the growth in the
crime rate (not supported by the facts) or
which expresses fear of loss of cultural
identity should they become numerically
predominant. It is true that if immigration
from Asia continues, even at a lower rate,
the question of integration will eventually
be posed in terms of recognizing national
"minorities" that will have become major¬
ities.
ELISABETH LONGUENESSE, French socio¬
logist, is a research assistant at the Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, in
France. She worked for several years at the
Centre for Study and Research on the Contem¬
porary Middle East, at Beirut, Lebanon.
27
