Africa's
generation gap
by Boubakar Ly
ONE of the salient characteristics of
African society, as of the vast
majority of Third World societies,
is its rate of demographic growth. Accor¬
ding to some estimates, the population of
Africa may double between now and the
end of the century. As a result of this
demographic trend this population is very
young.
The predominance of young people both
in the rural areas and in the popular districts
of the big cities raises the problem of their
integration into society. Young people can-
Many young Senegalese are members of
the Traditional M'Botai mutual aid
associations which take a wide range of
initiatives in social, economic and
cultural life. M'Botai associations are
groups of friends united by age, affinity,
ethnic group, interest in a chosen activi¬
ty, or simply the pleasure of being
together. They flourish both in the towns
and in rural areas where they promote
solidarity at times of birth, marriage and
death and help finance festivals and the
management of collective granaries.
Below, an M'Botai group meets fora work
session.
not be successfully integrated into society
unless the institutions concerning them are
also well integrated, or unless they par¬
ticipate in a society which functions suc¬
cessfully as a whole. This is not the case in
Africa, where society is facing a general
crisis, especially in its relations with young
people.
Most of the migrants who pour into the
towns and cities from the countryside are,
as in most Third World countries, young
people seeking jobs in mines, on plantations
and elsewhere.
In the countries of the Sahel, this
phenomenon began in the colonial period
when these, countries were integrated into
the international economic system; it has
become more widespread because . of
drought and other climatic factors. In the
past migrations were temporary; today
migrants are everywhere tending to settle
down permanently. In addition, many
young people are migrating to the in¬
dustrialized countries of the West. The
result is that the rural areas are becoming
depopulated; those who live there tend in¬
creasingly to be adult women, children and
the elderly.
Young people seem to feel condemned to
an inevitable fate which, when analysed,
appears to be the result of a number of fac
tors, the most important of which are
economic, social and cultural.
Among the economic causes is the system
of land-ownership which, in spite of the
conditions specific to Africa, make for
social inequality, the irregularity of farm
yields as a result of climatic conditions and
technological backwardness, and the
regrouping of industries in urban centres.
The social causes are due to a variety of
factors: the inequality of individual in¬
comes between rural and urban areas; the
centralization of essential social and
(especially) political activities; the limited
extent to which young people participate in
the organization and execution of local ac¬
tivities; the weight of administrative and
supervisory structures in the rural areas;
and the inadequacy of infrastructures:
roads, electricity, water, transport,
hospitals, schools, leisure and information
facilities all that can make village life self-
28

sufficient and counteract the attraction of
city life.
A cultural factor worth noting is the
burden of community-based customs and
traditional values which impose constraints
on the individual and imply constant
reference to the group. Migration to the
towns is sometimes felt to be a liberation,
even though it is prompted by material
conditions.
Young people who have been through the
educational system are particularly sensitive
to this. They form a large proportion of the
migrant masses since it is more difficult for
them than the rest to make a place for
themselves in rural society; their education
turns them into misfits in their own
environment.
For African schools are usually incapable
of integrating young people into society. In
view of the widely admitted fact that the
modern school system inherited from col-
onialization has failed, reforms have been
widely attempted. However, it must be ad¬
mitted that the problems remain.
One of these problems is the small
number of children in school. In spite of big
efforts and often-repeated declarations of
principle, many children are still excluded
from any form of schooling. In some cases,
the percentage of children in school is even
falling. Illiteracy is high both among young
people and adults, in spite of the organiza¬
tion of literacy campaigns in national
languages.
Generally speaking, the percentage of
children in school is less high in rural areas
than in the towns and cities. There are not
so many schools in the countryside, and
they are often so few and far between that
parents prefer to keep children, especially
their daughters, at home. If the number of
schools in urban areas is also limited in rela¬
tion to the very high level of demand, the
Above, a group of young Malians cross
the Niger with cattle from their village. In
Mali, where more than half the population
is between the age of 20 and 25, young
villagers of the same age group belong to
a "Ton", a traditional association whose
members perform farming and other
tasks of importance to the community as
a whole. "Ton-ci", the culture based on
the association, teaches young people
respect for the group, solidarity and
mutual aid, and prepares them for life in
the community.

situation is nevertheless better than in rural
areas.
In both cases, the school system rejects
numbers of young people and produces
drop-outs. Very few of those who start
school reach the end of their1 course,
especially in the rural areas where those who
go beyond the elementary stage are rare.
Furthermore, the school is still cut off
from its true cultural environment so that it
perpetuates among young people a sense of
alienation, aggravated by the fact that the
socialization process, especially carried out
by the family, takes place elsewhere.
Schools place young people in an environ¬
ment characterized by intellectuality,
abstraction and anonymity, as opposed to
the personalization, individuality and affec-
tivity of the family. The need to use a
language other than the mother tongue
sometimes makes the transition from fami¬
ly to school a harrowing experience involv¬
ing traumas which result in failure at
school. This duality of language and
cultural environment makes it difficult, and
sometimes impossible, for the former to ex¬
press the latter, and this ambiguity is
reflected in school programmes, textbooks,
and texts which are incapable of describing
in a foreign language the reality of ex¬
perience within a unique culture. In this
situation, the children, who understand
neither the languages nor the cultural
models vehicled by them, easily fall victim
to failure. In addition, the teaching pro¬
grammes take no account of the distinctive
features of the school's historical,
geographical or social environment.
Nor does the school provide professional
training, and the institutions established for
this purpose are inadequate and ill-fitted to
the needs of the different productive sec
tors. Young people find it difficult to in¬
tegrate themselves into economic systems
which do not function to increase a coun¬
try's potential and wealth; the activities of
these systems are determined by the roles,
inherited from colonial times, which have
devolved upon them in the international
division of labour. In addition to the effects
of crises, this situation essentially generates
underemployment and unemployment, two
Important facts of life for young Africans.
Rural populations which are under¬
employed because of the seasonal nature of
their work are forced to leave the coun¬
tryside. Young people in urban areas face
the problem of unemployment which af¬
fects both the illiterate and those who have
received an education, whatever its level.
But a new phenomenon, which more than
any other reveals the stagnation of the
employment situation, has appeared in
African societies: the unemployment of
those who have earned degrees in higher
education.
In the Republic of Niger, the Samaria
(from the Hausa word meaning youth; are
groups ofyoung people which were tradi¬
tionally organized in the villages under a
Sarkin Samari ("youth leader") to per¬
form tasks delegated to them by the chief.
Today the Samaria Is the name of Niger's
national youth movement whose
members are taking part in many develop¬
ment projects including reforestation,
measures to stop desert encroachment
and the construction of classrooms and
schools. Left, the Samaria on-site during
the building of a school.
The centuries-old Naam tradition in
Burkina-Faso (formerly Upper Volta) was
based on equality and shared labour for
the benefit of all members of the com¬
munity. Today the Naam movement is
undergoing a revival, serving both as a
structure for training and giving young
people greater responsibilities and as a
communal production organization deep¬
ly rooted in the village social and cultural
system. Since 1966 over a thousand
Naam groups have been formed, usually
consisting of young men and women
from the same village or group of
districts. Members of the groups par¬
ticipate In the development of their com¬
munity by cultivating the land, construc¬
ting wells and small dams and in many
other ways. Right, in the province of
Yatenga, a Naam group digs a pond.
Left, young and old work shoulder to
shoulder, busily tilling the soil in one of
Tanzania's communal Ujamaa villages
(see page 22).
30

The unemployment problem is
qualitative as well as quantitative, for the
quality of the jobs available to young peo¬
ple has a direct impact on their participation
in the life of the society in which they live.
Young villagers work in such difficult con¬
ditions that they are forced to swell the
ranks of the floating and unproductive ur¬
ban masses in the informal sector, living on
their wits and in many cases turning to
delinquency.
Young workers of both sexes doing jobs
which require no qualifications are involved
in productive work which has little meaning
for them. Within the working class they
form a mass seeking survival at all cost's;
they are excluded from the power to take
decisions which is in the hands of a foreign
minority and work in accordance with
norms which they have not chosen, for ob¬
jectives which often run counter to the in¬
terests of development and are misapplied
to the profit of a few.
Young workers and supervisory staff in
the administrative and commercial sector
also feel frustrated because of their exclu¬
sion from any form of participation and
decision-making. They are profoundly
discouraged and in time their feeling of
uselessness overflows beyond their work
situation. In administrative work their reac¬
tion takes the form of laxity and lack of
civic spirit and leads to all kinds of social
deviations.
This social crisis is accompanied by a
crisis in the family. Previously integrated
into a wider structure of relationships of a
patriarchal nature, the family today is ten¬
ding to become a nuclear family, especially
in the towns and cities. This has encouraged
the development of individualism. The
gradual disappearance of the patriarchal
system is creating authority problems in the
family and in society at large, where it
formerly cemented a wide range of social
relationships. Incomprehension prevails
between young people and adults, who
judge each other in terms of different socio-
historical contexts and value systems. All
the same, these conflicts are still latent, for
respect for age and the elders is still an im¬
portant fact of African life and psychology.
The adoption by young people of foreign
values and libertarian principles is not
leading to the kind of far-reaching criticism
of the social and cultural order that can be
seen elsewhere.
Lack of participation by young people is
accentuated by the lack of an African na¬
tional consciousness, that is, of a feeling of
identification with and integration in socie¬
ty as a whole. Its absence explains among
other things why young Africans do not
feel concerned by mobilization for
development.
The problem of youth in Africa hinges on
the question of participation. What can be
done to make young people aware of their
responsibilities and mobilize them?
Generally speaking, development
strategies must be redirected and aim at a
greater independence from the interna¬
tional economic system and a reduction of
social inequalities. A rural development
policy must be promoted in order to
transform the living conditions of rural
populations. Action must be taken on the
job market and employment structures.
Grass-roots community participation in
' development plans must be encouraged and
production structures transformed with a
view to greater participation of workers in
conception and decision-making processes.
Institutions must be established to promote
a co-operative approach to the organization
of production, human settlements (which
must be rethought both in urban and rural
areas), health, education and leisure.
For young people, education must be ex¬
tended and educational systems be reform¬
ed so that they are more deeply rooted in the
real situation in each country, so that more
attention is paid to environmental ques¬
tions, and so that these systems are more ef¬
fectively dovetailed into the structures of
production and employment. Less selective
educational methods should be introduced,
giving more responsibility to young people.
The encouragement of responsible attitudes
is a process that must take place at all levels
of society: young people should be en¬
couraged to assume responsibility for their
own organizations and define the objectives
of these organizations within the global
development strategy of each society.
Greater efforts must be made to encourage
them to feel that they belong to the com¬
munity, and their creativity, their spirit of
initiative and their critical sense must be
developed.
BOUBAKAR LY, Senegalese educator, Is lec¬
turer in sociology at the University of Dakar.
He is the author of many sociological studies
on A frican institutions. The present article has
been extracted from a paper presented to an
international symposium on "Youth, Popula¬
tion and Development in the Third World"
organized by the United Nations in Bucharest
in June 1984.
