A'modern' poet?
by Jean Gaudon
THE notion of "modernity" has lost
much of its usefulness as a critical
tool and should perhaps be dis¬
carded altogether on the grounds that it has
now come to serve merely as a prop for
misguided literary dogmatism or as a means
of disguising intractable difficulties of
reasoning. Baudelaire, who set himself up
as the, champion of modernity, based his
attitude on a paradox. For him modernity
involved the cultivation of a "transitory and
fleeting element" in order to avoid lapsing
into the "emptiness of abstract and indefin¬
able beauty". In electing to define what he
meant by modernity in an essay he wrote on
a water-colourist, Constantin Guys, who
dealt with transitory and modish objects,
Baudelaire adopted a thematic standpoint
or, to use an old-fashioned term, the stand¬
point of the subject-matter.
I doubt whether this approach is in any
way adequate for the study of Victor Hugo.
From a very early stage, in his theoretical
writings, he had already gone beyond the
terms of that dilemma by staying away from
thematic considerations. I do not know
whether he had pondered over the famous
line by André Chenier: "Sur des pensers
nouveaux faisons des vers antiques" (Let us
write poetry in the old style, but let the
thoughts be new) , which implied that poet¬
ry is nothing but an ornament, like icing on
a cake. My guess is that he had and that he
may have been thinking about this distinc¬
tion, which for him was devoid of meaning,
when, in 1833, in an article published in the
magazine L'Europe Littéraire, he declared:
"Une idée n'a jamais qu'une forme, qui lui
est propre" (An idea never has more than
one specific form), before going on to say:
"Aussi tout art qui veut vivre doit-il se poser
à lui-même les questions deforme, de langue
et de style, dans toutes les circonstances"
(Thus, any art that is intent on survival has
to ask itself about questions of form, lan¬
guage and style, whatever the circum¬
stances).
The right to be able to leave nothing
unsaid, in verse and prose alike, is, in
Hugo's view, the only genuine manifesta¬
tion of modernity and is inseparable from
considerations of form. The poet can be¬
long to his age only by improving the tool at
his disposal, that is, the language of the
nineteenth century, which Hugo described
as being "forgée pour tous les accidents de la
pensée" (forged to deal with all the irregu¬
larities of thought) and which he came close
to regarding as being forged by those same
irregularities for, as he said, ideas are the
"vraies et souveraines faiseuses de langues"
(the real and supreme coiners of language).
The poet's venture is a philosophical, ling¬
uistic and prosodie one whose different
parts are all closely intertwined.
The link between literary revolution and
political revolution which Hugo established
as early as 1830 cannot be explained away
by considerations of political opportunity,
and his poem Réponse à un Acte d'Accusa¬
tion (Answer to an Indictment), in Contem¬
plations, has to be taken literally. When
Hugo wrote: "Je déclarai les mots égaux,
libres, majeurs" (I decreed that all words
were equal, free and adult), he broke with
the tradition whereby poetic language was
considered as being a specialized form of
language among various other technical
languages. Poetry was, for him, as free and
sovereign as the people themselves. It was
no longer subject to ancient writ or to cus¬
tomary law and was free to demand its share
of the cultural heritage and at the same time
to seize the opportunities created by
chance. Thus the poet again became "that
man by whom the offence cometh". This
was an intolerable provocation. At the
same time as the Word took on a sacred
character the myth of the poet as seer is
central to Hugo's system poetry seemed
to lose its sacred aura.
This deconsecration of poetry, which is
indissociable from Hugo's political atti¬
tude, is particularly noticeable in the
broadening of his vocabulary which is often
chosen for its scandal value. It is a systema¬
tic affront to good. taste. By using the lan¬
guage of the gambling den, the brothel and
the gutter as a source of metaphors with
which to stigmatize Napoleon III and his
henchmen, Hugo called upon the entire
contemporary scene, summoned all the
facets of reality, and merged action and
dreams in a single cluster. His deliberate
stylistic incongruities enabled him to speak
in scandalous terms of what he felt to be
scandalous. The poetry of Châtiments has
the revolutionary force of something that is
utterly strange and unexpected and is all the
more effective in that the traditional
academic approach to political satire had


Planet-Eye, a smudged black Ink and pen¬
cil drawing by Victor Hugo. It evokes these
lines from Les Mages, a poem Hugo wrote
around 1854, when he produced the
drawing:
"The eye of the star In the light,
And the eye of the monster In the nightI"
/S
set artificial lexical limitations to what could
be expressed.
Plunging into the contemporary fray is no
more a poetic act than any other. It meant
something to Hugo only in so far as it
formed part of a scheme of things that trans¬
cended it in every respect and permitted the
inclusion of the whole of mankind's past as
well as its relationship with elemental forces
and its dreams for the future. The epic, as a
literary form in which the literal and figura¬
tive meanings are traditionally combined,
where history becomes myth and myth his¬
tory, is the realization of that aim. It is
consistent with the desire to achieve the
magnum opus that is all-encompassing and
with realization of its negative corollary, the
impossibility of ever achieving such poetry.
La Légende des Siècles, Dieu, and La Fin de
Satan, three poems which Hugo left un¬
finished and in which the formal discipline
of the poetic line is constantly challenged by
the temptation to explore the potentialities
of informal language, can be regarded as
the marks not so much of failure as of a
symbolic and unconscious decision not to
complete them.
In the Réponse à un Acte d'Accusation, a
revolutionary poet leaps on to the "borne
d'Aristote" to harangue the crowd. (Here
the word "borne" has two meanings: a stone
used as a fender to protect the base of a wall
or a gateway from being damaged by the
wheels of carriages; and, a boundary stone.
The allusion is to the revolutionary poet
Camille Desmoulins who, on 12 July 1789
climbed on a "borne" in the first sense
S
©


The Spirit of the Storm before Gilliatt. This
pen and brown Ink drawing by Victor
Hugo, with a caption in his own hand,
appears in the manuscript ofhis novel Les
address the people). I do not know
whether Hugo had studied Aristotle's Rhe¬
toric, but it is not necessary to have first¬
hand knowledge of that work to realize that
Aristotelian doctrine is based entirely on a
quantitative system. The orator's discourse,
and to a greater degree that of the poet,
differ from ordinary discourse in that they
contain what might be termed "guarded
transgressions of language" which can be
quantified. In the case of Victor Hugo, the
fact that he felt bound to leave nothing
unsaid was scarcely compatible with such
constraints and limitations. The link he
established between "form" and "sub¬
stance" entailed evolving a new rhetorical
system that made it possible to liberalize
verbal transgression rather than altering or
bending the body of doctrine to which
French neo-classical poetry conformed.
From as early as 1834, in his references to
Mirabeau, Hugo had outlined a theory of
poetic licence which had nothing in com¬
mon with Boileau's "beau désordre" (fine
disorder). Aristotle was caught out at his
own game, as it were, since it was for the
sake of mimesis that Hugo disregarded the
traditional rhetorical precepts: "Without it
being our wish, in the words we have just
written to describe this man's (Mirabeau's)
Travailleurs de la Mer (1866) and evokes
an incident In it. The novel's title was origi¬
nally Intended to be Gilliatt le Marin ("Gil¬
liatt the Sailor"), from the name ofIts hero.
extraordinary eloquence, we have depicted
him by the very disorder of our images."
The use of the word "images" is impor¬
tant in that it lays emphasis on one of the
keys to the poetic revolution, and it is rather
significant that it should have occurred in a
text in prose describing its own creative
process. The image is not just one more
stylistic device which, in the view of the
Aristotelians, should be handled with mod¬
eration; it is rather the chosen weapon of
poetry, whether it be in a prose work like
Les Misérables or in a collection of verse
like Les Contemplations. Hugo's rhetoric,
however, cannot be reduced to an emphasis
put on metaphors. Its reliance on tropes of
similarity (comparison, metaphor, symbol,
etc.), which aim at producing a unified vi¬
sion of the universe, verbally translated in
closed, finite forms, is complemented and
sometimes contradicted by an even stronger
tendency to use figures of contiguity, which
have the opposite effect of creating an im¬
pression of infinitude and of opening up the
sentence. His favourite figure is accumula¬
tion (as opposed to enumeration, which
implies the existence of a closed series, like
the seasons or the Olympian gods). The
"entassement" (piling up) that makes up the
"mur des siècles" (wall of the centuries), as

well as the more abstract concept of infinite
progression towards the absolute are stylis¬
tically expressed by long, distended, unba¬
lanced sentences which shatter the normal
syntactical patterns.
From the standpoint of a mimesis of infi¬
nite movement towards an unattainable
truth, the distinction made between verse
and prose has little meaning, firstly because
the prose may be poetic, but also because
the quality of the poetry may no longer be
attached to a particular kind of diction.
Although there is no lack of "beautiful"
lines in Hugo's poetic work, for he was the
master of the striking opening, the un¬
forgettable ending and of alliterative and
rhythmic skills, he seldom set out to achieve
maximum "poeticity". Booz Endormi, his
perfect poem, is atypical in this respect.
Flatness of expression is neither an in¬
advertence nor a sign of inability, but it is
one of the key features of his poetic
strategy. For Hugo, like Baudelaire, whom
critics picture, without reason, as the cham¬
pion of "pure poetry", the poetic discourse
is neither an unbroken song nor the juxta¬
position of a series of precious gems. It is
more in the nature of a trajectory consisting
of alternating highs and lows, variations in
the range of syntax and rhythm, and differ¬
ences in levels of intensity. Verse is there¬
fore not a pertinent unity but a vector con¬
veying the poetic current and relating to the
entire network to which it belongs.
Can it be said that Hugo's rhetoric goes
hand in hand, "involuntarily", with a logical
system that is also anti-Aristotelian? It
might be useful, in this respect, to examine
the role played in the poetic process by what
is known as antithesis. Hugo's obsession
with antithesis has been exposed to ridicule
without it having been realized that many
contrasting terms were not traditional anti¬
theses, contrasting, separating or classify¬
ing opposite notions, but disguised or
straightforward oxymorons. In other words
they are figures of speech whose function it
is to combine or merge into one another
ideas or objects that logic, or even nature,
keep separate. An example of this can be
seen in the line "Ténèbres et rayons affir¬
ment à la fois..." (Darkness and beams of
light assert at the same time...), from the
poem Voyage de Nuit, in Contemplations.
The phrase "at the same time" is perhaps
the key to a poetics that is intent on describ¬
ing the "irregularities" of thought. By up¬
setting the system governing the polariza¬
tion of ideas that would culminate in an
antithetical, Manichaean universe it makes
it possible to launch a head-on attack on the
principle of contradiction by introducing a
logical and chronological simultaneity.
Hugo is a difficult writer. A model pupil
turned virtuoso, he is also a complex and
disconcerting poet who often strays from
the habits of conventional Western think¬
ing. Even though certain individual features
of his work can be identified with recogniz¬
able aspects of the French cultural tradi¬
tion, his approach can still be said to be
revolutionary, because it is completely
coherent, with a consistency that is really
his own.
In A Celle qui est Restée en France, the
last poem in Contemplations, Hugo wrote:

"Deviens le grand nil fixe ouvert sur le
grand Tout" (Become the great unwin-'
king eye fixed on the great Whole).
Underlying this call for visionary poetry
we seem to recognize a call for the invention
of a new rhetorical order. The "Whole",
which is situated both within historical
time and beyond it, imposes a poetics of
the trajectory rather than of the object.
The act of creation becomes a means of
describing the movement towards an
"au-delà", a "beyond", that is destined to
- remain forever devoid of positive sub¬
stance. I see no objection to this being
called "modernity". Dante and Shake¬
speare are also modern. All things consid¬
ered, such a definition of modernity would
help us describe the literary phenomenon
more effectively than the frills and floun¬
ces of Constantin Guys. It would also
enable us to discover Victor Hugo and to
situate him in his true place, the "région
des égaux" (the region of equals), as he
describes it in his great book William
Shakespeare.
JEAN GAUDON, French critic and novelist, has
taught French literature at the universities of
Manchester, London, Yale and Paris. He has
published many studies on Victor Hugo and the
19th century including, Victor Hugo et le Théâtre
(1955, re-issued 1985), and Victor Hugo et le
Temps de la Contemplation (1969, re-issued
1985). He has also written several novels and
narratives including, L'Embarras Incertain, ou le
Hollandais (1976), Une Passion en Bavière
(1980) and D Comme Descartes (1979).
Drawing by Victor Hugo entitled "La Légende des Siècles"
(1860). The first edition of the collection of Hugo's poems
bearing this title appeared In 1859.
r
j
