The life and times of
by Evelyn Blewer
1802. Victor-Marie Hugo, third son of
Leopold-Sigisbert Hugo, a senior officer in the
French army, and Sophie Trébuchet, was
born at Besançon on 26 February. His two
elder brothers, Abel and Eugène, were aged
four and two respectively.
1803-1814. Spent his childhood in Paris,
apart from short periods on the isle of Elba and
in Naples and Madrid, where his father had
been posted. Started school in the summer of
1804. In 1809, became the pupil of de La
Rivière, a defrocked priest. In 1811, during a
nine-month stay in Madrid, was a boarder at
the "College of the Nobles" (San Antonio).
During this period the already strained rela¬
tions between his parents grew considerably
© The house In which Victor Hugo was born,
§ in Besançon, capital of the Franche-Comté
Ê region, eastern France.
worse and ultimately led to a judicial separ¬
ation.
1815. Hugo was sent to live in a boarding
house. Began to write his Cahier de Vers
Français (Notebook of French Verse).
1816. Continued to live in the same boarding
house, while studying at the Lycée Louis-le-
Grand. Tried his hand at translating Virgil's
poetry and completed Irtamène, a tragedy in
five acts.
1817. At the age of fifteen, entered a poem in
the French Academy's competition on the
"pleasure derived from study in all walks of
life". Did not win a prize, but was cited by the
Secretary of the Academy in his report. Wrote
a light comedy entitled A Quelque Chose
Hasard Est Bon (Chance Can Be a Good
Thing) and two acts of a tragedy, Athélie ou
les Scandinaves. His brother Eugène began
to show signs of mental illness.

Victor HugO 1802-1885
1818. Hugo completed his secondary school¬
ing and left the boarding house to live with his
mother. He wrote an initial version of Bug-
Jargal, a romantic account of the revolt of the
black population on the Island of Hispaniola.
The main character, who is a slave and the
leader of the insurrection, saves the life of a
white benefactor, whom he calls his "brother",
and sacrifices his life to save ten black hos¬
tages. He is the first servant of his fellow-men
to feature in Hugo's romantic work.
1819. Awared two prizes by the Académie des
Jeux Floraux of Toulouse. Founded, together
with his brothers, a review, Le Conservateur
Littéraire, of which he was the leading
contributor for thirty issues. Published, in
booklet form, the ode Destins de la Vendée.
This, his first published work, was to give
rise to a sharp controversy among the critics.
Indeed, all Hugo's works were to be violently
disputed or defended to varying degrees.
In 1820 Hugo paid a visit to Chateaubriand
and It was on this occasion that the
famous French author and diplomat Is
said to have dubbed him "enfant sublime"
(sublime child). This drawing of Hugo by
Eugène Legénlssel, which dates from
1819. captures the young poet's air ofpre¬
cocious genius.
1820. Hugo engaged in a secret correspond¬
ence with Adèle Foucher, a childhood friend
who was not acceptable to his mother. The
assassination of the nephew and heir pre¬
sumptive of Louis XVIII inspired Hugo to write
his ode Sur la Mort du Duc de Berry, which he
published in booklet form and in recognition of
which the King made him an ex-gratia pay¬
ment of 500 francs. Bug-Jargal'was serialized
in Le Conservateur Littéraire.
1821. Hugo began to collect material for a
novel, Han d'Islande. He published, in booklet
form, his ode Le Baptême du Duc de
Bordeaux, son of the Duc de Berry and known
as the "child born of a miracle". The poet's
mother, Sophie Trébuchet, died after a long
illness.
/^ ¿r .,


Life and Times of V. H.
1822. Hugo published his first collection of
verse, Odes et Poésies Diverses. The royal
household granted him a pension of 1,000
francs and, with this income, he was able to
marry Adèle Foucher on 1 2 October. Eugène
Hugo's mental condition suddenly took a turn
for the worse. Inez de Castro, a melodrama in
three acts, probably written in 1819-1820,
was accepted by the Théâtre du Panorama
Dramatique, but was not performed.
1823. Publication of Han d'Islande, a sombre
novel in which the love interest is paralleled by
the account of the frightful acts perpetrated by
Han, a monster whose only redeeming fea¬
ture is the affection he shows as a father.
Eugène went uncontrollably insane and had
to be committed to an asylum. Hugo was
granted a pension of 2,000 francs by the
Ministry of the Interior. In July, Adèle gave
birth to a son, Leopold-Victor, but the child
died three months later.
1824. In January, La Muse Française pub¬
lished La Bande Noire, an ode defending
ancient French archaeological treasures that
were threatened with destruction. Published
again in March in a collection of new odes, La
Bande Noire marked the emergence of Hugo
as an "antiquarian" or lover of antiquities.
Birth of Léopoldine, Hugo's first daughter.
Photo © Bulloz, Paris. Collections de la Maison de Victor Hugo
Portrait of Adèle Foucher, perhaps by
herself, dating from about 1820. She mar¬
ried Hugo In 1822.
S
©
¥< L
V
SrlLv*

Life and Times of V. H.
1825. Hugo started work on a play on Cor¬
neille, but was to abandon it. Promoted "che¬
valier" of the Legion of Honour, being cited for
"the noble efforts which he has constantly
deployed in support of the sacred cause of the
church and the monarchy." Accompanied
Charles Nodier and two other friends to
Rheims for the coronation of Charles X. His
ode Sur le Sacre de Charles X was to enjoy
considerable success in official circles and he
was granted an allowance to cover his travell¬
ing expenses. In the summer, Hugo, together
with his wife and daughter and Nodier and his
wife, undertook a journey to the Alps. On his
return, he wrote an essay on The Destruction
of Monuments in France, in which he called
for the adoption of a law for the preservation of
monuments threatened with demolition or ex¬
cessive "restoration".
1826. Hugo published a significantly ex¬
panded version of Bug-Jargal. He started
work on a play on Cromwell and published
Odes et Ballades, a collection of verse written
between June 1824 and October 1825. Birth
of a son, Charles.
1827. Hugo resumed work on the play Amy
Robsart, which he had drafted in outline in
1822, and proposed it to the Théâtre de
l'Odéon as being the work of his young
brother-in-law, Paul Foucher. Hugo accom¬
panied the sculptor David D'Angers to the
Bicêtre prison to see convicts being put in
irons. He used the observations he made on
that occasion to write Le Dernier Jour d'un
Condamné (The Last Day of a Condemned
Man) and Les Misérables. He completed his
work on Cromwell and published it with its
celebrated preface. This literary manifesto
traced the history of poetry back through the
ages and called for the emancipation of
drama from the ancient rules. It established
Hugo as the leader of the "new school". The
critics of this time, who were particularly
aware of the issues involved, detected in
Cromwell and in the ode A la Colonne de la
Place Vendôme which was published in
February of that year, the signs of a very
clear-cut political change. Indeed, it is from
1827 that Hugo can be said to have departed
from the stand he took in his early youth and to
have become, once and for all, conscious of
certain guiding principles from which he was
never again to stray.
The house in the Rue Notre-Dame-des-
Champs, Paris, in which Hugo lived from
1827-1830.
¿"ö/'ftffS**. * *"

Life and Times of V. H.
1828. Death of Léopold-Sigisbert Hugo, the
poet's father. The first and only performance
of Amy Robsart, which was a failure. In the
press, Hugo claimed responsibility for those
passages which had been the most loudly
hissed in the play attributed to Foucher. Pub¬
lication of the definitive edition of Odes et
Ballades containing the poems having
appeared in the first edition, plus a number of
others. Hugo started to take notes for Notre-
Dame de Paris and wrote virtually all the
poems contained in Les Orientales. Birth of
his second son, François-Victor Hugo.
1 829. Publication of Les Orientales in January
while, in Le Dernier Jour d'un Condamné,
Hugo launched his first attack on capital
punishment. Wrote the play Marion de Lorme,
which was accepted by the Comédie Fran¬
çaise, but was immediately banned by the
censor. According to a letter from Sainte-
Beuve to Lamartine, Hugo was "offered all
manner of compensation and, in particular, a
political post at the Council of State and a
place in the administration." He was also
offered a significant increase in his royal pen¬
sion. However, he proudly resisted these
attempts to buy him off and set to work on a
new play, Hernani, ou l'Honneur Castillan.
Hernani was completed and was accepted by
. the Comédie Française and authorized by the
censor, who commented: "It is a good thing for
the public to see to what lengths the human
mind can stray when it is set free from all
rules."
VictorHugo In 1829, byhis close friend the
painter and engraver Achille Devéria
(1800-1857).

1830. Publication in booklet form of the set of
poems entitled L'Aumône, which was sold in
aid of poor workers and the jobless in Nor¬
mandy. The collected poems of Charles
Dovalle, a young poet killed in a duel, were
published with a preface by Hugo in the form
of a letter, in which he defined romanticism as
literary liberalism in the following terms:
"Freedom in art and society is the twofold goal
towards which all rational and logical minds
should strive in a single forward movement."
Hernani was performed for the first time on 25
February, marking the beginning of a four-
month "battle" at the Comédie Française be¬
tween "classicals" and "romantics". Adèle,
Hugo's fourth child, was born in the very
middle of the "Three Glorious Days". Hugo
settled down to writing Notre-Dame de Paris,
on which he was to work without interruption
for the remainder of the year.
1831. Publication of Notre-Dame de Paris, a
novel about Paris in the year 1482. Through
the adventures of a young gypsy girl, an apos¬
tate priest and a hunchback with a heart of
gold, Hugo exalted the civilization of the fif¬
teenth century, condemned torture and capit¬
al punishment and popularized a certain im¬
age of the Middle Ages. The government of
Louis-Philippe commissioned Hugo to write a
Hymn commemorating the "July days," [the
Revolution of 1 830]. This was put to music by
Hérold and was sung by a choir at the cere¬
mony held at the Panthéon in Paris on 28 July.
The play Marion de Lorme was at last re¬
leased from censorship, which had been abo¬
lished following the July Revolution, and was
performed at the Theatre of the Porte Saint
Martin before being published. Les Feuilles
d'Automne, which had been written between
July 1 828 and November 1 831 , was also pub¬
lished. In its preface, Hugo said that the col¬
lection of verse did not have any political
significance and asked: "Is there any reason
why art should not forge ahead, just because
the earth shakes?"
Esmeralda and Quasimodo in one of the
towers of Notre-Dame, a drawing by the
French writer Théophile Gautier (1811-
1872) illustrating a scene from Hugo's
novel Notre-Dame de Paris.

Life and Times of V. H.
1832. Hugo wrote a new preface to the fifth
edition of the Dernier Jour d'un Condamné, in
which he argued that, along with the abolition of
capital punishment, it would be necessary to
institute a penalty based on charity rather than
on anger, in a bid to build a humanitarian
society. Guerre aux Démolisseurs! a vigorous
attack on the destruction of ancient monu¬
ments, was published in the Revue des Deux
Mondes. Publication of the definitive edition of
Notre-Dame de Paris, with a foreword and
three additional chapters. On 5 June, Hugo
was witness to the republican insurrection in
Paris following the funeral of General Lamarque,
and it was this event that was to stand at the
centre of his novel Les Misérables. Hugo also
wrote two plays, Le Roi s'Amuse and Lucrèce
Borgia. Rehearsals for the first started at the
Comédie Française at the end of the summer
and it was performed on 22 November. However,
it was taken off on 23 November because the
government thought it saw an uncomplimentary
reference to Louis-Philippe's mother in one of
the lines. Hugo published the play, sued the
Comédie Française and, in his address to the
court, portrayed the ban as the arbitrary and
despotic act of a government that was not very
sure of itself. Pending the verdict he gave up
the literary pension which he had been
receiving since 1823. He was to lose the case.
1833. Lucrèce Borgia went into rehearsal at
the Theatre of the Porte Saint Martin. Hugo
fell in love with Juliette Drouet, the twenty-six
year old actress playing the role of the prin¬
cess Negroni. The play was performed for the
first time on 2 February and was an instant
success. On 16 February, the poet and
Juliette became lovers, the beginning of a
love story that lasted for fifty years. In May,
L'Europe Littéraire published a long essay by
Hugo in which he analysed the evolution of the
French language and expounded his views on
the function of the dramatic poet in society.
Hugo then wrote Marie Tudor. The first
performance, on 6 November, ended in
uproar and "Miss Juliette" had to give up the
part. Hugo worked for Louise Bertin on the
libretto of an opera based on Notre-Dame de
Paris and published an essay in L'Europe
Littéraire on Ymbert Galloix, a young poet
who died of dejection and hunger.
Mademoiselle Juliette, lithograph by Léon
Noël. This portrait of Juliette Drouet was
made in 1832, a year before she met Hugo.

1834. Hugo published an essay on Mirabeau
as the preface to the Mémoires de Mirabeau.
In March, he published Littérature et Philo¬
sophie Mêlées, a collection of articles, essays
and prose fragments dating from different
periods of the writer's life. He wrote Claude
Gueux, an account based on the true story of
a worker who had been jailed for stealing a
loaf of bread and who had revolted against the
prison regime and had killed the warden.
Hugo's searing criticism of poverty and the
penal system was combined with a plea for
literacy and for education for the mass of the
population. In Hugo's view, the provision of
instruction would break the vicious circle of
crime and punishment. Since Juliette had fled
from Paris following an angry scene prompted
by jealousy and had taken refuge with her
sister in Brittany, Hugo set out after her and
brought her back to the capital in slow stages,
stopping on the way to sketch a number of
architectural and natural curiosities.
Donizetti's opera Lucrezia Borgia, based on
Hugo's play, was given its first performance in
Milan.
1835. Hugo was made a founder member of
the Committee which was established to
watch over "the original monuments of liter¬
ature, philosophy and the sciences and arts,
and their bearing on the general history of
France". He was to make very many declara¬
tions before the Committee in subsequent
years. Angelo, Tyran de Padoue (Angelo, the
Tyrant of Padua) was performed at the Com¬
édie Française and published. At the end of
July, Hugo left with Juliette for a one-month
trip to Normandy and, on their return, they
spent a further month in the Bièvre valley. A
new collection of verse, Les Chants du
Crépuscule, was published in October.
Claude Gueux, the hero of Hugo's novel of
the same name, by the Swiss-born French
artist Théophile Alexandre Steinlen (1859-
1923).
/*. ¿* *
-

Life and Times of V. H.
1836. Hugo was twice a candidate for a seat
at the French Academy, but was not elected.
In the summer, he went on a month-long
journey with Juliette and the artist Célestin
Nanteuil to Brittany and Normandy, which
afforded him the opportunity of indulging his
taste for topographical draughtsmanship. La
Esmeralda, an opera by Louise Berlin, with
libretto by Hugo, was first performed at the
Paris Opera in November, but was a failure.
1837. Eugène Hugo, whose mental condition
had grown progressively worse over the past
fifteen years, died in an asylum. In February,
Hugo published in booklet form La Charité,
the proceeds of which went to the poor people
of the 10th district of Paris, while in June, he
published a collection of poems entitled Les
Voix Intérieures. His annual journey with
Juliette took them to Belgium and Normandy
for one month.
1838. Hugo wrote Ruy Blas, which was the
first play to be performed at the newly
completed Théâtre de la Renaissance, in
November.
1839. Hugo started and then abandoned a
play on the Man in the Iron Mask, Les
Jumeaux, before setting out, for almost two
months, on a trip with Juliette, during which
they first went to Strasbourg and then
travelled along the right bank of the Rhine, on
to Switzerland and down the Rhone valley to
the Mediterranean. It was in the course of this
journey that Hugo visited the penal settlement
in Toulon. He was again a candidate for the
French Academy but, after seven inconclu¬
sive ballots, the election was deferred for two
months.
12 3Z¿' **&!£:£
The old bridge at Lucerne, Switzerland,
pen and ink drawing by Victor Hugo, dated
13 September 1839, on which he wrote:
"What I see from my window. For my
Didine." ("Didine" was a pet name for his
eldest daughter Léopoldlne).

1840. The election to the Academy was held,
but Hugo was again beaten. In May, he pub¬
lished a new volume of poetry, Les Rayons et
les Ombres. He went on a journey to the
Rhine with Juliette. Throughout the tour, Hugo
kept a voluminous travel "journal", which he
sent back to his family as he proceeded, and
he made a large number of drawings in his
sketchbook and album and on the manuscript
itself. On his return to Paris, his attention was
taken up with the repatriation of Napoleon's
ashes. On 1 5 December, the actual day of the
official ceremony, he published his verses on
Le Retour de l'Empereuras a booklet, and this
was followed one week later by a complete
collection of poems on Napoleon.
1 841 . At his fourth attempt, Hugo was elected
a member of the French Academy on the first
ballot, although by a very small majority. In
June, he was formally received into the
Academy and delivered an address that was
both political and literary in import. He devoted
himself to Le Rhin, a book based on his
travels to Champagne in 1838 and to the
Rhine in 1840.
1842. Le Rhin was published in January. In
June, Hugo was elected Director of the
Academy and, in that capacity, tendered the
official condolences of the entire French Insti¬
tute to Louis-Philippe on the occasion of the
accidental death of his eldest son. He
began and completed a new play, Les
Burgraves, which was accepted by the
Comédie Française.
Victor Hugo is
admitted to the
Académie
Française (1841).
Water-colour by
Henri Vogel.

"Don't talk to me about modern drama!!!"
Caricature of a conservative critic, drawn
by Hugo.
Life and Times of V. H.
1 843. On 1 5 February, Hugo had the "distres¬
sing happiness to give his daughter's hand in
mariage". Léopoldine married Charles Vac-
querie, the son of a Le Havre shipowner. Les '
Burgraves was performed for the first time on
7 March, but was regarded as a failure. In
July, Hugo paid a lightning visit to Léopoldine
and her family before leaving on a long jour¬
ney to Spain and the Pyrenees. On 4 Septem¬
ber, Léopoldine and her husband, and her
husband's uncle and nephew, were drowned
in the river Seine at Villequier. Hugo learnt the
news from the press five days after the
tragedy and returned to Paris to be with his
stricken family. The only glimmer of light in
that gloomy year was the relationship which
Hugo struck up with Léonie Biard.
1844. Hugo's literary output was confined to a
small number of poems, most of which were
inspired by his love for Léonie. Hugo became
a close friend and confidant of the King.
Verdi's opera, Emani, based on Hugo's play,
performed in Vienna.
A,
^>^
Vu. ^ ,iw uU ^-'V,*
1845. Hugo was elevated to the French
peerage by the King. He published a new
and definitive edition of Le Rhin. In July, the
police caught him in flagrant adultery with
Léonie Biard. As a peer, Hugo avoided
arrest, but Léonie was thrown into prison
'Vw * < ^
&$
©
and the scandal was such that Hugo had to
pretend that he was travelling abroad. In
reality, however, he was compelled to
withdraw almost completely from society.
He started to write Les Misères, the novel
that was to become Les Misérables.

1846. At the beginning of February, Hugo
re-emerged from his state of réclusion to
attend a meeting of the Monuments Commit¬
tee. Shortly afterwards, he made his first
speech before the Chamber of Peers on the
ownership of works of art. He visited the Con¬
ciergerie prison, where he took copious notes.
Claire Pradier, the only child of Juliette
Drouet, died at the age of twenty. Hugo, who
had always acted as though he were the
adoptive father of the young woman, shared
Juliette's grief. He visited Villequierforthe first
time. He continued to write poetry and work on
his novel.
1847. Hugo visited the La Roquette prison,
where he had a conversation with a prisoner
under sentence of death. He worked on
speeches dealing with penal reform and child
labour, and spoke in the Chamber of Peers in
favour of subsidies for the theatre and the
abrogation of the law exiling the Bonaparte
family, observing that the government had
much less to fear from that princely family
than from the starving populace. He became
friendly with the actress Alice Ozy and went
on a one-week trip to Normandy with Juliette,
passing through Villequier, which prompted
him to write the celebrated verses starting
©
"Demain, dès Taube, à l'heure où blanchit la ï
campagne ..." (Tomorrow, at dawn, at the "\
hour when the landscape is shrouded in I
white...). He continued to work on Les >
Misérables. Dargomizhsky's opera Esmeral- I
da, based on Hugo's play, was given its first =
performance in Moscow.
Léopoldine and the Book of Hours, a por¬
trait of Léopoldine Hugo aged eleven, by
Auguste de Châtillon. Her accidental
death by drowning, near the village of Vil¬
lequier, between Rouen and Le Havre,
when she was nineteen, was a terrible
blow to Hugo. His paternal love for Léopol¬
dine was echoed in the relationship be¬
tween Jean Valjean and Coserte in Les
Misérables and inspired one of his finest
poems, Demain, dès l'aube, à l'heure où
blanchit la campagne (Les Contempla¬
tions). The house of Léopoldine's parents-
in-law, at Villequier, on the banks of the
Seine, has become a museum, a Victor
Hugo shrine comparable to his house in
the Place des Vosges, Paris, and Haute-
ville House, Guernsey.


1848. The July Monarchy fell on 22 February
and the Republic was proclaimed. Hugo, who
had tried in vain to have the Duchess Hélène
d'Orléans appointed regent, was offered the
post of Mayor of the 8th district of Paris, but
he refused. In June, Hugo was elected to the
Constituent Assembly and, during the "June
days" exposed himself to the gunfire of the
insurgents in an endeavour to restore order.
His activities until the end of the year were
almost entirely political. He intervened in
favour of political prisoners threatened with
deportation or death; he spoke against the
restrictions placed on the freedom of the press
and for the provision of financial support for
theatres, which had remained closed since
the June uprising, for the abolition of the death
penalty and against theatre censorship. He
also voted in favour of the inclusion of a
reference to Human Rights in the preamble to
the Constitution and against any impairment
of universal suffrage. In November, he made
an important speech on the budgetary restric¬
tions which it was proposed to impose on
schools, universities and cultural institutions,
and on the subsidies granted to the sciences
and arts, and warned the elected representa¬
tives against trying to make savings on "intel¬
lectual weil-being" by declaring: "It is neces-
Vlctor Hugo, In 1848, planting "the tree of
liberty" in the Place Royal (now the Place
des Vosges), a water-colour by Henri
Vogel. In the background can be seen the
house In which Hugo lived.
sary to raise man's spirit and guide it towards
God, towards awareness, beauty, justice and
truth, towards disinterested acts and great¬
ness. It is by doing this and this alone that
you will find man at peace with himself and
hence at peace with society". The Presiden¬
tial elections were held in December. Hugo,
who had been impressed by a book entitled
L'Extinction du Paupérisme (the abolition of
dire poverty) voted for its author, Louis-Napo¬
léon Bonaparte, who won the election over
Cavaignac, Lamartine and others.
J

1849. In the Assembly, Hugo continued to
intervene in favour of the arts, including the
completion of the Louvre Museum, the aboli¬
tion of any theatre censorship and the provi¬
sion of financial assistance to artists. He was
elected to the new Legislative Assembly, in
which he made his mark by delivering an
explosive speech on La Misère (poverty). In
August, Hugo was elected Chairman of the
International Peace Congress, at which he
made the opening and closing addresses,
and in October he protested against the re¬
pression, by French troops, of the republican
uprising against the Pope in Rome. Even so,
his very active public life did not prevent him
from continuing to write.
1 850. On 1 5 January, a bill aimed at granting
La Conscience Devant une Mauvaise Ac¬
tion (Conscience faced with a bad action).
A drawing by Victor Hugo.
I
the clergy the monopoly of public education
was rejected by Hugo as being a monstrous
retrograde step. In his view, the ideal con¬
sisted of free, secular and, above all else,
compulsory education, where "the gates of
knowledge would all be wide open to all
brains". The forcible language of the dis¬
course On the Freedom of Education was
followed by other stands which ultimately
alienated Hugo from the conservative par¬
liamentarians. These included declarations
on the restrictions placed on voting rights,
against deportation and in favour of the free¬
dom of the theatre and the press. He pub¬
lished an open letter addressed to the meet¬
ing of the International Peace Congress in
Frankfurt and continued, albeit at a much
slower pace, his poetic activity. Liszt's sym¬
phonic poem "What is Heard on the Moun¬
tain", based on poems by Hugo, was per¬
formed in Weimar.
1
©

Life and Times of V. H. (CONT. FROM P. 17)
1 851 . Besides being increasingly criticized by
the government majority in the Assembly,
Hugo was also going through a serious crisis
in his love life. Juliette Drouet discovered her
lover's relationship with Léonie Biard and the
two women insisted that he choose between
them. His family life was convulsed by the
imprisonment of his sons for having written
newspaper articles on capital punishment and
the right of sanctuary for foreign refugees. On
2 December, Louis Napoleon's coup d'Etat
found Hugo in the front rank of the republican
resistance, but his efforts were powerless
against the might of the army and the passive
attitude of the civilian population. Nine days
later, Hugo went into exile. Established in
Brussels, he lost no time in starting L'Histoire
d'un Crime. Verdi's opera Rigoletto, based on
Hugo's Le Roi s'Amuse, was given its first
performance in Venice.
1852. Writing was to become the only form of
political resistance: "The inkstand versus the
cannon", as Hugo was to put it in a letter to his
wife. His work on L'Histoire d'un Crime prog¬
ressed, substantiated as it was by the increas¬
ing number of testimonies provided by
Frenchmen who had been expelled or had
escaped, and his Napoléon le Petit took
shape within weeks. Having been warned by
the Belgian government that he would be
liable to expulsion if he published a book on
the "Prince-President", Hugo left Brussels in
early August for Jersey, where his family and
Juliette Drouet joined him. Napoléon le Petit
was published in London and put on sale in
Brussels the same day. The Hugo family
moved into Marine Terrace in Jersey and the
exile devoted himself to his poetry. On 29
November, Hugo made a speech in comme¬
moration of the anniversary of the 1830
revolution in Poland, in which he hailed the
Poles as being the "first-born of persecution".
AU PEUPLE.
Art. 68 La Constitution est confiée á la gara*
et au patriotisme des citoyens français.
Lout s- Napoléon est mis hors la loi.
L etat de siège est aboli.
Le suffrage universel est rétabli.
Vive la République !
Aux Armes !
Pour la Montagne réunie
le délégué
VICTOR HUGO.
o
©
After the coup d'état by the Prince/Presi¬
dent Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte, on 2 De¬
cember 1851, Hugo called in vain on the
people to rise up against the man who was
to become Napoleon III. Hugo was obliged
to flee the country, crossing the frontier
into Belgium under a false name, on a
passport procured for him by Juliette
Drouet.

/-U/ **
1?t-*s4B/ £-
1853. Publication in Belgium of a volume of
Hugo's ruvres Oratoires (collected
speeches). In Jersey, he continued to pourout
satirical poems. The Hugo family was intro¬
duced to "table-turning". Although they were
initially sceptical, they became adepts follow¬
ing a communication which seemed to come
from Léopoldine. Over a two-year period, they
received messages from more than one hun¬
dred "spirits", including Dante, Jesus Christ,
Mozart, Rousseau, Socrates, Shakespeare
and Luther. In November, Les Châtiments
was published in two editions, one complete
and the other expurgated, and the collection
was thereafter smuggled into France.
1854. There was no let-up in the messages
received through the table-turning exercises
or in Hugo's enormous poetic output. In
January, a death sentence passed on the
neighbouring island prompted the exiled poet
to address an appeal to the Inhabitants of
Guernsey, calling them to abolish a punish¬
ment that was out of key with the times. He
started work on a long poem which was even¬
tually to become La Fin de Satan and, on the
anniversary of the 1 848 Revolution, made a
lyrical and Utopian speech, in which he
affirmed that the emergence of the United
States of Europe, and indeed of the Universal
Republic, would mark the end of poverty and
Frontispiece by Honoré Daumler (1808-
1879) for an edition of Châtiments.
Crushed by Hugo's poems, the imperial
eagle is struck down by divine justice.
ignorance, and the birth of an educated and
balanced civilization. The Spanish Junta de
Salud (Committee of Public Safety) invited
Hugo to settle in Spain, an offer which he was
very tempted to accept. The anniversary of
the Polish revolution afforded him an oppor- ,
tunity of publishing a pamphlet denouncing
the Crimean War.
1855. Death of Abel Hugo, the poet's eldest
brother. Hugo again wrote a number of bril¬
liant pages on the occasion of the anniversary
of the 1 848 Revolution, as well as a host of
poems, many of which were included in Les
Contemplations. In October, three French ex¬
iles were expelled from Jersey. Hugo sup¬
ported them by issuing a declaration which
was to be signed by thirty-five other exiles,
from France, Germany, Poland, Hungary and
Italy and was, in the days following, to give rise
to an order expelling all exiles. Hugo moved
on to Guernsey and settled with his family in
Saint Peter's Port.

Life and Times of V. H.
1856. Hugo wrote extensive fragments of
Dieu (God). The collection Les Contempla¬
tions was published in April and was such a
success that Hugo decided to protect himself
from further expulsion by becoming a property
owner for the first time in his life, when he
bought a house at 38 Hauteville Street. The
decoration of the house, which was complete¬
ly designed and supervised by Hugo himself,
would take years to complete, but the family
was able to move into it in autumn. The exile
launched two further appeals by way of en¬
couragement to embryo nations: these were
A l'Italie and A la Grèce.
1857. Hugo devoted himself completely to
poetry. Among other things, he wrote several
"minor epics", which were subsequently
brought together in La Légende des Siècles,
La Révolution and a good part of La Pitié
Suprême.
1 858. In the hope of finding a husband for her
daughter Adèle, Hugo's wife took her to Paris
for several months, and from then onwards
she was never again to live at Hauteville
House on a permanent basis. The poet com¬
pleted La Pitié Suprême, Le Verso de la Page
and L'Ane. His work on the "minor epics" was
interrupted at the end of June by a carbuncle
on his back, and he was only able to start
working again in early October.
26
Hauteville House, Hugo's home in Guern¬
sey, which he bought on 16 May 1856 out
of his earnings from Les Contemplations
and in which he was to live until 1870.
Photo shows the façade of the house
which looks out over the garden and the
sea. On the inside of this vast dwelling
Hugo lavished all his talent as an interior
decorator, creating what his son Charles
described as "a three-storey autograph,
rather like a poem with several rooms". At
the top can be seen the "look-out" where
Hugo worked. Donated to the City of
Paris by his descendants in 1927, Haute¬
ville House remains unchanged with its
interior as conceived by Hugo virtually
intact. It is open to the public from April
to October.

Frontispiece drawn by Hugo for his collec¬
tion of poems La Légende des Siècles.
1859. Hugo went on a two-week visit to the
island of Sark with his eldest son and Juliette
Drouet, this being the first time that the two
had met. In August, he replied to the amnesty
decree by issuing a Declaration which he
arranged to be printed in the English press
and in which he stated: "When freedom re¬
turns, so shall I". However, most of the
political exiles living in Guernsey returned to
France. The first part of La Légende des
Siècles: Histoire - Les Petites Epopées (His¬
tory the Minor Epics) was published in Sep¬
tember. Hugo forsook the epic style to write
several poems which were included in the
collection Les Chansons des Rues et des
Bois, but then returned to it by taking up La Fin
de Satan, which he had abandoned five years
earlier. He made a public appeal to the United
States of America in a bid to save the life of the
abolitionist John Brown, who had been sent¬
enced to death.
1860. Hugo wrote to Le Progrès, the news¬
paper of the Haitian capital Port-au-Prince,
conveying his hopes for the brotherhood of
man, stating: "On earth, there are neither
blacks nor whites. There are only minds." He
continued to work on La Fin de Satan until
April, when he returned to Les Misérables, a
work which he had discarded twelve years
before. In June, he returned in triumph to
Jersey at the invitation of the Committee set
up to support Garibaldi and delivered a
speech on freedom and the liberation of Italy.
His friend Ribeyrolles, a former parliamenta¬
rian and an exile, died in Rio de Janeiro, and
Hugo sent the Brazilian Committee an epitaph
in verse for his tomb.

Life and Times of V. H.
1861. Hugo grew a beard. In Paris, his
brother-in-law Paul Chenay published the en¬
graving "John Brown", which was produced
from Hugo's drawing of a hanged man. At the
end of March, the writer left Guernsey in the
company of Charles and Juliette for a three-
month journey on the continent, firstly to
Belgium, where he visited his wife and daugh¬
ter in Brussels, stayed in the vicinity of the
battlefield of Waterloo and completed Les
Misérables. He then went on to Holland.
Charles decided to settle on the continent.
Hugo wrote three important open letters: one
to the Congress of the Antwerp Artistic, Liter¬
ary and Scientific Circle on literary and artistic
property, another to the Assoziazione Unitaria
Italiana to thank it for having spontaneously
made him a member and to encourage it in its
work, and the third to Captain Butler, on the
sack of the Summer Palace in Beijing. He also
ordered a glassed-in room to be built at the top
of his house, for use as a study. This was to be
his "look-out".
1 862. Hugo wrote a letter to the Belgian news¬
papers on the prisoners condemned to death
in Charleroi, and this was instrumental in hav¬
ing seven death sentences commuted. He
organized a weekly meal in his home for the
poor children of the island. The publication of
Les Misérables started in Brussels on 30
March and in Paris on 3 April, but the perform¬
ance of a drama based on the novel by
Charles Hugo and Paul Meurice was banned
by the French government. In August and
September, Hugo travelled with Juliette in
Belgium and along the Rhine. Journalists
from many countries who were admirers of
Les Misérables organized a banquet in his
honour in Brussels, at which he took the floor
to hail the free press and the contribution it
had made to social progress. Since he was
about to return to Guernsey, Hugo had to
decline an invitation to speak at the Interna¬
tional Congress for the Advancement of the
Social Sciences, but he sent it a letter
announcing his membership which was pub¬
lished by the Brussels newspaper Le Temps
and in which he stated: "There is nothing
more pressing and urgent than free and com¬
pulsory education". He was also successful in
his appeal to the people of Geneva to reject a
draft Constitution upholding the death penal¬
ty. An Album of twelve drawings by Hugo,
engraved by Paul Chenay, with a preface by
Théophile Gautier and a portrait and foreword
by Hugo himself, was published in Paris.
Gavroche at the age of eleven, a drawing
by Hugo of the archetypal Paris street-
urchin who figures in his novel Les
Misérables.

1863. At the beginning of the year, Russia
crushed a popular uprising in Poland. Hugo
responded to the appeal of the Polish news¬
paper Kolokolby writing an address A l'Armée
Russe (to the Russian army), which was re¬
produced in the press throughout Europe. In
Puebla, the Mexican city besieged by French
troops, a bilingual newspaper published daily
"banner" headlines consisting of extracts
from Napoléon le Petit, and taunted the invad¬
ers with the slogan "You have Napoleon but
we have Victor Hugo". Hugo responded by
writing a stirring essay on The Mexican War.
His daughter Adèle fled from the family home
and set off for Canada. Hugo's wife published
Victor Hugo Raconté par un Témoin de sa Vie
(Victor Hugo's Life Recounted by an Eye¬
witness) and came back to Guernsey for ten
days. In the summer, Hugo and Juliette went
on a seven-week trip to Germany. The writer
started to work on a essay on Shakespeare
and wrote Promontorium Somnii.
1864. Publication of William Shakespeare,
the crowning genius of all time. Hugo was
invited to officiate at a ceremony in Paris
commemorating the three-hundredth
anniversary of Shakespeare's birth, and it
was agreed that he would be represented by
an empty chair. The Imperial government
banned the event. Hugo wrote a Preface for
the new translation of Shakespeare by Fran¬
çois-Victor Hugo and began work on Les Tra¬
vailleurs de la Mer (The Toilers of the Sea).
His annual tour took him to Germany, Luxem¬
bourg and Belgium.
13th Year of Absence, Victor Hugo,
1864.Probab/y an example of those draw¬
ings that Hugo called his "visiting cards"
and which he sent to his friends at Christ¬
mas-time. Photo © Bulloz, Paris. Collections de la Maison de Victor Hugo

Life and Times of V. H.
1865. Death of Emily de Putron, Francois-
Victor's fiancée. François-Victor left Guern¬
sey and his father delivered the funeral
oration. Hugo made several declarations
on capital punishment and agreed to be a
member of a Committee established for the
purpose of erecting a statue to Beccaria in
Italy. He wrote a letter to the Gonfaloniere of
Florence to commemorate the six-hun¬
dredth anniversary of Dante. In June, he
wrote La Grand-Mère, a one act comedy,
and then left with Juliette for four months on
the continent. He wrote a letter to the
Students' Congress of Liège, in which he
stated that the brotherhood of education
was the precursor of the brotherhood of
peoples. The Chansons des Rues et des
Bois was published in both Brussels and
Paris. He completed Les Travailleurs de la
Mer. Charles Hugo married Alice Lehaene.
1866. Publication of Les Travailleurs de la
Mer. The novel was dedicated to Guernsey,
"my present retreat and my likely grave".
Hugo wrote a drama entitled Mille Francs de
Récompense (One thousand francs reward)
and a one-act comedy, L'Intervention.. In
Brussels, where he lived for two months in the
summer and met his wife and sons again,
Hugo started work on a new novel L'Homme
qui Rit (The Laughing Man) and on the intro¬
duction to Paris-Guide, a collection of essays
intended for publication on the occasion of the
Universal Exhibition. Published an open
letter in response to the appeal launched by
the inhabitants of Crete, who had risen up
against the Turks. He also became an
honorary member of the Central Committee
for the Polish Cause.
1867. He issued a further letter to the people
of Crete, as well as a letter to England on the
Irish independence movement. He also wrote
a two-act comedy Mangeront-ils? (Will they
eat?) and published his essay on Paris, in
which he extolled Its history and conjured up a
majestic vision of its future whereby, in the
twentieth century, it would become the capital
of a united Europe and, in the centuries there¬
after, the capital of united mankind. He
addressed an appeal to Benito Juarez, Presi¬
dent of the Mexican Republic, asking him to
spare the life of the Emperor Maximilian "by
the grace of the Republic". He had a moving
exchange of letters with a Portuguese corres¬
pondent on the occasion of the abolition of the
death penalty in Portugal. Their correspond¬
ence was published in Le Courrier de
/Europe. He addressed a letter to the Con-

This head of a terror-stricken man is one
of a series of drawings by Hugo dating
from around 1864 to 1869.
gress of the Peace League taking place in
Geneva. He spent three months on the con¬
tinent, firstly with his family in Brussels, where
he saw his first grandson Georges, and then in
Zeeland. Publication in booklet form of La
Voix de Guernesey, a set of verses addressed
to Garibaldi on the occasion of his defeat at
Mentana. He likewise addressed a letter Aux
Membres de la République de Puerto Rico, in
which he proclaimed: "The freedom of the
world is composed of the freedom of its indi¬
vidual peoples".
1 868. Hugo addressed a letter to the Interna¬
tional League of Peace and Freedom, which
was published in the Washington newspaper
Public Opinion, as well as a letter to the Vene¬
tian patriots on Manin, whose ashes were
about to be transferred from London to
Venice. Death of Georges Hugo. Hugo spent
two months in Brussels. Birth of his second
grandson, also named Georges. Death of
Hugo's wife. Hugo accompanied the funeral
cortège as far as the French border. He com¬
pleted L'Homme qui Rit and addressed two
letters to Spain, following the fall of that coun¬
try's monarchy.
1869. Hugo wrote L'Epée, Les Deux
Trouvailles de Gallus and Torquemada for a
future collection of Théâtre en Liberté. He
launched an Appel à L'Amérique calling on it
to support Crete and visited Geneva to chair
the Congress of the International League of
Peace and Freedom. He spent several weeks
travelling in Switzerland and one month in
Brussels, where a grand-daughter, Jeanne,
had just been born. Publication of L'Homme
qui Rit. Letter to the Chairman of the American
Committee of London on the philanthropist
George Peabody. His poetic output stepped
up sharply.
Illustration by Georges Rochegrosse
(1859-1938) of a key episode In Hugo's
novel L'Homme qui Rit (The Laughing
Man, 1869). In the House of Peers, the
hero, Gwynplaine, disfigured in child¬
hood by gypsies who extended his mouth
so that he seemed to wear a perpetual
grin, denounces social injustices, under
the mocking glances of his fellow peers.
1 I -'-¿S '"i ii¿
//; ©

^Éa
Life and Times of V. H.
1870. Hugo responded to the appeals made
to him from across the Atlantic by delivering
an address Pour Cuba and a letter To the
Women ofCuba who had taken refuge in New
York. He continued his poetic activity and
planned the organization of the collection Les
Quatre Vents de l'Esprit. In June, his son
Charles and family came to stay at Hauteville
House. In view of the impending fall of the
Empire, Hugo left Guernsey with Juliette on
15 August and went to Brussels, where he
impatiently awaited the news from Paris. The
Republic was proclaimed on 4 September
and, on the 5th, Hugo returned to France after
almost nineteen years of exile. No sooner had
he returned than he turned his attack on the
foreign enemy. He addressed a letter Aux
Allemands (To the Germans), followed by
Victor Hugo and the Young Republic, a
lithograph dating from 1893 by the French
artist Adolphe Léon Willette (1857-1926).
This portrayal ofHugo/Jean Valjean as the
adoptive father of the young Republic/
Cosette is typical of the image of Hugo
propagated by the Third Republic and de¬
monstrates the popularity of the character
Cosette, taken as the incarnation of
childhood.
letters to the French people and to the Pari¬
sians. Publication of the first French edition of
Les Châtiments, from which public readings
were given in aid of the defence of Paris.
Other public readings were given in aid of war
victims. L'Année Terrible began to take shape
in the light of these events.
1 871 . The French and the Germans signed an
armistice in January and legislative elections
were held in February. Hugo was elected to
the National Assembly and set off at once for
Bordeaux, where it was in session. Three
weeks later, when he spoke in a debate on the
validation of Garibaldi's election, he was so
violently heckled that he resigned. His son
Charles' sudden death compelled him to re¬
turn to Paris on the very day that the uprising
of the Commune broke out. He went on to
Brussels to arrange his son's affairs. His hor¬
ror at the harsh repression of which the "Com¬
munards" were victims prompted him to offer
sanctuary to all the exiles of the Commune.
On account of the stand he took, he was
attacked in his home in the night and was
expelled from Belgian territory. He and his
entourage sought refuge in Luxembourg, after
which he settled in Vianden. The poems com-

prising L'Année Terrible continued to increase
in number. At the end of September, on learn¬
ing of the conviction of Henri de Rochefort,
Hugo rushed back to Paris to plead in his
favour and in that of other Communards.
1872. Adèle, Hugo's daughter, had gone out
of her mind and was brought back to Paris,
where she had to be placed in a nursing
home. She was to die in 1 91 5. Publication of a
collection of speeches and open letters en¬
titled Actes et Paroles 1870-1872, followed by
publication of L'Année Terrible. In May, the
people of Rome sent an address to the people
of France, through the person of Victor Hugo
who, in turn, drafted a Réponse aux Romains
(Reply to the Romans). He also sent letters to
the Chairman of the Society of Non-denomi¬
national Schools and to the Chief Editor of
Avenir des Femmes (The Future of Women),
in order to encourage them in their work. He
likewise addressed a letter on the Future of
Europe to the Peace Congress in Lugano.
Hugo returned to Guernsey and started work
on a new novel, Quatrevingt-treize (Ninety-
Three).
1873. While still in Guernsey, Hugo became
friendly with Blanche Lanvin, a girl working for .
Juliette. This was to be the last great love
affair of his life and was to last for a number of
years. He wrote poems, completed a first
version of his novel and then, having spent
almost one year on the island, returned to
France. Death of his son, François-Victor, in
December.
1874. Publication of Quatrevingt-Treize.
Completion and publication of Mes Fils. Letter
on the Centenaire de Pétrarque (The five-
hundredth anniversary of Petrarch). Letter to
the Peace Congress meeting in Geneva. Let¬
ter to the Italian democrats. Prolific poetic
output.
Drawing by Hugo ofa woman naked under §
a cloak and wearing a feathered hat. £
<r -


Life and Times of V.H.
1875. Letter to the Société pour l'Améliora¬
tion du Sort des Femmes, in which he
asserted: "Half of humankind is beyond the
bounds of equality and has to be gathered in
again". Hugo returned to Guernsey for one
week to collect the notes, files and manus¬
cripts he had left behind. Publication of the
first volume of Actes et Paroles entitled
Avant l'Exil and the second volume Pen¬
dant l'Exil. Letter to the Peace Congress.
1876. Hugo was elected a Senator and
militated in favour of an amnesty for the
Communards. Speech on the Philadelphia
Exhibition. Publication of the last volume of
Actes et Paroles entitled Depuis l'Exil.
Address Pour la Serbie, castigating massa¬
cres perpetrated by the Turks. A further
letter to the Peace Congress in Geneva.
Ponchielli's opera, La Gioconda, based on
Hugo's Angelo, was given its first perfor¬
mance in Milan.
1877. Publication of a new series of La
Légende des Siècles. Charles' widow mar¬
ried Edouard Lockroy, but Hugo continued
to live with his grand-children. Publication
of L'Art d'Etre Grand-Père (The Art of being
a Grandfather), which was dedicated to
Georges and Jeanne. Hugo went back to
work on L'Histoire d'un Crime (The Story of
a Crime), which he had set aside since he
first went into exile, and published the first
volume. Letter for the ceremony comme¬
morating the anniversary of Mentana.

1878. Publication of the second volume of
L'Histoire d'un Crime. Publication of Le Pape
(The Pope). Address on the hundredth
anniversary of the death of Voltaire. Hugo
attended the International Literary Congress,
at which he made several statements, includ¬
ing the opening address and a speech on
literary property. At the end of June, the poet
suffered a cerebral haemorrhage, which vir¬
tually brought his creative work to an end. He
spent four months resting in Guernsey with
his family.
1879. Publication of La Pitié Suprême. Furth¬
er statements on behalf of the Communards,
as a result of which a partial amnesty was
granted. In May, Hugo presided over a ban¬
quet commemorating the abolition of slavery
and delivered a speech on Africa. He visited
Villequier to meditate on the graves of Léopol¬
dine and his wife.
1880. Publication of Religions et Religion.
Speech for the three-hundredth anniversary
of Camoens. A further speech before the Sen¬
ate in favour of a total amnesty, which was
finally accorded. In August, he chaired a cere¬
mony commemorating the Société pour l'In¬
struction Elémentaire (Society for Elementary
Education) and made a speech on elementary
education that was particularly favourable to
non-denominational schools. Publication of
L'Ane.
Drawing ofa donkeybyHugo above which
he has written these words: "Ah çà! dé¬
cidément, que se passe-t-il après la
mort?" (Ah! Yes indeedl What does hap¬
pen after death?). In his 3,000-line poem
L'Ane (1880), Hugo puts philosophy and
the sciences under the microscope. 35

36
Victor Hugo photographed In 1878 by
Nadar (the pseudonym of the French
photographer artist and writer Félix Tour-
nachon, 1820-1910).
An immense crowd kept vigil over the
catafalque erected at the Arc de Triomphe
for the poet's state funeral on 1 June 1885.
Delegations from manycountries followed
his coffin which, in accordance with
Hugo's wishes, was carried to the Pan¬
theon where he is buried, on a pauper's
hearse.
v.* *^ ,. rrjfc "T'iiii «fa
Life and Times of V. H.
1881. Hugo's seventy-ninth birthday was the
subject of a grand popular celebration. On the
following day, hundreds of thousands of peo¬
ple filed past his house. Publication of Les
Quatre Vents de l'Esprit. Hugo attended the
first performance of a theatrical adaptation of
Quatrevingt-Treize by Paul Meurice.
1882. Publication of Torquemada. Hugo took
his last important stand when, in June, the
newspaper Le Rappel published his address
on the Jews and Russia, dealing with the
anti-semitic persecutions that had recently
occurred.
1883. Death of Juliette Drouet. Publication of
an additional series of Les Contemplations. In
the summer, Victor Hugo travelled to Switzer¬
land with his daughter-in-law and grandchil¬
dren. Publication of L'Archipel de la Manche
(The Archipelago of the English Channel)
which had originally been intended as a pre¬
face to Les Travailleurs de la Mer. This was
the last work to be published by Hugo in his
lifetime.
1884. In March, Hugo wrote a brief address to
celebrate the abolition of slavery in one of the
provinces of Brazil. In April, he addressed a
letter to the banquet commemorating the
anniversary of Greek independence. In May,
Hugo attended the concert at which Saint-
Saëns conducted his Hymne à VictorHugo. In
September, at Veules-les-Roses, he saw the
sea for the last time. In November, he visited
Bartholdi's workshop, where he saw the Sfa-
tue of Liberty Illuminating the World, which
was to be installed later in New York.
1 885. Death of Victor Hugo on 22 May, after a
short illness. He was given a State funeral. He
left behind him a vast amount of unpublished
work, most of which has now (one hundred
years later) been published.
EVELYN BLEWER, of the United States, spe¬
cializes in the study of Victor Hugo and his works.
A graduate of Yale University, she has also
studied in France. She has edited a selection of
letters from Juliette Drouet to Victor Hugo, pub¬
lished in 1985 under the title Lettres à Victor
Hugo, and, in collaboration with Jean Gaudon,
Hugo's La Fin de Satan (1984).
