A new hope in the nuclear age
by Lewis Thomas
TWO years ago, I felt in my bones, as
a dead certainty, that we were in for
World War III, and that it would be
fought with thermonuclear weapons. I had
no idea when it would come, or how, but I
was sure that it would come, sooner or
later.
I thought we were well along in the same
sequence of prewar years that had occurred
in the decade just before World War I,
when international folly suddenly exploded
to everyone's astonishment, with no one
realizing at the time how it had happened or
what was to come. Or in the same series of
blundering, feckless years before the slower
explosion of World War II. I could see no
differences in the public behaviour of
statesmen and diplomats, or in the steady
blind build-up of arms, or in the tone of in¬
ternational rancour.
Two years ago, my highest hope was that
I wouldn't live to see it.
I thought that every reason for abandon¬
ing nuclear weapons had been discussed
often enough and publicly enough.
Everyone knew the necessary numbers.
They were easy to remember once you'd
read them, strung together in those
analytical studies, the worst-case numbers:
1 . 1 billion human beings killed outright in
any full-scale exchange of nuclear bombs
between the superpowers and their allies.
And another 1.1 billion dying in the after¬
math a few weeks later. All told, 2.2 billion
abrupt deaths, approximately one-half of
the human species, most of them in the
United States, Europe, the Soviet Union,
China and Japan. Most hospitals gone,
most doctors gone, and, even if not gone,
left with nothing whatever to be done for
the kinds of injury to be expected under
such weapons.
And yet, all the evidence seemed to prove
that we were getting ready for just such a
war.
Everyone has always said, of course, that
they will never be used. They are not even
intended to be used. They are here in order
to prevent the other side from using them
against us. They are symbols of strength, of
will, even'patriotism, and that is all. And
recently we have been hearing a new kind of
reassurance about them. Do not worry, the
technical people are saying, science will
soon be making them safe. The missiles that
carry them are being- equipped with ar¬
tificial intelligence, computers carrying
detailed maps of the underlying targets on
the other side of the earth, with guidance
systems enabling them to explode within a
few yards of an enemy's commanding
general. The bombs are getting smaller,
neater, less destructive because of these
gifts from science. We can have wars the
old-fashioned way, delicate and precise, as
romantic as medieval swordplay. Do not
worry about evaporated cities, they say. But
then the people who talk this way always
add in a lower voice, "but we must keep
some of the big ones on hand, just in case
something goes wrong." More technology
will save us.
I have never heard of a war in which
things did not go wrong, most of the time as
incalculably wrong as possible. I would ex¬
pect, as something close to a certainty, that
any use of thermonuclear bombs by any na¬
tion would sooner or later be followed by
full use, by everyone, in an atmosphere of
total confusion and total fury.
The truth of the matter is that there exists
an important and influential body of people
with excellent minds and good public man¬
ners who wish mightily to preserve nuclear
weaponry, and to improve it to the ultimate
aim of unqualified military superiority. I
am certain that views like this are held by
many in places of authority throughout the
world. It is not true that everyone agrees on
arms control and eventual arms reduction,
even though everyone asserts this ambition
in public.
The present situation goes against the
grain, beyond comprehending. We are, I
suspect, the most fundamentally,
biologically, compulsively social creatures
on the planet. As individuals, we spend
most of our waking hours at this: we nod at
each other, make endless small-talk, keep at
each other from dawn to dawn, make
friends wherever we can. We begin smiling
at other people in our earliest infancy, hop¬
ing for a smile back, and the hope never dies
even when, as happens in some unlucky
lives, it never does happen. We cannot get
along without each other, and when we try
to do this it takes the fun out of living. No
doubt about it, we are a sociable social
species.
What we need right now is more common
sense, and collective common sense at that.
Most of all, we need a new set of reasons for
giving up nuclear weapons.
I think we have one, and that is why I feel
differently from my despair of two years
ago, with some hope for the future. Not
much, just some, and qualified hope at
that, but these days I'll take any hope I can
get.
The two circles superimposed on this
photo of a nuclear test explosion il¬
lustrate dramatically the enormous in¬
crease In explosive power of the arsenals
of the world that has occurred since the
end of World War II. If the small circle
represents all the explosives used during
World War II, the large circle would repre¬
sent the size of present-day nuclear
arsenals; present stockpiles of nuclear
weapons are estimated at 20,000
megatons (one megaton is equivalent to
one million tons of TNT) four times the
threshold level that scientists believe
would be enough, if nuclear war were to
be launched, to trigger the onset of
nuclear winter and the certain annihila¬
tion of the human race. To give an idea of
the qualitative change that has occurred
in destructive potential it need only be
pointed out that a single thermonuclear
bomb can have an explosive power
greater than that of all explosives used in
all wars since gunpowder was invented.
Paradoxically, the reason for optimism is
the scientific discovery, first bumped into
about 3 years ago, that nuclear weapons are
much worse, immeasurably worse, than
anyone had previously guessed. It is the
nuclear winter scenario (see article page 26)
that gives me hope.
This is the heart of the matter. If the
scenario is as probable as it now seems, but
even if it is only a possible one, it means that
no single country will ever be able to fire
enough bombs at another country, in quan¬
tities sufficient to be of decisive military
significance, without risking its own
destruction in the process, even if there is no
return fire. The weapons have turned out to
be not just homicidal and genocidal. The
wonderful thing about them, which changes
everything for the future of arms control
and arms limitation negotiations, is that
they are suicidal.
The way it works is embarrassingly sim¬
ple, so simple that no one understands why
it was not thought of until we were 35 years
into the nuclear age. It is smdke that does it.
The only way to avoid the catastrophe
would be to avoid setting fires, especially
fires in cities. But this is what nuclear
bombs are designed to do, what they are
good at. If you can imagine a nuclear war in
which cities and forests are scrupulously
avoided, and submarine ports, munitions
factories, oil and gas fields and refineries,
railroads and military headquarters are left
alone, and nothing is aimed at except other
bombs in very remote silos, or other
generals standing alone in open fields, then
24

you can imagine a nuclear war without the
risk of nuclear winter, but you would have
to imagine that such a war would begin and
then end in that way, without involving
cities. Given the record of other wars in this
century, I find it hard to imagine such
ascetic, aseptic restraint on the part of any
nation, especially any nation on the verge of
defeat. If there is ever to be a nuclear war,
the cities will be targets. Except for one
thing: the country that fires off enough
bombs to bring the other country to its
knees will have a few days to celebrate, and
will then find itself under the same black
cloud, frozen solid along with all the other
non-combatant bystander countries.
I have been astonished that the press and
television news programmes have thus far
paid so little attention to this scenario. It
ought to have been a running front-page
story from the outset, and it should still be
on the front pages.
If the predictions are correct, or
anywhere near correct, the revelation of
nuclear winter will come to rank, I believe,
as one of the great scientific achievements
of this century maybe, considering what is
at stake, the most influential of any cen¬
tury. The explosives simply cannot be used
as military weapons, and that, I believe and
pray, is that.
That is the substance of my "hope in the
nuclear age". It is not just a hope for
human beings, and for our children and
their grandchildren and theirs and theirs. It
is a hope for the earth.
LEWIS THOMAS, of the USA, is president
emeritus of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, and professor at
the State University of New York, Stony
Brook. A distinguished essayist, he is the
author of The Lives of a Cell: Notes of a
Biology Watcher / 1975), The Medusa and the
Snail: More Notes of a Biology Watcher
(1980), and Late Night Thoughts on Listening
to Mahler's Ninth Symphony (1983).
25
