Profile ofan inland sea
*.^i
I lili lili II I I I
iinniii
THE Mediterranean is sometimes de¬
scribed as a scale model of the world
ocean which facilitates the study of
important ocean phenomena. This is partly
true, as in the case of the analysis of inter-
oceanic exchanges or the formation of cold
waters, but on the whole, because of differ¬
ences of scale, attempts at extrapolation to
other oceans have not been successful. Be¬
cause of its size and situation, the
Mediterranean has a physiognomy and
dynamic of its own which do not occur
elsewhere, even in seas of comparable size.
It is too frequently asserted that the
Mediterranean is a dying if not dead
sea. I do not agree. True, there is justified
concern for its future on account of the risks
from pollution, but I do not think that the
solution is to cry wolf. The most responsible
and realistic solution to this real threat is to
develop new lines of research.
The Mediterranean ecosystem could be
described as a "machine" that generates its
own organization. In the Mediterranean, as
in any marine environment, all living
creatures, from micro-organisms to the big¬
gest fish and cetaceans, form part of an
extraordinarily complex chain. The system
is based on the producers, which use solar
energy to achieve a synthesis of living mat¬
ter from the mineral world. These produc¬
ers consist chiefly of micro-algae known as
phytoplankton. Starting with them, a food
chain is formed in which each link nourishes
the next. Phytoplankton, the "grassland" of
the sea, are consumed by small animals
the herbivorous Zooplankton which are in
turn consumed by carnivorous Zooplankton
AVERAGE ANNUAL PRECIPITATION
yïlpmiiBii«, . y " i
'/ V. M /
in
m Over 1 ,000 mm per year
'HillllHI, From 500 to 1,000 mm
lllllli: From 300 to 500 mm
1 I I I From 200 to 300 mm
I I Less than 200 mm Source: The Times Atlas of the World
which provide food for various species both
on the surface and lower down. Finally,
much of the animal waste is later restored to
the system by bacteria which transform it
into mineral elements, thus completing the
cycle of matter.
In the Mediterranean the functioning of
this "machine" or ecosystem depends close¬
ly on the unique geophysical conditions pre¬
vailing there. The extraordinarily heter¬
ogeneous and complex configuration of the
basins which constitute the Mediterranean
indicates that the sea has had a highly event¬
ful history, our understanding of which has
been greatly increased by a number of
geological and geophysical expeditions in
the last decade. One major event in this
history was undoubtedly the "Messinian
crisis" which occurred between five and six
million years ago, when the Mediterranean
was transformed into a huge "dead sea",
and all the water entering it from the neigh¬
bouring oceans evaporated, creating enor¬
mous deposits of salt which are now buried
under sediment. Such was the scale of this
crisis that it helped to modify the salinity of
the world ocean, providing a good illustra¬
tion of the interdependence of the
hydrosphere.
This tendency to evaporation persists to-
Between rainy Europe and the deserts of
Africa and Asia, the Mediterranean world
is unified first by the sea Itself, and then
by Its climate, typified by wide contrasts
In rainfall and the concentration of rainfall
In winter.
36

by Ramón Margallef Estimated at 5,700 million tonnes in 1982,
the petroleum reserves of the Mediterra¬
nean basin amount to more than 6% of
the world total. Refineries are numerous,
and Italy, for example, has a capacity of
200 million tonnes. There is a substantial
tanker fleet, with Greece alone account¬
ing for some 44 per cent of total capacity.
Although less serious than pollution
originating on land, pollution linked to the
exploitation and transport of hydrocar¬
bons remains considerable. The amount
of oil discharged into the Mediterranean
each year ranges from 500,000 to one
million tonnes, only some 10 per cent of
which Is due to accidents at sea. Below, a
tanker sails past St. Mark's Square,
Venice.
Uli 1 1
T -_
I I
Mill I I ¡J
day and is one of the essential features of
the Mediterranean's hydrological régime.
The Mediterranean (including the Black
Sea) has a surface area of 2.96 million km2
for a volume of 4.24 million km3. Its aver¬
age depth is 1,429 metres, with the max¬
imum of 5,000 metres occurring in the Io¬
nian basin, which lies to the south of Italy
and Greece. One feature of the profile of
the Mediterranean is the shallow depth of
the ridges separating the chief basins 40
metres in the Bosphorus, 400 between Sicily
and Tunisia, 320 in the Straits of Gibraltar,
the sole link between the Mediterranean
and the ocean.
The hydrology of this sea which is almost
entirely enclosed has been the subject of
considerable research. At first sight the ba¬
lance is negative, since evaporation greatly
exceeds precipitation and inflows from
rivers. According to current estimates, eva¬
poration causes an annual loss of 1 ,000 mm
or nearly 2,900 km3 of water. Average
annual precipitation amounts to 310 mm,
which is low compared to the estimated
world average of 970 mm. Even if we take
into account precipitation throughout the
catchment area, which amounts to 550 mm
per year only a third of which reaches the
sea total precipitation does not exceed
500 mm per year. Thus there is a massive
shortfall, and it is not necessary to be a great
mathematician to see that without a com¬
pensatory phenomenon of some kind the
Mediterranean would dry up completely
within 2,000 years, as indeed happened dur¬
ing the Messinian crisis.
A compensatory mechanism is, there¬
fore, essential. It is provided by the Atlantic
Ocean but is not limited to a mere inflow of
water. Broadly speaking, it can be said that
the Mediterranean converts water coming
in from the Atlantic into typically
Mediterranean water, some of which re¬
turns to the Atlantic in the lower layers of
the Straits of Gibraltar. On the other hand,
the water which enters the Mediterranean is
surface water. It is less salty than Mediterra¬
nean water (about 36 g of salt per thousand)
and its volume is from twenty to forty times
greater than that of the evaporated water.
During the summer months this surface
water is subj ect to a high rate of evaporation
and consequently its salinity increases, but,
as a result of its high temperature, not its
density. During the winter, as it cools, its
density increases and it descends to a lower
level where it acquires the typical character¬
istics of Mediterranean water (T= 13°C, 38g
of salt per 1,000). This water, which subse¬
quently emerges in the lower layers of the
Straits of Gibraltar, spreads out in a sheet
into the Atlantic, as far as the Azores and
the Bay of Biscay. Consequently, when the
volume evaporated has been replaced, the
deep outflow is almost equal to the inflow,
thus ensuring a slow but steady renewal of
the water of the Mediterranean (according
to specialists it takes 180 years for the total
volume of water in the Mediterranean to be
renewed). Above all, this reciprocal ex¬
change with the Atlantic Ocean helps to
maintain salinity and prevents the
Mediterranean from being transformed
once more into a dead sea. It also creates
major turbulence phenomena in the Albor-
án basin between Spain and Morocco.
While the water dynamics described
above play an essential role in ecosystems,
other, sometimes more important mechan¬
isms intervene in the control of biological
cycles. Phosphorus, for example, which is
present in water in the form of phosphates,
is used in the synthesis of living matter by
phytoplankton, thus acting as a limiting
factor in biological productivity. Calcula¬
tion of the phosphorus balance in the ^

38

Mediterranean reveals that elements are
recycled. By measuring the inputs pro¬
vided by water from the Atlantic, rains and
rivers and the outflows to the Atlantic,
losses in depth, withdrawals through
fishing, etc., the amount of phosphorus
theoretically available has been estimated
at about 500,000-600,000 tons per year.
Primary production, as far as it can be esti¬
mated at present, needs four times the
amount theoretically available. Thus the
speed of the biological cycle is higher than
that of the hydrological cycle. This confirms
that the same atom of phosphorus is used on
an average several times a year in the biolo¬
gical cycle.
This brief study of phosphorus also re¬
veals that the mechanisms responsible for
the recycling of nutrients form a safety de¬
vice which is continuously washing and
clearing the sea of accumulated waste. In a
sense the Mediterranean is withstanding
pollution better than other enclosed seas
such as the Baltic. However, this does not
mean that the mechanisms involved are
capable of coping with excess of all kinds.
No natural process can deal with an over¬
load that keeps growing indefinitely.
However, the mechanisms which restore
surface fertility are of limited efficacy.
Compared to other seas, the Mediterranean
is not very productive. Experts call it an
oligotrophic sea. By analogy with certain
terrrestrial ecosystems it could be said that
the Mediterranean corresponds to certain
semi-desert arid zones.
The relative poverty of the Mediterra¬
nean is reflected in the high transparency of
its waters, as a result of which it has been
described as a sea for tourists rather than
for fishermen.
In fact there are two main ecological sea¬
sons in the Mediterranean. A six-month
period from May to October is marked by a
significant rise in the temperature of the
surface waters, which may reach 25° or even
27°C. During this period these waters are
very sharply stratified, being separated
from the underlying cold layers by a very
pronounced thermal discontinuity known
as "thermocline". Save in rare circum¬
stances (local inshore mixtures or nutrient
salts brought down by rivers) fertilization is
out of the question. The transfer of nut¬
rients takes place downwards, by
sedimentation.
The second season, between November
and April, is described as "productive". As
the surface water cools, it sinks and is re¬
placed by water from lower down. The
homogenization of temperatures (in the re¬
gion of 13°C) all through the vertical profile
facilitates the mixing of the waters and
promotes a return of nutrients to the surface
and the development of phytoplankton.
A fisherman carrying strings of fish is
depicted In this mural dating from the
first half of the second millennium of the
pre-Christian era. It was discovered at
Thera (the Island of Santorin in the
Aegean Sea) and Is preserved In the
Archaeological Museum, Athens.
Currently available data (which are
admittedly far from complete) indicate that
the annual production ofZooplankton in the
Mediterranean amounts to about 8 g of
carbon per square metre. This is more than
enough to feed the higher links of the
trophic chain, especially pelagic fish and
cetaceans. But information is still scarce.
Mediterranean fisheries take about 40 mg
of carbon per square metre per year, some¬
times ten times more in certain zones of the
western basin. This is of course an excellent
yield in the light of what is known about
primary and secondary production levels.
Finally, I should point out that, according
to a general law of ecology, oligotrophic
ecosystems, while remaining at a relatively
low level of productivity, display far smaller
fluctuations over time than those observed
in more productive ecosystems. These fea¬
tures are, I believe, the chief characteristics
of the pelagic ecosystem" of the
Mediterranean.
FISHING
IN THE MEDITERRANEAN
Tonnes of fish taken
1968 1980
Spain 83,197 146,606
France 39,857 46,800
Italy 296,952 352,631
Monaco
Malta 1,300 1,023
Yugoslavia 30,061 34,968
Albania 4,000
Greece 55,815 75,745
Turkey 33,287 41 ,405
Cyprus 1,354 1,304
Syrian Arab Rep. 800 976
Lebanon 2,500 2,400
Israel 6,864 3,702
Egypt 13,560 19,939
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 5,000 4,803
Tunisia 14,537 60,154
Algeria 18,200 38,878
Morocco 10,578 27,316
TOTAL 617,692 858,650
RAMON MARGALLEF, of Spain, has been pro¬
fessor of ecology at the University of Barcelona
since 1967. He is a specialist in the ecologyofthe
primary producers of marine and freshwater
plankton and in theoretical questions related to
the complexity of ecosystems and their develop¬
ment. The present article has been extracted
from a more detailed study of Mediterranean
plankton which has appeared in the French
scientific periodical La Recherche (September
1984).
Source : FAO, Rome
In 1980, the official fish catch In the
Mediterranean was 858,650 tonnes, or 1
per cent of the world total. The quality of
the species taken Is such that the percen¬
tage In terms of commercial value Is far
higher. The Mediterranean Is rich In fish
species, which number from 450 to 500
(as opposed to 170 In the Baltic), some
120 of which are fished. In tonnage more
than half the catch usually consists of
Clupeldae (anchovies, sardines, etc.),
followed by mackerel. Shellfish and
molluscs constitute just under 15 per
cent (by weight) of the total catch.
Perspectives sur le Bassin Méditerranéen (Développement et
Environnement)-Plan Bleu pour la Méditerranée, 1985

