These stylized "hedgehog" anti-tank obstacles, erected after
the war at the suburb of Khimki In the outskirts ofMoscow, mark
the point reached by reconnaissance troops on 2 December
1941, the ultimate limit of the advance of Hitler's forces on the
Soviet capital.



Can we save
civilization? by Yuri Kirshin
DURING 5,000 years of history,
mankind has ' experienced more
than 14,000 wars. The aims pur¬
sued through these wars were widely dif¬
ferent. States took up arms in order to en¬
force political or economic domination, to
plunder or exterminate peoples, or to speed
up or slow down the pace of other nations'
political, economic or spiritual develop¬
ment. Wars were widespread at the time of
the foundation of centralized States. The
waging and outcome of a war influenced
social processes; the aggressor could con¬
quer economic centres, sources of raw
materials and commercial outlets, impose
unequal terms of trade, and bring security
to its empire. Political authorities also often
turned to wars of conquest to solve their in¬
ternal problems and overcome their own
crises.
However, the kings, emperors or chiefs
of general staff who prepared their future
campaigns in the tranquillity of their head¬
quarters, or the politicians who were engag¬
ed in the clash of parliamentary debate, did
not fail to weigh the advantages and disad¬
vantages of a war. Would the State lose
more than it gained? Would the expense of
occupying the territory of another State be
justified? Might not the cost of such and
such a victory turn out to be too high?
Realistic politicians, considering a given ob¬
jective negligible compared with the efforts
required to achieve it, have often turned
their backs on war, and signed peace
treaties instead.
Today, a world war and, a fortiori, a
nuclear war can no longer constitute a.
political instrument. It would be madness to
pretend otherwise, because the only effec¬
tive riposte to a nuclear attack is a nuclear
counter-attack. Since the chances of re¬
stricting a nuclear attack are nil, the latter
would immediately spread to all the con¬
tinents and would convulse the entire
planet, compromising the very survival of
humanity. Thus, whatever its objective
military, political or economicnuclear ag¬
gression would be an absurdity.
In addition to these cold practical con¬
siderations, there is a highly important fac¬
tor which no politician should forget even
for a second: those who lose their lives in all
wars, great and small.
"A house has been hit. There are few vic¬
tims; one dead. Imagine that it is your child,
your wife or your father. Would you say
that there were few victims? This one victim
was perhaps your reason for living." In t
these few words, Serguei Obraztsov, an in¬
ternationally known Soviet man of the
theatre, sums up all the horrors of war.
The 14,000 wars have claimed four thou¬
sand million human lives. A third world
war, if nothing is done to prevent it, would
alone claim as many victims. In the past ar¬
my confronted army, soldiers fought
against other soldiers. But weapons have
become more and more lethal; innocent
populations are increasingly affected. Ten
million died in the First World War, almost
all of them soldiers. The Second World War
claimed 50 million human lives, and there
was one civilian victim for each soldier kill¬
ed at the front. A nuclear world war would
exterminate the whole of humanity.
If war spells the death of humanity,
preparation for war is like a serious illness
which gnaws at all the organs. In 1982,
world spending on arms amounted to over
650 thousand million dollars,; more than the
total income of one-third of humanity liv¬
ing in the fifty poorest countries. The 1982
Report of the Independent Commission on
Disarmament and Security issues, under the
chairmanship of Olof Palme of Sweden,
pointed out that a 10 per cent reduction in
arms expenditures by the nuclear powers
alone would make it possible at least to dou¬
ble aid to the thirty-one least developed
countries. The industrialized countries are
not the only ones caught up in the arms^
13

"When we speak of victory, we are speak¬
ing also ofsomething of the utmost impor¬
tance that is a fact of life todaycollab¬
oration between States with different social
systems and structures. Theforming of the
anti-Hitler coalition was very instructive. In
recognizing that they had to work together
to save their own people and, indeed, all
humanity, the statesmen of the time set
what has become a standard of wise and
responsible policy".
Vitaly Korotitch (Ukrainian SSR)
Culture is always a victim of war. Right,
the entrance hall of the Shevchenko
Museum, Chernigov, the Ukrainian SSR,
in 1944.
i
i
%
L 4L
tí^*F \í*
S^jfrjwa;
m
%> T*'
' * \ m
1
>
*3
^ J7¡^'
3D
íj*§m
jM
^ race: the developing countries, 90 per cent
of whose population live in the direst pover¬
ty, account for two-thirds of the volume of
the international arms trade. The 130 armed
conflicts which have occurred in the last
forty years, and which have been
characterized by a growing interna¬
tionalization, have taken place in these
countries.
Whereas there was only one point of ten¬
sion on the eve of the First World War
Europe and two on the eve of the
SecondEurope and the Far East, today
the world's trouble spots are proliferating
and each one of them could spark off a
world war.
Humanity today faces no more urgent
task than that of braking this dangerous
trend, of limiting and reducing arms, in a
word, of saving civilization. To banish the
spectre of world war is to provide resources
for solving all the other fundamental world
problems, notably those relating to food,
the environment, and energy. Only peace
and peaceful coexistence between States
with different social systems can really open
future perspectives to the inhabitants of our
planet.
In this context, the objectives of the
struggle for peace have acquired a new
dimension. The struggle for peace is now
the struggle for the continuance of the
human species.
Nuclear world war is not inevitable. The
time when an aggressor could decide at the
drop of a hat whether or not to spark off a
war is long since over. Nevertheless, the
preparations for nuclear war have gone
much too far. It will only be possible to
avoid such a war if we fully devote ourselves
to the defence of peace throughout the
world, and do all we can to safeguard
civilization. The defence of peace will be
truly world-wide if all peoples, whatever
their socio-economic system, devote
themselves to it with the means at their
disposal.
Some countries have not known peace for
generations. Children are born while bombs
fall, learn to read and write in shelters; peo¬
ple move around with their rifles, eyes fixed
on the skies where enemy aircraft may ap
pear at any moment. All these people know
of peace is what their elders have told them
about it. During this time in Europe, for the
first time in our history, a second genera¬
tion is growing up which only knows about
war from books and films. If for forty years
the world has not been devastated by a
general conflagration, the merit must large¬
ly go to the United Nations, which was
created precisely to maintain peace,
strengthen security, and promote co¬
operation between peoples. But at the pre¬
sent time the United Nations and Unesco
must multiply their efforts in this field. For
if humanity is incapable of defending peace
today, there will be no one left tomorrow to
talk of it to coming generations, even sup¬
posing, and it is an unlikely supposition,
that such generations will be born.
YURI KIRSHIN, of the USSR, is a
philosopher and specialist in problems of war
and peace, a subject on which he has publish¬
ed many studies. He is a member of the
editorial staff of the literary and arts review
Friendship Among Peoples.
Left, February 1943, inhabitants of Stal¬
ingrad (now Volgograd) return to their
shattered city. The Soviet victory at the
battle of Stalingrad was one of the great
turning points of World War II. The battle
raged from 17 July 1942 to 2 February
1943. A turning point was reached on 23
November 1942, when two Soviet attack¬
ing groups joined up near Kalach to com¬
plete the encirclement of some 330,000
Nazi troops. The last of these troops sur¬
rendered on 2 February 1943. During this
final stage of the battle some 200,000
Nazi soldiers perished and 91,000 were
taken prisoner.
14

"There werefive of us in the family home,
fresh out of school. What should we do?
The decision was unanimous. We would not
bend the knee, we would prepare to fight.
So every morning we went secretly to the
scenes of recent battles to collect weapons.
Soon we had amassed enough weapons to
arm an entire detachment. Graduallyyoung
men from neighbouring villages joined our
group which became the nucleus of a par¬
tisan unit. We had to face many problems.
Most of us knew nothing about handling
weapons. Furthermore, winter was ap¬
proaching. We had to dig rough sheltersfor
ourselves in theforest. Each day was a new
ordeal and we often went two days at a time
without food. After long marches in the
rain we were often unable to light afire to
dry ourselves and had to sleep in our soak¬
ing clothes. "
Anatoli Stouk, (Byelorussian SSR)
Right, children sheltering during a
bombardment.
Official Byelorussian statistics show that
one out of every four inhabitants of the
Byelorussian SSR died during the war.
Byelorussia's forests and marshes are
ideal terrain for guerrilla warfare, and the
Byelorussians took every advantage of it.
By 1943, some 375 thousand partisans
were harassing the enemy rear and were
in control of 60 per cent of Byelorussian
territory. The ranks of the partisans were
swelled by people from many countries
who had escaped from prisoner-of-war
and concentration camps. Right,
members of a partisan group operating in
the Minsk region; from left to right,
Gerbert Dits, an anti-Nazi German, Albert
Barliche, a Frenchman, Alexander Krut-
chkov, a Russian, and Grigori Rybalko, a
Byelorussian.
Bitter harvest. Looking for all the world
like some fantastic, petrified weed, these
fragments of shell-casings, bombs,
mines, rifles, tanks, aircraft were
"harvested" by a farmer preparing his
field for sowing. He gathered them
together and formed them into this strik¬
ing "sculpture" which now forms part of
the huge memorial complex known as
The Battlefield, erected in memory of
those who died at the battle of Stalingrad.
15
