Indian workers in a garment factory in
Wolverhampton, England



United Kingdom
The struggle against
discrimination
by Robert Miles
THERE has been an Asian and Car¬
ibbean presence in Britain for sev¬
eral centuries, reflecting British
colonial history. Many British towns and
cities, particularly seaports, contain Asian
and Caribbean communities which have
been established for three generations or
more. Their origin often lies with travelling
salesmen from the Indian sub-continent or
with seamen recruited in the colonies.
These communities formed the base for
the migration that developed in the 1950s
in response to the demand for labour in
certain sectors of the British economy. As
happened elsewhere in Western Europe
after 1945, the expansion of the capitalist
economy exhausted the supply of labour
within the national boundary and employ¬
ers were forced to recruit workers from
elsewhere.
The majority of those recruited after
1945 were from colonies and ex-colonies,
and they arrived in Britain with British
citizenship. Comparable circumstances
existed in the case of certain migrant
groups to France and the Netherlands.
These colonial migrants arrived with the
right to settle and work, and with full polit¬
ical and civil rights. However, this position
of legal equality has not led to their attain
ing a position of economic and social equal¬
ity with the indigenous population.
Most New Commonwealth migrants who
came to Britain before 1965 did so in order
to fill positions in the labour market
vacated by indigenous workers. These
were mainly manual jobs, and particularly
semi- and unskilled manual jobs. They
were also often low-paid and involved poor
working conditions and/or shiftwork.
Migrants were concentrated in textiles,
food production, automobile construction,
metal manufacture, transport and the
National Health Service.
21

% WÊ^--

Although the majority of migrants in this
early period were men, the migration from
the Caribbean did include a large pro¬
portion of women who came in order to
work in their own right. Since the mid-
1960s, almost all the New Commonwealth
migrants have been the wives and children
of those who came in the earlier period,
and many of them have entered the labour
market as is their right.
Thus, in 1981 , 89.9 per cent of Caribbean
men of working age and 69.9 per cent of
Caribbean women were employed, com¬
pared with 90. 6 per cent of indigenous men
and 63.5 per cent of indigenous women.
The respective figures for Asian men and
women were 85.6 per cent and 41.4 per
cent. The much smaller proportion of
Asian women employed is partly explained
by cultural factors.
The position of these migrants in the
labour market in the 1980s has not changed
noticeably from the situation that existed
during the early period of the migration.
A national survey published in 1984
showed that, amongst the indigenous male
population, 42 per cent were employed in
professional and non-manual occupations,
and 58 per cent were employed in manual
work. The respective figures for Asian men
were 26 per cent and 73 per cent, and for
Caribbean men, 15 per cent and 83 per
cent.
Concerning manual work, men of Car¬
ibbean and Asian origin remained over-
represented in semi- and unskilled jobs,
compared with 16 per cent of indigenous
men.
Workers of Caribbean and Asian origin
in Britain are, therefore, predominantly
manual workers and are significantly over-
represented in semi- and unskilled manual
work. The migrant of the 1950s was
recruited to these positions. But an expla¬
nation is required for the fact that migrants
and their British-born children remain
largely confined to these same sectors.
Language problems have not been irrel¬
evant, and some of the migrants lacked
formal qualifications, but these factors less
easily explain the position and experience
of the migrants' children.
In the case of the latter, the question
of achievement within the British edu¬
cation system arises, especially for West
Indian boys. Yet even where people of
Asian and Caribbean origin speak good
English and have equivalent qualifications,
they are commonly employed in inferior
positions. A number of studies conducted
since the mid 1960s have shown that dis¬
crimination plays a crucial role in deter¬
mining their position in the labour market,
despite the fact that such discrimination
is illegal.
West Indian and Asian migrants and
their children (particularly young men of
| Caribbean origin) have been particularly
"-. vulnerable to unemployment. In the early
¡ 1960s, unemployment amongst New Com-
I monwealth migrants was higher than
~ amongst the indigenous population, but it
§ A Bangalee mother in London takes an
£ English lesson in her home.
Audio-visual aids are used to help these
Pakistani children learn English at their
school at Bradford in northern England.
fell during the 1960s, with the exception
of the recession of 1967/68, and by the end
of the decade was at about the same level.
However, over the past fifteen years,
unemployment amongst both migrants and
their children has increased faster than
amongst the indigenous population.
Within the Asian and Caribbean popu¬
lations, unemployment rates have been
even higher for young West Indian men
and for Pakistani and Bangladeshi women.
The aforementioned 1984 study showed
that 25 per cent of Caribbean men and 16
per cent of Caribbean women, and 20 per
cent of Asian men and women were unem¬
ployed, compared with 13 per cent of indig¬
enous men and 10 per cent of indigenous
women. In the 16-24 years age range, 44
per cent of Caribbean men and 38 per cent
of Caribbean women, and 30.5 per cent
of Asian men and 38.5 per cent of Asian
women were unemployed, compared with
26 per cent of indigenous men and 20 per
cent of indigenous women.
This higher level of unemployment is
due in part to the fact that Asian and Car¬
ibbean workers are over-represented
amongst those engaged in semi- and
unskilled manual work for low wages. Peo¬
ple doing these jobs are more likely to
become unemployed, partly because it is,
these sorts of manual jobs that are increas¬
ingly being replaced by machinery. But this
is far from being the only factor.
Asian and Caribbean people are more
likely to be unemployed whatever their job
level, and they are also more likely to be
unemployed due to dismissal from work.
These facts suggest that discrimination is
an important part of the explanation.
Discrimination confines migrants to par¬
ticular positions in the hierarchy of wage
labour, but in a way which is not always
evident to the victims; studies show that
people of Asian and Caribbean origin
underestimate the extent of discrimination
against them. Moreover, immigrants are
also subjected to incidents of violence. A
Home Office report published in 1981 con¬
cluded that there was a minimum of 7,000
attacks a year and that people of Asian
origin were fifty times more likely to be
the victim of an attack than people of Euro¬
pean origin. People of Caribbean origin
were thirty-six times more likely to be vic¬
tims of such attacks. The research team
concluded that "It was clear to us that the
Asian community widely believes that it
is the object of a campaign of unremitting
racial harassment which it fears will grow
worse in the future". These attacks take
\ place in certain urban areas, especially in
the big cities.
The vast majority of colonial migrants
to Britain and their British-born children
are part of the working class. In many
respects they share all the disadvantages
and problems of the working class, and
they are involved in traditional forms of
working class political organization and
behaviour. Overall, workers of Asian and
Caribbean origin are more likely to belong
to a trade union and to vote for the Labour
Party than are indigenous workers. They
have also played a prominent part in trade
union struggles, although the trade unions
themselves are often characterized by dis¬
criminatory practices against immigrants.
The political consciousness of these work¬
ers overlaps to a significant extent with the
political consciousness of the rest of the
working class.
The activities of self-help groups, com¬
munity schools, parents' groups concerned
with their children's experience in the edu¬
cation system, self-defence groups and
many others are all part of the complex
political reaction of colonial migrants and
their children to the specific problems that
they face in Britain and are an important
part of the continuing struggle for racial
equality there.
ROBERT MILES, of the United Kingdom, has
been lecturer in sociology at the University of
Glasgow since 1978. He is the author or co¬
author of several publications including Labour
and Racism (1980), Racism and Migrant Labour
(1982), and White Man's Country: Racism in
British Politics (7984).
23
