NIELS
BOHR
NIELS Bohr, who was born in Copen¬
hagen on 7 October, 1885, was
one of the foremost scientists of
the twentieth century. Before the First
World War, he took the new quantum
theory and used it to construct the first
successful, detailed picture of how atoms
work; in the 1920s, he first extended this
understanding to explain the periodic
table of the elements. Then revolutionary
new developments transformed quantum
theory into the foundation stone of
modern physics, and Bohr was instrumen¬
tal in providing the interpretation of quan¬
tum physics, the Copenhagen Interpreta¬
tion, which is still today the basis for
translating quantum ideas into everyday
terms. He worked on the Manhattan Pro¬
ject, the construction of the first atomic
bomb, but in the 1950s he campaigned to
achieve control of nuclear weapons, and
his efforts to promote the peaceful use of
atomic energy led to his receiving the first
US Atoms for Peace award, in 1957.
Bohr came from an intellectual family.
His father, Christian Bohr, was professor
of physiology at the University of
Copenhagen; his younger brother, and
lifelong friend, Harald, was an eminent
mathematician; and his son, Aage, follow¬
ed Niels both in the directorship of the
Institute of Theoretical Physics in
Copenhagen and as a winner of the Nobel
Prize in physics.
In his early academic career Niels Bohr
displayed thoroughness rather than
brilliance, carrying out a painstaking
measurement of the surface tension of
water in 1906, then moving on to analyse
the behaviour of electrons in metals, a
project for which he received a PhD in
191 1 . It was only after he completed this
work, and moved first to Cambridge and
then, in March 1912, to the University of
Manchester, that Bohr displayed what
became his characteristic approach to
scientific problems.
His particular genius, which was just
the thing required to make progress in
atomic physics in those days, was his will¬
ingness to patch together different ideas,
from different sources, to make an im¬
aginary "model" of the atom (a set of
equations, and a physical picture) that
worked at least in rough agreement with
the way observations suggested that real
atoms worked. Once he had a rough idea
what was going on, Bohr could tinker with
the theories to make the bits fit together
even better, and so work towards a com¬
plete picture. This was just about the only
approach that could have worked in the
second decade of the twentieth century,
for what physicists knew about atoms was
decidedly fragmentary and incomplete.
The electron itself, which we now know
to be a component of the atom, had only
Niels Bohr (right) with Einstein in
Brussels, in 1930. Einstein believed that
there were laws governing the behaviour
of everything in the universe from elec¬
trons to planets and to the end of his life
he was unwilling to accept a central no¬
tion of quantum theory that the precise
movement of a single electron could not
be predicted. "God", he once said, "is
subtle but he is not malicious. " And on
another occasion "God does not play at
dice." To which Bohr is said have
retorted "Stop telling God what to do."
been discovered in 1887, and it was only
in 191 1 that New Zealand physicist Ernest
Rutherford (1871-1937), on the basis of
experiments carried out in Manchester,
suggested that there must be a small cen¬
tral nucleus to every atom, containing all
of its positive charge and most of its mass,
while the electrons formed a cloud of
negatively charged particles around the
nucleus.
Later experiments showed he was
correctthe nucleus is only one hundred
thousandth of the size of the atom.
Typically, a nucleus about 10-13 cm
across is embedded in an electron cloud
10-8 cm across. To put these figures in
perspective, imagine a pinhead, perhaps
a millimetre across, in the centre of the
dome of St Paul's Cathedral (35 metres in
diameter), surrounded by a cloud of
microscopic dust motes far out in the
dome. The pinhead represents the
nucleus, and the dust motes represent
electrons. Atoms are mostly empty space.
But at the beginning of 1912, Ruther¬
ford's picture of the atom was still con¬
troversial. In particular, since opposite
electric charges attract one another,
physicists could not explain why all the
electrons in every atom did not im¬
mediately fall in to their nuclei, releasing a
burst of energy (radiation) in the process.
This is where Bohr came in, naturally
gravitating to Manchester to work with
Rutherford's group as his interest in the
atomic puzzle grew.
The simplest ¡mage of the atom that
emerged from Rutherford's work was
something like the Solar System, with a
nucleus at its heart, in place of the Sun,
and electrons orbiting around it, in place
of the planets. The picture is over-
simplistic, but it was the first step on the
road to understanding the atom.
Everything physicists knew about charg¬
ed particles in orbit said that they should
radiate electromagnetic energy (light, X-
rays or radio waves) and spiral inwards.
So there was an obvious flaw with the
model. Bohr resolved the dilemma by
20

a pragmatic genius by John Gribbin
plucking a totally different idea out of cur¬
rent developments in physics, and stick¬
ing it on to Rutherford's atomic model.
This was the idea, stemming from the
work of German physicist Max Planck
(1 858-1 947) at the turn of the century, that
electromagnetic radiation (light, or the
other forms) could only be emitted or ab¬
sorbed by an atom in discrete units, called
quanta. The automatic bank-note
distributor at my bank in London operates
much the same way. It will only issue me
with money in units of £5. 1 can get £20, or
£45, but I cannot get £1 , or £37, out of it.
Bohr said that the electrons "in orbit"
around the nucleus of an atom could not
spiral gently inward because that would
involve radiating energy continuously.
Quantum theory said that they could only
release certain fixed amounts of energy,
and to do so an electron would have to
"jump", instantaneously, from one "or¬
bit" to anotherrather as if Mars sudden¬
ly jumped into the Earth's orbit. There
were stable orbits, said Bohr, correspon¬
ding to fixed amounts of energy, rather
like the rungs on a ladder. But there were
no in between orbits, and an electron
could not spiral into the nucleus because
that would involve releasing fractional
amounts of energy.
What Bohr did had no right to work. The
whole idea of an orbit depends on
classical physics, Newton's laws; the idea
of electron states corresponding to fixed
amounts of energy (energy levels, as they
came to be called) came from quantum
theory. Making a model which patched
together bits of each theory gave no in¬
sight into what made atoms tick, but it pro¬
vided just enough of a starting point for
Bohr to make progress throughout the
next ten years.
Niels Bohr used to begin his lectures by
saying to his students "Every sentence
that I utter should be regarded by you not
as an assertion but as a question. " He Is
seen here, In 1936, at the Niels Bohr In¬
stitute, Copenhagen, in conversation
with two other Nobel Prlzewlnning
physicists, Werner Heisenberg (centre)
and Wolfang Pauli (right).
That progress continued in
Copenhagen, where the authorities
created a new Institute to entice Bohr
back. He became director of the Niels
Bohr Institute in 1920, developing it into
one of the great scientific centres, where
theoretical physicists came from all over
the world to bounce ideas off one another
and to probe the mysteries of quanta and
the atom. And in the early 1920s Bohr pro¬
duced his greatest single achievement, a
theory of the atom which explained, at
least in broad outline, the whole science
of chemistry.
The Siberian Dmitri Mendeleyev
(1834-1907) had come up with his
classification of the elements in the
1 860s. He showed that these fundamental
substances could be ranked in a table in
order of increasing atomic weight, in such
a way that elements with similar proper¬
ties appeared beneath each other in the
columns of the table. But there was no ex¬
planation of why elements with very dif¬
ferent atomic masses should just happen
to have similar chemical properties, until
Bohr improved his theory of the atom in
the years following the First World War. It
was clear to Bohr, and his contem¬
poraries, that the chemical properties of
atoms depend almost exclusively on the
number of electrons they contain. These
are related to the number of protons
(positively charged particles) in the
nucleus, and therefore to the atomic
mass. But the electrons themselves are
the visible face an atom shows to the
world, the "handles" by which it interacts
with other atoms. So why should an atom
of lithium, which has three electrons, be
very similar chemically to an atom of
sodium, which has eleven electrons, and
potassium with nineteen? Once again,
Bohr produced an imaginary model of the
atom to explain the observations, without
waiting for the fundamental physics to be
worked out.
Imagine the electron "orbits" around
the atom as more like onion skins, nest¬
ling one inside the other, than like the or¬
bits of the planets around the Sun. What
Bohr said, in effect, was that the inner¬
most orbit, or "shell", only has room for
two electrons. He didn't worry why this
should be so; he just chose the restriction
to match the observed patterns of
chemical properties of the elements. The
next shell out from the nucleus, however,
has room for eight electrons. So an atom
which has, say, six protons in its nucleus,
and therefore "needs" six electrons to en¬
sure its electrical neutrality, will slot two
into the innermost shell, and four into the
second shell. But an atom with eleven pro¬
tons (sodium) has two in the innermost
shell, eight in the second, full, shell, and
the last has to go into a new shell, out on
its own. This is very similar to the pattern
for lithium, which has two electrons in its
innermost shell, and, once again, just one
out on its own. And potassium fits the pic¬
ture if we imagine it to have three filled
shells (two, eight and eight electrons
each), with a lone electron in the fourth
shell.
What matters for chemistry is primarily
the number of electrons in the outermost
shell that contains any electrons at all.
Working outward through the shells for
heavier and heavier atoms, with more and
more electrons, Bohr was able to explain
the relationship between the elements in
Mendeleyev's periodic table in terms of
atomic structure, and although he had no
idea why a shell containing eight elec¬
trons should be "closed" to further addi¬
tions, he could use the fact that it was to
explain how atoms combine with one
another.
Bohr proved nothing mathematically
he just knew that things had to be this
Niels Bohr (left) sitting back-to-back with
Ernest Rutherford during a river-side pic¬
nic In 1923, at Cambridge, where he had
gone to receive an honorary Doctor of
Science degree. In 1911, Rutherford had
made the greatest of his many contribu¬
tions to sciencehis nuclear theory of
the atom (see article). It was while work¬
ing with Rutherford at Manchester
University that Niels Bohr developed the
theoretical Implications of the nuclear
model of the atom, combining It with the
quantum theory developed by the Ger¬
man physicist Max Planck.
21

way. In his Autobiographical Notes,
published in 1949, Einstein said of Bohr's
work and the early quantum theory "that
this insecure and contradictory founda¬
tion was sufficient to enable a man of
Bohr's unique instinct and talent to
discover the major laws of spectral lines
and of the electron-shells of the atoms
together with their significance for
chemistry appeared to me like a
miracleand appears to me as a miracle
even today".
In 1922, Bohr received the Nobel Prize
for physics for this work; in the same year,
a previously unknown element, whose ex¬
istence had been predicted by his atomic
theory, was discovered, and named haf¬
nium. But it was only in 1926 and 1927
that physicists at last began to put the
quantum theory on a secure footing,
discovering the relationships and laws
which explained why electrons had to
behave in this peculiar manner, why the
numbers allowed in each shell were
limited. That full version of the quantum
theory brought in concepts that still seem
bizarre. No longer could the electron be
thought of as a tiny particle, but rather as
an entity which could be both wave and
particle at the same time. Any experiment
designed to find a particle would indeed
show the electron behaving as a
particlebut set up an experiment to
measure wave properties, and it would
show electrons behaving like waves.
What was "really" going on?
By the late 1 920s, physicists had a com¬
plete theory, a set of self-consistent equa¬
tions, to describe the behaviour of atoms,
electrons and radiation. The only trouble
was it didn't make sense. Once again,
Jb^.df-ftt , z'*
¿
W-'fô-i'jf£c. $-
-MM