In defence of folklore
by Jean Paul Guibbert
Design on a playing card from Purl, a
town In the province of Orissa, India,
depicts an Incarnation of the Hindu deity
Vishnu who ¡s shown In the form of a
hybrid creature, Navagunjara, a combina¬
tion of man and beast, bird and snake.
FOLKLORE in its various manifes¬
tations forms part of the heritage
of mankind; enshrining folk
memory and traditions, it constitutes the
living museum of our civilizations.
Transmitted by the oral tradition, in¬
herited and assimilated by imitation or
learning, folklore is volatile and fluc¬
tuating. In other words it is living, which
also means that it can die.
Transposed, adapted, modified,
folklore appears in a variety of guises. It
is a reflection of man, and like man may
be well or ill nourished, rich or poor.
Precious and fragile, prone to loss, ob¬
livion, caricature and, of course, to
plunder, it eludes close definition and its
range is difficult to circumscribe. In
other words it is both highly vulnerable
and hard to defend.
21

s
©
Two examples of handicrafts from Benin.
Left, a ceremonial drinking cup fashioned
from a gourd engraved with friezes
bordering a bicycle motif. Right, In the
market at Porto Novo, the administrative
capital of Benin, metalsmiths have
transformed used tins Into sieves by per¬
forating them with traditional decorative
patterns.
Folklore today seems to be in a less for¬
tunate position than art, the protection of
which not so long ago provoked the same
doubts and hesitations. However, this ill-
fortune is also a sign of vitality, for the
resistance and opposition which folklore
arouses suggests that it does mean
something to us and that it does have a
life of its own, in addition to its rarely
mentioned attributes: the poetic and
didactic powers, the symbolic force and
cathartic possibilities, which make
folklore an effective instrument of cre¬
ation, education and the transmission of
values.
It is symptomatic of a growing trend
that Unesco should today be concerned
with the problem of the conservation and
protection of folklore. People every¬
where are coming to feel the heed for
roots, for the preservation of identity.
Without self-knowledge and self-respect
it is impossible to know and respect
others, and the cultural diversity in which
differences are rooted is also through
those very differences the hallmark of
the originality of the entire human race.
The key issue is folklore's right to ex¬
ist, a right which extends further than
recognition that it actually does exist and
raises more technical problems how
should folklore be defined, how should
its various forms be identified and kept
alive? This is why it will be necessary to
act with great flexibility. The machinery
which will have to be created could well
be based on models that have been
adopted for other forms of creative ac¬
tivity; but they will need to be adapted,
and provision will have to be made for ex¬
ceptions and special cases in order to
stimulate folklore as far as possible and
prevent it from becoming ossified. An ex¬
cess of legislation or categorization could
cause irretrievable losses. It is not im¬
possible that a kind of consensus may
spontaneously emerge from among those
concerned with the technicalities of
folklore, scholars and the representatives
of the different interest groups so that ex¬
cessive measures, whatever their nature,
will not be taken.
Opportunities must be created for the
widest public to discover, enjoy and
study folklore. It must also be explained,
put in its context or contexts, compared
and exchanged. Through an approach of
this kind folklore offers great potential
for promoting contact and under¬
standing between different peoples and
cultures.
But there is no doubt, either, that
folklore can be misused or caricatured in
ways which pervert its aims while
exploiting and even degrading its
substance, for its charm and fascination
are well known.
This raises the problem of the protec¬
tion of the rights connected with folklore,
as well as the more immediate concern to
protect folklore collections that exist to¬
day. Here too, it will be necessary to act
with a certain flexibility; otherwise
folklore may be confined within a protec¬
tionist system which would defeat its own
ends. Folklore will thus have to be ad¬
ministered and protected, like all human
property, through laws guaranteeing it
against attacks on its integrity and
authenticity. This all-round protection
will not be possible without purposeful
action on the part of the international
community, which, if its action is to be
fully valid, will have to take account of
the judgements and viewpoints of each of
its members.
Folklore cannot exist without people to
transmit it, and these people must be pro
tected, primarily within their own coun¬
try and community. But their protection
is a matter for universal concern.
Awareness of the issues involved must ex¬
ist both at the national and the interna¬
tional level.
The fact that such concern is felt, and
in many cases has been felt for some time,
in a number of countries which have
already created the necessary mechan¬
isms for the protection of folklore, is a
source of valuable experience which may
help other countries avoid a number of
pitfalls. Co-operation with these coun¬
tries and use of the knowledge they have
acquired may ease the way to the
establishment of various forms of pro¬
spection, collection and indexing of
folklore, as well as the diffusion of all
kinds of background data relating to it.
If the timeliness and even the feasibili¬
ty of establishing a binding international
instrument has been questioned, a ma¬
jority has nevertheless emerged in favour
of a flexible instrument, perhaps in the
form of an international recommenda¬
tion. Unesco's next General Conference
could formulate a number of principles
which States would be invited to adopt in
the form of national laws. Through inter¬
national co-operation and with the sup¬
port of clearly expressed wishes by the
nations, Unesco could contribute to the
establishment of the necessary infrastruc¬
tures, the formulation of a typology, the
training of personnel, the listing of rele¬
vant institutions and the constitution of
an international register of folklore
cultural property.
JEAN PAUL GUIBBERT, French sculptor,
poet and writer, is the author of a number of
studies on art and on the oral tradition. He has
a special interest in the popular and so-called
"primitive" arts and in problems relating to
the preservation and diffusion of, and exchan¬
ges between, the cultures of the world.
24

The classical repertory of Japanese Noh
theatre Is performed by professional ac¬
tors belonging to five schools which have
been officially recognized since the 17th
century. In 1910 a very ancient form of
Noh was discovered in Kurokawa, an
isolated rice-growing village northeast of
Tokyo. It had survived for centuries, and
is still performed six times a year by two
troupes of talented local actors on an Im¬
provised candle-lit stage (left).
Since it emerged In the early 1960s,
Butoh has become a leading modern
dance form In Japan. Moving with
dreamlike slowness In an atmosphere of
Intense concentration, Butoh performers
plunge Into a world ofshadows, in search
of the sources of life and dance. Butoh Is
largely improvised when executed by
solo dancers whose bodies are covered
with white make-up and who express
through bodily movements the Images of
their inner world. It mayalso be danced to
highly precise choreography, executed
by groups who try to create a universe or
rediscover a language of gestures in¬
herited from traditional daily life.
A piece of painted cotton cloth and a
ceramic bowl made by Peru's Shipibo In¬
dians and decorated with traditional geo¬
metrical motifs, the emblems of the tribe.
25
