City lights
The impact of rural-urban migration
CO
0.
i
©
THE phenomenon of migration is a
major factor in social change. It
affects not only those places that
receive migrants, but also those that send
them. In one type of migration, a member
of the family migrates temporarily to a
different place, moves between the place
of origin and the place of migration, and
treats the former as the reference point
to which he ultimately plans to return.
Migration from a rural to an urban area,
which is usually motivated by the need to
find work, makes heavy demands on the
members of the family back home. It
means that women have to undertake cer¬
tain tasks they did not previously perform
and thus involves a rearrangement of the
family time-table. It influences the social¬
ization pattern of children and may result
in a series of psychological problems. It
affects social life within the family as well
as relations outside.
The effect of these changes varies from
family to family and from culture to cul¬
ture. Response to male migration is dif¬
ferent in families in which the son has
En route for the city. For ruralpopulations
the great urban centres hold a natural
attraction which is magnified by the
hopesometimes justifiedthat in the
city their menfolk will find work enabling
them to improve the living standards of
the families they leave behind.
migrated from those in which the father
has migrated. In families in which the
migrant has the dual status of son and hus¬
band the impact of his migration is felt
differently.
A cross-cultural study of migration has
indicated that migration increases family
income, raises the standard of living some¬
what and adds in varying proportions to
the responsibilities of female family mem¬
bers. Some urban elements enter into the
inventory of the material culture of the
home.
Contrary to common belief, migration
and exposure to modernity may serve to
cement the bonds of kinship and to rein¬
force tradition. It is through the network
of kinship that people move into the city
and, once there, they continue to move
in the kinship and village circle. Back
home, the degree of dependence on kins¬
men increases with the departure of the
male to the town. The authority structure
changes very little; the patriarchal ethos
is pervasive. Family reunions generally
coincide with religious festivals and cer¬
emonial occasions and it is still the husband
who takes major decisions or gives the seal
of his approval, and in his absence the
other senior male members of the family
act as guardians.
Such a situation is understandable since
migration is a temporary phenomenon that
requires only ad hoc arrangements. These
are all withdrawn with the return to "nor¬
mality". However, such migration exposes
women to a wider world of work and expe¬
rience in the management of household
affairs that are in normal circumstances
looked after by men. Longer periods of
absence of husbands create a situation in
which women begin to assume greater
responsibilities and take decisions on mat¬
ters that cannot wait.
This said, the fact remains that men do
not migrate to improve the status of
women. They do it for the overall improve¬
ment of the family's standard of living and
to enhance its status within the traditional
structure. Seen in terms of long-term con¬
sequences, the suffering due to separation
caused by migration is actually an invest¬
ment made by the parents to provide a
better future for their children. The status
of the parents may not change much, but
their sons may have an education, and thus
get a better job, and their daughters may
marry well.

by Yogesh Atal
Migration to metropolitan centres causes
problems both in the cities and in the fam¬
ilies that remain in the village. It does not
immediately affect the status of migrants.
Realizing this and also accepting the inev¬
itability of the pulls and pushes that lead
ineluctably to migration, we need to devise
a suitable strategy to channel the move¬
ment of men. Studies carried out so far
suggest that we should think more about
the desirability of providing incentives
which would keep people in the rural areas,
such as the development of large villages
or small towns to which people could
move, but without moving very far. The
process would become decentralized with
suitable infrastructures being established
in the various regions of a country to ensure
the balanced economic growth necessary
for the elimination of rural poverty.
This text has been taken from the epilogue to Women
in the Villages, Men in the Towns, a book published
by Unesco in 1 984 as part of a series entitled "Women
in a world perspective".
WOMEN ALONE. A recent study of Indian
rural families from which at least one male
had temporarily migrated to Delhi showed
that 75 per cent of the families lived prin¬
cipally on remittances received from their
menfolk. Most of the cash was used for
the purchase of food and clothes; some
of it was spent on medicines and the edu¬
cation of male children.
*\ -- . »^-
"5^*--*
