Strange hiding-place
An arms cache in the Lascaux grotto
by André Malraux
The text published right is an extract
from André Malraux's autobiogra¬
phical work Antimemoirs, published in
1967. In it the famous French writer
and politician (1901-1976) evokes his
experience as a member of the Resis¬
tance. Under the name "Colonel
Berger", Malraux was leader of the
maquis in the Lot-et-Garonne and Cor-
rèze départements of southwestern
France. After playing an active role in
the Resistance he fought in Alsace and
Germany as commander of the "Als¬
ace-Lorraine" brigade.
Text © Copyright Reproduction prohibited
André Malraux Le miroir des Limbes I, Antimémoires V,
3 (pages 479 à 481) Bibliothèque de la Pléiade © Editions
Gallimard
The underground press played an Impor¬
tant role in French resistance to the Nazi
occupying forces. As well as spreading
information, it denounced economic
pillage and the requisition of workers,
and revealed the exploits of patriots and
the harshness of Nazi repression. In 1943
2 million copies of some 1,000 under¬
groundjournals were being printed. After
the war a large number of new French
publications grew out of these clandes¬
tine news-sheets.
From its scattered beginnings, the
French resistance grew constantly in
range and organization between 1940 and
1944. The units which fought against the
occupying forces came from a wide spec¬
trum. At the beginning of 1944 they
became the Forces Françaises de
l'Intérieur (F.F.I.), whose action would be
co-ordinated with Allied operations. In
the great battle which expelled the Nazis
from France, General Eisenhowerreckon¬
ed that the F.F.I, and the Resistance were
worth 15 divisions. Right, in Brittany, two
members of the Resistance brief advanc¬
ing Allied soldiers after the Normandy
landings in June 1944.
AT the beginning of 1944, I had in¬
spected the hiding-places of all our
maquis for the first time. Some of
them contained the arms which were intend¬
ed for the volunteers who would join us
when the landing was announced. There are
numerous caves in Périgord, and we climb¬
ed the iron ladders placed there for pre-war
tourists to locate our hidden weapons in a
honeycomb of cavities like the boxes of a
Magdalenian theatre. But the biggest cave,
at Montignac, was underground, and the
cache a long way from the entrance. We
carried powerful torches, for night had
fallen, and anyone who got lost there was a
dead man. The passage became so narrow
that soon we could only advance sideways.
There was a right-angled turn, and on the
rock which seemed to bar our way a vast
drawing appeared. I took it for a guide-
mark made by one of our guides, and shone
my torch on it. It was a frieze of superim¬
posed bison.
At Font-de-Gaume, the prehistoric paint¬
ings were blurred. These bison, on the con¬
trary, were stamped in the rock like seals,
their sharpness all the more remarkable for
the fact that the walls were great smooth
stones, now rounded,, now hollowed out,
not like rocks but like organs. These
petrified entrails through which one had to
worm one's way, for the rock-fault did not
form chambers, seemed like the bowels of
the earth. The bison, if not now a guide-

mark, had perhaps been one some twenty
thousand years earlier. All subterranean
caverns arouse disquiet, since a sudden
caving-in could bury one alive there. Not
death, but entombment; and the bison gave
this tomb a mysterious soul, as if they had
risen up from the ageless earth to guide us.
Over our heads, perhaps, German patrols
were prowling; we were, advancing towards
our weapons; and the bison had been pranc¬
ing on the stone for two hundred centuries.
The crevice widened out and ramified. Our
torches did not illuminate these chasms:
their beams guided us through them as a
blind man is guided by his stick. We could
no longer distinguish the rock except by the
gleaming fragments of the walls which sur¬
rounded us. In each cleft, one's torch would
pick out another cleftreaching down into
the heart of the earth. This darkness had
nothing to do with the night; it belonged to
chasms as enclosed as the sky is open, suc¬
ceeding one another endlessly, and ever
more disquietingly because they appeared
to have been consciously fashioned. My
companions had ceased to talk except in
whispers. Then a passage so narrow as to be
encompassed by the haloes of our torches,
and in which we had to stoop, led to a
crevasse about a hundred feet long and thir¬
ty feet wide. The guides stopped, and all the
beams converged. On red and blue para¬
chutes spread out on the ground lay con¬
tainer after container. Suggestive of two
animals of some future era, a pair of
machine-guns on their tripods, like Egyp¬
tian cats on their forepaws, kept watch over
them. On the roof, clearly visible this time,
immense horned animals.
This place had undoubtedly been sacred,
and still was, not only because of the spirit
of the caverns but also because an inex¬
plicable bond united these bison, these
bulls, these horses (others receded beyond
the circle of light) and these containers
which seemed to have come here of their
own accord and which were guarded by
these machine-guns pointing at us. On the
vaults, covered in a kind of saltpetre, ran
sombre and magnificent beasts, carried
along by the movement of our beams of
light like a flight of heraldic emblems. The
man next to me lifted the lid of a container
full of ammunition, and the torch which he
put down cast an enormous shadow on the
roof. Doubtless the shadows of the bison-
hunters cast by the flame of their resin
torches had been the shadows of giants long
ago...
We went down by a knotted rope into a
fairly shallow pit, on the wall of which was
an elementary human form with a bird's
head. A pile of bazookas fell over with a
weird clang which faded into the shadows,
and the silence returned, more desolate and
more menacing than before.
As we went back, the rock here and there
suggested limbless animals, as old walls sug¬
gest human figures. And we emerged to find
the little trees on the hillside white with
frost, the River Vézère, the war-time
darkness over the dim hump of Montignac,
the stars, the transparency of the terrestrial
darkness.
"Are you interested in the paintings?"
asked the guide. "Some kids found them
when they went in there to rescue a puppy
in September 1940. It's very very old. Some
scientists came, but then in '40, you can
imagine!"
It was Lascaux.
Destroyed during the War, the National
Library of Serbia in Belgrade (above) was
reconstructed In 1974. In that year a
liaison committee between the Library
and the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris
was created in order to encourage French
libraries to offer books to the newly-
rebuilt institution. One of those who
responded to the appeal was André
Malraux who in June 1975 presented to
the National Library the manuscript of his
book La Tête d'Obsidienne (see text
below).
"In the darkest hours of the last war-
after Warsaw, Rotterdam and
Dunkirk (...) Belgrade rose in
rebellion one Spring morning in 1941. It
and all its people chose liberty. (...) The
ensuing reprisals were a measure of the
rage caused by its refusal to submit.
From the earliest moments ofthe bomb¬
ing of the city, begun without a declara¬
tion ofwar, tens ofthousands ofhuman
beings were annihilated, and, with
them, the Library, an institution fun¬
damental to any national culture.
"In commemoration of these events I
have decided to donate my manuscript
to the National Library of Serbia, now
rebuilt. I see in the destiny of your
Library the destiny of a people for
whom culture andfreedom are one and
indivisible. Human dignity, which has
always cost your country dear, still in¬
spires its independence. "
