The menace
of desert advance
by Mohamed Skouri
FOR the past twenty years, areas on
the fringe of the Sahara have suf¬
fered from profound disturbances
which have drastically changed the facts
of desertification. In addition to the per¬
sistence of the drought, these areas have
undergone substantial socio-economic
and ecological changes which have even
increased the severity of the problem.
Although scientific knowledge about
near-desert environments has made enor¬
mous progress, a great deal still has to be
done on the practical level to arrive at
solutions which are adapted to the
ecological and socio-economic conditions
prevailing there.
Research must therefore aim not only
at broadening knowledge and at improv¬
ing the methods of exploiting natural
resources but also at taking greater ac¬
count of the characteristics of these
resources in relation to technological
development and to changes in socio¬
economic conditions.
It was with just such things in mind that
Unesco launched its major international
programme on Man and the Biosphere
(MAB). The goal of this programme, which
started operations early in the 1 970s, is to
promote a new approach to research on
natural environments, studying the im¬
pact of human activities on natural
resources in order to identify the best
ways of using those resources. As well as
leading to an improvement of methods,
this programme has contributed to the
launching of pilot projects embracing
research, training and demonstration ac¬
tivities and closely involving the people
concerned, researchers, extension
workers and decision-makers.
In preparation for a special meeting
held In Nairobi in April/May 1984 to make
a general assessment of progress in the
Implementation of the Plan of Action to
combat desertification, Unesco was re¬
quested to update three case-studies con¬
cerning Chile, Niger and Tunisia which
were initially prepared for the 1977 United
Nations Conference on Desertification.
The study on Niger provides a typical
example of the way MAB works.
Updating the case-study shows that of
the two main causes of desertification,
that is, the prolonged drought and in¬
creasing human and animal pressure,
either could have been the main one.
However, the fact that there are instances
of serious deterioration in sparsely in¬
habited regions means that the initial
cause of the process was the inadequate
rainfall. There is reason to believe that if,
in 1970, human and animal pressure on
the natural environment had been less
Each year21 million hectares ofonce pro¬
ductive land are rendered useless for far¬
ming and a further 6 million hectares are
reduced to desert. Left, the abandoned
village ofDouz, Tunisia, has been almost
completely swallowed up by encroaching
sand dunes.
12

©
severe, the effects of the drought would
have been neither as swift nor as
dramatic, but they would have existed in a
more localized fashion.
By 1983, despite a rise in rainfall since
1977, the vegetation had not yet returned
to its pre-drought level, either in quantity
or in quality. This was certainly due to the
fact that the rains during these "good
years" were neither abundant enough nor
sufficiently well distributed to make up for
the heavy toll of the long years of previous
deficits, and also because human and
animal pressure on pastoral areas had
outpaced regeneration. When the crisis
began during the 1970s, the pastoral load
was eased as the people fled and was
eased even more towards the end as
animals died after depleting all the fodder.
After the exceptional drought, the return
of Peul cattle herds, the livestock
replenishment policy and the rapid in¬
crease of small livestock has led to a rapid
reconstitution of herds, though previous
numbers have not yet been attained.
The responsibility of man, whose action
is coupled with the effects of the climate,
is beyond doubt. However, the impact of
man is localized since the destruction of
the vegetation through direct felling,
through grazing or trampling by herds,
and even through bush fires, never af¬
fected the entire environment as climatic
change did. In the absence of man, his
herds and/or his crops, the shortage of
rainfall would have had nearly identical ef¬
fects, outside areas of heavy concentra-
With the smell of water in their nostrils, a
flock ofgoats races towards a water hole
across rangeland badly eroded by over¬
grazing in Kenya.
tion. Overgrazing is not responsible for
the alarming regression of the Com¬
miphora africana, a shrub whose leaves
are eaten by goats and camels, but the
prolonged drought and the wind. On the
other hand, overfelling of forest for
firewood is quite independent of climatic
variability.
The greatest source of concern for the
future is now the effects of the regression
of the plant cover. When inadequately
covered, the land is exposed to the
ravages of the sun, water and wind. The
lack of plant matter reduces the formation
of humus so that a chain reaction is likely
to be triggered off which would make the
possibility of any true "recovery" of the
biological environment very unlikely.
The reduction of plant biomass and the
concomitant dwindling of plant formations
leave the soil bare and reduce obstacles
to the winds. Denuded surfaces have in¬
creased significantly and, in addition,
wind abrasion is affecting larger areas,
which in turn are increasingly difficult for
vegetation to reconquer. The now-
frequent, violent, sand-laden winds are
surely a sign of a worsening of en¬
vironmental disintegration.
In the final analysis, it is very hard to
provide a categorical countrywide
response to the question: "Has deser
tification increased or diminished in north¬
west Niger since 1977?" In fact, accor¬
ding to the sector or factor under con¬
sideration, one can give opposite replies.
Plant cover in the Sahel is constantly
undergoing change and quite frequently,
to complicate observation, the her¬
baceous layer does not develop at the
same rate as the tree layer, or growth on
sandy soils is not the same as growth on
clay soils. Faced with these non-
synchronous changes, it is rather difficult
to express an overall opinion on trends in
1984. On the other hand, views are
unanimous about the causes described
above and this makes it possible to build
a strategy on solid bases.
The study on Niger clearly underlines
the fact that despite adverse climatic con¬
ditions, the natural plant formations have
a good regenerative potential which can
be enhanced if human and animal
pressure is maintained at a level compati¬
ble with those formations' regenerative
capacity. The area covered by the study,
about 70,000 km2, is sufficiently large to
be quite representative of much of the
Sahelian environment.
MOHAMED SKOURI is a programme
specialist in Unesco's Division of Ecological
Sciences. An agronomist, he specializes in
problems of arid zones.
This article is based on a longer study publish¬
ed in Unesco's environmental magazine
Nature and Resources, Volume XX, No. 1,
January-March 1984.
13
