Art under siege
The Hermitage Museum during the 900-day onslaught on Leningrad
by Boris Piotrovsky
A few days after Nazi Germany at¬
tacked the Soviet Union, it became
clear that an enemy army group
had launched an offensive against Len¬
ingrad, one of the USSR's most important
political, economic and cultural centres,
and the cradle of the October Revolution.
What could be done to evacuate the city's
population, moveable property, and above
all the treasures of the Hermitage, one of
the world's greatest museums?
Ten days after the outbreak of war, a
convoy set off eastwards for Sverdlovsk
with the most precious objects; it was
followed by a second convoy twenty days
later. In all, 1,118,000 art objects were
evacuated. Meanwhile, on the Museum
Leningrad, 1941. Sculptures from the
city's summer garden find a refuge.
premises in Leningrad much remained to be
done: the remaining collections had to be
stored in safety and precautions had to be
taken against fire. Empty frames hung from
the walls like gaping holes, sheets of
plywood were spread out on the floors and
covered with sand. Barrels of water for
fighting incendiary bombs were placed in all
the rooms.
Caught in the grip of a powerful
blockading force, Leningrad defended itself
for 900 days. It was subsequently learned
that the Nazi leaders intended, after the city
had been captured, to destroy it completely
by flooding as a place of "no political or
cultural value". Consequently their troops
were ordered to reject offers to surrender,
"if any such offer were to be made".
No such offer was made. Leningrad was
resolved not to surrender. In spite of the ex¬
treme rigours of the siege and the ferocity of
the artillery barrages and bombing to which
they were subjected, the people of Len
ingrad did more than resist; they fought for
victory with all their might.
For the population of the beleaguered
city, the worst hardship was starvation,
aggravated by the onset of cold and the
terrible shortage of heating fuel. In autumn
1941, factory workers were only getting 250
grammes of bread a day; for other
categories of the population the ration was
reduced to 125 grammes. A number of
substitute foods were developed thanks to
the ingenuity of the city's scientists. Never¬
theless, 640,000 persons died of starvation.
But hunger was not the only killer. The
besiegers dropped over 100,000 bombs and
fired over 150,000 shells on Leningrad, a
museum-city of major historical and
cultural importance. In shelters improvised
in the cellars of the Winter Palace and
the Hermitage more than 2,000 people
crammed together, including the museum
employees and their families, scientists,
painters and other artists.
Uncle Vassla died 13 Mother, 13 May at
April at 2 a.m. 1942 7:30 In the morning, 1942
! jJt at, " : f
, Li ; ;
ifly.
i I
i\\\ÁMJ¡X
The Hermitage was hit by two bombs
which caused minor damage. More serious
harm was done by accurate artillery fire: all
the windows were shattered, snow
penetrated into the rooms, and the
Museum's walls, roof and ceilings sustained
heavy damage. A shell hit the famous gate
of the New Hermitage.
In spite of everything and although eighty
museum workers died of hunger, the sur¬
vivors resolutely worked on, supported by
the whole population. Scientific works were
written, meetings were held, the great
cultural events of the peoples of the USSR
were commemorated. In October 1941, a
lecture was given in the icy rooms of the
Hermitage to mark the 800th anniversary of
the birth of the Azerbaidjani poet Nizami.
In December of the same year, in the depths
of the hardest winter, a lecture was given to
mark the 500th anniversary of the birth of
Navoi, the founder of Uzbek literature. The
poets Nikolai Tikhonov and Vsevolod Ro-
jdestvenski, wearing their uniforms, came
to spend a day's leave. In June 1942, the
first exhibition of works by Leningrad
painters depicting the defence of the city
was organized. Four such exhibitions were
held during the war, bringing to the people
of Leningrad some 6,000 paintings, draw¬
ings, sculptures and works of graphic art.
The cultural activities of Leningrad were
never interrupted.
Restoration work on the Museum began
even before the end of the war. In
November 1944, those works which had
never left the city were exhibited in three
renovated rooms. On 8 November 1945,
after the victory, sixty-nine exhibition
rooms were reopened for the objects which
had returned from evacuation.
BORIS PIOTROVSKY, Sower archaeologist
and orientalist, is director of the Hermitage
Museum, Leningrad. A member of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, he is the author of
many studies on the history and archaeology
of the Transcaucasus and the ancient East, for
which he was awarded the USSR State prize.
He was among the Soviet archaeologists who
took part in Unesco's campaign to save the
temples of Nubia.
During the 900-day blockade of Len¬
ingrad, almost 700,000 men, women and
children died of cold, hunger, bombing
and shelling. Entire families were wiped
out. One of them is described in a diary
kept by 1 1-year-old Tanya Savicheva, left.
Again and again she recorded yet another
death in her family (below). Tanya herself
was later evacuated from Leningrad, but
her body was weakened by hunger and
she died in 1943.
Only Tanya Is left
dpL
They are all dead
i
^a
fvlijfr-
¿AM-
JllíUtól %
-J
