What's new in archaeology?
by Colin Renfrew
OVER the past two or three decades,
archaeology the study of the
human past through the material
remains of human activityhas changed
profoundly in nature. Archaeology was
once widely regarded as some sort of
backward extension of recorded history.
For times when written records were
available it was seen as a useful addition, as
simply some sort of illustration of the writ¬
ten narrative. For the prehistoric period,
prior to the availability of written
testimony, it offered some kind of shadowy
reconstruction of the past, an illiterate
substitute for a proper historical record.
Today, rather suddenly, archaeology,
seems relevant and relevant in a very inter¬
national way. Every continent has its own
rich archaeological record, whether or not it
has its own written records into the remote
past. Moreover we can see more clearly that
what happened in the Americas, for in¬
stance, or in Africa two or three thousand
years ago is just as relevant to our general
understanding of human history as events
occurring at that time in Asia or in Europe,
areas with a longer written record.
Several developments have come together
to create a new awareness that the ar¬
chaeology of all these areas and let us not
leave out Australia and the Pacific is part
of our archaeology, the record of the
history and achievements of our own
species, and a part of the cultural heritage
of our world.
In the first place, the development of new
dating techniques, especially radiocarbon
dating, has allowed the archaeological finds
from every part of the globe to be dated
reliably, without recourse to written
history. The application of other techniques
from the sciences, along with more rigorous
excavation methods, has given the ar¬
chaeologist a whole array of approaches
which he or she can use to investigate past
economies, the development of technology
and early social systems (see article page
12).
Secondly, with the development of what
has come to be called the "New Ar¬
chaeology", research workers have re¬
defined their aims. We are no longer simply
seeking to reconstruct the past, and form
some simple narrative of what happened in
early times. We are trying in addition to
understand why things changed and why
they became what they are. This aim re¬
quires the development of a clearer
theoretical framework for archaeology and
involves the questioning of old beliefs. And
if our goal is to understand how and why
things change, the study of the processes at
work in one part of the world may give us
very valuable insights into those operating
in another. The New Archaeology is
therefore not ethnocentric, or at least it tries
not to be.
Thirdly, with the increased pace of
development in many parts of the world,
both in towns and in the countryside
through the mechanization and intensifica¬
tion of agriculture, many components of
the archaeological record are under threat.
The awareness that this is so has given rise
to "rescue archaeology" as a national
policy in many countries, sometimes refer¬
red to as Culture Resource Management.
This implies both the effort to protect im¬
portant sites against damage, and an
acknowledgement of the need to conduct
systematic excavations at those whose
destruction, cannot be prevented, so as to
learn what we can from them before the site
has been destroyed. Along with the na¬
tional, public investment in rescue ar¬
chaeology has come a deeper awareness of
the significance of the early past for each
nation's own identity. Our past matters: it
is a fundamental part of what we have
become. And archaeology is the only way
we can find out about our early origins.
Up until a century ago, no-one had any
very clear idea of how old the world was,
and very little notion of the antiquity of
humankind. In most countries there were
creation stories, often suggesting that the
first appearance of humankind was the act
of god, or of the gods. But no one could say
with any precision how long ago this
occurred.
It was not until 1859, the same year in
which Charles Darwin published The
Origin ofSpecies, that the antiquity of man
was established. Flint tools were then
shown to have been found together with the
bones of extinct animals, and it was
demonstrated that the animals and the
humans who made the tools must have lived
many thousands of years ago.
Work over the century following these
revelations made many things clear. It was
shown that our species had first emerged in
Africa and that most of the globe had first
been peopled during what is termed the Old
Stone Age, well before 10000 BC. Evidence
for the local origins of farming was found
in several parts of the world. In some of
these areas, early cities developed for the
first time and writing was invented.
But when? To give a precise date to these
developments was extremely difficult. It
was not until the 1950s that progress in
atomic physics allowed new analytical
techniques to come to the aid of ar¬
chaeology. From the application of
potassium-argon dating applied to these
two elements found in rocks of volcanic
origin, we know that the first tool-making
hominids emerged in Africa around two
million years ago. They were not, of course,
very much like modern humans. But even
the earliest hominids, of the genus
Australopithecus, had the human ability of
walking upright, of using the hand to hold
things in a prehensile grasp, of binocular vi¬
sion, and other abilities distinguishing them
from many other species.
By 35,000 years ago, the first members of
our own species, Homo sapiens sapiens are
seen. Modern humankind dates from then
and this date for the appearance of modern
humankind is given to us by radiocarbon
analysis. This technique of radiocarbon
dating is another spin-off from atomic
physics, and it allows any piece of organic
matter (that is to say, material derived from
once living things, whether animal or plant,
and which contains carbon) to be dated in
the laboratory, so long as it is not more than
about 40,000 years old.
For prehistoric Europe, these results have
produced a revolution in our thinking. They
showed that many of the very early Euro¬
pean developments were not derived from
the east Mediterranean area, as had once
been thought. For instance it is no longer
true that the pyramids of Egypt are the
earliest stone-built monuments in the
world. Some of the stone-built tombs of
Europe are earlier, and Stonehenge in
England or the temples of Malta are now
the contemporaries of the pyramids not
their younger relatives.
The broader significance of radiocarbon
dating is much wider even than this. It
means that for the first time, those areas
which did not have an early written history
can have their own secure chronology. We
know now, for instance, that Australia had
a human population, the ancestors of the
modern aborigines, as early as 25,000 years
ago. We can now date properly the early
developments in the Americas, to take
another example. It has been shown that the
origins of the Maya civilization of Mexico
and neighbouring countries date back as
early as 2000 BC. We can now begin to
understand the African iron age, and
recognize properly the true originality of
the terracotta and the bronze sculptures of
Nigeria, some of them dating back to
around 600 BC. I
An extraordinary combination of climatic
and geological conditions has preserved
these footprints of a hominid in petrified
volcanic ash at Laetoli, Tanzania, for /
some 3,600,000 years.

ri'
/ -
> * £K '. v Ató'*' -w* s ' Àfti 3r '
/:
' ^ ' / * t '
v s'y^* í
' ti
HE" '
v, .U/7
:Xf 'V'/^V **I1

ó£0' /*
$2
MET- M
Wrt \
' II HtEr ' y-J>M
AS
^T- " ^.Trl
A¿¿F rlSSÍr
:,\
tefc
.**
«S^
-.-:-- .
Above, excavating a tumulus In fair
weather and foul, as depicted in the
Gentleman's Magazine, 1852. Below, a
modern scientific excavation being car¬
ried out at a Palaeolithic site in the Oise,
France.
These are just a few examples of the
many which could be brought forward from
each area of the globe. All of this means
then, that it is now possible to speak in
terms of a world prehistory. For each area
the long sequence of human development
can be built up. As a result of this dating
revolution, each country can have its own,
well-dated prehistory.
Dating techniques represent, however,
only one group of the techniques of ar¬
chaeological science, even though they are
probably the most important. Another line
of investigation is the laboratory analysis of
artefacts stone tools, for instance, or
pottery which can often give clear indica¬
tions of the original source of the material
used. This allows us to learn something of
the trade and exchange of goods among the
early populations and of the system of
distribution of the goods to the areas where
they were used, buried and later discovered
by the archaeologist.
The life sciences too have made their con¬
tribution. From the study of the rubbish of
early societies it is now possible to build up
a very clear picture of their diet, and hence
of their subsistence economy. For instance,
carbonized seeds from rubbish dumps,
when studied by a specialist, can reveal
precisely what food crops were being
cultivated by early farmers. Investigations
of animal bones can indicate which wild
animals were being hunted, and whether or
not domestic animals were being kept and in
what numbers and proportions.
Modern archaeology, it has been said, is
sometimes just the study of poor man's rub¬
bish. This is often quite true! For by study¬
ing these rather modest remains we can
build up a whole picture of the developing
economy of early societies which may tell us
more about life in them than the most
precious objects of gold or jade.
In many ways, however, the most ex¬
citing recent developments in archaeology
have not been those achieved in the
laboratory, in the perfection of dating
methods or the study of the early environ¬
ment. They have come rather, from a
change in outlook, and of philosophy. The
"New Archaeology" began in the 1960s, in
the United States and in Britain, arising
from a dissatisfaction with the assumption
and outlook of the traditional archaeology,
which often seemed to reach conclusions
framed in very simplified historical terms.
Its leading exponent has been Professor
Lewis R. Binford of the University of New
Mexico at Albuquerque, and his great
achievement has been to show that in order
to understand the past it is not sufficient
just to dig up the artefacts of past ages and
to write some intuitive story based on one's
impressions of them.
Instead, our concern should be the study
of culture processthat is to say how and
why human cultures change. We have to ask
much more carefully what is the explana¬
tion for all the differences, the variability
which we see in the archaeological record.
This means that we have to develop a better
theory, a better methodology for ar¬
chaeological interpretation.
Processual archaeologists, then, seek to
understand why things changed, and this
means developing explanations through a
willingness to generalize. It implies the con-

struction of theories in the same sort of way
that the scientist works when understanding ,
the world of nature. These theories can then '
be assessed, and sometimes they can be
tested against new archaeological findings.
To take an example, we may want to
understand how a particular city came to be
built, and how civilization emerged in an
area whether we are talking of ancient
Rome, or of Moenjodaro in Pakistan, or
whatever. To do this properly we need to
seek some more general understanding of
the processes which lead to increasing
growth and complexity in different human
cultures. We can then study how far the
case of Rome or Moenjodaro fits into the
general picture, and try to examine the
special features of each.
The "New Archaeology" is more op¬
timistic than the traditional approach. It
does not accept the assertion that we cannot
learn through archaeology about the social
organization or the religious life of past
societies as many traditional archaeologists
have asserted. Rather we have to try and
develop sound arguments which will allow
us to interpret the data about these aspects
of society, as well as about diet and about
technology and so forth.
Processual archaeology is very concerned
also to think more carefully about how the
Prehistoric megalithic temple complex at
Ggantija, on the island of Gozo, Republic
of Malta. Modern scientific dating tech¬
niques have shown that some of Malta's
prehistoric stone temples, characterized
by a very skilful use of local materials,
were built before 3000 BC, much earlier
than was once thought. Unesco is co¬
operating with the Maltese Government
on the preservation and presentation of
Malta's important monuments and sites.
archaeological record itself is formed
about exactly how the sites which we dig up,
and the objects which we find in them,
come to be found where they are. The new
field of ethnoarchaeology has developed in
order to investigate these issues. It involves
going out to live in a suitable contemporary
community, which has a way of life that is
in some respects similar to the prehistoric or
historic one that one seeks to understand.
The ethnoarchaeologist studies how the
modern archaeological record in that con¬
temporary society comes about.
Lewis Binford was one of the first ar¬
chaeologists to go and do this. His interest
was in the hunter-gatherers of the
Mousterian period, 40,000 years ago. He
saw clearly that the best way to understand
the archaeological record of those long-
dead hunter-gatherers was to go out and
study in detail the archaeological record of
a living community of hunter-gatherers. He
chose the Nunamiut eskimos of Alaska. He
. lived in a suitable community, taking part in
hunting expeditions. And because he was
not a very good hunter, he did the butchery
for the group. This gave him the opportuni¬
ty of studying how rubbish is discarded in
such a community, and his work has con¬
tributed greatly to the study of early hunter-
gatherers.
The same techniques of study can be ap¬
plied to urban communities also. In Tuc¬
son, Arizona, the "Garbage Project"
under the direction of Professor William J.
Rathje has studied the rubbish discarded by
families in different districts of the city.
Since they do not simply throw rubbish
away, but deposit it in trash cans, the Gar¬
bage Project has had to turn itself into a
rubbish-disposal squad, collecting the gar¬
bage from the trash cans and studying it in
the laboratory. It may sound odd, but the
results are very interesting.
This project illustrates the point that the
techniques of archaeology are relevant to
the material culture of human societies at all
times and places, ancient and modern. The
contemporary archaeologist no longer
thinks in terms of "primitive" and "ad¬
vanced" cultures. The hunter-gatherer of
today or yesterday is as interesting as the
city-dweller: both are part of the rich varie¬
ty of human culture although it must be
admitted that hunter-gatherers have con¬
tributed to it for a hundred times as long as
city-dwellers!
There is another reason why modern ar¬
chaeology really does deserve its place in the
modern world. The traditional archaeology
often explained things in terms of the "dif¬
fusion" of culture. The assumption was

"o "o
O -1
il
©I
C Q)
To help him unravel the archaeological
record left by the hunter-gatherers of the
Mousterian period, 40,000 years ago, the
U.S. archaeologist Lewis Binford decided
to study the archaeological record of a
modern community of hunter-gatherers,
the Nunamiut eskimos ofAlaska. In seek¬
ing to understand how hunters perceive
and use their landscape and the kind of
archaeology they create by their actions,
Binford mapped the life of the Nunamiut
community in every detail. Above, line
drawing by Binford of activities he
observed at a Nunamiut killing and
butchering site. Bone splinters discarded
by 2 men (nos. 2 and 3) entered the drop
zone. Larger bones were thrown behind
them In the toss zone.
^ made that the major advances came about
only in one or two areas, and were transmit¬
ted to the barbarian fringe by the "diffu¬
sion" of culture. In recent years, resear¬
chers have come to realize that this was
sometimes a rather colonialist viewpoint,
implying that the interesting developments
came about only in a few crucial, privileged
centres.
Today we see that, to understand the
changes taking place, you have to under¬
stand the processes that are operating local¬
ly in the area under study. It is necessary to
study the changes in social structure, the
developing population, the economy and
technology. Exchanges with other areas,
and the importation of new ideas can admit¬
tedly play and do play a part in that process,
but they are not necessarily of dominant
importance.
To take one example, it was assumed for
many years that the ruins of Great Zim¬
babwe, in the country which today takes its
The Tucson Garbage Project
The brainchild of a group of an¬
thropologists at the University ofArizona,
the Tucson Garbage Project was launch¬
ed in 1973 in order to study the material
culture of a modern city by "excavating"
its garbage, considered as evidence of its
residents' way of life. In the words of the
Project's director, Professor William L.
Rathje, "we believed that assumptions
about the way material culture is related
to behaviour in past civilizations can be
tested in a familiar, on-going society. Se¬
cond, we felt that applying archaeological
methods to such a society can produce
valuable insights into that society itself. "
Below, Rathje's student workers careful¬
ly sort, record and weigh household gar¬
bage for evidence of what contemporary
society buys and how it lives. This at-
. tempt to take a systematic look at modern
society in the United States from the ar¬
chaeological viewpoint is the prototype
ofsimilar studies conducted elsewhere in
the United States as well as in Mexico city
and Sydney, Australia.
name from that monument, must have been
the work of skilled immigrants from the
north, or perhaps the result of contacts with
Arab traders. It simply was not accepted
that they could be the work of the local in¬
habitants, that is to say, of the African
population. Yet today all the evidence (in¬
cluding the radiocarbon evidence) goes to
show that this was in fact the case. We don't
need immigrants, or a trading mission, to
account for the monument, which we can
explain better in terms of the local working
of the society of the time. Just the same is
true of Stonehenge in England which used
to be thought of as the product of contacts
and skills of the Mediterranean world. To¬
day we think of it in local terms. We don't
need Mediterranean colonists to explain it.
This does not mean that we should always
think of each land in isolation. But it does
encourage us to believe that every nation
should encourage the investigation by ar¬
chaeological means of its own past. Today
most countries are proud of their own
cultural heritage, and some of them have
remarkable museums, like those in Mexico
City and in Cairo, to display it.
There is also a growing concern for the
conservation of the cultural heritage.
Unesco is sponsoring a number of projects,
such as its major campaign to save the re¬
mains of the great early city of Moenjodaro
in Pakistan (see article page 32); and most
nations have their own programme for
safeguarding monuments. These are now
seen as international problems. Some of
them will be discussed at the World Ar¬
chaeological Congress, to be held in
September 1986 in Southampton and Lon¬
don (see note page 38). The U.K. national
secretary, Professor Peter Ucko of
Southampton University, is expecting that
representatives from most countries in the
world will attend. They will discuss pro¬
blems of conservation and of interpreta¬
tion, in the light of the newly-emerging in¬
ternational consciousness about our early
past.
Archaeology used to be the pursuit of a
few leisured amateurs, often based in the
more prosperous centres of the industrial
west. Today it is a field of great interest to
many people in every country in the world.
This is partly because it gives each of us an
opportunity to understand more fully our
own national history. But to focus on one's
own nation alone is mere chauvinism. Ar¬
chaeology also offers us the opportunity to
see the early history of each land as one part
of the broader history of the human species
as a whole. And processual archaeology in¬
vites us to try to understand better the
greater diversity of human culture, now and
in the past. This has been made easier both
by the battery of techniques made available
by the sciences, and the rigour and the self-
awareness which have been part of the
"New Archaeology".
COLIN RENFREW is Disney Professor of Ar¬
chaeology at the University of Cambridge and
a Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. He
has worked mainly on the Prehistory of Europe
and on the Theory ofArchaeology. Among his
publications are Before Civilization: the
Radiocarbon Revolution and Prehistoric
Europe (London, Pelican Press, and New York,
Cambridge University Press) and Approaches
to Social Archaeology (Cambridge University
Press and Harvard University Press).
