From the
Throne of Stone
A treasure-trove of Greco-Bactrian art
by Boris A. Litvinskiy
and Igor R. Pichikiyan
In this silver bridle ornament depicting
the gorgon, the monster ofancient Greek
mythology has been transformed Into a
sweet maiden. The object is an illustra¬
tion of the synthesis of Greek and Indian
art known as the Gandhara style. The
discovery of Indian silver coins and of
many ivory objects in central Asia shows
the existence of economic links between
Bactria and India in the 1st century BC.
Finely wrought ivory sword-sheath,
above, belongs to a spectacular treasure
found by Soviet archaeologists at Takhti
Sanghin in central Asia. The treasure has
illuminated some dark corners in the
history of the ancient land of Bactria, im¬
portant as a meeting place for east-west
overland trade and as a centre of artistic
crosscurrents. The sheath is decorated
with a relief carving of a Hon seizing a
deer. The lion 's head is depicted frontally
with tightly clenched teeth while the deer
is shown in profile, its legs bent in sub¬
mission (detail, above right). The carving
is thought to be an allegorical depiction of
a victorious conqueror, king or god, and
his submissive subjects. Beneath the lion
is a highly stylized scene showing a feline
predator attacking a wild sheep. Typical
of Achaemenid Persia, the sheath dates
from the early 5th century BC and is
276 mm long.
28

OVER a hundred years ago, in 1878,
three Bukhara merchants en route
for India halted in the oasis of
Kobadian (in the south of what is now Ta¬
jikistan), where they bought a mass of ob¬
jects and coins from an "old fortress", on
the promontory at the confluence of two
rivers. The objects and coins fell into the
hands of Indian jewellers, then those of
English collectors and finally, known as the
"treasure of the Oxus", ended up in the
British Museum in London.'
The objects comprising the treasure of
the Oxus are of superb artistic quality. They
made it clear that ancient Bactria, whose
territory covered what are today the
southern regions of Tajikistan, part of
Uzbekistan and the north of Afghanistan,
held the promise of major historical and ar¬
tistic discoveries. The laconic remarks of
ancient authors about the wealth and power
of the Bactrian kingdom were confirmed.
Descriptions of the site where the treasure
of the Oxus was discovered suggest that it
lay among the ruins of a city at the con¬
fluence of two rivers, the Vakhsh and the
Piandj, which meet to form the Oxus (Amu
Darya). The Techik-Tach mountain range
runs close alongside the western bank of the
Vakhsh. An ancient caravan route once
passed through the narrow valley. Ar¬
chaeologists have explored this site many
times and have found traces of two ancient
cities: Takhti Kuvad ("Throne of Kuvad")
and, five kilometres further north, Takhti
Sanghin ("Throne of Stone") where ex¬
cavations in 1928 and 1956 did not yield in¬
teresting results.
In 1976, the archaeological mission to
southern Tajikistan organized by the In¬
stitute of Oriental Studies of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, the Academy of
Sciences of the Tajik SSR and the Her¬
mitage Museum, Leningrad, decided to
begin new excavations at Takhti Sanghin.
Our aim was not, of course, to locate the
site where the treasure of the Oxus had been
found. Takhti Sanghin's location near an
old caravan route, its powerful fortifica¬
tions, and the scattered remains of ancient
columns, together with our intuition as ar¬
chaeologists, were enough to convince us to
begin work again on its ruins. We pitched-
our tents and erected our portable chalets.
Dozens of Tajik students and specialists
from Moscow got down to work.
The central part of the ancient city the
citadelwas rectangular (165 by 237
metres). It was surrounded by a six-metre-
high wall, with sturdy towers at each cor-
9.Q

ner, and a deep ditch. Two walls running
from the mountains towards the river, 500
metres north and south of the citadel, mark¬
ed the limits of the city.
A monumental building has been ex¬
cavated on a hill in the western part of the
citadel. It was almost certainly a temple,
since it contained a votive stone altar
dedicated to Oxus. At the centre was a vast
white hall with four columns. It was enclos¬
ed on three sides by two lines of galleries.
To the east (where the great main entrance
stood) was a colonnaded portal.
The architecture of this massive building
(the walls of the hall were four metres
thick), which we called the temple of Oxus,
suggests that it was built in the late fourth
or early third century BC. Its plan recalls
that of Persian fire temples; it is built of
local materials; its columns, pilasters, altars
and other details of the stonework are in
Hellenistic style.
Offerings were brought to the temple and
left in specially excavated ditches or in other
receptacles. Later, they were piled in cor¬
ners of the corridors which were subse¬
quently blocked up and became secret
treasuries.
We had the pleasure of discovering these
treasures. As the five metres of fill were
removed, hundreds of works of the hitherto
little-known Greco-Bactrian art appeared
before our eyes: bronzes with a dark green
patina, gleaming white alabaster sculptures,
glittering gold. We also unearthed many
carved ivory objects. In ten seasons of ex¬
cavations, 5,000 specimens have been
unearthed and restored.
Above all we were delighted to discover
works of art dating from the sixth-fourth
centuries BC, the period when the
Achaemenid dynasty ruled in Persia, which
recall those of the treasure of the Oxus. An
ivory scabbard for a short sword is ex-
A striking example ofcultural synthesis in
central Asia over 2,000 years ago, this
votive stone altar is surmounted by a
bronze figurine of a Silenus playing a
double flute. Carved on the base is an in¬
scription which reads, "After making a
vow, Atrossok dedicates it to Oxus."
Although the inscription is in ancient
Greek, the two names cited in it are of Ira¬
nian origin. It is thought that Atrossok,
who dedicated the altar with its Greek in¬
scription and Greek figure to the localgod
Oxus, may have been a Bactrian official of
a fire cult.
. pressively decorated with a relief carving of
a lion holding a deer between its outstretch¬
ed paws (see photos on preceding double
page). In size and shape (276 mm) it forms
a pendant to a scabbard from the Oxus
treasure.
Other works of art from Achaemenid
Persia whose manufacture recalls pieces in
the treasure of the Oxus have also been
discovered in the temple. They include a
rhyton (a drinking cup) the extremity of
which depicts a crouching lion, and a
horseman's sword-hilt topped by a griffon.
More than fifty gold plaques have also been
found.
The objects belonging to the next
chronological period (late fourth-early
second century BC) initiate the extremely
interesting and until recently unknown
Hellenistic period of Bactrian culture. In
date and place of manufacture (Asia Minor,
Bactria, the Scythian steppes) they are akin
to specimens in the treasure of the Oxus.
Clay and alabaster sculptures, the pro¬
totypes of which are found in the plastic
schools of Asia Minor, are purely
Hellenistic works of art. Besides many por¬
traits of Greek and Oriental sovereigns
wearing diadems, we have unearthed
sculptures of maidens (kore) depicted in im¬
petuous movement and a statue of Apollo
(the "Apollo of Takhti Sanghin").
A special place among all these
discoveries is held by a miniature ivory bust
of Alexander the Great, a new addition to
the rare Hellenistic effigies which have
come down to us of the warrior king who
was depicted by Lysippus, Leochares and
other great artists. Alexander's effigies on
coinage are probably based on a monumen¬
tal statue, which has not survived, in which
Lysippus depicted him as Heracles wearing
a lion mask with the paws crossed on his
breast. The iconography of the ivory por¬
trait of Takhti Sanghin in which Alexander
is shown frontally is taken from this same
model. Because of certain differences from
the coinage, in which Alexander is generally
30

Hunting scenes carved on the side of an
ivory casket illustrate the costume,
weaponry, horses' trappings and riding
skills of the Yueh-chih, conquerors of the
Greco-Bactrian kingdom (late 2nd-early
1st century BC).
shown in profile, this portrait is unique (see
colour photo page 22).
The discovery in the heart of central Asia
of this "masquerade" in which Alexander
is depicted with the attributes of Heracles is
particularly important because Alexander-
imagery played an important role in Greco-
Bactrian art, just as it did in Buddhist art
and in the art of Gandhara, in what is now
northwestern Pakistan.
Another work of the highest quality is an
original depiction of a combat between
Heracles and Silenus, an extremely rare
subject in the plastic art of Antiquity, which
adorns a Greek ceremonial sword.
Among the many reliefs embellishing the
Greek sword scabbards is a fantastic depic¬
tion of a female creature with the tail of a
fish, horse's hooves and a bird's wings. One
might think that an ancient Greek sea
divinity had been transformed into a
nymph-follower of the god of the river
Oxus. This image dating from the second
century BC, the period when the Greco-
Bactrian kingdom collapsed, is a proof of
the Hellenization of Bactrian culture and of
an important measure of the influence of
Antiquity in Greco-Bactrian art.
Probably from the same period is a
hemispherical gold plaque with a relief im¬
age of three panthers in a circle; each biting
the one before it (the "Round of the Pan¬
thers"). This is a fine example of the
"animal style" characteristic of Scytho-
Siberian art.
The abundance of objects made of ivory,
a rare and extremely costly material, is
evidence of close economic and commercial
relations with India, which are also borne
out by the extremely rare oval and rec¬
tangular punched coins which were struck
in India from the fifth to the second century
BC when the dynasty of Nanda and the
Mauryas held sway. Other ivory objects
found in the temple are incontestably works
of Gandhara-Indian style.
The hypothesis concerning the cultural
and artistic contacts which may have existed
between the Parthians and the Bactrians has
been put forward many times. The Takhti
Sanghin sculptures and almost seventy
silver coins, imitations of drachmas of the
Parthian king Phraates IV (36-2BC), sup¬
port this conjecture.
Some of the objects we have unearthed
attest to permanent relations with the
Scythian-Siberian world. Apart from the
gold plaque described above there is a
bronze disc with an image ("the Scythian
holding 2 horses by the bridle") and several
thousand bronze and iron arrowheads
which must have been brought to the temple
as offerings.
The discoveries at the temple of Oxus
thus reveal with precision the components
of Greco-Bactrian art: these elements are
Oriental (original), Hellenistic (secondary)
and that of Gandhara (a result of the Greco-
Indian synthesis).
Most of our finds have analogies with ob¬
jects in the treasure of the Oxus and in the
metropolitan Iranian art of the
Achaemenid period. There are many
reasons to think that the treasure of the
Oxus is organically related to the temple of
Oxus, that it is part of the temple treasure.
Exploration of Takhti Sanghin is going
ahead hand in hand with that of other Bac¬
trian monuments. On the opposite,
southern bank of the Amu Darya in
Afghanistan where the Kocha Darya flows
into it, our French colleagues have brought
to light an entire Greek city the ruins of
which are known as Ai Khanum. The ob¬
jects from Ai Khanum and those discovered
at the temple of Oxus complement each
other and give a fair idea of Greco-Bactrian
culture, its origins and extensions.
From a vast amount of material, science
has been able to shed further light on the
role of local tradition in the genesis of the
Hellenistic Bactrian culture. Study of this
material has informed us about the many-
sided relationship between the peoples who
had inhabited this region and various an¬
cient civilizations (from India to the
Mediterranean). The works of art
discovered in the temple of Oxus and
reintegrated in the cultural treasure of
humanity brilliantly illustrate the extent
and intensity of these links.
The synthesis of these civilizations was
not confined to the field of material culture.
On the right bank of the Oxus lived people
who spoke and wrote Greek and worship¬
ped the Hellenic gods; a syncretic Greco-
Bactrian culture was created there. A Greek
theatre and gymnasium, and other
specifically Hellenic buildings, have come
to light at Ai Khanum.
The literary, scientific and philosophical
writings of Greek authors were, it seems,
widespread in Bactria even at a later period.
It is possible that elements of this culture
survived the fall of the Kushan empire.
This is for the time being no more than a
hypothesis. It is highly important to con¬
tinue research, for the discovery of even
faint traces of ancient cultural traditions
which may have survived to the Middle
Ages would throw a new light on the genesis
of the science and philosophy of the Muslim
east.
BORIS A. LITVINSKIY, Sower specialist in
the cultures of central Asia, is a corresponding
member of the Academy of Sciences of the
Tajik SSR and director of the department of
historical and cultural relations between the
Soviet and the non-Soviet Orient at the In¬
stitute of Oriental Studies of the USSR
Academy of Sciences. Among his many
published works are "The Tombs of
Ferghana" (4 vols., 1972-1978) and "Tepai-
shah. Culture and Contacts of the Bactria of
the Kushans" (1983) written in collaboration
with A.V. Sedov.
IGOR R. PICHIKIYAN, Soviet archaeologist,
is a scientific collaborator with the Institute of
Oriental Studies of the USSR Academy of
Sciences. A specialist in the problems of the
art and ancient history of central Asia, he has
published over 100 studies on the culture of
this region.
31
