A city for the year 2000
by Oscar Niemeyer
Unlike Brasilia, created to be an urban
area in harmony and contact with nature.
Säo Paulo has experienced rampant
growth and virtually all its green spaces
have disappeared. Photo shows Säo
Paulo 's Coán building, designedby Oscar
Niemeyer.
CITIES have always changed under
the impact of progress, technologi¬
cal change, new forms of commu¬
nication, and human indifference.
In the past, city life was easy; it was more
natural, and there was a greater sense of
community. Then the little squares where
people got together, the markets which
brought animation to the narrow streets,
and the quiet tree-lined residential districts
all disappeared, with the spread of shops
and businesses created to satisfy everyday
needs.
The development of new means of pro¬
duction and transport, new urban activities,
and, above all, the industrial revolution,
transformed cities into dynamic metropoli¬
ses bustling with life but lacking the inti¬
macy which is so indispensable and which
was theirs in the past.
Cities have existed for thousands of
years... and perhaps the people of Nineveh
and Babyloncertainly those of Rome and
Alexandria faced some of the problems
which confront the modern city-dweller.
But metropolitan centres were then very
rare, and they may be considered a
twentieth-century phenomenon. In his
essay On the Populousness of the Ancient
Nations, the eighteenth-century philoso¬
pher David Hume (1711-1776) maintained
that no city would ever have more than
700,000 inhabitants. William Pelter was
convinced that the maximum population of
London would be five million. More realis¬
tically, Jules Verne (1828-1905) envisaged
cities with a population of up to ten million.
But the demographic growth of cities in the
modern world was to exceed all these
expectations.
Houses for five persons were replaced by
apartment blocks for two hundred; cars and
pedestrians packed the streets; the popula¬
tion density of urban areas skyrocketed;
traffic, noise and even security problems
began to preoccupy the city-dweller.
"Urban surgery" drove thoroughfares,
viaducts and level crossings through the city
fabric, and inevitably left scars, while man,
a forgotten and frustrated figure in the
anonymous crowds, was stifled by his own
lack of foresight.
Old tightly packed city districts were an
inviting target for demolition as magnates
constructed vast unsightly building com¬
plexes which disfigured the landscape with
their total indifference towards man and
nature.
As the implacably monotonous glass
cubes of rationalist architecture rose above
the streets, the old cities lost their former
unity.
Such is the explanation usually given for
the phenomenon of urban growth by those
who almost invariably forget the odious
social discrimination which it involves. New
possibilities have emerged only in those
countries where the institution of landed
property has been abolished. On the other
18

COft-^Jh^ IHilfi^
hand, the same errors continue to be made
in all Western cities: the rich have taken
them over, while the poor are relegated to
wretched quarters on the periphery.
From the "industrial city" project drawn
up in 1907 by the French architect and city
planner Tony Gamier to the Charter of
Athens of 1933 (see note page 5), countless
urban planning projects have been pro¬
posed but all, including the Charter itself,
are today strongly contested. Solutions
must be more coherent and more human;
the streets must be restored to pedestrians;
the urban fabric must again possess the
organic unity it has lost; and the creation of
large areas which are deserted outside
working hours must be avoided. Specialists
talk passionately about the problems of big
cities and issue a barrage of criticism: of
pollution, of the power of vested interests,
of intolerable crowding, of excessive
distances between work-place and home,
etc. But when it actually comes down to the
favelas (shanty-towns), and children
wandering through the streets, and the
workman who leaves home at dawn and on¬
ly gets back at night without ever seeing his
children, the discussion conveniently
evaporates, as if these were natural and ac¬
ceptable phenomena.
In such an appalling social context, the
city of the year 2000 cannot be built. As
envisaged today, this city would merely
reproduce, perhaps more aesthetically, the
discriminations and injustices of the capita¬
list world.
So what is to be done? How can we Latin
Americans, still oppressed by the old privi¬
leges created by the bourgeoisie, conceive of
a city which calls first and foremost for a
classless, just and interdependent society?
How can we imagine this ideal city if we
live beneath the yoke of dictatorships and
the chains of servitude, and when
privileges, landed property and
"... it will be a vertical city, one where
distances will be reduced, thus fulfilling
its principal purpose". Drawing by Oscar
Niemeyer.
authoritarianism frustrate all our efforts.
How can we define the nature of the city of
the future if poverty besets us and injustice
forces us away from the drawing board to
respond to the promptings of our con¬
science and sense of solidarity, take part in
politics and cry out our indignation and
revolt?
But we can always dream a little and pre¬
sent our modest proposal for the city of the
future. At the outset let us say that it should
not, in our opinion, be backward-looking;
it should not turn towards those medieval
cities which attract us so much today, but at
the same time it should preserve something
The dilemma facing modern
architecturewhether to provide a ser¬
vice for all users or to pursue the mirage
of a better and better environment for a
smaller and smaller fraction of the
world's populationis evoked by Le Cor-
busier's drawing The Contemporary
Disaster or Freedom of Spatial
Organization.
"It will be a multipliable city. A series of
cities will be stretched along an axis-
Parallel to them areas will be allocated to
agriculture, scientific research and the
major industries." Drawing by Oscar
Niemeyer.
of their tranquillity and their human-dimen¬
sions, two essential qualities which have
fallen victim to human progress and incom¬
prehension. The city of the future will not
be conceived for the machine; it will be built
for man, who will be able to walk through
it from end to end, as he did in olden times.
Thus it will be a vertical city, one where
the distances will be reduced, thus fulfilling
its principal purpose. The population densi¬
ty will be fixed in advance, in order to avoid
the rampant growtl) which has disfigured
the world's great cities. To enable
pedestrians to move around freely, all
vehicles will be left in outlying car-parks
with direct access to the different sectors of
the city, including the centre, with its ad¬
ministrative buildings, offices and shops.
Sectors for health, culture, education and
housing will stretch, according to the logic
of urban organization, from the centre to
the limits. ' '
It will be a multipliable city. A series of
cities designed on this model will be stretch¬
ed along an axis, divided by immense green
spaces for recreation and leisure. Parallel to
these, areas will be allocated to agriculture,
scientific research and the major industries.
This is the formula we propose. Many
others are bound to be put forward, but we
believe that it is in this smaller, more in¬
timate, more human city, that man will one
day rediscover the lost sense of community
and the charm of city life, for which he has
always felt nostalgia.
OSCAR NIEMEYER, of Brazil, is one of the
leading exponents of modern architecture in
Latin America, and won a worldwide reputa¬
tion for his work on Brasilia, the new capital of
Brazil. In 1956, the recently elected Brazilian
President, Juscelino Kubitschek, asked him to
design the government buildings for Brasilia.
At Niemeyer's suggestion a nationwide com¬
petition was held for the master plan of the
city. The competition was won by Niemeyer's
former teacher, Lucio Costa.
Agriculture
Scientific research
Industries
Cities
tbe»
