Cities
athirst
TODAY'S metropolitan giants sprawl
across wide areas and have an
impact on the environment far
from their city cores. London, Paris, Mex¬
ico City, Amsterdam, Los Angeles, and
many others have pushed out into fertile
farmland and, in so doing, have
transformed it into endless blocks of
masonry. They have stretched their ten¬
tacles of iron and concrete pipe many
kilometres out into the countryside to cap¬
ture the contents of remote streams and
lakes. They have denuded much of the
vegetation within their own city boun¬
daries, replacing the verdure of grass,
shrubs, and trees with asphalt, concrete,
and impervious rooftops.
All these actions have affected the ur¬
ban environment and the water supplies
upon which the city dwellers depend.
Numerous events take place during the
transformation of an uninhabited piece of
ground into a city complete with streets,
squares, subway tunnels, monuments,
and the rest of the paraphernalia of
civilization. Three overlapping stages in a
city's growth have an impact on the water
supply.
The first stage involves the removal of
trees and other vegetation to make room
for the initial homes, stores, and streets.
This removal affects the local area's water
budget by reducing the transpiration once
"lost" from the vegetation.
The digging of wells to supply the city-
dwellers also usually takes place during
the first stage. This also affects the local
water budget as the wells will usually
lower the water table.
Watercourses in the budding metro¬
polis will also be affected by sedimenta¬
tion. The construction of homes and com¬
mercial buildings as well as excavations
for water pipes can loosen the soil to a
point where it can be easily eroded into
the streams.
Construction of septic tanks is yet
another activity which usually takes place
in the early stages of a city's growth. If not
properly constructed and located, they
ê Water supply is one of the most urgent
| and intractable problems facing Mexico
5 C/fy (population 17 million), which is
® among the world's fastestgrowing conur-
§ bâtions. Local water sources are Inade-
^ quale and the city is being obliged to
% reach out further and further (between
a 150 and 200 km) and lower and lower
w (1,000 metres below the level of the city)
| for its water. Left, aerial view of Netza-
é hualcoyotl, a district of Mexico City.
25

may pollute areas of the aquifer. Without
a sewage collection system, cesspools
and other effluent sources generally drain
into groundwater horizons, and this has
caused outbreaks of cholera and typhoid.
During the next stage of urbanization,
excavations are made for bigger houses
and buildings, more topsoil is removed,
and small pools of water are filled up. Ac¬
celerated soil erosion and sedimentation
in the watercourses result.
As the city expands there will be an in¬
crease in impermeable surfaces. Reduc¬
ed infiltration into the groundwater will be
a consequence. Because of the increased
impermeability, peak flows will be increas¬
ed in the remaining watercourses. Some
flooding may occur.
The most dangerous situation for
human healthwhich usually occurs dur¬
ing this second stageis the discharge of
chemicals or insufficiently treated waste
water into the area's streams. This
pollutes the receiving streams and often
also leads to the killing of aquatic life.
Waterbased recreation will be affected.
The degradation of the streams' quality
will also affect those human communities
located downstream.
The final stage of urbanization is mark¬
ed by nearly all of the original open soil be¬
ing covered with buildings, streets and
other near-impermeable surfaces. Infiltra¬
tion to the groundwater is markedly reduc¬
ed, and storm runoff is increased and
accelerated.
With less water reaching the aquifer,
wells may have to be deepened to meet
the needs of a larger population. Or the
municipality may have to reach beyond its
own area to tap regional water sources. It
has been observed that certain basic
elements of water-supply technology-
capture in distant catchment areas, con¬
duction along aqueducts and distribution
within citiesare as characteristic of re¬
cent works as they are of late nineteenth-
century projects and indeed of Roman
systems. In this respect modern engineer¬
ing seems to have changed no basic prin¬
ciple, although it has come to have a bet¬
ter grasp of the problems involved.
And yet the U.S. Environmental Protec¬
tion Agency has identified a number of
major sources of pollution to the ground¬
water in the United States. Most are
related to urbanization. They include
underground injection wells used to
"dispose" of hazardous wastes; acciden¬
tal spills of these materials on city streets,
industrial sites, railroad rights-of-way, and
airports; leaks from pipelines and storage
tanks; abandoned domestic water wells;
overuse of agricultural chemicals; unlined
slurry ponds, and salt water encroach¬
ment into aquifers.
Roman engineers ofAntiquitybuilt highly
developed water supply systems. The
Pont du Gard (c. 19 BC) In southern
France, below, Is only a small section of
a 40-kllometre-long conduit, mostly
underground, which carried water to the
city of Nimes. Its 3 tiers of arches rise to
over47 metres. The highest tier, carrying
the conduit, consists of 35 4.6-metre
arches.
Pumping deeper and deeper for more
and more water can also lead to land sub¬
sidence. In the United States, the boom
metropolis of Houston, on the Texas
coast, has an acute subsidence problem.
So much water has been withdrawn that
the land within a 64-kilometre radius of the
city centre has dropped almost three
metres below its original elevation. It has
been pointed out, somewhat tongue-in-
cheek, that should this subsidence con¬
tinue at the existing rate, the top of a
downtown landmark, a 45-storey building,
will be below sea level by the year 2180!
Mexico City, situated at more than
2,134 metres above the sea, is obviously
not going to suffer a similar fate. But this
major metropolis has sunk some 10.7
metres during the past 70 years into the
filled-in lake bed on which it has been
built. The cause? Withdrawal of water
from the aquifer below.
Mexican authorities have been at¬
tempting to meet the ballooning demand
for water by planning to tap rivers more
than 1 60 kilometres away from the capital.
It has been suggested that by the year
2000, Mexico City's population may sur¬
pass 30 million, and therefore have the
world's greatest urban concentration. It is
interesting to note in that respect that
from 1 960 to 1 976, the water supply to the
city was more than doubled, but the
amount available per person declined. In
1982, only 15 per cent of the residents in
urban areas around Mexico City had
piped water for their homes. '
