A day in the life of.
Three young people recount
the happenings of a typical day
Taylan Coskun
Nationality Turkish
Pupil at the Lycée Turgot, Paris
Age 15
Day described: 29 April 1985
Season: Spring
Temperature: 1 1 degrees Centigrade
Weather showery
I got up at 0800 after putting off the
evil moment for fifteen minutes. Still half
asleep, I took a cold shower, ate my
breakfast and rushed out of the house.
Getting to the Underground station
was torture, but, stifled in the crowd, I
finally managed to wake up almost com¬
pletely. When I got out of the
Underground I had to run, but I managed
to get to school in time for the first class,
which was drawing.
The next class was history. Like my
other foreign schoolfellows I wasn't very
attentive. It isn't always easy to concen¬
trate on a lesson when you don't speak
the language perfectly. The effort involv¬
ed is much greater, especially when the
subject is French history!
Then it was time for a period of
physical education which we all enjoy
even though it is quite strenuous.
At lunchtime I didn't waste time
eating; instead I played chess with some
friends who are also chess fanatics like
me.
In the afternoon I had a biology class.
When it was over I rushed out of school
and went home as fast as I could. As
usual the Underground was packed.
When I got home I said a brief "hello"
to the family, dumped my school books in
my room and dashed off to play ping-
pong with some friends who live nearby.
We often spend hours playing together;
today we played until 1900.
Back home again, I had dinner and after
doing two hours homework I went to
bed. I didn't watch television at all today.
Below, immigrant workers arriving in
France.
James Amar
Nationality French
Pupil at the Ecole de Danse de l'Opéra
de Paris
(The French National Ballet School, Paris)
Age 15
Day described: 2 May 1985
Season: Spring
Temperature: 12 degrees Centigrade
Weather showery and overcast
My alarm went off as usual at 0715
and I got up at 0730. I don't have
breakfast as this is not advisable im¬
mediately before strenuous exercise.
I took the Underground to the Palais
Gamier (the Paris Opera House), climbed
the five flights of stairs to the practice
studio and changed into my practice
clothes. In the studio, before the ballet
master arrives, we usually spend about
ten minutes warming up and practising
the movements or positions we find most
difficult.
When the ballet master and the pianist
came in we all bowed to them as usual
and then the hard work really began. We
did exercises at the bar followed by
"floor work" (exercises to make you
supple). By this time we were all
sweating hard. Then came "centre
work", starting with adage (this is slow
tempo work involving controlled lifting of
the legs and balance exercises), followed
James Amar (second from left) during a
"centre work" class. This photo was
taken when he was twelve years old.
by pirouettes and turns, as well as small
jumps and high jumps which are very im¬
portant for male dancers. Our ballet
master is Monsieur Lucien Duthoit. He is
a premier danseur and I enjoy his classes.
At about 1015 1 got Into my track suit
to go to another studio for more work on
variations, stage presence, breathing,
etc. which lasted for about an hour and a
half. When that was over, at about mid¬
day, we all charged down the stairs and
gathered on the steps outside the front
entrance of the Opera House ready to
walk round to the Collège de l'Opéra, in
the Rue de Surène, where we do our or¬
dinary academic work.
I had lunch in the canteen and at 1 330
school work began. I had two hours of
French which is one of my favourite
lessons. Normally we have four hours of
school work, but today it was different
because I had to go round to the Opéra
Comique to rehearse for the Gala perfor¬
mance we are giving on 6 May to raise
money for our school.
After an hour and a half of rehearsal I
had a snack and a rest and then at about
1 830 I went to the dressing room to get
ready for the evening show. This was the
Spectacle de l'Ecole de Danse, a series of
six end of term performances put on by
the Ballet School. The programme con¬
sists of two ballets. Soir de Fête and La
Fille Mal Gardée. I take the part of one of
the peasants In La Fille Mal Gardée. I like
the music of this ballet and the dancing
was fun too because we had to do quite
a lot of miming. It's really very exciting
being on stage in front of a real audience,
and especially during Gala performances
when we dance with the big stars.
The performance ended around 2200.
When it was over, I changed and went
outside where my mother was waiting
for me. We went home together and had
something to eat and then sat chatting
about the show and I did not get to bed
until about 2330. What a day!

Tina Ungalaq
Eskimo boarding student at Frobisher
Bay, Northwest Territories, Canada
Home town: Igloolik, Melville Peninsula,
Northwest Territories, Canada
Age 16
Day described: 10 April 1985
Season: Spring
Temperature: - 28 degrees Centigrade
Blue and sunny sky with no wind
This morning, Millie, the night-watch
person at the student residence where I
stay, made her usual rounds at 0630 to
wake everyone up. But I didn't hear her
so I didn't get up until my friend woke me
up at 071 5. 1 usually take a shower, but
this morning I only had time to wash my
hair and my face. I was almost late for
breakfast which is served in the cafeteria
from 0700 to 0745; I managed to get
breakfast at 0740. 1 had eggs, sausages,
orange juice and toast.
When I had finished eating, I went back
to my room to get ready for school. At
0815 the buses came to take us to
school. Classes started at 0830 so I went
to my classroom for roll call. At 0835 I
went to Mathematics class where we did
some problems. Maths is one of my best
subjects. The second class was Inuktitut
and we didn't do much of anything to¬
day. So far I have been the top student in
Inuktitut which is my first language. At
0955 we had a ten-minute break. My
good friend Kayrene told me about her
Spring break last week, in her home
town, Broughton Island, Northwest Ter¬
ritories. I then had a double period of
related arts. We are doing a project on the
Middle Ages. I am making an imitation
stained-glass window out of brightly col¬
oured tissue paper. In the second period
we looked at some slides of fellow
students which our related arts teacher
took last term. Our last class before lunch
was English. We listened to a tape of
Building an igloo.
Wood-cut by Nanogak © All rights reserved
Shakespeare's The Taming of the Shrew
which we are studying.
Lunch was from 1205 to 1300. We
had hamburgers and French fries. I sat
with Kayrene and talked with her. When
we had finished eating, we walked to a
shop called The Purple Daisy to look
around and to see if they had any new
clothes. We found some clothes but they
were too expensive.
We only had one class in the afternoon
because school closed early at 1400 so
that the teachers and students could go
to Nakasuk Elementary School for the
opening ceremonies of the Baffin
Regional Divisional Board which is taking
over education from the Government of
the Northwest Territories.
When we got out of school, Kayrene
and I walked to the Bay to shop. I bought
a pair of running-shoes and Kayrene did
too. We got a Coke at the snack bar. We
were going to go back to the residence by
taxi, but the residence van came along sox.
we got in it to go back to Ukkivik
residence.
We went and played in the video
games room. I lost a game of board
hockey by four goals to two. After the
hockey game I went upstairs to my room.
My room-mate Mary was there; she had
been home for a Spring break too and she
was tired after her long trip from
Sanikiluaq to Montreal and then on here
to Frobisher Bay. I went to the super¬
visor's office to see if I had a letter from
one of my friends back home in Iglooklik.
To my surprise I saw Janice who is a
supervisor here in Ukkivik residence. She
had just come back from Ottawa where
she had been making wedding plans. She
told me her wedding was planned for 17
August and she was very excited about
It.
Supper was from 1700 to 1800. To¬
day is Wednesday so we had fish,
potatoes and turnips (yuk!) for supper.
After supper I went up to my room to get
my homework for study hour at 1815.
During the study hour I worked on
English and Biology and this essay.
Because I am a junior (16 to 17 years
old) I have to be upstairs at 2200. We
have snacks, usually fruit and muffins or
cakes, and from 2230 to 2300 we get
ready for bed and talk with friends about
our day until 2300, when it is time for
lights out. I stayed up until 2330 to
watch the news on television tonight,
but this was exceptional.
As you can see, my day is not so dif¬
ferent from any other young person's
day. However, if I want to graduate, and
I do want to, I have to live in this Ukkivik
residence from September to June to
study for grades 10,11 and 12. This is
because the school at home only goes up
to grade 9.
At times life in the residence can be
boring and sometimes the rules are a
drag; but deep inside me I know we need
rules if we are to be successful in school.
Although I am many miles away from my
home and family, many of the people
who work at the residence and the
students who live in it make this life style
enjoyable.
My Job
I shall do my job
Be it great, be it small
I shall pride where my sweat dances
I shall sow the seeds and wait for rain to weed,
Work my land and gather my hard won harvest.
I shall do my job
Be it great, be it small;
Priding myself where my sweat dances.
I shall do my job
Which comes from my hands
From my try and hope
From my duty and search
I shall do that job
For deep in myself
I'll know it's my job
A job in which
I tried, I tried
As a man of my time.
Lwanga Mwanje
21 years old
Kampala, Uganda; 1985
This entry for Unesco 's com¬
petition to find a poster for
International Literacy Day
earned a special mention for
Paola Rigger! (17), of
Switzerland.
