Public spaces and prívate faces
Patterns of urban living
by Maurice Aymard
-. tí&á
The separation of the family cell from the
outside world is an important feature of
traditional domestic architecture in the
Mediterranean, and in some mountainous
parts of the region the protective function
of the dwelling even tookprecedence over
all others. Above, In the valley of Göreme
in Cappadocia (Turkey) communities
numbering thousands found refuge over
the centuries in a complex of churches,
monasteries and dwellings hewn out of
the living rock. Turkey and Unesco have
launched an appeal for international soli¬
darity to preserve the site of Göreme and
safeguard it from the effects of erosion.
WHERE do Mediterranean people
choose to live? Never alone, al¬
ways in a group, regardless of its
size or wealth. In the Mediterranean, it
takes only a thousand people scraping a
poor living off the land and trading in its
produce to create an urban unit and infuse
into it the vital forces of cohesion and oppo¬
sition. Elsewhere, twice that number would
amount to no more than a village.
From the simple township to the major
conurbation, there are all the levels of a
hierarchy which is complex because it is
based not only on population figures, eco
nomic activity or accumulated capital, but
also on history, the architecture of build¬
ings, prestige, political and administrative
activities (which define élites), intellectual
life, and an intangible element that makes
one city more of a city than another.
Major towns and cities enjoy looking
down on smaller ones as mere villages, and
their inhabitants as unpolished rustics.
Nevertheless, even the smallest village
appears as an urban microcosm in the sense
that the group is the core of all social life.
The word city, in the Mediterranean basin,
refers to all these different strata of urban
27

life, each of which is formed on the same
model.
The town, as a theatre for trade and
communication, leisure, and all aspects of
social life, is clearly distinct from the coun¬
tryside, which is a place of work, animal life
and the production of material goods. It is
not a simple, homogeneous place into
which anyone can walk and automatically
become a city- dweller. On the contrary, it
is a dense pattern of interwoven spaces
arranged in accordance with an unwritten
yet carefully respected order whose consti¬
tuent rules, apparent at every level of urban
life, define the complexity of a culture.
Modern town planning was born in the
Mediterranean, in fifth-century Greece,
with Hippodamos of Miletus, who invented
the grid layout. It has triumphed during
every era of cultural standardization,
whenever the systematic reproduction of an
established model, acclaimed as superior,
has taken a kind of revenge on spontaneous
development: in Hellenistic Greece, in
Rome, during the Renaissance and the
Baroque period, and in the contemporary
world.
More than the functional needs pro¬
claimed by Haussmann centuries later, it
proclaims the total transparency of in¬
habited space, and is, essentially, an urban
ideal in which order reigns over darkness
and the human mind is the dominant force.
Yet even in propitious circumstances, such
attempts at organization are checked by the
outer walls of the basic unit: the home. The
home is a haven for fundamental distinc¬
tions, the foremost being the separation
between public and private life, followed by
others that situate every man, woman and
child with respect to others around him
and to the world as a whole.
The home can be quite simple, even
rudimentary, comprising no more than a
room three metres square, with a door for
its sole aperture. Such dwellings were found
in archaic Greek cities, throughout the
Maghreb, in Sicily, and in the bassi of
Naples. Such are the homes of the poor to
this day. However, Mediterranean man en¬
larged his home at the earliest opportunity,
annexing an enclosed space (the Arabic
zareba), building around an interior court¬
yard (the atrium or cortile of patrician re¬
sidences), secluded from the indiscreet
glances of passersby. This type of construc¬
tion is horizontal rather than vertical.
However, with the Roman insulae, vertical
construction, as it appears in today's hous¬
ing blocks, began to superpose distinct
areas of space.
For the home always serves the same
purpose; it unites the family and its material
possessions (including animals) under one
roof, but it also separates the family from
the outside world, and safeguards the para
mount value: the honour of the family
group and its head. This explains the prop¬
itiatory rites governing the construction of
the home. It also explains the sanctity of the
threshold a frontier between interior and
exterior, a barrier against evil forces. It
cannot be crossed by all and sundry, and
those who do cross it must obey certain
rules of etiquette. The bride is carried over
it by a relative, after receiving the custom¬
ary offerings intended to ensure her ferti¬
lity; the guest may cross it only if he is
invited by the head of the household, and
only when he has offered a gift.
Beyond the threshold new distinctions
immediately arise. The inside of the home is
parcelled out and organized in the same way
as the outside world from which it is
severed. It is the domain of family and
privacy only because it is the sphere of the
woman in her reproductive role and as a
provider of nourishment. It is the place
where the essential biological functions of
feeding, resting and procreating are per¬
formed. Man's presence within this sphere
is strictly limited. He is excluded from it by
day, for his business is elsewhere, either at

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 28
work in the fields, or in the city, in the
square, at the café, at meetings with other
men. In summer, it is even considered nor¬
mal for him to sleep out of doors on
occasion.
If the home prospers and becomes large
enough to entertain guests, it is divided into
two parts, one for receiving, the other for
the women the gynaeceum of classical
Greece, the women's apartments as
opposed to the men's area, the andron; the
sacred, forbidden harem of the Islamic
world. Even nomads' tents are partitioned
in this way. The barrier, representing a
strict dissociation between men's and
women's tasks, is functional. It is also laden
with symbolism.
By its very nature, the city as a:.space
where man must appear in public is disting¬
uished from two others. The first of these is
the home, which is a place for relaxation
and sleep, but which is also the woman's
Twice a year, on 2 July and 16 August,
thousands of spectators throng the mag¬
nificent shell-shaped Piazza del Campo
in Siena (Italy) to watch the Corsa del Palio
(Race for the Palio), a race of medieval
origin in which horses and riders repre¬
senting different wards of the city (con-
trade) compete for a silken banner or Pa¬
lio. Brilliant displays ofpageantryare held
before the race and excitement mounts to
fever pitch as the horses hurtle round the
cobbled square at breakneck speed. Be¬
low, the Piazza del Campo on Palio day as
depicted in an anonymous 18th-century
painting.
domain: closed, private, forbidden and to
be protected. The second is the country¬
side flat and empty, reserved for work
and nature. Thus, the city is a place for
action not involving work: ritual and festi¬
val, gesture and drama, leisure and games.
In considering the city as a place for
ritual, it is interesting to note that not one of
them lacks either a founder real or mythi¬
cal, hero or saint or a political and reli¬
gious centre, or a wall which unequivocally
separates it from the countryside and, like
the Roman pomerium, places it under di¬
vine protection. There is no city without an
easily comprehensible scheme: that of its
layout, when regular, that of its cardo and
decumanus, intersecting at right angles;
that of its axis of development; that of the
roads which were responsible for its found¬
ation, lead to its gates, and link it to other
cities across fields, desert or sea; that of the
orientation of its churches or the direction
in which prayers are offered. Every town
derives its meaning and special flavour from
a system of landmarks.
Whether they were designed geometri¬
cally or grew spontaneously, cities have
been organized for communication, for the
exchange of signs and symbols more than
for the exchange of goods. The street, that
narrow, encumbered passage which the
houses on it always seek to annexe as a
courtyard, is rarely the main scene of such
exchanges. It is a place where, given a few
chairs, the barber will shave his customers,
children will do their homework, or play
under the watchful eyes of women who sit
nearby sewing or knitting. The true centre
of urban life is the square, the destination of

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 32
the chaotic movement that flows through
the narrow alleys. Always better defended
from intrusion by individuals when there is
a strong sense of community, the square is
the public domain par excellence, and it has
been a fixture of Mediterranean town plan¬
ning since the Greek agora and the Roman
forum.
Consider, for example, the Plaza Mayor,
that inevitable, often sumptuous feature of
Spanish cities; the narrow squares that clus¬
ter around the ports of the Greek islands;
the Piazze della Signoria or Piazze del Com-
une of middle Italy; the Plaka the main
square of Dubrovnik, which stretches from
one gate of the city to the other, dividing the
city in -two. The square is the place for
holding meetings and discussions, assemb¬
ling citizens, organizing mass demonstra¬
tions, taking momentous decisions, and car¬
rying out executions.
Originally simply a meeting place, the
square soon became lined with porticoes
and arcades, providing shelter from sun and
rain. In most cases, it ceased to host mar¬
kets; instead it gathered around it the chief
religious and secular buildings, to which it
acted as an antechamber and proscenium,
as in the case of the temple of Rome and
Augustus, the curia, the cathedral, and the
ancient palace of the podesta.
It reflects its city's material and political
success. As the city expands, it diversifies.
The main square stands at the head of a
complex hierarchy that mirrors the social
order. There is a square for each neigh¬
bourhood, one for each ethnic and religious
community. There is also a square for each
function, market, cult, assembly or festival.
There are squares the size of streets, such as
the corsi, lined with the homes of the
prosperous and luxury shops, where pa¬
rades and solemn processions pass. Each
square also has class overtones; it is aris¬
tocratic or of the people.
The original destiny of Islamic cities
favoured a different utilization of space,
fragmenting the functions of the main
square. The only places where men can
assemble in the centre of the city are the
mosque and its courtyard, which are sur¬
rounded by madrasahs, hans, and baths. It
is here that decrees are announced and
prayers are intoned in the name of the ruler.
Commercial activity took root in the suqs
and bazaars. Other squares, perhaps the
largest, formed at the gates of the cities,
where travelling caravans entered and
camels were unloaded.
Alleyways, streets and squares form a
setting for leisure activities. The group puts

on a performance and observes itself per¬
form. Men come there to talk and linger,
not to work. They have spent their night
fishing or their day tilling the fields, or else
like so many men in the Mediterranean they
only work irregularly, a few days each year,
and are waiting for some hypothetical job to
turn up. In recent years, it has become more
common for them to spend their working
years in the United States, the Federal Re¬
public of Germany, Venezuela, or Austra¬
lia, returning to spend the rest of their days
among their own. N
The city can thus impose its own pace,
which differs from the monotonous and reg¬
ular routine of the working day. It is discon¬
tinuous, it consists of words and silence, of
the lengthy discussions that precede every
decision, accompany every transaction, and
surround every event. It is the pace of the
stroll, of slowly savoured ouzo. Men do not
go into a café to drink but to take their place
in a society of men. It is the pace of the
game, which occupies such an important
place in the lives of the Mediterranean peo¬
ples. Its significance is manifest in the card
games depicted in a famous painting by
Cézanne and a memorable scene by Pagnol,
in the checkerboard squares traced on the
flagstones of the forum in Rome, in the
knucklebones and dice that have symbol¬
ized chance since the time of Caesar.
Games are played everywhere: in the
street by the poor, but more often in public
places, in cafés or on terraces, or else,
where social stratification exists, in clubs
and circles. Every Andalusian town and city
has its "labourers' circle", every Sicilian
town has at least one circle of "galantuomi-
ni", an institution that may undermine so¬
cial solidarity, but gives its members an
opportunity to meet their equals, get to
know them and challenge them in games
that invariably entail betting.
Of course, there are the business centres
such as Barcelona and Genoa, caught up in
the flow of international economic affairs
which they controlled in the past. But these,
in a way, are the exceptions. Everywhere
else, the values of leisureliness still hold
sway, just as they did in the Athens of
Pericles at the height of the city's import¬
ance as a centre of crafts and trade: work is
for other people. The only activity that has
an acknowledged place in all cities com¬
merce, the exchange of goods tends to go
on at a leisurely pace. What's the point of
making a deal too quickly? Buying and
selling, winning and losing are subsidiary to
the pleasure of bargaining, to the pro¬
tracted discussion that is broken off and
then resumed, concluded only when the two
participants congratulate one another on
having played the game so well.
But living under observation by others,
however important it may be, cannot be a
completely satisfying goal. The show would
stop for want of a purpose if it did not
engage the community as well as the indi¬
vidual. It calls for those major perform¬
ances which mobilize the group in its en¬
tirety, enabling its members to test and
demonstrate its cohesion, to express and
verify that cohesion, to feel its power, and
draw renewed confidence from it. Such per¬
formances mark the great moments of so¬
cial life. Condemnation by the moralists of
the Roman empire of the theatre, circuses,
chariot races and gladiatorial combats of
Antiquity, even when justified on account
of their decadence, has caused us to lose
sight of their religious origin and signifi¬
cance. Today, virtually everywhere, group
performances are related to sport; bullfight¬
ing in Spain, and the major religious and
civic festivals still celebrated in certain Ita¬
lian cities are two examples. In all cases,
these performances are staged with men , by
men and for men.
MAURICE AYMARD, French historian, is direc¬
tor ofstudies at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en
Sciences Sociales andassistantadministratorof
the Maison des Sciences de l'Homme, in Paris.
For the past 20 years his research has mainly
focused on the history ofmodem Italy. The pre¬
sent article has been taken from La Méditerra¬
née, l'Espace et l'Histoire, (Flammarion pub¬
lishers, Paris, 1985), which was firstpublished, in
an illustrated edition, by Arts et Métiers Gra¬
phiques, Paris, in 1977.
35
