China's most precious
energy source
by Tang Ruoxin
AS the most active, sensitive and
vigorous element in modern
societies, the young people of the
world represent the future. They are our
most precious "energy source" and the
motor that pushes society forward. On
them depends the direction the human race
will take in the twenty-first century.
There is, however, a dual aspect of youth.
Young people are always the pioneers who
break with undesirable customs and social
traditions, bravely challenging all kinds of
chronic social ills; yet their naivety and im¬
patient discontent can often disturb other
people's daily lives and obstruct social
development.
As a group, young people are in the ma¬
jority. China, for example, is a country of
young people with more than sixty per cent
of the population under the age of thirty
and about seventy per cent under thirty-
five. Young people make up fifty per cent
of the total rural labour force and sixty per
cent of the total industrial work force.
Similar increases in the proportion of young
people in total population are forecast
world-wide and in particular in the develop¬
ing countries.
Modern life is changing young people's
values very rapidly. In China today they
have much greater self-esteem and self-
confidence than twenty years ago; they
stress the importance of the individual in
social life and. are eager to make a more
creative contribution to social progress.
There are two main raisons for this. The
first of these is the spread of scientific
knowledge. Ten times as many young
Chinese . receive higher education today
than was the case twenty years ago and they
form a group which is dedicated to the pur¬
suit of science and progress. Furthermore,
statistics show that more than ninety per
cent of young workers have received
primary education and, even in those rural
areas where education is relatively
backward, the cultural level of young
peasants has risen considerably.
The second reason is that social turmoil
"The traditional view that has prevailed In
China for thousands of years of the
superiority of agriculture as a form of
employment constitutes a serious
psychological barrier to the acceptance
by young people of jobs in commerce or
in the service sector. A serious effort has
been made to convince young people that
all types of jobs are equally worthwhile
and make no difference to social status. "
has subsided and a policy of reform has
been adopted. The Chinese Government is
devoting a major effort to reform of the
economy, thus creating conditions which
enable young people to give free rein to
their creative ability and talents.
Changing values are also reflected in
changing patterns of consumption. Young
Chinese people's life styles, including the
food they eat, the clothes they wear, their
transportation and their homes, their hob¬
bies and interests, have undergone a
remarkable change. The general trend is
towards high consumption, a factor which
will be of great significance for economic
development in China as in other develop¬
ing countries. A recent survey shows that
the sale of high-quality goods in China has
increased fifty times in twenty years and
that seventy per cent of buyers of these
goods are young people.
Providing young people with jobs has
become a serious problem for all countries
and China, with its large population is no
exception. The young people born in the
1960s are coming on to the labour market
and providing jobs for such large numbers
has put great pressure on the Government.
Experts have forecast that China's labour
force will increase by two hundred and thir¬
ty million over the next two decades,
32

'sti'^-*
m te
reaching more than six hundred million by
the year 2000.
In recent years, specialists in youth
research, who have studied this problem in
collaboration with economists, sociologists
and educationists, have proposed that
young people should be allowed the
freedom to look for jobs themselves and
have suggested a number of ways of
creating more job opportunities for them.
Combined with State economic reforms this
has created favourable conditions for solv¬
ing the youth employment problem. Since
1980, about fifty million young people have
found jobs.
To meet the needs of economic develop¬
ment in China, the quality of the labour
force must be rapidly improved. A research
report shows that China's young workers,
although more skilled than their parents,
are still far from matching the demands im¬
posed by the world revolution in science and
technology. To meet these demands we
need to make education more widespread,
raise the educational level and improve
vocational and pre-employment job-
training. A survey of two enterprises in
Suzhou City shows that trained workers are
superior in adaptability and creativity to
untrained workers and that their produc¬
tivity is 16.5 per cent higher.
Youth research experts also point out
that, in view of changes and reforms in the
economic system, the educational system
should undertake to alter young people's
traditional attitudes towards employment.
For example, the traditional view that has
prevailed in China for thousands of years of
the superiority of agriculture as a form of
employment constitutes a serious
psychological barrier to the acceptance by
young people of jobs in commerce or in the
service sector. A serious effort has been
made to convince young people that all
types of jobs are equally worthwhile and
make no difference to social status.
"As the most active, sensitive and
vigorous element in modern societies,
the young people of the world represent
the future... On them depends the direc¬
tion the human race will take in the
twenty-first century".
Juvenile delinquency is another com¬
plicated social phenomenon common to
many countries which requires serious
scientific research. Since the 1970s, juvenile
delinquency has become an increasingly
serious problem in China. In 1983, the
crime rate among teenagers amounted to
nine per 10,000. Although this figure is not
very high, juvenile crime represented
seventy-five per cent of all crimes commit¬
ted, a tenfold increase over the 1950s.
A social problem such as juvenile delin¬
quency can only be tackled by mobilizing
the resources of society as a whole. In
China, government departments are
responsible for co-ordinating the work of
the various social sectors. The research
departments are responsible for social in¬
vestigations, case analysis and have an ad¬
visory role and they work in close co¬
operation with the judicial departments and
social organizations such as neighbourhood
committees and the Youth League.
The public security departments and the
courts ensure that criminal offences are
punished in accordance with the law and at¬
tempt to reform culprits who are serving
sentences through corrective study and
labour.
The neighbourhood committees and the
Youth League have a preventive and
rehabilitative role. First of all they try to
spot potential delinquents and to prevent
them from committing crimes. Their se¬
cond task is to care for delinquents return¬
ing home after a period of imprisonment
,1 Ï
and to ensure that they do not relapse into
crime. Returning delinquents are given
preferential treatment as regards education
and employment in order to encourage
them to mend their ways, and these
measures have been very effective in reduc¬
ing juvenile delinquency and maintaining
public security.
Physical and psychological factors are
also important elements in youth research.
Researchers have discovered, for example,
that young Chinese are reaching physical
maturity two to three years earlier than did
the same age group of twenty years ago, a
fact which has important implications for
the country's economic and political life
and for the legal and educational systems.
Youth is a period of rapid physical
growth and of the attainment of sexual
maturity. It is a period during which
character, the sentiments and emotions are
unstable and this can lead to irrational ac¬
tion. This is why research on youth
psychology in China concentrates on the
specific characteristics of young people's
conceptual, emotional and sentimental
development and self-awareness.
There remains the important task of
adapting education to meet the new needs
of youth. This must be done in a scientific
way if we are to bring up a generation
capable of meeting the demands of the
twenty-first century.
TANG RUOXIN, of China, is bureau chief of
the Youth Research Institute of the Chinese
Academy of Social Sciences and deputy
editor-in-chief of the series To the Future.
