OENJODARO
Threatened centre
of an ancient civilization
by Syed A. Naqvi
An Incomparable monument to a great
civilization that flourished in the Indus
Valley some 5,000 years ago, the vast
ruins of the city of Moenjodaro are
located in the Sind Province of present-
day Pakistan, some 400 kilometres north
of Karachi. Sometimes referred to as "the
Manhattan of the Bronze Age ' ' because of
its extraordinarily modern, scientifically-
planned layout, Moenjodaro, even at the
height of its splendour, has always been
at risk from flooding by the Indus.
Preserved for centuries beneath a protec¬
tive layer of soil, the excavated city (the
excavations began in 1922) now faces
two additional threats: a rising water table
and corrosion by salts. Since the 1960s,
Unesco has been collaborating with the
Government of Pakistan in preserving
this outstanding site. With the aid of
Pakistani experts, Unesco has establish¬
ed a master plan for the work ofpreserva¬
tion, launched an international fund-
raising campaign and included Moen¬
jodaro on Its World Heritage List. Above,
a view of the site of Moenjodaro
dominated by a Buddhist stupa of more
recent construction.
MOENJODARO, a metropolis of the
five-thousand-year-old Indus
Valley civilization in Pakistan,
presents the earliest example of town-
planning and a setting for the future. Even
in the limited area laid bare by the ar¬
chaeologist's spade, it is like walking
through a fossilized embryo of Manhattan.
In the lower city, we find the crisscross
grid-iron system of street layout, a broad
boulevard over nine metres wide, running
north to south and crossed at right angles
by somewhat smaller east-west streets.
The blocks of residential houses between
are served by narrow lanes.
The prime considerations in planning
the houses were safety and comfort.
Avoiding the risk of heavy traffic on the
main streets, the doors of the houses
usually opened on to the side-lanes. In¬
terior courtyards provided light and air,
and windows were screened with grilles of
terra-cotta or alabaster. The thickness of
the walls of the houses in Moenjodaro
proves the existence of at least two-
storey-high structures. Most houses had
stairways that led either to the second
storey or to the roof, often used in
Pakistan and elsewhere in the East as a
cool sleeping place in summer. Besides
other basic amenities, many houses also
had wells for water supply which were lin¬
ed with brickwork and had protective
revetments at their head to prevent ac¬
cidents to children and domestic animals.
The grid layout and residential architec¬
ture are not the only indications of the
perception and care that went into the
planning of Moenjodaro. Never before,
and not until Greek and Roman times,
was so much attention paid to sanitation
and civic facilities. The water-discharge
sluices from the houses first collected the
refuse in small cesspits lined with bricks
at the base of the walls, from which the
dirty water was led through conduits to the
main drains which ran along the streets
below pavement level and were covered
with sturdy bricks. This drainage system
was connected to the larger sewerage
outlets, also covered at the top, which
finally led the dirty water outside the
populated area.
A few hundred metres to the west of this
densely built part of the city, excavations
have revealed some most conspicuous
monuments located on an artificial hill
some seven to fourteen metres high. The
Great Bath, a highly complex brick struc¬
ture, symbolizes a triumph of engineering
at that time. The pool, 1 1 .9 metres long, 7
metres wide and 1.9 metres deep, was
made watertight by an inner facing of
bricks set on edge in gypsum mortar
which was laid over a layer of asphalt 2.5
cm thick trowelled on to double brick
walls. The floor sloped to an outlet that led
in turn to a corbelled arched drain. This
corbelled arch was one of the earliest
achievements of architectural engineer-
32

U a*
:»-
Sfc
Photos © Raoul Zamora, Paris
ing, spanning an opening without using
wooden beams. (The possibilities of span¬
ning wider openings were extended later
on by the discovery of the keystone, and
in our times developed still further with the
use of reinforced concrete.)
A second architectural feature is the
podium of the great Granary situated on
the western flank of the mound. The
podium, made of solid brick square-
shaped platforms separated by a gridiron
of straight and narrow passages, is
thought to have been covered by a floor of
wooden boards, and probably the
superstructure was also made of wood. It
has been suggested that it served as a
State Treasury to which bullock carts
brought sacks of grain from farmers, since
in those days coins had not yet been
minted. A quantity of charred grains of
wheat collected from the excavations puts
the nature of the building beyond any
doubt. A third important building in this
area is the Pillared Hall. It has twenty
pillars and encloses a small courtyard,
and probably served as the centre of
administration.
The purpose of some of Moenjodaro's
sophisticated structures is one of the
many questions that still remain
unanswered about the city. The discovery
in 1922 of so complete and advanced a
metropolis came as an immense surprise
to the archaeologists who never had any
inkling that such a full-fledged civilization
existed in the Indus Valley as far back as
2500 BC. It was not until 1920 when ex¬
cavations started at Harappa, about 640
kilometres north of Moenjodaro, that the
existence of a whole network of such
"modern" ancient cities was suspected.
When Harappa, the mother city of the
Indus Valley , civilizationbecause of
which this civilization is also known as the
"Harappan culture" was discovered in
the second half of the nineteenth century,
it was found to be already robbed of its an¬
cient burnt bricks by the engineers laying
the railway line between Lahore and
Multan and, of course, by local villagers
hunting for easy building material for their
own houses. Since then, archaeologists in
the Indian sub-continent have located
nearly 1,000 other Harappan sites. They
show a remarkable similarity of cultural
deposits and cover an astonishing
geographical spread, from the Arabian
Sea to the foothills of the Himalayas and
from the eastern border of Iran to the
vicinity of the Ganges Valley. This area
was much larger than the combined size
of contemporary cultures in Mesopotamia
and the Valley of the Nile.
What was the mainstay of the life of the
Indus Valley people in that remote past?
The archaeological evidence shows that
they were primarily farmers, growing
grains, vegetables and cotton, and cattle
husbandry was central to the farm
economy. Their life-style was simple but
The Great Bath is undoubtedly the most
spectacular building of Moenjodaro. Built
like most of the city's buildings in brick,
the 12-metre-long bath itself was made
completely watertight by the application
of a layer of bitumen between two layers
of brick pointed with lime mortar. The
sloping floor of the bath was equipped
with an ingenious draining system.
A seal found at Moenjodaro. At top is an
example of the pictographic writing of the
Indus civilization. So far all attempts to
decipher this writing have failed.
33

not lacking in rich goods. They used cop¬
per and bronze for some tools and
weapons, and occasionally worked gold
and silver with other materials into the
beads for their jewellery. Among the
beads some were skilfully fashioned out of
rare semi-precious stones such as agate,
carnelian and lapis lazuli. At the same
time, the bulk of their artifacts consisted of
bone, shell, faience, flint, clay, and other
locally abundant materials. Their han¬
diwork in more vulnerable organic
substances has not survived, and we are
left to guess what kind of furniture they us¬
ed or what varieties of textile patterns they
preferred. The remains of the dyers'
workshop at Moenjodaro and certain pat¬
terns depicted, on dresses worn by
sculptured figures do, however, suggest
that they liked colourful clothing, often
embroidered or printed.
A further striking aspect of this ancient
civilization was the extent of standardiza¬
tion. In architecture, building bricks were
of standard size, 27.94 cm in length, 1 3.42
cm in breadth, and . 6.35 cm thick.
Drainage and sewer systems were stan¬
dard in pattern. The private houses were
generally standardized in their plans and
dimensions and only special structures,
possibly public buildings, were treated
differently but within the framework of the
city plan. Above all, the existence of strict¬
ly controlled weights and measures
throughout the Indus Valley civilization
distinguishes it from other contemporary
civilizations.
The King-Priest. This 18-cm-high
statuette, carved in steatite and dating
from about 2500 BC, is one of the few
sculptures in stone found at Moenjodaro.
The people respected the rule of law
which helped them to develop an
egalitarian society on such a vast scale
about 5,000 years ago, an achievement
unparalleled in the history of mankind. By
inference, therefore, the Indus Valley
possessed an efficient mechanism of con¬
trol, means of communication and
transportation and an administrative
framework free of such grandiose struc-
Movement of salts into the ruins
°0,D06ff
'Drawing Unesco
A. Salt-impregnated water
rises from the water table
by capillary action.
B. Salty water also
infiltrates through
surrounding earth and
débris which has yet to be
cleared away.
C Dust-laden winds carry
salts and deposit them on
bricks. Rain helps the salts
penetrate the brickwork.
D. Accumulated salts
within the bricks erode the
walls.
Eaten away by salts, the walls of Moen¬
jodaro are slowly crumbling into dust.
The salts are absorbed from the water
table which has risen considerably as a
result of the rise, through silting, of the
river bed of the Indus and of irrigation in
the surrounding plains. The water table,
which in 1922 was at a depth of about 8
metres, has risen to between 1.52 metres
of the surface in October and 3.66 metres
in May. The water impregnates the brick
walls by capillaryaction and in other ways
(see diagram) thus beginning a con¬
tinuous cycle of saturation, evaporation
and crystallization of the salts which
causes the walls to disintegrate. Control
measures envisaged include the lowering
of the water table, by pumping or drain¬
ing, and the complete excavation and ex¬
ternal cleaning of the walls coupled with
leaching out of the accumulated salts.
tures as forts, palaces or great temples
serving as centres of authoritarian rule. It
was here in those ancient times that a con¬
cept of some kind of Government of the
people, by the people, for the people was
evolved, laying the seed of democratic
rulesa cherished goal of us all today.
Of course the proof of this inference lies
in the results of further research into the
socio-cultural pattern of the Indus Valley
civilization and particularly the decipher¬
ing of its enigmatic script which appears
on seals and sealings discovered in the In¬
dus Valley. The epigraphists and
linguistic experts of the world have made
many attempts to decipher this script in
the last sixty years. An account of their ef¬
forts would make a long tale of trials and
errors. The net gain of their researches so
far has been recognition of nearly 350 dif¬
ferent pictographs and the fact that the
script was written from right to left. But in
the absence of long texts even the use of
computer technology has not yielded any
positive results and one can only hope for
a day when a bilingual inscription will be
discovered making it possible to unravel
the mysteries of the Harappan culture in
the same way as the Rosetta Stone did in
Egypt and the Behistun inscription in Iran.
A further insight into the skill of the
people is provided by a wide range of
utilitarian, recreational, artistic and cult
objects made of baked clay, stone,
metals, ivory, conch shell, faience and
other substances. A whole range of pot¬
tery types, most wheel-turned, presents a
multitude of forms, sizes and decorative
features. Amongst the innumerable terra¬
cotta toys, miniature bullock carts with
solid wheels are particularly striking. Such
carts are being used even today around
Moenjodaro. Here we also find the begin¬
nings of a chess-board designed on brick
tiles, with gamesmen made of agate or
ivory.
Who were the founders of this far-
reaching, long-vanished civilization?
Scholars believe that the people of the In¬
dus came down into the valley from the
foothills of the mountains to the west. Of
the early Harappan sites, recent
discoveries at Mehrgarh in Baluchistan,
southeast of the Sulaiman and Kirthar
ranges, show an unbroken sequence of
cultural evolution from the sixth millen¬
nium BC to the mature Harappan culture.
As to the end of this highly developed
civilization around 1500 BC, several
theories have been put forward by ar¬
chaeologists. Some of them attribute it to
the Aryan invaders who swept over the In¬
dus Valley about that time, others con¬
sider it due to a tectonic shift in the
coastline of the Arabian Sea affecting the
entire ecological system of the Valley.
However, further research is needed to
shed light on the causes of the sudden
demise of this great civilization.
The ancient remains of Moenjodaro are
now on the World Heritage List as a monu¬
ment of universal interest and Unesco has
launched an international campaign for
34

their preservation. When . excavations
started at the site in 1922, the structural
remains were in excellent condition. Soon
after they were afflicted by the plague of
waterlogging and the leprosy of salinity.
These two diseases, combined with the
menace of erosion by the River Indus,
posed a grim threat to the very existence
of Moenjodaro. This complex problem re¬
quired not only huge finances which were
beyond the resources of the Government
of Pakistan but also technical know-how
of a multi-disciplinary nature.
At the request of the Government of
Pakistan, the General Conference of
Unesco adopted a resolution at its seven¬
teenth session, authorizing an interna¬
tional campaign for the preservation of
Moenjodaro. In January 1974, the
Director-General of Unesco launched an
Appeal for international solidarity, stating
that " By the generous provision of money,
equipment and services, governments,
public and private individuals will not
merely be helping to save a precious
record of man's past, they will also be
demonstrating and strengthening that in¬
tellectual and moral solidarity on which
true peace must be founded".
Since then, over US$4 million have
been received in the Unesco Trust Fund
from Member States and private sources.
The Government of Pakistan, from its own
resources, has already invested about
US$6 million for the execution of the
Master Plan, which includes schemes for
groundwater control, conservation of
structural remains and the training of the
River Indus, at a total estimated cost of
US$19 million.
The first phase of the groundwater con¬
trol scheme, which envisaged fourteen
tubewells, collector and disposal drains,
and a pump house, has already been
completed. Work on the conservation of
structural remains has also advanced
considerably. The amount required for the
implementation of the River Training
scheme, about US$9 million, has yet to be
collected and work on this project has not
yet begun. The Director-General of
Unesco has, therefore, addressed a
second Appeal to the international com¬
munity urging that "This challenge is
commensurate with the responsibility we
all bear for our common history, to which
Moenjodaro is a moving testimony we
cannot and must not allow to disappear."
SYED A. NAQVI, internationally known ar¬
chaeologist and museologist, was head of the
National Museum of Pakistan, and then
General Director of Pakistan's Department of
Archaeology and Museums. He has excavated
at many Pakistani sites including Moenjodaro,
Taxila and Mansura. In July 1973 he joined
Unesco's Division of Cultural Heritage, which
he has headed since January 1982. He has
been directly responsible for the successful
campaigns for Nubia and Borobudur, as well
as supervising all Unesco's activities for the
preservation of the cultural heritage. Among
his studies on archaeology and ancient art are
The Muslim Art (1966), Gandhara Art (1967)
and 1,400 Years of Quranic Calligraphy
(1973).
Most of the houses atMoenjodaro had in¬
terior wells to provide water for cooking
and washing. Looking at first sight more
like chimneys after excavation of the soil
around them, these wells testify to the
continual rise in the ground occupation
level and provide archaeologists with a
convenient time and depth scale. The in¬
habitants of the city were obliged to add
fresh layers ofbrick at regular intervals to
raise the tops of the wells above the level
of the ground. Some wells have been
found to go right through entire rooms of
earlier houses.
35
