Architecture
by Kenzo Tange
WHEN I graduated from university
in 1938, modern architecture
was already a prey to the snares
of formalism. The modern movement,
which styled itself rationalism or func-
tionalism, had rejected all past traditions
and styles and was dominated by the idea
that the "white box" (which is actually only
a starting point) was the ultimate goal. AH
negation of the past was willingly in¬
tegrated. I could not help but think that this
kind of contemporary architecture had
already lost its vital force. At that time I was
strongly influenced by Le Corbusier, who
seemed to me to stand alone in setting his
work on the level of architectural art.
I was also strongly attracted by
Renaissance architecture and by
Michelangelo.
Study of Michelangelo enabled me to
understand the grandeur of ancient Greece

3
ÍA
»4
Entrance and gardens of thé shrine of Is», Japan.



and the city
and Rome. I was particularly interested in a
series of vast drawings depicting agoras and
forums. At the same period I was an en¬
thusiastic admirer of classical Japanese ar¬
chitecture and above all of the temple of
Ise, one of Japan's most sacred Shinto
shrines, which seemed to me a prototype of
Japanese architecture, and of the Katsura
Imperial Palace at Kyoto.
In 1946 I was asked to work on the plan
for the reconstruction of Hiroshima. This
experience was of paramount importance
for me, enabling me as it did to glimpse the
difficulty of rooting contemporary ar¬
chitecture in Japanese reality, behind which
we could still discern the weight of
tradition.
At that time there was a growing debate
about tradition. I felt my own interest shift
away from the Yayoi tradition, the basis of
aristocratic society, towards the popular
Jomon tradition. In a sense the Yayoi
culture could be considered as refined,
Apollonian, and the Jomon culture as crude
and Dionysiac. But if tradition acted for me
as a catalyst, stimulating the development
of my ideas and present at the conception
and preparation of my projects, it did not
appear as such in the final result. Concern
with tradition was related to our design ap¬
proach but our methodology was a question
of a different order.
The starting point of our methodology
was a critical attitude towards func-
tionalism. The different functions of a
building are as numerous as its users. The
totality of these functions had to be taken
into account.
In the case of a city hall, for example, it
is clear that all kinds of requirements im¬
posed by the mayor, the councillors, the
staff, and visitors, must be considered. In
view of this diversity, it is of crucial impor¬
tance in a methodological approach to
know what the real function of a city hall is.
At this point the concept of typology of
functions appears.
From all these arbitrary demands and
functions we select those which seem the
most human, the most essential, the most
future-orientated: accompanied by a
metaphysical content, the typology of func¬
tions thus comes to have a symbolic value.
My work on Hiroshima enabled me to
develop certain concepts which brought in¬
to play the relationship between architec¬
ture and the city. The Centre and the Park
of Peace became the heart of the city-
memorial of Hiroshima...
I then came to realize the need for an ad¬
ditional element to the four functions defin¬
ed in the Athens Charter*, one capable of
endowing the city with a sense of entity and
centrality. This element was the "urban
core", a structural concept through which
other cities could be provided with organic
entity, like Hiroshima. I understood that
where meeting places for the population
were concerned, the architect's interpreta¬
tion should go beyond the functional and
should embrace more general concepts.
Strongly aware of the role of information
in our society, I began to feel that urban and
architectural space, formerly open and un-
confined, actually exercised a force of at¬
traction. I felt increasingly that space,
which I had previously interpreted as being
created by the separation of physical ob¬
jects, actually exercised a force which held
these objects together. I slowly came to con¬
sider space as a truly active binding force.
My certainty that this was so caused a basic
change in my way of thinking about ar¬
chitecture and city planning.
Structures exist in several dimensions.
Dynamic relationships have physical struc¬
tures. Structures permit the association of'
elements. Space itself transmits messages to >
people. In linguistic terms, structure'
establishes the grammar of messages. It is
the channel whereby people can com¬
municate among themselves. We came to ^
The Athens Charter stemmedfrom the fourth
International Congress of Modern Architecture
(CIAM) in 1933 and dealt with what were con¬
sidered the four primary functions of the city:
dwelling, recreation, work, and transport.

the conclusion that it is impossible to
understand a building, a group of
buildings, or urban space, without in¬
troducing the concept of" structure into our
thinking.
The proposal for structural reorganiza¬
tion contained in our Plan for Tokyo in
1960 was a first step towards a structural
rather than a functional approach. In this
plan, we attempted to comprehend the
structure of Tokyo in terms of mobility and
communications. We then proposed a
structural reorganization which would
transform the city from its enclosed, cen¬
tripetal structure to an open, linear and ex¬
pandable structure.
From this approach the concept of the ur¬
ban axis was born, a concept which is now
almost universally accepted.
In the Plan for Tokyo, the urban axis was
a symbolic as well as a physical structure.
In the 1970s the complexity and diversity
of world problems became even greater
than before. Politically, the world had to
face tensions between East and West and
North and South. All aspects of the pro¬
blems which arose were so closely interlink¬
ed that independent solutions to individual
problems became impossible. A
multidimensional approach was required to
understand what was happening. Previous¬
ly seen in terms of linear equations, pro¬
blems now had to be solved by multi¬
dimensional equations. Some even claimed
that no approach was perfectly acceptable.
They decided to leave the field and to
sidetrack the issue by talking of the diversity
of criteria of values.
But in my opinion, what emerged from
all this was not diversity but confusion.
In such a period, there is a tendency to
lose the architect in the labyrinthine com¬
plexities of the information society. Feeling
that he can trust no one but himself, the ar¬
chitect falls back on a highly individual
aesthetic. Historically, in fin de siècle
periods, people have tended to put all their
faith in beauty alone, to become aesthetes
who, incapable of judging the kind of beau¬
ty which is appropriate, search for anything
new or unusual. They are convinced that
Detail of the convent of Notre-Dame-de-
La-Tourette (1957- 1 959) built in France by
the Swiss-born French architect Le Cor-
busier (Charles-Edouard Jeanneret-Gris,
1887-1965), whose work and ideas have
influenced Kenzo Tange. The structure
shows Le Corbusier's taste for plastic ef¬
fects and the freedom of his use of raw
concrete, on which the imprint of the
formwork can still be seen.
The first phase of the King Faisal Founda¬
tion Headquarters Complex at Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia, was begun by Kenzo Tange
in 1976. The Foundation's offices are in
the two triangular towers in foreground.
The vast Complex also comprises a
mosque, a religious school and library,
and an apartment building. Simple
geometrical forms have been used
throughout.

Kenzo Tange blends the forms of modern
architecture with those of popular
Japanese tradition, one of the oldest ex¬
amples of which is the Shinto Inner
Shrine of Ise, the naiku (left), which pro¬
bably dates back to the 7th century. The
wooden buildings reproduce in highly
developed form the architecture of the
simple peasant houses of ancient Japan.
They are built on piles, and their steep
thatched roofs are crowned by elaborate
ridge timbers.
-<*_ wv*-->-
Right, the 1,000-room Akasaka Prince
Hotel, Tokyo, a 40-storey tower built by
Kenzo Tange. The basic concept and
design were decided in 1972 and con¬
struction was completed in 1982.
Although the façades are partially clad
with aluminium, the use of mirror glass
produces the effect of lightness and
transparency sought by the architect.
they must create something different in
order to express themselves within this
multiplicity of values. This is how I inter¬
pret the post-modernist experiments which
appeared in the 1970s as an antithesis to
modern architecture.
Modern architecture can, I think, be
defined by two periods. In the first, it
adapted itself to industrial society. In the se¬
cond, in which we are today, it must adapt
itself to the information society.
The first period of modern architecture
was that of the projects of Le Corbusier and
Walter Gropius, expressions of industrial
society, all of which bore the unique imprint
of these Masters of architecture. My own
work is an attempt to answer one question:
what should the architecture of the infor¬
mation society be?
I feel it is obvious that modern architec¬
ture has entered its second period.
Although I am not keen on the term post¬
modernism, it indicates the resources and
the new visual vocabulary which will
perhaps contribute to the creation of a new
language for the architectural age to come.
I do not think, however, that post-mod¬
ernism can become the expression of the in¬
formation society.
The objective of my research is to
discover the architectural and urban
language proper to this new society.
KENZO TANGE is an internationally known
Japanese architect and city planner. His best
known early work was the Peace Centre at
Hiroshima (1951-1956). Among his more re¬
cent buildings are the Akasaka Prince Hotel in
Tokyo and the King Faisal Foundation Head¬
quarters Complex at Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (see
photos) In 1984, Kenzo Tange was elected to
the Académie des Beaux-Arts of the Institut
de France. The article published here has been
extracted from the address he gave on his
reception into the Académie.
