Unesco and peace research
An important objective of Unesco's Major Programme No.
XIII, Peace, International Understanding, Human Rights
and the Rights of Peoples, is to encourage reflection on the
factors contributing to peace by means ofstudies combining
philosophical reflection and moral considerations and to
clarify, in an historical perspective, the causes of conflicts
and their various interpretations. The article below is based
on a working document prepared by the Unesco Secretariat
for an Expert Meeting on Philosophical Research on Ac¬
tivities Linked with the Strengthening of the Spirit of Peace,
held in Paris in December 1980.
Reaching up to the Mediterranean sky,
the temple of Athena Nike (Giver of vic¬
tory) stands like a sentinel at the entrance
to the Acropolis, the natural heart of
Athens. Beyond it stands the Parthenon,
the rectangular, columned temple of
Athena whose deceptive simplicity is an
expression of the ideal ofclarity and unity
that Is the mainspring of the Platonic
tradition, Greece's spiritual bequest to
the world.
True successors to Leónidas, the Greek
armed forces inflicted a severe defeat on
Mussolini's Fascist forces who invaded
Greece in October 1940 and held out
against the combined Axis forces until
the end ofApril 1941. Greek losses during
the conflict are estimated at 160,000, of
whom 140,000 were civilians.
THERE is an urgent need to elab¬
orate a generally acceptable
modern philosophical framework
on which to base activities aimed at
strengthening peace; this would include
an epistemology of the investigation of
peace/war phenomena, a distillation of
the philosophical essence of what con¬
stitutes a stable peace, and the ethical
foundations of peaceful relations in all
domains.
The lack of a general epistemology
tends to weaken many well-intentioned
attempts at peace research. A number of
recent attempts to explain the peace/
war phenomenon have exhibited a
common methodological weakness
oversimplification. Oversimplified models
of analytical abstractions have, for exam
ple, been constructed in the hope of
throwing new light on complex, little-
understood phenomena by comparing
them with other, simpler and better-known
phenomena. The descriptive accuracy of
such models is doubtful, their capacity to
provide valid explanations of phenomena
is restricted, and they are only of limited
use in practical applications and in
forecasting.
In order to clarify the theoretical bases
of modern peace research it is necessary
to analyse its phraseology and ter¬
minology, sometimes borrowed from
other disciplines and often ambiguous. At
the 26th session of the United Nations
General Assembly, for instance, it was
suggested that "polemological baro¬
meters" should be establisheda meta
phor designating mechanisms capable
of predicting local conflicts that could
threaten peace.
Subsequently, the metaphor was car¬
ried further when it was proposed that an
attempt should be made to detect "fronts
of collective aggressivity", analogous to
the meteorologists' "weather fronts";
.computers were thought to be the best in¬
struments for establishing these "baro¬
meters" and detecting these "fronts".
Thus an elaborate meteorological
metaphor for the peace/war phenomenon
was built up.
We should not denigrate all the work ac¬
complished in the elaboration of com¬
puterized "polemological barometers",
but the dangers involved in the use of
such metaphors and the extrapolation of
32

methods from one field of research to
another, from a natural science to a social
science, should also be borne in mind.
Less popular has been the "medical"
model which assimilates peace and war to
good health and sickness in the human
body. Inventors of this model themselves
point out that "whereas the human body
clearly fits the idea of a 'natural system',
including the processes of self-
maintenance and aging, we have some
difficulties in conceptualizing the interna¬
tional system in a similar manner".
. Nevertheless, Norwegian theorist
Johan Galtung, explaining a distinction
between negative peace (defined as the
absence of war) and positive peace
(presence of patterns of co-operation),
supposes that it runs parallel to a distinc¬
tion between negative and positive health
in the medical sciences and the "health"
of the international system may depend to
a certain extent on the "health" of its
parts, i.e. nations.
"Meteorological" and "medical" con¬
ceptions of peace/war patterns are, of
course, clearly recognized by peace
research students as preliminary
metaphors rather than as fully elaborated
models. But in the field of peace research
there are also models whose
metaphorical character is not so obvious.
Among these are psychological Freudian
and behaviourist models, anthropological
models, ethological models, and so on.
Every attempt at modelling bears in
itself the danger of reductionism, of ar¬
tificial oversimplification of the object of
research. But when the theoretical ap¬
proach is derived from the natural
sciences (such as medicine or
meteorology) and extrapolated to the
social sciences, the danger is increased.
Modelling based on a comparison of con¬
flicts between primitive tribes and modern
conflicts between States (i.e. wars), being
within the social sciences, may very well
display external and immaterial
similarities. It can be presumed that con¬
flicts in societies with different social
structures will present some differences
as well as similarities, since the social
nature of conflicts as well as their degree
of complexity are variable. They cannot
be considered merely as simple ancient
and complicated modern forms of the
same phenomenon.
The need for peace research to develop
its own paradigm, or exemplary model, is
evident and, in fact, several such
paradigms exist. A well known one is the
theoretical Marxist structural explanation
of the cause of war which presumes
private ownership of the means of produc¬
tion, exploitation of populations by the
minority possessing classes and an an¬
tagonistic class stratification of society to
be the principal ground of external ag¬
gression and war, perpetual peace being
an ideal of a future world socialist com¬
munity free from every kind of exploita¬
tion. There are many modern modifica¬
tions of this scheme, using different
phraseologies but similar in their content.
Of course, the Marxist account of war
and peace has also been criticized.
From the philosophical point of view, for
instance, a fundamental criticism is
A prayer for peace. Monks in meditation
against the backdrop of the snow-capped
summit of Fujiyama, the sacred mountain
of Japan.
sometimes made. Although the Marxist
approach to an explanation of war and
peace does not rely on an explicit
metaphor or model, it is, nevertheless,
reductionist in that it attempts to explain
tensions and hostilities between
sovereign States in terms of conflicts of
another kind within the separate States.
The history of social science is strewn
with the relics of unsuccessful reduc-
tionisms; and this is why adoption of an in¬
terdisciplinary "systems" approach to the
phenomena of war and peace is thought
to hold some promise for the future. Nor
should we forget the positive models
elaborated since 1966 within the
framework of the World Order Models Pro¬
ject (WOMP) and which reached a high
level of conceptual design.
Another philosophical problem that it is
difficult to avoid is that of the status of
"laws" governing the development of
society. The debate has been a familiar
one at least since the publication of Sir
Karl Popper's Poverty of Historicism, but
it remains as relevant today as it was a
quarter of a century ago.
To what extent are the "laws" of social
development that we have discovered so
far, or that we can expect to discover,
similar to the laws of the natural sciences?
In what respects are they different? For
example, it is argued that whilst the laws
of nature cannot be changed by man, who
33

This drawing by
Aurore Dillon (aged 4 1/2)
won a prize in a children 's
ad contest held during a "Two
days with Unesco" event organized
in June 1984 on the initiative of the
cultural centre of Lucy-sur-Yonne (France)
under the auspices of the Unesco Courier.
The theme of the contest was: "Getting
to know each otherthe way to commu¬
nity and better mutual understanding. "
Other award-winners were: Sandrine Mar¬
tin (aged 7), Raphael Gomez (aged 10),
Séverine Déjardin (aged 12), André Beau-
vallet (aged 14), Patrick Beauvallet,
Fabrice Fougeron and Florence Go-
din (aged 16). A large number of
local schools took pan in the
event.
^ can only adapt himself to them and use
his knowledge of their peculiarities in his
activities, the laws of society, according to
Marxist belief, can be changed by human
activity to the benefit of mankind.
Is the establishment of perpetual peace
possible today? We know that throughout
history there has always been more war
than peace. Is this because of the ex¬
istence of specific laws governing society
and human behaviour that make war in¬
evitable or even, as some thinkers have
suggested, indispensable? If such laws
exist, are they absolute like the laws of
nature? Or can they, like other laws gover¬
ning society, be changed? Can their ef¬
fects be tempered or in some way
channelled?
Thus peace research has already pro¬
vided us with a number of theories,
elements of theories, models and
metaphors for the analysis of war and
peace; but a number of deep
philosophical questions arise with an in¬
sistence that makes it difficult for us to ig¬
nore them.
Peace research is an interdisciplinary
field of great complexity. Attention must
be directed to the "dialectic of peace", in
the sense of the complex interrelation¬
ships between the peace/war dimension
on the one hand, and, on the other, the
dimensions of human rights, development
within nations, equity between nations on
both the political and economic levels,
and the existence and recognition of
cultural diversity. Each of these dimen¬
sions in turn involves an ethical aspect
and discussion of peace/war problems of¬
fers an opportunity to test and refine the
principal theories of ethics that philosophy
has developed over the course of its
history, whether they be rationalistic, ¡n-
tuitionistic, utilitarian, or of any other type.
The view of Kant, for example, im¬
mediately comes to mind: a reasonable
being must act only according to maxims
which may constitute a system of laws.
According to Kant, who also outlined the
idea of perpetual peace, rational
behaviour must be based on a clear,
developed system of coherent ethics, em¬
bodied in laws and rules.
The notion of such a system underlies
proposals for a New International Order. A
fully thought out philosophy, above all an
ethical philosophy, of a New International
Order is needed, and this philosophy has
to form the basis of the modern concept of
peace. An understanding of the fun¬
damental concepts of the great theories of
ethics is of the utmost importance to an
appreciation of the values implicit in the
peace/war dialectic; and the practicalities
of the problems faced by the world today
in peace and war can, if carefully examin¬
ed and reflected upon, help to enrich the
ethical theories of philosophy itself.
