Let the past serve the future
by Osaga Odak
"Pick it up. Feel it. Take it to pieces. Can
you find this? This is the message that the
children in Kenya are given these days
when they visit one of the national
museums." This statement in a Nairobi
newspaper highlights the main objective
of the Nairobi Museum's education
servicesto show that learning can be an
active and enjoyable process. Below,
students handle a cast of early man at the
National Museum, Nairobi.
IN the Third World, application of de¬
velopment theory is directed primarily
towards alleviating human suffering
and enabling people to live relatively com¬
fortable lives. This implies the provision of
better health services, adequate educational
opportunities and proper communications
systems as well as improving agriculture
and moving towards industrialization.
The role of culture (and of archaeology
which is concerned with an aspect of
culture) in development has, however,
generally been neglected. Yet if develop¬
ment is to be meaningful, it has to embrace
all spheres of human activity, including
culture. Cultural intervention in develop¬
ment, it must be stressed, is fundamental to
the stability of the development effort.
Archaeology evolved as a discipline in
Europe. But at the time when it was
developing into a truly scientific discipline
the continent ofAfrica was in the process of
being colonized. The colonists were preced¬
ed by explorers and missionaries who saw

Africa as a continent inhabited by primitive
peoples who needed to be rescued from bar¬
barism and brought to civilization basically
through the Christian religion.
To the missionaries, African religions
and values were not worthy of preservation
and development. Furthermore, the
religious systems the missionaries imposed
were based on alien cultural systems which
were incompatible with African cultures.
The whole fabric of African culture was
undermined. Shrines were replaced by
churches, mosques and temples, sites sacred
to the Africans were defiled and artefacts
that bore witness to the continent's pre-
colonial technological achievements were
replaced by industrially produced items.
This was the context in which European
and American archaeologists came to
Africa. They came not to save African
culture and history from destruction, but
primarily for their own personal aims and
ambitions. Nevertheless, there were some
positive side-effects since their work,
oriented as it was towards reconstruction of
cultural successions and the development of
general archaeological methodologies and
theories, not only revealed numerous past
cultural achievements and laid the founda¬
tions for future work, but also led to an up¬
ward reassessment of the African cultural
profile.
Cultural consciousness based on tradi¬
tional culture among the colonized was not
encouraged during colonial times even in
countries where the colonists established
organizations dealing with antiquities and
archaeological programmes.
After independence," however, there was
a movement towards what might be termed
a "cultural renaissance". Study of tradi¬
tional culture systems and elements of
cultural disciplines such as archaeology
found their way piecemeal into syllabuses.
However, the lack of a sufficient number of
trained local educationists and the almost
total reliance on foreign experts in the
preparation of educational programmes
resulted, to some extent, in a continuation
of colonial programmes.
As the African countries moved towards
self-sufficiency in manpower, the position
began gradually to change. Efforts were
made to intensify investigation of the
history of Africa, but since there were few
written records in which that history was
reflected, African historians turned to other
sources. Archaeology in particular gained
new popularity as a tool of historical
research and was introduced as an auxiliary
discipline in the history departments of
several African universities.
Nevertheless, the appeal of archaeology
remains limited. This is in part because ex¬
cavation, an essential element in ar¬
chaeology, involves dealing with burial-
grounds, skeletal remains and other sites
and objects associated with certain taboos.
Hence, in ordinary people's minds, to be an
archaeologist is to be a "grave-digger" and
to practise an abnormal profession.
Modernization has also had a negative in¬
fluence. Modern developments in
agriculture, road building and the construc¬
tion of dams and hydro-electric power
plants have destroyed sites once regarded
with reverence and this in turn has en-
Students' quarters at the Centre for
Museum Studies, Jos, Nigeria.
During the International year of Disabled
Persons, 1981, the Tunisian National
Committee of the International Council of
Museums (ICOM) designed a scheme to
use museum facilities to help mentally
handicapped children. Right, during their
first experimental visit to an ar¬
chaeological museum, the National
Museum of the Bardo, Tunis, a group of
handicapped children examine a massive
foot from a statue of Jupiter. Above, a
drawing made after the visit by one of the
children, Khaled Zarrouq. The scheme
proved that the mentally handicapped
could benefit from the stimulus of regular
visits to museums.
couraged vandals to destroy other formerly
sacred places either in the hope of finding
treasure or even just for fun. All this has
created a climate of general disrespect for
traditional culture that has extended to in¬
clude disciplines such as archaeology and
anthropology which study traditional
culture.
Since independence the influence of
foreign archaeologists and of foreign foun¬
dations funding archaeological projects has
continued to display both negative and
positive aspects. Recent advances in the
study of human origins, especially in east
Africa, have, for example, focused world
attention on Africa's distant past. They
have also given outsiders the impression
that African archaeology has no problems
and that work is going ahead smoothly.
The fact is, however, that these studies
refer to periods before the emergence of
modern man. It may be asked, for example,
to what extent the study of human origins
contributes to the understanding of the
history and culture of the modern popula¬
tions of Africa. A government which is con¬
scious of the need to understand the overall
past of its peoples cannot rely almost ex¬
clusively on one aspect of human history,
however important, which is of little direct
relevance to its peoples, whilst ignoring
those areas vital to the promotion of their
consciousness of their cultural identity.
A further problem is that, due to the
shortage of funds from internal sources,
African archaeologists seek and receive
10

financial assistance from foreign founda¬
tions and financing agencies. Although in a
number of cases this has led to ar¬
chaeological work being carried out which
would not otherwise have been done, it also
involves two major negative side-effects.
Firstly, it tends to encourage local
authorities not to provide for ar¬
chaeological work in their development
planning on the grounds that funds will be
available from foreign sources. Secondly,
these foreign foundations and agencies
usually assist only projects they themselves
have selected. As a result local ar¬
chaeologists'; find themselves obliged to
design their research proposals to fit in with
the dictates of the funding agencies. In this
way foreign foundations may influence the
development of archaeological work in a
country without necessarily involving
foreign researchers.
All this highlights the need for coherent,
clear-cut national policies for archaeology
backed by legislation and adequate finan¬
cial resources. Such policies should include
clear guidelines concerning the relation¬
ships between archaeology and other
cultural organizations and disciplines as
well as an element of manpower planning.
An archaeological organization manned
by a sufficient number of local ar¬
chaeologists and inspired by a well-
formulated policy could play a very positive
role. By co-ordinating the efforts of local
and foreign researchers it could prevent
duplication of effort and ensure proper
distribution of research over the different
time periods and different aspects of
archaeology.
Armed with a sound policy and a
knowledge of national priorities, a local ar¬
chaeological organization could relate ar¬
chaeological efforts to national develop¬
ment needs and provide up-to-date infor¬
mation on the country's archaeological
potential. It would also be expected to have
at its disposal detailed documentation on
the country's cultural resources, including
an inventory of archaeological sites and
monuments based on work undertaken
previously together with the relevant data
(field notes, reports, publications and other
unpublished materials) retained at its
documentation centre.
The public has yet to recognize the role
archaeology has to play in modern develop¬
ment and few Africans are attracted to it. It
is not unusual for African countries to have
no more than a handful of professional ar¬
chaeologists, or even just one. The battle
for recognition has not been won even
within academic circles. The problem is to
remove archaeology from the dark corners
of academic elitism and throw it open to the
public.
Young people are currently in the majori- .
ty in Third World countries and, just as the
ultimate solution to illiteracy lies in free and
compulsory education for youth, so also, if
the battle for the recognition of ar¬
chaeology is to be won, it has to start with
them. There is therefore an urgent need to
stimulate interest in archaeology among the
young, to enhance its status within
academic circles and to develop interest in it
among the public at large.
Archaeology provides data which con¬
tribute to the reconstruction of the history
of peoples whose past is not or is only little
reflected in written records. Relics unearth¬
ed at archaeological sites mirror the origin
and development of a people's culture.
Some of the sites excavated could be
developed into on-the-spot museums or
cultural parks.
Archaeological sites, treasures and
artefacts can become symbols which inten¬
sify a people's sense of belonging to a locali¬
ty and to a historical and cultural tradition.
A sense of cultural identity is the basis for
self-awareness and self-realization which
opens up vast opportunities for individual
or group creativity. Accordingly, ar¬
chaeology can play an important role in any
nation's development.
OSAGA ODAK, of Kenya, is a cultural an¬
thropologist who specializes in rock art,
cultural resource management and . ethnic
studies. An Associate Director of the Kenya
Archaeological and Ethnographic Research
Agency (KAERA) and Cultural Research Co¬
ordinator in the Department of Culture of the
Kenya Government, he is also the chairman of
the Kenya National Committee of the Interna¬
tional Council on Monuments and Sites
(ICOMOS).
11
