Nuclear winter
The world-wide consequences of nuclear war
by
Carl Sagan
Vladimir Alexandrov
Paul Ehrlich
Alexander Pavlov
We present below extracts from the abridged transcript of a forum on the
worldwide consequences of nuclear war, held in Washington, D.C., on 8
December 1983, under the chairmanship of United States Senators Edward
Kennedy and Mark Hatfield and sponsored by the Nuclear Freeze Founda¬
tion. The main speakers at the Forum were four United States and four
Soviet scientists; Carl Sagan, Vladimir V. Alexandrov, Paul Ehrlich, Alex¬
ander S. Pavlov, Jack Geiger, Sergei Kapitza, Lewis Thomas and Yevgeny
P. Velikhov. The transcripts werefirstpublished in Disarmament, aperiodic
review by the United Nations.
DR. CARL SAGAN, Director of the Laboratory for Planetary
Studies at Cornell University:
The work I am about to describe has been done with four scientific
co-workersRichard Turco, Brian Toon, Thomas Ackerman and
James Pollack, besides myself. From the initials of the authors, this
has been called the TTAPS Study.
What we have attempted to do is to calculate, for a wide range
of possible nuclear-war scenarios, what the global climatic con¬
sequences will be.
To begin, I should like to describe our baseline case, which is a
nuclear war in which 5,000 megatons are exploded. This is between
one third and one half of the joint strategic arsenals of the Soviet
Union and the United States, and is by no means the worst nuclear
war that could be imagined.
The results that I am to describe have been discussed in a special
meeting in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in April 1983 by 100
specialists in this field. Confirmatory studies have been performed
by some eight or ten other groups worldwide, including two such
studies in the Soviet Union. There have been other studies in the
Federal Republic of Germany, in Australia and in this country, at
the National Center for Atmospheric Research, at the Lawrence
Livermore Weapons Laboratory and elsewhere. There is a major
study starting up at Los Alamos.
What I am describing is by no means just the conclusion of our
group, because the results of all the groups I have mentioned are
more or less the same.
I want to stress that there are differences on points of detail. We
can differ, for example, on what scenarios are more likely. But as
I will mention in a moment, the consequences seem surprisingly in¬
dependent of the kind of war waged, above a certain expenditure
of megatons.
And I do not for a moment want to suggest that there is no more
work to be done on this subject. There is a great deal more work
that needs to be done. The results I am describing are from what
is called a one-dimensional model in which the fine particles are free
to move up and down according to the laws of physics, but the
spreading in latitude and longitude is not by any means done
precisely.
Dr. Alexandrov will describe the first Soviet three-dimensional
model in which there is an attempt to describe the spreading quan¬
titatively in latitude and longitude. His results are quite similar in
general to those at the National Center of Atmospheric Research.
Here again, there seems to be a good convergence of results.
So now, let us consider the 5,000-megaton baseline case that I
described before; this is a case in which both cities and hard targets
like missile silos are targeted, so that there would be both soot and
fine dust produced.
The immediate consequences of such a war which would
presumably be fought in the northern mid-latitudes is that, in the
target zone, the obscuration of the sun by soot and dust would
make it pitch black. As the fine particles spread, initially in
longitude and then in latitude, things get brighter, but it appears
that the average in northern mid-latitudes would be about one per
cent of the ordinary sunlight on a clear day. And, as Dr. Ehrlich will
describe in greater detail, this by itself is already extremely
dangerous for plant photosynthesis. Many varieties of plants
throughout the northern hemisphere (and, as I will mention, in the
southern hemisphere as well) are in deep trouble when, to this ex¬
tent, the sun has been turned off. And this turning off is for a
significant period of time, probably a few monthspossibly much
longer.
Because the amount of sunlight reaching the surface of Earth
would now be so much less, and because it is sunlight that heats the
surface of Earth, it gets cold, and, for the baseline case, the
temperature decline is substantial; in our calculations to something
like -23°C, roughly - 10°F. These are average continental
temperatures in the northern hemisphere, far from coastlines. (The
severity would be moderated somewhat by the oceans, which act as
reservoirs of heat). And that means that many exposed plants,
animals and humans would freeze to death.
26

In addition, you know how in the burning of skyscrapers, say,
most casualties come not from the fire itself, but from toxic gases
produced by the conflagration of synthetics, insulation, drapes and
so on. In the' burning of large cities, there would be a great deal of
that, and so there is an additional thing to worry about, the produc¬
tion of a toxic smog that would persist at ground level for substan¬
tial periods of time.
Now, the fine particles that block the sunlight also carry radioac¬
tivity, and since we have tracked the motion of these fine particles,
we have in effect also tracked the intermediate time-scale radioac¬
tive fall-out. Almost all previous studies assumed that all the
radioactivity not promptly deposited on the ground went into the
stratosphere, taking a long time to fall out, by which time much of
the radioactivity had decayed. In contrast, we find that for a
reasonable mix of yields, there are many fine particles put into the
lower atmosphere (or troposphere) that fall out faster. The in¬
termediate time-scale fall-out doses are considerably larger, about
10 times more, than has been generally thought in the past.
To give some idea of these numbers, for the baseline case,
something like 30 per cent of northern mid-latitude land areas
would receive a dose (in the fall-out patterns that go downwind of
targets) of something like 250 rads, that is, approaching the mean
lethal dose for unprotected human beings. The intermediate time-
scale dose of radioactivity far from targets turns out to be
something like 50 to 100 rads all over the northern hemisphere. At
this dose, the human immune system our capacity to resist
disease begins to become compromised. This intermediate time-
scale dose represents a much more serious radiation burden than
has been described in the past.
After the soot and dust fall out, the sunlight gets down to the sur¬
face, and things warm up again. This is many months latersay,
six to nine months later, although it may be much longer when
conditions may return to their normal values. But there is an addi¬
tional negative effect: the ozone layer has been disrupted by the
high-yield explosions, and so now considerably more ultraviolet
light is penetrating to the surface of Earth, several times the amount
27

Urban dislocation
Within a week after a war, the amount of sunlight
at ground level could be reduced to just a few per
cent of normal. Urban survivors would face ex¬
treme cold, water shortages, lack of food and fuel
and serious radiation, pollution and disease pro¬
blems. They would probably attempt to leave the
cities in search of food.
^ that penetrates now. Ultraviolet light is extremely dangerous to
organisms; the nucleic acids and proteins, the two main biological
molecules, are sensitive to light in the near-ultraviolet wavelength
range.
It now seems that the southern hemisphere would almost certain¬
ly be involved in these effects. Conventional wisdom that the
southern hemisphere would not be involved comes, in part, from
tracking the debris from a single nuclear-weapon explosion. But a
single nuclear-weapon-explosion cannot provide enough fine par¬
ticles to heat the upper atmosphere significantly and cool the sur¬
face. However, if you have something like 10,000 explosions, the
case is very different. Then, the fine particles absorb sunlight in the
northern hemisphere, and the upper atmosphere heats up enor¬
mously. The temperature difference between the northern
hemisphere and the southern hemisphere then drives a new kind of
circulation, on which Dr. Alexandrov will have something more to
say, which transports the fine particles across the equator, thereby
carrying to some degree the cold, the dark and some of the radioac¬
tivity into the southern hemisphere. The idea that there are sanc¬
tuaries on the planet to which someone could flee in expectation of
a nuclear war now seems much less credible.
So, if we put together these consequencesthe dark, the cold, the
chemical toxins from the fire, the fall-out, the ultraviolet flux and
the fact that the phenomenon would be worldwide (perhaps less
severe in the southern hemisphere), we have a new circumstance, a
circumstance in which life everywhere on the planet is threatened.
The biologists even raise the possibility that the extinction of the
human species may be accomplished by nuclear war and nuclear
winter.
I would like to stress that there is a level of conflict below which
nuclear weapons could not drive the climatic catastrophe, what we
call "nuclear winter", and there are levels at which the world
arsenals certainly could drive nuclear winter. We do not know
precisely where this threshold is, the transition, but it seems clearly
far less than the present strategic stockpiles. Very roughly the
threshold may be somewhere near 1,000 strategic warheads it may
be a few hundred, it may be several thousand (depending in part on
how many cities are targetted). I do not want to pretend we know
this to high precision. But let us, just for the next minute or two,
call it 1,000 warheads. The global strategic arsenals are somewhere
around 18,000 strategic warheads. And with the present
planned buildup in American and Soviet strategic weapons, they
will rise in the next few years to something like 25,000 strategic (and
theatre) warheads. That means that we are somewhere between 18
and 25 times larger than the threshold needed if that is the
word to provoke, trigger, this nuclear winter, and put the biology
of the planet in jeopardy.
DR. VLADIMIR ALEXANDROV, Head of the Laboratory of
Climate Modelling at the Computer Centre at the Soviet Academy
of Sciences:
I would like to describe briefly the main climatic consequences of
nuclear war.
The climatic effects are, number one, the terrible geophysical
consequences of nuclear war. The results which I would like to pre¬
sent today are keyed by a simulation of the large computer climatic
model of the Computer Centre of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
It is a large three-dimensional model, which includes the general cir¬
culation model of the atmosphere and the thermodynamic model of
the upper zone.
The calculation of climatic consequences is our last experiment
using this model. To simulate these consequences, we used the
scenario of Professor Sagan's group, and we studied the con¬
sequences of the so-called basic version or basic scenario.
The main impact of nuclear war on our climate is the abrupt,
shocking, very deep and long-term cooling of the air over the con¬
tinents. This cooling is induced by the pollution of the atmosphere
by dust and, mainly, soot.
The fireballs of atomic bombs will ignite cities, plants, fuel
storage sites and forests. Our civilization is full of organic
materials, and the main building block of organic material, the
main atom, is carbon. In the atmospheric environment, synthetics
do not burn completely, so during burning, elementary carbon is
released. This elementary carbon creates the soot. The elementary
carbon has a pretty high conductivity, so it absorbs the solar light
intensively. So the atmosphere will be opaque to solar light, and the
solar flux will be blocked by the pollution of the atmosphere by dust
and soot. This result, the absorption of solar light, is highly sen¬
sitive in the scenario of nuclear war.
I would like to show you just one example of the temperature
drop. In 40 days, the temperature will drop over the United States
about 30°C to 40°C. this means that in July, the temperature over
the territory of the United States will be 0° to - 20°F, or something
like that. In January, it will be something like - 40 to - 60°F. The
picture will be the same over the European territory of the USSR.
The temperature drop over Scandinavia will be about 50°C; over
Saudi Arabia, up to 50°C; over West Siberia, 50°C; over Latin
America, 22°C, and so on; over northern Africa, 20°C.
This means that human beings will be involved shortly in very low
temperature environments. A very important factor during this
period is the strong inter-hemispheric transport. The reason for this
is the strong temperature contrast between the air in the northern
hemisphere and the southern hemisphere.
We studied the change of the global circulation of the at¬
mosphere, using our model, and we found that the global circula¬
tion will be drastically changed in the first three or four weeks. The
classical scheme of circulation disappears, and the global circula¬
tion represents just one giant cell of circulation, which will
transport the enormous amounts of pollutant from the northern
hemisphere to the southern hemisphere.
The oceans
As a result of the darkness and cessation of
photosynthesis, the phytoplankton rapidly die off,
food chains are disrupted and sea life declines.
Toxins and silt draining off the land contaminate
the coastal zone, and the thermal differential bet¬
ween intensely cold continental land masses and
the warmer oceans creates violent coastal storms.
Ocean food sources for humanity largely disap¬
pear and access to the remainder is severely
impaired.
28

^3É
Chemical spills
Nuclear explosions in or near cities would ignite oil
and gas storage facilities and would rupture tanks
containing various toxic chemicals which would
spill into rivers and streams. The pollution would
kill natural aquatic life.
This means that in about three weeks not more than one
month the situation in the southern hemisphere will be as bad as
in the northern hemisphere, and the tropical region will suffer in an
automatic way.
But as a whole, the atmosphere will absorb more energy than
now, because it will be dirty. The upper atmosphere will be warmed
up more than 100°C. So the temperature will increase with altitude.
Now, it decreases with altitude in the troposphere, in the lower layer
of the atmosphere, at the bottom of which we live. And when the
atmosphere becomes very hot above and very cold below, it will
create an enormous superstability. This means that the vertical mo¬
tion, the so-called convective motion, will be strongly suppressed.
At the same time, the vertical transfer of water vapour will be sup¬
pressed, so the hydrological cycle will be highly suppressed, and the
natural cleaning of the atmosphere by rain will also be suppressed.
So, the pollutants will stay in the atmosphere a much longer time
than is now the case.
The permanent increase of temperature described means that the
troposphere will disappear, and the stratosphere will start im¬
mediately from the surface of Earth.
The whole picture means that in a month maybe a little bit less
or maybe a little bit morethe whole globe will be involved in these
terrible consequences of nuclear war, regardless of where and how
the nuclear war occurs, because the pollutant, the dust and soot,
will be mixed very rapidly all over the globe in the space of some
weeks, and the presence of this pollutant will induce this mixing,
because the presence of this pollutant will create the huge
temperature contrast, which will increase the process of mixing.
The suppression of the hydrological cycle will provoke, will in¬
duce, droughts over continents. These droughts will take place in
very low temperatures.
At the same time, the oceans will not cool very much. Our
calculation shows that the mean temperature drop of the ocean in
10 months will be 1.2°C. So the air over the ocean will be as cool
as it is now, maybe several degrees Centigrade less than now. It
means there will be huge temperature contrasts between land and
sea. These temperature contrasts will create severe storms along sea
coasts. During these storms, a huge amount of sea air, full of water
vapour, will be transported over the land, and this water will
precipitate over the land in the form of snow, of course, and it will
start a severe nuclear winter lasting for many months, regardless of
when the conflict occursin July or in January, it does not matter.
And this severe meteorological environment will erase civilization
along the sea coasts.
During the heating of the upper atmosphere, the high mountains
will probably be warmed up. In our calculations, the temperature
over Tibet will increase up to 20°C in eight months. This means that
the hydrological cycle of mountain snow and glaciers will be chang¬
ed in crucial ways, and it is highly probable that this will cause large-
scale floods. Because of the melting of huge amounts of snow and
ice, these floods may be continental in scale. At the same time, in
eight months, the temperature over the land will be low enough
over the United States, the temperature drop will be as much as 20°
or 30°C; over northern Africa, as much as 10°C, and so on.
Finally, I would like to say a little about biota climatic feedback.
The shocking temperature drop will kill the tropical forests,
because tropical forests exist in very narrow temperature bands. So
the shocking cooling up to dozens of degrees Centigrade will kill the
biota and will kill most living species in our world.
At the same time, the biota, the forests of the temperate zone,
will be killed also. This means that the physical properties of the
land surface will be changed for many years ahead, after the
conflict.
This means that the reflectivity coefficient of the solar sun, sun¬
shine reflected from Earth's surface, will be increased two, three or
four times. It means, hence, that the amount of energy which these
huge areas of land have now will be decreased by two, three, four
times. It means that our climatic system, which is extremely fragile
and sensitive to any variations of external and internal parameters,
will inevitably rest in a new state. We do not know what state it will
be. Maybe it will be a new Ice Age. It is too early to give an answer
to this question. But anyway, this state will be absolutely terrible.
So the presentation which I have just made shows that it is highly
probable that in the post-war world, Homo sapiens will not have an
ecological niche. I mean that the environment will be so hostile to
human beings that probably life in the very low-temperature areas
will not be economically viable without fuel, without energy, with
completely frozen water, without any water supply (because all
fresh water will be in a frozen state), without a food supply and so
on.
DR. PAUL EHRLICH, Bing Professor of Population Biology at
Stanford University:
Let me say that I think the scientific results in this case are
something that scientists normally call "robust". Dr. Sagan has
given one reason for the robustness, namely, that the climatic ef¬
fects have been checked in several different kinds of studies in
several different laboratories.
Let me say they are robust in another way, particularly from the
point of view of an ecologist, namely, they have been very conser¬
vative in many of their assumptions. They have been conservative
in their assumptions about the size of firestorms, assuming that
about 4 per cent of the land surface of North America would be
burned off, when other estimates run over 50 per cent. They have
been conservative in not including factors that they know about but
which are hard to model, such as the fugitive dust, which would
blow off from the denuded landscape. If you recall pictures of dust
storms back in the Depression days, they are equally capable of
making it midnight at noon and could continue to produce, along
with long-term fires, some of these climatic effects for much longer ^
times than have been cited.
Agricultural impact
In a spring or summer war, sub-freezing
temperatures would kill or damage virtually all
crops in the Northern Hemisphere. The low light
levels would inhibit photosynthesis and the conse¬
quences would cascade through all food chains.
Most farm animals would be destroyed or severely
weakened by radiation. Those that survived would
soon die of thirst since surface fresh water would
be frozen in the interior of continents.
29

The forests
After a nuclear war, freshwater systems would
freeze to considerable depths, killing off the food
for woodland creatures. Radioactive fall-out would
kill many conifers. Dead dry conifers would
become kindling for massive forest fires.
production for a year in the northern hemisphere. That in itself
would be the greatest catastrophe ever delivered upon Homo sa¬
piens: just that one thing, not worrying about the prompt effects.
So that even below the threshold, one cannot think of survival of
nuclear war as just being able to stand up after the bomb has gone
off.
Some 70 biologists have reviewed the climatic results. In a
meeting last April [1983], they were able to come to a unanimous
conclusion about what these results mean, simply because built into
them is a level of biological overkill such that there can be no
disagreement. Asking ecologists and evolutionists to, evaluate the
biological impact of a nuclear winter was the equivalent of asking
a group of distinguished physicians: "If everyone in this room put
a loaded double-barrelled shotgun in his or her mouth and pulled
both triggers simultaneously, what would be the medical results?"
The darkness alone, as Dr. Sagan mentioned, would be more
than enough to cut off our ecological systems at their base because,
as you know, we all depend on plants for our lives. In the oceans,
the thermal inertia of the water would Iceep them relatively warm,
but the plants that support the oceanic food chains (single-celled
phytoplankton) have essentially no reserves and would die im¬
mediately. In temperate areas, all of the growing land plants would
die. They would be killed not just by the dark, but also by the ex¬
traordinary cold. If the war occurred during the growing season, as
it would be likely to do, many of the plants that in other seasons
are able to take quite a bit of cold would be killed outright, because
they would not have the chance to harden (increase their cold-
resistance) as they normally do in the fall.
Basically, you have: the dark, which could be more than enough
to destroy biological systems, at least in the northern hemisphere;
and the cold, which also would be more than enough to destroy
biological systems. Then there would be the extraordinary amounts
of radiation which were a surprise for the biologistswe had long
known that there would be very serious radiation effects on human
beings, but the new findings indicate they would be large enough to
damage ecosystemsthe toxic smog and the ultraviolet-B. Any one
of those would be more than enough to put ecological systems into
deep stress. Most of them would be enough, each by itself, to kill
off that year's food production, anyway. And, in combination,
there is an incredible level of overkill, so much that the biologists
were able to conclude unanimously that, if there were a large-scale
nuclear war triggering these kinds of climatic effects, in essence,
you could kiss goodbye to the northern hemisphere. No civilization
would survive in the northern hemisphere.
The only survival that there might be would be in extraordinarily
deep shelters, with huge supplies of food, with self-contained air
supplies and so on. And all those people, of course, would only be
delaying their deaths, because when they came out, there would be
nothing to come out to a denuded, highly radioactive continent
with no way to go back to agriculture to supply food, to supply any
of the amenities of life.
If the effects spread to the southern hemisphere, then, of course,
the biologists concluded, as Dr. Alexandrov has just indicated, that
the extermination of human life could not be precluded, and under
some circumstances, would be likely.
And let me stress that I have a long list of other ecological effects
which I and others had identified long before, that have long been
ignored, and that I am going to leave out today because of the over¬
riding effects that we have just been discussing.
If a war below the threshold occurs and there is no full-scale
nuclear winter, we would in no sense be out of the woods in terms
of the long-term biological effects. For example, a smaller war,
which set off fewer fires and put less dust in the atmosphere, could
very easily depress the temperatures in the northern hemisphere by,
say, 7° or 8°C. That would be enough to essentially cancel grain
DR. ALEXANDER PAVLOV, Director of the Moscow Scientific
Institute on Radiology:
Considering the after-effects of total nuclear war, it is necessary
to take into account both immediate, direct effects, connected with
the destructive factors of nuclear weapons, and remote, indirect in¬
fluences on human health and life, due to the inevitable disastrous
changes in the environment.
Today we are well aware of the destructive influences of such fac¬
tors of nuclear weapons as shock wave, high temperature, radiation
and contamination by radioactive nuclides.
I should like to note that after nuclear explosions, there will
develop in different proportions combined lesions with different
syndromes caused by mechanical traumas, thermal burns and
radiation.
The World Health Organization holds that human losses in a
total nuclear war would amount to more than one thousand million
persons, with the same number of wounded. In total, about half of
the world population would become a direct victim of nuclear war.
The fate of another half of the world population will depend on
harmful influences of radiological, climatic, socio-economic and
other factors.
Speaking about immediate effects of nuclear-weapon use, it is
necessary to dwell particularly on a new form of pathology that
is, the radiation lesions.
Today, numerous data have been collected, showing the
biological action of radiation on living beings. These data open
wide prospects for the use of radiation in medicine for thé benefit
of mankind. But radiation has another aspect. External or internal
radiation of the total body causes a pathological condition, so-
called radiation disease. The severity of radiation disease depends
on the size of the absorbed dose and the volume of irradiated
tissues. There exist various forms of that disease.
When high doses of radiation act on a human being, the clinical
picture is characterized by changes in the central nervous system ac¬
companied by stupor, which end with death in the next few hours,
or days, after radiation.
Radiation with lesser doses causes such clinical manifestations as
gastrointestinal changes, with haemorrhagic diarrhoea or
haemopoietic tissue, lesions with cytopenia, anaemia and im¬
munological damages. Infectious complications such as stomatitis,
pharyngitis, enterocolitis, pneumonia and others aggravate the
state of patients even further. Very often, such conditions end with
the death of the injured people.
The long-term effect will depend on the particular environment.
Human life cannot be thought of as separate from its environment.
Therefore, all data on the ecological and climatic changes on the
globe which will take place due to tremendous nuclear explosions
are extremely important and decisive for the estimation of the
remote consequences.
Worldwide effects
The cold and darkness following a nuclear war in
the Northern Hemisphere would probably extend
into the sub-tropics and tropics of both the Nor¬
thern and Southern Hemispheres. These would
cause large-scale injury to plants and animals
there and would severely damage or destroy
tropical rain forests, the great reservoir of Earth's
organic diversity. .
30

After 40 days
Maps show changes in surface air
temperatures 40 days (above) and 243
days (below) after the launching of a
nuclear war in which 5,000megatons are
exploded, as calculated by the Com¬
puting Centre of the USSR Academy of
Sciences. The lines are isotherms [an
isotherm is a line connecting points of
equal temperature] graded at intervals of
5 degrees. After 40 days there would be a
drop in temperature of 30 to 40 degrees
(Centigrade) over the USA and the USSR,
50 degrees over Scandinavia and Saudi
Arabia, 22 degrees over Latin America
and 20 degrees over Africa. After 243
days heating of the upperatmosphere will
lead to rises in temperature over large
mountain systems ranging from 5 to 6
degrees over the Andes to 20 degrees
over Tibet, enough to provoke flooding
on a continental scale.
After 243 days
Global atmospheric and climatic consequences of a nuclear war
would have a destructive influence on the future existence of all liv¬
ing beings on Earth and, in the first place, on the human popula¬
tion. The abrupt decrease in air temperature and impermeation of
the atmosphere by solar radiation would create extreme conditions
for the existence of mankind.
Those houses that remained unruined would be inadequate for
sheltering people. They would have to search for shelters
underground. That fact would lead to overcrowding, to the im¬
possibility of ensuring the simplest sanitary conditions, which
would cause epidemics of such infectious diseases as classical
typhus and enteric fever, cholera and viral diseases, etc.
The disappearance of forests, which are rightly regarded as the
"lungs" of our planet, would lead to an abrupt decrease in the ox¬
ygen content of atmospheric air. That would have an extremely
negative effect on the existence of living beings.
Low temperatures and a decrease in solar radiation would lead
to the disappearance of vegetables and agricultural crops that
would deprive mankind of the possibility of obtaining food pro¬
ducts. Chronic starvation would lead also to immunity damage,
that would facilitate the development of various infectious diseases.
The world's oceans and all other bodies of water would cease to
be a source of goods. In connection with global effects, oceans
would become a tomb for all animals and plants. That would
deprive mankind of its last source of food. The water supply would
be completely disrupted, with all that implies.
The human body has high possibilities of adaptation to various
extreme conditions. Man is able to live for a long time on ice drifts,
in Antarctica, to fly to space stations, to live in a blockaded town
for instance, during the Second World War, people lived in
blockaded Leningrad for 900 days. But in all these cases, a certain
hinterland .exists, which supports the people. In the case of nuclear
catastrophe, such a hinterland would not exist.
After a lapse of several years, from the moment of total nuclear
war, an approximate recovery of the atmosphere and normalization
of climatic conditions would be possible.
Restoration of the vital functions of living beings, capable of liv¬
ing in conditions of anabiosis, would be also possible. However,
human beings would not be alive then. My short excursus as a doc¬
tor into the- future after global nuclear war is naturally incomplete,
because it seems to be difficult to enumerate all the factors which
can arise within a complicated change of climatic, natural,
ecological and socio-economic interaction.
Destructive effects of a nuclear catastrophe would certainly lead
to the disappearance of human beings, that crowning point of
evolution on Earth.
31
