History off the record
The archives of a teaching age
by Eckhardt Franz
	 Ll
WJ
Emblem of
International Youth Year
Photo © United Nations
KILLINGWORTH Middle School, in
the English county of Northumber¬
land. Twelve-year-olds are studying
history not the broad sweep of history as
found in the traditional textbook, but
history as it happened where they actually
live.
In a farmhouse on the Middleton Hall
estate they find the date 1811 carved over
the door. By consulting old land maps they
learn what the countryside looked like when
the house was built and that it took its name
from another house, now in ruins, that
stood farther up the hill.
The name of the first occupant of the
house is recorded in the county archives.
Here also is to be found the contract of
employment of shepherd Robert Burn,
which lists his duties and specifies that he is
to be paid in oats, barley and wheat and the
yield of a row of potatoes and grass for two
cows and sixty sheep.
The children's teacher discovered other
things too the building plans for the
manor house, showing the dining and living
rooms, bedrooms and a study, the farm ac¬
counts in which the life style and farming
methods of the past come to life far more
vividly than in the readymade textbook
presentation which makes the eighteenth
century seem as remote and impersonal as
the sagas of classical antiquity.
In the Federal Republic of Germany, at
the suggestion of former President Gustav
Heinemann, an annual competition has
been held for the past ten years for
schoolchildren who, in their own
neighbourhood, in the local library, the
local archives, among their friends and ac¬
quaintances, search for traces of the history
Children at work making paving-stones in
a quarry near Paris. This illustration, from
the Journal Illustré, dated October 15,
1871, was displayed In a mobile exhibi¬
tion on "Working Children of the 19th
Century", organized In 1984 by the
Departmental Archives of the Val de
Marne.
of, for example, the 1848-49 revolution, life
under the oppressive National Socialist
régime and the new start after 1945.
Three seventeen-year-olds in Darmstadt
have researched a national democratic
festival held in the summer of 1848 and
have made a comparative study of leaflets
and posters, newspaper reports and police
records. A detective-like reconstruction of
past events from frequently contradictory
sources also provoked critical reflections on
contemporary journalism. Pupils in
Kelsterbach-am-Main are investigating the
employment of prisoners of war and forced
labour in local factories. They are discover¬
ing tombstones, old photographs,
newspaper reports, lists of names and court
records. These speak more eloquently than
all the figures of anonymous millions in
history textbooks.
Schoolboy or schoolgirl in the archive,
archivist in the schoolthis does not quite
tally with the conventional image of the ar¬
chive as the silent, cloister-like haunt of
28

r
éí^cjjSSc^TSbctói^íSs^q ^)@jtsiSocx>¿ áoq.|jeá£gTJ&>r^
,*q8osî (¿öospiaSLXÖÄ) 6íSD6c-a«3t&j£>í¿)x^o^^
._ ^jOTi¡iwBr--fffi ,
»»iBtÍAAEÍl-a^ . ¿tta^tfkéjBËèt^^iftlt^aÂlI) - ^oí«Sgg^!S»î)jt.O** KJ&aî.
. {t^3wt^a^l^'¿'&-aBW¿->'t^ (¿JSL>f^*«BWlSB^«iai ..r1 .
l^lJla-a» . «ílJi^T^áAaííoriíteciaA»,
ÖisAefti^jLaiJati^Sriä^lwL, *»- »*
í«Üñ*»sí6if0eía
.flT-t.,. ^fljví
.»r-i»
Sfi*¿-. ,,**.»-
*V * aa*L-ÍA»i
:
:-*©
z
©
During the period of their occupation of
Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), the Dutch Issued
many Instructions to local officials. The
one reproduced here Is written In Sinhala
and Is dated 1738. The National Archive
ofSri Lanka has a considerable collection
of these documents, dating from 1641 to
1795, which throw much light on ad¬
ministrative, economic and social condi¬
tions of the period.
The first Issue of The Gleaner, a replica of
which we reproduce, right, waspublished
In September 1834 a few weeks after the
abolition of slavery. The replica of this
first Issue was publishedas a supplement
to the December 8, 1890 Issue of The
Gleaner, now a dally, and Jamaica's
oldest newspaper.
WrrLKWKSTf:l>'...SKl¡ ' I.Ki-. I"*"'
1 IMC (.laKANl-R,,
äuit ¡UÏUeh.ij \
COMPENDIUM OF NEWS.
.iJHtrrkn-.ijrUiriBH. .laTl
AaJ . #m **kr#X h SI
Wütt.ií UD i-rh.r.r..iHJiu f.-jy-
Vol, L Sut HT day Aft mimm. Sepl ¡¡¡¡¡W 13th, 1 SU, >.i. 1.
TO BE PUBLISHED \¿i£&r*
44-jhl* MÉfJW ** -
; btHln-fkiM, 'ib^i -<t^i i . Ç,|_ m Ji.i »Lia ITTmi. ** IlLE^^l w
fat unsw uuau, 3^-áSw^^"^
-111 p-L.ra.1«- auch 1- í»*r
l"* *^¡jTÍ 'bm nHYt* fe1 *
Tt mj í.*-. IWj|h SîJîïr,!"*
n^r-laiT* -Vi
	
1 r... ...i..*-
"l.Etí^ÍAnií-'" i Tar : ttTÉiÉf« ]>«ri»- ; ÍMk«, ¡ d w
V)
I t
o

T/i/s study o/ í/ie proportions of the
human body Is the work of the German ar¬
tist Albert Dürer (1471-1528). The draw¬
ing, which was made In 1513, Is from a
collection of Dürer sketches now con¬
served at Dresden.
scholars in which elderly researchers,
waited upon by dusty, attentive archivists,
turn over the pages of ancient folio
volumes, only occasionally disturbed by
some cheeky student preparing a doctorate
in history. The changed professional image
of today's archivist, who not only takes
good care of the documentary heritage en¬
trusted to him but tries to use it actively for
the political and historical education of a
wider public and of the younger generation,
coincides with a new trend in historical
research and the teaching of history.
Like other school subjects, history must
no longer be taught in classroom lectures
dealing in broad contexts and supported by
recitals of large1 quantities of facts and
figures. It must be learned by independent
personal effort. The sources thus consulted
gain in clarity and vividness if they originate
in familiar surroundings and relate to the
student's own region or even his or her
place of residence. This is facilitated by the
increased attention now being paid to
economic and social history.
Exhibitions of documents from archives
and school visits to archives were, of
course, organized in the past. But the tradi¬
tional school visit, with a short introduction
to the life, duties and working methods of
the archivist, a tour of the archives and a
presentation of selected documents, was
merely a last optional item, coming after
visits to the local newspaper office or sugar
factory.
Nowadays, classes or study groups of
schoolchildren come to the archives to
work, under the direction of teachers and
archivists, with documents relating to the
historical theme they are studying in class,
so that through their personal fréquenta¬
tion of the archives they can acquire a con¬
crete perception of the past and its
documentary sediments, a glimpse into the
world of historical research and an
awareness of the need for a critical ap¬
proach to historical sources.
A display of a limited number of
documents centred on a particular subject
of study in class, in whose selection atten¬
tion is paid to their informative value, meets
educational purposes much better than a
magnificent exhibition of the precious,
original and visually attractive documents
from an archive, or a large-scale represen¬
tative display which impresses and over¬
whelms by its richness and variety.
Experience in recent years has shown that
not only senior secondary school students
but also younger children, especially those
in the twelve-to-fifteen-year group, acquire
an added interest in history while working
on source documents. In England even
eight- to ten-year-old children in domestic
science classes in primary schools have been
known to work with archive documents.
Not all schoolchildren can visit an ar¬
chive. Not every town possesses an archive
that is under expert supervision and many
of the smaller ones lack adequate space to
work in. But archives now go out to the
public. For more than ten years the Hesse
State Archives have been holding travelling
exhibitions devoted to various aspects of
the region's history. Exhibitions on, for ex¬
ample, "Industrialization in Hesse" and
"Emigration from Hesse" have made two-
year tours visiting between twenty and thir¬
ty towns in the State and exhibiting not only
in public records offices and museums but
also in town halls, savings banks and
schools. Many teachers are already enquir¬
ing about the exhibition planned for next
year so that they can structure their courses
around it.
Transcending the topical value of an ex¬
hibition, so-called "archival teaching
units", comprising a limited number
The preamble to the
Constitution of India
which was adopted
by the Constituent
Assembly on
November 26 1949.
30

(generally six to twelve) of facsimile
documents have been produced with the co¬
operation of public records offices. They
are accompanied where necessary by
transcriptions, translations and ex¬
planatory notes. Sets of transparencies with
accompanying explanatory texts serve a
similar purpose but they need to be sup¬
plemented by facsimile documents with
which the pupils themselves can work.
Archival teaching aids of this kind are
available in many States of the Federal
Republic. They cover a large number of
themes, especially economic and social
history, crafts and craftsmen of the past,
manufacturing and factories, road and
railway construction. More general
historical themes, such as the Reformation,
the Thirty Years War, the impact of the
French Revolution and the political strug¬
gles of the labour movement, also lend
themselves to illustration with documents
from the neighbourhood.
The archivist cannot cope unaided with
this new, additional task in the educational
field. Not all archivists have received
pedagogical training or have previous
teaching experience. If this work is to suc¬
ceed, there must be co-operation between
public records offices, school authorities,
teachers and archivists.
In France an organized Service éducatif
in the State and Departmental public ar¬
chives and the attachment of qualified
teachers to public archives, where they co¬
operate with archivists in organizing visits
and preparing exhibitions and archival
teaching units, goes back to the 1950s. In
the United Kingdom too, the functions of
the "Archive Education Officer" are
becoming more and more widely recogniz¬
ed. An essential condition for the develop¬
ment of this type of co-operation is that the
assistance of the public archives be made
use of in the training of teachers and the
running of guidance seminars for history
teachers and future teachers. Arrangements
of this kind are reported from many
countries.
"Archive and School" is a new and un¬
familiar concept for many archivists and
for most teachers. Several decades of prac¬
tice in France, and more recent experiments
and expert discussions in the United
Kingdom, the Netherlands and the Socialist
countries, show that this is an important
task and that the archivist can help the
teacher to instil new life into the historical
legacy of the past. It is also a task to which
particular weight should be attached in
Third World countries concerned for their
historical identity. A study planned for
1985 by Unesco's Records and Archives
Management Programme, on the theme
"Archives and Education", will develop
guidelines for future action from a com¬
parison of recent experiences in this
domain.
ECKHARDT G. FRANZ, of the Federal
Republic of Germany, is lecturer in archive
science at the Marburg school of archives, and
honorary professor of modern history at the
technical university of Darmstadt. He has car¬
ried out several missions for Unesco as a
specialist, notably to Beirut, Khartoum and
Tunis. He is the author of Einfuhrung in die Ar¬
chivkunde ("Introduction to Archive
Science", 1974) and many articles and
studies on history and archives.

