Streets apart by Merrick Fall
With a total of some 5,000 youngsters
aged from 8 to 15 roaming wild in its
streets, Bogotá has earned the reputation
of being the world capital of street
children. Established by the Salesian
Congregation, the Bosconia-La Florida
project is aimedat weaning partly or total¬
ly abandoned children away from the
street in a series of carefully designed
stages. They learn first to play in an open
setting during the day, then to spend the
night in a dormitory, then to attend
classes and, finally, to learn a trade.
Above, learning to become a welder.
Like the other projects illustrated on the
following two pages, the Bosconia-La
Florida project is linked with the Inter-
NGO Programme on Street Children and
Street Youth launched in 1982 by the In¬
ternational Catholic Child Bureau as a
follow-up to the International Year of the
Child, 1981.
THE deep-felt sense of security,
warmth and belonging that we
recognize in the idea of "home" is
a birthright common to men and women
everywhere, and yet there are millions of
young people approaching adulthood today
for whom such emotions can only remain a
distant dream. These are youngsters from
the fragile families who are drawn like
moths to the bright lights of the big cities of
the developing world Sao Paulo, Nairobi,
Bombayby hopes of jobs, salaries and a
better future. All too often they find instead
only menial tasks, lonely disappointment
and systematic exclusion.
Rural populations are unprepared for the
strains and stresses inseparable from social
change on such a huge scale. Marriages
crumble and disintegrate; their teenage off¬
spring, lacking moral support, drop out of
school, supposing they have been lucky
enough to get near one, and, with no
qualifications for employment, have
nothing to do except drift around the
streets, answerable to no one. In a word,
street youths are youngsters who through
This depressing picture is not entirely
new, but in recent years, with the explosive
growth of urban areas, it has taken on alar
ming proportions. Naturally enough, very
few statistics concerning those not at
school, at work or in prison have been pro¬
duced. For developing countries, estimates
put the combined total of children and
youths in this situation at not less than
seventy million and numbers are rising
rapidly. Nor is the problem restricted to
developing countries. In New York there
are said to be twenty thousand runaway or
destitute youngsters on the streets at any
given time. With variations, many in¬
dustrial cities affected by high unemploy¬
ment and poor housing now face similar
problems.
no fault of their own have missed out on
love and find themselves morally or
physically abandoned. They do not matter.
For them home is somewhere between the
bus station, the market-place and a corner
of someone else's slum.
The street, therefore, can be a bleak and

Founded by Father Bruce Ritter, a Fran¬
ciscan priest, Covenant House is an inter¬
national child care agency whose "Under
21" programme aids homeless and
runaway youth and operates short-term
crisis centres in New York City, Houston,
Boston and Toronto, as well as a long-
term residential programme in Antigua,
Guatemala. Above, a young person gets
advice from an "Under 21" Counsellor at
Covenant House, Toronto.
dangerous place where drug's, violence and
prostitution lurk beneath the surface. It
would be wrong, however, to think of the
street as being invariably a hostile milieu.
Throughout the Mediterranean it has
traditionally been an extension of the home,
as well as combining elements of the sports
field, the department store and the universi¬
ty. In the modern city, however, whether in
industrial or developing countries, the
street is an anonymous, unstructured,
neutral area where social norms and codes
of conduct are undefined. Its values are
those of the jungle, where good and right
are terms applied to what one can get away
with and where only the fittest survive. In
the street only the present moment counts;
it cancels out the past and puts everyone on
an equal footing.
The causal pathways leading to this state
of affairs are tortuous. No youngster can be
said to be abandoned for any single reason.
Whatever the immediate circumstances, in
developing countries the underlying social
pressures lie in the complex push-pull rela¬
tionship between the city and the coun¬
tryside. The massive transfer of population
into the cities that we are now witnessing
can be seen as the final act in the process of
industrialization which began in eighteenth
century England and is only now reaching
the far corners of the developing world.
Would you like to live in a shanty-town?
Probably not; but for many village families,
barely scratching a living from the soil, the
answer is yes. The media have shown them
what the modern world has to offer and
they want a share in its bounty, if not for
themselves then at least for their children.
The consequences for family life are
often disastrous; disgruntled husbands
move on and the children often face a suc¬
cession of stepfathers who have no interest
in their welfare or even survival. At the age
of ten or less they may be forced out to
"work" in the street. In some depressed
areas the proportion of female-headed
households is over fifty per cent. By con¬
trast, in closely-knit rural communities
where child-rearing has traditionally been
the responsibility of the extended family,
children whose biological family has
broken up, for whatever reason, are never
left to their own devices but as a matter of
course are sustained through childhood and
adolescence by a network of relatives or
foster parents. Today, however, even in
Africa, the most rural of continents, this
tradition is crumbling under the impact of
the consumer society.
The problem, to which there are no easy
solutions, has often been neglected by
governments. Youngsters on the street with
no visible means of support are sometimes
assumed to be delinquents, or pre¬
delinquents, and thus justifiable targets for
peirodical incarceration. Part of their
predicament, perhaps, is that as objects of
compassion they are unattractive. As street
children they require protection from moral
and physical danger; a few years later, when
they are rowdy street youths, it is society
that is seen as requiring protection from
them. Their most common "official" fate,
therefore, is to be placed in a State-run
home, which tends to be a poor substitute
for a proper family. One cannot love an
institution.
The non-governmental sector, by con¬
trast, has been quicker to grasp the nettle.
Many NGOS (non-governmental organiza¬
tions) have initiated original projects which
are models of drive and imagination. Con¬
sider, for example, the Bosconia-La Florida
project in Bogotá, Colombia, where life for
hard-bitten street youngsters is notoriously
precarious. Founded by the Salesian Con-
26

A project established in Kigali, the capital
of Rwanda, by a committee of the
Jeunesse Ouvrière Catholique, under the
auspices of the local diocese, seeks to
help young people aged from 14 to 25
who have migrated to Kigali from rural
areas. Its objectives are to provide lodg¬
ings, training, work and healthy leisure
pursuits, to foster a sense of solidarity
and self-respect and to encourage the
establishment of local small-scale in¬
dustries. The training provided includes
literacy classes, woodwork, sewing,
book-keeping and car maintenance and
repair (left).
Founded in 1972, in Dhaka, Bangladesh,
UCEP (Underprivileged Children's Educa¬
tional Programs) is an educationalproject
which reaches some 14,000 working
street children in four cities in
Bangladesh and Nepal. Right, a student at
work in a UCEP technical school in
Bangladesh.
Developing from a modest child care unit
established in 1955 by a doctor and his
wife, the Adharashram Community
Development Centre offers protection,
education and training to destitute
women and children, most of whom come
from the unauthorized shanty-towns
around the industrial city of Nashik, not
far from Bombay. Today the Centre offers
residential accommodation to a total of
116 young people, most of whom are
girls. Half the residents are aged between
5 and 12. Left, a cultural performance put
on by the residents.
Founded by Father Arnold Krol, of the
White Fathers the Undugu Society of
Kenya (' 'undugu "means' 'fellowship "or
"brotherhood") aims to help street boys
In the 10 to 14 age group who have come
from the shanty-towns on the outskirts of
Nairobi, Kenya, and who work and sleep
in the city centre. The main objective is to
rehabilitate the boys and provide them
with a minimum, practical form of educa¬
tion. In addition, with a view to
strengthening the community as a whole,
programmes have been developed for
women which include literacy classes, In¬
struction andadvice on hygiene and child
care and practical training in sewing and
dressmaking (above).
gregation, the scheme has evolved a whole
methodology of weaning the boys back into
society in successive stages. Based on gen¬
uine friendship and respect, it uses group
therapy to develop self-confidence and
motivation. Positive qualities such as loyal¬
ty, ingenuity and resourcefulness which the
youngsters have demonstrated by surviving
on the street are harnessed to the establish-
menl of a self-governing "Republic". The
process culminates in a fully-fledged com¬
mercial firm, Industrias Bosconia, which
manufactures solar heating panels and is
largely self-financing.
The pioneering experience gained on the
non-governmental side is now being drawn
together by the Inter-NGO Programme on
Street Children and Street Youth, founded
by a group of nine NGOs, both lay and
religious. As well as showing authorities
and agencies what can be done, it aims to
create a world-wide network of support for
fieldworkers and to organize a series of sub-
regional forums in Abidjan, Bogotá and
New Delhi during International Youth
Year. The vital role that such information
diffusion and advocacy can play is perhaps
best illustrated in the case of Brazil where
Unicef has been particularly active. While
the scale and intensity of the country's
problems are second to none, awareness has
reached a point at which a national move¬
ment and strategy are emerging. Today,
two hundred and forty-three projects are
under way, mostly with official support, at
the community level.
In the longer term, governments are like¬
ly to place less emphasis on supporting in¬
dividual projects and more on multi¬
dimensional preventive strategies. These
still require definition. Today, nobody real¬
ly knows why more youngsters are left on
the streets in some communities than in
others and it is only now that policy-makers
are beginning to consider the effects of
development on the family as a unit rather
than on its individual members. Paradox¬
ically, it is precisely at a time when the fami¬
ly is most threatened that its virtues are be¬
ing rediscovered. The family will once again
be the essential building-block of sound
social progress, a partner and not an instru¬
ment of the State.
MERRICK FALL, of the UK, is Executive
Secretary of the Inter-Non-Governmental
Organization Programme on Street Children
and Street Youth, Geneva.
