¿2 / v
zon be Li
Cpimoîifjf » rrtcw L toon
ft- - F .-¿y. - ,'s '
ÉÎ
©s
II
JO (a
-C Q)
O ç
-JÜJ
(TI r;
5«
Presentation to the Viceroy of New Spain
of the Chronicle of the Ceremonies, Rites,
People and Government of the Indians of
the Province of Mechuacán ("The Chron¬
icle of Michoacán"). In the preface, the
anonymous Spanish cleric who compiled
the Chronicle declared that it was pre¬
pared by the elders of the city of Mechu¬
acán "and by myself, in their name, not
as author but as interpreter". This illus¬
tration and the others accompanying this
article are facsimiles of a document dat¬
ing from 1541 which is preserved in the
Escorial Palace.
14

In the sixteenth century, Michoacán, which in the Náhuatl
language means "the place offish", was the name of the
Indian town of Tzintzuntzan, the capital of the Porhepecha.
We should know nothing about this vanished civilization of
Central America were it notfor the Chronicle of Michoacán,
which can rightly be said to be its testament. The book was
written in Spanish around 1540; it describes the history of
the Porhepecha people, their beliefs and theirfaith, and gives
the names of their gods and heroes. It was written at the
request of the viceroy of New Spain, by an unknown scribe,
to whom the last Porhepecha nobles dictated it when their
civilization was nearing its end. It is a purely Indian work,
and its verbal and poetic power is such that it stands with
the greatest epics of world literature. The French writer
J.M.G. Le Clézio has published a French translation of the
Chronicle of Michoacán (La Relation de Michoacán, Gal¬
limardpublishers, Paris, 1984). In thefollowing text he evokes
this legendary tale of the one-time glory of the Indians.



The Chronicle
Testament of a people
of Michoacán
by J.M.G. Le Clézio
THE great stories of history tell us
about beginnings: the creation of
the earth, its first inhabitants, and
the coming of the gods and of the beings
they created. They recount these events
simply, as if the world extended no further
than a particular land that was bound up
with a particular people, and beyond its
frontiers there was a different kind of life;
a different time, too, unreal and fraught
with danger, as dreams are.
Examples of such stories are the first
tales of the Iranian people, the epic of the
giant Gilgameth, the founding of the peo¬
ple of Israel, and the Greek and Scan¬
dinavian legends. These sacred texts are
the foundations of history. They show how
the emergence of a nation, a language, a
religion or a government is related to the
most ancient of myths. They also tell us
of the primal creation of the world, for
they show us how places were given names.
By naming mountains, rivers, springs and
forests, men rescued them from non-being,
and found in them the rudiments of what
were later to be towns and temples. This
appropriation of the earth is the real source
of history, a magical invention of the
moment when men and the gods met.
The Chronicle of Michoacán is one of
the few texts the books of the Chilam
Balam of the Mayas of Yucután and the
Popol Vuh of the Quiche Mayas are
others which tell us about these begin¬
nings. Thanks to the Western system of
writing, it catches the verbal magic of the
fabled past of the people of Michoacán
when, after centuries of wandering amid
tribal warfare, there came the first signs
of the destiny of a nation which played
a vital part in the civilizations of Central
America.
Yet in this case the writing is of
secondary importance. It merely transmits
a message to posterity, and it gives the text
its strange, almost dreamlike quality that
of the testimony left by a people before
its death and of which we understand very
little. The anonymous sixteenth-century
writing, which is jerky and full of redun¬
dancies, and the naive illustrations a
combination of Indian symbols and the
tradition of illuminated manuscripts dear
to the monks of the Renaissance are the
ultimate attempt to halt the flight of time
and to preserve an evanescent glory. The
writing is the work of a copyist; it may
be a translation of texts written in the
Porhé language, compiled by an obscure
monk who reconstituted in Spanish the
message of the last priests of Michoacán,
in some cases dictated to them by Don
Pedro Cuinierengari, the son ofaPetamuti,
as the priest-historians of the court of the
Cazonci, or sovereign, were called, and
a witness of the last days of the reign of
the Porhepecha.
What disturbs and moves us is the sacred
character of this profoundly Indian book.
This legendary story, handed down from
generation to generation by petamuti
priests, is a solemn tale, with the same
oratorical beauty as that of the religious
and military colleges of Tenochtitlán (Mex¬
ico City), which Bernadino de Sahagún
(1500-1590) used when writing the "Gen¬
eral History of the Things of New Spain".
But it also reminds us of the epics that
survive today among peoples that have no
written language the Tule of San Bias,
the Inuit of Greenland , the Dogon of equa¬
torial Africa, and the Tiwi of Oceania.
The Cazonci, or sovereign of the Por-
hepechas, seated on his throne in pres¬
ence of the Url, the representatives of the
main guilds of the kingdom (artists, fish¬
ermen, hunters, etc.).
One of the most powerful and most
orderly kingdoms in Indian America, that
of the Porhepecha, was whole-heartedly
dedicated to the supernatural forces that
brought it into being, and was unable to
survive the fall of its gods. Only the rep¬
resentatives of Curicaueri, the god of fire,
and Xaratanga, the moon goddess, had any
power in this hierarchical religious society.
But the faith that was the strength of men
in the early days of the Conquest, when
the two Chichimec brothers Uapeani and
Pauacum, the founding heroes, wandered
with their warriors in search of a promised
land and a dwelling for their gods, the faith
that inspired Tariacuri, the founder of the
empire, and his nephews when, village by
village, they conquered the domain of Cur¬
icaueri, their master this same faith now
rendered the Porhepecha powerless in
their superstitious fear of omens, and con¬
demned them to annihilation.
Stricken in its vitals, with its temples
in ruins, its gods overthrown and, worst
of all, the one incarnation of their god
Curicaueri, the Cazonci Tangaxoan Tzintz-
icha, fallen and enslaved by the Con¬
quistador Ñuño de Guzman, the Porhe¬
pecha Kingdom was unable to put up a
fight. The men of this warlike people were
struck motionless by a holy dread, and
fighting was out of the question. "Where
are they from, these newcomers, if not
from heaven?" said the Cazonci to his
nobles. "People say that these stags
(horses) that they bring with them come
from the place where the sky meets the
sea. Who can they be?"
The Indians sent these new gods offer¬
ings by way of greeting. The Cazonci sent
skins with colours from the four corners
of the world, as he would have done to
their own gods. And he ordered gold to
be placed in the middle of the court for
the chief god, Hernán Cortés.
But the Indians were soon to realize
that these "gods from heaven", the ter¬
rifying messengers from the other world,
had not come to bring the answer to their
prayers and receive their offerings; they
had come to fulfil the doom-laden sayings
of the oracles.
The news of the destruction of the
opposing empire of Tenochtitlán brought
no solace to the Cazonci; it perturbed him
even more. "Who are you?"he asked Mon¬
tano, the first Spaniard to set foot on his ^
15

The priests who offer up incense in the
temples, the curitlechas, gathered round
the High Priest, or Petamuti, who bears
the insignia of his ranka lance and a
gourd set with turquoise. "And they
declared that they bore the whole nation
on their shoulders."
territory. "Where are you from? What are
you seeking? For we have never heard tell
of men such as you, nor seen such men.
Why have you come from such distant
lands? Is there neither food nor drink in
your native land, that you have come to
make the acquaintance of peoples
unknown to you? And what had the Mex¬
icans done to you, that you annihilated
them when you were in their city?"
The apprehensive questions of the Por¬
hepecha people were soon to be answered.
Motionless and powerless, the men stared
at these new gods. Already the old gods
Xaratanga, Curicaueri, the mother Cuer-
auaperi, Hurendequauecara, the guardians
of the grottoes and the mountains, the
spirits of the springs and the lakes, the gods
of the four corners of the earth and of
hell had all returned to nothingness The
newcomers wanted gold, the "excrement
of the sun", the symbol of divine power.
Their lust for gold was not sated by the
spoils of war handed over to them by the
Cazonci; they wanted more and more, so
they sacked the temples and profaned the
tombs of the most illustrious kings.
The impregnable frontier city, Taxi-
maroa, had already been reduced to ashes
by the new victors. Disease influenza,
smallpox and measles decimated the
inhabitants and wiped out villages. Fore¬
seeing the terrible fate that awaited him,
in the solitude of the end of the world that
the gods had deserted, the last king of the
Porhepecha could not hold his peace.
"They are coming," he cried. "Must we
therefore die?"
Already Timas, the captain of war of
the Cazonci, knew that death was the only
way. "My lord, order copper to be
brought, and we shall put it on our shoul¬
ders and drown ourselves in the lake; so
we shall reach our end more quickly, and
join those who have already died."
With the fall of the gods the empire
of the Porhepecha came to an end. The
newcomers first destroyed the enemies
they feared most, just as they had done
at Tenochtitlán: the statues were cast down
from the temples and lay crumbled into
dust, before the eyes of the Indians. "Why
are the gods not moved to wrath? Why
do they not curse these men?" But the gods
remained silent. Defeated without even
offering any resistance, they had left their
dwelling places and their temples and had
gone back to the mysterious realms from
which they had come, under the earth in
volcanoes, at the bottom of lakes or in the
depths of the forest, in the warm lands
where perhaps they were born.
With the fall of the gods of the Por¬
hepecha another kind of conquest of
Michoacán began, a conquest in which the
goal was not the glory and power of the
ancient Chichimec gods, but possession of
the land, power over men, and gold.
Everything vanished when these con¬
querors approached, everything grew
silent, as the soothsayers had prophesied.
On the banks of a river, at the ford of
Nuestra Señora de la Purificación (prob¬
ably near the town of Purnandiro, on the
frontier of what is now the Mexican State
of Guanajato) in the year 1530, the last
Arrival of the first Spaniards in Michoa¬
cán. In his residence at Tzintzuntzán, on
the shores ofLake Pátzcuaro, the Cazonci
Tangaxoan orders gifts of food, copper
axes, jars of wine and hides of every col¬
our to be taken to the strangers who were
thought to be gods, for "from whence
could they have come, if not from the
heavens?" At his feet can be seen the
round plaques ofgold and the half-moon-
shaped sheets of silver in their greed for
which the conquistadores would pillage
the kingdom.
Cazonci was tortured and slain by the con¬
quistador Ñuño de Guzmán , after a parody
of a trial. So ended the glorious line of
the Uacusecha, the Eagles, who had built
up the empire, and also the reign of the
god Curicaueri, whose last incarnation on
earth the Cazonci had been. Another form
of speech, another conquest were about
to begin, covering over the silence of the
Indians.
All that is left today as a legacy, thanks
to the anonymous Chronicle, is the mem¬
ory of that greatness, the legend, both
touching and true, of a past era, when
poetry and history were one, and when
the kingdom of men was like the dwelling
place of the gods.
JEAN MARIE G. LE CLEZIO fe an essayist
and novelist of Franco-Mauritian origin. In addi¬
tion to his translation from Spanish into French
of the Relación de Michoacán (The Chronicle
of Michoacán, 1984), his many published works
include French translations ofMayan texts, such
as The Prophecies of Chilam Balam (1976), and
novels such as Le Chercheur d'Or (The Gold-
Seeker, 1985). Since 1 973 he has made several
trips to Mexico and is a part-time research
worker at the College of Michoacán.
16
