The mood of Britain, 1945
by Asa Briggs
"The air of England has a curious quality. We ais com-
plain about it one way or another when we come to it-the
physical air of England-but, oddly enough, we can ail
live in it, no matter where we come from. It is a mild air, it
is a medial air, it has no extremes about it, and we can ail
livre here. And what is true of men physically is true of
men's ideas. This air has always been hospitable to ideas ;
it has always been hospitable to freedom ; and we are men
who love freedom."
Archibald MacLeish, 16 November 1945
THE word"revolution"was some-
times used in Britain to describe
the transformation of ways of
life and, equally important, of attitudes
since the beginning of the Second World
War. The scientist Julian Huxley, who
was to become Director-General of Un-
esco in 1946, had published a volume of
essays in 1944 with the title On Living ira a
Revolution which caught the mood. Of
course, not everyone shared the sensé.
There had always been people who were
unwilling to chart plans for"reconstruc-
tion"untillong after the War had been
won, and there were some who in the
year of victory stressed continuity rather
than change, fearing change rather than
welcoming it.
Huxley, we ! ! known to the war-time
public through his broadcasts in the
BBC's immensely popular programme
the Brains Trust, in which everything was
discussed except the War, had no doubts.
The first of his essays, written as early as
1942, described how'there had already by
then been"a re-thinking of old prob-
lems"and a"transvaluation of values"in
Britain since the War began. Social ser-
vices were being extended, old clashs di-
viding lines crossed, and planning was
being taken for granted. Economie man
had given way to"social man". After the
War was over people would not want to
return to the ways of 1939."As a result",
he concIuded,"we now live in quite a
different world."
Huxley had made his reputation as a
writer on biological évolution. He con-
c) uded quite deliberately, however, in his
essays that only the word"revolution"
was adequate to cover what had been
happening not only in people's minds but
on the world stage. It was a world revolu-
tion which he contemplated, not just a
"revolution"in Britain. Certain trends
within the revolution were"inevitable"
and"universal". One was towards"a
more conscious social purpose". Another
was towards"a fuller utilization of the
resources of backward countries". The
question was one not of trends but of
methods,"The chief alternatives depend
on whether the revolution is effected in a
democratic or a totalitarian way."
Nothing could have been more demo-
cratic than Britain's general election of
July 1945 which displanted Britain's great
war leader, Winston Churchill, and
which brought the Labour Party into
power with a massive over-all majority of
146 seats in the new Parliament. In one of
the most readable of Britain's contem-
porary diaries Harold Nicolson, who lost
his own seat, wrote simply"Churchill is
out and Attlee has a clear majority ! No-
body foresaw this at aIl."Y et there were
people who foresaw it and had foreseen it
for some years as the logical outcome of a
"people's war"and the deveiopment of a
"citizens'army"which had been encour-
aged to think,"This is the dawn of a new
day", dectared the new Minister of
Labour with unsurprising enthusiasm,
"and in the light of it we are going to
march forward to those things of which
we have dreamed for years past."
It is easy in retrospect to analyse the
remarkable social and political conjunc-
tions of 1945 in a more sophisticated
fashion than was possible in 1945,
although even in the immediate after-
math of the election its first academic
analyst, R. B. McCallum, was at pains to
insist that even if it might be called a
revolution it was as well to avoid the
word,"Revolution is a cant word of the
day and is applied to almost any move-
ment of human affairs."
Certainly there was no element of force
or coercion in the domestic politics of
1945 ; the verdict was free. Nor was the
Conservative Party overwhelmed in
terms of the total number of votes cast
nationaux. In fact, Labour was in a
minority of 47, 8 per cent and the Con-
servative Party was to return to power,
once more under Churchill, in 1951.
Above all, the Labour Party itself was
less radical in 1945 than Conservatives
claimed during the heat of the general
election campaign ; it was wooing a broad
spectrum of the electorate, and many of
the policies it propounded had been
forged as part of a war-time national con-
sensus in which different parties shared
and to which they all contributed.
Moreover, it inherited rather than de-
signed the planning controls deemed
necessary to implement them. The eco-
nomy was to be"mixed","Labour will
plan from the ground up", its election
manifesto La6our Face the Future stated,
"giving an appropriate place to construc-
tive enterprise and private endeavour in
the national plan."
There was a reasonably broad consen-
sus on foreign policy in 1945 with the only 
On 8 May 1945, the day the Third Reich 
capitulated and peace returned to Europe
after 5 years and 8 months of bloody war, 
prime minister tMnsfon Churchill and 
members of his cabinet received a raptus-O
ous welcome as they appeared on the bal-
cony of the Ministry of Health in London. 
14


ion May 1940, Winston Churchill (1874-
1965), statesman, author and orator, be-
came prime minister of the wartime coali-
tion government that was to lead Britain to
vlctory in 1945. ln the darkest days of the
Second World War he rallied the people of
Britain behind him and, concentrating his
boundless energy on the conduct of the
war, oecame one of the principal
architects of the Allied victory. Swept out
of office in the Labour election landslide of
July 1945, he became prime minister again
for another four-year term from 1951-1955.
The author of a number of books, includ-
ing a biography of his famous ancestor,
Marlborough : his Life and Times, and a
six-volume history of The Second World
War, he was awarded the Nobel Prize for
Literature in 1953. Above, a smiling Chur-
chill gives his"V for Victory"salute.
 critics on the far left and far right. Much
was made of the need to continue the
alliance of"the Big Three"-the United
States, the Soviet Union and Britain. Ali
the main parties supported the idea of a
new international organization"with
teeth" ; the teeth, in particu) ar, mattered.
It seemed more important also to create
machinery that would work than to im-
pose a quick peace ; peacemaking was
approached as a process, not an event.
Finally, in the making of peace, it was
maintained, attention had to be paid to
economic and social issues as tell as to
political and diplomatie concerns. As the
authors of Patterns of Peacemaking, a
much praised book of 1945, put it,"The
last war slogans of'homes fit for heroes'
and'a wond safe for democracy'were
modest hopes compared with the aspira-
tions for social security, freedom from
fear and want, full employment and
world peace which have been generated
by this war."
Education was considered to be a
necessary agent not only in purging Ger-
many and Italy from the grip of Nazism
and Fascism but in bringing people of the
world together, and Huxley participated
in a London conference held in 1944 to
consider new international machinery de-
signed to extend the work of the Interna-
tional Institute of Intellectual Co-oper-
ation, a body associated with the League
of Nations, and at the founding Confer-
ence of Unesco in London in 1945, One
<II."as[l.
ui<II
e
J : :
(Q)
. <=[l.
of the most important reforms in Britain
carried out during the War itself had been
an Education Act of 1944, and there were
several meetings of Allied Ministers of
Education from European governments
in exile in London which considered the
international implications of educational
advance.
It was usually recognized too, that
education and science went together. The
winning of the Second World War had
depended on trained scientists-it was
sometimes called"the physicists war"-
with some of the ablest scientists working
in laboratories and"Iittle back rooms"on
electronics, radar and nuclear power. Sci-
entists were the first to appreciate,
however, that scientific discovery was in-
ternational rather than national in char-
acter and that the effective use of science,
which was to pose difficult moral prob-
lems in the 1950s and 1960s, depended on
advances in the social as well as the natu-
rat sciences.
Education and science did not figure,
however, in the list of maj or public preoc-
cupations in Britain which were identi-
fied in a pre-election public opinion poli
in June 1945, Housing came first, full
employment second, and social security
third. And by then as many as 84 per cent
of the persons questioned, large numbers
of them new voters, had made up their
minds as to how to vote.
There were echoes of the First World
War slogan"homes for heroes"in the
placing of housing first, and full employ-
ment had been identified as a major goal
of national policy in 1944, one of the
Government's"primary aims and re-
sponsibihties". Social security had been
the theme of the most popular of all
war-time reports, that of the Liberal Wil-
liam Beveridge, who went on in 1944 to
write Full Employment in a Free Society,
The name of Beveridge became one of
the best-known in the country, but, hav-
ing won a war-time by-election he lost his
seat at the general election in 1945. The
plan was more important than the man.
Beveridge was to criticize the use of the
term"welfare State". Yet it was such a
State which the Labour Government of
1945 set out to create-with a compre-
hensive national health service figuring
prominently as an extra plank in its prog-
ramme. The day it was brought into
effect, 5 July 1948, was treated as another
D-Day and compared with the Allied
landings in Normandy in 1944, and
Labour was at pains to insist that it was a
model for others to emulate.
It was to prove difficult in practice to
reconcile the demand for such an active
and greatly extended social policy with
the economic facts of life which Britain
faced in 1945, If there was sunshine in the
sky, there were lots ofclouds. Huxley had
written little in his essays about economic
problems, although he had been associ-
ated with Political and Economic Plan-
ning, an important cross-party opinion
group, since its foundation in 1931. He
16

believed in the possibilities of planning
without devoting sustained attention to
the most appropriate methods of carrying
it out. Nor had most of the Labour lead-
ers very clear ideas either.
In fact, Britain in 1945 faced very se-
rious economic probtems. short-term as
we) I as long-term, which severely limited
its choices and made it difficult to pursue
long-term goals. On the day of the
Japanese surrender in August 1945, J. M.
Keynes-by then a main influence on
economic policy-making-warned that
Britain faced an"economic Dunkirk"as
serious as the military Dunkirk five years
before.
Existing foreign investment had been
dissipated to pay for the War, there was a
heavy new foreign debt. and there had
been a serious destruction of shipping on
which a crucial export drive depended.
Many materials and foodstuffs were in
shorter supply than they had been during
the War. and rations were to fall lower
after 1945 than they had been in the
darkest years of the War. The abrupt
ending of American Lend/Lease was a
severe blow to an increasingly vulnerable
economy. and an indispensable Amer-
ican loan was securcd onl on difficult
and controversial tcnns, 1 n Ci' ! lSequènce,
the country remamed in thé snp of
austerity. Indeed. bread. which had nev-
er been rationed dring the \Val, was to
be rationed in lC) J (l,"That wc shoule !
have to do snch an nnpopuiar thing".
wrote the ChanceJlor or the Fxchequer.
"illustrates ViVId ! y the urgent, hn ! ! ages of
the post-war venais,'
Thé words"shoIlage ; md"crisis"
were to be two of the mo-, t used words of
the ! ate 1940s. \\hen thé queue became a
major nationai peacenme institution.
"Economie man"had not been sup
p) anted by"sociat mart'as Huxley had
suggested. The new : \\ (Jmcmmcnt had ta
deal not onlv with"èeOnOInlC man"in the
shape of tradition cntrl !) ltflCurs. des-
perate ! y struggling to restore theit
businesses, or ml ! 1agcrs of newl)'
nationalized industries.) ike cuat and the
rai) wavs. but with'SpIVS" (a ne'\\'wl, rd)
who dealr shadih in uripr (Ct.'lÌt : liL : dl\'
suhstan'ia ! biack rnarkets D'ère '. e ! e
solin to hc. : m.'rt'carl," ! Il' ahout SPI\',
than, fìh () ut any t"d.-h ! : r",, 1 1. ct, ri1J1. 1 th\rhaut n, , lr, _r snt,; crv m.'ïl. w
were tau tlgure. P1U1"i : ! I", : l\li\ : 11 EnId]
films. many of them cornuJv films, \\'flldl
ion November 1940 the city or Coventry
bore the brunt of a massive attack by Ger-
man bombers aiming to destroy the air-
craft and armaments factory complex on
the city's outskirts. Bombs destroyed
some 70, 000 houses and the 14th-century
Gothic cathedral of S1. Michael, above.
17
ro
Q.
ui'"
'"
5-
i
É
n,
o
Õ. r:c
[l.

 had been given a new lease of lifte during
the War and which evoke the mood of the
War and the immediate post-war years
more quicktv than plays. noyels or
poems.
! n cvoking thé mood of Britain in 1945
it would be misleading to concentrate
entirelv on the économies either of indus-
try or of consumer austerity. One enect
of the War had been to stimu) ate a hveiy
interest in the arts. including music. and
the interest was enhanced after the end of
the War.. A COill/cil for the Encourage-
meut of/Husic and the Arts had been set
up during the War. and in 1946 this body
gave wav to the.-I thé, COl/nci ! with an
annual Government grant at its disposa.
modes ! thoush this was b\ the standards
of some other European countries."I do
not betieve it is vet reahzed \\hat an im-
portant thing has happened", wrote
Keynes. who was even more interested in
the arts than in the dip ! omacv of the
Anglo-Ameriean 1. oan."State patronage
of the arts has crept in."
Keynes made the remark in a BBC
broadcast. and it vas often through the
BBC. which had providcd both an inspir-
ing and a consoling influence for the peo-
ple of occupied Europe during the War.
that the culture of the nation was most
universaiïy expressed. ! t was a sign of the
times that Sir William Haley, the BBC's
Director-Genera). planned the start of a
new Third Prorgamme which would pre-
sent the best not oniy in British but in
European culture. For him-and for his
colleagues-the community was"a
broadly-based cultural pyramid aspiring
slowly upwards". The pyramid would be
served bv three main Programmes.
"differentiated but broadh overlapping
in levels and interest. each Programme
leading on to the other. the listener being
induced through the vears increasingly to
discriminate in favour of the things that
are more worthwhile".
This was a verv British conception. So
too was the phi ! osophy that"each Pro-
gramme at any given moment must be
ahead of its public, but not so much as to
lose their confidence"."The listener",
Hatev maintained,"must be lcd from
good to better by curiositv. liking and a
gn) \\th of understanding. As the stan-
dards of the education and culture of the
During the Battle of Britain London was
the target of violent and highly destructive
bombing attacks by the Luftwaffe, The
bombing of London continued intermit-
tent/y throughout the war culminating in
1944 with the launching of V1 and V2 pilot-
less planes and rockets against the capi-
tal. Above, to escape the bombs many
thousands of Londoners slept each night
in London Underground stations. Right,
Shelter Scene (1941), one of a series of
drawings by the famous sculptor Henry
Moore who was an officiai war artist from
1940 to 1942,
on
"'-
F
Q
'"
E
o
Si
fui :
t8

community rise, so should the pro-
gramme pyramid rise as a who) e."
It was an essential feature of the mood
of 1945 that there was optimism about the
cultural pyramid. Social security reform
was based on a sense of solidarity. Much
other reform presupposed that"the
education and culture of the community"
would"rise as a whole"in conditions of
peace. Economists might be pointing to
the inherent difficulties in the British eco-
nomy ; sociologists, a smatler band, were
pointing instead to increased social
mobility and to higher levels of social
aspiration.
Britain's Labour Foreign Secretary,
Ernest Bevin, a trade unionist by com-
mitment and career, had warned of the
dangers of"poverty of désire", That
poverty, it was hoped, would now dis-
appear as completely as poverty affecting
the body. The hope was to reach its
pinnacle at the time of the Festival of
Britain, in 1951, which seemed to follow
naturally from the Allied victory six years
earlier, and, characteristically, it was ex-
pressed as a public as weiï as a private
hope."1951", the Director-General of
the Festival promised,"shall be a year of
fun, fantasy and colour, a year in which
we can, while soberly surveying our great
past and our promising future, for once
let ourselves go."
Science had its place in the new picture
atso. Two of the features of the Festival
were displays of jet engines and penicil-
lin, the one transforming travel, the other
medicine. There was a Dome of Dis-
covery, and most of the visitors to Lon-
don during the Festival went there first.
Many of them came from outside Britain,
although in retrospect this was a period of
severely restricted travel and people had
to depend on rationed newsprint and
broadcasting to find out what was hap-
pening in other parts of the wor) d.
The BBC was broadcasting to the
world in 1945 and, as the War ended,
there was considerable interest in Britain
in the world outside Europe. It was still
considered likely in May 1945 that the
war against Japan in the Far East would
continue into the unforeseeable future,
and once that war ended the political
problems of Asia were forced into the
newspaper headtines.
Inevitably issues of empire confronted
a British Government which inciuded a
strong anti-imperial element and which
wanted to settle them as quickly as pos-
sible. Already in 1945 the word most
generally used to describe the inherited
empire was"Commonwealth", and the
Labour Government always spoke of it in
this way ; it had no sympathy with
attempts by other imperial powers, as it
saw them, to put back the dock of empire
to 1939, In particular, the Government
was anxious to speed up the process of
implementing India's independence and
to try to introduce welfare State policies
in Africa.
There was a further strand in the think-
ing which related to Huxley's sense that a
worldwide revolution was in the making.
Great emphasis was placed on"develop-
ment"even though the economics of de-
velopment were expounded in such a
fashion that the advantages of tropical
development in Britain were stressed
more than its advantages to the people
who still had not won their political inde-
pendence. There was a sense that the
whole world was a great underdeveloped
estate.
The biggest changes in the world scene
were to become fully apparent only after
1947, when the Indian sub-continent secu-
red its independence, and there was to be
more than one crisis before the world
map was redrawn. There were few people
in 1945 who could have foreseen the fu-
ture speed of change, and it was other
actors in the drama, not the British, who
were to determine that. Britain had with
its Allies won the War, but it had lost
power in the process. It took time and
more than time to appreciate that, and
again it was people outside Britain, not
inside it, who were best able to judge the
conséquences, t
ASA BRIGGS (LORD BRIGGS) is a dis ting-
uished British social and economic historian who
has been Provost of Worcester College, Oxford,
since 1976 and Chancellor of the Open Universi-
ty since 1978. He is the author of many published
works, including A Social History of England
(1983), and a History of Broadcasting in the
United Kingdom, the fourth volume of which,
Sound and Vision, appeared in 1979. He was
made a life peer in 1976. His latest book is The BBC :
The first fifty ears ('Oxford University Press. 1985).
19
o
: ë
o
., jc :
'"
"
iE o.
us
. r : c'L
j
0
0
3
g
t-
8
c :
o
fj
0
il
