The waterlords
of ancient Sri Lanka
<L
ET not a single drop of rain that
falls on this island flow into the
ocean without first serving
humanity." This was the governing prin¬
ciple of a massive water resources develop¬
ment programme undertaken by one of the
greatest kings of ancient Sri Lanka,
Parakramabahu I (1153-1186). The king's
record was impressive. The Sri Lankan
Chronicle, the Culavamsa which was writ¬
ten in the Buddhist canonical language Pali,
enumerates his works both as a provincial
ruler in western Sri Lanka and later as the
monarch of the whole country: he either
built or restored 163 major reservoirs (call¬
ed "tanks" in Sri Lankan usage), 2,617
minor tanks, 3,910 irrigation channels, 328
stone sluices and 168 sluice blocks, besides
repairing 1,969 breaches in embankments.
Among the reservoirs he built was the tank
at Polonnaruwa, called on account of its
size the Sea of Parakrama. With an area of
3,000' hectares and an enclosing embank¬
ment fourteen kilometres long, it irrigated
nearly 10,000 hectares.
The resulting improvement in the conser¬
vation and distribution of water brought
about an expansion of cultivated land.
Consequently, during his reign the produc¬
tion of rice increased to the point that Sri
Lanka exported so much of it to neighbour¬
ing countries that the country is said to have
become known as the granary of the east.
. In executing this vast programe,
Parakramabahu I was fulfilling one of the
most important royal duties laid down by
tradition. The obligations of kings were
conceived as serving the two-fold interests
of the nation: the material and the spiritual,
expressed in Pali as loka-sasana-
abhivuddhi. Under the first category came
the two fundamental duties of defending
The great artificial lake of Anuradhapura
in the north of Sri Lanka, with a monu¬
mental stupa, Ruvanvalisaya, in the back¬
ground. The kingdom of Anuradhapura
(2nd century BC-10th century AD) cre¬
ated a remarkable Irrigation system
which was the basis of its prosperity.
the nation against external and internal
threats to its security, and the conservation
and management of water resources to pro¬
mote rice cultivation. Included in the se¬
cond category of duties was the sustenance
of Buddhism through the promotion of
monastic institutions and the construction
of impressive edifices. Every Sinhala
monarch who is rated great in history has
excelled in all or at least two of these three
functions.
King Mahasena, who constructed the
Minneriya tank in the fourth century, was
actually deified by the people, and in a tem¬
ple on the lake bund he still receives homage
from local cultivators who seek his help in
growing successful crops. When the fifth-
century king Dhatusena was asked by his
rebellious son Kahsyapa to reveal where the
royal treasures were hidden, he led his cap¬
tors to Kalaweva, a lake with a circum¬
ference of ninety kilometres which he had
constructed. Taking a handful of water, he
said, "This, my friends, is the whole of my
wealth."
These constructions involved a very high
level of technological knowledge and skill.
Perennial rivers were dammed with stone
barrages and diverted kilometres away
from their courses. Seasonal streams were
dammed in stages to form a series of reser¬
voirs along the valleys. The earthen em¬
bankments of these reservoirs extended
from a few hundred metres to fifteen
kilometres and in some places were eighteen
metres high. The Jaya-Ganga, an irrigation
channel aptly called the Victory River, was
a masterpiece of engineering ingenuity. Still
functioning today, it is over eight
kilometres long with a uniform width of
twelve metres. To minimize silting and ero¬
sion of banks, its gradient for the first thirty
kilometres is an imperceptible 1 in 10,000.
It connects two river systems and maintains
adequate water supplies in a series of inter¬
linked tanks which irrigated over 46,000
hectares of rice-fields.
Though little is known of either their
techniques or the tools they used, the skills
of the ancient Sinhala engineers in
hydrodynamics as well as surveying and
levelling were of a very high order. The
stone sluice gate with its control well, called
in Sinhala the Biso-kotuva, was a
remarkably effective apparatus which
displays a full understanding of water
under pressure. It regulated the speed and
the quantity of water issued to the fields and
thus protected both the channel and the
fields from erosion and flooding. It also
prevented a reservoir from being tapped to
its last drop by eager cultivators in times of
drought, to the detriment of the survival of
man and beast. Similarly, a stone spill or
flood escape was constructed to a required
height, often some kilometres away from
the sluice gate, to safeguard the em¬
bankments from the heavy pressure of sud-
dent rain or flood water.
Many a modern engineer has been baffl¬
ed by the sophisticated designs on which
these reservoirs and channel systems were
constructed. It is known that the Dutch
engineers of the eighteenth century and
their British counterparts in the nineteenth
29

failed to understand the design of the giant
tank near Mannar on the northwestern
coast. Only in recent years, when the tank
was restored in conformity with the original
design, was it found that levelling by the
unknown engineer of the past was vastly
superior to that attempted by modern
engineers.
The origin and early development of a Sri
Lankan science of water resources are not
easy to trace. The earliest recorded instance
of the construction of a reservoir dates to
the founding of the Sinhala kingdom in the
sixth century BC. But whatever the source
of their technological knowledge, the
Sinhalas won wide recognition for their
skills in irrigation. Pliny's account of the
Sri Lankan embassy to Rome in 45 AD to
the court of the Emperor Claudius refers to
the artificial lake near the capital,
Anuradhapura. Though couched in
mythological terms, the reference in the
Kashmirian history Rajatarangani to
Lankan experts who helped Jayapida to
drain a lake sometime around the eighth
century records a possible case of technical
assistance.
A complex system of rules and regula¬
tions on the management of water has been
operating in Sri Lanka since ancient times.
Not only did it prescribe how water was to
be distributed and used, it also assigned
responsibilities for the upkeep of tanks and
channels. Until driven to obsolescence by
the advent of the monetary economy in re¬
cent times, these regulations were upheld
through a process of co-operative self-help,
and the tradition persists in remote villages.
The royal duty to develop water
resources and thus provide life blood to
rural Sri Lanka and its multi-faceted
culture has been carried on by the Govern¬
ment of the country ever since political
power was vested in national leaders in the
1930s. In a massive effort to regenerate the
rural settlements of the Dry Zone in the
north central and southeastern regions of
the island, over 3,000 reservoirs of varying
sizes together with their channel systems
have been commissioned into service and
vast stretches of new rice-fields have been
brought under cultivation.
The Senanayaka-Samudraya (the Sea of
Senanayake, so named in commemoration
of the first Prime Minister of independent
Sri Lanka, who was an indomitable pioneer
in restoring ancient water resources and
establishing new villages) vies with the Sea
of Parakramabahu of 800 years ago. The
most impressive effort in this direction is
the current programme to divert Mahaveli-
ganga, the island's longest river. This multi¬
purpose project which, besides producing
electricity and controlling floods, will bring
thousands of hectares under cultivation,
symbolizes the persistent belief of Sri
Lankans that the glory of their nation lies in
the village with its lake, rice-fields and
temple.
Irrigation
ANANDA GURUGE is chief of Unesco's unit
for co-operation with UNICEF and the World
Food Programme. He is a specialist in Asian
and Buddhist cultures on which he has written
several books.
