'Emancipation
for men and for peoples'
"The Second World War put to a severe test not only coun¬
tries andpeoples, but also, in a sense, the whole system of in¬
ternational relations. Fascist aggression endangered the very
existence of races, States and nations. And so the war against
fascism was not confined to the field of military operations
and, with the achievement ofvictory, led to the revision ofin¬
ternational relations based on force, colonialism, inequality
and the servitude of men and peoples. The ensuing changes,
of which the anti-colonial, revolution is perhaps the most
significant, emanatedfrom the world's new awareness, of its
refusal to live in future as it had before the conflict.
"The creation of the United Nations would bring new
possibilities of emancipation for men and for peoples...
"The struggle for liberation which the Yugoslav nations and
nationalities waged during the war against fascism has one
particular aspect ofwjiicfi thepeople ofmy country are rightly
proud. It was both a fight for"liberation against fascism and
an act ofself-determination on thepart ofour nations and na¬
tionalities. These were determined to create a new community,
to establish between themselves relationships of a new type,
and to set up a new social system. Under this new system the
fundamental law of the country would enshrine, firstly, the
right ofeach nation and nationality to itsfull identity, and to
political, economic and culturalfulfilment; and secondly, the
right of everyone not only to enjoy individual liberty but to
participate effectively, on an equal footing, in the self-
managed determination of the destinies of a community of
liberated men and peoples".
Kole Casule
(Yugoslav writer)
A broadening of the trend towards
decolonization was one of the major
results of the Second World War. A spirit of
resistance had grown in countries oc¬
cupied by the fascist powers, and this fer¬
ment was echoed in other colonies where
the call for independence was voiced by
increasing numbers. One important
milestone in the anti-colonial movement
was the Asian-African Conference held at
Bandung (Indonesia) in April 1955. It was
attended by delegates from 29 countries
representing over half the world's popula¬
tion. The Chinese Prime Minister Chou En
tai, below right, played a leading role at the
Conference, which was organized by In¬
donesia, Burma, Ceylon, India, and
Pakistan. Below left, Mahatma Gandhi, the
father of the Indian nation, who preached
a doctrine of non-violent resistance. India
achieved independence in 1947.
\
©
22
