The living voice
by Paul Zumthor
NO one today questions the impor¬
tance of the part played by the voice
in the preservation of human soci¬
eties, although it was long discounted by
historians who paid little or no attention
to anything but the written word. What
is known as the oral tradition of a social
group is a system of vocal communications
bound up with attitudes that are more or
less rigidly codified, the prime function of
which is to ensure the continuity of a con¬
ception of life and the experience of a
group without which the individual would
be a prey to the vicissitudes of his solitary
state, if not to despair.
This seems obvious enough if we are
thinking of primitive civilizations or some
of the marginal cultures of the world today.
But it is harder for us to realize that our
own rational, technological culture of the
late twentieth century is imbued with oral
traditions and would find it hard to survive
without them.
In this article I shall consider only one
aspect, that of "poetry" in the broadest
meaning of the term, that is, an art which
arises spontaneously from language and
the perpetuation of which is a constant of
history, so much so that it could be called
one of the factors by which man can be
defined. But while everyone thinks it
natural that African or Amerindian ethnic
groups should have their own treasure-
house of poetry which is maintained by
oral tradition, we have to strain our imag¬
ination to detect more than traces of such
poetry in our own civilization a still active
presence, when the stage of moribund folk¬
lore has been passed.
Statistics show that ten thousand songs
a year were being composed around the
year 1980 in France alone. Allowing an
average of three minutes for each song,
that makes five hundred hours' listening,
or one hour and twenty minutes every day!
Even if we do not count failures the
effects of selection before the works are
performed there is still a considerable
mass of them. I use the word mass delib¬
erately, because this is clearly a phenom¬
enon of "mass culture", the main form of
poetry that is alive and functional at a
group level in the 1980s. There is no reason
to suppose that France is exceptional in
this respect.
We have to make an effort to admit that
this is so. For love of the "live" word died
out long ago in our Western societies,
being gradually excluded from the interests
of intellectuals and also from our "basic
personality." Owing to a prejudice that has
been part of Western mentality and tastes
for centuries, we are unwilling to accept
what is produced by any art derived from
language unless it is in written form. The
one exception we make is for the theatre.
This is why we find it difficult to acknowl¬
edge the aesthetic validity of anything
which, in intention or in fact, is not written
down. In the last five or six centuries all
the countries of Europe first, next those
of America, then starting from different
premises those of Asia, refined the tech¬
niques of writing to such a degree that our
sensibility automatically rejects what
seems to be the immediacy of vocal
expression.
Is this merely a matter of historical cir¬
cumstances that affect only the surface of
things, or is it a shift in hidden structures
that govern our perception and our
thinking? The Canadian Marshall
McLuhan examined this question as early
as 1962, and in The Gutenberg Galaxy, a
book that attracted much attention,
opened up a path for sociological and phil-
"Through the voice, the word becomes
something that is exhibited, a gift (...) In
extreme cases, the meaning of the words
ceases to matter and the voice of itself
captivates us because of the self-mastery
It indicates, as the Ancients taught us with
the myth of the Sirens." Above, mosaic
from the Bardo Museum, Tunis, illus¬
trating the story of Odysseus and the
Sirens, a famous episode in the Greek
poet Homer's epic The Odyssey. The
Sirens were mythical creatures, half-bird,
half-woman, who lured sailors to destruc¬
tion by the enchantment of their singing.
Homer tells us that Odysseus escaped
this danger yet heard their song by stop¬
ping the ears of his crew with wax and
having himself tied to the mast so that
he could not steer the ship off its course.
osophical reflection which has been effec¬
tively prospected by a number of research
workers since then. As we know, the prin¬
ciple they observe is that a message is more
than what appears to be its content. It has
another content, which is latent and which
stems from the very nature of the medium
by which it is transmitted. The introduction
of writing into a society and its subsequent
adoption by everyone therefore entails a
mutation in the mental, economic and
institutional spheres. Thus, in McLuhan's
view, two types of civilization that of oral
culture and that of written culture con¬
front each other. In a world based on oral
expression, man, who is directly in touch
with the cycles of nature, interiorizes his
experience of history without conceptual¬
izing it. He perceives time in the circular
patterns of a perpetual return, and con¬
sequently his actions are inevitably deter¬
mined by group norms. But the practice
of writing implies disjunction between

thought and action, an abstraction which
weakens the very power of language, the
predominance of a linear conception of
time, individualism, rationalism and
bureaucracy.
Research workers today hold that a
dichotomy of this nature cannot be main¬
tained except in a very general way, in
theory, and only insofar as it throws a con¬
trasting light on concrete reality, which is
nearly always situated in a median position
between extremes. The latter reveal dif¬
ferences which, as a rule, are actually only
differences of degree, since every cultural
situation has a different proportion of the
various characteristics concerned.
Yet these differences, slight though they
may be in practice, are categorical rather
than historical in nature. In most societies
men of the spoken word and men of the
written word are to be found side by side
and working together, in any period of
history. It is true that some civilizations
have known nothing of the written word
at least that is what we are told. But per¬
haps these civilizations have been less
numerous than one might think. For what
is writing? Symbolic marks, masks, tat¬
tooing and the various social emblems
are they writing or not? And other things
could be added to this list.
With these reservations, it is possible to
suggest a general typology of "situations
of orality". There are many such situ¬
ations, and the distinction between some
of them is unclear, but broadly speaking
there are four kinds:
primary orality, which has no contact
with any kind of writing;
mixed orality, which exists alongside
writing in a sociological context in which
the influence of writing is partial, external,
and slow to take effect;
secondary orality, which is actually
reconstructed from writing (the voice
utters what has been written or what has
been thought out in terms of writing) in
a context in which the written word takes
precedence, in both action and imagina¬
tion, over the authority of the voice;
mediatized orality, which we experi¬
ence today through the radio, gramophone
records and other media.
The only context in which primary oral¬
ity has flourished is in archaic communities
which have long since vanished. Even
today it is found here and there in the
tropics, among "primitive" cultures which
are dying out. The vestiges of primary oral¬
ity that ethnologists have found mean little
to us except as evidence touching evi¬
dence it is true, but incomplete and prob¬
lematical. Mixed and secondary orality
break down into an infinite number of
shades of meaning, as many as there are
degrees in the dissemination and use of
the written word, depending on the diver-
Considered by the ancient Egyptians to
be of divine origin, writing was reserved
to a privileged caste, the scribes. Below
left, Old Kingdom (Vth Dynasty, c.2494 to
c.2345 BC) painted statue of a seated
scribe, Louvre Museum. The nomadic
Tuaregs of Africa still use a traditional
form of writing, the tifinagh, but their his¬
tory and their literature are rooted in the
oral tradition. Below right, a Tuareg singer
from Algeria with an imzad (a single-string
violin). Tuareg women are the guardians
of the collective memory of their people
and their songs recount the feats of their
ancestors.
sity of societies and levels of cultures.
Mediatized orality is found today side by
side with the third or the second form of
orality, and even with the first, in a few
remote regions.
Typically, primary orality is character¬
istic of a civilization based on the voice.
The latter is a fundamental dynamic force,
whose function is both to create and to
preserve common values. A number of
books have been published on this role of
vocal activity, especially in African tra¬
ditional cultures. But the phenomenon is
universal. The difference between the
poetic forms produced in this way and writ¬
ten poetry is that the former do not provide
either those who hear them or historians
with material that can be slotted into water¬
tight lists and categories. When an eth¬
nologist records such poetic forms,
whether he intends to publish them in a
book or not, the very fact that he has
recorded them in a sense modifies the
nature of what has been recorded, just as
a photograph of a person is not the same
as his face.
Even if writing is widely practiced in a
society, primary orality remains alive in
that society, and may evolve for a con¬
siderable time in accordance with its own
laws. Again a good example of this can
be seen in Africa, which has experienced
this kind of thing at least twice in the course
of its history first with Islamization and
the introduction of the Arabic alphabet
among the educated section of the pop¬
ulation, in the tenth century, and then with
colonization, in the nineteenth century.
More generally speaking, today, where a
community has both a national language
with a written form and local languages
or dialects which exist only in an oral form
E
3
0)
tfí
S
tu
>
O
©

"The partition that appears to separate
oral poetry from written poetry (...) has
never been watertight (...) Many tales,
poems and songs which were written
down (...) became part of the oral tradition
and in some cases have remained so
much a part of it that their origin has been
lost sight of." Martín Fierro, by José Her¬
nandez, one of the great national poems
ofArgentina, published In 1872anda clas¬
sic of Hispano-Amerlcan literature, is a
masterpiece of the literature of the gau¬
chos. This written work, which is both
erudite andpopular in inspiration, quickly
became part of the repertoire of the pay-
adores, the wandering singers of the Rio
de la Plata, who improvised poems to the
accompaniment of the guitar. Left,
drawing of the gaucho Martín Fierro by
the contemporary Argentine artist Juan
Carlos Castagnino.
"Some civilizations have known nothing
of the written wordat least that Is what
we are told. But perhaps these civiliza¬
tions have been less numerous than one
might think. For what is writing ? Symbolic
marks, masks, tattooing and the various
social emblemsare they writing or not?
And other things could be added to this
list." Below, symbolic bark-painting by
the Australian aboriginal artist Daodi tells
us how the "man-crocodile" and the
"man-lizard" first succeeded in produc¬
ing fire and how the "man-crocodile" sub¬
sequently stole it (see the Unesco Cour¬
ier, January 1980).
or are no longer written, tension often
arises between a written national litera¬
ture, an oral poetry that employs a patois
to some extent, and attempts made by
regionalist movements to bring in a literary
(and therefore written) version of the local
speech.
In France, in the last century and a half,
the example of Occitan has shown the
extent of the various implications of such
a development; but great tracts of Africa,
Asia and even America are in the same
situation today, with more dramatic
effects.
Besides, the fact that tales or poems (or
even poetical genres as such) which have
hitherto been part of the oral tradition are
committed to writing does not necessarily
mean the end of that tradition. A two-tier
system may emerge we may have a ref¬
erence text (or textual model) which may
give rise to a body of written works, and
also to various oral versions that continue
to be produced at different times and
places. The history of European cultures
(perhaps from the time of ancient Greece)
provides plenty of illustrations of this pro¬
cess. When Elias Lönnrot published the
Kalevala in 1835, the oral tradition con¬
tinued to flourish so vigorously that a sec¬
ond Kalevala, published fifteen years later,
was twice as long as the first! Other exam¬
ples are the Russian byliny, the Anglo-
Scottish ballads, the Spanish Romancero
and the Japanese Tale of the Heike.
The African Shaka cycle is a noteworthy
case in our own day. Shaka, who founded
the Zulu empire at the beginning of the
nineteenth century, became the hero of
epics which are today part of the oral tra¬
dition. But a novel based on these epics
was written in 1925, and from it emerged
a pan-African literary tradition to which
we owe a number of important works in
English, French and even in the vernac¬
ular, which have been produced in a wide
variety of regions, from the Republic of
South Africa to Zambia, Congo, Guinea,
Senegal and Mali.
It sometimes happens that oral poets are
influenced by certain stylistic usages or
thematic trends that belong to the written
tradition. Such mutual influences are the
rule today; but the partition that appears
to separate oral poetry from written poetry
that is part of the literature has never been
watertight, and in many cases it has not
kept the two apart. Many tales, poems and
songs were written down and based on a
substantial literary tradition but, either
because their authors intended it to be so
or because of some accident of history,
became part of the oral tradition and in
some cases have remained so much part
of it that their origin has been lost sight
of. This was true of most of the "popular"
or folk songs of Europe and America.
On the other hand, of course, some of
the world's greatest writers have linked up
with an oral "popular" tradition from
which their art has derived part of its
power. When a work produced in this way
belongs to the past, it is therefore some¬
times marked by an ambiguity which his¬
torians and specialists in poetics find very
difficult to resolve. Well-known examples
are the Russian The Lay of Igor's Cam¬
paigners German Song of the Nibelungen,
and probably most of our medieval
"literature".
Yet even when such admixtures appear
to be inextricable a real difference remains,
which cannot be eradicated. One text may
be intended to be absorbed visually (as a
rule, by one person and in silence) by read¬
ing; another may be intended to be heard
(so that the listener will hear sounds, which
means, as a rule, that it is to be heard by
a group of people). The first text is a tan¬
gible thing a sheet of paper or a book.
The second is a vocal action. If we con¬
sider as I think we should that a work
attains its consummation, its peak of per¬
fection, the form which shows us its inner¬
most nature and the original intention of
its author (not necessarily consciously felt,
but determinative) at the moment when
it is communicated to another person, then
we have two entirely different works,

according to whether the text is read or
spoken; and this is so if the same text is
both read and spoken. It becomes two
works, which have only the form of the
words in common. Half a century after the
death of Dante, the Divine Comedy, which
was intended to be read, was on the lips
of the ordinary people of Florence, who
sang its terzine as they walked along the
streets. Was it the same work? Of course
not.
Written works have their own values,
on which European and American critics
have concentrated in the last twenty years.
But the voice brings to the fore other val¬
ues, which in the course of a performance
become part of the meaning of the text
that is being transmitted. They enrich it
and transform it, sometimes making it
mean what it does not say. For the voice
is more than speech". Its function is greater
than that of conveying language. It does
not convey language; rather language is
conveyed through it, and the physical exist¬
ence of the voice hits us with the force
of a material object. The voice is a thing;
its qualities can be described and meas¬
ured tone, timbre, range, height, regis¬
ter. Most civilizations have attached a sym¬
bolic value to each of these qualities, and
in everyday relations between persons we
judge people by their voice and (with a
bad conscience sometimes) we apply this
judgment to the value of what they say.
If I am listening to oral poetry, such
considerations determine my aesthetic per¬
ception. And more than that there can ^
"In those days when writing was virtually
. non-existent in parts of Africa, the task
ofmemorizing and recounting history had
to be entrusted to a particular social
group. It was thought that the successful
transmission of this history required a
musical background, and so the oral
transmission of history was confided to
trie griots, the musicians' caste,(...) which
thus became the repository of the col¬
lective memory of the peoples of Africa.
Griots are also poets, actors, dancers and
mimes and they introduce all these arts
into their performances." [The Sene¬
galese griot Lamine Konte, during a
recent interview with French journalist
and musicologist Marc Kerjean] Above,
the Kama-blon, the sacred hut of Kan-
gaba, Mali, the roof of which is cere¬
monially rebuilt every seven years. This
ceremony is the occasion fora greatgath¬
ering to hear the griots recount the gen¬
esis of Mall and to recall the exploits of
the epic figure king Soundiata Keita.
Within the framework of one of its major
programmes, Unesco Is actively working
to help preserve the non-physical ele¬
ments of the world's cultural heritage. In
Mali, a pilot project has been launched
which aims to revitalize the knowledge
embodied in the oral tradition so that it
can contribute to the development of
communities of whose cultural expres¬
sion it is a key element.
Lat Dior (1842-1886), king of Cayor (in
present-day Senegal) fought to the death
against the colonial invaders. His heroic
exploits, long part of his people's oral
tradition, have now been recorded in the
written history of Africa. Below, Lat Dior
as portrayed on a modern Senegalese
postage stamp.

be no doubt that the voice is an archetypal
form in the human unconscious, a pri¬
mordial, creative image, a force and a con¬
figuration of characteristics that predispose
each of us to particular experiences, feel¬
ings and thoughts. When we hear poetry
spoken, this force is. reactivated in us, in
a more or less confused way, but some¬
times with gi eat violence (as in the case
of certain rock music festivals). A human
form is there, and speaks to me, being
represented by the voice that emanates
"The come-back of the voice Is not only
due to media technology. Through the
media (...) we are witnessing a reawak¬
ening of the vocal powers of mankind,
after a period when public opinion had
devalued them." Below, people walking
around listening to portable cassette-
players are an everyday sight today.
from it. Through the voice, the word
becomes something that is exhibited, a gift
that is virtually eroticized, and at the same
time an act of aggression, a determination
to conquer the other person, who submits
because of the pleasure he derives from
hearing it. In extreme cases, the meaning
of the words ceases to matter, and the voice
of itself captivates us because of the self-
mastery it indicates, as the Ancients taught
us through the myth of the Sirens.
At least, all this was true in the past.
Is it true in 1985? Certainly, there are still
many traces of this sort of thing. Many
of us feel nostalgic, others want to retrieve
values that may have been lost, by chal¬
lenging the power of the ever-dominant
written word. Since the beginning of this
century there has been a movement for
poets to recite their poetry. Yet the fact
is that today the poetic voice comes to us
mainly in its mediatized forms and this
leads to ambiguity. The time when we hear
a poem (when we are listening to a record
or the radio or watching television) is the
moment when the "work" is created. But
the medium has been displaced; it now
occupies a space slightly removed from
both the written word and the voice. Elec¬
tronic media are comparable with the writ¬
ten word in three ways:
they do away with the presence of
the speaker;
' they have nothing of the purely pres¬
ent nature of a recital, for the vocal mes¬
sage that they transmit can be repeated
indefinitely in exactly the same form;
owing to the manipulation made pos¬
sible by highly sophisticated recording sys¬
tems, they tend to obliterate the spatial
associations of the live voice, and artifi¬
cially reconstruct the environment in which
it is used.
However, the media differ from writing
in one vital respect: what they transmit is
heard, and therefore cannot be read (apart
from the television or film image), that is,
it cannot be deciphered as the codified
signs of language can. This explains the
belief, widely felt in recent years, that the
triumph of the media is a kind of revenge
taken by the voice after centuries of repres¬
sion under the dominance of the written
word. This is true, but the come-back of
the voice is not only due to media tech¬
nology. It is through the media, and per¬
haps by virtue of the false idea that most
people entertain of them today, that we
are witnessing a reawakening of the vocal
powers of mankind, after a period when
public opinion had devalued them. Evi¬
dence of this reawakening can be seen in
many spheres, from the indifference of
many young people to the pleasures of
reading and the revival of the art of singing
throughout the world in the 1950s, 1960s
and 1970s.
What does all this add up to, in the long
run? At all events, what we have com¬
pletely lost with the advent of the media
is bodily presence the authority, the
warmth and the visible volume of the body,
of which the voice is but an extension. And
this produces in the person to whom the
medium is addressed (and perhaps also in
the person whose voice is transmitted by
it) a special kind of alienation, a disin¬
carnation of which he is probably not com¬
pletely aware, but which is certainly to be
found somewhere in his unconscious. We
may well wonder what inner disturbances
are now being produced, unknown to us,
by such repression.
It is, I think, inevitable that the live voice
should experience a pressing need to speak
out once more, to use an expression whose
full meaning should be restored. And this
is probably the best way to ensure the sur¬
vival and the renewal of the traditions of
the living poetic voice, which are in such
jeopardy today.
PAUL ZUMTHOR was born in Geneva, Switz¬
erland, and now lives in Montreal, Canada. A
specialist in medieval literature, he has for many
years made a particular study of oral poetry in
the contemporary world. He is the author of
many works, including Essai de Poétique Médi¬
évale (Essay on Medieval Poetry, 1972) and
Introduction à la Poésie Orale (Introduction to
Oral Poetry, 1983).
