Liu Jingting,
prince of story-tellers
by Yao Zhenren
LIU Jingting (1 587-1 670), the originator
of the modern art of Chinese story¬
telling, lived during the tumultuous
period of Chinese history when the Ming
Dynasty was supplanted by the Qing
Dynasty.
A native of Taizhou, Jiangsu Province,
Liu's original name was Cao Fengchun.
When he was fifteen, he had a brush with
the law and fled to escape punishment. He
travelled to the Xuyi area, where he became
an apprentice story-teller in order to earn a
living, eventually embarking on a career
which was to last over sixty years. One day,
distressed by his misfortunes and probably
in an attempt to shake off his pursuers, he
changed his name to Liu Jingting. He was
a man of plain features, and since he had
black moles on his face people nicknamed
him "Pockmarked Liu".
He sought advice from an elderly and
respected scholar, Mo Houguang, who had
made a profound study of the theory of story¬
telling. Mo held that apart from basic skills,
a good story-teller should first of all familiarize
himself with the lives of all social groups, be
conversant with different dialects, know the
customs and habits of different parts of the
country, and absorb all kinds of trivia. Even
more important, Mo said that the story-teller
should live each part man, woman, hero
and clown in a story instead of simply acting
as a mouthpiece for the characters. In addi¬
tion he should imitate the characters' ges¬
tures and emotional expressions so that he
could draw his audiences into the world
depicted in the story. Mo's ideas were quite
similar to Western theories of realistic drama
in the nineteenth century. After arduous
study, Liu finally understood the quintess¬
ence of story-telling and was able to move
his audiences even before he uttered a single
word.
He travelled to Yangzhou, Suzhou, Hang-
zhou and other places to make a living as
a performer. Finally he came to Nanjing,
known then as the capital of six dynasties,
where he began to win overwhelming admi¬
ration from audiences who were entranced
by his brilliant artistry.
Contemporary descriptions give some idea
of his outstanding performing manner. Zhang
Dai, a scholar of the late Ming Dynasty,
depicted Liu telling the Water Margin story.
"At the climactic point of the story, thun¬
derous shouting and brawling breaks out,
Discovered in a Han Dynasty tomb at Tian-
wei, Sichuan Province, this dancing fig¬
urine, drumstick in hand and a big smile
on his face, creates a vivid image of the
art of popular story-telling. It dates from
the later years of the Eastern Han Dynasty
(second century BC) and is now in the
collection of the Chinese History
Museum. Similar wood or pottery figu¬
rines have been found in other parts of
Sichuan and Jiangsu Provinces.
Wang Shaotang (1889-1968), descendant
ofa family ofstory-tellers from Yangzhou,
began his own story-telling career at the
age of 12 and perfected his art during his
60 years on the stage. His original inter¬
pretation of a story called The Water Mar¬
gin was so popular that people began to
call his oral version The Water Margin of
the Wang Family. In 1959, an 800,000-
word book was published, entitled Wu
Song, which was based on Wang's inter¬
pretations of popular stories.
and the whole house seems to be shaking
and collapsing. When Wu Song gets into the
wine-shop and finds nobody inside, he lets
out a mighty roar, making all the empty pots
and urns inside drone in resonance."
Another writer also described a Liu per¬
formance: "From time to time, his voice
changes from thunderous booming to melo¬
dious murmuring; his expression changes
from tears to laughter. The characteristics,
voices, behaviour and gestures of each role
are so vividly rendered that his listeners feel
as if they are in the story with the characters
while the story-teller has silently faded away
from the scene."
Liu became widely renowned as a master
story-teller and for about three years became
deeply involved in the political and military
affairs of the Southern Ming régime. Around
the sixteenth year of Emperor Chongzhen's
reign (1 643), he was invited by the then-pow¬
erful military governor of Wuchang and Mar¬
quis of Ningnan, Zuo Liangyu, to perform at
his army headquarters. Subsequently he
began to serve as a close aide to the gov¬
ernor, helping to mastermind plans and draft
documents.
These were palmy days for Liu. However,
after Zuo Liangyu's causes were lost and the
Southern Ming Dynasty collapsed, he had
to return to the street and to story-telling. He
wrote and circulated an epic about Zuo, at
a time when "current affairs" story-telling
seemed most likely to appeal to audiences.
His story was not just an account of what
he had seen and heard; it was mainly an
expression of deep grief over the fall of a
nation and the break-up of countless families.
In the first year of Emperor Kangxi's reign
in the Qing Dynasty, Liu Jingting, then a grey-
haired man in his late seventies, came to
Beijing by way of Tianjin. But his old age
apparently did not dim his lustrous talents;
he could still vividly portray the valour of war¬
riors as well as tender feelings between
young lovers.
Sadly, Liu led a miserable and dreary life
In old age. It is said that he died of frost¬
bite and starvation, but even today nobody
knows exactly when and where this master's
story ended.
YAO ZHENREN, of China, is editor and head
of the art department of Literary and Art Study,
a magazine published by the Chinese Art Study
Institute.
28

»7
I
¿i.
1
imi
tülE
ÉïV mm.
1 1
\ 1Mflr ' ní/a
Ufe- ^_ / / /f í \
tk
The on/y known portrait of the famous
17th-century story-teller Liu Jingting. It
is the work of Wang Su, an artist of the
late Qing Dynasty. This radiant portrayal
of Liu, with his flowing grey hair, square
headdress and fan, and costume typical
of the period, almost exactly matches the
description written by Zhang Dai, a
scholar of the late Ming Dynasty, in an
account entitled Recalling the Dream at
the Tao'an Hut.
* *-'
cy
S
o
©
29
