The Federal Republic of Germany
Integration or repatriation?
by Gisela Apitzsch and Norbert Dittmar
THERE are about 4.5 million for¬
eigners living in the Federal Repub¬
lic of Germany and West Berlin of
whom Turkish nationals form by far the
largest group, accounting for 35 per cent
of the total.
As a result of the current economic
situation the legal requirements affecting
foreigners are being applied in a more
restrictive manner and this has made their
situation more precarious and has also
made it more difficult for them to plan for
the future. Only a fraction of these
migrants enjoy legal security. Although 2.9
million foreigners have been living in the
Federal Republic for more than eight years
and thus fulfil the most important condition
for obtaining a residence permit which
would protect them against expulsion in
the case of long-term unemployment or
dependence on social security, only 3.2 per
cent are in possession of this precious doc¬
ument.
In order to clarify the present situation
of foreign communities from countries out¬
side the European Economic Community
(EEC) in general, and of the Turkish com¬
munity in particular, it is necessary to
retrace the policies concerning foreigners
adopted over the past few years.
Uncertainty about the future seems
etched Into the features of these foreign
workers in the port of Hamburg. Facing
them was the prospect of massive redun¬
dancies in the city's shipyards.
The ban on recruitment of foreign work¬
ers decreed in 1973 and a regulation of
the Bundesanstaltfür Arbeit (Federal Insti¬
tute of Labour), which came into force a
year later, concerning the granting of work
permits for foreigners stipulated that an
interruption of residence in the Federal
Republic could result in loss of employ¬
ment. To avoid this problem many migrant
workers tried to arrange for their families
to join them in the Federal Republic.
As a result, during the years of economic
crisis, the age and employment compo¬
sition of the foreign population underwent
a fundamental change. Whereas the num¬
ber of foreign workers living in the Federal
Republic in 1978 tallied almost exactly with
that in 1973, the number of foreigners in
employment had actually gone down by
18

28 per cent. The number of children under
the age of sixteen increased by about 25
per cent, passing the million mark in 1976.
In the following years the authorities
pursued a dual strategy: on the one hand
encouraging return to the country of ori¬
gin, and on the other promoting the inte¬
gration of migrants. As late as 1978 a prac¬
tice was introduced whereby foreigners
who fulfilled certain conditions, such as
having satisfactory living quarters and a
basic knowledge of the German language,
could be granted an unlimited residence
permit after five years of uninterrupted
stay and the right of residence after eight
years. In 1979 the general ban on employ¬
ment for spouses who had joined their
partners at a later date was lifted in favour
of a four-year waiting period. Since then
adolescents joining their parents later have
usually been granted full access to the
labour market after a maximum two-year
waiting period with the proviso that pref¬
erence should be given to nationals
of the Federal Republic and the EEC
countries.
These improvements in the situation of
the children of immigrant workers were
supported on the grounds that their dis¬
advantaged position at school and at work
might prove a threat to social stability and
that the members of this "second gen¬
eration" could be considered as a potential
source of skilled labour to meet shortages
expected in the late 1980s.
1979 was a key year for integration strat¬
egies, and a number of in-school and out-
Turklsh women photographed at the Fed¬
eral Republic of Germany's recruitment
office in Istanbul, before the 1973 ban on
the recruitment of foreign workers. Those
who spoke German, had a relative work¬
ing in the Federal Republic or had already
worked abroad stood a better chance of
getting a job.
of-school training programmes were ini¬
tiated. Perhaps the most important of these
was a programme of Measures for Job-
preparation and Social Integration of
Young Foreigners (MBSE). The MBSE is
a full-time, ten-month programme whose
primary aim is to provide adolescents with
an integrated course combining practical
job preparation, language teaching and
general education. The vast majority of
participants (95 per cent) are Turkish
youths. The initial intention was that the
programme should be offered nationwide
and be extended to offer 20,000 places.
However, a continual reduction has taken
place since the programme was established
in 1980, and in the year 1983/84 only 6,500
adolescents were able to benefit from it.
By the early 1980s, the tendency to
regard integration policy as a means of
limiting the number of foreigners grew
stronger. Opportunities for families to be
reunited have been drastically curtailed.
Since December 1981 only children below
the age of 16 (as compared with 18 pre¬
viously) have been allowed to join their
parents, and a stricter interpretation of the
regulations concerning living quarters fre¬
quently makes it impossible for married
couples or for parents and their under-age
children to live together.
One of the basic aims of policies con¬
cerning foreigners under the Government's
Urgent Measures Programme was the facil¬
itation of repatriation. Foreigners from
non-EEC countries who left the Federal
Republic or West Berlin between October
1983 and September 1984 could ask for
50 per cent of their pension contributions
to be paid back to them and the usual two-
year waiting period was waived. According
to information from the Regional Insur¬
ance Offices one-fifth of all Turkish nation¬
als living in the Federal Republic took
advantage of this offer even though they
lost the employers' contributions and had
to forgo all claims on a pension as well
as the possibility of returning to the Federal
Republic in the future.
Although the Federal Government has
an interest in reducing the number of for¬
eigners living in the Republic, the economy
is still dependent to a certain extent on
foreign workers. They account for 28 per
cent of the work force in foundries, 25 per
cent in the mining industry, 20 per cent
in the textile industry, 16 per cent in the
car industry and 14 per cent in the building
sector. In these areas, as well as in the
artificial fibre industry, in cellulose pro¬
duction and in heating and refrigeration
19

it would be well nigh impossible
to replace foreign workers by unemployed
nationals of the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many, since their qualification patterns are
unsuitable.
About half the unemployed nationals of
the Federal Republic are qualified in areas
in which hardly any foreign workers are
employed. Moreover, for health or age
reasons, two-thirds of them could not take
over jobs with a high level of stress, and
one-fifth of them are looking only for part-
time employment. Thus, even though
many nationals of the Federal Republic
consider foreigners to be a contributory
factor to the unemployment situation,
ousting them from the labour market
would in fact do little to improve it.
More than 95 per cent of foreign workers
are employed in production (one in six
production workers is a foreigner). In West
Berlin, where the proportion of foreigners
(12 per cent) is higher than anywhere else,
one in every four workers comes from one
of the former countries of recruitment, half
of them being from Turkey. Foreigners
also form a high proportion of the work
force in towns in the industrial area of the
Ruhr and in Frankfurt-am-Main, Offen¬
bach, Stuttgart, Mannheim and Munich.
Foreign workers have been much more
badly hit by unemployment than nationals
of the Federal Republic. Whereas at the
end of 1983 there was a total of 9.5 per
cent of registered unemployed, the rate
amongst foreign workers was nearer 14.9
per cent. Turkish workers were the most
severely affected with an official unem¬
ployment rate of 18 per cent.
- Foreign families are worried not only
about uncertain employment prospects,
and consequently about the right of res¬
idence, but also about the uncertain future
facing their children.
Foreign children form a significant part
(845,000) of the school populationone
in every twelve pupils is of foreign origin.
In towns with a high foreign population
some 25 to 30 per cent of the pupils in
primary and secondary schools are of for¬
eign origin, with Turkish pupils forming
the largest single group (53 per cent).
The opportunities for social progress for
these children are minimal 20 to 25 per
cent play truant, some 50 per cent of for¬
eign school-leavers fail to obtain a certif¬
icate of education, and only very few of
them continue their education beyond sec¬
ondary level.
Since responsibility for education lies
with the regions and not with the Federal
Government, there is no homogeneous
educational policy in the Federal Republic
of Germany. Each local authority puts its
own interpretation on the guidelines estab¬
lished by the Conference of Education
Ministers. Yet despite certain local dif¬
ferences to which this leads, a number of
common factors can be observed: the
native language and culture of foreign chil¬
dren is hardly taken into account in regular
courses and native language teaching rarely
figures on the time-table where classes are
mixed; there is a shortage of teachers who
are adequately prepared for teaching
involving foreign children; there is a grow¬
ing tendency to segregate foreign pupils.
A "mixed" class of Turkish and German
children at a school in Duisburg, in the
Federal Republic of Germany
Even though the educational aspirations
of foreign pupils have been shown to be
no lower than those of nationals of the
Federal Republic, 75 per cent of foreign
adolescents receive no education beyond
secondary level and no specialized job
training. Inadequate knowledge of the
German language goes a long way to
explaining this situation.
However, in order to enable at least the
following generations to acquire an eman¬
cipated status in their host country and to
ensure the peaceful co-existence of mem¬
bers of differing ethnic and cultural back-
gounds, more must be done than simply
to lament migrants' lack of readiness to
go through a process of acculturation.
What is needed and this also in the inter¬
est of the majority of the population is
a turning away from the employment of
foreign workers on the basis of short-term
economic interests and a re-thinking of
employment policies by those to whom
political responsibility is entrusted.
GISELA APITZSCH, of the Federal Republic
of Germany, is a research assistant at the Free
University of Berlin. She has been engaged in
a research programme on "Strategies in Inter-
cultural Communication", and is the author of
several articles on the problems of language
acquisition and communication among
migrants.
NORBERT DITTMAR, of the Federal Republic
of Germany, is professor of sociolinguistics and
second-language learning at the Free University
of Berlin. He is the author of several publi¬
cations, including Sociolinguistics, A Survey of
Theory and Methods (1976). He is currently
engaged in a project on cross-linguistic second-
language acquisition by Italian, Polish and Tur¬
kish migrants.
20
