The psychology of migrant
workers
by Ana Vásquez
WHAT is there in common
between Joâo, who had to leave
his wife and children back in
Portugal in 1978, and Mohamed, the North
African shepherd, who only arrived in
Europe a year ago? Does Mirjana,
Mohamed's twenty-five-year-old wife,
have the same feelings and make the same
These two recent (1985) works by the
French sculptor Arman stand in the fore¬
court of Paris's Saint-Lazare station and
mightbe seen as a monument to rail trans¬
port, but they could also be interpreted
as a comment on time-dominated big-city
life (left, L'Heuçe de Tous, "Everyone's
Time") and on the improbability ofescape
(right, Consigne à Vie, "Left Luggage
Office for Life").
plans as Maria, who is going on forty? Over
and above the raw data of the figures illus¬
trating the trends and scale of the migration
problem, what we are interested in finding
out is how human beings cope with their
transplantation and what upsets it causes.
In the first place it should be remem¬
bered that migrants' attitudes, experiences
and plans vary from one period to another.
For example, they will not have the same
outlook if they are only just preparing to
leave their own country as they will if they
have already spent five or ten years as
"foreigners" in another country. Hence,'
in psychological terms, a distinction can
be made between several key stages in the
actual experience of migration.
This is the standpoint from which the
analysis attempted here has been carried
out. It is exclusively concerned with men
and women emigrating to Europe. A host
of studies have shown that people emi¬
grating to the Americas leave their country
of origin for good, whereas those who go
to work in the leading industrial countries
of Europe visualize their stay as tempo¬
rary. The migrant's psychological situation
differs significantly in these two cases.
It is more harrowing for people to leave
their own country when their self-confi¬
dence has been undermined by the expe¬
riences they have gone through. Migrants
leave because they earn a poor living or
because they are unemployed. They are
accordingly placed in a position where they
are dominated, with all the demeaning con¬
sequences that implies. Leaving entails a
twofold effort. The first is psychological;
it entails an effort to overcome loss of self-
esteem and to look forward to the prospect
30

of vocational training or a fob abroad. The
second is material and entails finding ways
and means of making the journey.
Strongly influenced by the images con¬
veyed by the media and by the stories told
by people who have returned home, which
always tend to exaggerate the "wonders"
of foreign countries, migrants have an
idealized picture of the country to which
they are so keen to go. The "credibility
gap" between the country they dream of
and the real-life situation they will find
there causes their first traumatic experi¬
ence. This is compounded not only by their
living and working conditions but by their
meagre knowledge of the language of the
host country, behaviour patterns in large
industrial cities, administrative formalities
which they do not understand, and even
mechanical appliances which they look
upon as traps. Above all, however, a trau¬
matic situation is created by the discrim¬
inatory, if not overtly racist, attitudes to
which they are exposed. As they feel ill
at ease and anonymous in an unfamiliar
situation which they are unable to control,
the view they have of themselves is utterly
confused.
Admitting to the resulting disappoint¬
ment and sense of disarray would be tan¬
tamount to acknowledging failure, but that
is something the migrants cannot afford,
since their only strength lies in their desire
Members of a Turkish migrant family
browse before an array of TV screens in
a store In the Fed. Rep. of Germany.
to make a success of the plans they have
made. In many instances, therefore, they
develop defence mechanisms in order to
cope more easily with the difficulties con¬
fronting them.
Consequently, they withdraw into them¬
selves and into their community, since they
only feel at ease among their own people
and tend to idealize their country of origin.
This is reflected in the importance they
attach to certain features that seem to have
no bearing on the success or failure of their
emigration plans, such as loyalty to their
own folk or appreciation of traditional fam¬
ily cooking, or in their readiness to forget
the unemployment and poverty in their
country of origin.
Migrants also tend to become more frag¬
ile and to display somatization patterns;
when they are ill, they suffer from a range
of symptoms which are difficult to identify
and which may even give rise to certain
forms of mental pathology.
After a period of time which varies from
case to case, the migrants manage to over¬
come these initial stumbling blocks and
embark on a process of transculturation.
From the psychological standpoint, the
main feature of this stage lies in the con¬
flicts they experience whenever they have
to compare their habitual practices, norms
and values, in other words their original
culture, with those of the host country.
In their country of origin, the extended
family and the community deal with many
aspects of everyday life which are handled
by institutions in the industrial countries.
For example, the social security, family
allowance and day nursery systems require
information that has to be provided on
special sheets or forms within prescribed
deadlines. This is something foreigners find
hard to grasp.
Moreover, urban time and space are also
regulated. Even in the places where they
live, migrants are subject to constraints
which they regard as infringements of their
personal freedom. They cannot perform
certain religious or family ceremonies such
as the "sacrifice of the sheep", because
the smell and the noise will inconvenience
their neighbours; nor are they allowed to
make a noise after certain hours.
The organization of time in industrial
cities is particularly demanding: everyday
life is compartmentalized, with set times
for meals and leisure pursuits, and people
have to hurry from place to place. The
comments made by migrants point to the
difficulties they face in adapting to the new
31

as when they claim "The people
here rush around all the time, it's exhaust¬
ing", or "At the factory your every move
is watched and you're even timed when
you go to the toilet", or else "I am under
pressure because you always have to be
in a hurry. By the evening, I'm so ex¬
hausted that I feel as if I've had all the
stuffing knocked out of me".
Social relationships, especially between
men and women, are baffling and cause
tensions. Gestures that are meant to be
polite are taken for impudence, and signs
of friendship are misinterpreted. After
some bewilderment which prompts them
to withdraw into their shells, migrants
reach the point where they try to com¬
prehend these behaviour patterns and to
compare them with their own. Then they
slowly embark on a process of change
which eventually comes to affect significant
aspects of their personality , and cultural
identity.
After a while, when they meet newly
arrived compatriots, they realize how they
have changed when, for example, they feel
embarrassed by the newcomers' "noisy
behaviour in the street" or by "the way
they look at women". But even though
the migrants adopt some of the norms of
the host country; they are still "out on a
limb" as it were, torn between their deep-
rooted and unconscious attachment to their
At this spectacular naturalization cere¬
mony at the Hollywood Bowl in 1954,
7,600 people from 68 countries became
citizens of the United States.
native culture, which they do not wish to
betray, and their newly acquired outlook,
which they feel to be more suited to the
continued fulfilment of their plans.
"I should like to open a grocery store
in the village, but I haven't managed to
save enough money yet. I've been in Paris
for fifteen years.... What worries me most
is that my son wants to stay here, my
daughter would like to go on with her stud¬
ies... and even my wife is not all that keen
on going back." These comments by a
migrant worker reflect a situation that has
become fairly widespread and arises when,
after a period of time, the members of the
family start to question the dream of going
back home.
The teenagers speak and write badly the
language of the country of origin , and have
few real ties with the mythical land which
is meant to be "home", especially since
their friends are "over here". Women
sometimes without even realizing it find
that they enjoy greater social independ¬
ence. They often dread going back to a
situation in which they would again be
compelled to live under the thumb of the
family.
Such uncertainty can be distressing, for
emigrants feel that they have endured all
kinds of ordeals because they were going
to succeed and return home. Hence, giving
up the idea of returning is tantamount to
making a far-reaching appraisal of the very
meaning of their lives.
They have to ask themselves whether
they are going to stay and become inte¬
grated. However, in some European coun¬
tries the adoption of such a course is to
some extent a gamble, given the extent
of discriminatory and even aggressive reac¬
tions towards immigrant workers and their
children.
What choice lies open to them? The
uncertainties and the issues we have
described form the backdrop to the lives
of migrants and place them and their chil¬
dren in a kind of nomansland which often
prevents them from making and carrying
out long-term plans.
ANA VASQUEZ, French psychologist of
Chilean origin, is currently engaged in research
with the Centre National de la Recherche Scien¬
tifique, in France. She formerly taught edu¬
cational psychology at the University of Chile
and is the author ofsome 30 studies and articles
on the psychological problems ofdisplaced per¬
sons and the processes of transculturation.
32
