The JeanValjean
of writers
THERE are writers without whom the
history of literature is inconceivable.
There are those without whom his¬
tory itself is inconceivable. Victor Hugo is
among their number.
In his novel Les Misérables, there is a
significant episode in which Jean Valjean, a
former convict known for his prodigious
strength, who has carefully concealed his
criminal past and made a new life for him¬
self as a "respectable, honest man", witnes¬
ses an accident in which a man is trapped
under a cart. With a superhuman effort
Jean Valjean lifts the cart to release the
victim knowing that in doing so he will
betray his true identity. If my memory from
childhood days, when I read the novel,
serves me correctly, it is at this moment that
by Yevgeny Yevtushenko
Police Inspector Javert, who for years has
been on the track of Valjean, knows that at
last he has found his man.
There are similarities between Victor
Hugo himself and the hero of his novel. On
more than one occasion he had the oppor¬
tunity of resting comfortably on his laurels,
and at such times he skilfully concealed his
rebellious nature under a veneer of conven¬
tional literary respectability. But the sight
of his fellow-men being oppressed, rather
than arousing in him the instinct of self-
preservation, evoked a noble attitude of
protectiveness towards them. As stubborn
an inquisitor as Javert, Hugo was a scrupu¬
lous, methodical, high-principled profes¬
sional who did not shrink from plunging
into the underworld of Paris in pursuit of an

objective. Yet, at the same time, he was
always on the side of the hunted, not the
hunter. His was a dual, indeed a many-sided
nature, capable of encompassing the char¬
acters not only of an Esmeralda or a Quasi¬
modo, but of all the curious, teeming fauna
ofNotre-Dame de Paris. Like Jean Valjean,
Hugo could not prevent himself from strug¬
gling to "lift the cart" even if this might
mean being crushed under its weight him¬
self.
In so doing he assumed the burden of
history.
Hugo has been accused of being melod¬
ramatic and grandiloquent, and there is
some truth in this accusation. But we can
forgive every excess in return for scenes
such as that in which the street-urchin Gav¬
roche falls asleep in the belly of a statue of
an elephant. For Hugo was Gavroche as
well, drowsing from time to time in the
impressive but hollow belly of his fame,
knowing, like Gavroche, that his refuge was
being nibbled away by mice, yet ready at the
first sound of gunfire to leap down and take
his place at the barricades. To the end of his
days Hugo remained something of a Gav¬
roche, a Paris street-urchin.
When, in his poem Le Procès à la Révolu¬
tion (The Revolution on Trial), taken from
his book L'Année Terrible, he wrote, "O
juges, vous jugez les crimes de l'aurore
(Judges, you charge the very dawn with
crimes), he was defending not only the Re¬
volution but also himself. And in another
poem, Ecrit sur un exemplaire de la Divina
Commedia (Words written on a copy of The
Divine Comedy), he wrote:
Puis jefus un lion rêvant dans les déserts
Parlant à la nuit sombre avec sa voix
grondante.
Maintenant, je suis homme, et je
m'appelle Dante.
(Then I was a lion dreaming in the
wilderness
To the dark night growling my com¬
plaint.
Now I am a man, and my name
is Dante.)
Hugo was, indeed, the Dante of the French
Revolution. Not only did the poet in him
evoke the romance of the barricades, he
also waded, like Jean Valjean, through the
bloody, underground sewers of this historic
event.
Yes, like the hard-bitten convict who
bought a doll for the child Cosette, Hugo
was "sentimental". Yet those who con¬
demn others for their sentimentality are
usually themselves incomplete beings who
lack this great human quality and secretly
envy those who possess it. A man who is not
sentimental is not truly a man. It is better to
be quick to tears than to be incapable of
them.
The British essayist and historian Tho¬
mas Carlyle is said to have remarked that,
like Samson , great men carry on their shoul¬
ders the prison doors behind which people
. wish to enclose them. Hugo was such a man.
The snobbish, condescending verdict that
dismisses him as no more than a writer for
teenagers is, in fact, a compliment. For it is
during the years of adolescence that our
psychology takes shape and, it must be
admitted, that we absorb all that is best in 27
A ¿*

The Kidnapping of Coserte, an Illustration
by Emile-Antoine Bayard (1837-1891) for
an edition of Les Misérables. Faithful to
the promise he has made to her dying
mother, Jean Valjean traces Coserte and
takes her away from the Thénardier family
with which she had been boarded out and
where she had been persecuted by both
parents and children.
us. Later we form a shell and lose our
receptivity.
There are many outstanding writers who
do not awaken in me a sense of my own
humanity. This is by no means the case with
Hugo. In his poetic masterpiece Oblako v
shtanakh (A Cloud in trousers), Vladimir
Mayakovsky speaks of "the chimeras that
haunt Notre-Dame de Paris". At the time
when he wrote the poem, Mayakovsky had
not visited Paris and his vision of the cathe¬
dral was clearly drawn from Victor Hugo.
Great art always fathers offspring, and
Mayakovsky was one of Hugo's "children".
He, too, was a child of the revolution; he,
too, like Jean Valjean, felt the invisible
shackles of duty around his ankles.
In the last photographs taken of him,
Dostoyevsky's face bears the sombre ex¬
pression of a convict, a Jean Valjean. It is
no coincidence that the titles of Hugo's Les
Misérables and of Dostoyevsky's The In¬
sulted and Injured are so similar.
Someone once called the literary profes¬
sion a "sweet servitude". This may seem a
strange description, but it is an accurate
one. Hugo bore that servitude with honour.
YEVGENY A. YEVTUSHENKO, of the
Soviet Union, is an internationally known
poet and writer. His works include Razved-
chiki Gryadushchego (Outriders of the Fu¬
ture, 1952), Bratskaya GES (Bratsk Power
Station, 1965), and Kazansky Universitet
(Kazan University, 1970). He also directed
28 the film Detsky Sad (The Kindergarten).
