A message
to world youth
IN 1979 the General Assembly of the United Nations designated 1985
as International Youth Year.
The main purpose of this Year, dedicated to participation, develop¬
ment and peace, is to inform world opinion about the situation, needs and
aspirations of young people. It also aims to strengthen co-operation in the
search for solutions to questions concerning young people and in the laun¬
ching of joint youth action programmes, and to associate young people in
studying and solving problems of social, economic and cultural develop¬
ment and of world peace.
In 1983 Unesco's General Conference decided that the Organization
should play as full a part as possible in the celebration of International
Youth Year. Young people form a considerable and ever-increasing propor¬
tion of the world population. Inevitably they are concerned by all the
problems arising from the present and future of humanity. None of the
major questions of our time can be answered without the active involvement
of young people.
Young people constitute 45 per cent of the world's population today and
their numbers are continuing to grow. There were 730 million fifteen- to
twenty-four-year-olds in 1975, and this figure should rise to 1,180 million
by the year 2000 an increase of 60 per cent in twenty-five years.
If the role and impact of youth in national life vary from country to coun¬
try, young people in many cases share a number of common preoccupa¬
tions, fears and aspirations.
In many countries young people are particularly exposed to such
problems as unemployment, hunger, delinquency, drugs, violence and
racism, all of which are rooted in the tensions and uncertainties of today.
But young people are also endowed with imagination, enthusiasm, and
courage, qualities which may contribute to the changes which prove
necessary; they stand at the meeting-point of continuity and change, tradi¬
tion and progress.
The different groups of young people must have the opportunity to par¬
ticipate fully in all aspects of the economic, political, educational, cultural,
and scientific life of the society in which they live, and to exercise freely in
it the qualities which are theirs.
Unesco, which places action in favour of young people at the heart of its
programmes, notably those concerned with education and training, is
making its contribution to the achievement of this goal.
Unesco's efforts in this field are focussed on three main objectives:
stimulating research on young people in the different world regions; pro¬
moting the diffusion and exchange of information about and for young
people; contributing to the formulation of policies and the application of
programmes which will encourage the participation of young people in all
aspects of the life of societies.
The Unesco Courier will publish in the coming months a number devoted
to young people in which these themes will be covered and an opportunity
will be given to many young people to tell us in their own words about their
successes of today and their hopes for tomorrow.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
