The art of concealing art
Saving the treasures of the British Museum
by Harold Plenderleith
TO anyone who has not been caught
up in a major war or who may not
have been exposed to the possibility
of annihilation by aerial bombardment, the
problem of protecting inanimate objects
may seem straightforward, namely to bury
them in the ground or, at least, in a deep
cellar or "pill box", sheltered from the
possibility of a direct hit or exposure to
blast. This, however, is less than a half
truth, as the British Museum was to find out
when, in the course of the First World War
(1914-1918), London was suddenly
threatened by imminent bombing as part of
a Zeppelin attack.
A disused section of the Underground
Railway was hurriedly commissioned and
converted as a "safe deposit" for valuables
(with little foresight!) on the grounds that it
lay deep in the earth and at the same time
was conveniently near to the museum.
What the conditions were like there, no
one now knows, but when at the conclusion
of hostilities the collections came back to
the museum, they were found to be in such
a dreadful condition that the facilities
available for salvage and repair proved to
be inadequate. The solution was to establish
a chemical laboratory to investigate causes
of deterioration, to devise and supervise the
application of "safe" procedures for
restoration, and to publish the results. Such
was the origin of the British Museum
Research Laboratory.
The main cause of deterioration was not
far to seek. It arose from the sudden and
prolonged exposure of objects in a hostile
environment. Varying atmospheric condi¬
tions, temperatures and relative humid-
dities, inadequate or excessive ventilation
and polluted air had taken their toll, having
reacted differently upon objects according
to their structure and the materials of which
they were composed.
On 7 September 1940, Hermann Goering
launched the bombers of the Luftwaffe
against London in an attempt to break
British morale and will to resist by
destroying the capital. In the first two
nights some 850 civilians were killed and
2,350 wounded. The assault on London
and other cities, "the Blitz" as it was
popularly called, continued almost
without a break until May 1941. The bom¬
bing of London continued intermittently
throughout the war, intensifying during
1944 with the launching of the V1 and V2
pilotless planes and rockets. Right, Lon¬
don in 1941 during an air raid.
10
In some cases the objects contained the
seeds of their own destruction. Insect
parasites had attacked wood, paper, textiles
and leather, and affected books and
ethnographical material. Examples of stain¬
ed paper, drawings and watercolours were
common. Growths of micro-organisms oc¬
curred on leather and buckram bookbind¬
ings, as these provided a generous measure
of the required nutrients and proliferation
was encouraged by darkness and damp;
metallic corrosion was promoted by the
presence of water-soluble salts, especially
noticeable in the objects from the deserts of
Egypt and Mesopotamia.
In parallel with diagnosis and the earliest
experimental treatment of objects, the
laboratory instigated tests to study the
growths of micro-organisms under varying
conditions with a view to defining, if possi¬
ble, what might be regarded as a safe
museum climate.
As twenty years elapsed between the end
of the First World War and the outbreak of
the Second World War there was ample
time to devise measures for overcoming
hostile environments.
One thing was clear. There could be no
doubt that some of the most valuable of the
National Collections were in the heart of
London and located too near to target areas
for safety. A policy of decentralization was
therefore an urgent necessity and this in¬
volved endless visits of inspection to
localities far from the metropolis. In time a
short list of acceptable reception areas was
drawn up. The packing and loading in
museum basements presaged the long trek
by road or rail from the museum to these
destinations not by any means an easy
task in those days of severe transport
congestion.
The National Library of Wales in
Aberystwyth was chosen as the main
repository for the most valuable books and
manuscripts and it functioned admirably.
The National Gallery in London had its
own special requirements. Paintings are
essentially two-dimensional and easily
damaged by excessive man-handling and
are best hung on dry internal walls or
mobile hanging metal screens where they
can be easily inspected. Furniture, on the
other hand, requires floor room, duck-
boarding and racking, and smaller objects
of all kinds have to be accommodated in
dust-free boxes of easy access as this is
essential both for study and in the interests
of systematic inspection.
With the completion of the scheme there
was no doubt that much had been done to
avert a major disaster to the national
treasures, assuming that the museums in
London, and indeed anywhere else, would
never be regarded as targets for the
bombers. There came a sinister moment,
however, in 1940, when Coventry
Cathedral was destroyed by enemy bombs.
This heralded the advent of the so-called
Baedeker Raids, the name suggesting that
there might now be no limit to artistic
losses.
From then onwards, thoughts turned to
the desirability of establishing one great
central depository. But where? All the likely
sites had by this time been snapped up, and
it took a Mr. Winston Churchill (as he then
was) to solve our problem by offering an
underground limestone quarry in Wiltshire,
of enormous size, ideal in every respect save
that it had been at one time earmarked as a
mushroom farm and the relative humidity
inside was of the order of 98 per cent!
Following detailed discussion among the
various authorities concerned and tests by
engineers, who discovered a means of
waterproofing the walls, floors and ceil¬
ings, the quarry was gratefully accepted. A

plant-room was installed with equipment to
air-condition the repository and auxiliary
generators were at hand in case of
breakdown. The result was that within a
year we had the ideal underground museum
store with a constant atmosphere at 15°C
and 60 per cent relative humidity, well lit
from end to end and occupying a volume of
no less than 5,600 cubic metres. This was
enough to accommodate the greater part of
the already decentralized collections of the
British Museum as well as furniture, carpets
and other objects from the Victoria and
Albert Museum in London and smaller col¬
lections of the first importance from many
sources.
In the meantime the National Gallery had
been evacuated and its paintings
transported in adapted railway containers
from Trafalgar Square to a great slate
quarry near Blaenau Festiniog in Wales.
The Manod quarry, as it was called, had
high vaulted ceilings and a series of shelters
could be constructed within, each protected
by a powerful metal over-structure lest
there should be any falling debris from the
vaulted roof above. All was well, however,
save perhaps for the prevalent light-grey
slate dust. This was found to be neutral and
non-scratching and easily removed,
although at first it gave cause for misgiv¬
ings. These shelters provided 1,600 cubic
metres of storage volume.
The interesting discovery was made at
Manod that while the average temperature
was fairly constant, heating the air to 15°
reduced the relative humidity to 58 per cent,
a close approximation to optimum condi¬
tions, and it was thus much cheaper to
maintain conditioned air there than in the
British Museum Quarry in Wiltshire where
the freeze-drying process applied. They
even established a restorer's studio in the
Manod quarry where paintings could be
maintained in excellent condition: but less
and less treatment was found to be
necessary with the passage of time. The
behaviour of both painted panels and can¬
vases in this respect indicated the great ad¬
vantage of using conditioned air, at least, in
the preservation of paintings, and, as the
officer-in-charge at Manod commented,
"the pictures behaved admirably and gave
far less trouble in cracking and blistering
than had ever been the case at Trafalgar
Square." One good result has been the con¬
ditioning of the air in the National Gallery
Valuable objects from the British Museum
being stored in the safety of a London
underground railway tunnel.
buildings in Trafalgar Square in London,
now completed. It seems that despite the
complicated processes to which they had
been subjected there was no single case of
serious damage to paintings to be reported,
and the collection was eventually reinstated
in London in its entirety six and a quarter
years after the first load had left for Wales.
A similar survival claim can be made for
the collections from the British Museum
and the Victoria and Albert Museum.
As things happened, it was the British
Museum main buildings in London that
caused the greatest concern as these still
contained a large quantity of books.
Manifestly, it had been found impossible to
move some ten million books to safety: the
task was to extract from the shelves the
most valuable, and that task was for¬
midable enough. There remained, in fact,
almost the entire contents of the four steel
quadrant book-stacks and one of these suf¬
fered a direct hit from what seemed to be a
large oil bomb. This gave rise to a major fire
which could only be contained by profes¬
sional fire brigades, and many of these
came to our assistance from far and near.
As each quadrant was designed to con¬
tain a quarter of a million books, the loss
was great but, since then it has been largely
made up with the help of generous gifts
from all over the world and, not least, from
our former enemies.
If there is any important lesson to be
learnt, even from this short account of a
tragic period in museum history, it is to em¬
phasize the supreme importance of prepar¬
ing plans, in detail, well in advance of a
threatened catastrophe.
HAROLD PLENDERLEITH, of the U.K., was
the first director of the International Centre for
Conservation (now ICCROM), created in
Rome by Unesco, of which he is now director
Emeritus. He was in charge of the British
Museum Research Laboratory from its incep¬
tion and is a founder member and past presi¬
dent of the International Institute for Conser¬
vation of Historic and Artistic Works. He is the
author of many books and studies on prob¬
lems of conservation including The Conserva¬
tion of Antiquities and Works of Art (1956,
2nd edition with A. Werner 1971).
THE BLUE AND WHITE SHIELD
"Many wonders of the world have been
lost in war and strife; He who protects
and preserves has the happiest lot. "
Goethe
The path of devastation left in the wake
of World War II emphasized to an un¬
precedented degree the need for an in¬
ternational code for the safeguard of
works of art during wartime. A major step
forward in this direction was made on 14
May 1954 when the international Con¬
vention on the Protection of Cultural Pro¬
perty in the Event of Armed Conflict was
signed at a conference convened by
Unesco at the Hague (Netherlands). The
Convention, the emblem of which is a
blue and white shield, set up a kind of
cultural "Red Cross" under which works
of art, monuments and historic buildings
would be accorded the kind of protection
given to hospitals, ambulances and
medical personnel in time of war. As of
22 January 1985, 73 States had
deposited instruments of ratification or
accession to the Convention.
On the night of 17/18 September 1940,
the British Museum had a fortunate
escape when it was struck by a large
(1,000 kilos) high-explosive bomb which
failed to explode. The bomb penetrated
four concrete floors and ended up in the
basement. Had it exploded it would have
completely wrecked the building. Below,
the Museum's Prints and Drawings sec¬
tion after the passage of the unexploded
bomb.
11
