The new science of bibliology
BIBLIOLOGY is a comparatively new
science, dating from around the end
of the eighteenth or the beginning of
the nineteenth century. The word first ap¬
peared in France in 1812 in Traité de
Bibliologie a "Treatise on Bibliology" by
G. Peignot which he described as "a univer¬
sal repertory containing critical and
descriptive notes (...) on a large number of
works (...) and covering every aspect of
bibliography".
Bibliology as a science is arousing con¬
siderable interest today as two recent sym¬
posia bear witness. In 1981, a joint
French/Bulgarian symposium on
Bibliology, Documentation and Informa¬
tion Sciences, organized by the Central
Library of the Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences in collaboration with the French
by Anne-Marie Bianchi
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifi¬
que, was held in Sofia; and, in February
1984, a congress on Research and the
Teaching ofBibliology and Trades Relating
to the Book was held at the Georges Pom¬
pidou Centre, Paris.
The Paris symposium drew up a balance
sheet of the state of the art and proposed the
broad outlines of a policy for research on
the book, for the teaching of bibliology and
for the development of the teaching of pro¬
fessions connected with the written word,
excluding newspapers and periodicals, for
the period 1980 to 1990.
Bibliology can be said to be an extension
of bibliography. Whereas bibliography is
concerned primarily with the classification
of books and articles, bibliology aims to ex¬
amine and explain the various manifesta
tions of the book and the written word in
general with regard to its production and
distribution as well as to its reading.
Bibliology is the study of the written
word as a tool of communication within
society, with all its sociological, cultural
and economic implications. It therefore
encompasses all the disciplines that are
concerned with the world of books
bibliography, library management, book
collecting, and the psychology and psycho-
sociology of reading.
ANNE-MARIE BIANCHI, of Italy, is director
of the University of Grenoble bibliographical
documentation and research -centre, which
she founded in 1963.
33
