A region
in search of itself by Paolo Apolito
Above, a Syrian boystands beside a stone
statue adorning an underground mauso¬
leum atPalmyra. Theyare dividedbysome
twenty centuries but joined by the kind of
family resemblance that survives in the
history ofnations swayed by invasion and
conquest.
APART from questions of strategy, is
it possible today to form a mental
image of the Mediterranean as a
whole, to talk in terms of a "Mediterranean
entity"? It is reasonable to suppose that
Mediterranean countries on the road to
"development" or "revolution" do not re¬
gard the "Mediterranean" as a region com¬
mon to them all, but look instead to the
centre of modernization or revolution. In
other words, they look beyond the
Mediterranean, to the West, to socialism,
or to pan-Islamism.
What, then, is left of the Mediterranean
besides the geographical expression? In my
opinion, not much more than a Utopian idea
(but is this utopia attainable?). In recent
years, intellectual minorities in some coun
tries have begun or begun again to talk
about the Mediterranean. In most countries
of the region, this has coincided more or less
with the crisis of the "diffusionist" model of
development according to which develop¬
ment and modernization spread constantly
and gradually, like an oil stain, slowly per¬
meating from a centre the industrialized
regions towards outer regions which are
in contact with the centre, or rather are
influenced by it. Sooner or later, indus¬
trialization gives rise to social and cultural
changes which bring the outer regions to the
same level of civilization as the centre a
level which of course is measured according
to criteria set by the centre and thus brings
the state of underdevelopment to an end.
Italy's policy towards her southern regions,
23

for instance, has been based on this model
for decades.
But at the end of the 1960s and especially
in the 1970s it became clear that this model
took no account of what was actually hap¬
pening in the developing countries, and it
was replaced by new interpretative models,
none of which, however, was entirely satis¬
factory.
If the diffusionist model had worked, the
Mediterranean as the focal point of influ¬
ence from a number of economic centres,
would have lost its distinctive historical and
geographical features to an all-embracing
industrial society.
Things turned out differently, however,
and the result is that the Mediterranean, in
the view of the intellectual minorities men¬
tioned above, is coming back into its own as
an area with a common history. The outer
regions are slowly abandoning the attempt
to identify themselves with centres which
they have long vainly sought to emulate,
and are looking elsewhere for their identity.
In the Mediterranean, development can
obviously follow a variety of directions. It is
coming to be recognized that this is a region
of common or contrasting civilizations. (It
must be emphasized that this is as yet a
minority view).
Then the idea emerged that the
Mediterranean is a kind of hinge between
North and South, between the industrial¬
ized world and the developing world. Both
"... the complex of mentalities and social
behaviour which may be described as
'tradition' and which has been a formi¬
dable obstacle to all attempts at econo¬
metric planning." Above, view of Pocltel],
a Yugoslav town near the Adriatic coast.
worlds are represented in the
Mediterranean; economically, culturally,
historically and geographically they are
very closely related. These relationships
could form the basis of a new kind of bal¬
ance between the continents of Europe and
Africa and, to some extent, Asia. This is not
an original idea, but it is the only one so far
that seems defensible and even reasonable.
From the standpoint of a purely "econo¬
mist" logic of development, political con¬
cepts such as "cultural region", "identity"
and "historical depth" are considered to be
irrelevant, if not positively dangerous.
According to this view, only economic and
statistical parameters should be taken into
account.
But sociology based on indices and para¬
meters has proved to be short of ideas. As
the economic historian Paul Bairoch has
written, "the early 1970s saw the beginning
of a period of disillusionment with develop¬
ment policies in both the 'capitalist' and
'socialist' camps (to use over-simplified
24

"Some aspects of Mediterranean society
have exertedsuch pressure that they have
restricted the effectiveness of this (Wes¬
tern) development model. " Above, the vil¬
lage of Alberobello In southern Italy.
terms). There have been many failures and
semi-failures in both camps, but few succes¬
ses". National bourgeoisies (which Franz
Fanon had already denounced as incom¬
petent) and bureaucratic and military castes
had all employed similar procedures,
theoretically dependent on scientific mod¬
els whether capitalist or socialist which
were based on situations that already be¬
longed to the past and attached absolute
value to economic factors. Cultural prob¬
lems were seen as the province of moraliz¬
ing anthropologists, and the aim of both
camps was the rapid achievement of mas¬
sive industrialization.
Implicit in the development model that
almost everyone accepted is a backward-
looking, ethnocentric philosophy of history
which is more effective when it is repre¬
sented as economic pragmatism. The Ita¬
lian historian Rosario Romeo has given a
good description of this kind of philosophy,
which "proceeds from the tacit assumption
that there is a kind of normal or exemplary
historical process that coincides with the
history of Western countries, which
attained national unity early on and then
went on to construct the edifice of political
and economic freedoms which have led to
the apogee of the modern industrial demo¬
cracies. But the histories of other countries
are seen as tainted, to a greater or lesser
degree, by distortions and backwardness,
and are to be assessed in terms of the extent
to which they deviate from the history of the
countries of the North Atlantic region".
(Europa e Mediterráneo: una prospettiva
storiografica, 1984)
The norm changes from time to time:
besides referring to the history of the West¬
ern countries, it requires that statistical
figures and tables should take precedence
over all other considerations, that the
centre of the economic system should be
copied whatever the cost, and that the
strategical motive force of development
should be an altar on which the rest of the
economy must be sacrificed. Apart from the
ethnocentric and culturally imperialistic na¬
ture of this philosophy, the result is that
reality is reduced to a few categories and
thereby impoverished.
However, certain aspects of Mediterra¬
nean societies have exerted such pressure
that they have restricted the effectiveness of
this development model. A good example
of this is the complex of mentalities and
social behaviour which may be described as
"tradition" and which has been been a for¬
midable obstacle to all attempts at eco
nometric planning. More precisely, the
tradition-modernity dialectic has developed
in a different way from what was expected.
Whereas it was thought that tradition would
slowly disappear as a result of the powerful
stimulus of modernity, it was perceived that
in fact "tradition and modernity... relate to
each other through a variety of comprom¬
ises and mutual adjustments, with the out¬
come varying greatly from one place to
another". (Peter Berger, Pyramids of
Sacrifice)
For decades, the racist variety of positiv¬
ist anthropology took the lead in maintain¬
ing that the nordic "races" were the best
equipped for success in the modern, indus¬
trialized world, relegating the Latin coun¬
tries and the Mediterranean region to limbo
because of their supposed inability to over¬
come their anachronistic backwardness.
Between the wars, historiographie para¬
digms were propagated which, while they
put an end to racist anthropology, provided
new arguments to emphasize the superior¬
ity of certain countries over others.
In the words of Rosario Romeo, "The
new 'scientific' history of the quantitative
and 'serial' historians, like the old anthro¬
pology of the positivists, may conceal an
ideology whose aim is to assert the super¬
iority, conferred by destiny, of the Atlantic
countries over the others... The same pur¬
pose is served by a political historiography
on which ideology exerts such a strong
25

"... tradition and modernity relate to each
other through a variety of compromises
andmutualadjustments, with the outcome
varying greatly from one place to
another." Below, street scene at Korçë in
Albania.
pressure that in some cases it leads to the
violation of the elementary rules of conduct
of the historian's profession. In this way,
countries not on the Atlantic are relegated
to the margins of the world's historical de¬
velopment and, by implication, destined to
remain there. The common consciousness,
in which so many of the racist prejudices
that have been overcome at the cultural
level come to life again, combines with the
kind of historiography described above to
suggest that the attitudes required by mod¬
ern mass industrial society are largely in the
possession of the Atlantic nations, and that
consequently other nations should aim to
acquire, as far as possible, the attitudes,
values and techniques of the latter". The
various development sociologies continue
to affirm, by implication, the impossibility
of reaching the level of the models of de¬
veloped societies that they themselves pre¬
sent as examples.
One of the most decisive contributions to
the downfall of this philosophy was the
comical recent "discovery" that the heights
of development, which it was natural for the
Western, Atlantic countries to scale, had at
last been reached by Japan, a country which
belongs to neither of these categories.
If the Japanese success story teaches us
anything, it is that the last word has never
been spoken in history, that models, norms,
parameters and ideologies are never defini¬
tive in the world of men, a world that is less
closed today than in the past if ever it was
so.
The Mediterranean, of course, is not
Japan. In the Mediterranean region severe
economic stagnation is accompanied by a
dangerous potential for political explo¬
sions. The coming together of civilizations
seems increasingly Utopian in a deeply di¬
vided region. The difficulties are enormous
in a world where it seems that the strong are
growing stronger and the weak weaker. But
this is precisely why the solution is not to be
found in economics only; it must be sought
in a broader context, reaching to the very
heart of civilizations, and reviving pride in
their identity.
The problem faced by the Mediterranean
is how to vanquish its inferiority complexes
so that it may again become a centre of
attraction, continuing its history, which is
far from ended, and reviving the Utopian
dream. We must start talking earnestly
about the Mediterranean again, and lay the
first stone in the construction of a boundless
future.
PAOLO APOLITO, of Italy, is professor of cultu¬
ral anthropology at the faculty of letters of Saler¬
no University. His major research field is that of
cultural change in traditional societies, and he
has also studied the evolution ofmagic, festivals
and ritual. Among his published works are
Lettere al Mago ("Letters to the Magus", 1981)
and II Popólo del Totem ("The Totem People",
1985).
26
