Early days
bu Julien Huxley
In this extract from the second volume of his auto-
biography, Memories II (1973), published here by kind
permission of George Allen and Unwin Ltd., the late Sir
Julian Huxley evokes the exciting period from his
appointment in March 1946 as successor to Sir Alfred
Zimmern as Executive Secretary of the Preparatory
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Commission to his
early days in Paris as the first Director-General of
Unesco.
Text 1 copyright. Reproduction prohibited
TEE offices of the Commission
were in Carlos Place. The first
- M. time 1 entered its portais in my
new capacity, 1 was very nervous, as if 1
were both a Headmaster and a boy enter-
ing school for the first time. However,
Mrs Brunauer (l) knew the ropes and 1
soon found my feet in this strange job.
Once 1 had settled down, 1 feint that 1
should try to clarify my own ideas about
the ro ! e ofthe Organization. So 1 took a
fortnight off and went once more to stay
with Ronald Lockley (with whom 1 had
made the film The Private Life of the
Cannent on an island off the Pem-
brokeshire coast) ; he was now occupying
a farm on Dinas Head, also in Pem-
brokeshire. There, in the intervals of
walks and talks, exploring the promon-
tory and basking with my host in shel-
tered nooks overlooking the bird-
haunted sandstone cliffs, 1 wrote a sixty-
page pamphlet entitled Unesco, Its Pur-
pose and Its Philosophe (see page 28).
In this, besides stressing its obvious
duties in promoting cultural exchanges
and giving help to the educational sys-
tems of backward (or, as we say now,
"underdeveloped") (2) countries, 1 main-
tained that it could not rely on religious
doctrine-there was strife between diffe-
rent religions and sects-or on any of the
conf) icting académie Systems of philo-
sophy. Unesco, 1 wrote, must work in the
context of what 1 called Scientific Huma-
nism, based on the established facts of
biological adaptation and advance,
(1) Mrs. Brunauer, of the USA, had been assistant to
the previous Executive Secretary, Sir Alfred Zimmern.
(2) With changing times and circumstances these coun-
tries are now referred to as the"developing"countries.
brought about by means of Darwinian
selection, continued into the human
sphere by psycho-social pressures, and
leading to some kind of advance, even
progress, with increased human control
and conservation of the environment and
of natural forces. So far as Unesco was
concerned, the process should be guided
by humanistic ideals of mutual aid, the
spread of scientific ideas, and by cultural
interchange.
This was presented to the Commission
and was ordered to be printed as an offi-
cipal document. But one Saturday, when 1
was about to go to Oxford to look for
possible staff, 1 heard that Sir Ernest
Barker, the historian, who had been
appointed to the Commission in view of
his work on the Committee of the
League's Institute of Intellectual Co-
operation (see page 6), was to be present
at the meeting which was to discuss Un-
esco's role in philosophy. He and 1 had
previously quarrelled over my attitude to
established religion when 1 was Professor
of Zoology at King's College, London, of
which he was Principal, and 1 scented
trouble, rightly suspecting that he would
attack my pamphlet.
As an ardent churchman, he argued
forcibly against Unesco's adopting what
he called an atheist attitude disguised as
humanism, and got the members to agree
to state, when circulating my document,
that it expressed merely my personal
views, not those of the officiai Commis-
sion.
Looking back, 1 think he was right.
Though Unesco has in fact pursued
humanistic aims, it would have been un-
fortunate to lay down any doctrine as a
basis for its work. Further, a purely
. humanist tone would have antagonized
the wodd's major religious groups (...)
Meanwhile, there was the difficult
business of recruiting staff : this 1 had to
begin, whether or not 1 was eventually
appointed Director-General. Some 1
appointed directly, like Joseph
Needham, the eminent Cambridge
biochemist, who was also interested in
Chinese culture and in the history of sci-
ence ; and John Bowers, who was recom-
mended to me by a war-time colleague
for his first-hand experience of an under-
developed country's basic needs.
One virtually appointed himself-with
excellent results. 1 had to find someone to
take charge of the Libraries section.
Desmond Bernât had recommended an
English woman librarian, but 1 was not
sure of her competence, and asked Ed-
ward Carter, my Hampstead neighbour
(and Librarian of the Royal Institute of
British Architects), for advice. His re-
sponse was simple-"Why not me ?" (..,)
Edward was excellent, especially in
getting Unesco to set up good modern
libraries in underdeveloped countries.
Later, 1 was to see the one in southern
Nigeria, and be delighted to find that it
was not only housed in a fine building (as
was to be expected from a man interested
in architecture), but also well-stocked,
and with many readers in its spacious
rooms.
Others were recommended to me by
friends. Thus Sir Kenneth Clark recom-
mended the young Australian, Peter Bel-
lew, as head of the Fine Arts section (.,,)
Still others were wished on me by their
Governments. While the Preparatory
Commission was still in London, Julien
Cain the charming and learned head of
24

the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris,
came over with a young man called Jean
Thomas, who was officially recom-
mended by the French authorities as my
Deputy. It was understood that, in return
for waiving the right to nominate the top
man, France should be the home of the
Organization and one of its two deputy
Director-Generals should be a French-
man. Thomas and 1 got on excellently
throughout my term of office, while
Julien Cain became an influential mem-
ber of the Executive Board. He and his
gifted wife (she had once acted as Paul
Valéry's secretary) became close friends
of Juliette (3) and myself,
Professor Pierre Auger was also re-
commended by the French, for a post in
the Science Department. He was an ex-
cellent physicist, balancing the bio-
logically competent Needham, and even-
tually succeeded him as Head of the
Department.
Alva, sociologist wife of the celebrated
Swedish economist Gunnar Myrdal, took
charge of the Social Sciences Division,
and 1 myself asked John Grierson, the
pioneer of documentary films, to look
after the Cinema section of the Arts De-
partment. Flora McGlade (always known
as Mac) was already in my office, having
been Zimmern's assistant on the Prepara-
tory Commission. She stayed as one of
my secretaries aH through my time at
Unesco. 1 also kept Friedl Rothschild,
who had worked for me at P. E. P., (4) but
soon had to add others to my personal
staff : Mrs Paulette Matthews, as a second
The British sclentlst, p/ !//osopherand edu-
cator Julien Huxley (18871975) wus Un-
esco's flrst Dlrector-General (1946-1948).
secretary to deal with the flood of officiai
correspondence ; and Claude Berkeley,
cousin of the composer of the same name,
as my personal assistant, constantly
called on to deal with complaints, and to
prepare for the visits and travels 1 had to
undertake.
Alfred Métraux took charge of most of
the work in Anthropology and Sociology,
while Guy, his younger brother, after
working in various sections, later became
the very efficient Secretary of the Com-
mission dealing with Unesco's History of
Mankind,
Emilio Arenales, nominated by Guate-
mala, was very useful in dealing with
Latin American countries in general ;
with Manolo Jiménez for Mexican affairs
and for dealing with internai procedure.
Then there was Dr Irina Zhukova,
Russian by birth, who worked in the Phy-
siological section of the Science Depart-
ment, with special responsibility for
liaison with WHO, the World Health
Organization (.,,)
So 1 could run on. 1 secured another
Frenchman, Michel Montagnier, to deal
with arrangements for Conferences,
which he did with great efficiency ; a
Swiss, André de Blonay, to cope with the
affairs of national delegates, especially
during General Conferences ; while a
Chinese Professor, Dr Kuo, was made
Head of the Division of Education.
Later in the year an American, Walter
Laves, was nominated by the USA to
deal with questions of internat adminis-
tration. These, unfortunately, often 
25
(3) Joliette Huxley, née Baillot, Julian Huxley's wife.
('1) Political and économie Planning, a Bhtish indepen-
dent cross-party opinion group.
i: J

 caused trouble-there were jealousies
between different Divisions-and once, 1
remember, 1 had to intervene between
one Division and the staff responsible for
preparing Unesco's budget. The Division
Head thought that the Budget men
should corne to his office, while they
expected that everyone, even Assistant
Director-Generals, should corne to them
at their request. 1 eut the Gordian knot by
inviting both parties to rneet in my own
office.
But much more taxing than such
squabbles was establishing the pro-
gramme for the coming year. This,
together with an estimate of its cost, had
to be laid before the next General Con-
ference, which could in theory (and
sometimes did in practice) eut out some
item, refuse to grant necessary finance,
or even press for new items to be
included.
This task was made more difficult by an
anomaly in the relations between the Ex-
ecutive Board and the Director-General.
Under the original constitution, the
Board was given a hand in framing the
programme, in consultation, of course,
with the Director-General. This led to so
many disagreements, and such waste of
time, that in 1948 the arrangement was
altered : from then on, the Director-
General had sole responsibility for pre-
paring the Programme, while the Board
could only offer comment or criticism.
This is merely one example of the way
in which everything had to be impro-
vised, and arrangements made to patch
up the differences of interest between
various Divisions, the Director-General
and the Board. These were perhaps in-
evitable in a new organization-indeed a
new kind of organization, for its scope
was very much wider than that of the
original League's Institute of Intellectual
Co-operation. At any rate, they gave me
plenty of headaches during my term of
office (..,)
Headaches, yes, but also interest, and
indeed excitement-the excitement of
being in charge of a vast new internation-
al experiment, a stimulus which kept me
going through the gruelling two and a half
years of my tenure of office.
Once 1 started work at Unesco's head-
quarters in Paris, 1 had to deal with the
Executive Board over aU major prob-
temps. In 1947, the Board numbered only
eighteen members. These were chosen
from the delegates of member-states, al-
ways one from the UK, France and the
USA (and a Soviet delegate when the
USSR joined Unesco), one from the
country where the next conference was to
be held, and representatives of other
countries to make up its number.
In 1947, it included some very disting-
uished men-John Maud (latter Lord
Redcliffe-Maud) from Britain, Archibald
MacLeish from the USA, Pierre Auger
(soon to became head of Unesco's Natu-
rat Sciences Division), Dr. Photiades
from Greece, Professor Paulo E. de Ber-
rêdo Carneiro (later Chairman of the In-
ternational Commission for a History of
the Scientific and Cultural Development
of Mankind), Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrish-
nan, statesman and philosopher from
India, Ronald Walker from Australia,
etc. (..,)
The original principle was that Board
members should be men distinguished in
education, the sciences and the arts, from
different regions, but voting as indi-
viduals, not as representing their own
country. It was a fine idea, but it did not
work out. Board members were almost
always distinguished, but they usually
voted in favour of measures approved by
their Governments. So eventually they
became representatives of their own
countries, as tell as specialists in some
field of Unesco's work.
Another difficulty arose over Unesco's
budget. The Board was originally em-
powered to propose a budget sufficient to
carry out the programme submitted to
each Gênera ! Conférence. This led to
many squabbles, members of the Board
too often making proposais that would
benefit mainly their own country or re-
gion. They had the duty of consulting the
Director-General, but frequently the
consultation was mere) y formai.
This system was quite iDogicat, and
during my term of office the Director-
General became responsible both for the
details of the programme, and for pre-
senting the budget estimate. Of course,
he had to consult the Board and take into
account any comments or objections they
might make, but the unworkable system
of divided authority was scrapped (.,,)
It had been laid down by the London
Conference (S) that Unesco could seek
help in technical matters from non-
governmental International Agencies
concerned with subjects within Unesco's
purview ; and, if necessary, aid in the
creation of new ones. It was on
Needham's advice that ICSU, the Inter-
national Council of Scientific Unions, be-
came the first of such bodies to be
attached to Unesco. We provided it with
rooms in Unesco's headquarters in Paris,
and salaries for its staff : previously, the
Cambridge professor who was its secret-
ary-and sole executive-had to dictate
aH its correspondence in his College
rooms !
The ICSU gave Unesco much valuable
advice--on the peaceful uses of atomic
energy, on regional centres for scientific
co-operation and exchange of know-
ledge, on the calling of international sci-
entific congresses, and on liaison with
other International Agencies concerned
with science, such as FAO for agricul-
tural science and applied ecology, and
WHO for medicine, physiology and so-
cial we) !-being.
(5) United Nations Conference for the Establishment
of an Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization,
London. 1 to 16 November, 1945.
Soon after, 1 had a surprise visit from a
wealthy American art-lover, a trustee of
the Buffalo Art Gallery, and agreed to
recommend that an International Com-
mission on Museums should be attached
to the cultural section of Unesco. Thanks
to its advice (and that of other interna-
tional bodies concerned with the arts),
Unesco has done valuable work since
then, both in giving financial aid to gal-
leries and museums, and also in pub-
lishing and distributing excellent repro-
ductions of little-known paintings, sculp-
tures and architectural achievements
from various countries, especially repro-
ductions which could be used in schoo) s.
In the hot summer of 1947, we also set
up an International Theatre Institute (for
drama, opera, films and ballet) at the
insistence of Jack Priestley, an American
called Kuntz and John Grierson. The
committee responsible for this comprised
many well-known names in dramatic
circles, such as the French producer and
actor Jean-Louis Barrault, Sir Tyrone
Guthrie from England, and Lillian Hell-
man from the USA (...)
The Commission moved to Paris in late
November, 1946, and we and other dele-
gates had our offices in the former Hotel
Majestic, where the Peace Conference
was held after the First World War. Dur-
ing the Second World War, it was com-
mandeered by the Germans, and my offi-
cipal room had the"distinction"of having
been the office of the notorious Nazi
Commandant of Paris. Thus my occupan-
cy visibly symbolized the transition from
war and racialism to peace and cultural
co-operation.
The full Executive Board was now in
daily session, discussing not only Un-
esco's terms of reference and its immedi-
ate activities, but also whom to nominate
as Director-General.
Archibald MacLeish, the distinguished
American writer and poet, who was also
Librarian of Congress, had written a bril-
liant preamble to Unesco's Constitution,
in which he had stressed Unesco's role in
promoting Peace-"Peace through Edu-
cation, Peace through Science, Peace
through Culture, Peace everywhere in
the hearts of men"-a starry-eyed hope
rather than a guide to practica ! action.
The USA wanted him as Director-
General, but he declined, saying he could
not spare the time from his real work in
literature. The British delegate, Sir John
Maud, put forward my name, and there
were one or two other candidates (...)
Eventually John Maud came to tell me
that 1 had been duly elected, but for two
years only, in place of the constitutional
five (..,)
Looking back today, 1 am grateful for
having been appointed, but also grateful
that 1 did not have to serve for five years :
it would have been too geat a strain (in-
deed one later Director-General found
the job too much for him and had to
resign in the middle of his term). N
26
