Above, the Sistlne Hall of the Vatican Library In Rome.



The riches of the Vatican library
THE Vatican Library was officially founded by Pope Sixtus
IV on 15 June 1475 by the Bull Ad decorem militantis Ec-
clesiae. By that date however the papal library already had
a long history. It contained collections of ancient manuscripts
assembled by earlier Popes following a tradition which began with
Damasus in the fourth century and was continued by Boniface VIII
(during whose pontificate the first catalogue was produced) and by
its first real promoter, the humanist Pope Nicolas V who opened the
Library to the public and left at his death over 1,500 manuscripts.
In 1481 the Library possessed 3,500 manuscripts acquired by
papal envoys throughout Europe. The contents of other works were
recorded for posterity by a throng of copyists. The humanist preoc¬
cupations of this period, which were welcomed and encouraged by
the Popes, not only included the holy scriptures, patrological and
theological works, but also extended to secular texts: philosophy,
literature (Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Syriac, Copt and Arabic), law,
history, art, architecture and music. The Vatican Library still
perpetuates this humanist tradition today.
The heritage constituted by successive Popes has been enriched
by the donation, acquisition or deposit of entire libraries. Some of
the most important libraries in Europe thus came into the hands of
the Vatican Library. Notable among them are the Palatine Library
of Heidelberg (1622), the libraries of the dukes of Urbino (1657),
Colour page opposite
Detail from a rare 15th-century Ethiopian
Illuminated manuscript on parchment
preserved In the Bibliothèque Nationale,
Paris, shows David playing the lyre. One
of the world's oldest libraries, the
Bibliothèque Nationale was originally the
Royal Library. First opened to the public
In 1692, It became State property during
the Revolution and was renamed the
Bibliothèque Nationale In 1795.
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
of Queen Christina (1690), and of many patrician families, as well
as holdings from churches and other Vatican institutions such as the
basilica of St. Peter and the Sistine Chapel. The Library also houses
a store of archives whose riches are still unexplored.
The holdings of the Vatican Library today total some 70,000
manuscripts, 8,000 early printed books (incunabula), and a million
printed works. They also include major collections of prints (over
100,000), maps, handwritten documents (some 200,000), tens of
thousands of archive documents, coins and medals, and even art
objects of all kinds housed in the oldest part of the Vatican
museums, which is under the supervision of the Library.
The Vatican Library has. a restoration laboratory and a
photographic laboratory. It publishes works and distributes them
through its own bookshop. The Library is managed by a prefect
(the scientific and administrative director) under the supervision of
the Cardinal librarian.
The Library is dedicated exclusively to research and access to it
is limited to scholars and specialists. Each day it is used by an
average of 120 readers, sometimes as many as 180.
Alfonso Marie Stickler
pro-Librarian
of the Holy See
Left, ornamental letter from a 15th-
century "Life of Alexander the Great"
produced at Naples for king Alfonso of
Aragon and now preserved In the Vatican
Library. The profile of the young Alex¬
ander Is depicted In the medallion.
(Another masterpiece In the Library Is
shown on colour page 20).
Photo © BICE/Vatican Library, Rome
23
