Latín American Woman
'An elusive shadow'
by Luisa Futoransky
As it by common accord, the best con¬
temporary women singers of Latin
America seem united In their desire to
rediscover their national folklore and to
spread it, even to other countries and
othercontinents, to revivepopularpoetry
and to create new songs of protest or of
hope that are rooted In social reality.
Their goal Is to achieve a renewal of the
popular music of the continent, to bear
witness to their times and to speak out for
the peoples of their countries. On these
pages we present seven such singers
together with brief excerpts from some of
their best-known songs. Unless the
singer wrote the song herself, the
author's name Is given In brackets after
the title.
Violeta Parra (Chile)
The poor of this world
Know not where to turn their eyes,
So In the undying hope
Of finding there the prize
In this world stolen from them
By their peers, they upward look
to the skies
("Porque los pobres no tienen")
LATIN America is no more a
homogeneous entity than are Africa
or Europe. The very term Latin
America brings to mind a jigsaw puzzle
whose pieces are extremely difficult to fit
together, so varied are the countries of
which it is composed both as regards their
past history and their present situation. Of
course, we still share a common language;
and I say "still" advisedly, since it is no
secret that Castilian Spanish, so long a
powerful bond between the countries of
Latin America, is undergoing an ac¬
celerating process of differentiation, similar
to that which separated the Romance
languages from Latin. Language apart, the
countries that comprise Latin America have
developed along quite distinct lines as a
result of the diversity of their geography
and climate, of the origins of their popula¬
tions and of their political and cultural
backgrounds.
10

To attempt to give a global picture of
Latin American women over the past
decade would, therefore, be simply to add
to the sum total of generalizations and pre¬
judices. To launch into a disquisition on
that abstraction the Latin American woman
within the limits of this article would be
more than pretentious, it would be impossi¬
ble. I shall therefore confine myself to of¬
fering a few indications and pointers to
those interested in pursuing this subject.
Try as I would, I could not conjure up a
face, hands, legs, or indeed any kind of por¬
trait of that disjointed doll that bears the
label a Latin American woman. In the win¬
dows of the old-fashioned village shops, at
carnival time, everything was much easier.
There you could see Madame Pompadour,
with powdered wig, a beauty-spot on either
cheek and hooped skirt; or Manola (the
typical Spanish dancer), her red and white
spotted cotton skirt with its ruffles, fitting
tightly over her hips, high-heeled dancing
shoes and with carnations in her hair; or a
grand lady ofthe past, her mantilla, held in
place by a comb, allowing a glimpse of kiss-
curls plastered to her temples, wearing a
crinoline and holding an ever open fanthe
sunshade was an optional extra.
All too quickly, life dissipated the fine
certainties of carnival day, when a person
could be easily identified by his or her ap¬
parel. Falling back thus on my childhood
memories in search of the elusive outline of
this Latin American woman, I found only a
fugitive shadow, a graceful masquerade.
Who is this peasant girl from Oruro, in
Bolivia, whose photograph could be slipped
into a newspaper story on Tibet or Burma,
without anyone being the wiser? What have
a Colombian housewife, a young Mexican
bank employee, an Argentine textile worker
and a Brazilian sweet-vendor in common?
Were we to follow up these questions we
should find ourselves enmeshed in an inex¬
tricable web of theories, ranging from an¬
thropological studies of the first wave of
migration across the Behring Straits to
psycho-sociological analyses of the after
effects of slavery upon the Black popula¬
tions of the Atlantic coast.
I shall, therefore, attempt the more
modest task of examining the context
within which women have found themselves
during the more recent past. As everyone
knows, the last twenty years have been a
difficult period in the history of the conti¬
nent, marked by the rise of authoritarian
and repressive regimes. The growth or the
restriction of democracy has been closely
related to the mobilization of women, since
this is clearly bound up with the evolution
of the labour market and the family
structure.
It should be noted that, as I write these
lines, at least three of these Latin American
countries have returned to the democratic
fold, which gives one hope that, freed from
other constraints, women will be able to
devote their energies to specific problems
relating to the feminine situation.
The women of the Plaza de Mayo, in
Buenos Aires, for example, come to mind.
Soledad Bravo (Venezuela)
Little green bird, how can you say
I should not weep?
Little green bird, how can I stem
the tears that pour?
Alas, alas, I have but one life to live,
Little green bird, and they would
cast me through death's door (...)
Alas, alas, they have removed
my chains,
Little green bird, only to clamp them
on once more.
("Pajarlllo verde"
Venezuelan folksong)
Amparo Ochoa (Mexico)
The curse remains.
We offer the stranger
Our faith, our culture,
Our bread, our money.
Today we go on exchanging
Gold for glass beads
And giving up our treasure
For shining mirrors (...)
We open our homes to them
And we call them our friends,
Yet when an Indian arrives
Worn out by the long journey from
the mountains,
We spurn him and look upon him
As a foreigner in his own country.
("La maldición de Malinche"
Gabino Palomares - Mexico)
11

Mercedes Sosa (Argentina)
Each time they wiped me out
I would disappear,
Beside my own funeral bier
Alone I cried,
And in my handkerchief a knot I tied, '
But then it went out of my head
That there were other times I had
been dead
And I went on my way singing...
("Como la cigarra"
Maria Elena Walsh Argentina)
Sara González (Cuba)
How can you say
That a woman is incapable
Of building, thinking
And fighting for life,
When all history proclaims
another truth (...)
("Que dice usted")
Maria Bethanla (Brazil)
I want to give out an unearthly scream
For this is one way to make myself
heard (...)
Father, remove this cup from me,
Father, remove this cup from me,
Father, remove this cup from me,
This cup of blood-red wine (...)
("Caliz"
Chico Buarque Brazil)
12

Tania Libertad (Peru)
His tread was light,
His heart was of steel,
And the messenger declared:
The people have awakened (...)
("Pescador de luz"
V. Merino - Peru)
When the armed forces seized power in
March 1976, Argentina sank into economic
crisis accompanied by unemployment and
repression. In 1977, a few mothers of los
desaparecidos (victims of the military who
had "disappeared") began to meet regular¬
ly at the Plaza de Mayo, a square near the
presidential palace, demanding a hearing
which the authorities systematically refus¬
ed. Gradually as many as two thousand
women joined this group. Various forms of
pressure were applied in an attempt to
reduce them to silence, to which they replied
by organizing "lightning" demonstrations
and meetings in churches. In 1979, they
formed an association which was joined by
women from all over the country and which
launched an inquiry into the fate of the hun¬
dreds of children reported missing, children
who had been taken away with their parents
or had been born while their mothers were
in prison.
The association never concerned itself
with the kind of problems normally tackled
by feminist movements but relied instead on
the traditionally accepted role of women to
sanction their message and their protest.
They were united by something that
transcended social differences; this was a
matter of life and death everything else
could wait. Faced with a common social
catastrophe, solidarity and a united front
was the only answer.
It would, therefore, be difficult, a
mistake even, to try to establish a parallel
between the demands of Latin American
women and those of European feminists.
Brazil is another special case. From 1972,
modelling themselves on the mothers'
associations that had been formed in the
suburbs of Säo Paulo, Brazilian housewives
began to take action to improve their living
conditions, in particular to obtain the cre¬
ation of crèches, dispensaries and schools as
well as an improvement in public transport
facilities. Housewives' Associations and
Mothers' Clubs were formed, with the
backing of some sections of the Catholic
Church. From 1978 on, they concentrated
on fighting against the rise in the cost of
living.
Without doubt this movement will go
down in history as one of the most popular
ever, since between May and August 1978 it
succeeded in collecting one million three
hundred thousand signatures to a petition
which it presented to the government. The
demands which aroused such unanimous
support included a price freeze on all essen¬
tial foodstuffs, a wage increase propor¬
tionately higher than the rise in the cost of
living and the immediate payment of a flat
rate bonus to all workers.
Special mention should be made of those
women who, during the last decade, impell¬
ed by the flood tides of history, have ven¬
tured far beyond the domestic front and the
arena of the work place to participate in
liberation movements. To cite but one ex¬
ample, women made up thirty per cent of
the people's army that fought against the
Somoza dictatorship in Nicaragua.
It could be objected that all these are ex¬
treme cases. Yet even if this were true, the
difference as compared with events in other
Latin American countries is only one of
degree. Nevertheless, it must be recognized
that, for many Latin American feminist
groups, the United Nations Decade for
Women acted as a powerful catalyst,
stimulating them to action and laying the
foundations for their success.
This is why the Latin American reality is
so disconcertingit is extremely difficult to
find a common denominator among its
multiple facets.
On the one hand we find women engaged
in the national struggle; on the other we
have women in certain countries still
demanding the most elementary rights in
such matters as divorce, abortion or protec¬
tion from sexual abuse. At all events,
whatever may be our political persuasion,
the situation could well be summed up in
these words of Nora Astorga, lawyer,
mother of five and Nicaragua's deputy
minister of foreign affairs: "I have never
been a feminist in the sense that this is
understood in the industrialized countries.
Our struggle is quite different. Where op¬
pression and exploitation exist we believe
that to liberate women we must first liberate
society".
Respecting the principle that the best way
to illustrate a point of view is to maintain a
judicious balance between the general and
the particular, I return to my personal
memories of infancy and youth which may
provide a yardstick by which to measure
what has been accomplished. The changes
that have occurred in the field of education,
for example, where twenty years ago mixed
schooling would have been unthinkable,
have been enormous. Young girls at school
were taught handicrafts, to play the piano
and to read music; as young adolescents
they progressed to sewing and dressmaking
and, finally, to training as teachers or as
bookkeepers. Entry to university was much
more restricted and some professors could
still be heard to say that "they did not want
students in skirts attending their courses".
Sex education to prepare us for marriage
or maternity was limited to discreet ex¬
amination of an illustration of a cross-
section of the human body in an anatomy
.textbook.
The arduous and often disheartening
struggle to achieve an identity still con¬
tinues. For some women, for example, it
may be the symbolic rejection of the little
word "of", as used in such phrases as "the
pupil of", "the wife of", "the mother
of", "the widow of", "the mistress of",
"the companion of"...
The battle is being fought on many fronts
and the objectives vary widely according to
the specific situation being faced. Each
small step forward is achieved at the cost of
great effort and sacrifice, but also brings
and will continue to bring with it moments
of joy and fulfilment.
Of one thing I am sure; if in twenty years
time I have the good fortune to be able to
reflect once again on what has been achiev¬
ed by that elusive figure the Latin American
woman, I am sure that the balance will be
very positive. In the meantime, for my part,
I am ready to give of my best to ensure that
it will be so.
LUISA FUTORANSKY/s an Argentine writer
whose works include the novel Cuentos Chi¬
nos (Chinese Tales) and several books of poe¬
try, notably Babel Babel, Lo Regado por lo Se¬
co, El Diván de la Puerta Derecha and Partir
Digo.
13
