Managing the world's
most precious resource
HALF the population of the world, two billion men, women
and children, lack easy access to an adequate supply of
pure fresh water. In rural areas, where the situation is
worst, only 29 per cent have access to safe water supplies and still
fewer, 13 per cent, have sanitary facilities.
Yet drinkable water is necessary for life, for health, and for a
productive existence. Without it, both men and animals sicken and
die. Fresh water provides sustenance to plants, constitutes the
habitat of fish and aquatic organisms, and makes agriculture possi¬
ble. It is essential to some industries, and in rivers and lakes pro¬
vides a medium of transportation and recreation. The United Na¬
tions has recognized the importance of fresh water and adequate
sanitary facilities by naming the period 1981 to 1990 the Interna¬
tional Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade.
Water, or the lack of it, poses enormous problems for mankind.
The World Health Organization estimates that 80 per cent of the ill¬
ness affecting the population of the earth is directly associated with
water: for example, 400 million people suffer from gastro-enteritis,
200 million from schistosomiasis, and 30 million from onchocer¬
cosis, and water is involved in the transmission of all of these. It has
been estimated that if potable water were universally available, the
world rate of infant mortality could be halved, primarily through
eradication of diarrhoeal diseases.
Those who are ill cannot work productively. But even among
those who are well, tremendous amounts of time and energy are
wasted by the daily search for water. Women and children in
developing countries often walk long distances each day in search
of water. In one village in Burkina Faso, (formerly Upper Volta),
17

for example, mothers walk for two to three hours a day to find a
river or stagnant pond, and return to their homes carrying 25
kilograms of the precious stuff in earthenware jars on their heads.
In some slums surrounding the cities of developing countries,
families often have to spend 10 per cent of their income to buy
water for household needs.
While water scarcity is the major problem for the majority of the
world's people, a surplus is sometimes just as serious, as when
floods occur, wiping out whole villages and sweeping food crops
away. Tidal waves can be a deadly hazard for villagers living along
coastlines.
Many such problems are the result of man's incomplete
understanding of the ways in which water moves through and over
the earth, is replenished by rainfall and disappears into the at¬
mosphere through evaporation. Others are caused by man's
mismanagement of the earth's waters, or by a lack of management.
Pollution and over-enrichment (eutrophication) of inland water
bodies are major problems worldwide, while coastal areas of the
oceans, where two-thirds of the world's population live, have suf¬
fered extreme pressures as these people have advanced
economically.
Man's fresh water problems are likely to increase in future unless
steps are taken to improve the management of this valuable
resource throughout the globe. Unesco's programmes are designed
to contribute to this more rational management. The objectives are
to improve scientific and technical knowledge, train the necessary
personnel, build up research and training institutions and stimulate
participation by the populations concerned in the conservation and
development of water resources.
Unesco's programmes deal with both fresh water and the oceans,
but in view of the immense scope of these subjects, this issue of the
Unesco Courier focuses attention on some of the major problems
involved in the rational development and management of fresh
water resources.
Unesco's involvement in water problems goes back to 1950, when
it launched a programme of research on the world's arid zones, in
which hydrology played a major part. By 1965, despite Unesco's ef¬
forts, world water problems had increased. The rapid growth of
population, together with the extension of irrigated agriculture and
industrial development, had led to such environmental stress that
nations realized they could no longer use the earth's water resources
as carelessly and wastefully as they had in the past. The need for
a consistent policy of rational water resource management had
become evident.
Thus it was that Unesco began the first worldwide programme of
studies of the hydrological cycle the International Hydrological
Decade (IHD). This remarkable example of international co¬
operation, which involved more than 100 countries, made a signifi¬
cant contribution to an understanding of the processes occurring in
the water cycle, assessment of surface and groundwater resources,
and adoption of a rational attitude towards water use.
The International Hydrological Programme
After reviewing these results and assessing the continuing need
for co-operation in this field, Unesco's General Conference in 1974
decided to launch the long-term International Hydrological Pro¬
gramme (IHP). The IHP's purpose is to develop a scientific basis
for the rational management of water resources, taking into ac¬
count both quantity and quality. It is designed to help find solu¬
tions to specific water problems in countries with different
geographical conditions and levels of technological and economic
development, and constitutes the main components of Unesco's
fresh water programme.
The IHP works through governmental representation on Na¬
tional Committees and National Focal Points (through which the
work is carried out). By the end of 1983, 101 Member States of
Unesco had established National Committees, and National Focal
Points had been established in another 31. Thus a total of 132
Member States were involved in the programme. It is an open-
ended programme: IHP's Intergovernmental Council, in Paris in
March 1984, approved the third phase of its work, designated
IHP-III.
IHP-III involves worldwide projects under 18 major themes.
These range from assessment of the role of snow and ice on the
water cycle to the compilation of information on the impact of
climate change on droughts and catastrophic floods, to the applica¬
tion to water resources studies of new technologies like remote sens¬
ing from satellites.
Beginning with IHP-I, great emphasis has been placed on educa¬
tion and training activities. Nearly 1,500 specialists were trained in
Unesco-sponsored or organized courses during the period
(1975-1980). During 1981-1983, more than 600 specialists in the
water sciences from developing countries obtained advanced train¬
ing under Unesco sponsorship.
Because of a change in Unesco's budgetary period to coincide
with other United Nations bodies, the second phase of the IHP
(IHP-II) extended only over the period 1981-1983. The IHP has
now returned to six-year phases, coinciding with Unesco's
Medium-Term Plans, with IHP-III running from 1984-1989.
Practical Applications
IHP-III is placing much greater emphasis on practical applica¬
tions of scientific knowledge and rational water management,
although the programme will continue to deal with the traditional
hydrological sciences. The current programme phase is also at¬
tempting to devote greater efforts to reaching audiences that
formerly would not have been thought to be within the scope of
such a scientific endeavour, such as planners, policy-makers and
the concerned public. Demonstration projects are also emphasized,
Desalinization, the process of removing
salt and other minerals from sea water to
provide pure water for drinking or for
industrial use has been practised on a
small scale for many years. As water
needs grow and the techniques involved
become more efficient, more and larger
desalinization plants are coming Into op¬
eration, although the initial capital outlay
required is still very high. Left, a desalini¬
zation plant at Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
18

A typical family with five children needs
about 40 litres of water a day just to sur¬
vive and about 200 litres a day to keep
clean and healthy. In many parts of rural
Africa and Asia women and children
spend up to eight hours a day on the soul-
destroying task of fetching the water.
Right, In Niger, a woman and her daugh¬
ter at a water hole.
to reinforce learning. And the immediate practicality of results is
being stressed. All these aspects are illustrated in the Major
Regional Projects described below. Another characteristic of the
programme is the attempt to use new techniques, such as remote
sensing from satellites, for the study of water resources.
One notable aspect of the IHP as a whole is its participatory
nature: the IHP works because a great number of experts and pro¬
fessional organizations around the world recognize the need for it
and want to take part in it. Most of this participation is on a volun¬
tary basis, through the IHP National Committees.
At the IHP Council meeting in Paris in March 1984, Unesco's
Regional Hydrologist for Africa made an eloquent plea to the inter¬
national community to assist in "making more heads free from car¬
rying pots, pans and buckets in search of water several kilometres
away".
Such is the purpose of Unesco's major regional project on the ra¬
tional use and conservation of water resources in rural areas in
Africa. (There are similar programmes for Latin America and the
Caribbean and for the Arab States.) Some parts of Africa south of
the Sahara are among those in which, as noted earlier, village
women have to spend several hours a day walking to and from
water sources during the dry season to meet their families' needs.
Traditionally, such people have lived a nomadic life, wandering
from place to place to make best use of available water, so they
never developed methods of water storage. But as population has
grown, water supplies have become exhausted.
In the Far East, where traditions are different, villagers in areas
where groundwater is saline have taken easily to the idea of building
ferrocement tanks for rooftop rainwater storage. The tanks are
built inexpensively from concrete reinforced by metal mesh, or
sometimes by bamboo poles. In north-east Thailand, for example,
1,500 such tanks have been built by villagers in a self-help project
to store rainwater collected from rooftops.
During 1983, the Asian Institute of Technology, with Unesco
support, organized a seminar and study tour of the Thai villages for
African officials from Benin, Ghana, Liberia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Zambia and Burkina Faso, to familiarize them with the use
of ferrocement for rainwater harvesting from rooftops. The group
attended lectures at the A.I.T. laboratory and visited the material-
testing laboratory. They also travelled to Java, Indonesia, to
observe the use there of tanks for rainwater storage as an alter¬
native to water from heavily polluted irrigation canals, which are
the traditional source of drinking water.
After the tour, participants recommended introduction of fer¬
rocement to Africa, and the establishment of training centres and
pilot projects. Since then, Unesco has proposed that the Govern¬
ment of the Republic of Congo provide funds for some 20 ferroce¬
ment rainwater storage tanks to demonstrate the suitability of this
technology for rural Africa.
Subsurface dams are another possible way of providing water to
drought-prone areas. These dams are simply sheets of metal or
other impervious material placed perpendicular to the direction of
water flow and introduced into dry sandy river beds. The dams
force a build-up of water under ground which can then be tapped
by bore-holes, and sometimes create sand reservoirs by retaining
the bed load that moves in the stream during floods. In a Botswana
project, two concrete weirs raised the level of the sand bed by about
one metre. Other similar projects are going on in Kenya and
Burkina Faso.
Major Regional Projects
The Major Regional Projects, begun in 1981, are intended to
contribute to the growth of scientific and technical potential in the
area involved, to the development of information networks, and to
a rational use of water resources based on the choice of the most
appropriate technologies for local conditions. The African project
will include publication of an inventory of existing rural water
systems and technologies, with the idea of identifying the most pro¬
mising low-cost examples.
. The purpose of the Major Regional Project in the Arab States is
to promote the conservation and improvement of traditional water
systems for use in rural areas. Here, too, an inventory of traditional
methods is being compiled, this time in co-operation with the Arab
Centre for Arid and Dry Lands. For each type of traditional
system, the project determines the conditions under which it will
best function. Studies are being undertaken to determine the ap¬
plicability of the systems under present circumstances and the way
in which they complement modern water management systems.
Guidance material is prepared for teaching engineers and techni¬
cians; other material is designed for decision-makers and some for
the general public. Local traditional skills are being revived to
assure the survival of the traditional systems.
The Latin American and Caribbean Major Regional Project has
similar aims: bringing back life to rural areas by combining prin¬
ciples of both traditional and modern technologies in low-cost, ap¬
propriate systems. National education and training programmes
will be promoted through mass media informational campaigns,
using radio, video, films, posters and training manuals.
Among the projects in this area are those that attempt to obtain
water in arid areas from non-conventional sources such as fog and
dew. Other projects will be aimed at obtaining energy for transpor¬
ting, desalinating and pumping water from sources such as extreme
daily temperature fluctuations, water currents and solar radiation.
Attention is being given also to water resource management and
erosion control through such techniques as terracing, construction
of farm ponds, and water-saving practices, such as irrigation
through porous pots. ^
19

Rising from the skyline in the Pacific
coastal regions ofLatin America, in areas
where there is very little rainfall, these
curious, diamond-shaped structures are
helping to solve the problem of a chronic
lack of water. They are fog traps which
have been installed at experimental sites
in Chile, Ecuador and Peru as part of
Unesco's Major Regional Project on the
Use and Conservation of Water Resour¬
ces in the Rural Areas of Latin America
and the Caribbean. Fog, which is frequent
in these coastal areas due to an effect
known as "thermal inversion", is often
the only local source of fresh water. The
octahedral structures, which are made of
ordinary mosquito netting, intercept the
moisture which condenses into water.
Each octahedron can produce up to 200
litres of water a day.
The Secretariat for the International Hydrological Programme
(IHP) is provided at Unesco headquarters in Paris by the Divi¬
sion of Water Sciences under its Director Sorin Dumitrescu.
Under the supervision of the Intergovernmental Council of
the IHP, the Secretariat co-operates closely with the IHP Na¬
tional Committees and Focal Points for the IHP established in
over 130 Member States. An expert in water resources is sta¬
tioned at each of Unesco's five Regional Offices for Science
and Technology to provide on-the-spot advice and
assistance.
Close contacts are maintained with other United Nations
organizations with an interest in water resource problems
such as the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP),
the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Health Organiza¬
tion (WHO) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA).
Field Projects
In addition to those included in its own annual budget, Unesco
also administers a number of field projects financed by funds from
outside the Organization. These deal with applied research, educa¬
tion and training, assessment of water resources and institution
building. For example: In Algeria and Tunisia, a study of ground¬
water resources in the northern Sahara, completed in 1972,
established the limits of exploitation of both shallow and deep
aquifers underlying the area. The results were presented in a form
useful for planning ministries. The International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations co-operated in this project.
In Portugal, an environmental study of the Tejo estuary
(1977-1982), dealing with quality aspects of water management, is
to form the scientific basis on which the government will base its
pollution and environmental regulations and its decisions for in¬
vestment in waste water purification works. Other water resource
assessment projects have been carried out in the Canary Islands,
Spain, Brazil, Zambia and Mozambique.
In the Sudan, Unesco, with funds from the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), has assisted the Ministry of Ir¬
rigation since 1974 in establishing a hydraulic research station in
Wad Medani. This station is gradually becoming the water
resources engineering study branch of the Ministry. It will be
capable of carrying out hydrological surveys, hydraulic model
studies and hydraulic computations. Similar projects have been
carried out in Brazil, India, and Argentina.
In Nigeria, another Unesco/UNDP project has since 1978
assisted the Federal Ministry of Water Resources in establishing a
Federal Institute of Water Resources, which gives top priority to
training middle-level water resource technicians. Similar projects
have been carried out in Brazil, Tanzania and India, some with
financial support from Unesco's Funds-in-Trust projects.
In Sweden and Sicily (1977), India (1979) and Tanzania (1981),
Unesco has organized short-duration training courses on ground¬
water development from hard rock with the support of the Swedish
aid agency SIDA. With the assistance of the Norwegian Govern¬
ment, two to three-month courses for hydrology technicians were
organized in Kenya (1977) and Zambia (1982 and 1984).
The unique characteristic of all Unesco's activities in science and
technology is their international nature: no other organization is
able to call on the entire scientific resources of the world. Further¬
more, Unesco has in large part been responsible for creating some
of the most important international scientific bodies and networks,
such as those mentioned above, and for supporting them and en¬
couraging their activities. Because the world's waters are in large
part transnational resources, only an organization that works
through governments, as Unesco does, can fulfill this role.
This text is taken from a booklet now being prepared by Unesco science
writer David Spurgeon and which is to be published shortly by
Unesco's Science Sector under the title Managing the World's Waters.
The booklet will also cover problems connected with the world's
oceans.
20
