African first nights
by Jacques Téphany
IN 1866, during his eleventh year of exile
in Guernsey, Hugo wrote, in two
months, a four-act, prose melodrama
entitled Mille Francs de Récompense (A
Thousand Francs Reward). Was the world-
renowned author of Les Misérables at long
last going to start writing for the theatre
again, something he had not done since the
failure of his play Les Burgraves in 1843?
This, at any rate, was what the exiled
writer's friends were saying in Paris, where
this event was awaited with the greatest
impatience. Instead, the visionary of
Guernsey put away the large blue sheets of
paper, covered with his extraordinary hand¬
writing, in the bottom of a trunk, declaring
that the censors would not pass it for publi¬
cation, and adding, laconically, "I wrote it
to rid myself of an obsession with an idea".
The work was among a collection of
plays, entitled Théâtre en Liberté, that re¬
mained unpublished during Hugo's life¬
time. It resurfaced in 1934, when it was
published for the first time. It was not
staged until 1961, when it was put on in
Strasbourg by Hubert Gignoux. Twenty-
four years later, on the occasion of the
centenary of the author's death, our turn
came to stage the ballad of Glapieu.
What is it about?
The scene is set in the Paris of the 1820s.
An outlawed convict named Glapieu a I
Jean Valjean with a sense of humour I
creeps stealthily over the rooftops of the I
city. He is hungry, but manages to summon I
up just enough strength to bid defiance to I
God : "The first good deed I have the oppor- I
tunity to do I shall do at once. That will put I
God in the wrong."
Glapieu glances through the window of a I
wretched attic. Inside he sees an old man I
who is slowly dying, surrounded by the
trophies he won as a soldier of the Imperial I
army. Only his widowed daughter, Etien- I
nette, and his grand-daughter, Cyprienne, I
remain to watch over him in his poverty. In I
order to support them Major Gédouard is I
reduced to giving music lessons. This was
appalling, naked destitution something
men perhaps may bear, but not women.
Cyprienne is in love with a young bank I
clerk, Edgar Marc, who is employed by the I
rich banker Baron Puencarral. And it is in I
the name of this same Puencarral that all I
Gédouard's furniture, including his piano, I
has been seized. The agent of this despic- I
able act is a businessman named Rousse- I
line, the pitiless incarnation of the spirit of I
the Restoration period. Rousseline decides
to teach Etiennette a lesson in realism if I
you want to be rich, do not look as though
you are poor, and if you do not wish to I
condemn your daughter to destitution, give I
her to me and I shall marry her. At the end I
of her tether, like Fantine in Les Misera- I
bles, Etiennette leaves the choice to her I
16 daughter. But Cyprienne, like Cosette in I
the same novel, obeys the voice of youth
and refuses the offer. At this point Glapieu,
who has been concealed the while in a
cupboard, like the lover in any trivial bed¬
room farce, emerges crying "Well said, my
dear!" The tone of the play is set.
I shall not go over all the ins and outs of
the melodrama (which reveals that the
banker is Etiennette's long-lost husband
and Cyprienne's father), but content myself
with pointing out that the whole spirit of the
play is personified in that of the central
character, Glapieu. The convict is neither
saint nor martyr. He is the street-urchin
Gavroche at fifty, he is the spirit of Paris, he
is the bitter, poetic laughter of the people.
If the convict who is another kind of
exile is, in the eyes of official morality,
guilty of every shortcoming, his position
gives him an advantage over the honest
bourgeois, he is "on the outside". Glapieu
on his rooftop is Hugo on his island. They
can both play at tearing away the mask of
honesty. The judge says: "You are a thief."
What does Glapieu say? "I stole because I
was hungry." Justice, like the army, does
not want to know, it sticks to the bare facts.
So Glapieu is arrested at the age of sixteen
and jailed for several years , long enough for
a lad to get to know about politics.
In Mille Francs de Récompense the mira¬
cle is that the hero's soul is still that of a
child. Humour, which in Hugo is the cour¬
tesy of despair, is also the mark of youth.
And has the stage any better tool than
laughter for showing reality in a new light?
In a flash it reveals what manifestos, exile,
epics and novels are slow to analyse. It is
grace as against ponderousness. Our pre¬
sentation in the theatre was based on this
duality.
First the melodramatic aspect; we had to
believe in it and put all our heart into it.
Melodrama is a struggle between the ideal
and the real, between magnanimity and
money, between youth and the past. Bad
melodrama depicts absolute good against
absolute evil, and this confrontation often
results in equally absolute boredom. But
good melodrama and Mille Francs de
Récompense is a masterpiece of its kind
shows that good and evil are relative.
We take to Edgar Marc, for example,
because he loves Cyprienne; yet he is the
very stuff of which the bourgeois are made
and will become a cold, forbiddingly worthy
man. Rousseline, who is a "bad" character,
has the same advantage as the convict of
being on the outside; and he has, too, his
intellectual honesty. The other bad charac-
Life and Times of V. H.

Photo of Victor Hugo in Brussels in 1867 taken by Albert d'Ar-
noux, known as Bertall (1820-1882)
The French actor Pierre Meyrand in the role of the outlaw Glapieu,
In a production ofHugo'splay Mille Francs de Récompense ("One
Thousand Francs Reward") staged by the Théâtre en Liberté
company In 1985 at the Cité Internationale Universitaire in Paris.

ters think that they are good he knows
that he is bad. He has no liking for the
bourgeois, any more than has Glapieu he
likes only himself. And here the two real
heroes of the play, the outcast of society and
the outcast of evil, are at one. There was the
same fatal bond between Valjean and
Javert.
In her staging of this duel, Ariette
Téphany decided on an empty stage rather
than a realistic setting, relying on the im¬
agination of the audience and its apprecia¬
tion of the text.
All that is to be seen, centre stage, is a
piano. It is at once a coffin and a music-box,
a safe and a cultural symbol of bourgeois
aspirations. Glapieu will smash this object,
which is both enemy and accomplice, be¬
fore becoming enmeshed in its strings like a
fly in a spider's web.
Pierre Meyrand, who played the part of
Glapieu, interprets the role in the spirit of
Chaplin; but the vagabond he portrays is
not a comic tramp but a hard man who has
learned how to struggle for life, to fight
against hunger. With him the grotesque
becomes bravado, the ridiculous is height¬
ened with emotion. We do not laugh at him,
but with him.
The show, and its leading actor, had a
tremendous reception wherever it was
staged in France, both in Paris and in the
provinces. Audiences consisting both of
ordinary suburbanites and of young people
were particularly enthusiastic. Author,
actors and public came together in a unity 17
/". ¿f

^ few playwrights anywhere in the world have
been capable of inspiring. Hugo had been
rediscovered.
In Africa, during an official tour of eight
French-speaking countries, this interaction
achieved an almost miraculous intensity.
We played on two memorable occasions to
audiences of 2,000 students on a basket-ball
field in Dakar and of 3,000 in a concrete
amphitheatre in Kinshasa.
The actors, sweating profusely in their
heavy winter costumes, wondered how a.
performance lasting two and a half hours,
with no scenery, nothing but a piano, a text,
ten arc-lamps and very poor acoustics,
could hold such a vast audience. What
would our African hosts find to interest
them in these stories of money, of a married
woman become a widow, of the Emperor
and of the Restoration? How would they be
able to penetrate the obscurities of Hugo?
No sooner had Glapieu spoken his first
lines than the attention of the audience was
riveted and its sympathy captured. Laugh¬
ter came in short but hearty bursts. There
was none of the inertia of the kind of audi¬
ence that is slow to laugh and then goes on
laughing because it has begun to laugh, so
that neither the action of the play nor the
actors can continue. This was alert, obser¬
vant laughter of an audience that seemed to
anticipate Hugo's humour. They were ex¬
pecting it, they wanted it. The show main¬
tained its pace despite the heat and difficult
technical conditions.
For the audience was there, ready to play
its part, and the actors delighted in working
the miracle of melodrama, that mixture of
drama and emotion. When Glapieu is
alone, in front of the safe, he lights a cigar,
assumes the pose of a person of con¬
sequence, and suddenly the vagabond is
transformed into a business magnate. At
this point the audience burst into thunder¬
ous gales of Homeric laughter. At other
times there were ripples of admiration for
the villain's stratagems (yes, admiration,
for after all it is up to the poor to thwart his
tricks). And then there were anxious sighs
or embarrassed giggles at the transports of
the lovers, Cyprienne and Edgar.
There was, too, a silence full of uneasy
amazement when Etiennette launched into
the monologue in which she makes her con¬
fession with the words: "Dreadful things
happen; women are not always happy."
The actress uttered these words simply, in
matter-of-fact tones, yet with all the feeling
that a woman can put into them. The audi¬
ence could be heard to emit, in unison, a
single groan of pity.
And when, at the final trial, Glapieu
begins to unravel the threads of the plot and
to perform his good deed (and in so doing
sacrifice himself), the audience of three
thousand at Kinshasa held its collective
breath in suspense. My neighbour was
moved to tears. Then, when Glapieu made
his exit to go back to prison, the three
thousand rose to their feet as one with a cry
that we did not understand at first, the cry
"Encore" uttered by three thousand people
smiling through their tears.
All the actors taking part and the few
French people in the audience were under
the spell of the most powerful theatrical
experience of their lives. It was a celebra¬
tion of the French language and the play
had been performed before its very own
audience, the audience it would surely have
had in 1866 had Hugo not locked it away at
that time.
We begin to understand the nature of the
"obsession with an idea" of which Hugo had
spoken. Novels did not give him the oppor¬
tunity to reach the reader directly, not even
novels that became legendary, like Les
Misérables. His relationship with the reader
was always purely conceptual. In the
theatre, and especially in Mille Francs de
Récompense, which is a really a shortened,
dramatized version of Les Misérables,
Hugo would have felt again the touch of
human warmth. He denied himself that
pleasure, returning to exile, as Glapieu re¬
turned to prison, with no illusions.
The illusions are for us, we who are
people of the theatre.
JACQUES TEPHANY, of France, who com-
bines the roles of playwright and script-writer
with those of theatre administrator andproducer,
is also the author of studies on Victor Hugo and,
in particular, on his play Mille Francs de Récom¬
pense. The presentation of Mille Francs de Ré¬
compense which he evokes in this article was
created in 1979-1980 by the Théâtre en Liberté
company, under the direction ofAriette Téphany,
and has been revived in 1985. It was broadcast
on French television in July and has been on tour
in France and in French-speaking Africa under
the aegis of the Association Française d'Action
Artistique.
