Return ticket
The problems of going back
by Eric-Jean Thomas and Catherine Wihtol de Wenden
THE flows of migration to the West¬
ern countries which took place after
the Second World War, and espe¬
cially from the 1960s onwards, differed
from earlier migratory movements in that
they were primarily intended to be tem¬
porary.
In the wake of those immigrants who
took their families and left their homeland
to conquer a new world, the immigrants
of the 1960s scarcely entertained the idea
of settling in the host country on a per¬
manent basis. Their intention was to find
better paid jobs, to put some money aside,
and then to go back and turn their savings
to good account.
The clampdown on immigration decided
by the industrialized countries after the
1973 oil crisis had the unexpected effect
of increasing the immigrant population res¬
ident in those countries and prolonging
their stay. At the same time, there was
a significant decline in the number of sea¬
sonal returns coinciding with vacation
periods.
This paradoxical situation stemmed from
the fact that restrictions on immigration
initially applied only to the workers them¬
selves who, since they expected more strin¬
gent regulations to be introduced, did their
utmost to bring their families over to join
them. As a result, many migrant workers
postponed their return home indefinitely,
and, afraid that they might not gain re-
admittance to the host country, refrained
from returning to their country of origin
even for a temporary visit.
For example, between 1974 and 1982,
an estimated 100,000 Portuguese returned
home, whereas some 200,000 emigrated
during the same period. The same phe¬
nomenon also occurred in other sending
countries with different economic struc¬
tures, such as Finland, where the number
of returns home fell by 7 per cent in 1982.
A study on Turkey carried out in 1980
showed that the return phenomenon had
been reduced to a mere trickle.
For this reason, some European receiv¬
ing countries, including France and the
Federal Republic of Germany, have
attempted in the last decade to introduce
policies aimed at encouraging immigrants
to return home. These policies raise ques¬
tions of principle which were irrelevant in
Egyptian migrant workers returning home
after two years in Iraq
the liberal climate of international migra¬
tions which still prevailed at the beginning
of the twentieth century.
The idea that States had the right to
encourage immigrant workers to return to
their countries of origin in a situation
where labour was surplus to requirements
slowly emerged between the two World
Wars. Today, no European State can take
peremptory measures for the collective
expulsion of migrants. It is widely accepted
that the loss of residence entitlement,
which entails the loss of acquired social
benefits, should give rise to compensation.
As a result, there has been a gradual
recognition of a right associated with the
return process, which is no longer rejected
either by immigrants or by the trade
unions, which are now more concerned
with negotiating the amount of compen¬
sation to be paid. In a context of economic
crisis, workers who are nationals of the
host country sometimes protest against the
discriminatory nature of such a right which
does not apply to them and which gives
them the impression that immigrants are
favoured when it comes to leaving their
jobs.
This thinking about the return process
gradually began to spread in the receiving
countries when they closed their frontiers
to foreign workers. In a sense it was
because immigrants were no longer leaving
that the host countries "invented" the idea
of giving them money to encourage them
to return to their own countries.
The fact is that policies to incite immi¬
grants to retufn raise questions of legality
both for the countries which carry them
out and, increasingly, for the countries of
origin. In the host countries, providing
assistance for return to the countries of
origin is theoretically supposed to reassure
public opinion which is anxious about the
immigrant problem, but in practice it is
a costly, not very effective, and sometimes
even damaging exercise. It may well be
asked what purpose it serves, apart from
having symbolic implications and serving
as a bargaining counter between the States
concerned.
To what extent does the return of the
migrants benefit the countries from which
they emigrated? In fact, although their
return may appear, at first sight, to be an
advantage for the country of origin, a num¬
ber of recent studies have shown that this
is by no means always the case.
In terms of vocational training, the mar¬
ginal status of foreign workers in the host
country is little incentive for them to
improve their qualifications. The govern¬
ments of the host countries have clearly
recognized this, since those which attempt
33

to promote the return of immigrants have
introduced a variety of measures to
improve the job qualifications of would-be
returnees in line with the requirements of
the countries of origin.
However, these intentions are not
always easy to fulfil, especially since the
immigrant workers are reluctant to take
time off work for vocational training,
thereby foregoing immediate financial
gain. The problem is further compounded
by the fact that most of the prospective
returnees are unskilled workers.
Lastly, it must be stressed that on-the-
job training in factories and other work¬
places is primarily geared to the needs of
the industrial society of the host country
and will be of little value to the country
of origin.
In terms of financial input to their coun¬
try of origin, regardless of whether the
immigrants return as "failures" or "suc¬
cesses", they will try to acquire a social
and economic status higher than that they
enjoyed when they left. The vast majority
of the "returnees" aspire to be self-
employed and put their savings into those
sectors of the economy in which they are
most likely to achieve this status.
In agriculture, unless they have a well-
thought-out plan, they often use their sav¬
ings to purchase more or less unproductive,
land and equipment that cannot be easily
serviced.
The purchase or construction of a house
is one of the main purposes for which they
use their savings. However, such an invest¬
ment can hardly be said to be productive
and may entail a high social cost in urban
areas.
The tertiary sector of the economy, espe¬
cially small independent businesses, is the
big magnet for their savings. Such small
businesses, of which one-man taxi services
are typical, are notoriously unproductive
and are liable to have parasitic effects on
the economy of the country of return.
Lastly, savings are often channelled into
the purchase of consumer goods. As a rule
this has an adverse effect on the economy
This work by the Belgian artist René
Magritte ( La Maison de Verre, 1939) could
be seen as the depiction oía man eternally
looking back to his past or dreaming of
a return to his homeland.
in that it stimulates domestic demand for
imported goods.
Studies carried out so far do not suggest
that any change in social and political atti¬
tudes is intrinsic to the migration process.
For if emigration gives rise to specific polit¬
ical or family behaviour patterns different
from those of the country of origin, con¬
siderable caution must be exercised before
concluding that such patterns will survive
after the migrants have returned home.
Finally, it must be emphasized, firstly,
that the percentage of immigrants return¬
ing home is extremely small and that until
recently the countries of origin displayed
little interest in the problem. Secondly,
although the structural effects of the return
of immigrants are by no means clearly
grasped, they are limited and, in general,
have a disturbing impact on the economy
of the home country. Thirdly, it is becom¬
ing clear that policies to encourage
migrants to return can only be put into
effect by the host countries as a result of
far-reaching concerted action with the
countries of origin.
The return of immigrants can only
become a reality and be a source of profit
to the emigration countries if negotiations,
which will have to be bilateral, at least in
the early stages, lead in the long run to
concerted action between these countries
and the immigration countries.
ERIC-JEAN THOMAS, of France, is a lawyer
with the Paris Court of Appeal and teaches at
the University of Paris. He is the author ofmany
studies on the legal aspects of migration. He
was director of a comparative study entitled
Immigrant Workers in Europe: their Legal Sta¬
tus, published by Unesco in 1982.
CATHERINE WIHTOL DE WENDEN, of
France, is engaged in research with the Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique and is
a consultant with the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD). She
has published many articles on the political
aspects of migration, including a work entitled
Les Immigrés dans la Cité (1978).
