Birth of an ideal
by Howard Brabyn
UNESCO, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, w uld
almost certainly never have corne into
being, at least in its present form, had it
not been for the very special conditions
that existed in London during the Second
World War.
With great tracts of Europe occupied
by Axis forces, Britain's bomb-scarred
capital was the temporary home of seven
Allied Governments-in-exile and of
General de Gaulle's Free French Com-
mittee, of statesmen, diplomats and
generals, of intellectuals and refugees,
and of ordinary men and women corne
from ait corners of the earth to fight for
freedom. It was a microcosm of a world in
ferment.
Although the overriding common pur-
pose was the winning of the war, the
presence in London of so many able men
and women from so many countries also
engendered an intellectual ferment which
was to leave a permanent mark on the
post-war wor) d. Among these men and
women were the education ministers of
the Allied Governments in exile who at a
critical point in the struggle against the
Axis Powers had the vision and the cour-
age to plan ahead for the task of recon-
structing their educational Systems after
the war was over.
As Gian Franco Pompei (President of
the Executive Board of Unesco from
1968 to 1970) was to write later : (l)
"We recall with admiration that on 16
November 1942, in a London then halfin
ruins, Richard A, Butler, President of the
Board of Education of England and
Wales, invited his colleagues from the
Allied Powers in exile, Belgium, Czecho-
slovakia, France, Greece, Netherlands,
Norway, Poland and Yugoslavia, to meet,
not just to discuss the problems of the
moment, brut also to plan the establish-
ment after the war of a permanent orga-
nization for co-operation in the field of
education."
The invitation was enthusiastically re-
ceived and the first meeting of the Con-
ference of Allied Ministers of Education
(CAME) took place at Alexandra
House, London, three years to the day
before Unesco was born. Au the coun-
tries invited were represented by their
ministers of education or their deputies.
Although it spoke of educational needs
in the post-war world, the letter of invita-
tion made no spécifie mention of the pos-
sibility of creating a permanent interna-
tional educationa) organization. Yet, as
Denis Mylonas points out in his remark-
able study La Genèse de l'Unesco (The
Genesis of Unesco) (2), only two months
later, during the second plenary session
of CAME, this possibility was mooted by
the Belgian delegate Jules Hoste in a
document he had prepared concerning
the intellectual relations between the Un-
ited Kingdom and Europe in which he
expressed the hope"that these relations
which had been developed and institu-
tionalized within the framework of the
International Institute of Intellectual Co-
operation (see page 6) would be vigorous-
! y renewed in more practical form after
the war".
Meanwhile, a number of independent
British and international organizations,
including the London International
Assembly (founded in 1941), the Council
for Education in Wor/d Citizenship, the
British Association for the Advancement
of Science and the Association of Uni-
versity Teachers, spurred on perhaps by
their contacts with the many European
intellectuals in exile in London, were ex-
amining various aspects of the future of
education in Europe in the post-war
world.
The personal prestige of their mem-
bers, among whom were numbered such
men as Lord Robert Cecil, Henri Rolin,
René Cassin, Jan Masaryk, Gilbert Mur-
ray and Julian Huxley, added great
weight to their deliberations which,
almost without exception, stressed the
need for an international educational
organization or organizations of one form
or another and which were to have great
influence on such governmental orga-
nizations as CAME.
Denis Mylonas describes how :
"in May 1943, during the fourth plenary
session of CAME, an ad hoc committee
was formed to study a joint report (Educa-
tion and the United Nations) drawn up by
a joint committee of the London Interna-
tional Assembly and of the Council for
Education in World Citizenship, This re-
port proposed, among other things, the
'création as soon as possible'of an inter-
national organization for education (.,,)
The ad hoc committee considered that the
creation of such an organization would be
premature,"
Nevertheless, only a month later, in
July 1943, delegates attending the fifth
plenary session of CAME were talking of
their own Conference as"containing the
seed of an international educational orga-
nization".
Indeed, in the nine months of its ex-
istence, CAME had vastly extended the
scope of its activities. It had created com-
missions on cultural conventions, on
books and periodicals, on scientific mat-
ters, and on films and audio-visual media,
as tell as committees or sub-committees
on history, the restitution of scientific
equipment and on the restitution of
works of art. To these would be added
later further commissions on the protec-
tion and restitution of cultural objects
and on school equipment, and another to
enquire into the special educationat prob-
lems of liberated countries, finance and
drafting committees, committees on
emergency assistance for teachers and on
the re-education of children who had
been subjected to nazi-inspired educa-
tion, a technical sub-committee to the
scientific commission, and sub-commit-
tees on educationat broadcasts and on an
international film centre. Just by looking
at the titles of these commissions, com-
mittees and sub-committees, we can see
emerging the hazy outlines of many of the
important programmes with which Un-
esco is still very much concerned today.
Meanwhile, world interest in the activi-
ties of CAME was growing and towards
the end of 1943 the delegates decided that
the time had corne to enlarge the Confer-
ence by giving full delegate status to those
countries until then represented only by
observers. By now the concept of the
creation of an international organization
was fully accepted, and in its letter of
invitation to the US Government the
Conference declared that among"the ob-
jects of the reconstituted Conference
would be to consider plans for the forma-
tion of a permanent organization, at first
confined to the United Nations3, but
eventually to be placed on an internation-
al basis with the object of promoting co-
operation in educational matters in the
post-war period".
The United States Government
accepted this invitation with alacrity and
enthusiasm. In its reply it acknowledged
"the important preliminary work done by
the Conference of Allied Ministers of
Education"and recognized it as"a useful
agency for the further emergency de-
velopment of international co-operation
CONTINUED PAGE 12
(1) ln the Minds of Men, Unesco, 1972
(2) La Genèse de l'Unesco : La Conférence des Ministres
Alliés de l'Education (1942-1945), by Denis Mylonas.
Bruylant, Brussels, 1976.
(3) Here the term United Nations refers to those nations
that had signed the Declaration by United Nations on 1
January 1942 ; the United Nations Organization did not
then exist.
5

Birth of an ideal
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 5
in educational and cultural reconstruc-
tion". It also declared that"the govern-
ments collaborating in the Conference
should take steps, with other interested
governments, to seek the best means for
establishing a United Nations agency for
educational and cultural reconstruction,
organized and administered along demo-
cratic Unes".
Thus, by April 1944, the United States
was represented at the Conference in
London by a strong delegation which in-
ctuded J. William Fulbright and a man
who was to play an important role in the
preparation and drafting of the constitu-
tion of Unesco-the poet and Librarian
of the American Congress Archibald
MacLeish.
The American delegation had arrived
with already well-formed proposais for a
"United Nations Organization for Edu-
cationat and Cultural Reconstruction"
and these were discussed at two special
"enlarged"meetings of the Conference
and a tentative draft constitution was ela-
borated. After discussion of this draft at
the tenth plenary session of CAME, at
which the Conference accepted a minor
but significant amendment proposed by
the chairman of the Scientific Commis-
sion, it was sent by the Chairman of
CAME, Richard Butler, to the govern-
ments of al) members and associate mem-
bers of the United Nations, as well as to
institutions with links with the United
Nations, for consideration and comment.
The amendment mentioned above
proposed the addition to a paragraph
concerning the exchange of information
on problems of education and culture of
the words"including scientific research".
Innocuous enough on the face of it, the
addition of this phrase was an indication
of the pressure that was building up to
extend the importance of science in the
activities of the proposed new
organization.
Reactions to the United States propos-
ais were generally favourable, but were
to be influenced by the outcome of the
Dumbarton Oaks Conference, held in
Washington from 21 August to 7 October
1944, which was to pave the way for the
creation of the United Nations Organiza-
tion during the following year at the San
Francisco Conference. The Dumbarton
Oaks Conference had given cautious
approval to the concept of an educational
and cultural organization, but everything
would dépend on the Conference at San
Francisco at which the Charter of the
United Nations was finally to be adopted.
Work at the London Conference came
virtually to a standstill, the general feel-
ing being cleariy expressed in a declara-
tion in March 1945 by Richard Butler,
chairman of CAME, that"the creation of
a United Nations Educational Organiza-
tion should have the closes possible con-
nexion with any organization created by
the San Francisco Conférence",
The eagerly awaited United Nations
Conference on International Organiza-
tion opened in San Francisco on 25 April
1945, and when it closet, two months
later, it had not only agreed the Charter
of the United Nations Organization
(which came officially into force on 24
October 1945), but had also approved a
French recommendation"that govern-
ments should convene within the next few
months a general conference to draw up
the statute of an international organiza-
tion on cultural co-operation". It also
recorded an addendum by the United
States delegation, speaking in support of
the French proposai, mentioning"the
plans of the Conference of Allied Minis-
ters of Education to call in the near future
a United Nations conference for the
establishment of an international orga-
nization on education and cultural co-
opération. The Government of the
United Kingdom had been requested to
convene such a conférence,"
The way ahead was now clear for the
creation of the new specialized agency of
the United Nations, and on 12 July 1945,
following the nineteenth plenary session
of CAME, British minister of education
Richard Law issued a press release
announcing that"A conference is to be
held in London on November 1 next, to
consider the establishment of a United
Nations Educational and Cultural
Organization".
On 3 and 4 August 1945 invitations
were despatched to the governments con-
cerned, the French Government being
specially associated with the British Gov-
ernment as inviting power. A working
committee to prepare the Conference
was established, and on 1 November 1945
the Conference for the Establishment of
the United Nations Educational and
Cultural Organization began its work at
the Institute of Civil Engineers, one of
the few buildings in London large enough
to house such an important meeting that
had not been damaged by bombs.
The Conference started out to estab-
lish Uneco ; it ended up establishing Un-
esco, For some time past a number of
eminent scientists, including, in particu-
lar, Joseph Needham and Julian Huxley,
had been pressing for the inclusion of
science in the title of the new organiza-
tion (see page 21), In her opening speech
on the first day of the Conference, the
chairman of the Conference, Ellen Wil-
kinson, had announced the intention of
the British delegation to propose the in-
clusion of science in the organization's
title. During the third plenary session,
the Chinese delegate, Hu Shih, declared
his support for the British proposition,
and by the end of the Conference Unesco
was firmly established as the name of the
new organization. There can be little
doubt that the events of August 6 and 9 at
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, still fresh in ail
their horror in delegates'minds, had con-
siderable bearing on this decision.
The Conference took place in an
atmosphere quite remarkable for its
sense of urgent purpose, of determina-
tion to succeed in what was seen as a task
of crucial world importance, and of refus-
ât to allow minor differences to stand in
the way of the main objective.
The tone was set from the outset by the
US delegate Archibald MacLeish. In a
speech in which he seconded Léon
Blum's motion that Ellen Wilkinson, the
new British Minister of Education, be
elected President of the Conference, he
declared :
" (,..) The achievement of greater and
more effective international co-operation
in the field of education, as in the fields of
culture generally-of science and the
arts-is the immediate purpose of this
meeting, But that purpose has behind it a
greater and even more moving objective-
the common understanding of the masses
of the people in this world (.,,)
The univers al languages of communica-
tion have always existed in the sciences
and in the arts and in the language of the
human spirit, Human science has prQ-
vided those universal languages with in-
struments, in the last few years, by whiçh
men can speak to men across the frontiers
of the world, by which the peoples of the
world may speak and answer (.,,) What
remains to do is what we have been called
here to accomplish : to crea te a social in-
strument through which these instruments
of communication, these universal lan-/co/ ? ! My ! <caf<OM, f/ : g MMpr ! a//a/ !-
guages, may be put to the service of the
common hope for peace (.,.)"
The Conference achieved this goal
with remarkable unanimity and des-
patch. At three o'clock in the afternoon
of Friday 16 November 1945, the Presi-
dent of the Conference, Ellen Wilkinson,
opened the tenth plenary session at which
delegates formally signed the Final Act,
the Constitution of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, and the Instrument Estab-
lishing a Preparatory Educational, Scien-
tific and Cultural Commission,
Once again Archibald MacLeish found
the right words to sum up the feelings of
all the delegates at the close of the Con-
ference :
H J 1 think, speaking in all frankness,
that some of us who came to this Confer-
ence came with narrower ideas of what this
Organization was going to be than the
ideas with which we leave it, Some of us
thought it was to be an international orga-
nization for this or for that or the other
piece of the whole objective ; but 1 think
not one of us knew we should be construct-
ing here a great and powerful instrument
for the broadest possible purpose, which is
the purpose of the common understanding
of men for peace (...)".
HOWARD BRABYN is editor of the English edi-
tion of the Unesco Courier.
12
