A living presence
in Brazil
IN Brazil, the influence of Victor Hugo
was an all-pervading force throughout
the nineteenth century. His works
attracted the attention of more than a hun¬
dred translators, and in the north-eastern
province of Maranhao alone, over ten
thousand copies of Les Misérables were
sold. In his book Victor Hugo in Brazil,
Carneiro Leao states that the works of the
French poet became known as early as
1841, through the very first Portuguese
translation of the poem Madame autour de
vous, from the Feuilles d'Automne.
Most Brazilian writers were influenced
by Hugoi whom they regarded as the cham¬
pion of freedom of expression and perma¬
nent renewal and the architect of social
justice. But his most illustrious disciple was
undoubtedly the young, romantic poet from
Bahia, Antonio de Castro Alves (1847-
1871), whose short life was rich in adven¬
ture and creative achievement.
His romantic temperament had its roots
in childhood. His grandfather, José Anto¬
nio da Silva Castro, was a legendary figure
in the Bahia region, having led the Maria
Quiteña battalion in the struggle for inde¬
pendence. Later, his uncle became a fer¬
vent actor in the great liberation campaigns.
His mulatto nurse, Leopoldina, who had
recounted to him the sufferings of the en¬
slaved Blacks, was the source of inspiration
for his major work The Slaves. Finally, his
teacher, Abilio César Borges, sensing his
talent, taught him English and French, thus
giving him the opportunity to discover the
great European poets such as Byron and
Hugo.
Of course, Castro Alves was subject to a
variety of influences, particularly as far as
his poetry was concerned, but none of them
was so profound as that of Hugo on the
sensitive young poet. Very early on he iden¬
tified with Hugo, translating many of the
latter's longer poems, such as Chant de
Bug-Jargal, and dedicating many of his
works to him.
The main principles of romantic drama as
defined by Hugo are to be found in Castro
Alves' dramatic works, especially in Gon-
zaga, or the Revolution at Minas, a prose
drama inspired by the independence cam¬
paigns supported by poets in the eighteenth
century. This play, now of purely historical
interest, was a decisive landmark in the
history of the Brazilian theatre. If we recall
that prior to it there was no solid theatrical
30 tradition in Brazil, we can recognize the
by José de Souza Rodrigues
importance of Hugo's contribution in a do¬
main which continued to grow and flourish
from the nineteenth century onwards. Once
more Hugo brought rejuvenation and re¬
newal.
This innovatory force also influenced
Brazilian poetry, to which Hugo made a
decisive contribution with regard to form.
His style, full of imaginative daring, unex¬
pected metaphors and visual evocations,
and the verbal magnetism of a poetry of
cosmic range, which upset all the classical
norms , are at the root of a trend in literature
whose most outstanding representative
Castro Alves was. The historian Capistrano
de Abreu called it "condorism", after the
condor, the great South American bird that
can soar to the highest peaks of the Andes.
The "condorism" of Castro Alves takes
shape in his great poetic fresco The Slaves, a
fierce diatribe against the enslavement of
the Blacks in Brazil. The Slave Ship, one of
the poems from this lengthy, passionately
committed work, was enthusiastically ap¬
plauded when the author recited it at the
Literary Lyceum on 7 September 1868.
Hugo's influence is clearly present in its
atmosphere of unbridled imagination,
powerful idealization and plastic grandeur.
Thanks to the active engagement of the
young romantic poet from Bahia, there was
an upsurge of support for the abolitionist
cause.
A Dantean vision... on the deck
Bodies lie red under the lanterns.
Bloodstained light...
The crack of the whip and the clanking of
chains. . .
A mass of bodies black as the night
Seethe in a macabre dance. . .
Raising the starving mouth to her
nipple,
The mother feeds the black child
With the blood of her poor veins.
Naked frightened girls,
Borne along by the monstrous crowd,
Bewail in vain their sorrows.
Like Hugo, the defender of the poverty-
stricken and the unfortunate, Castro Alves
became the spokesman of the revolutionary
ideas of his generation. In his poem The
Century, following in the footsteps of his
French mentor, he evoked the great causes
that engrossed the thinkers of his time
(Victor Hugo's exile was one of these),
directly echoing the universal humanism of
the poet of Guernsey.

Frontispiece by Achille Devéria for an edi¬
tion of the second version ofHugo's novel
Bug-Jargal (1826).
This mimesis becomes more understand¬
able when it is recalled that, from the end of
the eighteenth to the beginning of the
nineteenth century, Brazil, especially in the
political and legal fields, was experiencing
the growing pains of a young society. There
was intense, countrywide awareness of
questions of national importance, such as
the fight for independence, the emancipa¬
tion of slaves, the war with Paraguay, the
sovereignty of the people and the equality
of nations.
Most young people saw in Hugo the
elected representative of the people, the
Deputy of Paris a guide and a prophet, the
defender of freedom and the apostle of
justice. His speeches in the National
Assembly and his humanist discourses
aroused enormous interest.
Victor Hugo's name is for ever associated
with the fight that has been waged in Brazil
since the last century for the emancipation
of man and for equal rights. His is still a
living presence there.
JOSE DE SOUZA RODRIGUES, of Brazil, is an
attaché at his country's Permanent Delegation to
Unesco. Formerly a professor at the Catholic
UniversityofRio de Janeiro and Brazilian cultural
attaché in Peru, he is the author of a number of
works including Concretismo (1978), an essay
on visual poetry in Brazil, and El Grabado en el
Brazil: Grabadores Populares (1978), a study of
the popular an of engraving in Brazil. 31
/\ ¿* *
