Spotlight
on
youth
As part of its coverage of
International Youth Year, the
Unesco Courier asked the
Managing Editors of those of
its editions which are
published away from
Unesco's Paris Headquarters
to prepare a brief exposé of
the youth situation in their
respective countries. We
present below edited and
abridged versions of their
reports, as well as personal
reflections by two high school
pupils, one Senegalese, one
Swiss, and by a young Soviet
worker.
Photo Gilles Salvia, Unesco
Youths wearing punk outfits in a Belgian
street
Belgium
THE basic problem facing young
Belgians today is finding a job. The
18-to-25-year-olds are hardest hit by
unemployment (between 1 0 and 1 2 per cent
of the working population as a whole are out
of work). The situation is particularly painful
for graduates, whose education requires a
big investment in terms of money and
energy.
Nevertheless, the attraction of higher
education is still as strong as ever. Between
30 and 35 per cent of young people are in
higher education, showing a strong predilec¬
tion for economics and informatics.
A recent law raised the school leaving age
to 1 8. But this has scarcely changed the real
situation, as most young people already con¬
tinued their studies beyond the age of 15.
In spite of the crisis, the standard of living
is still very high and the system of social
benefits relatively generous. Cases of van¬
dalism, drug use, asocial and antisocial
behaviour exist, but not to an alarming ex¬
tent, and this phenomenon does not seem to
have been influenced by the decline in the
socio-economic situation.
There are examples of vitality, enthusiasm
and generosity. Initiatives on behalf of en¬
vironmental conservation, disarmament,
and aid to developing countries aroused in¬
terest and commitment early on, as did the
work of youth centres and cultural
organizations.
Photo Hervé Donnezan © Rapho, Paris
Young lumberjacks at work on a river in
Finland
Finland
IN Finland young people constitute a
smaller and smaller proportion of the
population. In 1950, 30 per cent of the
population was under 15 years of age; in
1980, only 20 per cent. The physical needs
of young Finns today are well provided for.
Some think that they are too affluent.
Various sub-cultures have spread as a result
of the modern transnational culture. A need
for conformity may be seen in the popularity
of video game arcades and in the preference
for garments with well-known brand names.
But young Finns are not only consumers;
they have many hobbies. Some 64 per cent
of 7-to-24-year-olds are members of one or
more voluntary organizations. They are avid
readers and active library users. According
to a survey, nearly all children and some 90
per cent of the young read at least one book
every six months.
The picture is not entirely cloudless,
however. For one thing, youth unemploy¬
ment seems to be here to stay. The
unemployment rate among the young is
twice that for adults. Because of unemploy¬
ment and because their studies last longer
than in the past, young Finns are leaving
home later than they did (every other Finn in
the 20-24 age group still lives with his or her
parents). When they do leave home, they
face an acute housing problem. The
greatest fear of young Finns is war, even
though they have no personal experience of
it. In their choice of career the young rate
an interesting job first, advancement
possibilities second and wages or salary
only third.
20

Photo Diego Goldberg © Parimage, Paris
A group of schoolchildren dwarfed by the
dome of the Palace of Congress in Brasilia,
capital of Brazil
Brazil
THE situation for young people is far
from satisfactory. 85 per cent of Bra¬
zilian children have no chance of
going beyond the first years of primary
schooling. Of 100 pupils who complete
primary schooling, only 8 go on to secondary
education. And only one-third of the pupils
who finish secondary education reach
university level.
In Brazil today some 400,000 young peo¬
ple enter universities or other institutions of
higher education each year, around 2.5 per
cent of the 1 8-to-23 age group.
Young Brazilians are also feeling the
dangerous and disturbing impact of several
social and economic problems, not the least
of which is unemployment. Galloping infla¬
tion is also having a serious impact on the
vast majority of the population, whose stan¬
dard of living is continuing to fall.
Much of the critical behaviour of young
Brazilians can be attributed to youthful high
spirits. People tend to be incendiaries at 18
and firemen at 40.
It would be extremely unjust to hold the
young exclusively responsible for antisocial
attitudes and reactions which are certainly
due in large part to the trauma of economic
uncertainty with no end in sight.
Photo © Roger Viollet, Paris
Painted wooden statuette from ancient
Egypt (Vlth Dynasty, 2345 to 2200 BC).
The Arab World
BECAUSE of the pre-eminence of the
family system In the rural world, it
is primarily in the big cities that
young people have emerged as a social
category with their own culture. The city thus
provides the best framework for observing
the specific problems of young Arabs.
Schooling is, ideally, a State service pro¬
vided for all social strata, and guarantees
equality of opportunity. But while the same
educational rules are applied to all pupils,
both the inclination to acquire knowledge
and school failure rates vary widely among
pupils from different socio-cultural
backgrounds.
In order to subsist, the "young adults" re¬
jected by the school and not integrated into
the economic system create their own social
environment: gangs of young people
graduate rapidly from petty misdemeanours
to serious delinquency.
For girls, education is the ideal way of
achieving liberation from the restraints of the
Arab-Muslim tradition. But those who ex¬
perience this liberation without serious
problems come from already acculturated
backgrounds. It is mainly middle-class girl
students and high school pupils who feel the
dramatic consequences of this double
culture. One consequence can be found in
the demonstrations of young city dwellers of
both sexes in favour of a return to tradition
and to Islam.
In spite of high failure rates at every level
of education, there is a growing number of
graduates and, as a corollary, their price on
the labour market is falling. In other words
the system is creating increasing numbers of
drop-outs and graduates: the former are vir¬
tually excluded from the labour market, the
latter are obliged to accept posts for which
they have not been prepared.
Photo Rajak Chantan © Rapho, Paris
Teenage talkfest in Rome
Italy
THE youth unemployment situation in
Italy has worsened during the last
few years. In 1 974, 2.6 per cent of the
workforce were unemployed young people
whereas in 1984 the figure had risen to 7.7
per cent. This problem is now the source of
the gravest concern to the country's social
and political institutions.
The educational system lags far behind
the extraordinary economic and technical
progress of recent years. To enable it to
catch up on lost time, many solutions have
been put forward and are now being put into
effect.
Notable among them is the raising of the
school-leaving age by two years (to age 1 6)
through a law which is currently being ex¬
amined by Parliament. This may help to
solve the problem by modernizing voca¬
tional education and making the system
more coherent.
There is reason to hope that current
preventive measures to cope with such
problems as delinquency and drugs (slightly
on the increase) will prove effective. But
these phenomena, which are less acute in
Italy than in other industrially developed
countries, will only entirely disappear when
the root causes of the malaise affecting
young people have been eliminatedthe
difficulty of finding a job, the disappearance
of traditional values and ideas, the harmful
influence of the media in propagating the
myth of glittering success achieved without
effort.

Photo Paul Almasy, Unesco
A translator working on a scientific
document at Pakistan's National Scientific
and Technical Documentation Centre
(PANSDOC), Karachi. The Centre was
created with the aid of Unesco.
Pakistan
SPIRITUAL and intellectual confusion
naturally accompanies the tensions
which arise during the transition
from an agricultural to an industrial society.
Young people are the most affected by this.
Young people constitute more than half of
Pakistan's population today. Since in¬
dependence they have become more con¬
vinced of the need for education and the
literacy rate has risen. In response to the
demands of the modern world, more and
more of them have acquired a scientific
education. But the acquisition of a
theoretical scientific education has not
brought them the material success which
was their goal in switching over from arts to
science. The educational system, which has
not yet found its bearings, has failed to give
young people a clear cultural identity or ap¬
preciable economic support. During the last
decade particularly many Pakistanis have
emigrated to the Gulf countries in search of
economic prosperity.
Highly educated young people who can¬
not find job opportunities commensurate
with their qualifications have begun to fall
victim to frustration and loneliness. A few
have been tempted to take refuge in drugs.
Rapid industrialization and urbanization
have also exposed cultural traditions to
change, and restlessness and ambition to
get rich quick have overwhelmed old values.
The clash between old and new values is
causing a growing dissatisfaction among
young people. Both the young and the older
generations have begun to realize that
young people should be entrusted with more
responsibility.
Photo Gary Fullerton, Unesco
Typical house door in Zanzibar
United Republic
of Tanzania
IN Tanzania today there are some
13,500,000 people under the age of 35,
just under three-quarters of the total. An
estimated 83 per cent of them live in rural
areas, and the majority of them have either
graduated from primary school or are at
school.
After independence young people were at
the forefront in programmes for
rehabilitating the inherited economy and
culture. The Arusha Declaration of 1967
charted out a strategy for development
based on socialism and self-reliance. This
blueprint ushered in new initiatives for
young people, who took part in launching
Ujamaa villages, helping the peasants to
move to new villages, opening up new farms,
building houses, schools, dispensaries, and
roads, and conducting literacy campaigns.
The Tanzania-Zambia railway was basically
built by young people, and its impact was to
provide them with employment and
technical training.
Today the Universal Primary Education
(UPE) Programme enables all school-age
young people to have primary education. By
1983 there were some 9,897 primary
schools with 3.37 million pupils. In 1977 a
youth organization called Umoja wa Vijana
was created to mobilize and unite all Tanza-
nian young people in the process of building
a socialist self-reliant society. Its organiza¬
tional structure reaches from national level
down to the grassroots; at each level there
are youth leaders elected every five years.
Umoja wa Vijana has a total membership of
over 4 million.
Photo Hervé Donnezan © Rapho, Paris
Students at the entrance to the Faculty of
Medicine in Barcelona
Catalonia
YOUNG Catalans are noted for their
long associationist tradition which
has left a strong mark on their lives
and behaviour and has strongly encouraged
their involvement In the life of their society.
Catalan society today is concerned to
preserve and consolidate these associations
and movements and also to assimilate the
new forms of expression and participation
that are practiced by young people and
spring from their special needs and
situation.
One of the most striking aspects of the
situation of young Catalans nowadays is un¬
doubtedly the problem of unemployment
which, if nothing is done, may seriously
jeopardize their integration into society. The
problem is not confined to those who are out
of work; it creates a state of mind and a
general climate which affect all young
people.
Since the restoration of democracy, many
communities, like the Autonomous Govern¬
ment of Catalonia itself, have created
organizations concerned with youth affairs,
taking care as far as possible to avoid in¬
terfering with young people's activities
through excessive paternalism or control.
Today these organizations are seeking to
convince society at large and its relevant in¬
stitutions that public action on behalf of
young people must weld the whole range of
different initiatives into a coherent whole.
22

Photo Sunil Janah, Unesco
Detail of sculpture in the 1 3th-century Sun
Temple, Konarak, Orissa State
India
YOUNG people in India today feel
restless and resentful at the prevail¬
ing socio-economic injustice,
poverty, unemployment, corruption and the
irrelevant system of education imparted by
many of the country's institutions. Campus
unrest is widespread. Most young Indians
live in rural areas. They work in agriculture,
but there is not enough work to keep them
busy throughout the year. Most of them have
not reached the secondary level of educa¬
tion. The small numbers of young villagers
who have completed schooling or higher
education and training are victims of open
unemployment. Lack of job opportunities
forces some of them to migrate to the towns
or cities; the rest remain in the villages,
frustrated.
Thousands of young graduates remained
unemployed or underemployed for years.
With some exceptions, schools and univer¬
sities provide education which is not skill- or
career-oriented. Even though many millions
of jobs have been created during the past
three decades, the unemployment problem
has not been fully solved, owing to lack of
proper manpower planning, an outdated
system of general education, and consistent
population growth. The new pattern of diver¬
sified and vocational education introduced
in the last two years is a step in the right
direction.
With the expansion of the world media net¬
work, Indian young people are able to get a
glimpse of social and economic conditions in
other countries, especially developed coun¬
tries. This makes them impatient with the
pace of social and economic change at
home.
Photo © Magnum, Paris
Young workers in an electronics factory
Republic of Korea
THE under-25s of the Republic of
Korea were children in the 1960s
and 1970s when the country ex¬
perienced unprecedented social and
economic changes. \
A generation conflict in the 1980s has
been one of the unintended consequences
of these changes. As part of the moderniza¬
tion policy people were exposed to Western
influences; this brought discontinuity and
alienation to the lives of young people, who
emerged as a new generation with different
attitudes and life-styles from those of their
predecessors. They are deeply concerned
about the meaning of life and the quality of
society and show great interest in political
problems. At home they are ruder and more
aggressive than their predecessors; they are
impatient with lack of relevance in education
and with a society that often practices
hypocrisy.
The younger generation is experiencing
an identity crisis. They are living in a period
of transition both in their own lives and in the
social development of Korean society. Some
of them are active in youth movements
which propagate civil rights and find their
historical roots through activities related to
the traditional culture. With industrialization,
the traditional extended family system has
given ground to the nuclear family system,
and generally speaking the function of the
family has been weakened.
Urbanization and the rapid increase in the
educational population have negatively in¬
fluenced the quality of education. The in¬
crease of students in the higher education
system has raised serious problems in the
structure of employment. Many young
workers face unfavourable employment pro¬
spects. Most (73.2 per cent) work in
manufacturing industries. In 1983, 54.8 per
cent of the country's population (39,951 ,000)
were under 24. The proportion of young peo¬
ple in the total population has been declining
since 1960.
Photo Silvester © Rapho, Paris
Cleaning a statue of the Buddha in Bangkok
Thailand
IN 1981 there were approximately 11
million under-25s in Thailand, re¬
presenting about 23 per cent of a total
population of 48 million. Young people living
in rural areas (where more than 80 per cent
of Thais live) vastly outnumber the rest. In
1978 it was reported that about 67 per cent
of young people in the 15-25 age group had
only a lower primary education.
Most are employed as unskilled labourers
in agriculture, industry or business. The
small numbers who reach higher education
often find that their study programmes do
not prepare them for an occupation and are
not related to the labour market. There is a
growing awareness of this problem, and the
Government is also pursuing other
possibilities such as non-formal education
and education through the mass media.
Unemployment is considered to be the
most important problem. In 1981 the
unemployment rate was highest in the 20-24
age group. Young Thais have become
restless in the last decade. In 1973 a Na¬
tional Youth Bureau was established to plan,
co-ordinate, supervise and evaluate youth
development programmes. The State is pro¬
moting opportunities for vocational training,
club activities, sports and recreation.

Photo © François Dupuy, Paris
Wall painted in trompe-1'sil, Geneva
Switzerland
YOUNG people today have far greater
access to education than the pre¬
vious generation, and most of them
are able to take courses suited to their tastes
and abilities. But competition for jobs re¬
mains acute and the economic recession
has resulted in the loss of large numbers of
posts, leaving many technicians and
graduates without employment.
With the spread of home computers and
electronic games, young people are becom¬
ing familiar with informatics at an early age
and courses for beginners in this field are
very popular. More than just an amusement,
modern means of communication are also
making young people more aware of how
other peoples live and helping them to
become more mature and responsible.
Finally, as the contribution below from a
young Swiss student demonstrates, conser¬
vation of nature has become a major con¬
cern of young people.
Fine prospects open up before us. In this
respect, there is a vast difference between
teenagers in the developing countries and
those in the industrialized countries. Unfor¬
tunately, many people in our country are pre¬
judiced against foreigners in general.
School work is the most important factor in
my life at present, followed by leisure ac¬
tivities. When you spend up to 8 hours a day
at school, you need a healthy dose of diver¬
sion and relaxation to keep your balance.
As far as racial and religious problems are
concerned, I live in an extremely tolerant en¬
vironment both at school and at home.
When I think of the future, the most impor¬
tant thing for me is preparation for working
life. My second major preoccupation Is the
protection of the environment. I think also of
world peace and what I would call the unarm¬
ed dialogue between peoples.
Thomas Bittet
student
Photo A. Tessore, Unesco
Children at play beneath the mosque at
Djourbel
Senegal
WHERE the future of young people
is concerned, there is a big dif¬
ference between industrialized
countries and developing countries. In the
latter, high illiteracy rates and slender
education and professional training oppor¬
tunities make for an uncertain future. In addi¬
tion, increasing thoughtlessness among
young people is a trend which is finding ex¬
pression in delinquency.
The first priority for us is employment,
which offers the only means of achieving
fulfilment, meeting one's own needs and
providing for the future. Next come problems
of health and housing, domestic needs, the
organization of the family, the acquisition of
knowledge, leisure activities and participa¬
tion in political life. In Senegal there are
several linguistic, cultural and religious com¬
munities and this promotes a high level of
tolerance. I have learned to love all living
creatures.
I belong to several youth movements. In a
Muslim association called the "Dahira", I
learn about my religion and about how to
contribute actively to religious life. The
socio-educative hostel at my school
familiarizes me with community action
techniques and encourages pupils from
widely different backgrounds to mix. Finally,
as a result of the secular scout movement I
have discovered my environment, improved
the circumstances of my life, mastered cer¬
tain forms of technical knowledge and ac¬
quired or developed such qualities as a
sense of initiative, fraternity, and an
awareness of the importance of community
development for the neediest groups in
society.
Djiby Fediore
student
Photo A. Gorelovski © APN, Moscow
Students of the Institute of Engineers and
Physicians in Moscow prepare for an
academic festival
USSR
I was born and grew up in the village of
Kujnoie, 500 kilometres southeast of
Moscow. I have been living in Moscow
for 7 years. One day when I read a
newspaper article about a ball-bearing fac¬
tory in the capital I decided to come and work
here. Precision tools interested me. I set off.
To begin with, the factory hired me as a
labourer on a modest salary. I shared a room
with a work-mate. Then I studied at the
machine-tool manufacturing technical col¬
lege. Three evenings a week I studied after
work. After a year I became a fitter. It was
more interesting: I was working with ball¬
bearings and I was better paid.
When I finished my technical college
studies, I became an adjuster. That's what I
am today. It's close to the work of an
engineer, but I'm still a workman. I could
become an engineer; I would have to study
some more. But that calls for a very big ef¬
fort. And then I have new responsibilities; I
got married three years ago.
Where I come from people say: build your
house before you get married. When I
became a fitter and had an appartment I
returned to my village where Tonia, my
fiancée, was waiting for me. We came back
to Moscow together. Today we have a two-
year-old son. Tonia is a nurse. Our material
situation has considerably improved. We
can even save a little.
Anatoli Medvedev
worker
24
