North America
Men for all seasons
by Anthony P. Maingot
THE history of the exploitation of
migrant workers in general and in
North America in particular is too
well known to warrant repetition. It has
provided the plot of more than one major
novel and the workers' plight has been
portrayed in all its pathos in more than
one film. That plight tends to be a com¬
bination of substandard wages and living
conditions and a high degree of job in¬
security. More often than not these con¬
ditions have been associated with the agri¬
cultural sector in labour-intensive agro-
industries.
Because such substandard programmes
continue to exist it might be good to look
at some cases where the use of migrant
labour in agriculture has worked well for
the migrant, his family and community as
well as for the employer. It might be pos¬
sible to derive some lessons from a review
of such cases. It is fortunate, therefore,
that we now have good data on two agri¬
cultural programmes utilizing migratory
labour, one in the State of Florida and the
other in Canada.
The 8,000 migrant workers in the Florida
sugar industry are in a way all that is left
of the original bracero (strong arm) pro¬
gramme that started in 1942 and at its
height brought more than 420,000 workers,
mostly Mexican, to work in US agriculture.
Only one part of that large migrant worker
scheme of the 1940s remained intact: the
so-called H-2 programme (from the cat¬
egory of visa granted to temporary work
ers) bringing British West Indians to work
in the Florida sugar cane industry. Estab¬
lished in 1943, it continues up to today.
The story of the success of this H-2 pro¬
gramme is the story of a felicitous match
between nature and economic circum¬
stances in Florida and the cultural ori¬
entations of British West Indians.
Florida cane is grown under conditions
which do not allow full mechanization.
Such a cane culture is not suited to the
use of cane cutting machines; it needs
skilled and dependable manual labour.
Here nature shapes economics, for if a
machete-wielding man in Florida is to com¬
pete with a harvesting machine in Hawaii,
he has to be skilled. But cutting cane man¬
ually is nasty, back-breaking work that no

one in the world engages in unless the
rewards are real, as indeed they have been.
To be sure, the major element of this
reward is monetary the difference
between what the workers make abroad
and what they would! have made staying
home. But there is another incentive which
explains the popularity of the H-2 pro¬
gramme: the worker is not locked into the
"cane culture",, i.e. the complex and
demeaning life style associated with the
sugar plantation which affected not just
the worker but his whole family. Certainly
the companies' stance toward labour
reflects self-interest, not altruism nor a
particular fondness for West Indians.
Here again the reason for the situation
is economic, since the traditional source
of abundant and thus cheaply available
labour does not exist. It has not been dif¬
ficult, therefore, for the U.S. Department
of Labor to provide certification for this
programme: every effort to recruit local
labour has so far failed. This is where both
economics and culture come in, because
the necessary labour is available in the
West Indies where migration and work
abroad have long been integral parts of
the area's cultural orientations.
An interesting cultural aspect of this
migration is that even before the dawning
of the trade union movement West Indians
tended to organize for improvement.
Today these workers who come for the
five-month season are represented through
their union, the British West Indian Cen
tral Labour Organization. Additionally,
being citizens of small but proudly dem¬
ocratic States such as Jamaica, Barbados,
and St. Vincent, they possess the advan¬
tage of having the support and vigilance
of their Governments which, no doubt, are
keenly aware of the contributions the earn¬
ings of these workers make to the balance
of payments and hard currency situation.
The joint effort in favour of workers'
rights has paid off. Apart from subsidized
room and board, they get a 50 per cent
subsidy for travel to the job, and upon
completion of contract, free travel back.
Workers receive a medical exam before
travelling, and are covered by their own
group hospitalization insurance as well as
State-mandated workers' compensation
for job-related injuries. The goal in nego¬
tiating these subsidies is of course to fulfil
the whole purpose of migratory work:
sending much of the earnings back home.
In a fundamental way, work in the Flor¬
ida sugar industry helps to reinforce their
status back home rather than replicating
the terrible wastage of human lives so typ¬
ical of the history of the sugar plantation.
An interesting comparison can be made
with West Indian farm workers in Canada,
where the programme was established
much later than in the USA. First came
the Jamaicans in 1966, followed in 1976
by workers from the eastern Caribbean and
Mexico. By 1982 there were some 6,000
working on fruit, vegetable and tobacco
farms. Over half of these were Jamaicans.
In Canada as in the United States the eco¬
nomic rationale is the same: the inability
to recruit sufficient native workers.
As distinct from Florida, however,
where only eight large growers are
involved, in Canada the farm workers deal
with small farmers; in 1982, 782 employers
participated. The hourly wage in 1983
ranged from $3.50 to $4.80 per hour. As
in the case of those going to Florida, nearly
all had jobs back home when recruited.
However, those going to Canada tend to
come from a different labour pool: over
half were skilled or semi-skilled workers.
As is to be expected, West Indians indi¬
cate that they travel for the increased pay,
yet fully 22 per cent of those in Canada
indicated that they had travelled for the
experience of being overseas.
Although clearly a very small part of the
overall flow of migrant farm workers, espe¬
cially into the United States, the cases
described illustrate the fact that this type
of work does not have to be exploitative
and degrading to the workers to be bene¬
ficial to the employer. Work in agriculture
does not have to be associated with the
wasting "plantation syndrome."
ANTHONY P. MAINGOT, of Trinidad and
Tobago, is professor of sociology and director
of the graduate programme in International Stu¬
dies at Florida International University, Miami,
USA.
25
