A truce for children
by Hélène Ahrweiler
Photo © Felix Tinhes Jaramillo, Bogotá
SPECIFIC texts designed to ensure the
protection of children engaged in
national or international armed
conflicts have already been drawn up by the
Red Cross and the United Nations.
However, these often remain a dead letter
since many conflicts occur with no official
declaration of war.
Cases have been known of thirteen-year-
old paratroopers in action, ten-year-olds
being used to clear minefields and seven-
year-olds taking part in terrorist
operations.
Some obscure and primitive reasoning,
which merits careful psychoanalytical ex¬
amination, seems to prevent us from taking
a bold stand against the indoctrination and
mental preparation of children for war,
their paramilitary training, their employ¬
ment in the preparation of military defence
works, their enrolment in combat units and
even their widespread use in the front line
from the age of ten.
For the militarization of children is not a
new phenomenon. We have only to recall
the children's crusades of the early thir¬
teenth century, one of the causes of which
was probably the population explosion. In
the year 1212, twenty thousand children,
some of them barely eight years old, set out
from Marseilles for the Holy Land. Of the
seven ships in which they embarked, two
sank and the remaining five reached land at
Bougie (present day Bejaia, Algeria) and
Alexandria, where the surviving children
were sold as slaves. Other children's
crusades set out from Italy, Flanders and
from the Rhineland.
It would seem that the time has come to
set out in more detail the rights of children,
to be inscribed alongside the rights of man.
It is true that, in November 1959, the
General Assembly of the United Nations
adopted a ten-point Declaration of the
Rights of the Child. Nevertheless, the in¬
creasingly widespread militarization of
children has not only resulted in the deaths
of many, with others left permanently han¬
dicapped or enclosed in prisoner of war
camps, it also means that whole sections of
the youth of the world are growing up in an
atmosphere of violence; this calls for addi¬
tional, more specific measures.
Unesco has mobilized the international
community for the protection of historic
monuments, that is to say the world's
cultural heritage. Should not similar steps
be taken to mobilize support for the protec¬
tion of children, who make up the world's
human heritage?
Any Convention that might be drawn up
should give priority to two simple measures:
(a) Prohibition of the enlistment of any
child under the age of sixteen for whatever
purpose.
(b) Recognition of the right to education,
which would imply the evacuation of
schools and schoolchildren from any area
which, for whatever reason, had become
destabilized.
On the analogy of truces declared to
enable the wounded to be evacuated and
cared for, a "truce for children" should be
instituted, since children are just as helpless
as the wounded.
"The world", wrote the French author
Georges Bernanos (1888-1948) in his book
A Diary of my Times, "will be judged by
the children." Nor should we forget
another of the same author's sayings:
"Blessed is he who saves from despair the
heart of a child."
HELENE AHRWEILER, who was born in
Athens, has been Rector of the Academy of
Paris and Chancellor of the Universities of
Paris since 1982.
