Who's Who
in the Mahabharata?
by Lokenath Bhattacharya
JARATKARU or Jamadagni? Or was it
Jayadratha, or Jarasandha? There are
so many names beginning with J in the
Mahabharata that I confuse them. Who was
who? Who did what?
A group of trekkers and pilgrims, just
arrived at Bhaironghat after covering on foot
the nine-kilometre distance from Gangotri
near the source of the Ganges, we had
crowded into the only tea-stall at the halting-
place before embarking the next morning on
the two-day bus journey to Rlshikesh from
Lanka, on the other side of the Ganges.
It was already evening and shivering cold,
and the mountains all round, at that altitude
of about 3,000 metres, stood like giant seh-
tries obstructing the view on every side. The
singing-ringing-roaring river down below
drowned our whispers like so many noth¬
ingnesses in an all-engulfing ocean of
silence.
Our chit-chat, to pass the time as we fought
against the cold with chipped cups of hot tea,
had started with a casual question: who was
the king whose name began with J and who
conducted that great sacrifice in the course
of which the Mahabharata story was
recounted for the very first time by a sage?
While we were making wrong guesses, the
answer came from the owner of the tea-stall,
a middle-aged man of great simplicity, whose
face, smile and voice had a touch of the age-
old India. No, he said in a Hindi which we
Bengalis, South Indians and others of the
group had no difficulty in grasping no, it was
Janamejaya, King Parikshit's son, who, in
the course of a sacrifice conducted by him,
requested the sage Valsampayana, a leading
disciple of Vyasa, the author of the epic, to
narrate the story.
j And Jaratkaru? Well, he was the father
of the sage Astika who intervened to save
the life of the serpent Takshaka when Jan¬
amejaya, while making his great sacrifice of
serpents, was determined to persecute the
serpent race.
Then the tea-stall owner took up one by
one the other Js we had mentioned Jamad¬
agni, Jayadratha, Jarasandha, and so on
and described in detail who they were or what
they did.
Time passed as we sat enthralled, imag¬
ining ourselves to be the assembly that had
gathered in the court of Janamejaya, with
the tea-stall owner, an unlettered man, a
replica of the sage Vaisampayana. In a cor
ner of the stall, in the dim light of the lamp,
the silhouette of a man, perhaps a sadhu
(holy man), could be seen standing on one
leg. We were told that he had taken a vow
to remain standing in that posture for one
full year without interruption and that he
would have completed the year on the next
day. Looking like a figure from the Mahab¬
harata, he fitted well into the surroundings
and as a backdrop to our discourse. Trans¬
posed into a space without time, we felt pos¬
sessed by the truth of the saying that what
is not in Bharata (the Mahabharata) is not
in Bharata (India). Just as we carry the
Ganges in our veins, so the battleground of
Kurukshetra, the scene of the eighteen-day
war between the Kauravas and the Pan-
davas, lies in our heart. And that battle is
our inner battle with ourselves. And doesn't
the Mahabharata story almost start with the
Ganges? Wasn't it Ganga the goddess who,
in fulfilment of a curse, assumed human form
to become the wife of King Santanu, to whom
she bore eight sons, the youngest of whom
was Bhishma?
The Mahabharata is a story told to be
heard which continues to be told and heard
by countless millions throughout the length
and breadth of the country during festive
occasions, dramatized in performing arts
such as Kathakali or Yakshagana or the pup¬
pet plays of different regions. No one,
whether educated or illiterate, Is immune to
its overwhelming attraction and Impact. Chil¬
dren learn it at their grandmother's knee, and
village evenings are enlivened when, their
day's work done, villagers gather in the tem¬
ple or under a tree to listen to these stories
being read. Even to this day, in cities like
Calcutta, busy market-places are magically
transformed in the evening when people
gather in clusters in any open space they
can find and listen as someone recounts and
explains an episode from the Mahabharata.
The orality of the Mahabharata has a
sanctity all its own. How many could read
it in India where the literacy rate is around
37 per cent? But ask any passer-by who
Arjuna was, for example, and listen to all he
has to say.
The name of Arjuna brings back another
memory. As a child, on a visit to Maha-
balipuram with my father, I remember making
some stupid remarks about the famous rock-
sculpture known as Arjuna's Penance.
Seeing Arjuna standing there on one leg,
much like the sadhu we later came across
in the tea-stall at Bhaironghat, I laughed at
The great Hindu epic, the Mahabharata
provides the inspiration for Pandavani, a
form of oral literature current in a wide
area of central India. Teejan Bai (right),
one of the best-known contemporary Pan¬
davani singer-narrators, belongs to one
of the two main streams of Pandavani,
the Kapalike school. The performer
recites and sings several episodes from
the epic whilst playing the tambura, a
long-necked, three-string lute with a
sound-box made of half a gourd covered
with the skin of a salamander. The Instru¬
ment is usually made by the performer
himself or herself. The performer is
accompanied by two tambourplayers and
a harmonium player. A second singer
maintains a dialogue with the principal
singer and beats out a rhythm on the
Changuri, a kind of tambourine.
what I then considered to be the futility of
making so much fuss about a person who
had perhaps never existed. My father's
rejoinder was prompt and sharp. If Arjuna
does not exist, who does, you or I? We come
and go; Arjuna remains. He has a vital exist¬
ence in us and lives in our imagination. He
is much more real than the so-called reality
of the factual world.
Composed several thousand years ago,
the Mahabharata possesses in a supreme
manner all the characteristics of a true epic,
and remains an unfailing source of spiritual
strength to the people of India. Generations
of gifted writers have added a mass of mate¬
rial to Vyasa's original, giving the work its
present form of ninety thousand couplets,
which makes it by far the longest epic in the
world. All kinds of historical, legendary, geo¬
graphical and philosophical material has
been added to the original over the centuries.
To writers in these fields, especially when
printing did not exist, the Mahabharata was
like a national library, inclusion in which was
a token of their enrichment of the national
heritage. The immediacy of its grandeur lives
in the hearts of men, more than in a
book.
LOKENATH BHATTACHARYA, of India, is
director of the National Book Trust, New Delhi.
He is the author of several works including The
Prose Poems of Lokenath Bhattacharya (1972)
and The Drum of the Guru (1979).
26
