12

A Unesco approach
to international migration
by Ronald G. Parris
INTERNATIONAL migration,
whether permanent, temporary or sea¬
sonal, legal or illegal, organized or
spontaneous, is inherently characterized by
varying levels of confrontation between
different social systems and cultural tra¬
ditions and has occurred within differing
historical and structural contexts (reli¬
gious, political, economic, the result of war
and natural disasters).
These phenomena have long received
the attention of Unesco, beginning as early
as 1949 with studies ranging from the ques¬
tion of cultural assimilation and the edu¬
cation and training of migrant workers and
their families to the problems associated
with their return and re-adaptation to their
countries of origin.
Resolution 1.142, adopted at the Seven¬
teenth Session of the General Conference
in 1972, called upon Unesco to launch a
specific programme of action on behalf of
migrant workers and their children. Activ¬
ities undertaken to implement this reso¬
lution have included studies of the various
dimensions of migration, wide dissemi¬
nation of their results and the sponsoring
of Meetings of Experts to evaluate these
research findings and to offer recommen
dations for the attention of Member States.
The major orientation of these actions
has been that migration should be con¬
sidered not simply as a labour problem but
as a social, cultural and political process
of intricate dimensions. One practical
objective remains that of encouraging
States to choose and implement appro¬
priate policies in the economic as well as
political and cultural domains that could
lead to the definition of a genuine charter
for immigrants. Such a charter could be
based on the principle of equality of treat¬
ment of immigrants with the local pop¬
ulation, while recognizing the relevance of
making particular distinctions, where spe¬
cific needs exist (for example, language and
skills training) and the importance of the
formation and protection of the cultural
The basis of the apartheid economic sys¬
tem in South Africa is cheap blackmigrant
labour. Millions ofAfricans are denied the
right to live permanently with their fam¬
ilies, which are left in the rural areas or
Bantustans. Many African children see
their fathers only once a year and are
brought up by the womenfolk alone.
Photo shows a family in the "independent
State" of the Transkei in the Republic of
South Africa.
identity of individuals and groups as a
' right.
More recent Unesco programme activ¬
ities have focused on the education and
training of immigrants and the impact of
migration on the social structures of
selected countries, particularly on racial-
ethnic relations. Research has also been
undertaken on the patterns and conse¬
quences of rural-urban migration in Africa,
Asia and Latin America and the mech¬
anisms of. adaptation of migrant workers
to urban life.
In his everyday life, the experience of
the migrant worker is generally one of cul¬
tural alienation, isolation, ambivalence
and rejection, which forces him into social
universes that are generally disconnected
and conflictual. The migrant worker is in
a "nomansland, which is neither that of
his country of origin nor that of his country
of employment," resulting often in the des-
tructuring of the very family group and
immigrant community that he needs to
sustain him. Everyday life is typically orga¬
nized around two poles: his family and
fellow countrymen, in a cultural environ¬
ment resembling or at least drawing on
elements of the culture of the country of
13

^ origin; and his work and public life, in a
culture unfamiliar to him.
This cultural divergence or dichotomy
finds expression in the gradual acquisition
by the migrant of two autonomous lan¬
guage tools: the mother tongue, which pri¬
marily serves him for private use with fam¬
ily and friends ("language of affect") and
a specialized administrative language of the
country of employment, devoid of affective
connotation and representing "the lan¬
guage of power or domination." Inter¬
related with this linguistic dichotomy is the
division of his daily life into two discon¬
nected universes: the universe of work and
that of the cultural ghetto.
The isolation and alienation identifiable
in the general migrant population assume
even more significance when female
migrants are considered. Sex differences,
rather than obscuring the alienation the
migrant experiences qua migrant, tend to
exacerbate the problems of cultural adap¬
tation female migrants have to overcome.
The reproductive behaviour together with
the productive functions of female
migrants constitute the core elements of
their experiences in the countries of
employment and represent the context for
assessing the effects of migration on their
identity, status and cultural behaviour both
inside the family and in the world of work.
The socio-cultural conditions encoun¬
tered by migrant workers and their families
and the patterns of migratory flows them¬
selves take as a point of departure the
international economic, political and
demographic structures that generate
them. These factors include, in particular,
the demand in the more industrialized
countries for cheap manpower and the
need of the labour-surplus countries to sell
their labour power. Deteriorating demo¬
graphic patterns in some of the more indus¬
trialized countries also play a role.
It is also important to consider the par¬
ticular terms and conditions of recruitment
and employment of migrant workers (for
example, organized bilateral agreements,
spontaneous undocumented movements),
Twoyoung Mexican women illegallycross
the Rio Grande del Norte (or Rio Bravo),
which forms the frontier with the United
States, between Ciudad Juárez in Mexico
and El Paso, Texas.
for these too play a role in the socio-
cultural experiences of migrant workers
and their families, including their access
to the institutions and services of the
receiving countries.
For these reasons, the approach to the
problem of migration must be holistic. The
situation of the migrant worker must be
considered in its various dimensions, for
his culture, education and training are all
interrelated with the economic and polit¬
ical factors affecting his labour or employ¬
ment, and these, in turn, should be ref¬
erenced to the racial-ethnic and class
systems of the receiving countries. It is
necessary to keep in mind the effects of
his presence on these systems and the prac¬
tices and policies employed which, by
design or chance, keep him in a state of
economic domination and cultural limbo.
And when considering the problem at the
level of the economy, it could be asserted
that migration,' whether spontaneous or
organized, fails to correct the underlying
weaknesses of the socio-economic struc¬
tures of either the receiving countries or
the countries of origin, while remaining
a structural component of the world
economy.
Institutional discrimination, racial and
ethnic prejudice are common features of
the societies to which the migrants go.
Racial and ethnic prejudice is often mani¬
fest in the terms and conditions of entry
and in official immigration policies, in the
daily practices on the job and in the class¬
room and in indigenous attitudes and daily
contacts between migrant workers and the
local population. In some cases, racial
strains lead to racial violence. The migrant
worker, at first an economic object, soon
becomes a racial-ethnic object.
Leaders in the receiving countries, who
declare themselves in favour of immigra¬
tion, so long as it is limited to certain coun¬
tries of origin, or in favour of extending
civic rights and privileges only to those
immigrants whose "cultural traditions"
more resemble or are more likely to be
compatible with their own, hence making
these immigrants more assimilable, are,
like the more direct opponents of coloured
immigration, declaring a case for racism.
Under present conditions of economic
crisis and unemployment, many receiving
countries re-define the presence of immi-
With Unesco support, the Association
Africaine des Femmes de l'Espace 93 at
Bobigny in the northeastern suburbs of
Paris organizes educational activities
designed to encourage the wives and
daughters ofmigrants toparticipate In the
social life of the host community. Dress¬
making, sewing, knitting, crochetwork,
painting on cloth and dyeing feature
among the range of manual activities
available. Left, the sewing room. Unesco
has offered similar contracts to four
migrant workers' associations: two in
France, one in Switzerland, and one in
Belgium.
14

grants and migrant workers as threatening
the livelihood and survival of the indig¬
enous population or even as an explanation
for the economic ills themselves. Greater
social controls are usually demanded,
including calls for their expulsion and
repatriation.
Examples abound everywhere. Recent
official policy in Nigeria, after the falling
off of oil revenues, has been that of forcible
expulsion of immigrants, particularly illicit
workers. In France, a political party has
been consolidating its political position by
associating immigration with unemploy¬
ment, provoking a vigorous response in
the form of an anti-racist movement mobi¬
lized under the fraternal slogan "Touche
pas à mon pote" ("Don't touch my pal")
which has been relatively successful in cap¬
turing the attention of public opinion and
articulating the opposition of diverse
groups opposed to racism and the scape-
goating of immigrants. The response of
Asian and Caribbean immigrants in Britain
to racial violence and discrimination has
been increased collective organization and
participation at the community level as well
as a marked involvement in trade union
activities.
Finally, what then is the legal status of
immigrants and migrant workers in the
countries of employment? This is a prob¬
lem with which Unesco has also been con¬
cerned. Experience has shown that like
their socio-economic status, their legal sta¬
tus is generally precarious, often depend¬
ing on the discretionary powers of the
administrative authorities. Their legal sta¬
tus could be subjected to reassessment dur¬
ing periods of economic downturn.
This has been the case, for example, with
Asian and Carribean immigrants in Brit¬
ain, where a series of Immigration Acts
beginning with the Commonwealth Immi
gration Act, 1962, have strictly circum¬
scribed the conditions of entry and also
the right of admission of family depend¬
ents, including spouses. This is true also
for some of the labour-importing countries
in West Asia, which have instituted their
own measures of control. The extension
of civic rights to immigrants is closely
guarded. The right, for example, to vote
remains a controversial point of issue in
several of the receiving countries.
RONALD G. PARRIS is a specialist on deve¬
lopment in Unesco's Sector of Social and
Human Sciences. He is a former professor of
sociology at New York University and at Van-
derbilt University, and Dean of the School of
Arts and Sciences at Virginia Union University,
in the United States. He is the author of several
publications on the problems of migration.
