France
The dilemma of the North
African worker
by Abdallah Buhamidi
IMMIGRATION from North Africa to
France is nothing new; it started with
the men who came to fight with the
French forces in the First World War. But
the biggest influx took place more recently
and dates back some thirty or forty years.
Most of the immigrants came after the
Second World War, to help rebuild the
French economy. They provided man¬
power that was plentiful, adaptable and
cheap; the problem of social and cultural
adaptation did not arise.
Neither they nor their French hosts
envisaged long-term coexistence. The
French economy was interested in these
men and women solely as a source of
labour, and the immigrants intended to go
back home as soon as they had saved
enough to give their families, which most
of them had left behind, a better life.
Today this may still be the case for some
600,000 immigrants whose families have
remained in their country of origin. But
for the majority, the situation is no longer
entirely the same, even though most of
them have not abandoned the idea of going
back one day.
In fact a number of recent developments
are causing immigrants from North Africa
to reconsider the question of going home.
As a result of the economic crisis they are
victims of unemployment. The current dif¬
ficulties on the labour market are hitting
them harder than the indigenous popu¬
lation or even other immigrant groups.
Except when the work to be done is
arduous, dangerous or dirty, immigrant
workers are the last to be hired. However,
when firms run into difficulties, reorganize,
and decide to reduce their workforce, they
are also the first to be fired, unless they
are offered the chance of taking early
retirement, possibly accompanied by a
financial inducement to return to their
country of origin.
For the present crisis is not merely short-
term or cyclic. It affects the country's eco¬
nomic structures, which are having to be
adapted to meet the demands of foreign
competition. The necessary modernization
calls for technological competence of the
highest order. The days of unskilled
labour, however cheap, are over.
Furthermore, many of the first arrivals
have now reached the age of retirement
(early or otherwise), and for them the
problem of going back home is com¬
pounded by the question of their children
and their children's future. For the fact
is that, although many have never aban¬
doned the idea of returning home, they
have always postponed it until their chil¬
dren who were either born in France or
came as soon as their father was in a posi¬
tion to give them a home finished their
education.
As they grew up in France, these chil¬
dren acquired attitudes, modes of thought
and a way of life that have made most of
them foreigners in their country of origin,
to which they would find it extremely dif¬
ficult to adapt. The parents too, while they
are foreigners in France, have also grad¬
ually become foreigners in their own coun¬
try.
In such conditions, is it possible to go
back?
The experiences of people who have
made the attempt are very instructive,
although they are so recent that it is dif¬
ficult to draw any general conclusions from
them.
Readaptation to the country of origin
is not a simple matter, either for those who
have made a success of their return or for
those who have encountered difficulties,
especially since the "returnees" are often
ill prepared for the situation.
The most successful cases seem to be
those who adapted best to life in France,
where they acquired knowledge and voca¬
tional skills which made it easier for them
to fit back into the social and working life
of their country of origin.
It has also been observed that the immi¬
grants' children who have achieved the best
results in French schools are those who
have maintained the closest ties with their
original culture and with the chief vehicles
of that culture, their parents. The problem
of the social and cultural adaptation in
France of North African immigrants and
their children is thus closely linked in a
complex interaction with the problem of
identity.

Painter Rachid Khimoune's interest in
Arabic calligraphy and geometric man¬
hole cover designs has Inspired an un¬
usual artistic experiment. He makes casts
of the covers and reproduces them on
large canvases into which he incorpo¬
rates pages of writing. "The street is the
immigrant's lot, " he says. "I find the same
arabesques there as I do In Muslim art."
Integration difficulties were a logical
result of living in a community which was
regarded solely as a source of labour and
which was relegated to the fringes of the
host society and its culture. Integration was
not encouraged. Apart from these diffi¬
culties, the problem of the adaptation of
North African workers was distorted by
an enormous misunderstanding which tran¬
scended the simple question of adopting
the laws and customs of the host country
and which made any possible integration
dependent on repudiation of one's self.
The values so dear to North African
immigrants and their culture, perceived in
France in terms of clichés divorced from
the historical context common to the two
shores of this part of the Mediterranean,
had no chance of asserting themselves
against those of the host country.
The rejection of certain forms of expres¬
sion of this immigrant community has been
attributed to the fact that Arab Muslim
culture is very different from European
culture. This explanation is not fully sat¬
isfactory, since in other circumstances the
two cultures have several times proved to
be fully complementary and perfectly com¬
patible.
At a very early stage, the values of which
the parents were the bearers were rejected
not only by the host society but also by
their own children, who attributed their
difficulties to their cultural identity and
therefore to their parents.
Through the school and the acquisition
of a working knowledge of the language,
"He is the son of Immigrants, adrift
between two cultures, two histories, and
two languages... inventing his own roots,
forming his own attachments," wrote
Algerian writer Mehdl Charef in his novel
Le Thé au Harem d'Archi Ahmed, which
he successfully adapted for the screen
In 1984. Cultural ambivalence can be a
bitter experience for second-generation
immigrants, banishing them to the fringe
of two worlds, but it can also be a source
ofcreativity. Novelist Leila Sebbar, above,
is the daughter of an Algerian father and
a French mother. She draws inspiration
for her work in the confluence of two rich
civilizations.
even the less gifted children soon gained
access to a code for understanding the host
society which was a closed book for their
parents, who thus lost their status as socio-
cultural initiators the basis of their
authority and its "legitimacy".
Because of their ambiguous attitude to
their own identity, the parents contributed
involuntarily to the deterioration of their
relations with their children. Anxious to
resemble the dominant model through the
educational and social success of their chil¬
dren, they overvalued that model to the
detriment of their own cultural values, to
which their children should have referred.
Caught up in this contradiction, the chil¬
dren harboured a negative image of them¬
selves and linked this disparaged identity
with their failure, which they saw as pre¬
ordained. This situation created conflict
within the family and jeopardized its co¬
hesion as a group. The father was the first
victim and then by way of reaction the
children, who in such circumstances were
bound to do badly at school. In these con¬
ditions many young people have rejected
their culture of origin, while failing to
acquire access to the host culture or to
achieve the qualifications necessary to
achieve a satisfying social and professional
life, still less the integration dreamed of
by their parents.
"In the past we thought of going back to
Algeria one day. Now we know we'll stay
here," says sculptor Mohand Amara.
Going back was once the dream of many
Immigrants, but is it possible for their
children? Many immigrants are only par¬
tially integrated in the host society, but
no longer feel they belong in their society
of origin, which also regards them as out¬
siders.
The contribution made to. the French
economy and culture by immigrants from
North Africa has been far from negligible.
Thanks to their constant comings and
goings between the two shores of the Med¬
iterranean, North African immigrants have
become an organic link between France
and the Maghreb, participating in the com¬
merce between the two cultures.
Through its contact with immigrant chil¬
dren, the French educational system is re¬
examining its methods in such a way that
many French children, hitherto excluded
because of their non-conformism from the
traditional channels of knowledge and
instruction, will certainly benefit.
Mention should also be made of the
growing number of writers and artists
(especially musicians, painters and film¬
makers) whose specific modes of expres¬
sion are making a mark on French cultural
trends.
One of the greatest benefits which
i France is reaping from the presence of
North African immigrant workers is
undoubtedly an awareness, still in its
infancy, of her pluralistic identity, the
; source of all her riches, symbolized by the
slogan chanted during a recent anti-racist
demonstration: "First, second, third,
fourth generation, we are all the children
i of immigrants." '
ABDALLAH BUHAMIDI, of Morocco, is a psy¬
chologist and guidance counsellor with the
Paris-based association Jeunesse, Culture, Loi¬
sirs et Technique. He is also director of the
association's specialized guidance service.
17
