A road cleared amidst the devastation of Hiroshima.



A time-table for peace
by the Venerable Gyotsu N. Sato
MOST Japanese over sixty today
remember the Second World
War with great bitterness.
They remember the agonizing loss of
life of their families and other loved ones.
They remember with no less regret,
although without the same inner suffering,
the loss of their precious possessions and
livelihoods as well as the destruction of
the all-encompassing texture of their
cultural values.
The vast potential for death, destruction
and evil inherent in war, either in the form
of sudden slaughter or of protracted suf¬
fering on a massive scale, has grown in
the past four decades until the total denial
of life-sustaining social and environmen¬
tal systems is now possible, including the
ultimate disruption of the environment on
a global scale.
To some extent this was perceived by
wise observers forty years ago, but today
it is a nightmare experienced by
everyone.
On this bridge at Hiroshima a passerby
left a white "atomic shadow" on the
pavement which his or her body had
screened from nuclear radiation. It is
estimated that 60 per cent of the deaths at
Hiroshima were caused by thermal rays
and fire, 20 per cent were due to injuries
caused by the blast, and 20 per cent to
physical disorders caused by radiation.
The war's far-reaching destruction both
of mind and matter, and its after-effects
which went far beyond those of previous
wars, enable us to envisage for the future
a vast, comprehensive human suffering
reaching its ultimate dimension.
In view of the immensity of the scourges
of war, we, the people of the United Na¬
tions, developed a common conception of
a time when international security should
no longer be sought in the accumulation
of armaments, through the doctrine of
alignment and strategic superiority, or
through a precarious balance of deter¬
rence, but in disarmament. This concep¬
tion has been transformed into a historic
E
E
E
o
u
©
20

r±st$mfa#t¿mtJziMz®ancopi<!>otzo
WII¡rt"JK:'^)V:'[:IK¡
»mtXítA f.iWtL Wfi : a: rr; Al V ~ ^ «Mu > \WT ;¿*¡; : i l?; r. VN lt¿ .^ í,°?A-avr:írt^J.
R*í.iftir(»ii. u+.i't BttCta
-.atala»^'
19*
""
S¡3
When he cried, "Mother!", only his voice was recognizable. HIROSHIMA 1945
The mhcol uniform of Toshbki Asahi.
Tb* bbll LT-iuirrJ »tule lïurf t-tít UavmMnl rît «hi' iMrtks ij tito Mutet»! RLvrr
(400 mrtrr\ in-tn ihc hj.TM.mLcT.i Thi' M ,h±ti^ jntl ihn- .^*ilii-r wlki «*J .h ilvm dirtl lui cru- -,|vi
TcaJiuii. bewem. ivfa bnall\ ihtr to ntth Imue. Hb I Jit Ml Witte* an J jj| [be ikin ia>J |\tUt Lit <D ihe [
t h» mother cuuld mi- kíHj^íT rrrojcniTC him. Hi- dull ihr" nmining ci Aúi attto)«*»i-iiioí.ir @
human consensus set forth in the Final
Document of the United Nations Special
Session on Disarmament, 1978.
We Japanese are unable to forget even
for a moment the results of a hurried war¬
time experiment in societal destruction
wreaked on two medium-sized cities,
each with a population of 400,000,
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. One reason why
the experiments were performed was to
compare the results of different fissile
matters: Hiroshima was destroyed with a
bomb whose fissile material was uranium
equivalent to 12.5 kilotonnes of TNT,
Nagasaki by 25 kilotonnes of TNT
equivalent of plutonium.
It has been calculated that 1 50,000 died
at Hiroshima, and 75,000 at Nagasaki
within six months of the bombs being
dropped. Even today there are scientists
who claim that less casualties were caus¬
ed by the effects of radiation than was
once believed. They have tried and are
still trying to lay more emphasis on blast
effects than on the effects of radiation, at
a time when Japan's Hibakusha, the
atom-bomb survivors, are engaged in the
final stages of a struggle for a State
Reparation Law, before the last witnesses
have disappeared.
There must be renewed efforts on the
part of all the world's nation-States,
whether or not they are members of the
United Nations, to reconfirm the agreed
Principles of Disarmament unanimously
adopted in the First Special Session on
Disarmament in 1978. There must be
Fragments ofclothing, watches and other
accessories shown in this poster belong¬
ed to some of those who perished in the
atomic bomb attack on Hiroshima on 6
August 1945. In centre, the school
uniform ofa boy who died 3 days after the
bomb was dropped. The following year
the city anounced that the bomb had kill¬
ed 118,661 people. Today the death toll
from the bomb is estimated at over
200,000.
disarmament negotiations and a time¬
table leading to General and Complete
Disarmament, with nuclear disarmament
being given the highest level of priority.
Our fellow Buddhists, under the
guidance of the late Sage the Most
Venerable Nichidatsu Fujii, have travelled
all round the world in a World Peace
March. In support of a Time-Limited Com¬
prehensive Disarmament Programme,
they travelled over five continents via five
routes, starting from the venue of the
World Assembly of Religious Workers for
General and Nuclear Disarmament held
in Tokyo in April 1981, and ending at the
Second Special Session on Disarmament
held in New York in June and July 1982.
How can the disarmament time-table be
arranged? How should we bind the
behaviour of all States? Here I should like
to plead that all nation-States should now
agree to the Comprehensive Disarma¬
ment Programme and complete their im¬
plementation of it by the end of this cen¬
tury at the latest. They should, first of all,
Declare the use of nuclear weapons il¬
legal, under any circumstances,
Defuse and abandon on a prorata basis
all nuclear war-heads ¡n all carriers and in
all arsenals,
Stop production of nuclear fissile
material for military purposes,
Stop nuclear explosions at once either
for military or "peaceful" purposes,
Stop immediately extra-territorial
deployment of nuclear-related weapon
systems.
This reiteration of the historic consen¬
sus is imperative if this generation of ours,
which is responsible for having created
the interacting postures for fighting
nuclear war on each side of the con¬
fronting blocs, is not to unleash a nuclear
war.
Let us all demand not only the powerful
nuclear super-States but all States around
the world, to co-operate in the formulation
of the Comprehensive Disarmament Pro¬
gramme accompanied by the binding
time-table mentioned above, and then let
us see!
GYOTSU NICHIGU SATO is a Japanese
Buddhist monk who is Vice-President of the
Geneva-based International Peace Bureau.
After graduating from the Imperial Military
Academy, he served in the Japanese Air Force
and later worked on missile development.
Since he entered the Buddhist Order of Nihon-
zan Myohoji in 1945 his activities on behalf of
peace have taken him to many parts of the
world. (See "From Man of War to Man of
Peace," Unesco Courier, September 1980).
21
