1986: Year of Peace/ 11
MOKarHAPOOHAfl
Scientists and peace
A Conference on the theme "Scientists
on the Problems of Peace and Pre¬
vention of Nuclear War" was held in
Moscow from 27 to 29 May in the context of
the International Year of Peace. Those
attending the Conference included not only
Soviet delegates but also over a hundred
scientists from 44 countries representing all
the continents.
Representatives of Mr. Javier Perez de
Cuellar, Secretary-General of the United
Nations, and of Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow,
Director-General of Unesco, emphasized the
importance' of a conference whose theme, as
the representative of the Director-General of
Unesco pointed out, "epitomizes the struggle
in which mankind is engaged to save our
planet and humanity from a nuclear holo¬
caust."
The ultimate aim of the Conference was to
work towards the total elimination of the nu¬
clear arsenal and other means of mass des¬
truction before the year 2000, an aim which,
like all the initiatives stimulated by the Interna¬
tional Year of Peace, has been warmly wel¬
comed by world opinion. The proposals put
forward by the Soviet Union in order to attain
this objective were spelled out in detail in a
report entitled "For a world free from nuclear
arms in the 21st century", presented by Mr.
Anatoly Dobrynin, Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union.
After a report on the activity of the Commit¬
tee of Soviet Scientists for Peace and against
the Nuclear Threat, presented by the Commit¬
tee's chairman, Mr. Evgeniy Velikhov, a num¬
ber of study groups examined certain topics in
greater depth, notably "Prevention of the mili¬
tarization of space and international co-oper¬
ation", "Current problems of nuclear disarma¬
ment and the limitation of conventional
armaments" and "Probable consequences of
a nuclear conflict".
New information presented by Mr. Georgy
Golitsyn, a Corresponding Member of the
USSR Academy of Sciences, speaking on
behalf of a large group of Soviet scientists,
brought the "nuclear winter" scenario (see the
Unesco Courier, May 1 985) into clearer focus.
In the event of an atomic war, the discharge of
soot after nuclear explosions into the upper
layers of the troposphere and into the strato¬
sphere would in themselves be enough to
cause serious climatic disturbances.
Sir Frederick Warner (United Kingdom)
presented the results of research into the
environmental consequences of nuclear war,
carried out as part of the ENUWAR project of
the Scientific Committee on Problems of the
Environment (SCOPE) of the International
Council of Scientific Unions. Some 300 re¬
searchers from 30 countries are taking part in
this work.
One speaker, Mr. B. Raushenbakh (USSR)
pointed out the dangers for humanity inherent
in the increasing computerization of the tech¬
nologies of destruction. Mr. S. Gustavsson
(Sweden) stressed the need to develop furth¬
er international legal safeguards with a view to
avoiding nuclear war. Messrs R. Khan (India),
O. Obassanjo (Nigeria), T. Berendt (Hungary)
and I. Ivanov (USSR) emphasized the dis¬
astrous consequences of the arms race,
especially for developing countries, while Mr.
A. Fokin (USSR) drew attention to the fact that
chemical weapons, which are less complex
and costly than the nuclear arsenal, are within
reach of a larger number of countries and that
their banning is all the more urgent. Finally,
Mr. B. Sendov (Bulgaria) recalled that peace
education for the young generation was one of
the keys to future peace.
At the close of the Conference, an "Appeal
to the Scientists of the World" was adopted.
The only way to save humanity, it states, is
that of genuine disarmament and international
co-operation in every field of constructive
action: from space exploration to the exploita¬
tion of the ocean depths, from environmental
protection to the non-military use of atomic
energy, from the solution of the world hunger
problem to the elimination of epidemics and
disease.
