p.
Brazil and its neighbours
by Eric Nepomuceno
Above, Desembarque de Pedro Alvares
Cabrai em Porto Seguro em 1500 ("Pedro
Alvares Cabrai landing at Porto Seguro,
1500"), oil on canvas (1922) by the Brazi¬
lian artist Oscar Pereira da Silva (1867-
1939). In 1500 the Portuguese Government
sent Cabrai to follow the route discovered
by Vasco da Gama around the Cape of
Good Hope to India. To avoid the calms of
the Gulfof Guinea, orto carry outpossible
instructions from the Portuguese king
(who may have wanted to extend his
dominion over a part of the globe which
fell within the Portuguese sphere as de¬
fined by the Treaty of TordesiIlas of 1494),
Cabrai sailed so far westwards that he
sighted the coast of what is today the
Brazilian State of Babia. He went ashore
and took possession of land which he
named Vera Cruz ("True Cross"), a name
which was soon abandoned in favour of
Brazilafter the valuablereddyewood{pau-
brasil) in which the country abounded.
THE most outstanding feature of
Brazil's relations with her neigh¬
bours has always been the fun¬
damental differences existing between
them. Brazil was discovered and colo¬
nized by the Portuguese indeed, for
fourteen years at the beginning of the
nineteenth century it was the seat of the
Portuguese royal family and court
whereas the other South American terri¬
tories came under the control of the
Spanish Crown.
Strangely enough, Christopher Col¬
umbus began by seeking, albeit unsuc¬
cessfully, the support of the Portuguese
sovereigns for his plans. Had he managed
to convince them, the colonization of the
South American continent might well
have been more balanced and the differ¬
ences less pronounced.
In a series of Papal Bulls promulgated
between 1492 and 1494, the Catholic
kings of Spain were granted the privileges
of the conquest which Columbus had
been instrumental in starting. All the
conquered lands lying west of the meri¬
dian passing through Cape Verde and the
Azores came under Spanish jurisdiction.
King John II of Portugal complained to
the Pope and an attempt was made,
through a further set of Bulls, to grant
certain rights to the Portuguese. When
the tension between the two powers was
reaching alarming proportions, the two
monarchs agreed on the "partition of the
ocean sea", which was enshrined in the
Treaty of Tordesillas (1494). This docu¬
ment provided for the demarcation of
areas in lands already discovered or "yet
to be discovered", while respecting the
rights acquired by Portugal and Castile,
but the precise boundaries were never
drawn. Indeed, had the provisions of the
Treaty been complied with, Brazil would
have only one-third of its present-day
landmass. Moreover, both Portugal and
11

y.Û^'X '
^ Spain always tried to draw the "dividing-
line" in places that best suited their
interests at the time.
For thirty years from the discovery of
Brazil by Pedro Alvares Cabrai in 1500 to
the arrival of the expedition led by Mar-
tim Afonso de Sousa in 1530 the Portu¬
guese Crown did not pay much heed to its
new colony. Cabrai was not a "naviga¬
tor", and the purpose of his expedition
was not so much to explore the country as
to set up a trading station in the port of
Calicut in India all of which suggests
that Brazil, like the rest of the Americas,
was discovered only by chance.
The exploratory expeditions which
sailed along much of the seaboard in 1501
and 1502 came to the conclusion that the
territory was not an island, as Cabrai had
originally believed. Various historians
claim that the kings of Portugal main¬
tained the utmost secrecy about the new
discoveries to protect them from the
covetous eyes of more powerful nations.
Furthermore, the new colony did not
have many attractions: it was too large,
and although it produced timber, there
were no signs of precious metals or
spices. This was an age when the Indies
were synonymous with Eldorado, when a
sack of pepper was worth its weight in
gold, and Cabral's exploit only spelt dis¬
appointment and tedium. The timber
supplied by the colony entailed heavy
handling costs and the vast area on which
it was produced had to be defended. The
extensive seaboard whetted the greedy
appetites of other European countries,
which felt wronged by the Treaty of Tor-
desillas. Since there was no prospect of
obtaining an immediate return, the King
of Portugal embarked on the costly task
of exploring the colony. To all intents and
purposes, however, the new-found terri¬
tory was left to its own devices.
The first colonizing expedition led by
Martim Afonso de Sousa came across a
handful of Frenchmen living on those
forsaken lands, but they were expelled
and the settlement of Portuguese com¬
munities began. Meanwhile, Spanish col¬
onization was well underway; by 1540
there were settlements virtually through¬
out the area conquered by the Spanish,
whereas Brazil was sparsely colonized
and the settlements were primarily con¬
centrated on the coast. The Portuguese
"conquistadores" benefited from land
concessions, but they ran their own pri¬
vate ventures without any support from
the Crown and the fruits of their labours
largely depended on the good fortune of
"entrepreneurs". Accordingly, very few
young colonies managed to prosper.
In 1580, the Kingdoms of Portugal and
Spain formed the Iberian Union, and the
colonization of Brazil was given fresh
impetus, but this did not bring the Brazi¬
lian "sub-continent" and its neighbours
any closer together. Parts of Brazil were
invaded by the Dutch in the Northeast,
by the French in the North and on the
southern central seaboard and the
struggle to expel these intruders resulted
in the occupation and colonization forces
penetrating far beyond the tentative
limits laid down by the Treaty of Torde-
sillas. In little more than a century the
Pedro I ruled as the first emperor of Brazil
from 1822 to 1831. He was appointed Re¬
gent in 1821 when his father King John VI
of Portugal returned to Lisbon from Brazil
where he and his family had taken refuge
after Napoleon's conquest of Portugal in
1807. When Pedro issued a declaration of
Brazilian independence on 7 September
1822, he is said to have been wearing on
his breast a yellow flower with a green
centre, thus choosing the colours of Inde¬
pendent Brazil. On 12 October he was
proclaimed constitutional emperor of Bra¬
zil at Rio de Janeiro. Above, Acclamation
of Emperor Pedro I, by Jean-Baptiste
Debret (1768-1848), a French painter who
was the imperial family's officialartist until
1831.
Portuguese Crown thus doubled the size
of its initial bridgehead in South
America.
The expeditions originally mounted to
capture and enslave the indigenous
population came to an end, but then
others were launched between 1628 and
1641 against the Spanish Jesuit missions
in a number of places in the interior of
what is today southern Brazil. Through¬
out the eighteenth century, Portuguese
expeditions continued to settle the cen¬
tre-west region and add more territory to
the colony. Further treaties were con¬
cluded with Spain, but the expansionist
movement went on, not slowing down
but changing its direction as the Portu¬
guese took over vast areas of Amazonia.
The pace then slackened and expan¬
sion almost came to a halt in 1822, when y
12

\ U i m "fi - " ^ ;* ** « ;
Gathering in front of the Imperial Govern¬
ment Palace, Rio de Janeiro, on 13 May
1888, the day when the abolition ofslavery
was decreed in Brazil. Photo above, taken
by Luis Ferreira, is in the collection ofDom
Pedro de Orleans e Braganga.
Sao Paulo is Brazil's biggest city and eco¬
nomic nerve centre as well as being the
capital of the State of Sao Paulo. From
here in the 17th century expeditions orga¬
nized by adventurers known as ban-
deirantes (from the bandeira or flag
around which they rallied) set out into the
interior with the purpose of capturing
Indian slaves or finding gold andprecious
stones. One of the most famous of these
expeditions which marked the start of ter¬
ritorial expansion in Brazil was led by
Antonio Raposo Tavares, who left Säo
Paulo in 1628 with 8,000 men, crossed the
Mato Grosso, reached the Bolivian Andes
and came back down the Amazon. The
Monumento as Bandeiras, below, was
erected In Säo Paulo's Ibirapuera Park in
memory of these early pioneers. The
monument is by Victor Brécheret (1894-
1955), a Brazilian artist of French origin
who introduced Brazilian sculpture to new
ideas and trends.

the independence of Brazil was declared.
The relative standstill was partly due to
political contingencies connected with in¬
dependence, the consolidation of which
was hindered by outbreaks of domestic
unrest, and partly to a period of consider¬
able prosperity enjoyed by the agricul¬
tural export sector: the absolute domina¬
tion exercised by the central-southern
region pushed expansionism into the
background.
The Brazilian Empire (1822-1889) and
the Republic in its early years spent much
time and energy in securing international
recognition of the country's borders and
in consolidating control and sovereignty
over the territories inherited from the
Portuguese Crown, but this did not stop
expansion from going ahead, chiefly in
the Amazon region. The final acquisition
of land occurred in the early years of the
twentieth century, when Bolivia relin¬
quished the 200,000 square kilometres of
the Acre region following swift military
action, subject to the payment of 2 mil¬
lion pounds sterling in compensation,
and a promise to build a railway line
linking Bolivian territory with the
Madeira and Amazon rivers.
Hence the outcome of the constant
conflict of interests between the King¬
doms of Portugal and Castile, and of the
colonization on which they both embar¬
ked, was that Brazil and its neighbours
grew apart. The South American con¬
sciousness that is so evident in the Span¬
ish-American countries is certainly not a
Brazilian characteristic. The community
of interests which Simon Bolivar and José
de San Martín envisioned, going beyond
the confines of the patria chica
(homeland), is a Spanish-American view
to which Brazilians have never managed
to subscribe.
There has always been a special rela¬
tionship between Brazil and its largest
and most powerful neighbour, Argenti¬
na. Because of their national characteris¬
tics and the influence they wield in the
South American context, relations be¬
tween the two countries have always been
very important but, curiously enough,
they have not been among the priorities
of either.
In its expansionist drive, the Portu¬
guese colony came up against dense
forest in the North and Centre West,
while in the South it faced a population of
Hispanic origin . The formation of the two
nations Brazil and Argentina was dic¬
tated by the major objectives of the
metropolitan powers. The Spanish
Empire was primarily interested in min¬
ing the precious metals to be found on the
Peruvian and Bolivian highlands, and did
not pay too much attention to the expan¬
sionist designs of the Portuguese on the
Río de la Plata estuary. However, the
population migrating from the highlands
found excellent farming and stockraising
conditions in this region and chose to
occupy both banks of the river and resist
incursions from the North.

Above, workers in an aircraft factory, Säo
Paulo State. Brazil's industry is highly
diversified and competitive on world mar¬
kets. Favoured by its abundant iron ore,
Brazil is the world's third largest producer
of iron and steel, and has a dynamic ener¬
gypolicy especially regarding the produc¬
tion of hydroelectric power. A wide range
ofprocessing industries are almost exclu¬
sively based in or near the big cities, espe¬
cially Säo Paulo, which far outstrips Rio de
Janeiro and Belo Horizonte In this field.
Following this first clash of interests,
and for many years thereafter, relations
between Brazilians and Argentines, with
the Uruguayans wedged between them,
oscillated between a kind of confronta¬
tion and lukewarm attempts at co-oper¬
ation. Over a period extending from in¬
dependence to the first half of the twen¬
tieth century, two closely related forces
contended for a measure of domination
in South America. These were, on the
one hand, the Argentine élites, who were
essentially responsive to the interests of
the British Empire and, on the other, the
Brazilian élites, who sought to gravitate
towards the orbit of the rising power of
North America.
Over the past forty years, the struggle
between Brazil and Argentina for
hypothetical supremacy in South Amer¬
ica has been reduced to a war of words.
Among the reasons for this are the econo¬
mic growth and accelerated industrial de
velopment of both countries; the decline
of British influence in the region and the
emergence of new power centres with the
consequent diversification of internation¬
al relationships; and the manifest state of
dependence in which both Brazil and
Argentina found themselves for some
decades. In the 1950s, and to an even
greater degree following the oil crisis in
the 1970s, Brazil and Argentina began to
show growing signs of having reciprocal
interests. The same is true of Brazil's
relations with some of its other South
American neighbours, as negotiations
aimed at bringing about closer bilateral
and multilateral relations are being
stepped up.
A whole series of domestic and exter¬
nal factors, both positive and negative
ranging from the oil crisis to the runaway
growth of the foreign debt and including
the gradual return of almost all the coun¬
tries of the region to elected or transition¬
al civilian governments paving the way
for full democracy are now combining
to strengthen future relations between
Brazil and the other countries of South
America.
For the first time since the sudden in¬
terruption of the normal constitutional
process more than twenty-two years ago,
Brazil now appears prepared to treat the
other Latin-American countries on an
equal footing. If she does so, Brazilians
will undoubtedly see that immense differ¬
ences still exist, such as the marked influ
ence of African cultures on the formation
of their national identity and the absence
(contrary to the situation in almost all the
surrounding countries) of a significant
contribution from ancestral indigenous
cultures. At the same time, however,
they will be able to see very many points
of similarity that have hitherto been vir¬
tually concealed.
The Brazilians' true discovery of Latin
America will probably be a slow process.
The first step will entail taking the coun¬
try out of the orbit of official pronounce¬
ments and bilateral trade and instilling
awareness among the population. When
this happens, the tango will still be the
tango and the samba will still be the sam¬
ba, just as pisco' and cachaca,2 feijoada,3
cebiche4 and parrillc? will not necessarily
mix happily. Even so, there can be no
doubt that our dances, national drinks
and dishes and, above all, those who
partake of them, will gain thereby.
1. High quality brandy made mainly at Pisco (Peru).
2. Sugar-cane alcohol (Brazil).
3. Dish consisting of beans, salt pork, dried meat and
sausages (Brazil).
4. Marinated fish dish (Peru).
5. Barbecued meat (Spanish-American word).
ERIC NEPOMUCENO, Brazilian writer andjour¬
nalist, has published several collections of short
stories, notably Antes do invernó (Before the
Winter, 1 984) as well as a study on Hemingway,
Madrid non era uma festa (Madrid was no Fiesta,
1978), and historical and political essays (es¬
pecially on Cuba and Nicaragua). He writes on
Brazilian affairs for several Spanish and Latin
American newspapers.
15
