Satellites scan the ocean
Modern technology
in the service of oceanography
by D. James Baker
WHEN I entered oceanography
in the early 1960s, rapid strides
were being made towards de¬
scribing and predicting ocean behaviour.
The first expedition in whióh I partici¬
pated spent six months in the Indian
Ocean helping to measure the currents
and winds in the equatorial regions there.
But the technology and the research ships
available to us at that time had serious
limitations. The ship we used was the
Argo, a former submarine rescue ship
deeded from the United States Navy to
the Scripps Institution of Oceanography
and our equipment was largely devoid of
electronics. Our officers used celestial
navigation, dead-reckoning and local
measurements. The difficulty of obtain¬
ing any kind of global view or photograph
of conditions at any one time over a large
area of the Indian Ocean was painfully
obvious.
Today, our instruments are much more
sophisticated, largely because of the re¬
volution in micro-electronics and com¬
puters, but the limitations of measure¬
ments from ships are still with us.
Measurement of the ocean from satellites
promises to liberate us from many of
these shipboard limitations. Navigation
by satellite, a technique that uses satel¬
lites and on-board receivers and com¬
puters, is commonplace for research
ships and commercial vessels. Accurate
positioning is available at two hourly in¬
tervals in most regions of the world and in
any weather conditions. We are also now
beginning to use other satellite data to get
photographs of the behaviour of the
oceans its temperature, the shape of its
The SEASAT satellite which produced the
global measurements of water vapour,
wind speed and wave height illustrated on
colour page opposite. Drawing shows
SEASAT in polar orbit over Alaska.
surface, its waves and its chemical and
biological properties.
The ocean is a subject of intense in¬
terest to the applied scientist for a variety
of reasons. Whereas in the past increas¬
ing energy and food requirements could
be met by expansion of frontiers, use of
chemicals for fertilizers and pesticides,
and by using available reserves of gas and
oil, we are today being confronted by the
finite dimensions of the world. We are at
the point where we affect both regional
and global climate. We are a factor in the

^ global cycles of carbon, nitrogen, phos¬
phorus and sulphur because we produce
significant amounts of these chemicals
and dump them into the air and the sea. It
is essential that we understand how the
overall ocean-atmosphere system works
if we are to live successfully with global
change. We have to understand the cyc¬
ling of energy, waste and essential che¬
micals through the atmosphere, land and
oceans.
The oceans regulate the climate and
make it more predictable. The slow varia¬
tions of ocean currents which affect the
transfer of heat to the atmosphere could,
in the view of many experts, provide a
mechanism for predicting the climatic
changes in the atmosphere. But in order
to understand these variations of ocean
currents we need to understand the
general circulation of the ocean, how the
currents are driven and how and why they
change. Another largely unknown factor
in the climatic system involves the role of
sea-snow and sea-ice. Both of these are
quantities that can be measured and mon¬
itored by satellite.
The distribution and cycling of nut¬
rients is also important to the "habitabi-
lity" of our planet. The nutrients are re
lated to the biological productivity cycle
through the atmosphere, rivers, coastal
zones and the deep ocean. The continen¬
tal shelf is a critical area. Most of the
world's fisheries occur here, much of the
world's petroleum production may be in
these areas in the future and it is here that
most of man's pollution enters the ocean.
The shelf is a direct source of food for
humanity and the pressures on this food
supply are increasing rapidly. We must
know what is happening here and we
must be able to understand the mechan¬
isms that control the transport of these
nutrients from terrestrial sources to
oceanic sinks. To do this we must be able
to understand the interactions between
physical and biological processes in the
oceans. Large-scale satellite views of nut¬
rients in the ocean are necessary for this
understanding.
Changes in the amount and timing of
global rainfall are critical for farmers.
The green revolution has shown dramati¬
cally how genetic engineering can pro¬
vide farmers with exactly the right kind of
crops for a maximum of productivity if
the water resources are known. Thus
rainfall is critical, but we must know it
globally. The problem is not yet solved;
j -jjjr£3&g?9*¡7'"'" ' J Jküü
'Ï	
©
.¿***
in fact, the natural rainfall patterns over
the globe are only marginally predictable
by the use of climate models now avail¬
able. Global rainfall is another parameter
that we can measure by satellite.
For the oceanographer, ships are
essential. There is no other way to get
samples of water, chemicals or biological
organisms from the sea. But ships alone
cannot give us an overall view of the
ocean. A typical research ship travels at
about ten knots; at that speed it takes
about ten days to make a single crossing
of the North Atlantic. It can therefore
take months to complete a careful survey
of any large region, and in that time the
state of the ocean can change drastically.
From ships and from the relatively few
buoys that are moored in the ocean for
weather measurements and for research
purposes, we get an average view of the
ocean's properties (for example its
temperature and salinity) and of near-
surface weather. This average view is im¬
portant, but we have to recognize that the
ocean is continually changing. It does not
change as fast as the atmosphere, but it
does behave in a similar way. The atmos¬
phere changes its weather in a few days
and its climate varies from year to year.
The ocean's "weather", that is, the cur¬
rents and temperatures, changes over
periods of a few weeks instead of a few
days. The ocean's "climate" also changes
from year to year.
But how do we get an overall view of
the ocean? Our instruments have to be
placed in a position away from the earth
in order to see it all at once. Satellites are
the only way. Typically satellites receive
their power from the sun, and they are
classified as either passive or active. The
passive satellites receive the radiation
that comes from the earth and attempt to
interpret it; the active satellites illumin¬
ate the sea with specified radiation and
observe the reflected pulses. We now
have satellites that can measure the shape
of the ocean's surface, the surface
temperature of the ocean, the wind speed
near the surface, the extent of the polar
ice, the surface chlorophyll and a variety
of properties in the atmosphere.
From these instruments we get a global
view either an image of almost half the
earth at a time from a satellite in geosta-
Above, the US research ship Anton Bruun,
which took part In the International Indian
Ocean Expedition. Before being refitted
for ocean biology research and renamed
in honour of the famous Danish oceano¬
grapher, it was the US presidential yacht
Williamsburg.
Left, the Argo, the research vessel of the
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, San
Diego, California.
24

ON- 90E QÇ09
tionary orbit, or from a series of tracks of
"low earth orbiter satellites" which travel
closer to the earth and repeat their orbits
about every ninety minutes. Thus we
have at our disposal a new and remark¬
able series of pictures of the ocean and
the land, and this new imagery has dra¬
matically changed the way in which we
view the ocean, allowing us to plan for
new research programmes. We now see
the possibility of describing and under¬
standing some of the important cycles of
climate, of nutrients and of other en¬
vironmental factors that affect global
habitability.
Enormous quantities of data have been
collected since the early 1960s, when
satellites first came into use, but it is only
in recent years that satellite pictures that
can be used for real scientific understand¬
ing of the ocean have become available.
The four photographs on page 22 demon¬
strate the power of these new techniques.
Encouraged by this technological
advance, a number of scientists have
proposed the establishment of an interna¬
tional Global Habitability Programme
aimed at improving our understanding of
the climate and the global cycles. The
central elements of the programme
would be satellite measurements by many
nations and shipboard and land-based
measurement and modelling of the
ocean, the earth and the biosphere. Us¬
ing satellites, ships and computers, en¬
vironmental scientists have the technolo¬
gy to carry out the required research. In
addition, their theoretical tools have ad¬
vanced to the point where the integrated
study of the global system is becoming
feasible. With scientists working together
internationally it is possible that rational
management of the earth and its re¬
sources may be achieved.
D. JAMES BAKER, of the USA, is Dean of the
College of Ocean and Fishery Sciences and
professor of Oceanography at the University of
Washington Seattle. He is a member of the
Board on Ocean Science and Policy and the
Climate Research Committee of the US National
Academy of Sciences as well as of the Earth and
Space Sciences Advisory Committee of the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
He is the author of many articles on the general
circulation of the ocean, the role of the ocean in
climate variation, and ocean technology. This
article is extracted from a longer study first pub¬
lished in the Unesco science magazine Impact oí
Science on Society.
Satellite image ofa cyclone over the Indian
Ocean
25
