All about Alice
by Anthony Burgess
Copyright © Anthony Burgess, 1982.
Reproduction prohibited
LEWIS Carroll, who wrote Alice's
Adventures in Wonderland (1865)
and Through the Looking-Glass
(1872), was, in private life, a professor of
mathematics at the University of Oxford
named Charles Lutwidge Dodgson.
He produced other books as well most¬
ly on difficult mathematical subjects.
Lewis Carroll was also the first of the
great photographers, and his studies of chil¬
dren especially of little Alice Liddell , who
was both the heroine and the first reader of
the two great books have a charm and a
mastery of technique envied by the snap¬
pers of today.
His love of girls, which he was too inno¬
cent to interpret sexually, had perhaps
something to do with his desire to remain a
child himself.
He never married, he was deeply and
innocently religious, he liked to be cut off
from the dangerous outside world. But the
publication of the two Alice books brought
him fame.
Both the Alice books are fantasies,
aspects of the love of nonsense which was
prevalent in England in the Victorian age.
There was no nonsense in the rest of the
world.
Alice's adventures take the form of
dreams in which bizarre things happen, but
these things are based on a more serious
approach to language than we can permit
ourselves in waking life. By language I
mean, of course, the English language in
which Carroll wrote; many of his dream-
jokes are impossible to render into other
tongues.
There is a strange poem which one of the
characters, Humpty Dumpty, kindly ex¬
plains to Alice, that sums up the possibili¬
ties of the dreaming world. It is called "Jab-
berwocky" and it begins:
Twas brillig, and the slithy toyes
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe.
All mimsy were the borogroves,
And the mome raths outgrabe.
"Slithy" is both slimy and lithe, to "gyre"
is to girate, to "gimble" is both to gambol
like a lamb and to turn like a gimlet or
corkscrew. Humpty Dumpty calls these
"portmanteau words", because, like port¬
manteaux, several things can be crammed
into them. James Joyce saw the possibilities
of this Jabberwocky language and, in his
great novel Finnegans Wake, which pre¬
sents an adult, not a child's, dream, he used
the technique. What, with Carroll, began as
a joke ends, in Joyce, as the most serious
attempt ever made to show how the dream¬
ing mind operates.
To be honest, Alice is not a very nice little
girl. She is far too sharp and bossy and
proud. She lacks humility, but and this is
an aspect of the British imperialist spirit
she also lacks fear. It requires great
44
courage, at the trial of the Knave of Hearts,
with the Queen shouting "Off with her
head!", for her to cry: "You're nothing but
a pack of cards!" and to see the chaos of the
mass of pasteboard that, a minute ago, was
an imperialist society whirling about her
head. She is transported to mad colonial
territories and retains something of her
sanity. She is very British and very Victor¬
ian, but she is also admirably and universal¬
ly human.
June 1982
ANTHONY BURGESS, prolific British novelist,
critic and man of letters, has published most
recently Flame into Being, a study of D.H. Law¬
rence (1985) and Homage to Qwertyuiop ( 1986),
a collection of essays.
"Off with her head!" the Queen shouted at
the top other voice. Nobody moved. "Who
cares for you?" said Alice (she had grown
to her full size by this time). "You're no¬
thing but a pack of cards!" At this the
whole pack rose up into the air and came
flying down upon her. ...
