I< I \ . il
I
() Começo «) uni j «ar
\ii tu
i-l
ftN . . . de V*,.
v* . u« T»r,«co ce
'
[* 2î0uei\ |,..s I
1 » «PC* Q> '
r""'"'U,, \,(1;1(J VIROI GOBRA
pïre
AUÎfl
Hiuorid D« Zé Carr eiro
« du C
»WPrHUtfttHM
¿J1J
«*- >u r_.. ,_
ESTA PROXIMO
r Y
M
AUTCU JOSt COÍ.TA LEITE
ESTAMOS NO
F I M DA ERA Discussfto do (ironie
com um Gaohaceire
Ati££ftA£>£ üi,Kií' o ÉXEMPLO iv\
iniK.ii <lo unibigo
\)\: PÔGO
CASAMENTO ^
«ÍTOPII» HI'"
COHPL(T*
It, 1 1 ,.¡riK
/"

Clothesline literature by Clelia Pisa
Stories told on a shoestring
MOST of the small booklets or
folhetos, which constitute what
is known as literatura de cordel
or "clothesline literature" are master¬
pieces of Brazilian popular art. Their for¬
mat is small (11 x 15 centimetres) and
they have between 8 and 16 or 32 and 48
pages. They are printed on ordinary
paper, with pale-coloured jackets. The
wood engravings forming the frontis¬
pieces illustrate the story inside. Folhetos
have been produced since the end of the
last century, originally in northeastern
Brazil where they were sold at markets,
cattle fairs, sugar mills and other centres
of economic activity.
The folhetos have changed since those
days. Now, some of their covers have
photographs instead of engravings, and
they have been influenced by modern
reproduction techniques. However, to¬
day as in the past, the authors of the
stories inside are poets. They write in
Colour page left: display of "clothesline
literature" booklets pegged to the lengths
of string from which they take their name,
literatura de cordel (literally "string liter¬
ature"). Each booklet contains a popular
story whose theme Is evoked in the cover
illustration. The stories are told in verse.
Below, The Devil's Chariot, a wood-block
print illustrating the cover of a "clothes¬
line" booklet dating from the 1970s. J.
Borges is the name of the printer.
four-, six- or ten-line stanzas, and rhyme
is all-important. To get people to buy the
booklets, the poet himself, or a book¬
seller, declaims just enough of the text to
whet the curiosity of passers-by, so that
only the purchasers will ever know how
the story ends. The vendors often display
their wares by attaching them to lengths
of rope or string, like clothes hung out to
dry, whence the name literatura de cordel
by which they are known in Brazil.
The subject-matter varies enormously,
ranging from accounts of political events
to epics containing echoes of the Chanson
de Roland, the Roman de la Rose or the
Roman de Renart or, more topically, of
the visit of Pope John Paul II to Brazil or
a trip to the moon. The ideas behind them
are often conventional: the established
order is respected, good always triumphs
and punishment is meted out to wrong¬
doers. The authors, publishers and retail¬
ers of the folhetos are simple folk who
would never dream of breaking rules.
However, the texts are not entirely of
their own choosing and, as we shall see,
some have tried and still do to infil¬
trate a message into the folhetos. This, is
because the folhetos have such a wide
following that they attract greedy eyes.
To take one example, some 3 million
copies have been printed of the hundred-
odd folhetos about Padre Cicero, a village
"miracle-worker".
Although individual authors some¬
times print and market their own work
with the help of their wives and children,
specialized folheto publishers (folhe-
terias) have existed for many years. These
publishing houses, located in seven cities
in northeastern Brazil, print and distri¬
bute work by many poets. However, the
mass exodus of workers to Brazil's south¬
ern States in search of employment has
changed the situation. The State of Säo
Paulo, Brazil's richest, today has over
one million of these "immigrants" and a
large folheto publishing company has
been established there.
Neither the poets nor the illustrators
make fortunes out of their work. Some
folheto authors have steady jobs with
small radio stations. It must be remem¬
bered that folhetos are not only read but
recited, and the rhymed verse can give a
new slant to news with which people may
already be familiar. In the early 1980s,
there were some 2,500 "practising" poets
working for radio stations, travelling
around to fairs, and so on.
The Brazilian authorities and the Ro¬
man Catholic Church were quick to grasp
the importance of the folheto as a vehicle
for ideas, proposals and reforms. By the
1940s, government agencies were already
making widespread use of them five
titles were published on Getúlio Vargas,
the then President of the Republic.
When folhetos are funded by official
bodies, Catholic associations and univer¬
sities, the poets are commissioned to
communicate to the general public such j
Photo © All Rights Reserved
27

A MOCA QUE BATEU NA MÂE
.	 E VIROU CÁVALO
AIJTCI: »adelfa CmIa« Covciconi«
' Ttovador
0*Û«ad* do "Omfel * FeUlor* d« Piraticofcer*
L* Evrü*j - , jauto 1* I97J
Preço Cr$ 1,00
SALVADO« - UAIllA - BÄASU.
É
information as the key passages of a pas¬
toral letter or a piece of legislation.
However, the fact that these folhetos are
free may influence the way in which their
message is received. This funding system
may well have contributed to the survival
of such features of the folheto's original
appearance as the wood engravings on
the covers, which might otherwise have
been more frequently replaced by photo¬
graphs.
Peasants in remote rural areas, waiting
for help that only God can provide,
fishermen setting out on their jangada
Cover of a typical "clothesline literature"
booklet. The text reads: "The girl who
struck her mother and became a horse.
Author: Rodolfo Coelho Cavalcante,
Brazilian troubadour, delegate of the Pira-
cicaba Folklore Centre, 1st edition, June
1973. Price 1 cruzeiro, Salvador, Bahia,
Brazil."
rafts for a hard day at sea, and factory
workers dreaming in their« dormitories
these are the people who enjoy reading
folhetos. Poor but proud, smiling and sad
by turns, hoping that the future will bring
respite from their hardships and difficul¬
ties, they love tales of ghosts and spec¬
tres, werewolves, beautiful mermaids
and stately princesses. However, in a
country like Brazil that is being totally
changed by the transistor radio and tele¬
vision, it is hard to predict what the future
holds for these little books that have
brought joy to so many people.
CLELIA PISA, a Brazilian writer and journalist
who has lived in France since 1955, has contri¬
buted to French radio programmes networked
abroad and for the last ten years has been Paris
correspondent of a Brazilian daily newspaper.
She is the author ofpoems and literary criticism,
and recentlypublished with Maryvonne Lapouge
Brasileiras, a book on the women of her country.

