The Channel Tunnel by John Ardagh
Right, artist's impression of the "Euro-
bridge" ("Europont") concept of a fixed
link between Britain and continental
Europe: a suspension bridge with 5,000-
metre-iong spans. Two 6-iane motorways
would tte enclosed with theprotective con¬
crete tul>e.
Opposite page: section of theproject for a
Channel Tunnel which was adoptedby the
British and French Governments In Janu¬
ary 1986. Passenger trains and special
shuttle trains for transporting vehicles
and their passengers will run through twin
tunnels (diameter 7.3 metres) bored 40
metres under thesea t)ed. Between the two
main tunnels Is a smaller service tunnel
(diameter 4.5 metres).
12
THE Channel Tunnel between Britain
and France, a dream nearly two cen¬
turies old, is to become reality at
last. And this is most warmly to be wel¬
comed by all those who care for the future
of Europe, for in all kinds of ways eco¬
nomic, touristic, political, even psycholo¬
gical it will serve to strengthen Britain's
Hnks with the Confinent, and especiaUy
with France. Thus it will strike a blow at that
old insularity which has shrouded the island
of Britain for so long. We shall be islanders
no more.
The joint decision to build the Tunnel
was announced by President François Mit¬
terrand and Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher in a ceremony at Lille on 21
January. The project chosen from among
several contenders is for a twin-bore railway
tunnel. This is what the French wanted, for
express railways are France's forte. The
Brifish might have preferred a combined
road and rail tunnel, but this would have
been more costly. However, it has been
agreed that a separate road tunnel might be
added some time after the year 2000. In the
meantime, so long as the two parliaments
ratify the plan, digging will begin next year
on a fifty-one-kilometre tunnel from a point
near Folkestone, in Kent, to a point near
Calais. British and French banks are pro¬
viding the main part of the budget, which
will be at least £2.3 bilHon.
When the Tunnel opens, in 1993, it will
be able to carry up to thirty million passen¬
gers a year. Fast trains will Unk London with
Paris (some 450 km) in just over three
hours, and London with Brussels in even

Two 19th-century conceptions of a Chan¬
nel TunneL Above left, a scheme for a
"submarine railway between France and
England" by HectorMoreau (1851). Above,
drawing of a project for a Dover-Calais
tunnel devisedby French engineer Thome
de Gamondin 1875. Smoke from the steam
trains was to be evacuated by ventilation
chimneys one of which, in mid-Channel, Is
topped by a lighthouse.
less time. And a rail shuttle service will
carry freight trucks and private cars be¬
tween terminals at either end of the tunnel,
with trains leaving every three minutes at
peak periods.
It was a French engineer in 1802 who first
proposed a tunnel under the English Chan¬
nel: Napoleon was interested, for he
thought it might assist his planned invasion
of England. In the 1880s the scheme was
revived, and private companies began to
bore pilot tunnels; but the British Govern¬
ment took fright, mainly for defence
reasons, and the project was stopped. Not
until the 1950s did it surface again, and after
much discussion new preHminary diggings
began in 1974. But again the British Gov¬
ernment cancelled the scheme (in 1975),
this time for economic reasons.
Throughout that long period, the French
showed noticeably more enthusiasm for a
Channel tunnel than the British. This may
seem curious, seeing that France already
has many land frontiers, whereas for Britain
a tunnel would be its first fixed link with the
Continent, and thus more valuable. But the
British were held back by their insularity,
and especially by . fears that an invader
might be able to make use of the scheme.
Happily, all that is past. Today Britain's
politicians and business circles have shown
themselves as eager as the French.
It is true that ordinary British public opin¬
ion remains sceptical. Some people point
out that the train shuttle for cars will take
almost the same time as the hovercraft ser¬
vice (thirty-five minutes) and wiU be only
forty minutes faster than the present ferry
crossings: these critics wonder whether
enough people will use the tunnel to amor¬
tize its huge costs. The inhabitants of the
Dover and Folkestone areas are alarmed
for their environment, and for the future of
jobs with the ferry services. And many ex¬
perts predict that in economic terms the
tunnel will benefit France more than Britain
if, as they believe, the new industry
attracted to its vicinity opts less for prosper¬
ous Kent than for the stmggling Nord-Pas
de Calais region with its wider spaces, lower
costs and more central position in the Euro¬
pean Economic Community.
However, those who take a wider and
longer-term view believe that these possible
drawbacks for Britain will be far out¬
weighed by the advantages. Passengers by
express train will be able to do the journey
at least an hour faster than by air, city centre
to city centre, and without any tedious waits
at airports. Also the fares will be cheaper.
So the tunnel will probably stimulate a vast
increase in tourism and business travel be¬
tween London and Paris and Brussels,
much of it in the form of day excursions. It
will also encourage new export trade by
train and tmck, and it will help to build the
Kent and Pas-de-Calais areas into a vital
nerve-centre of the European Economic
Community, buzzing with new modem in¬
dustry. Above all, as Mrs Thatcher has said,
the tunnel venture is a symbol of Britain's
involvement in Europe and of its close ties
with France. In my own view, it will streng¬
then the exchanges between peoples and
thus lead to better understanding, for
it is ignorance that breeds prejudice and
chauvinism.
JOHN ARDAGH is a British journalist who has
written a number of studies of French life in¬
cluding The New France (Pelican Books, 1970-
1977) and France in the 1 980s (Penguin Books,
1982). In 1983he was awarded the EnidMcLeod
Prize for books promoting Franco-British
understanding.
13
