
The shocking slaughter
ofAfrica's wild life by Paul-Emile Victor
by Sir Julian Huxley
THE wild life of eastern Africa is the
wonder and envy of the rest of the
world. Unique in abundance and
variety, it has been gravely diminished in the
past and is seriously threatened in the im¬
mediate future. Its natural habitats and wild
lands cover more than half of its immense
area, and are of tremendous potential import¬
ance if properly used. But they too have been
reduced in extent, their value has been sadly
reduced by improper use and they are
threatened with drastic misdevelopment in
the immediate future.
The future of African wild life is bound up
with that of the conservation of natural re¬
sources. Both are now in the balance. The
next five or at most ten years will be decisive in
determining whether they are headed down¬
hill towards a point of no return, or set on the
upward path of beneficial development.
Let me state the African situation in ecolo¬
gical terms. The ecological problem is fun¬
damentally one of balancing resources
against human needs, both in the short and in
the long term. It thus must be related to a
proper evaluation of human needs, and it
must be based on resource conservation/and
resource use, including optimum land use and
conservation of the habitat.
Over the whole of south-eastern Africa, the
wild life resource has been shockingly re¬
duced from its astonishing past abundance. In
spite of this, the wild life of this region is still a
resource of unique value. It must be pre¬
served both as an object of study and as a
spectacle to be enjoyed. Its scientific study is
a necessary basis for proper land use policies,
and an increasing number of people from all
over the world are finding unique satisfaction
and interest in it as a spectacle.
Proper management of wild lands can yield
a large crop of meat as well as numerous
ancillary animal and plant products. The
meat-crop could in particular areas be com¬
mercially profitable, but of more general im¬
portance is the fact that it would go a long way
to satisfying the Africans' meat-hunger, which
springs from the region's marked protein de¬
ficiency.
This in turn would help in reducing the threat
of poaching to African wild life. "Poaching"
today is in reality a large-scale illegal trade in
slaughtered wild animals. It is by no means
confined to killing for meat; all too often it
takes the horrible and wasteful form of merely
taking the valuable trophies, such as rhino
horn, wildebeest tails, or elephant ivory, and
leaving the slaughtered carcasses to rot.
The poacher's methods are not only waste¬
ful, but extremely cruel. It is bad enough when
gangs of bowmen with poisoned arrows wait
near a waterhole or at a gap in a prepared
barrier, and shoot large numbers of animals,
which then die an agonizing death. However,
pitfalls are worse; in the Serengeti, for instan¬
ce, whole series of carefully-sited pitfalls have
been laboriously dug, providing proof of the
value of the proceeds.
What is needed is a comprehensive and
conservationist land use policy for the region,
based on a proper survey, to decide which
land should be allocated primarily for agricul¬
ture and for commercial or industrial develop¬
ment; which allocated for game-cropping,
watershed protection, forests, National Parks
and Nature Reserves, or merely kept unde¬
veloped in reserve until its best use can be
determined; and which could be best de¬
veloped by establishing a fruitful symbiosis
between wild life and domestic stock.
Wild life in Africa as a resource may be
summed up in the phrase Profit, Protein, Pride
and Prestige, with enjoyment and scientific
interest thrown in. It can yield Profit from
tourist revenue, sales of meat and trophies,
and Protein from game-cropping schemes; it
can be a source of local Pride and internation¬
al Prestige; while its importance as a source of
scientific knowledge is very great.
To let the wild life die or be destroyed would
be to allow a precious element in that rich
variety to be submerged forever in the drab
monotonous flood of uniformity that is
threatening to engulf our mass-produced
technological civilization. Unesco has roused
world opinion to save the threatened monu¬
ments of Nubia: it should take on the responsi¬
bility of rousing world opinion for the equally
worthy task of saving the threatened wild life
of Africa.
September 1961
JULIAN HUXLEY (1887-1975), British zoologist
and biologist who won a worldwide reputation for
his work in embryology, was Unesco's first Direc¬
tor-General, from 1946 to 1948. The author of
some 40 books on science, travel, religion, poli¬
tics and natural history, he was awarded the
Unesco Kalinga Prize for the popularization of
science in 1953.
*
18


