'The action of a man who
snatches something from death'
by André Malraux
André Malraux, French Minister ofState for CulturalAffairs, was one of the speakers
at a ceremony held at Unesco 's Paris Headquarters on 8 March 1960 to launch the
International Campaign for the Preservation of the Monuments of Nubia. Below,
extracts from André Malraux's address.
ON 8 March 1960, for the first time,
all nations, though many of them
even now are engaged in covert or
open conflict, have been summoned to
save by a united effort the fruits of a civi¬
lization on which none has a pre-emptive
claim.
Such an appeal, in the last century,
would have seemed fanciful. With our own
century, however, has come one of the
greatest developments in man's spiritual
history. These temples which had been
looked on only as records have again be¬
come living witnesses; these statues have
acquired a soul.
The only ancient Egypt which can come
alive for us is the one conveyed by its
art and this is an Egypt that never ex¬
isted at all, any more than the kind of
Christianity which would be inferred from
Romanesque art if that were our only wit¬
ness to it. Yet Egypt has survived in her
art, not through famous names or lists of
victories. ... Despite Kadesh, one of his¬
tory's decisive battles, despite the car¬
touches carved and recarved at the behest
of the bold pharaoh seeking to force his
lineage upon the gods, Sesostris has less
meaning for us than the unfortunate Akhe-
naton. The face of Queen Nefertiti haunts
our painters as Cleopatra has inspired our
poets; but whereas Cleopatra is a queen
without a face, Nefertiti, for us, is a face
without a kingdom.
At their highest expression, Egyptian
conventions were designed to mediate be¬
tween ephemeral men and the controlling
stars. It is an art that consecrates night. ...
In such a way, during three thousand
years, Egyptian art translated the temporal
into the eternal.
Let there be no misapprehension about
this today: it is not as a witness to the
past that it moves us, nor as what used to
be called beauty. "Beauty" has become
one of our age's most potent mysteries,
the inexplicable quality which brings the
Egyptian masterpieces into communion
with the statues of our own cathedrals, or
the Aztec temples, or the Indian and
Chinese grottos; with the paintings of
Cézanne and Van Gogh, with the greatest
dead and the greatest living artists; with, in
short, the whole treasury of the first world
civilization. For the first time, men have
discovered a universal language of art.
The emotion we share with the creators
of these granite statues is not even one of
love, nor a common feeling for death nor
even, perhaps, a similar way of looking at
their work; yet before their work, the ac¬
cents of anonymous sculptors forgotten
during two thousand years seem to us as
much untouched by the succession of
empires as the accents of mother love.
If Unesco is trying to rescue the monu¬
ments of Nubia, it is because these are in
imminent danger. Yours is the first attempt
to deploy, in a rescue operation, on behalf
of statues, the immense resources usually
harnessed for the service of men. And this
is perhaps because for us the survival of
statues has become an expression of life.
At the moment when our civilization di¬
vines a mysterious transcendence in art
and one of the still obscure sources of its
unity, at the moment when we are bringing
into a single, family relationship the mas¬
terpieces of so many civilizations which
knew nothing of or even hated each other,
you are proposing an action which brings
all men together to defy the forces of dis¬
solution. Your appeal is historic, not be¬
cause it proposes to save the temples of
Nubia, but because through it the first
world civilization publicly proclaims the
world's art as its indivisible heritage.
The slow flood of the Nile has reflected
the melancholy caravans of the Bible, the
armies of Cambyses and Alexander, the
knights of Byzantium and Islam, the sol¬
diers of Napoleon. No doubt when the
sandstorm blows across it, its ancient
memory no longer distinguishes the bril¬
liant notes of Rameses' triumph from the
pathetic dust that settles again in the wake
of defeated armies. And when the sand is
scattered again, the Nile is once more
alone with its sculpted mountains, its col¬
ossal effigies whose motionless reflection
has for so long been part of its echo of
eternity.
But see, old river, whose floods allowed
astrologers to fix the most ancient date in
history, men are coming now, from all
parts of the world, who will carry these
giants far away from your life-giving, des¬
tructive waters. Let the night fall, and you
will reflect again the stars under which Isis
accomplished her funeral rites, the star of
Rameses. But the humblest worker come
to rescue the statues of Isis and Rameses
will tell you something you have always
known but never heard from men before:
that there is only one action over which in¬
different stars and unchanging, murmurous
rivers have no sway it is the action of a
man who snatches something from
death.
May 1960
ANDRE MALRAUX (1901-1976), French writer
and politician, was the author of a wealth of
literature covering the fields of art, civilization,
war and autobiography. Among his best-known
works translated into English are La condition
humaine (Man's Fate, 1934), L'espoir (Man's
Hope, 1938), Le musée imaginaire (Museum
without Walls, 1967), and his autobiography,
Antimémoires (Antimemoirs, 7967/ He fought
with the French Resistance during the Second
World War, and was Minister ofState for Cultural
Affairs from 1958 to 1969.
60
i
