Maldives
THE Republic of Maldives (formerly
the Maldive Islands) is an archipela¬
go in the Indian Ocean. The islands
are grouped into twenty-six natural clusters
or atolls (the English word atoll is derived
from the Maldivian atolhu), but are divided
for administrative purposes into nineteen
atolls with the capital, Male', forming a
twentieth division. Stretching 750 km from
north to south, the islands are the coral
crowns of a vast submerged mountain
range. Out of some 1,200 islands, only 200
are inhabited. The northernmost atoll is
some 550 km from the Indian sub-con¬
tinent.
The ring-shaped atolls of coral reef are
pierced by openings which are in some cases
deep enough for shipping. All the islands
are low-lying, usually not more than 1-2
metres above sea level. They have white
sandy beaches and crystal clear lagoons
with tall coconut palms.
Most of the population inhabit tiny vil¬
lages on remote islands, and live from
fishing, which forms the basis of the eco¬
nomy, and from collecting coconuts. Male'
is the collection centre for the entire export
trade and the distribution centre for the
entire import economy.
Arable land is minimal and, while small
amounts of coconuts, millet, sorghum,
maize and yams are grown, virtually all the
main food staples have to be imported.
Apart from fishing, the other most impor¬
tant sources of income are tourism and
shipping. Maldivians speak a common lan¬
guage, Dhivehi (referring to themselves as
Dhivehin "islanders" and to their coun¬
try as Dhivehi Raaje "the island realm")
and practise a common religion, Islam. In
Male' itself there are no less than thirty-one
mosques.
The early history of the Maldives is
shrouded in mystery, although according to
one authority the islands may have been
originally colonized, probably by people
from Sri Lanka or India, several centuries
before the Christian era. Until the twelfth
century AD, Buddhism seems to have been
the prevalent religion, and a number of
ruins of Buddhist temples and other sacred
places have been excavated in modern
times. Then, through gradual contact with
Arab traders, for whom the Maldives lay on
the direct route to Malacca and China, the
country was gradually prepared to receive
Islam, which was officially accepted by Sul-
A land of
©
f '
\f *,:
i iJii" '* "'
w . f> ¿
..<*
?'\
m r. ELiA
r ê m * j
tan Mohammed ibn Abdullah, who in 1153
proclaimed this religion throughout his
realm.
Two important features stand out in the
history of the Maldives. First, the orderly
fashion in which this small but scattered
kingdom was ruled; second, the valour with
which the Maldivians have defended their
country's independence against all odds and
superior powers.
Orderly rule sprang from the administra¬
tive machinery. The Sultan was acknow¬
ledged as the source of all power and law so
long as he ruled for the benefit of the peo¬
ple, which could, by custom and usage,
dethrone him or correct him if he went
astray.
As for the second feature, the Maldives
can be said to have remained independent
virtually throughout their history. The only
periods marred by foreign domination were
the fifteen years of Portuguese rule in the
mid-sixteenth century and two months of
rule by the Moplas of south India in the
mid-eighteenth.
The Portuguese, based at Goa in India,
began their period of colonial rule in 1558.

by Hassan Ahmed Manik
atolls
Right, head ofa Buddha found in 1975 in a
shrine on the island of Todhdhu, Ari Atoll.
It is now displayed at the National Museum
of the Republic of Maldives, Male'. Buddh¬
ism was practised in the Maldives until the
12th century AD, when the whole country
accepted the Islamic faith.
Left, portrait dating from 1880 ofa woman
from the family of a Maldlvian Sultan who
was a keen photographer. Although the
Maldives is an Islamic country, women
were never required to wear the veil, and
when they went out simply covered with a
small cap the knot of hair traditionally
worn over the ear (see photo page 5). The
top of the dress has a scalloped decora¬
tion, here ofcotton, but woven ofgoldand
silver thread in ceremonial wear.
Workers in a small fish canning factory
which handles mainly tuna and bonito, on
Felivaru island, to the north of Male' Atoll.
THE REPUBLIC OF MALDIVES
Approximately 1,200 coral islets of which about
200 are inhabited
Date of independence
26 July 1965
Unesco date of entry
18 July 1980
Capital
Male'
Area
298 km2
Population
176,000 (1984)
Gross national product (per capita)
(US$ 1983)
393
Economic activities
Agriculture: coconut palms; vegetables
Industry: knitwear; fish canning
Fishing
Tourism: 74,000 arrivals (1 982)
Language
Dhivehi
They were beset by problems in controlling
the widely scattered islands with their hos¬
tile population, and were driven out in 1573
after a guerilla war led by Mohammed Tha-
kurufaanu the Great. After liberation this
Sultan, whose exploits are still remembered
in folklore and epic, introduced reforms in
every field; he is credited with having intro¬
duced a new monetary system, a new script,
reform of the administrative machinery,
and the setting up of a standing militia to
maintain internal peace and defend the
country against foreign invaders.
In 1752, Moplas from the Malabar coast
of India took Male', destroyed the Sultan's
palace, and took the Sultan into captivity.
Their occupation lasted only two months;
Ghazee Hassan Izzuddeen led the Maldi¬
vians in a rebellion which expelled the
Moplas. This national hero was the founder
of a dynasty of sultans which reigned until
the twentieth century. |
Population, surface area, GNP and tourism fi¬
gures for this and other country profiles in this
issue have been taken from United Nations,
Unesco and UNCTAD sources.
13

The period of British "protection" which
began with the forcible signing of an "ag¬
reement" on 16 December 1887 by Sultan
Mohammed Mueenudhdeen XI was not a
particularly significant episode. Britain did
not interfere with the internal affairs of the
Maldives to any marked degree. There was
no British governor or representative sta¬
tioned in the Maldives to advance their
country's interests. This was, in fact, an
agreement whereby the Maldivian Sultan
managed to keep a super-power which was
all-powerful in the Indian Ocean outside his
domain. For the Maldivians, foreign affairs
and defence were not so important so long
as they had unobstructed relations with Sri
Lanka, where they sold the dried smoked
fish for which they were renowned, and
obtained all the provisions they required.
The ingenuity of the Maldivians had again
managed to find a way to keep their own
world to themselves. The Protectorate
came to an end in 1965, and later that year
the Maldives joined the United Nations. In
March 1968, following a referendum, the
country became a republic.
HASSAN AHMED MANIK, a leading historian
and archaeologist of the Republic of Maldives, is
the author ofseveralpamphlets published by the
Department of Information and Broadcasting,
Male', of which he was Director until 1983, not¬
ably History of the Maldives (1982), from which
the present article has been adapted. He is
currently working on a History of Dhivehi Civiliza¬
tion in the Maldives.
Maldivian script
BOLI
In frame above, drawing top rightdepicts a
cowry shell, which is commonly found in
the Maldives and was used as currency
from China to Africa until the 18th century.
Beneath it is the name of the shell in the
Dhivehi language, written both in taana (a
contemporary script which is read from
right to left) and in Latin letters. Left, an
enlargement of the letter "b" above the
phonetic transcription of the syllable
"baa" (the name of the letter in Dhivehi)
and its phonological symbol. Right, the
position of the letter on the line and a
drawing showing the gesture made by
Maldivians when they write It. Bottom
right, the name of the letter in taana script.
Above, sculpture in coralline rock dating
from the beginning of the Christian era,
unearthed around 1970 during pipe-laying
workin Male '. It represents a divinity, prob¬
ably pre-Buddhlstic, which some special¬
ists have likened to sculptures found in
southern India. The inscription has not yet
been deciphered.
Right, page from a geomancer's manu¬
script, over a century old. The writing is in
a script known as gabuli taana. By turning
the drawing in a certain direction deter¬
mined by the position of the stars, it was
possible to establish which geographical
sector was "unlucky". This sector was de¬
fined by lines originating from centre of
figure and passing through the mouth of
the fish and the mid-point of its body.
<z>
1
M
©
The same letter produced by a computer.
Unesco Is supporting a Maldivian govern¬
mentproject to adapt the Dhivehialphabet
to a variety ofcomputers and data proces¬
sing systems. The numerous applications
will include printing of school books,
newspapers, telex and other forms ofdata
transmission.
7^J.
t
14
