How Japan reckons with
SURPRISING though it may seem in a
country where many business enter¬
prises are computerized and where
microcomputers are widely used in schools
and families, the soroban or Japanese aba¬
cus is still playing a unique role in Japanese
life as a calculating device and as an educa¬
tional tool.
The soroban was introduced into Japan
from China about 450 years ago. The
Japanese then developed and began to
manufacture an improved version which was
soon being used throughout the country. Chil¬
dren were taught to handle the soroban in
small schools known as tera-ko-ya and it is no
exaggeration to say that the three R's in
Japan became "Reading, Writing and soro¬
ban".
Why, at a time when the price of computers
is falling and their performance is improving,
should the soroban not only survive but form
part of training programmes organized by
some Japanese firms, with one world-famous
computer manufacturer even holding an
annual soroban contest for its employees?
There are several answers to this question.
Firstly, a skilful handler of the soroban is likely
to be a dab hand at immediately spotting
errors in facts and figures, and able to use
mental arithmetic to make the kind of instant
estimates that are invaluable in business
analysis and decision-making. Another plus
for the soroban is that using it helps to develop
the kind of psychomotor skills required for
handling keyboard machines.
Today the use of the soroban is taught in
Using the soroban or Japanese abacus,
this 1 1-year-old schoolboy can solve with¬
in ten minutes twenty addition and sub¬
traction problems involving 5- to 10-figure
numbers, and perform mental arithmetic
calculations on 12- to 13-figure numbers.
At the blackboard, a primary schoolboy
solving multiplication problems by mental
arithmetic.
20

the abacus by Toshio Sawada
Japanese primary schools, from the third year
on, and occupies a major part of the curricu¬
lum in higher commercial secondary schools.
A number of features make the soroban a
useful educational tool. By manipulating
beads pupils can actually see the process of
calculation, become familiar with numbers
and enjoy learning to be numerate. It also
helps them to understand decimal notation.
Another advantage, since higher figures are
handled first (see drawings) is that it is easy to
see approximate figures and also, incidental¬
ly, to calculate not only written but dictated
numbers.
Research has shown that handling the
soroban develops certain kinds of mathema¬
tical skills. Japan won first prize at a World
Congress cf Mathematics held a few years
ago. Might further investigation show that this
victory was in some measure due to the con¬
tinuing role of the soroban?
TOSHIO SAWADA, Japanese educator, is a
senior specialist for curriculum in the Vocational
Education Division of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Bureau at the Ministry of
Education, Japan.
Lower beads worth 1 Frame Dots indicating units Column rods Upper beads worth 5
^^^^^^/t>^V^^_^t>^^^^
L	L	L	L/	L	L	/
The soroban is a calculating instrument
consisting ofa rectangular frame contain¬
ing a number of counting beads which
slide back and forth along rods. A cross¬
wise bar divides the soroban into two
parts: the upper part consists of a row of
beads each with a value of 5 and the lower
part has four rows of beads each with a
value of 1. On the crosswise bar, a dot is
marked at every third rod to Indicate the
unit or the decimal point. The rows of
beads to the left have a higher value than
those to the right, and calculations with
numbers of more than two figures are
always done from left to right. The value of
the beads is determined by their position:
they only "count" when they are pushed
towards the crosswise bar.
Two examples of simple arithmetic on the soroban:
A. Addition: 87+52- 139
(1) Put down 87.
(2) Add 50 (from the 52) to 80 (of 87) by
moving the bead worth 5away from the bar
and positioning a bead worth 1 on the rod
to the left. The number shown on the soro¬
ban is 137.
(3) Add 2 to the 7 of the last rod. The
answer is 139.
TEE ^¿5
<^> Bead left in its place or with no value
^^ Bead moved in the course of the calculation
<©> Bead already "counted" or "positioned"
B. Subtraction: 92-35= 57
(1) Put down 92.
(2) Take away 30 (from the 35) from 90 (of
92), leaving 6¿.
(3) 5 cannot be subtracted from 2. There¬
fore borrow 10 from the rod to the left,
which is worth 60. 10-5~- 5. Take away 10
from 60 and add 5 to the rod on the right,
which is already worth 2. The answer is 57.
©
21
