THIS story starts in 1945. A girl named
Sadako Sasaki was living in a
Japanese city called Hiroshima
along with about half a million other peo¬
ple. When she was two years old the first
atomic bomb ever to be used against human
beings was dropped on Hiroshima. Most of
the city was completely smashed and
burned to the ground. Sadako was about a
mile and a half away from where the bomb
exploded, but she wasn't burned or injured
at all, at least not in any way people could
see.
A few weeks after the bomb, people in
Hiroshima began dying from a sickness
even the doctors couldn't understand. Peo¬
ple who seemed perfectly healthy would
suddenly get weak and sick and then just
die. It was so strange and new that no one
knew what to do. In fact, even today no one
really knows exactly what radiation does or
what it might do to a particular person.
By the time Sadako was in seventh grade,
she was a normal, happy, twelve-year-old
girl going to a regular school and studying
and playing like everyone else. Ten years
had passed since the bomb and she was
thinking about other things. One of the
things she thought about most was running.
One day after an important relay race
that she helped her team win she felt ex¬
tremely tired and dizzy. After a while she
felt better, so she thought it was just that she
was so tired because of the race. Over the
next few weeks she tried to forget about it,
but the dizziness kept coming back, espe¬
cially when she was running. She didn't tell
anyone about it, not even Chizuko, her best
friend. Finally, one morning, it got so bad
that she fell down and just lay on the ground
for a while. This time everyone noticed.
They took her to the Red Cross hospital to
see what was the matter. No one could
believe what they found out. Sadako had
leukaemia, akind of cancerof the blood. At
that time quite a few children about Sada-
ko's age were getting leukaemia, which the
people then called "the A-bomb disease".
Almost everyone who got the disease died
and Sadako was very scared. She didn't
want to die.
Soon after Sadako went to the hospital
her best friend, Chizuko, came to visit her.
She brought some special paper and folded
a paper crane. Chizuko told Sadako about a
legend. She said that the crane, a sacred
bird in Japan, lives for a thousand years and



A thousand paper cranes
The article below is an extract from a booklet written and
published by pupils of Hiroshima International School,
Japan. It concerns the short life of a Japanese girl, who
contracted leukaemia through the after-effects of the atomic
bomb, and the children's club which was set up after her
death to work for peace. For further information about the
Club and its activities, please write to the Hiroshima Center
for Global Education, 2-6, 2-Chome, Ushita-naka, Higashi-
ku, Hiroshima-shi, 730 Japan.
if a sick person folds a thousand cranes, that
person will get well. Sadako decided to fold
a thousand cranes. Because of the
leukaemia she often felt too weak and tired
so she couldn't work all the time, but from
that day on, whenever she could, she folded
cranes.
Sadako actually folded her thousand
cranes, but she wasn't getting any better.
But instead of getting angry or giving up,
she decided she would fold more cranes.
She started on her second thousand. Every¬
one was amazed by how brave and patient
she was. On 25 October 1955, surrounded
by her loving family, she went to sleep
peacefully for the last time.
But this story doesn't end with Sadako's
death. She had a lot of friends who loved
her and who missed her very much. And
they didn't only feel sad about Sadako. Lots
of other children in Hiroshima had died or
were dying of the A-bomb disease. Her
friends wanted very much to do something
for Sadako. So thirty-nine of her classmates
formed a club and began asking for money
for a monument for her. The word spread
quickly. Students from 3,100 schools in
Japan and from nine other countries gave
money, and finally, on 5 May 1958, almost
three years after Sadako died, they got
enough money to build the monument. It's
called the Children's Peace Monument and
it is in the Peace Park which is in the middle
of Hiroshima right where the atomic bomb
was dropped.
The movement to build this monument
became so famous and popular that a movie
called "A Thousand Paper Cranes" was
made about it. About sixty children from
Hiroshima and about twenty children from
Tokyo helped to make the movie, and when
it was finished they wanted to stay together
as friends so they started a new club called
"The Paper Crane Club". The purpose of
this club was to help children get together to
think and work for peace. This club has
continued to exist for almost thirty years.
The members take care of Sadako's
monument, visit atomic bomb survivors,
people who were in Hiroshima when the
bomb was dropped, and who are getting
sick and old or who just need help for some
reason.
One other thing they always do is fold
cranes. They use the cranes in many ways.
Sometimes they hang them on Sadako's
monument and other monuments in
Hiroshima's Peace Park. Sometimes they
send them to world leaders as a way of
reminding those leaders that the children of
the world want to get rid of nuclear bombs.
And whenever world leaders or atomic
bomb survivors or people working for peace
come to Hiroshima, members of the Paper
Crane Club greet them and put a wreath of
cranes around their necks to welcome them
and to help them think about the meaning
of Hiroshima.
But the meaning of folding cranes, and
the meaning of Hiroshima and the Paper
Crane Club are perhaps best summed up in
the words carved on the granite base of the
Children's Peace Monument:
THIS IS OUR CRY
THIS IS OUR PRAYER
TO BUILD PEACE IN THIS WORLD
29
