Music, the pulse of a people
by Tárik de Souza
v XL
Shown on this page are three typically
Brazilian musical instruments: 1. Wind in¬
strument of the Xavanté Indians (Mato
Grosso State, Centre West Brazil) is made
from a gourd adorned with feathers. 2. The
berimbau-de-barriga, an instrument of
Angolan origin, consists ofa wooden bow
(the berimba, 128 cm long on specimen
shown here) with a single string. The
gourdat the base of the bow functions as a
sound-box which the musician moves to¬
wards or away from his or her stomach to
modulate notes plucked from the string.
This instrument is used to accompany Ba-
hian dances such as the capoeira, which is
also of African origin. 3. The cavaquinho,
of Portuguese origin, is a small guitar-like
instrument with four metal strings. Highly
popular, It is played with a plectrum and
used by many groups of Brazilian
musicians.
©
BRAZIL was born singing. Flowing
through the veins of this "sub¬
continent" is the lifeblood of a
mingled ethnic heritage. From the Indi¬
ans, the original inhabitants, came tribal
choirs and vocal groups singing in coun¬
terpoint to the loud and clear rhythms of
work, festivity and suffering. From the
Portuguese invaders came plaintive and
nostalgic stringed instruments, hymns
lamenting their exile and songs in
celebration of bloodthirsty conquest.
From the Black slaves, bound by their
chains, came chants of forced labour,
conveying the hidden message of struggle
and resistance, and the wild batuque
dance of revolt and passion. Held in the
grip of these discordant influences, it was
impossible for Brazil to create a har¬
mony. Were we to plot, however sketch-
ily, a map of its songs and dances, its
rhythms and melodies, we would find
that there is almost as wide a variety of
musical languages as there are cultural
microcosms in this vast country.
Culturally rich yet socially downtrod¬
den: a typical aspect of the northeastern
region of Brazil, with its baiöes drawn
from the violas played by blind singers at
fairs; the xaxado danced at rustic celebra¬
tions by the crusading cangaceiros, Robin
Hood-like bandits whose sandals kick up
clouds of dust from the parched earth;
and the coco of the seaboard, in which the
29

Maria Bethania, a great interpreter of
Brazilian song, draws her repertoire from
her country's poetic and literary heritage
(she created one show around the work of
Clarice Lispector, a leading practitioner of
the Brazilian "new novel"). Above, in Paris
during a gala organized in 1982 by the
French women's liberation movement.
In 1967, a group of young artists from
Bahia revolutionized popular Brazilian
music. Known at firstas the "Baianos" and
later as the Tropicalists, they Included
Caetano Veloso and his sister Maria
Bethania, Gilberto Gil, Gal Costa, Rita Lee
and the Mutantes, the conductor Rogério
Duprat, as well as painters, sculptors,
artists, poets and film-makers. The group
brought in original new trends which were
"cannibalistic" like the Modernist move¬
ment of the 1920s in the sense that they
tried to assimilate influences of all kinds.
One result of this collective enterprise was
the Í.P Tropicalis, a mixture of samba and
rock, chachacha and bossa nova. Today,
twentyyears later, Caetano Veloso (above,
in Paris in 1985) has lostnone ofhis poetic
talent and eclectic spirit; he has turned the
Beatles hit Help into a bossa nova and
injected "rap" into the samba.
words are broken down into syllables at
lightning speed and are lost in a spate of
verbal dexterity culminating in the
tongue-twisting embolada. Equally typic¬
al is the bitter Northeast of the toada, the
monotonous chanting of the inhabitants
of the Sertâo forced to emigrate from
their arid lands, in contrast to the spell
cast by the medieval puluxia from the
interior; the last incantation of the
incelênçia (funeral song), the lowing of
the cattle and the gentle rustle of the
grasslands.
The main sources of this musical tor¬
rent, flowing counter to the course fol¬
lowed by the river Säo Francisco from the
Sertâo down to the sea, are the coastal
areas, in the splendid works of Luiz Gon-
zaga, from Pernambuco, and Dorival
Caymmi, from Bahia. Gonzaga gave an
urban tone to the rhythms and beliefs of
the interior and to the legend of the sad
fate of the emigrants driven off their land
by drought. Caymmi speaks of the sea
and fishermen the weather-beaten pro¬
letariat of the seaboard but with the
Afro-Brazilian eloquence characteristic
of the passionate macumba of Salvador,
the city of 365 churches in Bahia State.
Gonzaga exalted the two-beat baiâo
which, in its export version, has swept
throughout the world, while Caymmi
1. In Brazilian Portuguese, samba is masculine and
therefore differs from the zamba of northern Argentina
and other regions of South America. Editor.
2. Bossa nova means "new trend" in Portuguese. Editor.
Chico Buarque de Hollanda (right, in Paris
in 1985), one of the idols ofBrazilian popu¬
larmusic, began his career with A Banda, a
samba which had a big success during a
TV song festival in 1966. The same year,
Joäo Cabrai de Meló Neto's play Morte e
vida Severina, for which Buarque had writ¬
ten the music, had a triumphant reception
on the other side of the Atlantic. Still as
popular as ever, Chico Buarque has
moved from the lyrical flights of his early
work to songs ofsocial commitment, while
continuing along the path of poetic and
stylistic experimentation which produced
Construçâo, one of his most famous com¬
positions.
Right, Intermitencias I, a score forpiano by
Claudio Santoro (born 1919), one of Bra¬
zil's great contemporary composers. A
pupil of Nadia Boulanger and the French
composer Olivier Messiaen, In 1939 San¬
toro joined the "Música Viva" group
founded by the German musician Hans
Joachim Koellreutter which was in the
forefront ofone. of the two musical schools
which emerged after the 1922 Week of
Modern Art. Unlike the "nationalist"
school which urged musicians to seek in¬
spiration in national life, giving special
emphasis to the wealth of Brazilian musi¬
cal folklore, Koelireutter's group cham¬
pioned dodecaphonic music and the uni¬
versality of musical language. In the late
1940s, Santoro left the group and moved
towards other techniques of composition.
He later founded the Department of Music
at the University of Brasilia, where he still
teaches. Currently director of the Brasilia
Symphony Orchestra, he has written
chamber music, symphonies and choral
works.
30

adapted the folklore of the street-ven¬
dors' cries and of the sambas1 to the pulse
of the industrial era. The delightful har¬
monies he produced from his violin pro¬
vided the model for the vocal and in¬
strumental bossa nova2 with which his
fellow-Banian Joäo Gilberto introduced
music that was Modernist in inspiration.
A second focal point of cultural influ¬
ence for the emergence of all these trends
was to be the city of Rio de Janeiro. It was
not by chance that it came to be the
country's second capital, from 1763 to
1960, in succession to Salvador, which
had performed that role from 1549 to
1763, and that it had the same mixed
population. After all, it was in Rio in
the very centre of the city, in the house of
a set of festive Bahians that the samba,
the basic feature of the country's music,
was born. The samba rhythm, which was
derived from the African lundo and had
the same origins as the maxixe, was
eventually expelled physically from its
place of birth. However it continued to
follow the route taken by the poverty-
stricken and established itself in the
foothills of the morros the mountains
surrounding Rio where the first samba
schools were founded.
The samba schools are local social
organizations which are instrumental in
promoting the city's annual costume and
mask parade, headed by an intricately
interweaving pattern of samba dancers.
With the creation of a music industry
(factories manufacturing records, radios,
and subsequently television sets), the so-
called samba de morro can be said to have
gone downtown. It is accordingly no
longer a code of conduct or way of eking
out a living for popular poets, but has
entered the "literate" sphere of
bourgeois writers like Ary Barroso, the
author of the celebrated Brazilian Water-
colour, or Joäo de Barro, to whom we
owe, among other works, Rio's signature
tune Copacabana, Little Princess of the
Sea.
It was the samba, coupled with post¬
war North American jazz, which gave
rise to the bossa nova, the rhythm of
which also owes something to the aud¬
acious skills of Ravel, Debussy and
Chopin. The composer Antonio Carlos
(Tom) Jobim, a pupil of the German
theorist Hans Joachim Koellreutter, a re¬
fugee from Nazism who settled in Brazil
in 1937, joined with the poet and diplo¬
mat Vinicius de Moraes in creating a set
of harmonic progressions that were to
change Brazilian music, instrumental and
vocal alike. Through the bossa nova
movement, composers and artists like
Baden Powell or the dissident Jorge
Ben who also mixed the samba with the
blues as well as Edu Lobo and Sergio
Ricardo, who composed the sound tracks
for Glauber Rocha's films, were all in¬
volved in changing both the form and the
socio-political content of Brazilian
musical discourse.
Even the harsh northeastern songs of
Geraldo Vandré took the path of the
orchestral avant-garde under the impetus
of the resourceful Quarteto Novo, at
least two of whose members succeeded in
absorbing some of the most progressive
currents of jazz. These were the percus¬
sionist Airto Moreira, with his discovery
of the unusual sounds he could make with
an ass's jawbone, and Hermeto Pascoal,
described by Miles Davis as "the world's
most impressive musician", who con¬
ducted a symphony of sounds on a series
of receptacles filled with stones and
turned a set of cheap carafes into "wind
instruments".
Following in the footsteps of the musi¬
cian Baden Powell and the path opened
up by the bossa nova from 1958 to 1965,
Chico Buarque de Hollanda (born 1944)
gave a fresh lease of life to the samba by
devising an original combination of the
musical language of the morro foothills
with urban satire. For their part, Gilberto
para ney
INTERMITENCIAS I
para piano
Claudio santoro
t..Vv 1
¿¿¿B
&*f* * 1*'*
© ©1971 &J.TV&Ö-C?
JJ; «s»
(&ï#Uf Pfcv'O
Tsui ¿rCit^ ttlirvli
31

^ Gil and Caetano Veloso, both of whom
were born in 1942 and were "launched"
by the same television festivals as had
contributed to the fame of Chico Buar¬
que, picked up, each in his own way, the
musical threads laid down by Caymmi
and Joäo Gilberto. They also created a
cultural movement, known as Tropicalis-
mo, that was closely related to the paint¬
ing of Hélio Oiticica, the Cinema Novo
(see article page 33) of Glauber Rocha,
and the "cannibal theatre" of José Celso
Martinez Correa. Notwithstanding its
brief existence, from 1967 to 1969, the
movement reconciled the country's tradi¬
tions of critical revisionism, steeped in
the literary irony of the drama, poetry
and prose of the Modernist writer Oswald
de Andrade, with the "concrete" poetry
of the Futurist Décio Pignatari and the
brothers Augusto and Haroldo de
Campos.
This approach also incorporated the
aesthetics of the "popular bad taste" of
the idols of Brazilian music-hall and the
international style of the Beatles, and
combined discontinuities and silences
like those of Stockhausen, or sound
effects as in the work of John Cage, with
the langorous melodies of long-ago sam¬
bas. Rogério Duprat, the main orchestra-
tor of Tropicalismo, which featured
singers of the importance of Gal Costa
and Maria Bethania, was also a pupil of
Koellreutter. Moreover, since there is
always a master "arranger" in the many
different schools of Brazilian music, it is
useful to take a look at the instrumental
heritage known as the choro.3
3. Choro (literally "lament") is a Brazilian musical
genre. The word can also denote a group of musicians.
Editor.
The word chow was first used to de¬
note a mixture of European genres, in¬
cluding the schottische, waltz, tango, pol¬
ka and habanera, by Alfredo da Rocha
Viana Filho, known as Pixinguinha
(1898-1973). Through his work with a
variety of orchestral ensembles and his
patient transcription of the oral music of
self-taught composers, Pixinguinha laid
down the parameters of Brazilian musical
tradition. His baton charted the path
taken by the country's music from the
brass-dominated marchinha of carnival
time to the feverish sounds of the military
bands of Pernambuco , and from the mod-
inha, a legacy of the Portuguese court
related to the fado, to moonlight ser¬
enades in the suburbs. This is the origin of
Abre Alas, the first piece of carnival
music involving a literal host of musical
instruments. The leading composer of
"serious" music in Brazil, Heitor Villa-
Lobos (1887-1959), was a friend and con¬
temporary of Pixinguinha, and indeed
wrote a celebrated series of works known
as Choros.
An equally fundamental feature of the
structure of Brazilian popular orchestra¬
tion is the percussion accompaniment
which came to be added to the ensembles
of violins, cellos and violas in the shape of
small drums improvised from all kinds of
kitchen utensils and metal tools. The
most famous example of this is the
arrangement for Brazilian Watercolour.
Although this important musical cur¬
rent has branched out in countless direc¬
tions, it has also been enriched by con¬
tributions from different regions, such as
the church music composed by slaves and
transcribed by Milton Nascimento, who
was born in Rio but received his musical
education in the religious processions of
We/for Villa-Lobos (1887-1959) is the father
of "serious" music in Brazil. Asa musician
he was largely self-taught, and for several
years travelled throughout Brazil, asso¬
ciating with wandering folk musicians and
discovering the wealth of Brazilian folk¬
lore with which his music is suffused. The
best-known works of this prolific compos¬
er are a series bearing the generic title
Choros, and Bachianas brasileiras, a set
of pieces in which a contrapuntal tech¬
nique in the manner ofJ.S. Bach is applied
to themes of Brazilian origin. In photo, left,
taken in New York in 1957, Villa-Lobos is
seen with three percussion instruments
used in Brazilian popular music: on the
piano is an afoxé, a gourd covered by a
lattice of beads; he is holding a chocalho,
a kind of sleigh-bell, and a reco-reco, a
grooved piece of bamboo which is
scraped with a wooden rod.
Minas Gerais, or the rescoring of the
northeastern coco of Jackson do Pan-
deiro in the electronic style of contem¬
porary rock. Songs composed in Brazil
respond to the clash of stimuli between
the country's oral and choreographic
traditions and the worldwide community.
Thus, with such an open-minded out¬
look, mambo and rock turn up in the
music of the quintessentially Brazilian
Chico Buarque just as bossa nova
rhythms appear in the numbers of such
British groups as Style Council and
Everything But a Girl, and some Euro¬
pean brass bands include A Banda, again
by Buarque, in their conventional
repertoires.
The litany intoned by the Portuguese
priests as they taught the catechism could
be combined with the Indian choirs to
produce a number of Sertâo viola pieces,
but there are other even more eloquent
examples of borrowing from this Third
World songbook. Frank Sinatra has sung
Tom Jobim's The Girlfrom Ipanema and
One Note Samba; the Modern Jazz Quar¬
tet has recorded Bachiana No. 5 by Villa-
Lobos; La Casa, music written by Vini-
cius de Moraes for Brazilian children, is a
success in Italy, just as Rita Lee's Brazi¬
lian-style rock is popular in France. In¬
deed, as Caetano Veloso thunders in one
of his latest hits, written in the "rap" style
of the Blacks of Brooklyn: "E deixa os
portugais morrerem à mingua/ minha
patria é minha lingua" ("And let the 'Por¬
tugals' die in destitution/my country is my
language").
TARIK DE SOUZA is a Brazilian journalist, poet
and music critic. He has contributed to many
Brazilian magazines since 1968, and writes a
regular column on popular music for the Jornal
do Brasil. Founder of the magazine Rock, a
historia e a gloria (Rock, the Story and the Glory),
since 1981 he has been a popular music reporter
and critic for Rio de Janeiro's educational televi¬
sion service. His published works include Rostos
e gostos da música popular brasileira (Faces
and Fashions of Brazilian Popular Music) and a
book ofpoems, Autopsia em corpo vivo (Autopsy
on a Living Body).
32
