'Knowledge of the Orient'
An imaginative publishing project
in partnership with Unesco
by Etiemble
IT is a Saturday towards the end of
November 1985 and my desk is lit¬
tered with a dozen or so press cut¬
tings. All of them, without exception, en¬
thuse about the publication, at last, of the
first six re-issues of the Connaissance de
l'Orient ("Knowledge of the Orient")
Series, agreeably presented at a price
affordable by the interested but less well-
off readers often the most zealous in
their thirst for knowledge. Indian,
Chinese and Japanese authors are rep¬
resented in this first batch of re-issues, to
be followed next Spring by an equally
rich, successful and well-produced batch
of masterpieces.
So this seems an appropriate moment
for me to recount how and why I was led,
inexorably, to launch this Series, which
has received the generous support of
Unesco, and why I should never have
been able to guide it, successfully I hope,
without the vigilant backing of this often
misjudged organization.
No sooner had I arrived in Paris, in
1927, to enter the hypokhâgne (the pre¬
paratory class for those wishing to enter
the prestigious Ecole Normale Supér¬
ieure) of the Lycée Louis-le-Grand, than I
began to spend the greater part of my
leisure hours in bookshops which, in
i j r r. l C-r -
ffffF WW*\>T\
i i
5 ?
fâ
Considered to be one of the masters of
Japanese prose, lhara Saikaku (1647-
1693) was the creator of the realistic story
in Japan. Several of his works have been
translated into French and English in the
Unesco Collection. Above, illustration
from a French version of Koshoku Gonin
(1689), published in the Connaissance de
l'Orient series under the title Cinq
Amoureuses in 1959 and 1979. It shows
two characters giving an outdoor dramatic
performance.
: " k !
ir
V
those happy times, allowed students with
open minds but empty pockets to browse
at will through the books that interested
them. I divided my time between three
such understanding bookshops, reading
twenty pages in one, thirty in another and
ten in the third, and buying, each time
that this was possible, one of those
books I had already read but which I
wanted to keep for my future library.
As you can imagine, young provincial
as I then was, guided, or rather mis¬
guided until then by two schoolmasters
whose religious fanaticism limited their
literary repertoire to Bossuet, Pascal and
Thomas Aquinas, I threw myself into the
reading of the Manu-smrti (the Sanskrit
code of law), the Life of the Buddha and
Soulié de Morant's two-volume study on
Confucius.
Subsequently, when this young pro¬
vincial, newly-arrived at the Rue d'Ulm
(the site of the Ecole Normale Supér¬
ieure), was asked by the director of liter¬
ary studies, Monsieur Célestin Bougie,
for which higher degree he intended to
study, he. replied: "Philosophy". To the
further astonishment of Monsieur Boug¬
ie, the impudent young man added:
"This, of course, means that I shall enroll
immediately at the School of Oriental
Languages and for all the classes of ad¬
vanced Chinese studies, since it seems
to me to be unthinkable to aspire to a
higher degree in philosophy which cov¬
ers only European philosophy.
Moreover, the better to understand the
relationship between moral philosophy
and law I shall also enroll at the Faculty of
Law."
Considering me to be unbalanced,
Monsieur Bougie promptly enrolled me
for a grammar degree, saying: "The
Textes Sacrés et Textes Profanes de l'An¬
cienne Egypte, Des Pharaons et des
Hommes ("Sacred and Profane Texts of
Ancient Egypt, Pharaohs and Men") was
published in 1984 in the Connaissance de
l'Orient series (see article) and the Unesco
Collection of Representative Works. This
anthology of texts, many previously un¬
published, sheds much light on ancient
Egyptian society and ways of living. Left,
weighing the heart ofa corpse, an illustra¬
tion from the Book of the Dead, one of the
major works of Egyptian literature and of
the world literary heritage.

J .
- * »
»tfl
A ' <- *
A * » »
au
I
'
^
'.
c »
! í
«
» 1
E
©
^ grammar candidates are mediocre and
you might manage to get your degree; I
wouldn't give much for your chances in
philosophy, if you are hoping to cope not
only with the Asian philosophies but with
law, including Roman law which also
forms part of the degree course!"
I am glad now that I was thrown thus
unceremoniously into the deep end of
grammar. I revelled in the study of the
comparative grammar of the Indo-Euro¬
pean languages, which gave me a taste
for many different literatures. As the
years passed I became infatuated with
Japan, and, in 1934, as a New Year's
Day present, I treated myself to a copy of
the Haikai (short poems) of Kikaku.
In 1943, after a period spent in the
United States with the Navajo and Hopi
Indians, at a time when Rommel and his
Afrika Korps were in retreat towards
Libya, I was invited to Alexandria by that
great Egyptian man of letters Taha Hus¬
sein to head the first Department of
French and Latin at the university of
which he was the Rector. A month in
Martinique and Guadeloupe was fol¬
lowed by a long voyage under the con¬
stant menace of Nazi submarines, then
three months in Algeria waiting for the
aeroplane that would, finally, wing me to
the Valley of the Nile. Then followed Lux¬
or, Karnak and, later, Lebanon.
On the ship which was carrying me to
my new post at the leisurely pace im¬
posed by the convoy system, I spent my
time making my first incursions into Ara¬
bic. I was fascinated by Taha Hussein, as
well as by Tawfiq Al-Hakim, Bishr Faris
and Hussein Fawzi. In particular, Taha
Hussein revealed to me Ibn Khaldun, the
true father of sociology.
Some years later I began working with
the French publishers Gallimard on the
Both a philosophicalschoolanda religion,
Taoism has profoundly influenced
Chinese civilization. With Laozi (Lao-tse),
Zhuangzi (Chuang Tzu, c. 350-275 BC) is
the greatphilosopher of the Taolst school.
His work, a collection ofprose namedafter
its author, is that ofa philosopher-poet. In
the Taolst tradition, as earlyas the Chuang
Tzu, the human body is seen as a symbolic
landscape. Document above, the modern
reproduction of an 18th-century en¬
graving, represents the inner landscape of
the head and the torso.
The Vedas are the sacred books of the
Brahmanic tradition. Collections of
prayers, hymns and litanies, they are
thought to have been composed between
the 14th and the 10th century of the pre-
Christian era. Left, cover illustration of a
new (1985) French popular edition, Les
Hymnes Spéculatifs du Veda, first pub¬
lished in the Unesco Collection In 1956.
Above, cover illustration ofa French trans¬
lation of Le Dit des Heike (The Tale of the
Heike), one of the most popular works in
Japanese literature, which was published
in the Unesco Collection of Representa¬
tive Works in 1976 (see the Unesco
Courier, August 1985).
10

X
cf: .--
Connaissance de l'Orient Series, which
was under the patronage of, and partly
financed by, Unesco. It had not been
easy to bring this about and it was thanks
to Jean Thomas, at that time Deputy
Director-General of Unesco, who de¬
cided that it was of the utmost importance
to the modern conception of the dissemi¬
nation of culture that my proposed Series
should receive Unesco backing, that the
project was able to go ahead.
I owe a great deal to Jean Thomas, but
the most munificent present he ever gave
me, as well as to all those who read in the
French language, was the support he
lent to my project. Over thirty full years,
from 1 956 to 1 986, the Connaissance de
l'Orient Señes has continued to progress
and to open itself out to an increasing
range of writing genres and of languages
from what can broadly be termed the
Orient.
Always insisting on direct translation
from the original text, and having the
services of the best translators for each
language and for each author, I think I
can safely say that, thanks to Unesco, I
have been able to complete a large part
of my far-fetched projectto enable my
CONTINUED OVERLEAF
Illustration from Le Rêve dans le Pavillon
Rouge ("The Dream of the Red Chamber"),
a French translation ofHong lou meng, the
great 18th-century Chinese novel by Cao
Xueqin (c. 1715-1763). The translation (2
vols.) appeared in the Unesco Collection
of Representative Works In 1981 in the
prestigious Bibliothèque de la Pléiade Col¬
lection published by the Paris house of
Gallimard.
?&. -
W

compatriots, rather than waste their time
on fashionable trifles, to read master¬
pieces of the highest civilizations, pre¬
sented in all their most diverse forms:
from India, Sukasaptati (Les Contes du
Perroquet) and Shrikanto; from China,
works of Chuang-tzu (see extract p. 11)
and Lieh-tzu(1), as well as Récits d'une
Vie Fugitive ("Tales of a Fugitive Life") by
Chen Fou and the Pérégrinations d'un
Clochard ("Wanderings of a Tramp") Liu
Ngo's masterpiece, not forgetting, of
course, Le Rêve dans le Pavillon Rouge
("The Dream of the Red Chamber") by
Cao Xueqin.
One problem, however, still preoccu¬
pied me. To fulfil my own dearest wishes
and those of Unesco, those volumes now
sold out in their original, highly-priced
printing would have to be re-issued in a
fine new Series which would be cheaper
but even more attractive than the Folio
paperback edition, since it would be a
matter of reprinting masterpieces chosen
from among masterpieces.
When Moenis Taha Hussein, the man
responsible for the Series at Unesco (it
was his father who had introduced me to
the writings of Ibn Khaldûn, Al-Ma'arri,
Al-Mutanabbi and others), reached the
age of retirement, I discussed the situa¬
tion with his successor and was happily
surprised to learn that he had already
persuaded Antoine Gallimard to reprint,
in an attractive new series (format,
covers, paper, inks all play their part)
those titles that are out of print but which
cannot, at present, be reprinted in the
original series, but which in this way will
be ensured a wider dissemination.
Now, it is precisely the aim of Unesco
and of myself to offer to cultures perhaps
a little too closed in on themselves the
keys to such works as the Vedic
Hymns{2), the Secret Traditions of the
A/o(3), by Zeami, the Pillow-Book of Sei
Shonagon (see extract page 14), the
Vetala-pancavimsatikaw, Chuang-tzu's
Complete Works, and the marvelous
Song of the Road (5), on which Satyajit
Ray based his film Pather Panchali,
which won the Grand Prix at the Cannes
Film Festival in 1956, the year in which I
launched the Series for the benefit of the
French-reading world.
To be honest, when people ask me:
"What do you consider to be your
greatest achievement?", I reply: "The
garden which, with my wife Jeannine, I
designed, planted and have maintained
since 1953; and since 1956, the Con¬
naissance de /'Or/enfSeries." B
RENE ETIEMBLE, French writer and university
teacher, is the founder-director of the Connaiss¬
ance de l'Orient series published by Gallimard
(Paris), in which, in collaboration with Unesco,
many representative works of Far Eastern litera¬
ture have been published. A novelist, he is also a
prolific essayist whose works include Parlez-
vous Franglais? (1964), Le Jargon des Sciences
(1966), Essais de Littérature (Vraiment) Génér¬
ale (1974), Quarante Ans de Mon Maoisme
(1976) and Trois Femmes de Race (1981).

