The quest for identity
by Raymond Chasle
THE emergence of the countries of the
Third World on the international
scene has enabled islands to assert
themselves as economically, socially and
geo-climatically distinct. The legitimacy of
their claims is now acknowledged, but they
have by no means won full practical recog¬
nition. Furthermore, the specific cultural
characteristics of islands have not yet been
given sufficient consideration.
Most islands have been affected by
changing fortunes and the upheavals of
history. They have been the targets of his¬
torical rivalry and of maritime greed on the
part of nations which have sought to exploit
their strategic value or have attempted to
impose trade monopolies.
As regards the people who live on
islands, we are talking in some cases about
human settlements so ancient that they can
be traced back to pre-history or to the ear¬
liest historical times. Alternatively, we can
say that settlements are relatively recent in
the case of islands which had no indige¬
nous population. Between these two ex¬
tremes, there has been an unending flow of
emigrants through the ages. The broad
miscegenation of island peoples, both
biological and cultural, may be traced to
chance encounters at ports of call or to the
deliberate settlement of groups brought in
as slaves.
As stopping-places for expeditions which
were often hostile and bent on plunder, and
as ports of destination for ships whose
holds and steerage had been converted
into "Negro pens", islands took in the
slaves who had survived disease and ill-
treatment, and with them their skills, know¬
ledge, beliefs and dreams.
After the abolition of the maritime slave
trade and the consequent emancipation of
slaves, the need to find substitute labour in
the form of hired workers soon brought
about a return to slavery. Thereafter, con¬
flicts began to break out, sparked by re¬
ligious, ethnic, linguistic and legal conten¬
tions in the various societies.
The replacement of traditional systems
by new systems of values introduced by
missionaries in the name of Christian
morality caused cultural confrontations and
turmoil. So-called "racist colonial" forms of
prejudice laid the foundations of laws, de¬
crees and new institutions which showed
scant respect for local beliefs and value
systems. Initially, all this brought about a
cultural breakdown. Then, by degrees,
islands achieved a vigorous and original
synthesis of their own cultural resources
and those imported from outside.
Traces of original cultures have survived
not only in the sphere of tangible assets
which are, moreover, threatened by
changes, not to say in danger of vanishing
altogether (architecture is a typical exam¬
ple), but also in the domain of intangible
values, which neither imported new reli¬
gions nor imported models of rational
thought have ever been able to obliterate.
The institutions transplanted by the col¬
onizers have been remodelled and restruc¬
tured. The languages of ruling powers have
become imbued with Creole imagery. After
whole decades of attempts to write imitative
poetry with crude emotional appeal, the
island poets, whose work has brought the
dream of the islands to fruition, have risen
to the top of their calling and now rank with
the greatest: Aimé Césaire, Nicolás Guil¬
len, Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo, Malcolm de
Chazal, Saint-John Perse (Nobel Prize for
Literature, 1960), Edward Kamau Braith-
waite, Derek Walcott. Many island poets
have also done much to generate and nur¬
ture the growth of social awareness in the
context of the struggle for liberation.
Modern communications and newly-ac¬
quired independence have enabled the
Creole-speakers of the islands of the Indian
Ocean and the Caribbean to discover and
recognize linguistic and cultural affinities, to
restore the dignity of the Creole language,
long neglected and dismissed as inferior,
and to emphasize the similarities in the
Creole spoken by populations far distant
from one another and the discrepancies
between the Creole spoken on neighbour¬
ing islands.
Encouraging signs indicate that the
populations of islands are becoming more
and more strongly attached to the basic
features on which they pride themselves
and which distinguish them from others;
they have already paid too heavy a tribute
to history to put their identity at risk; they are
not merely preservers but truly creative
crucibles of culture; and they must over¬
come the opposition between those willing
to be totally engulfed by the new and those
who cling rigidly to the old for a third way
is possible. It is possible to cultivate a criti¬
cal and lucid receptiveness to external in¬
fluences. They are coming to realize that
the dynamic forces of society must stem
from their own cultures and develop out of
their own intrinsic values, so that they can
guide their destiny towards a future that is
not shaped by external pressures. Plur¬
alism, ultimately, is the best antidote and
the most effective weapon against the soul-
destroying forces of standardization. H
RAYMOND CHASLE, Mauritian writer and dip¬
lomat, represents his country in the European
Economic Community and at United Nations
institutions in Vienna and Geneva. In 1984 he
was the principal negotiator for cultural and so¬
cial co-operation at the third Lomé Convention.
8
