1 986 Year of Peace / 1
1986 has been proclaimed the Interna¬
tional Year of Peace by the United
Nations. A Unesco-sponsored interna¬
tional symposium entitled "Philosophical
reflection on the Foundations of Peace in
the Present World Situation" was held at
Unesco's Paris Headquarters from 3 to 6
December 1 985. It was attended by inde¬
pendent specialists in a number of disci¬
plines, from all the world's geocultural
regions, and by representatives of other
United Nations agencies, trades unions
and other non-governmental organiza¬
tions.
At the outset it was pointed out that a
review of world events showed the un-
tenability of the claim that the world has
enjoyed a period of peace since the
Second World War came to an end and
certain countries came to possess nuc¬
lear weapons. It is true that the balance of
terror causes peace to prevail between
States situated, for the most part, in the
northern hemisphere. But never before
has war embroiled so many States in the
southern hemisphere, in many of which,
for the last decade or so, famine has
claimed an average of 60 million lives
annually.
Thus it seems that peace is not coter¬
minous with the absence of war in va¬
rious parts of the world: true peace can
only be indivisible. Given the destructive
power of nuclear weapons, which now
makes it possible to annihilate the whole
of humanity, the notion of universal
peace is no longer an ideal but a condi¬
tion for the survival of the human species.
Participants in the symposium also in¬
sisted on the fact that between the state
of peace, with the serenity that accompa-
In each issue published during
1986, proclaimed International Year
of Peace by the United Nations, the
Unesco Courier will report on diffe¬
rent events being held international¬
ly in connection with this event.
The first text in the series appears
below.
m)
nies it, and the state of war, synonymous
with death, there is an intermediate stage
in which humanity merely achieves
physical survival, a situation that should
not be confused with the true contours of
peace. Man, in his physical and spiritual
totality, is and must remain at the heart of
any conception of authentic world peace.
This should not be forgotten at a time
when the development of the neutron
bomb perversely makes it possible to
save material goods while destroying
people.
What ethical attitudes are necessary
and what specific steps should be taken
for the patient construction of such a
peace? In any design for peace, setting
aside questions of disarmament and
armament, the participants thought that
the material crisis (famine, unem¬
ployment, debt) could eventually be sur¬
mounted. It is the spiritual crisis, with its
attendant intolerance, racism, and con¬
flicts of values, that divides the world
today. Any ethical vision of peace or any
action to promote peace must lead ulti¬
mately to the total liberty of man by gra¬
dually breaking down the barriers of indi¬
vidual and collective intolerance. If this
liberty, from an ethical point of view,
essentially belongs to every person, it is
also a responsibility for every State. Con¬
sequently there must be a constant
search for a simultaneous and reciprocal
balance between human rights, for each
individual, and the rights of peoples, for
all nations; for a balance between the
material and spiritual needs of all men;
between economic and technological de¬
velopment on the one hand and cultural
and political development on the other;
between being and possessing.
It was unanimously felt that the
achievement of an indivisible peace in
spirit and in practice will mean demilitar¬
izing our cultures, both individual and
collective, our conflictual visions of
healthy opposition and difference, our
manichean judgments, our knowledge
which is partial in both senses of the
word.
All the participants also emphasized
the central role incumbent on the orga¬
nizations of the United Nations system in
this search for a world equilibrium and a
lasting peace.
