The yestermorrow
of the book
by Marshall McLuhan
Text©McLuhan Associates Limited, 1972
Reproduction prohibited w
rHEN Gutenberg transformed the
European manuscript into a new
uniform and repeatable package,
he ended the regime of oral scholastic phil¬
osophy and provided the means of retriev¬
ing the world of pagan authors.
At the same time that the new intensity of
words as visual objects came into play
against the old oral ground, words became
visual counters in a new "objective" sense.
The world of resonance and multi-levelled
50
depth of verbal structures which had been
the basis of the exegesis both of the sacred
page and the Book of Nature, was suddenly
muted by high visual stress.
New kinds of rational authority were sub¬
stituted for the old resonance with its affin¬
ity for magic and metamorphosis.
Clearly, scholastic philosophy was a form
of discourse that would not do in the new
era. It was doomed, not because of its con¬
tent or meaning, but because it was chatty,

"The new electronic interdependence,"
wrote Marshall McLuhan, "recreates the
world in the image of a global village, " an
aphorism aptly portrayed by the optical
trickery of this Salvador Dali painting, Vis¬
age paranoïaque (vertically a face, hori¬
zontally a group of villagers).
conversational discussion that took all man¬
ner of things into account at any given
moment.
With the coming of print, specialism de¬
veloped because the individual reader, by
solitary effort, could speed over the super¬
highways of assembly-line printing without
the company or comment of a group of
fellow learners and disputants.
With the advent of telegraph and tele¬
phone and radio and TV as service environ¬
ments, totally new figure-ground rela¬
tionships have come into play. In science
and in fiction, in art and in politics, the fact
of audience involvement in all aspects of the
social process has become an irresistible
datum.
So far as the book is concerned, the mode
and means of involvement of reader as co¬
author and of audiences as actors has been
the symbolic or discontinuous form in poet¬
ry and painting, and music, in press and
novel, and in drama.
Print made handwriting "obsolete", but
there is more handwriting in the present day
than there ever was before printing.
Obsolescence is not extinction but the
necessary matrix of innovation. Therefore
handwriting has blossomed out in many
new forms, including that of the typescript.
In the same way as the information
offered by the printed book is outstripped
by photo and film and TV, the book has
steadily hybridized with other forms of
visual image giving us many new art forms.
There is a sense in which it is possible to
speak of the book as "hardware" tech¬
nology.
The paradox is, oral culture is stable and
conservative, whereas the written word is
fashionable and fluctuating. There is a good
deal on this subject in The Gutenberg
Galaxy. For example, "correct" grammar
begins with the written word. Nobody ever
committed a grammatical error in an oral
culture.
Alexander Pope felt that an inky smog
had settled over all human consciousness in
the age of Newton. What lay ahead now
seems, in retrospect, to have been a con¬
siderable advance over the world that Pope
saw in dissolution. In the age of video cas¬
settes, when it will be possible to dial a book
as easily as an acquaintance, totally new
forms of literary experience are at hand. It
is our literate job to be ready to cope with
these innovations.
January 1972
HERBERT MARSHALL McLUHAN (1911-
1980), Canadian sociologist, was founder-direc¬
tor of the Centre for Culture and Technology of
the University of Toronto (1963-1980). In addi¬
tion to his celebrated work The Gutenberg
Galaxy (1962), he was also the author of Under¬
standing Media (1964) and The Medium is the
Massage (with Quentin Fiore, 1967).

