Worlds apart
by François Doumenge
Tropical Islands, in spite of their beautiful
scenery and idyllic climate, are a prey to
serious economic and biological con¬
straints and natural disasters. Above, a
small island near Suva, Fiji.
I
"SLANDS are "worlds apart", so dis¬
tinctive are their physical and biologic¬
al characteristics, as well as their eco¬
nomic and demographic situation. Sur¬
rounded by the sea, they are by definition
relatively isolated, a condition which has
effects on their plant and animal popula¬
tions as well as on their social and economic
equilibrium.
Degrees of insularity are difficult to
measure. Islands with more than a certain
surface area are continental islands. Small
island countries usually have a surface area
of less than 20,000 km and a population of
less than a million persons.
Excluding islands in Arctic and extreme
southern latitudes and in the Med¬
iterranean, most small island countries are
found in the intertropical zone. In terms of
climate they enjoy definite assets, and con¬
sequently they conjure up images of lush
vegetation, agreeable weather conditions
and varied landscapes that are idyllic to
many a mainlander. Oceanic influences en¬
sure that there is a high degree of continuity
in the life cycle of plants, a high level of
insolation encourages natural productivity,
and the trade winds exert a beneficial influ¬
ence on the environment. Nevertheless,
there are constraints: a central belt of heavy
rainfall corresponding to the intertropical
front is bordered by two dry belts, with the
result that within a single archipelago
groups of very humid islands are sometimes
found next to quite arid ones. Moreover,
the alternation of wet and dry seasons is
marked by violent disturbances such as cy¬
clones, typhoons and serious droughts.

V
Among the native fauna of the Galápagos
archipelago in the Pacific Ocean, 1,300 km
from the coast of Ecuador, are the giant
tortoises which take their name from the
archipelago, iguanas, sea-lions (left),
birds and many small animals which owe
their survival to their isolation. The Galá¬
pagos islands feature on Unesco's World
Heritage List, and belong to the interna¬
tional biosphere reserve network which
has been created as part of Unesco's ma¬
jor programme on Man and the Biosphere
(MAB). The network, which today extends
to 226 sites in 62 countries, consists of
protected, representative areas for con¬
serving biological diversity within each
major ecological zone of the world. In 1985
MAB launched a project aimed at includ¬
ing in the biosphere network a number of
sites in the Lesser Antilles Region.
The kea (Nestor notabilis), a large parrot
and one of the most robust of its species,
Is found only in the south of New Zealand.
The bread-fruit tree (Artocarpus altilis), a
species orginating in the South Pacificand
introduced successfully Into the Carib¬
bean, produces large fruit (left) which
when cooked tastes like bread. Its seeds,
the size of chestnuts, are also edible.
^ Finally, as a result of their geological forma¬
tion and geographical situation, these is¬
lands are subject to earthquakes and vol¬
canic eruptions.
More serious than the susceptibility of
islands to natural disasters are the biological
constraints of endemism.(1) These are parti¬
cularly onerous since fewer plant and anim¬
al species are found on islands, because of
their physical isolation, than on continents.
These natural populations are fragile, since
their regenerative capacity and their power
of resistance are weak when faced with
overexploitation or harsh competition from
outside species introduced accidentally or
for economic reasons. The proliferation of
such species and their retinue of parasites
and pathogenic organisms may cause real
ecological catastrophes. On the other hand,
by virtue of their isolation, islands may
constitute veritable biological sanctuaries
for the preservation of species which might
have been eliminated in evolutionary com¬
petition among continental communities.
1. Defined by the Dictionnaire encyclopédique Quillet as
"the quality of being endemic or having a limited and
clearly demarcated distribution", the French term "en-
demisme" possesses not only biological or ecological but
also cultural connotations.
The application of plant health measures
and the judicious introduction of species
which could occupy an ecological niche left
empty because of an island's isolation may
yield excellent results, as is shown by the
successful transplantation of citrus trees
from Mediterranean countries to certain
South Pacific and Caribbean islands, or the
transplantation of the bread-fruit tree (Ar¬
tocarpus altilis) from the South Pacific to
the Mascarene Islands and the Antilles.
Demographically speaking, there is no
minimum viability threshold as such for
island communities. In practice, most
islands were originally occupied by small
groups of individuals. As a general rule,
when there are less than 20 inhabitants per
km2, land development is difficult, and
densities of more than 300 inhabitants per
km2 result in overpopulation.
Small island societies are particularly
vulnerable to outside interference, which
may reach spectacular proportions. In hu¬
man biological terms, islands act as a sound
box, amplifying effects which quickly die
out on continents. Island populations are
vulnerable because of their isolation, and
may be decimated by contagious diseases
introduced by immigrants or visitors. In the
nineteenth and the early twentieth centur
ies this happened on a number of Pacific
islands ravaged by epidemics of influenza,
measles, smallpox or cholera, which took a
heavy death-toll.
At present, regardless of natural or eco¬
nomic conditions, the demographic balance
of islands is still positive. Demographic
growth leads to emigration, which acts as a
safety valve when population pressure be¬
comes incompatible with the maintenance
of the living standards made possible by the
local economic situation. On some islands
in Polynesia and the Caribbean, the number
of emigrants now exceeds the number of
resident islanders. Beyond what level of
emigration, it may be asked, will it be im¬
possible to maintain demographic equilib¬
rium?
In education, population levels impose a
limit on the range of fields of training.
While a satisfactory level of general educa¬
tion may be achieved with a population
generating only a few thousand pupils, tech¬
nical education calls for larger numbers of
pupils in order to make adequate use of
costly facilities. To warrant the provision of
higher education, it seems that recruitment
must be made from a population "pool" of
not less than 600,000, provided that the
existing secondary education structure
i
10

reaches at least one quarter of the school-
age population.
Below these thresholds, it is difficult for
small islands to offer independently the full
range of educational possibilities and to
provide the necessary supervisory capacity,
particularly in very specialized fields. Stu¬
dents must therefore turn to overseas uni¬
versities. This vital contact with the outside
world can be made through membership of
a wider cultural sphere of influence, or by
the creation of regional higher education
institutions such as the University of the
West Indies in Jamaica and in Trinidad and
Tobago, which serves the whole of the
Caribbean, and the University of the South
Pacific at Suva (Fiji), which is financed by
the islands of the South Pacific.
The economies of small islands cannot
make an impact on international markets.
Their output is too limited to influence
prices. Their greatest weakness is that they
are subject to market fluctuations, except
where a former protective power or a neigh¬
bouring economic centre will guarantee
prices and a preferential market for their
products. This explains why small island
plantations declined in importance after the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Their
agricultural commodities sugar, copra,
bananas or, to a lesser extent, coffee and
cocoa can scarcely compete international¬
ly. Without a superabundant supply of
natural resources, which is extremely rare,
it is hard for them to go beyond the stage of
precarious subsistence. Nor do their limited
internal markets, their lack of specialized
manpower and capital, favour the develop¬
ment of processing industries, which are
very few in number.
Ultimately, it is the range of possible uses
of the sites and situations afforded by is¬
lands for the establishment of service activi-
Islands, especially those of the Caribbean,
are regularly ravaged by cyclones, atmos¬
pheric disturbances characterized by vio¬
lent wind and torrential rain, accompanied
by tidal waves and even minor earth tre¬
mors. Although they only last for a few
hours, they can destroy an entire harvest
and ruin a country's economy. Photo be¬
low shows the damage caused in 1979 In
Santo Domingo, the capital of the Domini¬
can Republic, by Hurricane David, one of
the most violent this century. The hurri¬
cane, which had previously devastated
Dominica, left hundreds of dead and
homeless in its wake.
ties which makes it possible to offset the
weakness of production and processing in¬
dustries.
Islands may, for example, be used for
technical bases within international trans¬
port and communication networks.
Although the bunkering stations of the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries and the
fuelling bases of the inter-war years are
outmoded, submarine cables and telecom¬
munications stations now face competition
from satellites, and today's long-haul airlin¬
ers do not need intermediate landing fields,
new needs have emerged. Port dispersal
facilities have been developed with the ex¬
pansion of containerization and the need to
divide up the cargoes of large carriers.
Other possibilities may arise such as the use
of certain islands as strategic bases, or as
observation stations for satellite launching
and tracking. The main advantage of the
integration of small islands into a vast
worldwide network is in making available
to them infrastructures which would
never have been justified for local use.
But for small islands tourism is the main
key to entry into worldwide economic cir¬
cuits. Since the Second World War, particu¬
larly with the expansion of air travel, tour¬
ism has come to play a dominant role in the
economy of these countries. The number of
visitors to even very remote islands has
sometimes equalled, or even exceeded, that
of the indigenous population. This has
brought an injection of economic resources
through investments, jobs and business.
Yet the excessive concentration of activities
into a single sector is dangerous since, as
well as any pernicious social effects it may
have, it creates a danger of destabilization,
the effects of which cannot be controlled in
the event of a political or economic crisis in
the system of national or international
relations.
Financial services are another field in
which the special nature of islands may
Above, the port of Castries, St. Lucia. Pro¬
viding port facilities is one economic
activity whereby small island countries
can take advantage of their geographical
situation.
prove useful. Under the colonial powers,
islands enjoyed tax and tariff advantages
which offset some of the disadvantages of
isolation. With the expansion of interna¬
tional trade and banking links, islands be¬
came desirable locations because their
isolation guaranteed security and because
their tax laws were extremely liberal.
However, this branch of economic activity
is also dangerously dependent on the inter¬
national economic situation.
The economic vulnerability of small is¬
land countries is not always an obstacle to
their development. Their viability depends
on their ability to predict the evolution of
the world economy and to adapt to it by
moving from one specialization to another,
rather than by seeking a diversification
which would be risky for their small-scale
economies. This means that they need a
novel economic structure and management
system, not necessarily that which suits con¬
tinental States.
FRANCOIS DOUMENGE, of France, is profes¬
sor of ethology and the conservation of animal
species at the Museum National d'Histoire
Naturelle in Paris, and a consultant specialist
with a number of international organizations. A
former Rector of the Académie des Antilles et de
la Guyane, from 1971-1973 he directed United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) projects relating to fishing and aquacul¬
ture in the South Pacific islands. Among his
published works are L'homme dans le Pacifique
Sud (1966) and Pêche et aquaculture japonaises
(1975). The present article has been extracted
from a study on the viability of small island coun¬
tries which he carried out for the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNC¬
TAD) in 1983.
11
