The writer
between two worlds
Two young pupils in a Mexican school
by Tahar Ben Jelloun
THE Third World intellectual must live
with a terrible fact: over 80 per cent of
people in the Third World can neither
read nor write. No magic wand can be waved
to change their plight; it will be a long, hard
struggle which will call on men and women
with a real determination for change.
Is it not a paradox to write in a continent of
illiterates? "No," says the Mexican writer
Carlos Fuentes, "it is not as paradoxical as it
may seem. Perhaps the writer knows that he
is working to keep alive a relationship with a
past which has rarely found its political
equivalent."
A literature in which many poor and domin¬
ated peoples find a recognizable picture of
themselves has come from a single fissure
etched in the warm and human earth of Latin
America. The waifs and strays of Bogotá are
part of the same wound as the urchins of Cairo
and the shayatin ("little devils") of Casablan¬
ca. A peasant dispossessed of his land has
the same dreams whether he lives in north
Africa or northeast Brazil; the same imagina¬
tion broken by injustice, forbidden to express
itself, thwarted by a tragic fate.
Once he has resisted blandishments and
pressures, the writer born of this reality cannot
accept that a dispossessed peasant should
be left to live what political and military author¬
ities call a reasonable life.
"A continent of illiterates" has a greater
need of writers than a continent sated with
knowledge. Writing here is a refusal to accept
defeat.
And so we have this gamble on liberty and
on the future, for this continent will not always
be afflicted by the inevitability of illiteracy.
Those who come later, perhaps the children of
this period, will be entitled to call us to
account. The writer will have to declare his
books or his silence.
The commitment of the artist implies solv¬
ing his country's problems at the same time as
creating a work of art. This still has a meaning
in countries which are confronted with life-
and-death problems, not intellectual fads. In
this respect the Peruvian writer Mario Vargas
Llosa has noted something which is valid not
only for Latin America but for the Third World
as a whole. "Elsewhere, to be a writer means,
primarily and often exclusively, assuming a
personal responsibility for a body of work
which, if artistically valid, will enrich the culture
of the country in which it is created. In Peru
and in other Latin American countries, to be a
writer means primarily, and often exclusively,
assuming a social responsibility." There is
virtually no escape from assuming that re¬
sponsibility.
If this conception of literary activity relates
to reality by making the writer a repository of
information with his eyes fixed on the outside
world, then it causes a major misunderstand¬
ing. For the main thing is forgotten, namely
how to write, how to create.
Should we then go far in the other direction
and regard literature as a pure stylistic exer¬
cise or a lifeless tour de force?
There is a widespread misunderstanding
about where the writer's commitment lies. To
militate in a political party or organization is
one thing; to write while taking part in politics
as well is another. The one does not exclude
the other. But it is rare that the two combine in
such a way as not to be mutually harmful and
do not create confusion and misunder¬
standings.
As for the writer who deliberately chooses
to live in exile, he leaves far behind him the
prevailing stagnation, the temptation to bitter¬
ness and inactivity. Whatever he does is
bound to be wrong! If exile leads to nothing, he
is wrong. If exile brings him success, he is
wrong. The child who leaves his family con¬
nexions by the wayside is not forgiven.
But to be far away does not necessarily
mean to be absent. To go away is another way
of establishing links with one's land and peo¬
ple. Wherever it is produced, the work of a
writer or an artist returns in one way or another
to the land of its origin.
But when exile becomes a way of thinking
and of becoming ensnared in the toils of an
unhappy conscience, when it severs a man
from his deepest roots, when it becomes an
end in itself and submerges the individual in a
set of problems which ought not really to
concern him, then exile becomes alienation. It
returns to the mother country another person,
often a stranger who has lost the capacity for
wonder: a wreck apparently in good health.
duly 1982
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN, Moroccan writer and
journalist, has divided his time between France
and Morocco since 1971. Among his recent
works is L'écrivain public, published in 1983.
59
