y firs
s e s
•
I space
b lek ei Leono
On 18March 1965, AlekseiLeonovbecame the first man to leave a
space vehicle and walk about in outer space. He described his
extraordinary adventure in this article specially written for the
Unesco Courier.
ONLY the unforgettable moments at
the take-off and the recollection of
the long months of flight training
forced me to believe in the reality of the
scene that unfolded before my eyes as I
viewed the spaceship while I floated
through the vacuum of space. Voskhod 11
sailed with an awesome majesty.
Before me, blackness-an inky-black sky
studded with stars that glowed but did not
twinkle; they seemed immobilized. Nor did
the sun look the same as when seen from
Earth. It had no aureole or corona; it re­
sembled a huge incandescent disc that
seemed embedded in the velvet black of
the sky of outer space. Space itself
appeared as a bottomless pit. It will never
be possible to see the cosmos the same
way on Earth.
Below me our blue planet drifted by. It
did not look round but completely flat, like
a giant physical map. Only the curvature of
the horizon showed that it was round.
Two minutes after the ship had been
placed in orbit, Pavel Belyayev, Comman­
der of Voskhod 11, and I began making
preparations for my exit into space.
When we were over Kamchatka, Com-
mander Belyayev helped me to put on the
cylinder containing my air supply. I check­
ed the connexions linking my breathing
mixture to the spacesuit. Belyayev opened
the inner door of the air lock. Together we
fastened to my spacesuit the tether cable
that would keep me attached to the ship.
Built into the tether was the telephone
cable that would be my link with the ship
and Earth. I unstrapped myself from the
seat and floated into the chamber of the
air lock.
I gave a hand signal to the Commander.
The inner door closed behind me. Be­
Iyayev at once began to empty the cham­
ber of air in order to equalize the pressure
with that outside the ship. I could feel this
happening from the way my spacesuit be­
came inflated. Suddenly the outer door of
the air lock opened into space. A blinding
burst of sunlight poured into the chamber. I
made my way forward in the lock towards
the exit and poked my head out. We were
over the Mediterranean.
I found myself spinning and was power­
less to control it. I had had the same ex­
perience when Belyayev and I were prac­
tising in the aeroplane-laboratory the tech-
nique of exit and re-entry under conditions
of weightlessness. So I did nothing about
it. I merely waited for the twisting of the
tether to slow down the rotations. I could
have checked this by grabbing hold of the
tether, but I preferred to keep on rolling
because this enabled me to see better.
While I was drifting in space, I was al­
ways in telephone contact with Pavel Be­
Iyayev and with Earth. I spoke to Yuri
Gagarin who was on duty in the control
room of the spaceport. I heard Radio Mos­
cow announce the launching of our craft.
While over the Yenisei, Commander Be­
Iyayev gave me the signal to re-enter the
ship. I was feeling wonderful, in excellent
spirits, and was in no hurry to leave open
space.
I tried to enter the air lock directly, but
this proved anything but easy. The .inflated
spacel?uit constricted my movements. I had
to use all my strength to re-enter, but be­
fore long I was back in the cabin alongside
Pavel Belyayev.
So ended the experiment in which a
man climbed out of a capsule into space. I
had spent twenty minutes outside the
cabin. During this time, Voskhod 11 had
gone far from the Mediterranean, over
which we had been travelling when I first
went into the air lock-we were now
approaching the Pacific. •
June 1965
39
