A ^f^wríp'Q by MA' Sinaceur
reason and tolerance
This statue of Averroës, the work of the
brothers Agapito and Venancio Vallmit-
jana, Spanish sculptors of the second half
of the 19th century, stands in an alcove at
the University of Barcelona.
IN reflecting on Averroës, it is not my
wish to evoke the man whom Latin
Schoolmen held in boundless admira¬
tion or the researcher whose commentaries
on Aristotle rivalled in power of thought the
works he was analysing. Nor shall I dwell
here on his life as a sober, pious judge or on
the affinity of his approach with that
developed by the great Islamic jurists, an
approach characterized by a spirit of frank
self-questioning. Instead I shall concentrate
on two ideas, two notions which bring us
abruptly face to face with real problems,
real questions, eternally posed.
The first of these is the notion of the unity
of reason. To know, it is postulated, is to
acknowledge participation in universal
knowledge. I use the word reason instead of
the term intellect which Averroës used, true
to the terminology of the philosophers of
Alexandria and Baghdad. To transpose in
this way is not to yield to lack of rigour and
precision; it is simply a refusal to succumb
to pettifogging and indecision or to bend the
knee to a form of erudition for erudition's
sake.
The unity of reason, then, was what
Averroës propounded, an overriding con¬
cept which inspired audacious develop¬
ments. For the French philosopher/writer
Ernest Renan (1823-1892) it was human
thought taken as a whole, "a universal phe¬
nomenon stemming from superior powers".
Unity of reason encompasses the principles
on which we base the demonstration that
takes us a step further, the proof that suc¬
ceeds, the experiment which achieves its
end. It is the unity of the psychological
make-up of mankind the hardships and
vices that engender evil and suffering, and
the faculties that enable us to construct the
city of harmony and peace. It is humanity
one and indivisible, living and permanent,
as essential to itself as is personal dignity to
the most individualistic of individuals,
which the most intimate, innermost truth
affords to him who recognizes and acknowl¬
edges it. Thus he who knows and is, is no
more, as individual, than a splendid speci¬
men of the Universal.
The second idea is not unconnected with
the first. Reason cannot destroy faith. Both
express the same truth. Now this was a
notion that was as bound to displease the
Schoolmen of old as it does the ideologists
of today. Two truths, it should be remem¬
bered, cannot contradict each other. But, a
word of caution, this is a truth that no single
statement can exhaust, not inert truths that
one can take hold of and possess. The real
Averroës was a practitioner of rational tol¬
erance, a tolerance which was neither com¬
plaisant, sceptical nor moralistic:
1. Reason should seek neither purposeless
confrontation with nor the destruction of
the faith of those for whom it is a necessity.
Among men there are many kinds of
exchanges, undertakings and beliefs. Yet
men can live together quite happily in a
world in which opinions are varied and
diverse. This is because there are opinions
that merit respect; and to respect implies to
explain and to understand.
2. Reason demands that we examine other
cultures in a spirit of understanding and
objectivity: "We accept with joy whatever is
in conformity with truth truth, that is,
which is the outcome of research; ... that
which is not in conformity with truth we
shall point out and excuse..." No matter
whence it comes or where it originates,
validity is the only condition knowledge has
to fulfil. Knowledge is not the sole constitu¬
ent of the heritages of the different cultures;
each of them also encompasses conceptions
that comfort or disturb.
3. Finally although Averroës did not state
this explicitly it is implicit in the whole
thrust of his argument what applies to
religion and to philosophy applies also to
any body of beliefs: concealed behind two
apparently opposed truths lies an identity
waiting to be discovered. Such an opposi¬
tion is an invitation to research, to medita¬
tion, to the elaboration of a unity which
goes beyond the apparently contradictory
expressions of diversity.
By dint of excessive study, philological
examination and pointless and laborious
annotation it is possible to obscure the
clearest lines of thought such as those
most dear to Averroës, and the most mean¬
ingful of his life. And it is these latter that
have the power to move us. At a time when
people are wondering anxiously whether
there is today a place for such a thing as
"modern humanism", the least we can hope
is that in recalling his ideas we shall ensure
the continuance of the essential principles
he stated so strongly.
One day Averroës was informed of a holy
man's method of curing men and women by
making them pay out sums of money equiv¬
alent to the supposed value, as determined
by him, of their affected organs. Instead of
launching into a diatribe against supersti¬
tion, Averroës declared: "There goes a man
who believes that a human being can be
moved by the act of giving." It is to be
hoped that evocation of the path followed
by Averroës, the path of totally frank and
open thought, has power to move the hearts
of men today.
MOHAMMED ALLAL SINACEUR, director of
Unesco's Philosophy Division and professor of
Sociology of Development at Hassan II Univer¬
sity (Morocco), was formerly a research officer at
the French Centre National de la Recherche Sci¬
entifique. He has written widely on philosophical
problems and on the history of mathematics.
24
