Higher education and peace
THE risk of a nuclear conflict is the over¬
riding problem facing humanity today
and efforts to prevent nuclear annihila¬
tion should be the first priority of peace and
disarmament education.
These were two of the major points that
emerged from a recent International Con¬
sultation on ways of improving higher educa¬
tion in the field of peace and respect for hu¬
man rights and the rights of peoples. Orga¬
nized by Unesco and the Greek National
Commission for Unesco, the meeting was
held in Athens from 20 to 24 January 1986,
and was attended by leading scientists, spe¬
cialists in the social and human sciences and
in higher education from 17 countries of
Unesco's European region, Latin America,
Africa, the Arab Region and Asia.
The participants, among whom was Profes¬
sor Bernard Lown (Nobel Peace Prize 1985;
see article opposite page), described experi¬
ences in their countries and exchanged views
on ways of informing students about problems
relating to peace. They discussed how to
teach about the dangers of a nuclear war, the
arms race, and military uses of science and
technology, as well as how to increase the
role that students, future researchers and de¬
cision-makers should play in finding solutions
to problems in these areas. .
It was pointed out that the risks of nuclear
war and the consequences of the arms race
extend to the developing world: some Third
World countries already have nuclear
weapons, while others are afraid of countries
which possess them. At the same time there
have been many wars since 1945 using con¬
ventional weapons, and the prevention of
such wars and the constant violations of hu¬
man rights should also remain priority areas.
The reduction of military arsenals is a pre¬
requisite for economic and social develop¬
ment for mankind as a whole and especially
for Third World countries.
Stressing the urgent need for radical im¬
provements in higher education on these
issues, participants made a number of sug¬
gestions about the general approach, aims,
content and forms of international education.
Among their recommendations were:
promoting the introduction of a global
approach based on the ideas of international
understanding, tolerance and solidarity
among peoples and countries, and on respect
for cultural diversity;
developing an educational strategy which
would integrate education for peace, respect
for human rights and the rights of peoples into
development education;
basing international education on a scien¬
tific approach;
including among the aims of international
education the prevention of a nuclear catas¬
trophe, the prevention of conventional wars
and the violation of human rights;
promoting the idea of a united front of
people to face the unprecedented threat of a
nuclear catastrophe in order to ensure the
survival of human civilization;
resisting the development of ideological
and psychological stereotypes dehumanizing
other peoples;
improving communications between scien¬
tists and politicians;
introducing problems related to the New
International Economic Order, underdevelop¬
ment, poverty, imperialism and neo-col-
onialism;
extending programmes of peace and hu¬
man rights education to military academies;
promoting the establishment of "linked
schools and universities" from different coun¬
tries in order to strengthen international
understanding;
establishing in universities and higher
education institutions an oath on graduation
for young scientists and engineers in which to
draw their attention to the ethical and human
consequences of scientific research and tech¬
nological achievements.
Teachers often lack documentary material
and other teaching aids to help them intro¬
duce their students to internationalaffairs.
To fill this gap, the United Nations and
Unesco's Associated Schools Project
have prepared a practical handbook,
World Concerns and the United Nations,
for primary- and secondary-school
teachers. The handbook, published In
English, French and Spanish, contains
model teaching units on subjects such as
peace and disarmament, human rights,
racism, development, the environment,
and cultural diversity, as well as advice to
help teachers plan stimulating lessons
which can be integrated into traditional
history, geography, science, languages
and even mathematics courses. Painting
right by a 12-year-old Romanian girl,
Adriana Moisln, illustrates a model
teaching unit on the theme of different
perceptions of the world.
.oi«;;*' I
BS
*^v;'í'.~JÍ' - !?a
_ - -i-
Z&SS&.
Il ¡%;tó
18
