Violence
in the Third World
by Soedjatmoko The present text is an abridged version of its author's con¬
tribution to a major forthcoming study on war as a human
institution. Entitled The Quest for Peace: Transcending Col¬
lective Violence and War among Societies, Cultures and
States, the study will be published later this year under the
auspices of the Unesco-supported International Social Sci¬
ence Council. This book, prepared as a contribution from the
social sciences to the United Nations International Year of
Peace, aims at a systematic and comprehensive presentation
of the latest knowledge from different social science disci¬
plines concerning the problems of war and peace.
'V
"Societies are beginning to come apart at
the seams as the despair, frustration and
rage of the 'have nots' clash with the
fear, reluctance or intransigence of the
'haves'." Below, rural South Africans.
'IOLENCE is a sign of institution¬
al failure and system overload,"
Professor Nazli Choucri has writ¬
ten. O These conditions are by no means
unique to the Third World, but it remains a
fact that the vast majority of wars and war¬
like incidents that have taken place since
the Second World War have been fought in
the Third World. Furthermore, the daily
turmoil and frictions of life under circum¬
stances of economic struggle and rapid so¬
cial change give rise to violence among
groups and individuals within Third World
societies.
I
H0C
"V. '
là
'vi W
^ ; L-,
*¿
?
ê
1
.
Despite their great diversity, the coun¬
tries of the Third World have some charac¬
teristics in common, apart from their loca¬
tion in Africa, Asia or Latin America, that
make possible some generalizations about
violence as they experience it. In the first
place, most developing countries share the
experience of colonial domination, though
the nature and duration of it vary
tremendously among them. Most of them
are poor. Perhaps most importantly, most
are engulfed in a process of very profound
social and economic transformation that,
though a necessary condition for develop¬
ment, is in itself a source of instability.
For many developing countries, one can
begin the search for the roots of violence
with the circumstances of decolonization.
For those countries that gained their inde¬
pendence by armed struggle, the fight for
independence gave a legitimacy to the use
of violence that still clings to it in many
settings. A further legacy of colonial rule is
the forced cohabitation within a single State
of antagonistic groups that are artificially
bound together within the borders estab¬
lished by the colonizers. In many instances
quarrels that were submerged but not re¬
solved during the colonial period have re-
emerged and, often, burst into violent con¬
flict after independence.
Poverty is not necessarily a cause of vio¬
lent conflict though many argue that it is
in itself a form of violence. If can be seen as
such when it is the product of maldistribu¬
tion of resources and denial of opportunity,
and exists in the midst of plenty or even
excess. Under these conditions, poverty is
usually the result of social and economic
relations that can only be maintained by the
threat or the use of violence. One major
feature of recent decades has been the
growing self-assertiveness of poor and tra¬
ditionally powerless groups. In some cases,
groups of people have managed to move up
the economic ladder, though many have
met with violent resistance on the way.
However, it is not poverty but the attempt
(1) Nazli Choucri, "Demographics and Conflict", Bulle¬
tin of the Atomic Scientists, Vol. 42, No. 4 (April, 1986).
©
30

m.
to break out of poverty that generates vio¬
lence both as a tactic and as a response.
Heightened aspirations and a refusal to
accept a miserable lot have also contributed
to massive population movements, within
and across national boundaries. Violent
clashes with established residents are a
common result of migration. For example,
in the Indian State of Assam, many lives
have been lost in attacks by the Assamese
on illegal immigrants from Bangladesh. In
Honduras, the migration of Salvadorans in
the early 1960s not only produced local
clashes but led to a build-up of tensions that
culminated in war between the two States.
Even in cases where migration is received
peacefully or the initial violence simmers
down, the long-term basis may be laid for
communal tensions that erupt into violence
at later stages as has been the case
throughout South and South-east Asia as
well as in many parts of Africa.
The process of development itself is al¬
ways a source of turbulence and often a
source of violence. Developmental success
inevitably brings about structural change,
upsetting traditional hierarchies and often
generating violent reaction. The failures of
development lead to even greater strain on
the social fabric. The global recession of the
early 1980s , the debt burdens of many of the
developing countries, the prospect of slow
and uneven growth for many years to come,
the drawing down of the financial and eco¬
logical capital of whole nations, have cre¬
ated intolerable strains. In many parts of
the Third World, communities are on the
verge of breakdown. Societies are begin¬
ning to come apart at the seams as the
despair, frustration and rage of the "have
nots" clash with the fear, reluctance or in¬
transigence of the "haves" and erupt into
religious, ethnic, tribal, racial and class
violence.
The dislocations caused by rapid and ex¬
tensive change make countries vulnerable
to conflict arising from both internal and
external sources. Adjustment to the de¬
velopments of the late twentieth century is
threatening enough to the equanimity of
any society without the further challenge of
trying to compress centuries of technologic¬
al change and nation-building into the span
of a few decades.
It is important to keep in mind, however,
that the process of social transformation is
by no means confined to the Third World.
All countries are in some measure caught
up in sweeping value changes that respond
to new technologies and modes of organiza¬
tion, and to a pace and scale of change that
are unprecedented in human experience. It
is not only in the Third World that the
re-examination of old and newer values has
led to challenges to the State.
The fragility of young States in the face of
internal turbulence and external pressure
leads many governments to attempt to cen¬
tralize power and to rely upon the armed
forces to maintain stability. The ease with
which this tendency slides into a cycle of
militarization, repression and internal con-
"Adjustment to the developments of the
late 20th century is threatening enough to
the equanimity of any society without the
further challenge of trying to compress
centuries of technological change and na¬
tion-building into the span of a few deca¬
des." Above, village girls from Ahwa, in
Gujarat State, India, go to the communal
well early in the morning to draw water for
domestic use.
flict is all too familiar to students of Third
World political development.
Many of today's violent conflicts are pro¬
ducts of the inability to manage change.
Others have their roots in contradictory
perceptions of and beliefs about change.
The complexity of the irrterlinkages be¬
tween problems creates in many minds a
longing for simple, reductionist explana¬
tions, whose foundations in reality are so
insecure that they have no capacity for
tolerance of other approaches.
No region has quite mastered the disloca¬
tions of the twentieth century, with its
dizzying growth of populations and massive
movements of people, its instant communi¬
cations, alienating technologies, shrunken
spaces, and horrifying destructive power
and so all remain vulnerable to conflict.
Developing countries are not unique in this.
It would be difficult, for example, to draw a
clear distinction between the violence in
Northern Ireland and many of the ongoing
conflicts in the Third World. Nonetheless, ^
31

"In the developing world, 800 million peo¬
ple live In absolute poverty and depriva¬
tion. 500 million are malnourished.
Many millions have no access to safe
drinking-wateranddo nothave the income
necessary to purchase food. They lack
protection against thé consequences of
environmental degradation and natural
calamities, such as floods and drought,
which, in Africa in particular, have pro¬
duced famine and suffering of unpre¬
cedented proportions."
Source: United Nations
32

**,
^ three of the widely shared qualities that
have been mentioned colonialism, pover¬
ty, and accelerated change do give the
Third World some distinctive preconditions
for violence.
There is also a psychological sense of
belonging to the Third World, which arises
from the recognition that the international
system is dominated by and directed for the
primary benefit of countries that exclude
the Third World from decision-making and
a fair share of the benefits of interaction.
The resulting sense of vulnerability and ex¬
clusion and the often angry sense of injus¬
tice that accompanies it gives the coun¬
tries of the Third World some sense of
solidarity despite their differences and leads
them into conflict with the North.
This kind of conflict has not often been
pursued by armed warfare between States,
but it undoubtedly feeds the atmosphere of
confrontation that leads to isolated acts of
violence. And isolated acts can all too
quickly fall into a pattern of mutual escala¬
tion of violence, with States entering into
conflict as patrons, sponsors or perpetrators
of terrorist incidents, punitive responses,
campaigns of destabilization and overt or
covert interventions. Uncontrolled, indis¬
criminate and self-perpetuating cycles of
violence are thus set in motion.
One further source of violence in the
Third World should be mentioned: with the
achievement of functional nuclear parity
between the superpowers, and the virtually
uncontested recognition of spheres of influ¬
ence dominated by one or the other in the
North, the Third World has become the
only "safe" battleground for the contest
between East and West. Neither superpow¬
er is yet willing to run a serious risk of direct
nuclear confrontation, which is implied by
any armed conflict between them in the
industrialized world. Thus the Third World
has become a theatre, in both the military
and the dramatic sense, of East-West com¬
petition. Of course this competition is not a
factor in all violent conflicts in or between
developing countries, but it has prolonged
and intensified many of those in which it is
not a prominent cause. Inevitably, it adds to
the complexity of South-South or North-
South confrontations.
The sources of violence in the Third
World are thus an admixture of internal
pressures resulting from rapid change and
external pressures resulting from the clash
of outside interests. Efforts to minimize and
control violence must recognize that these
two aspects require rather different
approaches. The effort to minimize internal
violence must focus on ways of increasing
the resilience of societies; the effort to mini¬
mize external violence must focus on res¬
traint in the definition of and response to
threat.
SOEDJATMOKO, an Indonesian scholar in the '
field of international development and politics,
has been Rector of the United Nations University
in Tokyo since 1980. The author of numerous
publications on economic, social and cultural
problems, he has also served as a member of the
Indonesian Mission to the United Nations and as
his country's ambassador to the United States.
