/# ¿Äe world ofmen ^ CÄwfl*s rzM
CARPENTER Shih went to Ch'i and, when he got to
Crooked Shaft, he saw a serrate oak standing by the
village shrine. It was broad enough to shelter several
thousand oxen and measured a hundred spans around,
towering above the hills. The lowest branches were eighty
feet from the ground, and a dozen or so of them could have
been made into boats. There were so many sightseers that
the place looked like a fair, but the carpenter didn't even
glance around and went on his way without stopping. His
apprentice stood staring for a long time and then ran after
Carpenter Shih and said, "Since I first took up my ax and
followed you, Master, I have never seen timber as beautiful
as this. But you don't even bother to look, and go right on
without stopping. Why is that?"
"Forget it say no more!" said the carpenter. "It's a
worthless tree! Make boats out of it and they'd sink; make
coffins and they'd rot in no time; make vessels and they'd
break at once. Use it for doors and it would sweat sap like
pine; use it for posts and the worms would eat them up. It's
not a timber tree there's nothing it can be used for. That's
how it got to be that old!"
After Carpenter Shih had returned home, the oak tree
appeared to him in a dream and said, "What are you
comparing me with? Are you comparing me with those
useful trees? The cherry apple, the pear, the orange, the
citron, the rest of those fructiferous trees and shrubs as
soon as their fruit is ripe, they are torn apart and subjected to
abuse. Their big limbs are broken off, their little limbs are
yanked around. Their utility makes life miserable for them,
and so they don't get to finish out the years Heaven gave
them, but are cut off in mid-journey. They bring it on
themselves the pulling and tearing of the common mob.
And it's the same way with all other things.
"As for me, I've been trying a long time to be of no use,
and though I almost died, I've finally got it. This is of great
use to me. If I had been of some use, would I ever have
grown this large? Moreover you and I are both of us things.
What's the point of this things condemning things? You, a
worthless man about to die how do you know I'm a worth¬
less tree?"
When Carpenter Shih woke up, he reported his dream.
His apprentice said, "If it's so intent on being of no use,
what's it doing there at the village shrine?"
"Shhh! Say no more! It's only resting there. If we carp and
criticize, it will merely conclude that we don't understand it.
Even if it weren't at the shrine, do you suppose it would be
cut down? It protects itself in a different way from ordinary
people. If you try to judge it by conventional standards,
you'llbewayoff!"
Extract from The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu, translated by
Burton Watson. Columbia University Press, New York and Lon¬
don, 1968.
11
