Self-portrait
of a woman writer
by Ding Ling
I am a Chinese writer, and for the
first sixty years of my life I lived,
worked and wrote in the wake of
the Chinese people, by whose difficulties
I have been guided and inspired. In this
way I came to know the world and its
contradictions,^ but at the cost of many
trials and tribulations. Today, at the age
of seventy-seven, one hope remains to
be able to serve my fellow countrymen
until I die.
I was born in 1904, at a time when
the Manchu Empire was in its death
throes, into a family of notables, a
breeding-ground of mandarins such as
described in those great classic Chinese
novels Dream of the Red Chamber, by
Cao Xueqin, and The Scholars, by Wu
Jingzi.
My family was a replica in miniature
of feudal society in decline and its his¬
tory was a chequered one. The branch
of the family to which my father be¬
longed was impoverished and going
rapidly downhill, and when I was four
years old my father died completely
ruined. My lonely childhood gave me an
insight into the miserable lot of the peo¬
ple in Chinese society at the beginning
of the twentieth century and opened my
eyes to the selfish attitudes which gov¬
erned relationships between one man
and another. I found comfort in, and
learned much from, reading the great
Chinese classic novels. European Re¬
naissance literature and foreign literature
of the nineteenth century was also grist
to my mill. And it was this reading that
sowed in me the seed of my vocation as
a writer.
Ding Ling during a visit to a farm co¬
operative in 1955
I became a writer, not out of personal
vanity or out of a love of art for art's
sake, but to defend my fellow country¬
men and help them to achieve liberty.
The same objectives motivated other
writers, both my contemporaries and
those of the following generation, to en¬
gage in a literature of combat.
I wanted to give myself up totally to
the cause of the people, to share their
destiny, their cares and their sufferings,
to live and die with them. During the
1920s my female characters had been
petty bourgeois intellectuals in revolt;
from the 1930s onwards they were based
on working women and peasants.
I took part in the agrarian reform
which abolished the feudal land system
and redistributed the land. In the new
China that had just been established I
was given the task of helping in the
reorganization of literary life. So
absorbed was I in this task that I almost
forgot that I too was a writer. It was
only when this practical work was com¬
pleted that I began once again to be
haunted by the characters buried deep
within my soul. I became eager to reveal
their existence by writing them into my
novels, stories and essays.
When I write, my pen follows the
thread of my imagination and I stick to
my first impulses, not trying to refashion
the characters I have known and loved
in my life and who become the heroes
and heroines of my books.
December 1982
DING LING (1904-1986) is one of the most
popular figures in modern Chinese literature.
Among her novels translated into English is
The Sun Shines over the Sangkan River.
L*4
J^M ^Bk ^m - - ^^fe M
-
47
