Today's crisis in
THE important place social anthropology
holds in contemporary thinking may
seem paradoxical to many people. It is
a science very much in vogue: witness not
only the fashion for films and books about
travel, but also the interest of the educated
public in books on anthropology.
Today there is no fraction of the human
race, no matter how remote and retarded it
may still appear, which is not directly or in¬
directly in contact with others, and whose
feelings, ambitions, desires and fears do not
affect the security and prosperity and the very
existence of those to whom material progress
may once have given a feeling of ascendancy.
Even if we wanted to, we could no longer
ignore or shrug off with indifference, say, the
last head-hunters of New Guinea, for the sim¬
ple reason that they ate interested in us. And
surprising though it may be, the result of our
contacts with them means that both they and
we are now part of the same world, and it will
not be long before we are all part of the same
civilization.
As they spread throughout the world, the
civilizations which (rightly or wrongly) felt that
they had reached the height of development,
such as Christianity, Islamism, Buddhism,
and on a different level the technological civi¬
lization which is now bringing them together,
are all tinged with "primitive" ways of life,
"primitive" thinking and "primitive" behaviour
which have always been the subject of anthro¬
pological research. Without our realizing it the
"primitive" ways are transforming these civi¬
lizations from within.
For the so-called primitive or archaic peo¬
ples do not simply vanish into a vacuum. They
dissolve and are incorporated with greater or
lesser speed into the civilization surrounding
them. At the same time the latter acquires a
universal character.
Thus, far from diminishing in importance,
primitive peoples concern us more with each
passing day. To take only one example, the
great civilization the West is justly proud of
and which has spread its roots across the
inhabited globe, is everywhere emerging as a
"hybrid". Many foreign elements, both spir¬
itual and material, are being absorbed into its
stream.
As a result, the problems of anthropology
have ceased to be a matter for specialists,
limited to scholars and explorers, they have
become the direct and immediate concern of
every one of us.
Where, then, lies the paradox? In reality
there are two insofar as anthropology is
chiefly concerned with the study of "primitive"
peoples. At the moment when the public has
come to recognize its true value, we may well
ask whether it has not reached the point
where it has nothing more left to study.
For the very transformations which are
spurring a growing theoretical interest in "pri¬
mitives" are in fact bringing about their extinc¬
tion. This is not really a new phenomenon.
Let me cite a few examples. Protected by its
exceptionally hostile environment, New
Guinea, with its several million tribesmen,
may well be the last great sanctuary of primi
tive society on earth. But civilization is making
such rapid inroads that the 600,000 inhabi¬
tants of the central mountains, who were total¬
ly unknown a mere twenty years ago, are now
providing labour contingents for the building
of roads. And it is no rarity today to see road
signs and milestones parachuted into the un¬
explored jungle!
As Western civilization becomes more
complex with each passing day and spreads
across the whole of the earth, it is already
beginning to show signs of the sharp differ-
In a shrinking world, from the tributaries of
the Amazon to the mountain fastnesses of
New Guinea, traditional ways of life are
being transformed.
56

anthropology by Claude Lévi-Strauss
enees which anthropology has made it its
business to study but which it could formerly
do only by comparing dissimilar and widely
separated cultures.
Here, no doubt, lies the permanent function
of anthropology. For if there exists, as anthro¬
pologists have always affirmed, a certain "op¬
timum diversity" which they see as a perma¬
nent condition of human development then
we may be sure that divergencies between
societies and groups within societies will dis¬
appear only to spring up again in other forms.
Who knows if the conflict between the old
and new generations, which so many coun¬
tries are now experiencing, may not be the
ransom that must be paid for the growing
homogenization of our social and material
culture? Such phenomena seem to me patho¬
logical but anthropology has always been
characterized by its ability to explain and jus¬
tify forms of human behaviour which men
found strange and could not understand.
In this way anthropology at every phase has
helped to enlarge the currently held and al¬
ways too constricting view of humanity. To
picture the disappearance of anthropology,
one would have to conjure up a civilization
where all men no matter what corner of the
globe they inhabited, and whatever their way
of life, their education, their professional acti¬
vities, their age, beliefs, sympathies and aver¬
sions were, to the very roots of their con¬
sciousness, totally intelligible to all other men.
Whether one deplores it, approves it, or
merely states it as a fact, technical progress
and the development of communications
hardly seem to be leading us to this end. And
as long as the ways of thinking or of acting of
some men perplex other men, there will be
scope for meditation on these differences;
and this, in a constantly renewing form, will be
the abiding province of anthropology.
November 1961
CLAUDE LEVI-STRAUSS, one of the world's
greatest living anthropologists, has been profes¬
sor of social anthropology at the famed College
de France, Paris, since 1959. Between 1935 and
1939, he was professor of sociology at the Uni¬
versity of Sao Paulo, and led many scientific
expeditions in central Brazil. He has written
many authoritative works including A World on
the Wane (Hutchinson, London) also published
by USA Criterion Books, New York, under its
French title, Tristes Tropiques.
Ä<C >**""
