1986: Year of Peace / 3
Messages from young people
TD encourage young people to reflect on
"the maintenance and strengthening of
peace", Unesco recently asked its
National Commissions to send in essays on
this theme written by young people tietween
the ages of fifteen and twenty-four.
Forty-four young people from all over the
world responded with messages expressing
their desire for peace and their awareness of
the fragility of peace. They unanimously con¬
demn the arms race, considering that the
money swallowed up in amis spending should
be devoted to the development of the poorer
nations, and that peace Is inconceivable as
long as hunger, poverty and sickness prevail
in many parts of the world in short, that
peace is inseparable from development and
justice. They believe that armed conflicts
mainly originate in Ideological and political
intolerance, racism and social inequality.
They all see the conflict between generations
as a form of social Injustice, especially in a
period of economic crisis. Misunderstood by
older generations, young people, they say,
often feel they are outsiders!
Most of the young people advocate the
same road to peace. In politics, they consider
that solutions to disputes should always be
negotiated, and describe the United Nations
as the only international body capable of en¬
suring peace. Many of them feel that the
family should instil the values of peace in
young people from a very early age. They
deplore literature and mass media program¬
mes that encourage violence for its own sake,
and render human suffering commonplace.
Most of them consider fraternity and generos¬
ity to be the fundamental values and maintain
that the latter will only become a living force
when they are professed by each Individual.
For them, everything begins with the indi¬
vidual. Hence the decisive role of family unity,
the keystone of a peace that will extend to join
communities and nations.
Below, extracts from some of the letters:
m)
"1 should like to be part of an organization of
children between the ages of ten and thirteen
which would try to influence and convince
younger children that war is a bad thing for all
mankind."
Branimir Majcica (Yugoslavia)
"War does not necessarily mean bombing.
Today certain dictatorships use torture or
psychological terror. Thus people do not die
from bullets, but from malnutrition or pneumo¬
nia, or If the machine of State Is strong and
allows it, by 'suicide'. It is difficult to challenge
this, because only falling bombs can be
seen."
Christine Kasper (Austria)
"¡When elephants fight, the grass suffers.'
The struggle for military superiority between
the super-powers has hit the Third World
countries hardest."
Basanta Raj Sharma (Nepal)
"In the developing countries there Is only one
doctor for every 3,700 people, but the figure
for army personnel is one for every 250."
A.R.M. Saifuddin Ekram (Bangladesh)
"When I ask a child who has not yet reached
the age of five 'What does peace mean?' he
replies, 'I don't know'.' If I ask him what war
means, he says: 'People fighting, that Is
dying'. The child knows much about war, but
nothing about peace."
Issam All Abdel Rahman (Egypt)
"Holding out a bunch of flowers the little- girt
said with a smile: 'Buy flowers, sir. Flowers
are the messengers of the heart.' 'I do not
want to buy,' he said. 'I would like to ask you a
question. Do you think selling flowers is
appropriate in the present circumstances?
Thousands of people are dying. Innocent peo¬
ple are being swept away. They are darkening
children's eyes. And you? You sell flowers!" In
a sad voice she said, 'You are not the only one
who is surprised about this.... All the flowers in
the world would not be enough to decorate the
graves of those of whom you speak with such
pity. The dew on the flowers reminds me of the
tears of my young brother who lay in the dark
sucking my mother's breast smeared with
bjood. I know why I sell flowers. Their beauty
Is the beauty of life. But it seems that you have
not yet understood their message..."
. . Gadàh AI Qudsi (Jordan)
"Mothers, when you give birth, say 'Peace'!"
Alejandro Angel Puja Campos (Chile)
