Twenty-five years of research
The Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission
TWENTY-FIVE years ago, international co-operation in
marine science was in its infancy. Although serious scientific
investigation of the deep oceans had begun almost a cen¬
tury earlier, when, on a cold grey December day in 1 872, the British
corvette HMS Challenger set out on an historic three-and-a-half-
year round-the-world océanographie exploration cruise, interna¬
tional océanographie research as we know it today did not com¬
mence until after the Second World War.
The Challenger brought back valuable information on ocean
temperatures, ocean currents and the depths and main contours of
the great ocean basins, and other governments were quick to
mount similar expeditions.
These, however, were individual, unco-ordinated efforts and,
rather surprisingly, it was not until the 1 950s that marine scientists
and governments came to realize that, if ocean properties were to
be adequately measured, the measurements would have to be
made in many places simultaneously.
The success of the first truly international co-operative venture
the investigation of the Atlantic Polar Front in 1958, within the
framework of the International Geophysical Year demonstrated
what could be achieved through international co-operation. It also
demonstrated the need for some form of international organization
to which governments would be prepared to give their
wholehearted backing.
It was in this context that an Intergovernmental Conference on
Océanographie Research, held in Copenhagen in 1960, recom¬
mended the establishment, within Unesco, of the Intergovernmen¬
tal Océanographie Commission, more familiarly known as the IOC,
which it charged with the task of promoting "scientific investigation
with a view to learning more about the nature and resources of the
oceans through the concerted actions of its members".
During the twenty-five years that have elapsed since that
momentous meeting the IOC has grown both in numbers and in
stature. The forty oriqinal Member States have swelled to 113
and the Commission itself has gained recognition as the world
leader in international oceanographical research.
A major turning point in the life of the IOC came in 1 969 with the
establishment of the Key Long-Term Expanded Programme of
The route taken by HMS Challenger during
her historic océanographie research
cruise, 1872 to 1876.
v &"
10/74^1- ITS
HAWAIIAN I.
MANILA'. MARIANA I.
MARIANAS TRENCH
I
»S 1 Mt UM - I,
DEEPEST POINT ONV,
>'. EARTH'S
9 '' CAROLINE I. SURFACE .'
4/74
MELBOURNE
12/74, U
TONGATABU
7/74
26

Oceanic Exploration and Research (LEPOR) which was to deter¬
mine the main thrust of the Commission's activities for years to
come.
An event of equal importance for the IOC, and indeed for the
world, was the signing in 1 982 of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, which is expected to extend the scope of the
IOC's responsibilities very considerably.
Throughout its twenty-five years of existence the IOC has been
taking innovative initiatives that have helped to push back the
boundaries of océanographie knowledge. These include: a new
approach to the relationship between the marine environment and
the living resources of the sea; the preparation of specialized maps
of the ocean, in particular bathymétrie (ocean depth) charts, maps
of the sea bed and of its geological and geophysical characteris¬
tics; the setting up of two international experiments on the rela¬
tionship between the ocean and the atmosphere; the global inves¬
tigation of marine pollution; the establishment of a system of
collection, classification, exchange and analysis of ocean data;
and, the elaboration of a comprehensive plan for a Major Assist¬
ance Programme to Enhance the Marine Science Capabilities of
Developing Countries.
During the past quarter of a century the objectives of the IOC
have remained fundamentally the same, although they have been
broadened and clarified. The Commission's aims today could be
summed up as being:
to identify problems the solutions to which require international
co-operation in ocean research;
to develop scientific investigation of the oceans and the related
services such as international océanographie data exchange and
ocean observing systems;
to strengthen the marine scientific and technical capabilities of its
Member States through training, education and mutual assistance.
The silver jubilee of the IOC, which was celebrated during the
thirteenth session of the Assembly, held in Paris from 12 to 28
March 1985, provided a special opportunity for a critical review of
the Commission's work and the formulation of guidelines for future
activities.
The governing body of the IOC is its Assembly which meets once every two
years. An Executive Council consisting of thirty-three Member States
exercises overall supervision of the implementation of the Commission's
activities. The day-to-day running of the IOC is the responsibility ofits chief
executive officer, the Secretary of the Commission. Unesco provides most
of the staff and Secretariat services and close co-operation is maintained
with the Division of Marine Sciences of Unesco on projects of mutual
interest. The Commission also functions as a joint specialized mechanism
for discharging certain of the responsibilities, in marine scientific and
technical affairs, of the five UN OrganizationsUN, Unesco, FAO, WMO
and IMOmembers of the Inter-Secretariat Committee on Scientific Pro¬
grammes Relating to Oceanography.
A researcher prepares to lower a net
designed for taking plankton samples.
27
