The griot by Lamine Konte
2
od
i
©
In traditionalAfrica, the griot is a musician
and singer who is also a kind of chronicler
and historian of the society in which he
lives. His art is transmitted from father to
son. Photo above shows the author of our
article, the noted Senegalese griot Lamine
Konte, singing to his own accompaniment
on a Senegalese Instrument, the kora.
I am, first of all, an African from Senegal,
and secondly I am a Casamançais. I was
born in the area of southern Senegal
known as Casamance, "Casa di Mansa", a
name which is half Portuguese and half Man-
dingo, and which means "the house of the
king". It dates back to the fifteenth or sixteenth
centuries, when the Portuguese were in the
region. More specifically, I come from a family
of musicians or griots. We griots are simul¬
taneously musicians, historians and singers,
and our art is handed down from father to son
and from generation to generation. I grew up
in that world. Then I became interested in
Western culture and acquired a grounding in
Western music, particularly classical music.
This varied background enables me to ex¬
press myself authentically and at the same
time to be on the same wave-length as a
French audience.
I have been told that my father was a
famous griot. I was not fortunate enough to
know him, since he died when I was barely
777/s article is based on an interview with Lamine Konte
by Marc Kerjean, a French radio producer who is a
student and broadcaster of African music, blues and
jazz.
one year old. My father is still a formidable
competitor: all those who knew him are con¬
stantly comparing the two of us. He was an
excellent musician. Soundioulou Cissoko,
who was his fellow performer, is today one of
Senegal's great players of the kora (a 21-
stringed harp-lute). They collaborated
closely.
I did not receive any musical or poetic train¬
ing as such. It comes about spontaneously
when you are born into a family of musicians.
A little African sociology will help to explain
why. Since the Mandingo empire, Mandingo
society has been organized and structured
according to a caste system which has lasted
from the thirteenth century to the present.
Each caste contained men who were parti¬
cularly gifted at a certain craft: there were, for
example, the castes of the griots, the
weavers, the ironsmiths, and the warriors.
When you were born into a family of griots,
hence of musicians, you were ipso facto pre¬
destined to make music, that tradition has
become a thing of the past, now that the
sociological context has evoived: with coloni¬
zation, Africa started to be influenced by other
civilizations, schools were established, and
nowadays a child from a family of griots can ^
21

The kora is a 21-string instrument which
produces a sound somewhere between
that of the harp and that of the guitar,
depending on the way in which its strings
are plucked. The sound-box is made from
half a calabash. Along the neck are strung
21 rings to each of which a string is
attached. There are two sets of strings,
separated by a bridge; each set is plucked
by the thumb and index fingerofone hand.
To tune the instrument, the mobile rings
are moved to tighten the strings until the
right notes are obtained. Above, kora-
player Arfan Kouyate and singer Penda
Diabate, during a 1982 concert of Man¬
dingo music in a lecture hall of the Sor¬
bonne, Paris.
^ grow up to be a schoolteacher, a mason, or a
mechanic. But originally, when you were born
into a or/of family, you devoted yourself exclu¬
sively to music. The only activity permitted
outside music was farming, since it was for the
common good.
Music is a universal phenomenon, and all
the musicians in the world began in approx¬
imately the same way: they were people who
had the gift of combining notes in a pattern
that was harmonious to the ear. Since writing
was not current in some parts of Africa, it was
^^ necessary to entrust a social group with the
mm task of reciting history, and thus of acting as
22 the memory of the African people.
It was, accordingly, the task of the griot
community to pass on an oral record of his¬
tory. A musical medium was needed to do
this. The griots made instruments that were
suited to the languages and the rhythms in
use. We owe the griot tradition to the intelli¬
gence of the earliest politicians: they grasped
the fact that one cannot govern a community
without historians, and thus without music.
There are also many legends which tell of the
origins of the griots, but in my opinion they
came into being quite naturally: since they
wanted to make music, they freely indulged
their desire. And this activity has devolved on
them since the reign of Sundiata Keita, the
first emperor of Mali since the fourteenth
century, in other words.
The participation of the griots was neces¬
sary at the major turning-points in a lifetime,
such as birth and marriage. They also sang
the praises of their hosts and knew family
histories. They usually earned a living from
the gifts that they received in return for their
services. It is possible for a griot to bear a
grudge against an ungenerous client, for after
all, he is a man, with a man's weaknesses. But
his essential role is to sing the praises of
individuals without any discrimination on
financial grounds; he sings for the poor fisher¬
man and the rich merchant alike. His aim is to
bring to life the history of the family of his
client, just as his father taught it to him.
Some people believe that griots possess
magic power, but in Africa, magic power be¬
longs rather to iron-smiths. Some griots have
power, since they possess a considerable
store of wide-ranging knowledge and are re¬
ceptive to all forms of culture; when they reach
a certain age, they are necessarily powerful,
but is this magical or is it another kind of
power? It is difficult to give an unqualified
answer. You need to meet a particular griot
personally in order to find out what type of
power he wields.
The "story-telling" griots sing the great tra¬
ditional epics, telling of the warlike deeds of
heroes, their native land, and love. They also
put on shows, since in Africa, there is no
established theatre structure. They are
actors, poets, dancers and mimes, and they
bring all the arts into play in their perfor¬
mances. Since they are highly versatile, one
of their roles is to dance themselves and to
induce a gathering of people to dance. Some,
admittedly, specialize in one or other of these
fields: they express themselves through
musicordancing, or through the spoken word.
But others, while they play music, may also
sing, tell stories and even dance.
In the days when the caste system was
operating strictly, the griots used to meet reg¬
ularly in a family context. That was very com¬
mon. These family reunions were called
"practice sessions". The whole family
gathered together, with all generations pre¬
sent, and they played in order to ascertain
how high their standard was. I know a story
about a gathering of griots in Mali. I believe it is
true, since many people were eyewitnesses to
it. Every seven years, the great griots of Mali
met to repair the roof of a hut. They sang and
played music at the same time, whereupon
the roof flew up into the air as if by enchant¬
ment and landed on the ground. They res¬
tored the roof. Then they started singing
again, and the roof rose up from the ground
and settled on the hut. This phenomenon has
something to do with magic power. But, ulti¬
mately, all forms of expression contain a grain ^

A griot from West
Africa being inter¬
viewed
©3
BL^A
1 ;H
A.
^ 1
i \
Photo © Hoa-Qui, Paris Photo © Hoa-Qui, Paris
©
Four examples of Africa's wealth of tradi¬
tional musical instruments: (1) Bambara
wind Instrument from Mali; (2) a Gabonese
harp; (3) anthropomorphic harp from
Zaire; (4) guitar of the Mangbetu people of
Zaire. The neck is surmounted by a carved
wooden head.
23

of magic power, in that they draw on a certain
spiritual force. And so the music and singing
of the Malian griots was able to move the roof
of a hut.
African musical instruments vary from re¬
gion to region. Mali is the cradle of African
music, and since the empire of Sundiata it has
influenced the art of music in other regions.
The instruments found there are more soph¬
isticated than those of northern Senegal,
where 80 per cent of the music consists of
rhythm of drumming, in other words. In a
Wolof group, in northern Senegal, there are at
least fourteen types of percussion, whereas in
a Malian group the percussion is accompa¬
nied by more elaborate instruments such as
the kora or the balafon. The great musicians
of northern Senegal play the halam (a Wolof
name for a five-stringed guitar, a very old
African instrument) and most of them served
their apprenticeship in Mali. In Casamance,
we play the bolong, a sort of three-stringed
kora, which sounds like a double-bass; but
percussion predominates.
No instrument is particularly easy to play
well. The kora, for example, poses problems,
since its music cannot be dissociated from the
Mandingo language. You have to know that
Trumpet-players in the Madagascan group
Hira-Gasy. Instruments ofEuropean origin
are played in many parts of Africa today.
éX.
language in order to play the instrument.
There is no score, and it is played by ear. And
so you have to remember the tunes, and in
order to do this, you have to know the history.
Since history is invariably recounted in Man¬
dingo or Malinke, it is indispensable to know
the language in order to attempt to play the
kora. However, it has recently become a little
more accessible. Many musicians play it while
singing in Wolof or in Portuguese Creole. My
father usually sang in Portuguese Creole. I
personally welcome this move towards a
widening of horizons, and I should like the
kora to become a universal instrument like so
many others.
In Africa there are many kinds of percussion
instruments. Each ethnic group has its own.
The Mandingo, for example, play the koutero,
the Malinke the djembé. In the forest regions
of Central Africa, there are others, different
from those of the savannah. There are as
many types of percussion as there are ethnic
groups.
Until relatively recently, playing a musical
instrument was not an activity for women, who
were expected to sing. If necessary, they
accompanied themselves on a primitive Ma¬
lian instrument made of iron, but that was all.
Usually, a woman sings as an accompani¬
ment to her husband while he plays an in¬
strument. Singing is for women and instru¬
ments are for men. Male African society prob¬
ably considered that it was easier to sing. This
situation has now changed. I was able to
observe this in 1977, at the Second World
Black and African Festival of Arts and Cul¬
tures, held in Lagos, Nigeria: there was an
all-female Guiñean instrumental ensemble
playing the kora and the balafon. I have also
seen a women's orchestra playing modern
instruments such as the saxophone, trumpet,
Western-style percussion, and electric guitar.
I return to my country every year, or at least
every two years. It makes me feel more alive,
it's a tonic and it gives me confidence. The fact
of being "cut off" from my African roots has a
good effect on my music. Not being in my own
country, I can see more clearly what is hap¬
pening there, and this gives me inspiration.
From afar, you can see your country in a truer
light, in greater depth and with stronger affec¬
tion. In my native land I would probably be
taken up with concerns that have nothing to
do with my music. What is more, I do not feel
very far away: I am only four hours' flying time
from Senegal.
In Senegal people listen to all kinds of
mus' - from James Brown to Johnny Halliday.
It's quite a medley. Manu Dibango, the
Cameroonian from Paris or the Parisian from
Cameroon, whichever you prefer, is someone
who is doing a great deal of work for Africa. He
is a great musician. He has long defended the
cause of African music, as I myself and other
African musicians have done. This puts him in
a sympathetic light. He richly deserves his
success, for he has worked very hard. Accord¬
ing to him, we are witnessing "the birth of a
new race, an Afro-European race", and
"European music must not remain in its
ghetto".
I believe that neither European music nor
African music should remain in its ghetto, for
they both need to evolve through their rela¬
tions with each other. Staying in one's ghetto
means failing to develop. The future of the
world lies in the intermingling of people and
cultures. For music, the pattern of develop¬
ment is similar.
It is a mistake to think that for traditional

In African music in the past the role of
women was to sing, not to play In¬
struments. But today things have changed
and groups of women musicians are not
uncommon. Right, women musicians from
Mali.
music development means deterioration. In
Africa, traditional music associated with tradi¬
tional instruments does not rule out other
forms of music which are played on Western
instruments. Since colonization 300 years
ago, traditional music has assimilated the
accordion, the harmonica and the guitar. But
until recently this branch of music has been
rejected by Westerners.
Only twenty years ago, people thought that
Africans should confine themselves to playing
the tom-toms! The time has come for Wester¬
ners to adjust their stereotyped view of African
culture and acknowledge the coexistence of
traditional music with other forms of musical
expression. I defend traditional music, for it
can change and develop. And I should like the
form resulting from contact with Western
music to win recognition in France.
It is true that the griot's approach is poles
apart from that of the European musician. In
Africa, music has a social role to play. Its
prime function is to accompany celebrations
and to put across a philosophy. Nothing else!
Westerners relate to music in a wholly diffe¬
rent way. The act of listening is all-important;
they expect the musician to deliver a dis¬
course. In the past few years, however, an
inter-reaction has gradually been taking place
between European and African music. Euro¬
pean audiences no longer react to African
music as if it were a museum piece. And the
Afro-Europeans have realized that they must
not go on repeating the faithfully handed-
down ancestral rhythms on their percussion
instruments if they want to make tradition
relevant to the circumstances of modern
Africa and to a type of music that expresses
urbanization and the mutual impact of
civilizations.
As far as I am concerned, traditional forms
of music are the most important, since they
underlie everything else. I have kept the
polyrhythmic character of African music and
our own special way of communicating with
an audience. By playing and recording in
Europe I have learned a great deal. Every¬
thing must be carefully set up, with studied
arrangements and the quality of sound reg¬
ulated to suit my instruments in short, my
contact with Western technology has been
invaluable. But I regard myself as a messen¬
ger with ideas to communicate to a European
audience. I belong to a different century from
that of my father, and I want society to change
and develop.
LAMINE KONTE, Senegalese griot, is a storytel¬
ler, author and composer of music. The son of
Dialy Keba Konte, a famous griot of the Casa-
mance region of Senegal, he came to Europe in
1971 and embarked on an international career.
He has made more than 10 LP albums including
Chants Nègres, Chants du Monde (Negro-Afri¬
can poems and songs) and La Kora du Sénégal.
He was responsible for the music in Bako, a film
made by Jacques Champreux and Cheikh
Doukoure.
y r * ?
Wm ,
A group of traditional African musicians
performing before an audience of
thousands during the Second World Black
and African Festival of Arts and Cultures
held in Lagos (Nigeria) in 1977.
25
