Three continents , one people
American Indians, Europeans and Africans
have shaped the destiny of Brazil
by Carlos Rodrigues Brandäo
IN the main square of Goiânia, capital of
the State of Goiás in the Centre West
of Brazil, stands a monument which
commemorates the founding of the town
less than fifty years ago. Three great male
figures cast in bronze support a massive
stone monolith. Since they are not wearing
distinctive clothing, only at close quarters
can they be seen to represent an Indian, a
Black and a White.
Similar monuments, on a smaller scale,
probably exist throughout the country.
They all reflect the widespread belief that
for many years was championed by landed
proprietors, fed by the popular imagination
and propagated by Brazilian history
books that the country's history and cul¬
ture were, and continue to be, the work of
"three races": Indians, the original inhabi¬
tants of Brazil; Blacks brought from Africa;
and Whites, the first of whom arrived from
Portugal in 1500.
In the 1960s, the National Council for the
Protection of Indians, as it was then called, ^
The Black slaves who were transported to
Brazil were compelled to accept Catholic
Christianity, but they did not forget their
own gods. In their prayers they assimi¬
lated their fertility goddess Yemanya to
the Virgin Mary, the god Oxala to the infant
Jesus, Exu to the devil. In secret theyprac¬
tised African rituals resembling the
voodoo cults of the Caribbean. These
practices were at the origin of the candom-
blé and the macumba, Brazilian dances
which are also celebrations of syncretic
religious cults. The first candomblé (the
word originally meant a ritual African
society) was founded in Salvador In the
early 19th century by Yorubas from West
Africa and the ritual is still deeply im¬
planted in this old Afro-Brazilian city (up¬
perphoto). The macumba flourishes in the
Rio de Janeiro region and southern Brazil.
Right, macumba scene on Copacabana
beach, Rio de Janeiro, where each year on
31 December a fiesta in honour of
Yemanya is held, during which the
Cariocas (the people of Rio) launch boats
laden with offerings of food, jewels, per¬
fumes and lighted candles.
21

estimated their number at 250,000. As in all
the countries of the continent, the indig¬
enous population of Brazil dwindled con¬
siderably during the colonization period, a
trend which persists today. In 1900 there
were some 230 indigenous tribes; by 1957
only 143 were left, a number which has not
decreased since then. Thus in fifty-seven
years, eighty-seven tribal groups dis¬
appeared individuals, tribes, villages,
ways of life, languages, dialects and
cultures.
Brought from Africa on slave ships, men,
women and children entered Brazil mainly
through the ports of Bahia and Rio de
Janeiro, whence they were dispatched
either to the great sugar plantations or,
later, the coffee plantations, or else to the
gold and gemstone mines in the regions
which now correspond approximately to the
States of Mato Grosso, Goiás and Minas
Gerais.
Through ignorance or perversity, the col¬
onizing Whites labelled as "Indian" a varied
range of indigenous cultures and peoples,
just as they used the blanket-term "Black"
for those who had been uprooted from
widely differing peoples, tribes and cultures
in Africa. The Africans who came to Brazil
included Muslim Blacks from Mali as well
as members of tribal groups from widely-
separated regions with completely different
forms of social organization, language, cul¬
ture and religion Yoruba, Dahomey,
Fanti and Ashanti, Hausa, Mandingo and
Bantu. From the earliest days of slavery in
Brazil, the White masters set out to convert
the imported slaves to Christianity and to
intermingle them in such a way that only
Blacks totally unknown to one another
would be living on the same plantation or in
the same inland city.
Slave labour was not evenly spread
throughout Brazil. Blacks from Africa
played a greater part in the settlement of the
coast than in that of the interior, and estab¬
lished themselves more in the Northeast
and East than in the Amazonian regions of
the North. They were concentrated in wide
areas of Bahia and Minas Gerais and were
never numerous in the north of Paraná oí in
Santa Catarina. These two regions were
among those initially settled by poor white
farmers, the caipiras (peasants) and Sertäo-
dwellers, then later by European immi¬
grants (Italians, Germans, Poles and
others), who to a large extent came to re¬
place the Black slave labour force when the
economic interests of the land-owners no
longer dictated the production of wealth
based exclusively on the slave system.
To what extent did each of these different
ethnic groups contribute to the develop¬
ment of Brazilian culture? The social con¬
tribution made by Indians, Blacks and
Whites was first and foremost natural rather
than cultural, for before becoming a nation
whose culture is to a great extent the out¬
come of combinations and exchanges
among different national and ethnic groups ,
Brazil was and still is a country whose
population is largely the result of mis¬
cegenation between these three main
human elements.
As in some other South American coun¬
tries, unlike the situation in, for example,
the United States, from the earliest days of
Portuguese colonization there was intensive
sexual intermingling between the "three
races", resulting in the emergence of a large
mestizo population. Brazil is thus not a
nation in which ethnic groups and cultures
have remained strictly separate from one
another. Nor is it a country where racial
interbreeding took place in one direction
only, for example between Indians and
Whites or between Whites and Blacks.
Here, mainly among the poor and power¬
less, there have always been liaisons and
marriages between Blacks and Whites, be¬
tween Indians and Whites, and between
Blacks and Indians. In each region there are
specific names for the ethnic types resulting
from such interbreeding. But, as a general
rule, the word mulatto is used to designate
someone with one Black and one White
parent, caboclo for a person born to an
Indian and a White, and mameluco (a less
common term, corresponding to a rarer
type of union) for the son or daughter of a
Black and an Indian. It is no exaggeration to
say that the Brazilian nation is the product
of ethnic intermixture, even if there is sup¬
posed to be a majority of Whites (although
this is considered to be debatable by some
observers), especially in the cities of the
South.
Those who lay stress on the important
modernizing influence of the wave of Euro¬
pean immigration in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries which mainly
affected the prosperous and industrialized
regions of the South obscure the fact that
the pushing back of national frontiers to the
North and West was largely due to the slow
and indefatigable work of the poor mestizo
people. History has forgotten that it was
they who conquered, in their fashion, the
most remote and hostile regions of Brazil.
While nearly all the Amazon Basin (an
area the size of Europe, excluding Russia) is
a "product" of the colonizing work of poor
and landless caboclos, most of "Brazilian
baroque" culture is the creation of genera¬
tions of mulatto artists. The sculptors (such
as o Áleijadinho) , painters, poets and musi¬
cians who produced the first authentically
Brazilian high culture in Minas Gerais were
children of Whites and Blacks, some of
them slaves. In the colonial period , as later,
neany all the artists and craftsmen were
Black slaves or mestizos, as educated and
wealthy Portuguese or Brazilian Whites
conspicuously dissociated themselves from
productive work.
It is very difficult to attribute a specific
cultural contribution to Indians or to Blacks
in this vast country which has always been
dominated by Whites. We have attempted
to show that in Brazil there has never been
an abstract category of "Indians" or
another, equally abstract, category of
"Blacks", but different nations, peoples,
groups and individuals who represent in
concrete terms what it means to "be Indian"
or to "be Black" in Brazil.
Their contributions took a variety of
forms, according to the pattern of events in
each region and the way in which economic,
political and cultural relations were built up
among the different ethnic groups. Thus the

Indian influence is much stronger through¬
out the Amazon region than in the Centre
West, whereas Black influence is especially
strong and active all along the coast, but
chiefly in the States of Rio de Janeiro,
Bahia and Minas Gerais.
With a few rare and localized exceptions,
the achievements of the indigenous peoples
did not leave an impression on Brazilian
culture that could nowadays be recognized
as a genuine "cultural system", in technol¬
ogy or Teligion, for example. However, cer¬
tain rudimentary agricultural techniques
such as the widespread practice of coivara
or slash-and-burn cultivation hunting or
fishing methods and very widespread folk
remedies, are recognized as being of indig¬
enous origin.
Although there have been no transfers of
complete systems of symbolic or religious
thought from indigenous to regional cul¬
tures, it is certain that in nearly all areas of
Brazilian life, and in people's representa¬
tion of their lives, there are ways of feeling
and thinking which have sometimes close,
sometimes remote, connections with the
typically Indian. Traces of indigenous cul¬
tures are found in the names used to desig¬
nate geographical features and many towns
all over Brazil, and in important aspects of
systems of interpreting reality.
The situation was completely different
for the Black populations brought from
Africa: if they exerted only a fragmentary
influence on Brazilian ways of life, they
brought to Brazilian culture elements of
material culture and symbolic representa¬
tion which today form part of everyday life.
For example, besides the powerful traces
of Black culture discernible in Brazilian
Catholicism, there are today a great many
religious systems, beliefs and cults whose
ancestry is clearly African. The candomblé
is certainly the most important religion of
Afro-Brazilian origin, with many initiates
throughout the country. But this is only one
strand in a rich and varied tapestry of Black
forms of worship to which Whites are in¬
creasingly drawn. From the Casa das Minas
cult, confined to the northern regions, to
the umbanda (a later Brazilian derivation
from rituals of "Afro" origin, now more
widespread than the candomblé itself
throughout the national territory), a rich
and intense religious and ceremonial activ¬
ity is emerging in Brazil.
A type of athletic wrestling known as
capoeira, initially practised with razors or
knives, was repressed for many years. It
used to be associated with Blacks in the
lowest social groups, but it has spread so
extensively that today there are very few
large or medium-sized towns which do not
boast one or more "capoeira schools". This
rapid dissemination is also a social phe¬
nomenon, in that young people of all social
classes are eager to learn and practise it. A
cross between dancing and a martial art, in
which lively footwork and skill in dodging
are essential, capoeira is only one of many
Black contributions to Brazilian culture
which have achieved nationwide status.
Most current studies on the contributions
of different ethnic groups to Brazilian cul
ture take the view that such fragments are
not really of central importance. To claim to
measure the extent to which Indians and
Blacks participate in a predominantly
White culture with distant European roots,
in terms of their contribution to Brazilian
cuisine, farming techniques, handicrafts or
folk ritual, is to conceal the fundamental
and essential behind a picturesque veil.
Admittedly, any nation which, like Bra¬
zil, is the product of encounters, conflicts
and alliances between national and ethnic
groups, conclusively demonstrates that
people must learn how to live together in
everyday circumstances, respecting the
right to be different and the rights of minor¬
ities. It is impossible to forget that Blacks
and Indians always took part in Brazilian
life as serfs and slaves, as subjects or dispos¬
sessed peoples, and that in spite of every¬
thing they were brave enough to struggle
and resist. Sepé-Tiarajú, an indigenous
warrior chief, and Zumbí, a warrior taken
as a slave who chose to die rather than
submit to slavery, are perhaps more striking
examples of the contribution of minority
populations to Brazilian culture than all the
minor products and skills with which Blacks
and Indians have enriched it in other
respects.
Similarly, the Black consciousness move¬
ments that are being organized throughout
the country, as well as attempts by indig¬
enous groups to resist expropriation of their
land and to defend their rights fore¬
shadowing a future Union of Indigenous
Peoples are the strongest evidence of the
free and creative participation of Blacks
and Indians in Brazilian life and culture.
There is a racial problem in Brazil. A
racial democracy has theoretically been
achieved, but both the employment statis¬
tics and the life led by the vast majority of
Brazilian Blacks and mestizos reveal that a
wide gap still exists between the desire for
full democracy and the assertion of social
equality among ethnic groups. However,
there is evidence of a strong national aware¬
ness of the rights of Indians.
A new, fully democratic assertion of
"Négritude" and "Indianity" is once again
finding vigorous expression in the arts, in
scientific research and in politics, and this is
undoubtedly the most important historical
development that today binds together
growing numbers of Whites, Blacks and
Indians.
CARLOS RODRIGUES BRANDÄO, of Brazil,
professor of social sciences at the University of
Campinas, Brazil, is the author of numerous
books on education, culture and Brazilian popu¬
lar religions, notable among which are Identi-
dade e etnia ("Identity and the Ethnic Group"),
Os deuses do povo ("The Gods of the People ),
A educaçâo como cultura ("Education as Cul¬
ture"), Sacerdotes de viola ("Officiants of the
Viola") and O festim dos bruxos ("The Feast of
Sorcerers").
45
