by Niliifer Gole
Women of the Mediterranean:
tradition and change
P
46
"It is up to us to dismantle themechanisms
of invisibility, all those processes which
impoverish our relationship with the
world, impose silence on the majority of
women, and bring to the fore a few of us,
under certain conditions, to legitimize the
exclusion process as a whole. n
Fatma Oussedik (Algeria)
RUNNING in filigree through studies
on the situation of women in various
Mediterranean countries is a com­
mon thread: a desire to seek out the femi­
nine presence wherever it lies hidden, in the
political and cultural as well as the religious
and urban context.
The two dominant aspirations offeminist
movements in the industrialized coun­
tries-the equality of the sexes and the
search for a specifically feminine identity-
find an echo in the perceptions of women of
the Mediterranean countries.
In the industrialized countries these two
themes made headway only with difficulty.
... Does not the demand for both equality
and recognition of a specific identity leave
women in a "Catch 22" situation?
This thorny problem also faces the
women of the Mediterranean. The societies
in which they live are exposed to the
onslaught of the hegemonic cultural model

of the industrialized countries, a
homogenizing model conceived in terms of
the Universal, of History, of Progress, as
opposed to regional, national and cultural
specificities.
Mediterranean societies are not, by
nature, modern societies in the individualis¬
tic, egalitarian, liberal sense. Liberal ideol¬
ogy situates and defines Western society
both in the "public" area (social relation¬
ships) and in the "private area" (the rela¬
tionship between the sexes); when it in¬
trudes on Mediterranean societies, it not
only meets strong resistance with regard to
matters concerning the "private" area but
also creates a duality in the social sphere.
Italy is an example of a Mediterranean
country in which these two influences co¬
habit and even create a geographical dicho¬
tomy between the North and the South,
with the northern influence more and more
gaining the upper hand.
The complexity of the situation in which
Mediterranean women find themselves re¬
sults from the specificity of their cultural
heritage, the impact of a hegemonic cultural
model and the claims of the feminist
movement. The conflict between the sexes
thus takes on a particular coloration in each
country as a result of the interaction and the
opposition between these elements in the
religious, political and cultural fields.
In the political and religious context of
the Arab Mediterranean the question arises
as to whether or not the Islamic cultural
heritage constitutes an obstacle to equality
of the sexes. Must the Arab-Islamic past be
"mutilated" in order to enable equality of
the sexes to be established, or should this
past be sifted and analysed, in which case
might not a measure of hidden political
power of women stand revealed?
In Morocco, women who have exercised
direct power have been given a dehuman¬
ized image, being represented either as
something "monstrous" or as pertaining to
the "sacred". However, the exercise of in¬
direct power via a husband or a son seems to
have been more acceptable to the extent
that it conjured up the image of the devoted
wife or mother.
Examination of the specific form domina¬
tion of women takes in Algeria comes down
to an examination of the various aspects of
Algerian women's "invisibility", that is to
say, the various forms of social rejection to
which they are subject as being "Other". It
also involves study of the struggle of those
women who have attempted to escape from
this cloak of "invisibility" by acquiring a
certain autonomy in their private lives or by
outright militancy.
One aspect at least of the condition of
Mediterranean women can be defined.
From the situation of Algerian women to
that of Italian women there is a progression
from "silent" action towards conscious, col¬
lective action by women. The "silent" way
is perhaps peculiar to Muslim societies;
nevertheless, outspoken, independent ex¬
pression by women is possible only within
the context of a lay society.
April 1985
NILUFER GOLE is a Turkish sociologist and the
author of many articles and studies on women 's
participation in public affairs, the discrimination
from which they suffer and the solutions pro¬
posed by feminist movements.

