¿0' W
4. Peace in the regional
context
by Ahmad Sidqi Ad-Dajani
PEOPLE today are beginning to
understand more clearly that the sta¬
bility of relations between States is
influenced by circumstances in each indi¬
vidual State. The stability of relations be¬
tween the world's rich States is affected by
the stability of basic structures in the
world's poor States. Countries that are rich
and secure must realize that they cannot
remain so if they continue to close their eyes
to the scourge of poverty that prevails in the
entire southern half of the globe.
The term "independence" has begun to
imply responsibility as well as freedom,
both at the level of the individual State and
that of the community of States. The world
situation may be likened to that of a ship full
of people. Those at the bottom have de
cided to drill their way out. If the others
leave them to their own devices everyone
will perish, whereas if they offer assistance,
all will be saved. We owe this parable illus¬
trating the meaning of responsibility to the
Prophet of Islam.
The stability of world peace at the
national, regional and international levels is
affected by the dominant philosophies of
our age. We are currently witnessing a
reawakening of philosophical thought and a
renewal of interest in fundamental philo¬
sophical issues. The place of religion in
Western industrial societies had declined,
and the role of philosophy had shrunk. In¬
deed, some Western thinkers had asserted
that the age of philosophy was over.
Today, however, there is a revival of

©
interest in philosophical thought and en¬
quiry, a trend which extends to the man in
the street, whose life is dominated by the
phenomenon of mass communication. We
are also witnessing a revival of religion, the
impact of which a blend of social, cultural
and political factors is today apparent in
various societies and social milieux. The
trends emerging in these religious revival
movements and those that are likely to
emerge in contemporary philosophies will
have a decisive influence on the issue of
peace or war.
The question of peace requires a system
of values that is recognized throughout the'
world, and at the same time there must be a
growing acceptance of others, despite their
diversity. This would tend to a situation of
equilibrium. If a relativistic value system
prevails, in which some people are regarded
with contempt and differences are not
accepted, then equilibrium is disrupted and
the spectre of war must inevitably reign.
The establishment of non-homogeneous
States within a single region is a major cause
of tension and a source of local and regional
conflicts. Thus, after the withdrawal of the
Western colonial powers and the triumph of
nationalism, States with arbitrary and artifi¬
cial boundaries came into being. Within
these artificial geopolitical units were va¬
rious tribes and racial communities, one of
which eventually became dominant. Such
States have to contend with tribal or civil
war within their borders, and this phe¬
nomenon may be a lasting one inasmuch as
its main cause is deeply rooted in their
human composition. It should be noted that
civil war is frequently characterized by
savagery, sometimes spreading to a point at
which it threatens the peace of an entire
region.
Another form of heterogeneity is appa¬
rent in the multinational State. In a world in
which the nationalist impulse has grown
increasingly powerful, especially in the last
two centuries, and in which the nation-State
has come to be regarded as the ideal form of
State, the presence of a number of national
population groups within a single State
brings the danger of communal strife, un¬
less adequate steps are taken to recognize
the nationalist impulse and national lan¬
guages and to promote economic and social
progress under a strong central federal
authority.
National and religious pluralism are
closely interrelated, and conflict between
national groups is sometimes expressed as
religious conflict and vice versa. Civil wars
break out under the banner of religion:
Europe, for example, was convulsed by
wars of religion at the beginning of the
modern era. Furthermore the presence of a
number of different national groups within
a single State may lead to tension between
that State and its neighbours because of
what are termed "national minorities".
Another form of the heterogeneous State
also appears in the "bi-national States" that
arose in the modern world during the period
of the Western colonial offensive. In these
La planète affolée, oil on canvas by the
German-born (later US, then French) artist
Max Ernst (1891-1976). The picture was
painted in 1943 in the United States. Paint¬
er, sculptor, poet, essayist, Max Ernst has
been called the "Leonardo of surrealism".
10

States, minorities of European stock
dominate an indigenous majority, and the
phenomenon of "biculturalism" is clearly
apparent. In many cases this situation of
dominance has resulted in outbreaks of
deadly strife between different population
groups.
Perhaps the most dangerous form of the
heterogeneous State in a single region is the
"settler colonialist" State which is im¬
planted in a homogeneous region on a basis
of racist aggression. Both Africa and Asia
have suffered as a result of having been
selected as targets for a number of assaults
by European settler colonialism during the
colonial era.
Colonialism has been and still is a leading
cause of wars, and colonized peoples have
suffered severely as a result. It has been a
destructive force in regions which have lost
a unity formerly characterized by the in¬
tegration of natural and human elements.
The effort to halt the destructive impact of
colonialism and to repair the damage done
by it was initially expressed in the form of
resistance to colonialist assaults and subse¬
quently in the form of revolutionary wars of
liberation, such measures being regarded as
necessary to the building of peace and the
return to a normal situation.
While colonialism is a particularly blatant
form of exploitation, exploitation in gener¬
al, even within a single State or community,
is a source of tensions that may lead to wars
and revolutions. In any society, social re¬
volution is neither more nor less than a
decisive answer to the exploitation of the
downtrodden classes by the dominant class.
One distinguishing feature of the modern
world has been the appearance of ideo¬
logies, and fierce ideological struggles have
been a source of tribulation in our time.
Clearly this type of struggle was one of the
sources of tension leading to what is com¬
monly known as the "cold war". The strug¬
gle is intensified by the attacks of ideo¬
logical opponents which permeate the
communications media.
Another cause of tension at the regional
level is terrorism, which has emerged as a
phenomenon of the contemporary world. A
variety of factors nationalist, social,
ideological, political and intellectual have
interacted to give rise to this phenomenon.
While terrorism is still largely shrouded in
obscurity, it is at any rate clear that a dis¬
tinction must be made between it and resist¬
ance to colonialism. Terrorism may occur at
the level of individuals, and it may also
assume official form when practised by
States.
What can be done to remove these causes
of tension? Any successful action must be
based on an understanding of human
aspirations and instincts.
The impulse to universal brotherhood is a
natural human instinct, while the racist feel¬
ings that have come to dominate the minds
of some people are a deformation of that
instinct. Nationalist sentiment is also natu¬
ral to man, a "social animal", but chauvinis¬
tic nationalism is a clear deformation of that
sentiment. Again, man instinctively strives
after justice, bufonee he achieves power he
begins to exploit others. The spiritual
dimension is a basic feature of human
nature, and the motive force behind reli¬
gious faith. But religious fanaticism is a
deformation of that motive force. Lastly,
while it is natural for man to seek ideologies
that provide comprehensive explanations of
the universe, ideological confrontation is a
deformation of that natural desire.
The problems that have arisen in human
relations spring to a great extent from a
failure to reconcile the obligations arising
from a plurality of reference-groups and
from artificial contradictions^ between thé
demands of these multiple affiliations. Our
world has suffered greatly from an exagger¬
ated emphasis on the "national" group to
the detriment of the demands of our affilia¬
tions to the global group. This has had
disastrous consequences for all nations. In
his introduction to Bertrand Russell's book,
Has Man a Future?, Arnold Toynbee
speaks of the striking contrast between the
enormity of the dangers that we have
brought upon ourselves and the petty
nature of the national interests for which we
are fighting and which would be doomed to
extinction if the whole world were
annihilated.
AHMAD SIDQI AD-DAJANI, professor ofhistory
at the Scientific Centre on the History of Arab
Countries in Cairo, has written widely on the
history of the Arab world.

