The Picasso Museum in Paris
The Picasso Museum in Paris, which opened its doors to the
public on 1 October 1985, contains Picasso's collection of works
by other artists and the major dation of "Picasso's Picassos"
which was made by his heirs to the French State in 1979. The
total amounts to some 230 paintings, 150 sculptures, 90 cera¬
mics, 1,500 drawings and 1,500 engravings. This outstanding
ensemble is housed in one of the finest historic buildings in the
Marais quarter of Paris, the Hôtel Aubert de Fontenay, com¬
monly known as the Hôtel Salé (built in 1659) which has been
specially restored and altered for the purpose. Below, a Unesco
Courier interview with Dominique Bozo, who played a leading
part in the creation of the Picasso Museum.
Courier: Can Picasso's personal collection
(whether of his own works which he kept for
himselfor of the works of other artists which
he acquired) offer the art enthusiast any
indications as to the line of direction taken
by the artist in his work?
Bozo: This is a difficult question to answer
inasmuch as a personal collection is not
necessarily intended to be either a guide to
an artist's work or the reflection of a con¬
frontation of ideas. What is remarkable in
Picasso's case is that he started to establish
his personal collection, by purchase or by
exchange with other artists, very early on,
from the beginning of the century. It has
therefore been possible to assemble in the
Museum works of others that he selected at
the same time that he was producing key
works of his own. Thus the paintings of
Henri Rousseau "Le Douanier", acquired
by Picasso around 1919 and 1920 at the time
when, after a foray into cubism, he was
returning to the classical style, are, in a way,
a recognition of the scope for figurative art
that derived from the cubist revolution.
Similarly, the thirty works by Cézanne,
even though they did not become part of the
collection at the time of the birth of cubism,
around 1907, are important to the under¬
standing of space and light in the work of
the great native of Aix-en-Provence, and,
indeed, of the cubist upheaval. The paint¬
ings of other fellow artists André Derain,
Georges Braque, Henri Matisse give rise
to encounters which enable us to assess the
directions being taken by Picasso in his
work.
Courier: Does the panorama presented by
the collection give any indications as to
Picasso's ability to encompass the
"universal" implications of art contact
with other cultures, continuity and rela¬
tionships with preceding artistic periods?
Bozo: From the beginning of the century up
until the start of the Second World War,
Picasso collected and hung in his studio
works of primitive art from Oceania and, in
particular, from Africa. The bulk of these
works are on display at the Picasso
Museum. What we learn from them is that
Picasso did not actually copy primitive art,
but that he found in the reasoning that lay
behind its creation, its colour and its style of
cubism, a kinship, an emotional affinity
which reinforced him in his own approach.
Picasso was also an observer of prehistoric
art, in particular Iberian prehistoric art, and
these works too can teach the art enthusiast
something about his creative development.
Primitive art, however, never encroached
upon Picasso's artistic or philosophical
autonomy.
Seen in this way, and in so far as it brings
together the testimony of other cultures and
the works of contemporaries who might be
considered as sources, the Picasso Museum
is a place in which we can learn about and
leam to understand an exceptional
personality.
One great achievement of the Museum is
to have brought together almost all Picas¬
so's preliminary studies, to have, as it were,
catalogued the archives of his thought.
Through this experimental laboratory of his
work (the testimony of other cultures, or
affinities with other artists), the Museum
has developed an extraordinary pedagogic¬
al tool which enables us to select themes or
subjects from Picasso's work and to show
The staircase of the Hôtel Salé, home of
the Picasso Museum In Paris. The chande¬
lier Is by Diego GiacomettL
26

their continuity and development, or the
deviations during a given period or
throughout his work as a whole. We know
that he always went further than he had
expected to go, that at times his creativity
deserted him and that he felt the need to
pause from time to time to consider what he
had achieved. This led him to acquire a
certain mastery over his thought, and this
re-ordering of his ideas took place by refer¬
ence to the works of the great masters who
had preceded him. Regularly in his work we
find paraphrases of the great universal
artists; and as a consequence of these con¬
frontations there is a very great sense of
Hberty in his work as compared to other
attitudes and methods that are fixed once
and for all. The other great achievement of
the Museum is that it also contains a collec¬
tion of major works and series of paintings
leading up to or developing from them.
Courier: Did wide-ranging considerations
such as those we have discussed influence the
organization of the Museum?
Bozo: The Museum was conceived with the
aim of showing that each of Picasso's works
stands alone and of highlighting the master¬
pieces, while at the same time demonstrat¬
ing the strength of the artistic renewal from
one period to another and the way in which
each period draws inspiration from the one
that has gone before. For example, a work
from the 1950s may be placed beside a work
dated 1919 to show the continuity in form or
theme. This gives the pubUc food for
thought. Similarly, sculpture and paintings
are juxtaposed, for Picasso turned to sculp¬
ture when a spatial problem arose 

in his
painting.
Courier: Is the current layout and presenta¬
tion of the Museum definitive?
Bozo: By no means. Our attitudes to
museums have changed since the
nineteenth century. Nowadays, the more
one is involved with a museum the more one
appreciates its wealth and the potential for
modification. The inner resources of the
works themselves are such that it should be
possible to present them in different com¬
binations. At the moment they are hung in
such a way as to show off the richness of the
collection, to make it easily accessible to the
public and to provide a harmonious contrast
with the seventeenth century building in
which it is housed.
Courier: Are there other museums in the
world conceived and established on the same
principles?
Bozo: There are several museums of this
kind in the world: the Rodin museum in
Paris, the Matisse museum at Nice, the Van
Gogh museum in Amsterdam and the
Edvard Munch museum in Oslo are just a
few examples. Almost all countries would
Hke their greatest national artist to have a
museum. This is fine if the artist in question
is of a high standard and if the country owns
the best or the largest collection of his or her
work. In this case it is less a matter of
creating a museum in the practical sense of
the term than of an artistic "space" close to
the place of creation. We are very fortunate
to have the Hôtel Salé as a setting for the
Picasso collection since this enables us to
demonstrate that twentieth-century art can
cohabit with and indeed be an extension of
the art of the seventeenth century. On the
great staircase, for example, Picasso's
in this part of the Picasso Museum are 5
sculptures from different periods of the
artist's life: ¡eft and foreground, two
bronze Heads of a Woman, 1931; right, the
famous Woman with a Baby Carriage
(bronze), 1950; in background, two cera¬
mics. Standing Flautist and Seated Flaut¬
ist Playing a Double Flute, both 1958.
monumental sculptures from the 1930s
mingle happily with the works of Flemish
sculptors who came to work in France dur¬
ing the seventeenth century. Furthermore,
during the 1930s and later, Picasso lived in
private town houses or country residences
very similar in style and atmosphere to that
of the Hôtel Salé and many of his works
were created in this kind of setting. Finally,
the fact that the furnishings are the work of
another artist (Diego Giacometti, the
brother of the sculptor Alberto Giacometti)
gives another dimension to the concept of
artistic encounter.
Courier: What lessons can be learned from
such a venture?
Bozo: Today members of the general public
are encouraged to go to museums, but they
often lack the necessary knowledge and the
means of informing themselves to benefit
fully from them. They often feel somewhat
lost even though fascinated. Twentieth-cen¬
tury art is something of a problem. There is
such a wide variety of seemingly contradic¬
tory trends, ranging from a continuation of
the classical tradition to the most severely
critical art of today, that it is easy to become
lost in the diversity of modern thought. The
Picasso Museum gives the general public an
introduction to twentieth-century art. Get¬
ting to know a particular artist is a good way
of acquiring an understanding of the cen¬
tury, especially when his work spans eighty
years of creative activity. In short, we are
concerned with the work of an artist who
was also a humanist; and his relationship
with the past, with art as part of our heritage
and of the historical process, gives the
Museum a universal character which is both
instructive and stimulating.
DOMINiQUE BOZO, of France, is directorof the
National Museum of Modem Art at the Georges
Pompidou Centre in Paris.
27
