Perceptions of threat
and security
by Yoshikazu Sakamoto
S
ECURITY", as discussed in the
context of international relations,
concerns the security of nations
"national security". The State-system is
characterized by this emphasis on the secur¬
ity of the State as the primary and para¬
mount actor in international politics.
At the same time, it is evident that, when
"national security" became a key political
symbol after the Second World War, in
Two visions, nine centuries apart, of the
end of the world. Miniature, left, from the
Saint Sever Apocalypse (1028), with com¬
mentary by the 8th-century monk Beatus,
originally belonged to Saint Sever Abbey,
south-west France, and is now in the Bib¬
liothèque Nationale, Paris. Right, detail
from Pablo Picasso's Guernica, "the most
celebratedpainting of our century" and Its
most symbolic, both in the masterly bold¬
ness of its conception and execution and
in the grim topicality of its content.
many countries the issue of "internal secur¬
ity" became as important as, if not more
important than, "external security" which
the idea of "national security" originally
referred to.
This illustrates the basic fact that the
State is not always a tightly homogenized
entity, but is composed of groups with di¬
verse and often conflicting interests. Thus,
an examination of the concepts of "secur¬
ity" and "threat" should begin by raising
two basic questions: Whose security, and
security of what? Or, threat to whom and to
what? Hence the need for an examination
of actors and values.
The emergence and consolidation of the
modern nation-State in the West involved,
firstly, the establishment of the State
machinery and, secondly, its extension and
penetration into society mobilizing the
people who would be integrated into the
State and who would constitute the
"nation".
This mobilization process has two com
ponents: domination and participation. As
a result of domination, two functionally
distinct strata emerge: the ruling elite and
the ruled masses, the former normally small
in number. But there is another form of
coercive integration in which a majority
prevails over a minority. What is crucial is
obviously not number but the locus of
power.
The political system of a State integrated
in this fashion is bound to be characterized
by an unequal and inequitable distribution
of values. Even in a democratic society, one
can observe an inequitable distribution of
the effects of external insecurity in favour of
the privileged elite. It is said that a proposal
for world peace once contained the
observation that "if the King, the President,
the Prime Minister and the Commander-in-
Chief are to be the first to go to the front
line in the battlefield when war has been
declared, there will be no war".
This being the case, measures have been
taken by the elite in the nation-State to ^
15

ensure that people's perceptions of their
interests are identical with those of the elite.
These measures are intended to strengthen
the people's sense of identification with the
elite and with the State; they point to the
second aspect of the mobilization process
participation, whether real or manipulated.
One way of strengthening the people's
sense of identification with the nation-State
is through manipulation of the popular
perception of the threat-security issue.
There are three levels on which manipula¬
tion is systematically applied.
The first has to do with the conception of
the values to be defended and secured
against threat. In the nation-State, there is
always a latent cleavage which may develop
into a situation in which values for the elite
and values for the people are no longer
compatible, and the elite and the people
constitute a threat to each other, making
"internal security" a fundamental issue to
both parties.
To counteract this withdrawal of national
allegiance and identification on the part of
the people, the elite frequently resorts to
symbols such as order, royalty, property,
cultural tradition, and national mythology,
which are conceived of as transcending sec¬
toral interests.
The second level concerns the perception
of the presence and degree of the external
threat to security. Even if the internal cleav¬
age is limited, enabling a degree of national
consensus to emerge, there is still room for
different perceptions as to the presence and
degree of external threat. Accordingly, the
elite group has to manipulate public percep¬
tion in order to mobilize the people fully in
support of a policy.
The third level has to do with the cost
involved in counteracting the perceived
threat. To facilitate public acceptance of
the cost, the manipulation of public percep¬
tion is systematically carried out by resort¬
ing to symbols of patriotism to convince the
people that the "threat" is serious and the
cost to be paid is acceptable. What fre¬
quently happens is that those citizens who
are educated and earn higher incomes con¬
stitute the "attentive public" who do not
readily conform to the policy and rhetoric of
the elite group. It is the poorer and less
educated who are more likely to fall victim
to the manipulation of patriotic symbols
and show willingness , even fanatical confor-
mism, to make sacrifices in support of
chauvinistic policy. It is indeed a tragedy
that those who get least from the existing
system often pay most.
Another way of strengthening a sense of
identification with the nation-State is by
promoting popular participation in the pro¬
cess of value allocation.
This can take two forms participation in
the political decision-making process and
sharing of the well-being distributed by the
State. The former concerns input, the latter
output. Theoretically, the West put an
emphasis on the former, the East on the
latter. In practice, the States in the West
and in the East have a similar characteristic
in common the welfare state.
The development of the welfare state has
given rise to somewhat contradictory re¬
sults. On the one hand, it has made people
more dependent on the State as far as their
welfare is concerned. On the other it has
reinforced the popular attitude toward the
State, which has come to be regarded as a
mere instrument for satisfying the welfare
needs of the people an attitude which has
led to the erosion of the authority of the
State. The welfare state offers more service
16

- :- -
"...Bleeding on the wall, living, red or half-
Infected, the wound of a man ... Strange
wounds that we encounter with embar¬
rassment and nausea, suffering oh empty
walls. " These lines are by the French poet
Henri Michaux, who also painted the
watercolour at left. Above, In this calli¬
graphic composition by Hassan Mas-
soudy, the word "peace" in Arabic sug¬
gests the shape ofa bird floating on peace¬
ful waters which are themselves depicted
by the same word repeated many times.
and distributes values more equitably than
the classic nation-State; but it evokes less
political enthusiasm and dedication. A new
form of incongruity is emerging between
people and the State.
One of the main reasons for this incon¬
gruity is the loss of "impermeability", espe¬
cially military impermeability, of the na¬
tion-State. Whereas the welfare state pro¬
vides the people with abundant welfare faci¬
lities, it fails to guarantee their survival. No
single State, including the major powers,
can protect its people from the danger of
extinction. The survival of the people of one
great power is at the mercy of another.
In Sum, the implementation of popular
participation has not led to a strengthening
of the process whereby people identify with
the nation; on the contrary, the greater
extent of participation has raised public
awareness that the nation-State is not an
adequate institutional framework for ensur¬
ing the people's security.
It is clear today that the incongruity be
tween "national security" and people's
security can be observed not only within the
nation-State but also in the field of interna¬
tional security.
At the international level, there is an
unmistakable tendency to define what con¬
stitutes security and the threat to it in
accordance with the perceptions of a very
small number of elites in the major powers.
The fact that the entire globe can be annihi¬
lated as a result of the perception or mis-
perception of a top decision-maker testifies
to the extraordinary concentration of power
whereby the security-threat nexus is de¬
fined on behalf of the people of the world
without their mandate.
While the elite of each major power per¬
ceives the threat to security as originating in
the arms buildup of the other, the people of
the world perceive the threat to security as
originating in the arms race between the
major powers and fear that this may even
escape control of the elite of these powers.
In this sense, the threat is systemic.
17

The systemic character of the threat im¬
plies that attainment of global security
assuring the security of the people of the
world calls for significant modifications in
the State-system. Efforts have been made
to strengthen the institutional framework
for global security, such as the peace-keep¬
ing and peace-making machinery of the Un¬
ited Nations and the arrangements for arms
control and disarmament in a search for
"common security", but no substantive
progress has been made.
In the absence of an institutionalized
framework despite the impending systemic
crisis, transnational people's movements
for disarmament have emerged. Such
movements are an uninstitutionalized de¬
vice for coping with a crisis and are an
indispensable initiator of a new institutional
framework that has yet to be created.
YOSHIKAZU SAKAMOTO, ofJapan, isa former
Secretary-General of the International Peace
Research Association, and is currently a profes¬
sor of law at the University of Tokyo. He is a
member of the International Commission for
Peace in the Minds of Men, the jury responsible
for awarding the Unesco Prize for Peace Educa¬
tion. A longer version of this article has appeared
in the Unesco Yearbook on Peace and Conflict
Studies 1983, published by Unesco in 1985.

