The Afro-Brazilian experiment
by Gilberto Freyre
BRAZIL'S experience can be useful to
new nations in Africa, Asia and else¬
where for, after four centuries of
pre-national and national development and
more than a century of independence, Bra¬
zil is now emerging as a civilization in search
of forms of expression suited to a tropical
environment. This civilization does not,
however, repudiate the European values
which are so basic to Brazil's national
heritage.
Brazil now boasts its own types of
architecture, music, painting, cooking,
Christianity, social life, attitudes towards
health and hygiene, and football a more
dionysiac Brazilian kind of football than the
apollonian English one. All of these express
a new type of civilization whose novelty
derives as much from racial intermingling as
from an intermixing of cultures.
The cult of the Virgin Mary is an exam¬
ple: elements have been assimilated from
the Yemanja cult (the female counterpart
of Orixa, a secondary divinity in the African
jeje-nago cult). Brazil has black Virgins like
the Virgin of Rosario and mestizo Virgins
like Our Lady of Guadalupe, whose de¬
votees pledge themselves by offering ex¬
votos wood and clay sculptures whose ex¬
pression and colour symbolism are more
African than European.
Brazilians do not consider themselves
less Catholic because elements of African
rites or beliefs have been incorporated into
their religious worship. Though their
Catholicism is more tropical and less
European, believers do not feel it has been
corrupted or de-Christianized. The same
holds true for Brazilian cookery, music,
sculpture and painting of European origin:
African penetration represents not a cor¬
ruption of values but an enrichment.
The process of "tropicalization" of the
Portuguese language in Brazil stems pri¬
marily from African influence, and only
secondarily from Amerindian influence. As
a literary language, it is no longer con¬
sidered as inferior to the academic language
of Portuguese purists. Less and less
academic, the Brazilian language is daily
acquiring new rhythms and expressions
whose musicality and forcefulness are deep¬
ly marked by their African origins.
More has been written about the African
influence on Brazilian music than on any
other Brazilian art form. It is apparent not
only in popular music but also in some of the
country's most serious music. The compos-
GILBERTO FREYRE, of Brazil, is an interna¬
tionally known authority on sociology and on
social and cultural anthropology. His works
translated into English include: The Masters and
the Slaves, New World in the Tropics, and The
Mansions and the Shanties.
er Heitor Villa-Lobos (1887-1959) was in- must not forget that another factor, besides
fluenced both by American and even more the historical one, has contributed to these
by Amerindian musical themes, which he similarities: a common tropical environ-
considered basically Brazilian. ment undergoing the process of moderniza-
The cultural affinities between Brazil and tion.
Africa are, as we have seen, strong. But we August-September 1977
24
