Food for a hungry world
by Antoine Dakouré
©
s
I
FOR years, the vast problem of world
hunger has been the focus of lengthy
debate in various organizations at the
governmental, non-governmental and in¬
ternational levels.
In a noteworthy study entitled Agricul¬
ture: Toward 2000 the Food and Agricul¬
ture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) warned all nations of the deteriorat-
"Even the best rural developmentprojects
designed by experts and backed with all
the material, technical and financial re¬
sources needed, are destined to fail if the
farmers in whose interest they are pur¬
ported to be carried out do not feel suffi¬
cientlyconcerned to offer theirunreserved
participation and if they lack the assur¬
ance that the projects are for their own
benefit." Below, Egyptian farmers hard at
work.
ing situation and offered concrete sugges¬
tions for controlling hunger effectively.
Today, however, it must be admitted that
the plight of the world's underprivileged is
steadily worsening. Nearly 500 million hu¬
man beings, stagnating in poverty, are
under daily threat of famine. The popula¬
tion of the most vulnerable countries in¬
creases by 2.5 per cent a year, whereas the
annual increase in cereal production has
levelled out at 1 per cent. If current trends
continue, requirements for cereal aid,
which totalled 7.6 million tonnes in 1979,
will reach some 21 million tonnes by 1990.
Land resources are very seriously de¬
pleted in many regions. Demographic
pressure, which is responsible for the in¬
creasing over-exploitation of arable land,
the destruction of plant cover and the
damaging effects of extensive grazing, is the
ultimate cause of accelerated desertifica-
> >*i .

V M
tion, whose consequences in the medium
term are just as harmful as a nuclear holo¬
caust. Our planet is threatened by famine
and yet, at the same time, we continue to
exhaust almost 20 million hectares of land
every year.
Why does the problem seem insoluble
despite all indications that it has been care¬
fully and perspicaciously analysed? There
are undoubtedly many reasons, the most
serious of which , it would seem , is that both
the developing and the industrialized na¬
tions lack the political courage needed to
implement the measures recommended.
It is important to seek methods of
approach that involve farmers as much as
possible rather than insisting on taking deci¬
sions for them and imposing solutions on
them without taking the precaution of soli¬
citing their opinion. This is an essential
prerequisite to obtaining their collabor¬
ation. Without the farmers' wholehearted
involvement no profound changes can take
place. Their participation cannot be
obtained by presidential decree or ministe¬
rial decision. Tangible, co-ordinated mea¬
sures are required which will progressively
create a favourable environment, working
at a pace acceptable to the farmers and not
racing ahead at the speed of technicians and
politicians. The farmer must be assured that
the land he needs, as well as seeds, equip¬
ment and other inputs, of adequate quality,
will be made available to him at the right
time and in sufficient quantity. Furth¬
ermore, he must have some guarantee that,
when production begins, he will not be
despoiled of the fruits of his labour.
As stressed in the study Agriculture: To¬
ward 2000, it should be possible to solve the
problem of hunger by the year 2000. Gener¬
ally speaking, however, while considerable
emphasis has been placed on all the sectoral
areas that influence programme success, I
feel that the vital question has yet to be
answered: "What concrete measures can be
taken to create the motivation essential to
progress in the field of agricultural produc¬
tion?" Unesco and the FAO could under¬
take joint initiatives in order to make a
detailed examination of this question with
the appropriate organizations in the coun¬
tries concerned.
As a first step, food aid, which enables us
to attend to the most urgent cases rapidly, is
a highly positive factor. It can help stabilize
food prices and encourage efforts to in¬
crease the quantity and improve the quality
of agricultural production.
Beneficiaries and donors of food aid must
ensure that it does not become self-perpe¬
tuating. A prolonged commitment would
constitute a long-term hindrance to the de¬
velopment of local agricultural production.
This reservation aside, nobody can deny
that well organized food aid is precious. It
could, however, become a formidable
weapon and a serious threat to peace if the
donor countries were to succumb to the
temptation to use it as a lever in internation¬
al relations.
April 1984
ANTOINE DAKOURE, a former Minister ofPlan-
ning and Rural Development of his country, Bur¬
kina Faso, was President of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) in 1973. His country's
ambassador to the European Economic Com¬
munity from 1981 to 1983, he also served as a
memberof the independent Brandt Commission.
10
- i'h.-ra' a
