by Mikhail E. TarakanovFolklore
and phonosphere
THERE will always be people who claim
that when they listen to instrumental
music or "pure" music it conjures
up no spatial images in their imagination, and
that they experience it only as duration. One
thing is certain, however: it is difficult to con¬
ceive of music as a phenomenon without a
precise image of musicians playing in a speci¬
fic place, whether an enclosed or an open
space. By its very nature, and whatever the
context, music is, and will remain, a perfor¬
mance.
In the USSR, popular music occupies a
prominent position. As we find wherever folk¬
lore has stayed alive, spontaneous musical
improvisation, intended to be heard by a
gathering of people and calling for certain
spatial conditions, is still a major form of cre¬
ative art. Professional art based on oral tradi¬
tion has also been preserved over very wide
areas, in Central Asia and in Transcaucasia,
in the highly elaborate form of the mugam,
epic tales told by renowned artists who have
learned a special technique of singing and
acquired a perfect mastery of the traditional
instruments of the East.
This popular music has conquered new
territory on the stage, on radio, on television
and in records, and in so doing has been
assimilated into the public system of music
consumption. This expansion has had an en¬
couraging impact on the status of music in
general, while at the same time it has pushed
traditional types of creation towards profes
sionalism with the new spatial forms needed
for producing and listening to music and the
professional sophistication that these require.
The creators of folk music have to learn
musical techniques, polish their perform¬
ances and rehearse intensively to prepare for
concerts when they use such specialized faci¬
lities as recording studios, rehearsal rooms,
and the stages of variety theatres. A delicate
problem arises: exposed to the limelight of
professionalism, the spiritual nature of popu¬
lar creative art is likely to wilt, and needs
protection. Folk song and folk dance troupes
are as plentiful in the USSR as they are well-
loved beyond its borders. As a consequence
of this powerful movement to take over folk¬
lore, living folk art is tending to lose its spon¬
taneity and formal continuity and to be turned
into a subject for study and teaching.
Fortunately, a movement is also emerging
to preserve the full authenticity of folk art,
notably through staging performances that
are faithful in all respects to the spirit of popu¬
lar festivals. In many regions folk troupes have
sprung up which are keeping alive the old
styles of singing.
Lastly, new forms are taking shape which
have their roots in oral tradition but are by no
means identical to it. Open-air song festivals
that attract huge crowds are one example of
such a trend. Meanwhile, many popular sin¬
gers and vocal and instrumental groups are
also striving to safeguard the unique charac¬
ter of folk music.
Left, a concert ofpopularmusic and dance
in a vast concert hall at Erivan, capital of
the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic. In
the Soviet Union, popular music and folk
music are fully Integrated into the public
system of music consumption. This en¬
courages greater professionalism but in¬
evitably creates the risk that some of the
spontaneity and continuity in the creation
of folk arts may be lost.
The masterpieces of folk art are now
reaching more and more people millions of
viewers through television familiarizing
them with the different national styles and
encouraging contact between the hundred or
so nations which make up our country.
It is true that such contacts have a long
history, as is borne out by the tradition of
Russian music of Eastern inspiration dating
back to Rimsky-Korsakov, Borodin and Mus¬
sorgsky; but in the age of the mass media it
has become a phenomenon on a grand scale.
Conversely, the increasing use of sound
production techniques is exerting a growing
influence on the language of music through
the possibilities it affords for manipulating
sound by such means as the special arrange¬
ment of instruments in the concert hall, the
amplification of weak sounds, the "purifica¬
tion" of tone quality, the "broadening" of
sound range, and the combination of pre¬
recorded music or sounds with musicians in
live performance.
Use of these techniques is not confined to
concert performances and the broadcasting
of concerts on radio or television. It also ex¬
tends to the use of music in other fields, some
artistic (soundtracks of cinema or television
films) others not (news or reports on topics of
general interest).
Thus the places where music is listened to
have become more and more numerous,
ranging from the giant stadium to the cinema
auditorium and the radio cassette in the
home.
There is no longer any area of human activ¬
ity from which music can be a priori excluded.
Music, one might justly claim, has won a total
victory over the world in which we live: a
"phonosphere" encompasses the planet. The
problem today is not whether the phono¬
sphere should or should not exist, but how it
can be made more harmonious. The pollution
of daily life by noise, with its consequent blunt¬
ing of auditory and musical sensitivity, has
attained alarming proportions. We must keep
it at bay and, at the same time, allocate a
larger share of the human phonosphere to
music which requires us to listen to it intel¬
ligently and which is charged with meaning.
MIKHAIL EVGENIEVICH TARAKANOV is a
director of research at the Institute of Art of the
Academy of Sciences and of the Ministry of
Culture of the USSR. A specialist in the theory ^""
and history of 20th-century music, he is the -j
author of many published works including The
Style of Prokofiev's Symphonies (1968), The
Musical Theatre of Alban Berg (1976) and The
Works of Rodion Shchedrin (1980).
