The concrete poetry movement
by Severo Sarduy
FROM its beginnings in a small, privately
printed review launched in Säo Paulo in
1952 and the work of its three founding
poets, Haroldo de Campos (born Sao Paulo,
1929), his brother Augusto (1931), and Décio
Pignatari (1927), Brazil's concrete poetry
movement, concretismo, which was actually a
whole new way of looking not only at poetry but at
life itself went on to make its mark all over the
world.
The review, Noigandres, is now a coveted
collector's item. Rather unexpectedly, the aes¬
thetic ideas it championed first had a response in
the Federal Republic of Germany, in the work of
Max Bense, who had come to concrete poetry
thanks to the Swiss-Bolivian poet Eugen Gom-
ringer, who himself had become a founder-
discoverer of the movement through a chance
meeting with Décio Pignatari. The movement
next found an echo in the work of the Japanese
poet Kitasono Katsue, before conquering that
nomadic and universal land, the printed page.
How should we define concrete poetry and its
essence, concretud (concreteness)? Instead of
being a poem in the conventional sense, a con¬
crete poem is akin to a diagram or drawing, a
pattern on the printed page which forcefully and
efficiently represents not only objects or con¬
cepts but the relationship between them, the
invisible structures of sound and meaning that
bind them together, their hidden affinities or anta¬
gonisms. What is more, as Guillaume Apollinaire
put it, writing must be understood in analytical
and discursive terms before its all-embracing
ideographic message can be understood. For
example, the poem reproduced here, Epithala-
mium-ll, by the concrete poet Pedro Xisto, en¬
capsulates the story of Paradise and enables it to
be grasped at a glance, consisting as it does of a
HE, a SHE and an "S" representing the devious
serpent, but also of an "H" (for homo, in other
words Adam) and an "E" for Eve, positioned
symmetrically and indissolubly bound together
by the serpent, just as in the Garden of Eden. The
Epithalamium (1966), a concrete poem
by Pedro Xisto.
reader is obviously free to interpret the scene in
his or her own way, and thereby join in the
process of poetic creation.
However, according to Haroldo de Campos,
the Pound-like patriarch of the movement and its
chief theorist, concretismo is not merely "a hedo¬
nistic graphic arrangement or layout", nor a cal¬
ligramme in which words are transformed into
¡mages of the things they designate (the word
"rose" actually becoming a rose). In concrete
poetry words are dismantled and modified so
that we can see what they are made of, like a
complex toy taken to pieces by a wayward child.
In short, the poet becomes a "designer" of
meaning.
The term concretismo is taken from the plastic
arts, and designates non-figurative, geometric
and rational compositions in which the key fea¬
ture is the objective technique with which they
were produced, and a clearly defined icon-like
image drained of any residual emotion or subjec¬
tive content, rather than any message or percep¬
tion of the "other" reality, which such works might
have managed to convey.
©
The poetic movement adopted the theoretical
tenets of this style of painting and even ex¬
panded on them: when in 1955 Eugen Gom-
ringer was introduced to Décio Pignatari by the
Argentine theorist and teacher Tomás Maldon-
ado, he was the secretary of the Swiss graphic
artist, architect and designer Max Bill, then direc¬
tor of the College of Design in Ulm (Fed. Rep. of
Germany). Above all, however, concretismo
delved back into an area of the Brazilian past that
had been overlooked or unintentionally under¬
rated. This was the subversive tradition which
began with the Modernists around 1911,
reached its climax in the 1930s with Carlos
Drummond de Andrade and Murilo Mendes, and
continued as far as Joäo Cabrai de Meló Neto.
But the concrete poets went even further: they
took over the broken and violent diction of
Oswald and Mario de Andrade, the "cannibalist
forefathers", as Haroldo de Campos called them,
and went back even further to rediscover the
authentically revolutionary modern idiom of
Sousândrade (Joaquim de Sousa Andrade,
1833-1902), a great poet who had been com¬
pletely forgotten. In 1877, this contemporary of
Baudelaire, who lived in the United States for ten
years, wrote what Haroldo de Campos regards
as the foundation stone of concretud: a long
poem entitled Oguesa errante, which culminates
in an astonishing sequence "Wall Street
Hell" which might be described as textual mar¬
quetry or polyphony, in which layout, neol¬
ogisms, verbal montage and sudden changes in
tone evoke the newspapers of that period and
the hectic world of the stock market. It is a
typographical explosion in a pre-Poundian ex¬
panding universe.
This, then, is Brazilian concrete poetry. It is
poetry at its most modern and most aggressively
international, and yet poetry securely attached to
its roots: the authentic voice of Brazil.
SEVERO SARDUY, a Cuban writer who lives in
France, is the author of a number of novels,
poems and essays. His works include Cobra and
Colibri (novels) a book of essays, Barroco, anda
collection of poems, Un testigo fugaz y
disfrazado.
28
