Blueplanet
Unique in the solar system,
only the earth has rain,
rivers and oceans
by Howard Brabyn

The enormous surface area of the world
ocean is revealed by this map, known to
map-makers as a homolographic, equal-
area projection.
OUR ancestors made a major, if
understandable, mistake when
they named our planet "Earth".
They believed that, with the exception of
some comparatively small bodies of wa¬
ter such as the Mediterranean and the
Black Sea, the surface of our world con¬
sisted almost entirely of rocks and soil.
They knew, of course, of the existence
of other waters but believed them to be
part of the river Oceanus which encircled
the world and from which sprang all other
rivers and seas. Even as late as the six¬
teenth century, the great Flemish geog¬
rapher Gerardus Mercator (1512-1594),
the father of the science of cartography,
believed that the earth was about equally
divided between land and water and that
there was a vast undiscovered land mass
in the southern hemisphere to balance
the great expanses of Europe, Asia and
North America that lie within the north¬
ern hemisphere.
The Ancients would have been
astounded to learn that water covers 70.8
per cent of the surface of the earth and to
see the satellite photographs that confirm
the excited words of twentieth-century
astronauts as they watched the wonder of
earthrise from the arid, barren expanse of
the moon: "Our planet is blue! Our
planet is beautiful!"
The earth, in fact, is uniquely favoured
among the planets of the solar system. It
alone has a surface temperature that per¬
mits water to exist in all three forms
liquid, solid and gas; it alone, as far as we
can tell , has rain , rivers and oceans. To be
strictly accurate we should say ocean,
since what geographers conventionally
define as the Pacific, Atlantic, Indian,
Arctic and Antarctic oceans in fact con¬
stitute a single body of salt water from
which the continents emerge like islands.
This vast, endlessly churning volume of
liquid was the source of life on earth and
remains essential to its continued ex¬
istence. Acting as a huge heat reservoir it
moulds our climate, levelling out the ex¬
tremes of temperature that would other¬
wise prevail over the earth, creating de¬
serts and frozen wastes. It is a major
source of food and a potential source of
valuable minerals and energy. It is a high¬
ly efficient waste disposal unit and pro¬
vides the least expensive form of trans¬
port known to man. Its margins are man¬
kind's favourite playground and its gran¬
deur and beauty have inspired poets
throughout the ages.
Nobody really knows for certain how
the oceans were formed. Some scientists
believe that the water came from thick
clouds that surrounded the earth and
that, as the earth cooled, rain fell from
the clouds in a continuous downpour last¬
ing hundreds of years. However, the
newly-formed earth of 4,500 million
years ago was very different from the
earth we know today. It may have been a
much larger planet with a molten core of
rock and a vast atmosphere of cosmic
gases. Because such volatile gases as
neon and xenon are extremely rare in our
present atmosphere as compared with the
cosmic mix, it is generally thought that
this early atmosphere was stripped away,
perhaps during a period of higher heat
output from the sun, and that our present
atmosphere and surface waters derive en¬
tirely from the earth itself.
However, if water, which has a
molecular weight of eighteen, which is
less than the atomic weight of neon, had
been suspended in the atmosphere, it too
would have been swept away. Many sci¬
entists therefore believe that the water
must have been tied up in compounds,
perhaps hydrated silicates, until the earth
had formed. Water would then have been
released in liquid form as the rocks
cooled some time during the first
thousand million years of the earth's his¬
tory.
Although we may still have doubts
about its origin, we have learned a great

The composition of sea water
deal about the ocean of today. The statis¬
tics are impressive. It has a volume of
1,370 million cubic kilometres and a sur¬
face area of 361 million square
kilometres. It accounts for just under
98.8 per cent of the total hydrosphere,
the remainder being made up of ice (1.2
per cent), and water in rivers and lakes
(0.002 per cent) and the atmosphere
(0.0008 per cent).
The average depth of the ocean has
been estimated at 3,790 metres, consider¬
ably greater than the average elevation of
the land above sea level, which is 840
metres. The point of maximum depth of
the ocean is to be found in the Mariana
Trench , between the islands of Guam and
Yap, some 11,000 metres below the sur¬
face öf the Pacific. If Mount Everest were
to be placed in the Trench, its summit
would be about two kilometres below the
ocean surface.
Locked up in all this water is a great
variety of salts and minerals in solution.
In fact, sea water contains all the ele¬
ments that make up the minerals in the
earth's crust. At one time it was thought
that the salinity of the modern ocean was
due to salts derived from rock weathering
and transported to the ocean by rivers.
This would mean, however, that the
salinity of the ocean was steadily in¬
creasing, whereas calculations have
shown that the ocean probably acquired
its modern characteristics between 1,500
million and 2,000 million years ago and
that, for at least 100 million years, the
oceanic system has been in a steady state
with a fixed chemical composition. This
implies that inflow and outflow of ele¬
ments must be basically in equilibrium
and that dissolved elements carried to the
ocean in rivers and in rain must precipi¬
tate from ocean water or be cycled back
through the atmosphere by evaporation
to fall on the continents.
The atmosphere and the ocean are in¬
extricably linked. The wind, in combina¬
tion with the heat of the sun and the
rotation of the earth, powers the mighty
ocean currents, moving huge volumes of
water in giant whirlpool motions that ro¬
tate clockwise in the northern hemi¬
sphere and anti-clockwise in the southern
hemisphere (see box page 7). These cur¬
rents carry staggering amounts of water.
It is estimated, for example, that the Gulf
Stream, an "ocean river" some eighty
kilometres wide and 450 metres deep,
propels more than 4,000 million tons of
water a minute.
Movement of deep-ocean waters is
governed primarily by variations in
temperature and salinity. Cold water is
heavier than warm water because it con¬
tracts as it cools (although, unlike other
liquids it expands when it solidifies into
ice) and tends to sink. Salt also makes
water heavy and although salinity in the
CONTINUED PAGE 9
The constituents of sea water include dissolved inorganic sub¬
stances (mineral salts), dissolved gases and dissolved organic
substances. Water is, in fact, the most powerful solvent of all liquids
and all the natural elements can be found in sea water. The most
common of these elements are chlorine (55 per cent) and sodium
(31 per cent) which combine in the ocean to form sodium
chloride common table salt. Of all these elements only sodium
chloride, magnesium and bromine are at present being extracted in
significant amounts.
In the open ocean the salinity of water varies only between very
narrow limits, average salinity being about thirty-five parts of salt to
a thousand parts of water.
There are two rather curious parallels between sea water and
the liquids of the human body: the ocean covers 70 per cent of the
surface of the globe 70 per cent of the human body consists of
water; a comparison of the composition of sea water and human
body fluids shows that the proportions of the elements are largely
the same.
57 OF THE ELEMENTS THAT MAKE UP
THE "SALT" OF SEA WATER"
(In order of their abundance)
Chlorine Lithium Uranium Cadmium
Sodium Rubidium Nickel Tungsten
Magnesium Phosphorus Vanadium Xenon
Sulphur Iodine Manganese Germanium
Calcium Barium Titanium Chromium
Potassium Indium Antimony Thorium
Bromine Zinc Cobalt Scandium
Carbon Iron Cesium Lead
Strontium Aluminium Cerium Mercury
Boron Molybdenum Yttrium Gallium
Silicon Selenium Silver Bismuth
Fluorine Tin Lanthanum Niobium
Argon Copper Krypton Thallium
Nitrogen Arsenic Neon Helium
Gold
Chlorine
Sodium
Other
JÉ
o
>-
ï
ID
2
C I
I
cu ^ >^
E ^ jS
^ s"^ _s^
¿i j**1 r
c: jt
1 H
	
^y S^
E / ^ /^
b S s ¿<

open sea remains fairly constant at
around 3.5 per cent, water near freezing
ice will be heavier because extra salt is left
behind in the freezing process. As this
heavier, saltier water sinks it begins to
move along the ocean floor in the oppo¬
site direction to the surface current above
it.
It is this mechanism that is responsible
for the renewal of virtually enclosed
bodies of water such as the Mediterra¬
nean where salinity is high due to high
rates of evaporation. This increases the
density of the surface water which sinks
and begins to flow westwards through the
Straits of Gibraltar and out into the
Atlantic. Passing above this submarine
current, lighter water from the Atlantic
flows in to replace it.
The other great forces that act upon the
movement of the ocean are the attracting
force of the sun and the moon and the
centrifugal force resulting from the orbit¬
al movement of the earth round the sun
and the moon round the earth; these
cause the rhythmic movement of the wa¬
ters of^the ocean which we call tides (see
box this page). These same forces actual¬
ly move the earth itself and the atmos¬
phere as well, although the rise and fall of
the continents is so small as to be imper¬
ceptible.
Theocean has a powerful effect on
climate! Compared with the land, the
ocean heats slowly in summer and cools
slowly in winter, so its temperature is
much less variable; because of its huge
size it has a moderating effect on land and
air temperatures and helps to iron out
temperature extremes.
Curious as it may seem, the ocean floor
is much younger than the ocean it under¬
lies (the oldest sediments found so far by
deep-sea drilling are from the Upper
Jurassic period and are only about 150
million years old) and is continually being
added to by extrusion of new, initially
molten basaltic rock rising from the man¬
tle. As the upwelling molten rock solidi¬
fies on reaching the ocean floor it is
magnetized in the direction of the earth's
prevailing magnetic field. Magnetic pat¬
terns are established which can be dated
by reference to the time-scale of
geomagnetic reversals which occur at
irregular intervals of a few hundred
thousand years. Our knowledge of the
geology and topography of the ocean
floor has made giant strides during the
past twenty years, thanks largely to tech¬
nological advances which have made
possible improved bathymétrie and sub¬
marine geological mapping (see article
page 11).
The mineral resources of the sea bed,
unlike those contained in the overlying
waters, tend to occur in localized deposits
on top of and within the rocks and sedi¬
ments of the ocean floor. These potential

^ riches include: surface deposits such as
heavy metals, diamonds, sand, oyster
shell and gravel, and the much-publicized
nodules of manganese and phosphorite
that have formed by precipitation from
sea water; subsurface deposits, such as
coal and iron ore, which have been mined
since as early as the beginning of the
seventeenth century by tunnelling from
the land; and fluid and soluble minerals,
such as oil, gas, sulphur and potash,
which are extracted through boreholes.
At present oil and gas represent around
90 per cent in terms of value of all miner¬
als obtained from the oceans. As recov¬
ery techniques improve this situation is
likely to change rapidly and it was largely
in an attempt to ensure an equitable
share-out of what looks like being a new
minerals bonanza that the United Na¬
tions Convention on the Law of the Sea
was drawn up (see page 30).
Although all the chemical elements are
present in sea water itself, only magne¬
sium, bromine and sodium chloride
(common salt) are now being extracted in
significant quantities. The other resource
which is increasingly being extracted
from sea water is water itself fresh
water. Rising demand for fresh water and
improvements in technology are making
desalted water competitive in ever larger
areas of the world.
The ocean is a provider of food to eat as
well as of water to drink. Over the past
decade total catch from the sea has aver¬
aged 75 million tons (see box page 34).
Our present fishing methods, however,
are inefficient. We overfish certain spe¬
cies to the point where they are in danger
of complete extinction and reject others
which are equally valuable as a source of
protein. It has been estimated that with
efficient harvesting of all the fish of the
Relative sizes of the planets, arranged in
order of distance from the sun (but not
according to their respective distances
from each other).
sea, the ocean could provide a sustained
yield of around 2,000 million tons of food
annually.
The Japanese in particular are actively
developing methods of "fish-farming"
which hold great promise. Fish will re¬
main in an area convenient for fishing if a
food supply for them is artificially
created. For instance, by inducing up-
wellings of the nutrient-rich bottom
layers of ocean water, similar to the
naturally occurring upwelling that sus¬
tains the huge anchoveta fisheries off the
coast of Peru, the potential yield of the
ocean could be increased perhaps as
much as tenfold.
The ocean's potential as a source of
energy which can be harnessed to meet
man's needs is still largely hypothetical.
Only in a few places is it economic to
harness the energy locked up in the
world's tides. Only one large tidal power
plant has been built at La Ranee, in
France and there are thought to be only
about twenty-four potential tidal power
sites in the world. Research is continuing
on the extraction of the energy stored in
waves, but this is still at the early ex¬
perimental stage.
Greater hopes are placed in exploiting
the temperature differential between the
surface and the lower layers of the ocean
to generate electricity by means of a pro¬
cess known as Ocean Thermal Energy
Conversion. Experiments with this tech¬
nique undertaken by French researchers
have proved technically successful, but as
yet the technique remains uneconomic in
practice.
As man turns back again to the sea, the
source of all life, in an attempt to draw
even more heavily on its resources, he
will have to tread warily if he is not to
destroy it entirely. There was a time when
we could dump into the ocean the sewage
and other effluents and wastes from
homes and industry safe in the knowledge
that they would be rapidly dispersed, di¬
luted and degraded. But with the rapid
growth of world population and the con¬
centration of people in coastal areas,
both for industrial and recreational pur¬
poses, combined with the sheer bulk of
the material to be disposed of and the
inclusion in it of new, non-biodegradable
waste products, this is no longer possible.
Furthermore, lead in exhaust emissions
from cars and wind-borne toxic DDT re¬
sidues as well as agricultural fertilizers
and pesticides of all kinds are finding
their way into the ocean to add to the
pollution from oil spills, from radio-ac¬
tive fallout and from dumped radio-ac¬
tive wastes.
The ocean has been called "the last
frontier". We are rapidly acquiring the
basic knowledge and the technology
which will enable us to harvest the untold
riches of the sea; with the Convention on
the Law of the Sea we have the embryo of
a legal and institutional framework with¬
in which to reap this harvest to the best
advantage of all mankind and to correct
past errors due to ignorance, neglect and
greed.
HOWARD BRABYN, of the United Kingdom, isa
Paris-based writer and journalist with a special
interest in the popularization ofscience. He was
formerly Editor of the English edition of the
Unesco Courier.
10
