The non-aligned countries
pool their news
by Pero Ivacic
NEWS exchange, the basis of relations
among news agencies, is more impor¬
tant today than ever before.
In recent years, news exchange has be¬
come accepted practice for most news agen¬
cies in the non-aligned world. January 1977
marked the second anniversary of the cre¬
ation of the system known as the "Pool" a
multichannel flow of news reports and in¬
formation between these agencies.
Current efforts to build a new international
economic order inevitably stimulated initia¬
tives for change in the structure of informa¬
tion, which for decades had been based on a
one-way flow of news from the developed to
the developing countries under the influence
of a small number of news agency giants in
the developed world.
On the basis of recommendations adopted
at the Fourth Summit Conference of Non-
Aligned Countries held in Algiers in 1973,
bilateral exchanges of views took place be¬
tween the news agencies of some ten non-
aligned countries concerning possibilities of
joint action to change the existing situation.
The Pool was officially constituted at the
meeting of information ministers and news
agency directors of sixty-two non-aligned
countries held in New Delhi in July 1976. All
the resolutions of the meeting were endorsed
a month later at the Non-Aligned Summit in
Colombo (Sri Lanka).
The first meeting of the Pool co-ordination
committee, held in Cairo in January 1977,
noted that more than forty news agencies in
Africa, Asia, Latin America and Europe were
already contributing actively to the news flow
of the Pool. Five news agencies were already
functioning as regional or multilateral collec-
Over 40 news agencies in non-aligned
countries of Africa, Asia, Latin America
and Europe have pooled their resources
for the exchange of news reports and in¬
formation. The recommendations which
led to the creation of this news agency
"Pool" were adopted at the Fourth Summit
Conference of Non-Aligned Countries,
held in Algiers in 1973. Below, the Confer¬
ence Centre where this historic step was
taken.
tors and redistributors of news reports and
information from other agencies participating
in the Pool.
The Pool is a tangible example of co-opera¬
tion among equals on a voluntary and demo¬
cratic basis. The manner in which it functions
is the best proof of this. A news agency is
considered as a participant if it transmits its
selection of news reports to one or more of the
Pool's collector-redistributor news agencies.
The process involved is simple. Each parti¬
cipant agency transmits by the means at its
disposal teleprinter, telex, airmail one or
more of its news reports daily to a Pool redis¬
tribution centre.
Each agency selects which reports it will
send to the Pool. A redistributing news agency
translates the reports it receives into the lan¬
guages it usually transmits abroad, scrupu¬
lously respecting the substance of the news
received.
This concrete form of co-operation among
the non-aligned countries is in no way viewed
as a challenge to or competition with existing
news reporting systems. The Pool's function
is to fill the previously existing vacuum in the
international information system.
Interest in the Pool has been shown by
several news agencies outside the non-
aligned world, where the Pool is increasingly
making its presence felt in the mass media.
It is obvious that a new dialogue has begun
in international communication, and that the
process of building a new international in¬
formation system is under way. Difficulties
clearly lie ahead and change will not be rapid,
but the process which has been initiated can¬
not be arrested or reversed.
The best contribution to the quest for the
most widely acceptable solutions will be to
continue the dialogue among all those who
have an interest in the world of information a
dialogue which must take place between
equals.
April 1977
PERO IVACIC, Yugoslav journalist, was, when
he wrote this article, Director-General of the
Yugoslav national news agency Tanjug, which
played an active role in the setting up of the
non-aligned countries' news pool.
£
E
TO
O
©
; » ' ,«i \ 2
53
