Rocks around the clock
The concept of geological time
GEOLOGY is the science which
deals with the condition and the
structure of the Earth and the evi¬
dence afforded of ancient forms of life. It
includes the description of landforms, but it
is much more concerned with the processes
and forces responsible for the landscape we
see today.
These processes generally operate ex¬
tremely slowly. Huge periods of time are
involved in the crumpling of the Earth's
crust into mountain ranges, in the wearing
down of other mountains into plains, in the
advance and retreat of sheet ice and in the
relentless movement of vast sections of the
crust itself.
The concept of the enormity of geological
time is a relatively recent one in Western
thought. In AD 1656, James Ussher,
Archbishop of Armagh in Northern Ire¬
land, after careful study of the genealogies
recorded in the Bible, calculated that the
Creation occurred at 8 pm on the 22nd of
October of the year 4004 BC, an estimate
which was widely accepted even as late as
the eighteenth century.
In 1785, however, the Scottish naturalist
James Hutton published his Theory of the
Earth in which he suggested that the natural
processes such as mountain building and
erosion were so slow that the Earth must
have been in existence for many millions of
years. His views were generally discounted
until the early 1830s, when another Scots¬
man, the geologist Charles Lyell, gave them
his backing in his famous three-volume
work The Principles of Geology, which laid
the foundations for evolutionary biology as
well as for an understanding of the develop¬
ment of the Earth.
With the emergence of geology as a sci¬
ence in its own right, people at last became
aware of the huge length of time nature
took to achieve the changes they recognized
as having occurred.
The Earth is a rocky planet and its his¬
tory, virtually from its origin up to the
present, can be elucidated from the study of
rocks exposed on its surface or attainable by
drilling.
Rocks can be grouped into three major
categories: igneous rocks, formed from the
molten material that rises from the Earth's
interior; metamorphic rocks, that have
been transformed and crystallized by heat
and pressure; and sedimentary rocks, which
have a layered structure and are formed
from fragments worn away from existing
rocks and deposited elsewhere as sediment
(see page 15).
Ancient igneous and metamorphic rocks
provide clues as to the origin and early
history of the Earth's crust; younger de¬
formed and igneous rock formations help us
to understand how mountain chains were
formed; and sedimentary rocks, deposited
in layers or strata over millions of years,
provide the major evidence on which the
standard geological time-scale is based.
Sedimentary rocks contain fossils, the re¬
mains of once-living organisms. Because
living things are continuously changing
4-71III ted
The land surface is shaped by erosion
and deformation. Erosion by water,
wind and ice wears away the rocks of
the continental crust. Deformation
occurs where the crust is unstable,
rocks fracture, shear, crush, fold or flow
plastically.
Erosion Deformation
U-shaped valleys like this one
in Alaska are formed by the
gouging action of a glacier mov¬
ing down a river valley. The
moving ice and the rocks it car¬
ries abrade and carve out the
valley's steep sides.
Canyons are formed when uplift of the
land increases the speed and cutting
power of a river flowing through a plain.
The most spectacular example is the
Grand Canyon of the Colorado River, in
places over 1.5 km deep (see colour
page 20).
Rift valleys, often called
Graben (the German for
"trenches"), are the results
of blocks of land sinking be¬
tween parallel faults. The
East African Rift Valley, the
world's largest, is nearly
5,000 kilometres long.
12

through evolution, fossils found in
sedimentary rock provide the principal
means of establishing the relative age of
rocks found in different geographical areas.
In combination, therefore, stratigraphy
(the study of the sequences of rock strata)
and palaeontology (the study of fossils in
relation to the evolution of the Earth's
crust) might be described as the study of
"history in layers".
With the development of radiometry in
the 1950s, it became possible for scientists
to supplement the relative age dating
obtained from the fossil record with abso¬
lute age data (that is to say, age in years).
The age in years of some types of rock can
be calculated from the amounts of radio¬
active elements and their decay products in
the minerals of which the rock is composed.
Radioactive isotopes of uranium, potas¬
sium and rubidium decay at known rates
into stable isotopes of lead, argon and
strontium respectively. The decay products
begin to accumulate in a mineral after it has
crystallized and cooled, thus, as it were,
setting a "radioactive clock" running.
Just as "clock" time is divided into hours,
minutes and seconds, so geological time
(see table page 14) is divided into Eras,
Periods or Systems, and Epochs or Series.
The first era, known as the Precambrian,
covers the span of time from the formation
of the Earth's crust, about 4,600 million
years ago, until the time, about 570 million
years ago, when, for the first time in the
history of the Earth, evidence of varied
forms of life preserved as fossil remains
becomes plentiful. The Precambrian era,
which some geologists also divide into two
sub-divisions, the Archaeozoic and the Pro-
terozoic, thus comprises nearly 90 per cent
of geological time.
Three eras span the period from the end
of Precambrian time to the present the
Palaeozoic ("ancient life") era, from 570
million to 225 million years ago, the Meso-
zoic ("middle life") era, from 225 million to
65 million years ago, and the Cenozoic
"modern life") era, from 65 million years
ago to the present. Broadly speaking, in¬
vertebrates and relatively simple verte¬
brates, such as fish, amphibians and primi¬
tive reptiles were in the ascendant during
the Palaeozoic era, the Mesozoic era saw
the rise to domination of the larger reptiles,
such as the dinosaur, and the Cenozoic, the
contemporary era, is the time of the domi¬
nance of mammals.
The eras are divided into smaller units
called periods or systems. Most of them are
named after geographical regions where
rocks containing fossils characteristic of
their segments of geological time have been
found. Thus the Cambrian period is so
called after the ancient name for Wales and
the Permian period is named after the
ancient Russian kingdom of Permia.
Some periods are named, not after their
geographical location, but after the physical
characteristics of their rocks. Thus the
name of the Cretaceous period is derived
from the Latin word for chalk, creta, while
the Triassic period is so named because, in
Germany, rocks of this period are divided
into three distinct layers consisting of red
sandstones, limestone and shales.
In some cases, both types of nomencla¬
ture are used for the same period by geolog¬
ists in different parts of the world. Thus,
two periods which North Americans call the
Pennsylvanian period and the Mississippian
period (geographical names) are grouped
together in Europe as the Carboniferous
period (from the coal-bearing nature of its
strata).
Periods are divided into epochs or series,
which are in turn sub-divided into ages or
stages, and at this point wide divergences
appear in the nomenclature used by geolog¬
ists in different parts of the world.
This is basically because the relationship
between geological time and sequences of
rock strata has usually been modelled on
national or regional traditional thinking,
and standards, terminology and classifica¬
tion differ from country to country. Neither
the names nor the dates shown, even on a
simplified table of geological time such as
that published on page 14, will be accepted
by all geologists.
The solution of many basic geological
problems would, therefore, be greatly
facilitated if, through the adoption of com¬
mon standards and terminology, data from
different areas could be made intelligible to
geologists the world over. Achieving this
aim is one of the major aims of the Interna¬
tional Geological Correlation Programme, a
co-operative undertaking by the Interna¬
tional Union of Geological Sciences and
Unesco (see page 14).
Of particular importance are projects
aimed at progressively refining geological
time-scales. Geologists need accurate time-
determination methods not only as a basis
for research on the evolution of the Earth's
crust, but also for identifying and assessing
energy and mineral resources.
An understanding of the natural pro¬
cesses which have led to the accumulation
of mineral deposits or fossil fuels depends
on the geologist's ability to understand the
sequence of stages responsible for the
formation of deposits and to make accurate
correlations between sequences concerned
with the formation of similar deposits in
widely separated areas. To paraphrase the
old saying: "Geological time is money".
Drawing © The Sunday Times, Geological Museum, London
Detachment, or décollement, is a common mechanism
of folding in many lesser foothill ranges like the Jura
(above). It occurs in flat sedimentary layers alongside
rising fold-mountains, in this case, the Alps. As the
young fold-mountains rise, they push the sedimentary
layers sideways until they are detached from the under¬
lying rocks and are rucked up like a carpet on a slippery
floor. The "polish" or lubrication is a soft layer of rock
salt or clay underlying the sedimentary layers.
Overfolds form in fold-mountains when rucked-up rock
layers topple over. In Scotland, erosion has exposed the
underside of such a fold, a wide belt from Aberdeen to
Antrim that is upside down.
Nappes are masses of rock that have
been driven over younger rocks for long
distances until they cover them like a
cloth. The Matterhorn (above right) was
carved by glaciers out of a nappe of
pre-Alpine granite driven over Switzer¬
land from the south.
13

Geological time scale
Era Period / System Epoch / Series Duration
millions of years
CENOZOIC
Quaternary Holocene 0.01
Pleistocene 2.5
Tertiary Pliocene 4.5
Miocene 19
Oligocène
Eocene
12
16
Palaeocene 11
MESOZOIC
Cretaceous
Names based on
geographical
location and
vary widely
71
Jurassic 54
Triassic 35
PALAEOZOIC
Permian 55
Carboniferous
Pennsylvanian
Mississippian
45
20
Devonian 50
Silurian 35
Ordovician 70
Cambrian 70
Proterozoic
or
Algonkian
PRFHAMRRIAN Not divided into periods 4030
Archaeozoic
or
Archaean
A geologist's hammer has been adopted as the "trademark"
of the International Geological Correlation Programme
(IGCP), a major scientific venture, jointly undertaken by
Unesco and the International Union of Geological Sciences
(IUGS), devoted to the study of the earth's crust and its
mineral and energy resources. The Programme involves
some 4,000 geologists In more than 110 countries, working on
about fifty research projects. It combines the advantages of
non-governmental participation and guidance through Its sci¬
entific partner, the IUGS, with the benefits of governmental
support through Unesco. Projects undertaken by the IGCP
range from study of geochronology to prospecting for eco¬
nomic mineral deposits and processing of geological data.
14
