Nueva canción
Latin America's song without frontiers
by Daniel Viglietti
THE history of the peoples of Latin
America and the Caribbean can be
told in song. Apparently the slight¬
est of art forms, a mixture of words and
music full of wit and feeling, songs illumin¬
ate the past centuries of our continent like a
flash of lightning. They tell of arrows loosed
against cannon, and later of peasants with¬
out land and workers without factories.
Even more recently, they are harbingers of
freedom in societies new-born. Song knows
no frontiers: "The great songwriters trans¬
cend geography," observed the Uruguayan
musicologist Lauro Ayestarán. "They cre¬
ate authentic musical units in a way that
El Circo (The Circus), a tapestryby Violetta
Parra, a noted composer and singer of
Chilean popular music as well as a collec¬
tor of Chilean folklore.

^- races, nations or mere geographical areas
do not (...). Folklore thumbs its nose at
geography."
But not at history. Songwriters are
perhaps the real unifying factors in the poli¬
tical and cultural life of Latin America
today. One reason for this is the extent of
their audience. In a continent where levels
of illiteracy are high , songs can be read with
the ears. As a result of technological pro¬
gress portable transistor radios are ubi¬
quitous, and consequently the popularity of
songs is spreading like seed scattered to the '
winds.
This raises the question of what kind of
seed is being sown, and what kind of harvest
it will yield. In the countries of Latin Amer¬
ica it is impossible to ignore the pervasive
impact of an alienating type of song, for the
most part imported straight from foreign
cultural capitals, or else home-produced
withthe mentality of colonized peoples.
There is undeniable hostility to such trends
as the nueva canción ("new song"). Despite
this censorship, whether direct or indirect,
the song that speaks to the people through
the quality of its message threads its way
through the labyrinth of repression and si¬
lence until it finds receptive hearers. Folk¬
lore, in the traditional sense of the term, is
very close to the strains of the nueva canción
or nuevo canto, questionable expressions
but ones which were accepted by partici¬
pants in the First Festival of New Latin
American Song, held under Unesco aus¬
pices in Mexico City in 1982.
When a rural Ecuadorian, in the heart of
the mountains, listens on his transistor
radio to the Chilean Victor Jara singing his
Plegaria de un labrador (A Farmer's
Prayer), he is, although he may not realize
it, listening to a piece of folklore. Such
songs belong to a group of sometimes
ephemeral phenomena which might be
called "subjective folklore", and which
have not yet been given a place among the
categories made by folklore specialists.
There is also an anonymous mass of sounds
which have left no trace at all, except in
popular memory. To rediscover that
memory, and to recapture the experience of
listening to those sounds, is a task crying out
for new generations of researchers, but
thwarted by a chronic lack of support from
national governments and international
bodies.
The thread of history that stretches un¬
broken from the sounds produced by the
Jew's harp to the cassette recorded by a
singer of nueva canción passes through
stages which are too numerous to describe
in this article. But mention should be made
of the generation of composers and perfor¬
mers which provided a link between that
past and today. And "today" will soon be
"yesterday", if we think of the earliest ven¬
tures of Atahualpa Yupanqui, to take one
notable architect of this continuity between
two periods. A few decades before the ex¬
plosion of the modern media, Yupanqui
would have been a troubadour, a tavern
poet, a wandering minstrel. The amplifica¬
tion of his message (by radio, records, cas¬
settes, cinema, television and video cas¬
settes) has enormously multiplied his im¬
pact. Song, that ancient form of oral com¬
munication, is also taking on a new lease of
life by conquering new spheres of influence
and new publics. Its range and its access to
the media are giving it an added intensity of
purpose and a new potential to affect peo¬
ple and to "heighten awareness".
"New song" is a river through which
several currents swirl. In the late 1950s and
in the 1960s, the Cuban revolution, Che
Guevara and the Chilean experiment pro¬
vided opportunities to develop more direct
and deliberate political messages which
gave added meaning to the term "protest
song". The participants in the First Protest
Song Meeting, held in Cuba in 1967, identi¬
fied more strongly with the aesthetic and
ideological features of the songs than with
the actual term "protest song", which
nevertheless continued to stick for some
time. In the 1970s, other political events in
Uruguay, Chile, Argentina, Nicaragua,
Grenada, El Salvador and Guatemala
boosted the development of this genre.
To sing "from the side of power" was the
novel experience of the Nueva Trova Cuba¬
na, "the new Cuban song" movement,
which set to work with rigour and imagina¬
tion, determined not to yield to the tempta¬
tions of apologetics. The movement was
most successful in the sphere of lyrics,
where it reached poetic heights which were
no obstacle to communication, even with
audiences elsewhere in Latin America. In
musical terms, working in a medium strong¬
ly influenced by the former colonial powers ,
the Nueva Trova began to find its way by
working with the Sound Experiment Group
of the Cuban Institute of Cinema Art and
Industry and with Cuban composer Leo
Brouwer guiding the first steps of the
movement's original singers, Pablo
Daniel Viglietti photographed moments
before the beginning of a concert he gave
as part of Nicaragua's Vacaciones felices
("Happy holidays") programme. The audi¬
ence consisted of children from a poor
district of Managua, the capital.

Portrait ofAtahualpa Yupanqui, one of the
most celebrated composers and singers
of Argentine and Latin American popular
music, by the Ecuadorian painter Oswaldo
Guayasamin (Quito, 1977).
Milanés, Silvio Rodriguez and Noel Nicola.
Launched by such pioneers as Dorival
Caymi and Vinicius de Moraes, the Música
Popular Brasileira a more accurate label
since it does not exclude the purely in¬
strumental has become the Latin Amer¬
ican movement that boasts the richest varie¬
ty of styles and professional possibilities as
well as a relatively wide range of recordings.
As a result, works of great musical value,
such as the songs of Chico Buarque, have
become extremely popular.
It can safely be claimed that nueva can¬
ción today exists throughout "our Amer¬
ica", that voices travel across frontiers and
that we are witnessing the birth of a distinc¬
tive kind of polyphony and the emergence
of a synthesis which is still not widely per¬
ceived, except in the work of certain inter¬
nationally known artists.
Almost all of Latin America has been
subjected to the onslaught of cultural im¬
perialism, and in resisting this it has learnt
to sing of the everyday lives of humble folk,
their joys and frustrations, hopes, sorrows
and festivities, and, when circumstances
make this inevitable, of their suffering in
prison or in exile.
Little has been said of the divided world
of song in those countries where political
conditions have entailed exile, either within
the country or abroad. The nueva canción
of Chile, Argentina and Uruguay, to take
only a few examples, is a kind of duet: one
voice sings within the country, in contact
with harsh everyday reality; the other, in
close contact with the first, sings in exile,
creating and disseminating an itinerant cul¬
ture of resistance.
If we look at this two-sided process in the
case of Uruguay, which has returned to the
path of democracy, we need a wide-angle
lens in order to keep in focus all those who
sang of freedom inside the country. And we
need keen hearing to catch the voices of all
the Uruguayan singers scattered among the
exiled population throughout the world: the
Los Olimareños duo, Alfredo Zitarrosa,
Anibal Sampayo, and many others. The
freedom to create was repressed within our
country from 1973 to 1985, but so it was
abroad, since we were all to some extent
prisoners of a certain attitude towards ex¬
pressing our affliction in song. That "state
of exile" left its mark on our writing. Inside
the country, people sang out of suffering,
but in a spirit of defiance and, with a deter¬
mined gaiety in their creation, they stood
up to be counted in the shadow of the
general danger. (I am thinking of such
groups as Los que iban cantando and Rum-
bo, of Leo Masliah and Rubén Olivera).
Both teams worked in unison, one in the
fiery furnace , the other in the mists of exile ,
to produce a truly passionate counterpoint.
In 1985 the return from exile began, and a
new era called for new songs. In our songs
the oldest among us had to come to terms
with a period when our model democracy
was overwhelmed by oppression. The
young ones, during the dictatorship, had to
sing in a more oblique fashion. And those
who come after us: how will they, in their
turn, have to sing? Facing up to the immedi¬
ate past with eyes wide open? What can we
do now, when "almost" everything is pos¬
sible? In those who chose to stay behind
when they could have left, what strings are
being tuned? In those returning from exile,
what new flowers of song are budding? In
the voices of those who have been released,
what new dreams will take flight on wings of
melody? After the doves and the hawks,
what firebird will come to herald new
songs? Singers of the nueva canción, who
remained, departed or returned, but who
will never be silenced: what new movement
shall we add to the sonata? Or, to choose an
example nearer home, what new stanza
shall we add to the milonga? M
DANIEL VIGLIETTI, Uruguayan composer and
poet, is a leading figure in Latin American music
who abandoned a career as a classical guitarist
in order to write and perform popular songs. A
journalist and a researcher into folk music, he
was imprisoned in his country because of his
songs in 1972, and freed after an international
campaign on his behalf sponsored by such per¬
sonalities as Miguel Angel Asturias, Jean-Paul
Sartre and Mikis Theodorakis. Exiled in 1973, he
settled in France, and returned to Uruguay in
1984 where he was greeted by an immense
crowd of fans and sympathizers. His biography
(by Mario Benedetti) accompanied by an anthol¬
ogy of his songs, was published in French in
1974 under the title Chansons pour Notre Améri¬
que.
