Rabindranath Tagore with a group of
students in the school he founded at
Santiniketan in 1901.
Photo © Rabindra-Sadana, Vlsva Bharati



of a man
by Satyajit Ray
WITH a wordly wisdom unusual in a
poet but characteristic of the
Tagores, Rabindranath set out in
a practical way to improve the lot of the
poor peasants of his estates. But his own
gain from this intimate contact with the
fundamental aspects of life and nature, and
the influence of this contact on his own life
and work, are beyond measure.
Living mostly in his boat and watching
life through the window, a whole new world
of sights and sounds and feelings opened up
before him. It was a world in which the
moods of people and the moods of nature
were inextricably interwoven. The people
found room in a succession of great short
stories, and nature, in an outpouring of
exquisite songs and poems. Dominant was
the mood of the rains, exultant and terrible.
Rabindranath Tagore received the Nobel
Prize in 1913, and a knighthood in 1915,
while war was raging in Europe. Touring
the United States and Japan in 1916, the
poet made eloquent appeals for peace. He
felt that world peace could be achieved only
through intellectual co-operation between
nations. He said, "The call has come to
every individual in the present age to pre¬
pare himself for the dawn of a new era,
when man shall discover his soul in the
spiritual unity of all human beings."
While peace had been restored in
Europe, in India there was unrest. The
occasion was the Rowlatt Bill, designed to
suppress all political movements. It dashed
India's hopes of gaining the self-govern¬
ment that the British rulers had kept prom¬
ising through the war years.
Dominating the Indian political scene at
this time was Gandhi. As a protest against
the Rowlatt Bill, Gandhi launched a move¬
ment of passive resistance. But the masses
misinterpreted the movement and, follow¬
ing a rumour of Gandhi's arrest, violence
broke out in many parts of the country.
In the Punjab, martial law was declared.
In charge of the troops at Amritsar was
Brigadier General Dyer. On the first day of
the month of Vaisakh, a crowd gathered in
Jallianwallabagh, as it had done every other
year. It was a peaceful crowd . But Dyer was
taking no chances. Machine guns rattled.
Rabindranath wrote to the Viceroy, Lord
Chelmsford, and the letter was published in
the newspapers. Condemning the Govern¬
ment for the killing at Jallianwallabagh, he
concluded: "And I for my part wish to
stand, shorn of all special distinctions, by
the side of my countrymen who for their
so-called insignificance are liable to suffer
degradation not fit for human beings. And
these are the reasons which have painfully
compelled me to ask your Excellency to
relieve me of my title of knighthood."
The next ten years of Rabindranath's life
were filled with ceaseless activity. The ne¬
cessity to collect funds for his university
took him to all parts of the world, and the
West as much as the East welcomed him
with open arms.
Wherever he went, he spread the mes¬
sage of peace and stressed the importance
of intellectual co-operation between
nations. He said: "We ought to know that
isolation of life and culture is not a thing of
which any nation can be proud. In the hu¬
man world, giving is exchanging, it is not
one-sided."
On 7 May 1941 , Rabindranath was eighty
years old. For the occasion, he had com¬
posed a message his last message to the
world which concerned itself with the
state of so-called modern civilization, a civi¬
lization that was being shaken to its very
roots by barbaric wars of aggression:
"I had at one time believed that the
springs of civilization could issue out of the
heart of Europe. But today, when I am
about to leave the world, that faith has
deserted me. I look around and see the
crumbling ruins of a proud civilization
strewn like a vast heap of futility. And yet, I
shall not commit the previous sin of losing
faith in man. I shall await for the day when
the holocaust will end and the air will be
rendered clean with the spirit of service and
sacrifice. Perhaps that dawn will come from
this horizon, from the East, where the sun
rises. On that day will unvanquished man
retrench his path of conquest, surmounting
all barriers, to win back his lost human
heritage."
December 1961
To commemorate the centenary of the birth of Rabin¬
dranath Tagore, the Indian Government asked one of
the country's leading film directors, Satyajit Ray, to
produce a documentary film on the poet. In December
1961 the Unesco Courier reproduced the text of Ray's
commentary, from which these extracts are taken.
63
