Treasures of Mongolia
by Namsraïn Ser-Odjav
30

Granite tortoise forms part of the remains
of Karakorum, the ancient capital of the
Mongol ruler Ogdal, son of Genghis Khan.
The ruins lie on the right bank of the Orhon
river at the foot of the Khangal mountains.
The tortoise once formed the base of a
stela engraved with ancient texts. Stones
on its back are offerings made in accord¬
ance with a still current tradition known as
obo In Mongolian.
The soyombo Ideogram (left) which fea¬
tures on the national flag of the Mongolian
People's Republic is regarded by Mongo¬
lians as their national emblem of liberty
and independence. Each sign takes its
meaning from ancient symbolism. For in¬
stance, the fire-sign situated above a sun
and a quarter moon (legendary father and
mother, respectively, of the Mongolian
people) here signifies: "May the Mongo¬
lian people always live and prosper!"
IN the late nineteenth century, the world
scientific community learned of an ex¬
traordinary archaeological discovery in
the valley of the upper Orhon Gol in Cen¬
tral Asia. Where this river emerges from
deep gorges and flows in a wide curve into
the plain, the ruins of a vast city had been
discovered, apparently watched over by a
giant stone tortoise, symbol of eternity.
This was the famous Karakorum, capital
of the Mongol Empire founded in the thir¬
teenth century by Genghis Khan. It was
situated on the right bank of the river, 400
kilometres south-west of Ulaanbaatar, the
present capital of Mongolia, in an area
which was suitable for both crops and live¬
stock and which possessed very old-estab¬
lished mining deposits, the Dalakyn-tal
an area which, indeed, had been the cradle
of many Central Asian civilizations. The
strange inscriptions found on the statues
and stone stelae discovered in the city were
later attributed to the "Blue Turks"; many
writings from the period between the sixth
and the eighth centuries describe this peo¬
ple's glory and its tragic destiny.
Karakorum was a settlement of several
thousand inhabitants. Its agriculture and
crafts were highly developed, trade
flourished, and it boasted a sophisticated
intellectual community. Its foundation has
been traced back to 1220, when Genghis
Khan's headquarters were transferred to
the banks of the Orhon Gol, probably near
Mount Melekhit, the "Tortoise Mountain".
On the heights which today overlook the
village of Kharkorim, one can see the im¬
posing granite tortoise which probably gave
the site its name.
AH around this stronghold, craftworkers'
and traders' quarters and other houses were
graudally built, until, by about 1230, the
area had taken on the appearance of a town.
Subsequently, in order to house the ad¬
ministration that was his gift to the Empire
and to receive ambassadors with all due
ceremony, the great Khan Ogödei, third
son of Genghis Khan, ordered major con¬
struction work to be carried out.
In the various foreign sources which men¬
tion it, the capital of Genghis Khan's im¬
mediate successors is described first as a
sort of mysterious reservoir from which
wave upon wave of savage conquering
hordes come pouring out; later it is seen as
the economic, political and cultural centre
of the united Mongol tribes in the thirteenth
century; and, ultimately, as an archaeolo¬
gical cemetery. But the real Karakorum was
quite different.
An envoy from King Louis IX of France,
the monk William of Rubrouck, who was
received in 1256 by Möngke Khan, has left
us a detailed description of the community.
Twelve different religions coexisted in
Karakorum, where mosques, Buddhist
monasteries and a Christian church clus¬
tered cheek by jowl. The earth rampart
which surrounded the city had four gates,
each with its own market.
The palace of Ogödei Khan was a master¬
piece of the architecture of the period. The
two-storey building contained a vast central
reception hall, supported by sixty-four col¬
umns and tastefully appointed; its walls
were adorned with paintings and the floor
was of green glazed tiles. All the roofs,
made of green and red tiles, had orna¬
mentation in relief. This love of ornament
and the inventive use of a few decorative
motifs, characteristic of the architecture of
the time, gave this palace a festive air.
The archaeological excavations carried
out in recent years in Karakorum add to the
written records on a number of points. The
palace and the other major constructions
were built of sun-dried bricks, some of
which still bear the trade-mark of the manu¬
facturer, and the houses could be warmed
by a system of underfloor heating. The aris¬
tocratic areas extended to north and south
along the Orhon river. The craftworkers'
and traders' quarters and the administrative
districts that have come to light have
yielded rich finds: fragments of porcelain
and glazed pottery, farming implements,
craftworkers' tools, cast iron hubs of
wheels, domestic utensils and all sorts of
ornaments in gold, silver and bronze. Coins
31

^^Ê
were particularly numerous, of both Mon¬
gol and foreign minting.
In 1380, Karakorum was destroyed. But
approximately two centuries later, on the
same site, there arose the yurt of Avtai
Khan, founder of the Erdeni Dzu Monas¬
tery. The great circular platform which
formed its base is still visible today.
The Erdeni Dzu architectural complex is
an outstanding example of Mongol
architecture, and its establishment by the
Khalkha Mongol chief Avtaï Khan can be
traced precisely to the year 1586. Its layout
was quadrangular, and in the seventeenth
century an unusual precinct was added,
consisting of 108 small buildings in the
shape of pagodas, the soubourgan. On each
of these is inscribed the name of the person
to whom it is dedicated. Erdeni Dzu con¬
tains other remarkable monuments, either
restored or under restoration, in particular
the Labrang, a palace, and three large tem¬
ples. These are set side by side on an earth
terrace raised for that purpose, and form a
harmonious whole, despite certain dissimi¬
larities: the temple in the centre has two
storeys, whereas those on either side have
only one, and each has a double pitched
roof.
The monastery of Erdeni Dzu is a focal
point in the history and culture of the Mon¬
gol people. Besides paintings, ornaments
and embroideries dating from the fifteenth
to the seventeenth centuries, it houses a
whole library of rare manuscripts and
wood-block printed editions. Here, too, are
preserved the works of the seventeenth-
century painter and sculptor Zanabazar,
great illustrator of the Buddhist canon and
one of the first Mongol artists to have
attained universal stature. In his day there
was an extraordinary flowering of the arts
and culture in Mongolia.
One of the most remarkable monuments
of the Orhon valley is the funerary complex
of the Turkish chiefs Köl and Bilge Kagan.
Besides the tombs, it contained tall com¬
memorative stelae with runic inscriptions
and a great many stone statues. More than
ten centuries ago, the roofs of the sacrificial
temple collapsed, and gradually the clay soil
formed a protective shell over the ruins. An
avenue lined with sculptures representing
princes and great army chiefs used to form
an approach to the temple from the east.
Apart from two grey marble statues, head¬
less but still virtually intact, this ceremonial
guard had been reduced to a shapeless mass
of mbble.
A section of marble jutting out of the
ground was the sole clue to the whereabouts
of the great stone tortoise. The stela erected
on its back was covered with ancient, angu¬
lar Turkish characters, inscribed in regular
Unes. More than two centuries of history of
the nomadic tribes of Central Asia were
contained in that narrow compass. These
CONTINUED PAGE 37
32
-^
statue of a warrior-guardian on the site of
a cemetery for Turkic chiefs (7th-8th cen¬
tury) In the Orhon valley. Stones In front of
the effigy of the valiant warrior are known
as ba\aba\ and Indicate the numlier ofene¬
mies he had vanquished.

The temple of Labrang (above) ¡s situated
In the vast precinct of the Erdenl-Dzu
monastery, a monument of major
architectural and cultural importance lo¬
cated some 400 km west of Ulaanbaatar,
the Mongolian capitaL The building is a
massive Tibetan-style edifice with a flat
roof, trapezoidal windows and walls
whose exterior face inclines slightly In¬
wards. Dating from 1780, it was the resi¬
dence of the Lama and a place of worship.
Stela, (left) which once stood on the back
of a sculpture of a tortoise at Karakorum,
Is carved with inscriptions in ancient Tur¬
kic letters which relate episodes from the
history of the nomad tribes of CentralAsia.
One passage declares: "Listen until the
end to what I say to you here, you who
come after me. O Turkic people! May the
Turkic people never perish, may they be a
people forever!"
33

Since 1980 Unesco and the
Mongolian Government have
t>een carrying out restoration
work on the monastery of
Amartjayasgalam, which
stands 2,000 metres above
sea level, 300 km north of
Ulaanbaatar. The roofs are
being covered with varnished
tiles manufactured using the
same techniques as those
with which the original tiles
were made. The monastery
consists of some 30 buildings.
PtKJto © CorrtHlle Jest, Pans


The traditional dwelling of the Turkic and
Mongolian nomad herdsmen of central
Asia, the yurt is a collapsible circular tent
In which a wooden latticed structure Is
covered with felt. In thepast massive royal
yurts were transported from place to place
on ox-drawn platforms. In the 13th cen¬
tury, William of Rubrouck claimed to have
seen a yurt drawn by 22 oxen. Although
such great mobile dwellings have dis¬
appeared today, the yurt Itself (Rül In Tur¬
kish; gher In Mongolian) Is still a striking
feature of the Mongolian landscape.
Above, a 13th-century scene as depicted
by an artist In the 19th century.
Photo taken (rom Art de la Mongolie de l'Antiquité au Délxit du
20e Siècle by Niam Ossorine and Tsulten, Plastic Arts. Moscow,
1984

77ie 18th-century drawing below depicts
the entrance of thepalace of Karakorum as
It appeared In the 13th century, when It
was adorned with a magnificent silver tree
wrought by a French craftsman. In his
Travels In the Mongol Empire (1253-1255),
the monk William of Rubrouck, envoy of
the French King Louis IX to Möngke Khan,
left a detailed description of this extraor¬
dinary tree, "at the roots of which are 4
silver lions, each vomiting white mare's
milk. At the top, one of the four ducts pours
forth wine; another caracomos, clarified
mare's milk; another bal, a drink made
from honey; and another rice-beer. As a
receptacle for each drink a silver bowl is
placed at the foot of the tree. At the top of
tfie tree he has made an angel holding a
trumpet, and beneath the tree a vault
where a man can hide."
Photo taken horn Art de la Mongolie de l'Antiquité au OétMt du
20e Siècle by Niam Ossorine and Tsulten, Plastic Arts publishing
house, Moscow, 1964
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 32
tombs, then, are outstanding examples of
the art and culture of the Turks of the
Mongol steppe, but they are also an essen¬
tial Hnk in our knowledge of the past.
The sculpted stone warriors are power¬
fully original works of art. They are usually
represented in a traditional upright pose,
holding a chaUce in the right hand. Their
costumes, hairstyles, earrings and belts, de¬
corated with a variety of plaques, to which
their weapons are attached, are depicted
with great precision. The faces have slant¬
ing eyes set very close together, a long nose
and a small mouth with a moustache. But
the realism of this model is combined with
considerable imagination in the invention
of individual features. These statues stood
as silent witnesses to the ceremonies and
funeral rites which took place in the monu¬
ments raised in their honour, facing east. In
front of the statue of the valiant warrior was
set up a row of rough stones, balbals, which
indicated the number of enemies he had
killed.
In the Orhon valley there are also an
incalculable number of ancient rock draw¬
ings: animals, people, signs and decorative
patterns of various kinds. When we begin to
decipher these scriptures in stones, a whole
world starts once again to stir into life and
meaning. For a moment we feel the joy and
the fear aroused at night, before the fire, by
the sacred ceremonies. In the rock forma¬
tions of the steppe, worn away by wind and
rain, we see the faces of divinities or terrify¬
ing idols, emerging as they were seen or
imagined by the artists of old and by those
of their tribe.
Horses, the valiant steeds of the steppe,
were held in high esteem. They appear in
complex compositions, often with necks
outstretched, caught in full gallop. Some¬
times the horse is bestridden by a horse¬
man, drawing his bow or reaching out an
arm. The oven-hot air makes the drawings
shimmer and seems to give them a Hfe of
their own, adding to their evocative power.
The stag is another animal often portrayed.
It was apparently an object of worship and
an important factor in the economy of these
tribes.
This rapid survey of the Mongol cultural
heritage is necessarily incomplete. And the
Orhon valley undoubtedly still holds count¬
less hidden riches. Such a fine historical site
deserves a place among the treasures of the
world cultural heritage. For here, on the
banks of the Orhon, dwelt the people who,
for twenty centuries, set the course of his¬
tory not only in Central Asia but in Asia
Minor and Western Europe by mapping out
this vast area where flourished what is
commonly known as the "Empire of the
Steppe".
NAMSRAÏN SER-ODJAV is head of the ar¬
chaeology department at the Institute of History
of the Academy of Sciences of the Mongolian
People's Republic, a member of the Permanent
Council of the International Union of Prehistoric
andProtohistoric Sciences, andprincipalscienti¬
fic adviser to the Mongolian National Commis¬
sion for the Study of Central Asian Civilizations.
He has participated in a collective work on the
history of the cultures of Central Asia currently
being prepared by Unesco.
37
