Inside the Earth
The Earth's interior has a layered struc¬
ture. The outermost layer is the crust;
beneath this is the mantle; and in the
centre is the core. Temperatures and
pressures inside the Earth are very
high at the core the temperature is
thought to be about 3,500 degrees Cen¬
tigrade and the pressure nearly 3,750
tonnes per square centimetre.
The Crust: In relation to the Earth as a whole,
the crust is as thin as a postage stamp stuck
on a football. It consists of a thin skin of rock
which is less dense than the underlying man¬
tle from which it has been derived by complex
processes over many millions of years. There
are two kinds of crust: continental crust,
which makes up the continents, and oceanic
crust, which forms the ocean floors. Con¬
tinental crust is lighter In weight and much
thicker than oceanic crust. It is also very
much olderparts of the continental crust
are over 3,500 million years old, whereas
oceanic crust is nowhere more than 200 mil¬
lion years old.
The Mohoroviclc Discontinuity: The sharp
boundary that marks the junction between
the crust and the mantle.
The Asthenosphere:Th\s Is a hotter, weaker,
partly molten section of the top of the upper
mantle with a consistency like thick porridge.
It Is of great Importance because it enables
the rigid plates of the crust above to move
about.
The Upper Mantle: scientists believe that the
upper mantle consists of dense, dark-col¬
oured rocks, probably peridotite and perhaps
also dunite and ecloglte, composed of Iron
and magnesium-rich silicate minerals. Frag¬
ments of these rocks are found In volcanoes
fed by magma (molten rock) that originates In
the mantle.
The Transition Zone: In this region, where the
upper mantle grades into the lower mantle,
higher pressures force the minerals to
change their structure.
The Lower Mantle: The minerals composing
the lower mantle are probably simple oxides
with very compact structures produced by
high pressures.
The Core: Almost twice as dense as the man¬
tle, the core is probably composed of Iron
with some dissolved sulphur and silicon. The
Earth's magnetic field is generated In the
outer core, which Is molten. The Inner core is
thought to be solid.
