Our place in the Solar System
Sun
A nuclear furnace that converts hydrogen
into helium, releasing an enormous amount
of energy. Central star of the Solar System,
making up 99 per cent of its mass. Mean
surface temperature: 5,500 degrees Centi¬
grade. Core temperature: 17 million degrees
Centigrade. Diameter: 1.39 million
kilometres. Distance from Earth: 150 million
kilometres.
Mercury
Dense, probably partly metallic. May have a
thin atmosphere. Average midday temper¬
ature: 350 degrees Centigrade. Diameter:
4,840 kilometres. Distance from Sun: 57.9
million kilometres.
Venus
Similar in composition to Earth. Shrouded in
a dense atmosphere of carbon dioxide. Sur¬
face temperature: 300 degrees Centigrade.
Diameter: 12,104 kilometres. Distance from
Sun: 108.2 million kilometres.
Earth
Silicate layers surround dense metallic core.
Water, and an atmosphere of nitrogen and
oxygen, support life. Surface temperature:
Between 60 degrees Centigrade and -90
degrees Centigrade. Diameter: 12,756
kilometres. Distance from Sun: 150 million
kilometres.
Mars
Surface has Moon-like craters but also such
Earth-like features as canyons and volca¬
noes. Atmosphere is carbon dioxide with a
little nitrogen and water. No evidence of life.
Surface temperature: (?) 20 degrees Centig¬
rade at Equator. Diameter: 6,760 kilometres.
Distance from Sun: 227.9 million kilometres.
Asteroids
Small bodies revolving in paths between
Mars and Jupiter. Mostly less than one
kilometre across. Mean distance from Sun:
414.4 million kilometres.
Jupiter
Giant frozen planet enveloped in a thick
atmosphere of hydrogen and helium. Strong
energy source. Diameter: 142,700 kilometres.
Distance from Sun: 778.3 million kilometres.
Saturn
Least dense of planets. Mainly hydrogen and
helium. Orbited by ice-covered fragments
(rings). Diameter: 120,800 kilometres. Dis¬
tance from Sun: 1,427 million kilometres.
Uranus
Probably ice with some solid ammonia, hyd¬
rogen and helium. Owes its green appear¬
ance to a methane-rich atmosphere. Di¬
ameter: 47,600 kilometres. Distance from
Sun: 2,869 million kilometres.
Neptune
Probably frozen methane, water and ammo¬
nia. Diameter: 44,400 kilometres. Distance
from Sun: 4,498 million kilometres.
Pluto
Most distant planet yet discovered. Composi¬
tion unknown. Diameter: (?) 3,000 kilometres.
Distance from Sun: 5,900 million kilometres.
The Moon
Its composition shows small but significant
differences from that of Earth. Analysis of
Moon rocks reveals a far greater proportion
of titanium, chromium and zirconium than is
found in the Earth's crust, suggesting that
the Moon formed separately probably by an
agglomeration of pre-existing solid particles.
The surface is marked by countless craters
formed by falling meteorites. Bright areas
(uplands) represent primeval crust. Dark
areas are basins formed 3,600 million years
ago by impact and flooded by lava eruptions.
Meteorites
Stony and metallic debris, seared by heat,
that falls to the Earth from outer space. They
are probably fragments of colliding aster¬
oids. They range in composition from Iron-
magnesium silicate rock to nickel-iron. They
have a maximum age about the same as that
of the Earth.
A speck in space
The Earth and the Solar System are ex¬
tremely small in relation to distances in
space. These are measured in light-
years one light-year is the distance light
travels in one year about 10 million mil¬
lion kilometres.
The nearest of the 100,000 million stars in
our Galaxy is four light-years away, and
the Galaxy itself is 80,000 light-years
across. Yet it is only one of millions of
galaxies in the Universe.
The Solar System consists of the Sun and
the material revolving around it planets,
moons, asteroids, comets, meteorites,
dust and gas. Most of this material circles
the Sun in the same direction and in the
same plane.
o
©
Sun Mercury Venus Earth Mars Asteroids Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto
