Time and tide
Tides, the periodical rise and fall of the waters of the ocean, are due
to the gravitational pull of the moon and, to a lesser extent, of the
sun. At most seaside places there are two tides a day, the average
time interval between two successive high waters being twelve
hours and twenty-five minutes.
When the moon is directly over any point in the ocean, it pulls the
water towards it causing a "doming up" of water under the moon.
On the side of the earth opposite to this point, however, the
centrifugal force generated by the rotation of the earth will exceed
the attractive pull of the moon, causing the water of the ocean to
tend to dome outwards. Thus high tides will occur at the same time
on opposite sides of the earth, rather than a high tide on one side
and a low tide on the other.
Low tides occur at points ninety degrees away because water is
flowing away from these areas towards the areas of high tides. In
other words, there is a horizontal flow from every point of the ocean
towards the points directly under or directly opposite the moon.
The gravitational pull of the sun, which is less than half that of the
moon, somewhat complicates matters. When there is a new moon,
the moon is situated between the earth and the sun so the
attraction of the sun and the moon reinforce each other. Two weeks
later, when the moon is full, it has moved round to the opposite side
of the earth to the sun so that the earth is between them and once
again they are pulling on the ocean, this time in opposite directions
but along the same axis. At these times the earth experiences its
highest tides, commonly known as spring tides.
At the quarters of the moon, when the sun and the moon are at
right angles to each other in relation to the earth, their respective
gravitational pulls tend partly to counteract each other. At these
times the tides, commonly called neap tides, are neither so high
nor so low.
The moon travels in an elliptical orbit in relation to the equator,
swinging back and forth over the northern and southern hemi¬
spheres. In some parts of the earth this inclination of the moon's
orbit, coupled with the fact that the axis of the earth is tilted in
relation to its orbit round the sun, produces diurnal tides (tides
occurring at intervals of twenty-four hours and fifty minutes) rather
than the semi-diurnal tides (tides occurring at intervals of twelve
hours and twenty-five minutes) described above. Semidiurnal tides
predominate in the Atlantic, whereas diurnal tides are found on the
coasts of Alaska, the Philippines and China.
At the times of new and full moon, the
earth, the moon and the sun are in line and
reinforce each other's pull on the oceans
on earth, causing the spring tides the
highest and the lowest tides of the lunar
month.
%
-c
"J>-* I.'
Spring Tides
During the first and last quarters of the
moon, the sun and the moon pull at right
angles to each other, causing the neap or
weak tides.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 6
