Charting the oceanfloor
by Dale Krause
and Jacques Richardson
Portuguese nautical chart of the Atlantic
Ocean drawn on parchment by Pascoal
Roiz in 1633.
T
| HE tale of Aeneas, legendary hero
of ancient Greece and Rome, is
one of hazardous voyages back
and forth across the Mediterranean Sea,
between the Eurasian land-mass and
Africa. In his turbulent wanderings from
Troy to Carthage to Latium (Italy),
Aeneas is constantly in peril from the
hidden dangers of travelling over deep
waters. He loses his father, Anchises, as a
result of intemperate weather inevitably
attributed to the mystery of the ocean's
depths. The sea is thus an enigmatic en¬
vironment, threatening and incompre¬
hensible.
And so it remained until the great
marine explorations of the fifteenth to
nineteenth centuries. Only relatively re¬
cently have we begun to understand,
measure, evaluate and demystify what
lies in the salty deep of the world ocean.
We now know that although our planet
is made up essentially of soil, rock and
sand (in either solid or molten form),
r-
*
<
©( 4
-V
v.
»j£
I fyy-
E '-**.
*
i
k¿ 4
*
Ct-
11

The earliest Surviving European Sea Chart, Photo taken tram The Drama of the Oceans © Abrams,
fne Carta Pisana (above) depicts the entire NewYork
Mediterranean. It is hand drawn on a
sheepskin and dates from about 1275.
Peoples with no tradition of the written
word used ingenious methods of pro¬
ducing navigation charts and maps.
Drawings show (above left) a Micronesian
navigation "chart" consisting of a lattice¬
work of sticks showing the relative posi¬
tions of the islands of the Marshall Islands
group, and (above right) an Eskimo "map"
carved from wood recovered from the sea.
Echo-sounders are used to chart the topo¬
graphy of the ocean floor. Left, a marine
scientist at work at an echo-sounder re¬
cording unit aboard the British research
ship Discovery.
12

nearly 71 per cent of its surface is covered
by the sea. Of the remaining 29 per cent
of terrestrial or land formations, one-fifth
of all the continents are submerged as
"continental shelves". It may not seem
significant at first glance that 20 per cent
of the continents are under water, but this
represents a territorial land-mass equal to
that of Africa. This was not understood
by the ocean's first users (prehistoric man
and some of our less remote ancestors),
who perceived a sheet of water as a join¬
ing or interruption of two or more pieces
of land unaffected by what lay beneath.
As man's activities in fishing, sailing
and navigation, transport and the move¬
ment of navies became more far-ranging
and complex, it became necessary to
learn more about what lay beneath the
water. The explorations of Phoenician,
Indian, Chinese and Arab sailors pro¬
duced the first simple maps of the ocean.
The oldest existing chart of the sea, in the
form of a clay tablet, dates from the
Babylonian period of 4,500 years ago.
The Micronesians, using twigs and shells,
produced charts of the Pacific Ocean.
Gradually, our "road maps" of the sea,
or sailing charts, became more detailed
and complicated. Mariners recorded not
only depths, but also the locations of
obstacles such as large rocks, shoals and
reefs. They noted local and regional cur¬
rents, seasonal temperatures and salt
content. They compiled atlases of the
shapes of coastlines, islands, harbours,
river estuaries and deltas, beaches and
coastal vegetation, as well as catalogues
of fish and other inhabitants of salt water.
And when the first international meeting
of hydrographers (mappers of the sea)
was held in Belgium in 1853 to try to
understand the effects of the ocean and
weather on one another, it gave birth to
the new science of oceanography.
But it was not until the undersea man¬
oeuvres of navies during the principal
wars of the twentieth century that curios¬
ity and need drove governments, pe¬
troleum and mineral explorers, and uni¬
versities to begin a systematic study of the
shape and substance of what lies under
the ocean's waves. Thus blossomed the
disciplines of marine geology and
bathymetry (measuring ocean depths) to
provide the new knowledge that is indis¬
pensable if we are to use the sea intel¬
ligently and preserve its resources as far
as possible for future generations.
The sea bed that was once thought to
be flat is, we know now, anything but an
endless plain. The continental slopes that
drop gently from the continental shelves
are marked nearly everywhere by sub¬
marine canyons, large troughs that have
been eroded by dense currents of com¬
bined sea water and mud; these form as
earth-slides at the tops of the canyons and
wear away courses or paths much as sand¬
paper smooths down wood. Submarine
earthquakes, modern volcanoes and
eruptions of red-hot magma (lava) con-
Main types of minerals on the sea floor
Type of Materials Geological
deposit or elements setting
Construction Pebbles, quartz Coast and shelf
materials and carbonate
sand, shells
Placer Iron Coast and nearshore
deposits Gold
(sand Platinum
and gravel Tin
containing Diamonds
heavy Rare earth
metals) elements
Zirconium
Titanium
and others
Hydrocarbons Petroleum Mainly passive
Gas continental margins
and certain basins
Hydrothermal ore Iron Fracture zones,
deposits Manganese spreading centres,
Copper certain basins
Zinc
Lead
Silver
and others
Manganese Manganese Deep sea
nodules Iron
Cobalt
Nickel
Titanium
Molybdenum
and others
(4,000 metres)
Phosphorites Phosphorus Coastal (locally
Uranium continuation of
Rare earth land resources)
elements and nearshore:
and others submarine plateaux
After P. Rothe, "Marine Geology: Mineral Resources of the Sea",
Impact of Science on Society. Nos. 3 / 4, 1983
stantly shift the contours of the sea bed
along the central ridges of the ocean
basins.
Research carried out between the
1930s and the 1950s in the Pacific Ocean
basin revealed hundreds of undersea
mountains (called seamounts), mostly
old volcanoes, measuring 3,000 metres or
more in altitude above the floor of the
sea. Some of these are shaped like cones
with their topmost peaks missing; they
are called guyots or tablemounts. These
flat-topped ancient volcanic summits
have had their tips worn away over time
by wave action and they may rise to with¬
in 100 to 1 ,600 metres of the surface of the
ocean. During the Cretaceous period
(roughly 100 million years ago) they be¬
came inhabited by organisms similar to
those that built shallow-water reefs or
masses of coral in the Pacific, Carib¬
bean and other oceans. The guyots, and
seamounts in general, have sunk as the
earth's crust beneath them has cooled.
Techniques used to measure depth be¬
gan with "sounding" using a fibre or
wire cable marked periodically with
metallic or other weights, dipped and
raised continuously to estimate the sur¬
face-to-bottom distance. The method is
unreliable because of the irregularity of
the sea floor, movement of the ship and
currents running beneath the surface of
the ocean.
Echo-sounding and sonar, invented to
meet naval needs during the two World
Wars, use a pulse or beam sent mechani¬
cally or electronically from a vessel to the
bed of the sea, where it is reflected and
then recaptured by the emitting vessel.
The total time elapsed during the pulse's
round trip is translated into distance, giv¬
ing a "fix" on the target of the sound
signal. A chart is produced by this process
so that a printed memory or record can be
kept of the depths along the course fol-^
13

A world map
of the sea
depths
The fifth edition of GEBCO (General
Bathymétrie Chart of the Oceans) con¬
sists of nineteen sheets. Sixteen of the
charts cover the world from 72 degrees
north latitude (at the northern tip of Nor¬
way) to 72 degrees south latitude (the
Bellingshausen Sea of Antarctica), with
a scale of 1:10 million at the equator.
There are two polar sheets, or polar
stereographic projections, of scale 1:6
million at 75 degrees latitude, and a
world sheet reducing all the eighteen
other sheets printed on the scale of 1 :35
million. There is a guidebook for all
these charts.
National hydrographie offices in
eighteen Member States of the Interna¬
tional Hydrographie Organization are
responsible for upkeep of the basic
data, a set of sixty-five "master sound¬
ing sheets". The Intergovernmental
Océanographie Commission at Unesco,
together with three major non-gov¬
ernmental scientific bodies as well as
the French Institut Géographique
National and the Scott Polar Research
Institute in Cambridge, are charged with
providing the scientific details to be en¬
tered on the GEBCO charts.
Interested teachers, researchers,
fisheries specialists and others may
order the GEBCO series, boxed and
accompanied by a supporting descrip¬
tive volume, at a cost of US $120 from:
Hydrographie Chart Distribution Office,
Department of Fisheries and Oceans,
1675 Russell Road (Box 8080), Ottawa
K1G3H6, Canada.
Part of the eastern Pacific Ocean sea floor
and of the west coast ofSouth America are
depicted on the portion of the fifth edition
of the General Bathymétrie Chart of the
Oceans (GEBCO), reproduced here in
black and white. The sea floor In this re¬
gion is about 4,500 metres deep and is
moving slowly towards South America ata
rate of almost 9 centimetres a year. The
7,000-metre-deep Peru-Chile Trench is for¬
med at the margin of the continent, where
the sea floorplunges down into the interior
of the earth and slowly melts. GEBCO was
prepared by marine scientists from many
countries and was published by Canada.
The work was carried out under the aus¬
pices of Unesco's Intergovernmental
Océanographie Commission (IOC) and the
International Hydrographie Organization.
14
ECUADOR COLOMBIA
ÍT?
lowed by a vessel. Shortcomings of this
method include errors in data resulting
from under-sea obstacles and variations
in the speed of sound through water
(caused by differing salinity, tempera¬
tures and depth).
The systematic compilation of depth
charts, called the General Bathymétrie
Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO), dates
from the time, early in this century, when
Prince Albert I of Monaco realized that
the best possible maps of any surface,
undersea as well as on land, are a critical
tool in good management of the re¬
sources and environment of the sea. Pub¬
lishing GEBCO the first time was fairly
easy: in 1903 knowledge was so scanty
that the job took only seven months to
complete. As the next three editions were
researched and compiled, oceano-
graphers became aware of massive relief
features found on the sea floor, for exam¬
ple, the spine-like mid-ocean ridges of
the Atlantic and the Pacific. They did not
understand that geological processes
gave rise to, then changed, these large-
scale features.
The current (fifth) edition of GEBCO
has been compiled under the aegis of the
Unesco-based Intergovernmental
Océanographie Commission and of the
International Hydrographie Organiza¬
tion, and was made possible by new re¬
search in geology and geophysics that has
enabled scientists everywhere to estimate
trends in the shape and materials forming
the sea bed. The huge amount of depth
data, collected for the most part since the
1950s, has been integrated into the fifth
edition of GEBCO. This was published in
1982 by the Canadian Hydrographie Ser¬
vice after seven years of exhaustive com¬
pilation compared to the seven months
required for the first edition eighty-three
years ago.
The latest edition of GEBCO, like its
earlier versions, is both a major improve¬
ment over the previous charts and a signi¬
ficant contribution to scientific know¬
ledge; it is a scientific synthesis of all
océanographie and hydrographie inves¬
tigations stretching over more than a cen¬
tury. To a geologist, poring over GEBCO
is like reading an exciting book on the
history of ocean basins and continental |
15

margins and on the geological processes
that formed them.
GEBCO was drawn up by geological
oceanographers from millions of depths
soundings. Although this number seems
large, it must be remembered that the
ocean has a total area of some 360 million
square kilometres. Thus the number of
soundings is generally insufficient to por¬
tray accurately the bathymetry of the
ocean floor by using a purely geometrical
joining up of depth points. So the science
of geomorphology is used to interpret
scattered data, combined with some de¬
tailed studies, in order to obtain reliable
bathymétrie contours at the GEBCO
map scale. Depth soundings near conti¬
nents are usually more numerous.
The basic data for GEBCO were
gathered by ships using single-beam
echo-sounders. In recent years, a new
sounder, using fifteen beams side by side,
has come increasingly into civil use as a
scientific instrument. This "swath-sound¬
er" uses a computer to integrate sound¬
ings and produces a detailed contoured
strip-chart of the deep sea floor that is a
few kilometres wide.
The high quality of GEBCO's fifth edi¬
tion can be judged from a detailed swath-
sounding record made by the Federal
Republic of Germany's research vessel
Polarstern in the Atlantic Ocean between
Europe and South America late in 1984.
Only two differences were found: an un¬
discovered seamount off Brazil, and a
correction to the measurements of a sub¬
marine canyon off southern Argentina.
At the next stage above purely naviga¬
tional charts, bathymétrie maps like
GEBCO and its larger-scale cousins
(such as the Bathymétrie Chart of the
Mediterranean Sea) are the basic portraits
of the sea floor for both general and
geological uses. There are also special¬
ized charts of the sea bed produced from
geological and geophysical data showing
sediment and rocks, magnetic and gravity
fields, sediment thickness and so on.
Multi-beam echo-sounders can be turned
to "look sideways" in order to produce
shaded images of the sea floor; these
resemble photographs.
Information for specialists can be
synthesized into geological charts, as has
been done in the ocean sheets of the
Geological Atlas of the World, a twenty-
two-sheet array produced by Unesco and
the International Commission for the
Geological Atlas of the World (also com¬
piled by geologists from all over the
world).
Since the early 1970s, more and more
nations have become vitally interested in
the ocean and its resources a curiosity
stimulated by the eight years of intensive
negotiation to draft, by 1982, a Conven¬
tion on the Law of the Sea.
Over many years, carelessness and
mismanagement have led to depletion of
some species of fish and other seafood in
waters that had been rich and productive.
The search for petroleum under the seas
and its production took explorers far
along the continental shelves, virtually
everywhere. While the new energy
sources are welcome, the ensuing pollu¬
tion problems, including oil spills peri¬
lous to flora and fauna, are much less so.
A variety of useful metals and other
minerals are now within our reach and
some nations consider many of these eco¬
nomically significant for the future and
are planning their extraction from the sea
bed. Good bathymétrie charts and geolo¬
gical maps are essential tools for such
study, exploitation and conservation of
the natural resources of the ocean. H
DALE KRAUSE has been head of Unesco's
Division of Marine Sciences since 1973. A spe¬
cialist in marine geology and tectonics, he has
led océanographie expeditions in the Pacific and
Atlantic oceans.
JACQUES RICHARDSON was head of Un-
esco's Science and Society Section from 1972 to
1985. He edited Managing the Ocean: Re¬
sources, Research and Law, a book co-pub¬
lished last year by Unesco and Lomond Publica¬
tions, Inc., Maryland, USA.
Right, this example of a geological map of
the sea floor is taken from sheet 21 of
Unesco's Geological Atlas of the World
which covers the Indian Ocean.
The centre line of the symmetrical
stripes marks the axis of the mid-ocean rift
where the sea floor is moving apart at a
rate of about 1 to 2 centimetres a year.
Molten lava wells up along this crack and
becomes new sea floor as it cools. Thus
the age of the sea floor increases progres¬
sively the farther it is from the ridge. The
age ofthe sea floor isshown on the map as
stripes (coloured on the original sheet)
and ranges from zero, where the sea floor
is currently forming, to over a hundred
million years south-west of Madagascar.
Among other features shown on this
geological map are: the location of geolo¬
gical faults (heavy black lines); the kinds
of rock found in drill cores taken from the
sea floor; contours showing the thickness
of sediment that has slowly deposited on
top of the cooled lava; the location of
earthquakes (black dots, red on the origi¬
nal sheet); and the location ofactive volca¬
noes (triangles). Land appears dark grey
as reproduced here.
This geological map of the Indian Ocean
was prepared by marine geologists under
the auspices of the Commission for the
Geological Atlas of the World. The Atlas
consists of22sheets6small-scale maps
covering the oceans and 16 larger-scale
maps covering the continents. The Atlas is
a major scientific contribution to human
knowledge because it summarizes the
geology of the entire earth. It was made
possible by the hard work of land and
marine geologists from all over the world,
co-operating within Unesco. The Atlas is
published by Unesco and is available
through Unesco sales agents.

