The prophet, the scholar
and the statesman
by Roland Goetschel
THE philosophy of Moses Mai¬
monides lies at the convergence of
Jewish and Arab-Islamic thought;
this explains the considerable importance
accorded to political activity in his thinking
and practice. This article is an attempt to
rediscover the coherence of this philosophy
through a discussion of his major work, The
Guide of the Perplexed.
The need for political order. The starting
point of Maimonides' thought is the nature
of man whom, like Aristotle, he considers
to be naturally a political animal. While
other living creatures can very well look
after themselves without help from other
members of their species, this is not the case
with the individual isolated human, who
outside society would in the normal course
of events be doomed to perish before very
long. Man's food requirements alone neces¬
sitate the existence of an elaborate technol¬
ogy and a multiple division of labour, which
would be inconceivable outside a political
system: "This is why men need someone to
guide and unite them, so that their society
can be organized and perpetuated and so
that they can give one another mutual assis¬
tance."
For Maimonides the need for govern¬
ment also emerges from the great diversity
which exists between different members of
the human species. There is need for a guide
who can remedy what is defective and mod¬
erate what is excessive, who can impose a
common and permanent law on the mem¬
bers of a society.
He distinguishes three kinds of political
regimes. First, conventional legal regimes
in which the aim of the legislator is simply to
ensure that the affairs of the community are
transacted in an orderly fashion, without
insisting on the improvement of man and his
rational faculty. The regime of Divine Law
is different in the sense that it is concerned
not only with material and social improve¬
ment but also with man's spiritual welfare,
leading him to eternal happiness. There are
also regimes which claim to be prophetic
For Maimonides, "the regime of Divine
Law ... is concerned not only with material
and social improvement but also with
man's spiritual welfare" (R. Goetschel).
Opposite page, the Tables of the Law (the
code which Moses, the great legislator,
gave to the Jewish people during the Ex¬
odus) from the Ben Ezra synagogue, Fos¬
tat (Old Cairo). Above, an illumination rep¬
resenting the Exodus of the Hebrews,
taken from a manuscript of the Hebrew
Haggada (book derived from the Talmud).
This manuscript, copied in Spain in the
14th century, is today preserved in the
Budapest Academy of Sciences (Kauf¬
mann Collection).
32

¿T/ï
* r' % -BfcW,.
and which have in fact borrowed all or part
of their content from the true prophetic
regime.
The prophet, the scholar and the states¬
man. Although all men possess the faculty
of governing, this faculty will not be fully
developed unless a man has brought his
rational and his imaginative faculties to a
state of perfection. If such is the case, he
will be able to become a prophet when a
divine emanation flows first of all into his
intellect, then into his imagination. If this
divine influence flows only into the man's
intellect without being received by his imag¬
ination, he becomes a scholar who devotes
himself to speculation. Conversely, if the
divine emanation touches only his imagina¬
tion without influencing his intellect, he will
join the ranks of statesmen who make laws,
or those of soothsayers or interpreters of
omens.
It is clear from the above that con¬
ventional legal regimes are set up by politi¬
cians who draw substance from their imag¬
ination alone, while the regime of Divine
Law is based on a prophetic gift, necessitat¬
ing the two-fold perfection of the rational
and the imaginative faculties. The true
prophet combines the capacities of the pol¬
itician and the scholar, while surpassing
them both. The influence working on his
intellect brings him the speculative insights
which enable him to grasp the essential
nature of things and makes him a superior
philosopher.
The prophecy of Moses. The divine ema¬
nation sometimes comes to the prophet
with a force sufficient for him to attain per
fection for himself, and sometimes with a
superabundance that allows him to strive to
transform others. There are many degrees
of prophets as there are many degrees of
scholars. Maimonides also makes a major
distinction between Moses and the other
prophets. All prophets except Moses
received the prophecy through an angel,
whereas to Moses God spoke directly.
In his commentary on Chapter XXXIII of
the Book ofExodus, Maimonides returns to
the subject of Moses as legislator. If God
would not reveal his essence to Moses, he
nevertheless made known to him the thir¬
teen attributes of God which allowed Moses
to understand the nature of living beings
and the links between them, thus teaching
him how to govern over them. The ultimate
aim of this revelation is therefore to estab¬
lish political order: "And that was the final
aim of his demand, for he ended by saying:
that I may know thee, that I may find favour
in thy sight and consider that this nation is
thy people, which I must govern by means
similar to thine." The ruler of the ideal city
will therefore govern his State as far as pos¬
sible according to the model furnished by
God as ruler of the world.
The finality of the Divine Law. The object
of the Law is to bring man to a full realiza¬
tion of both his spiritual and his bodily exis¬
tence. This is achieved by the institution of
civil peace as well as through the individual
acquisition of virtues useful to society. The
Law of Moses therefore carries within it a
two-fold perfection: it establishes a perfect
community, and it produces in man right¬
eous ideas which will lead to happiness.
True human perfection is not found
where it is commonly supposed. Most peo¬
ple think that perfection lies in assets which
include the possession of power. As Mai¬
monides wrote, "the possession of the title
of a great king belongs to this class." But
such perfection is external to the human
essence. The two other perfections, that of
the body and even moral perfection, are
themselves only a means to intellectual per¬
fection, which reaches its highest degree in
the knowledge of God.
However, as Maimonides points out in a
reference to The Book ofJeremiah, on the
last page of the Guide, knowledge of God
must not remain speculative, it should lead
mankind to ensure that solidarity, law and
justice prevail on earth. To know God is
therefore to submit to ethical restraints, and
this ultimate requirement should be the pri¬
ority of the ideal ruler, for he more than all
other men created in the image of God must
accomplish "the imitation of God", the sov¬
ereign ruler of the universe.
ROLAND GOETSCHEL, of France, is director of
the Department of Hebrew and Jewish Studies,
and of the Centre for Hebrew Studies and
Research at the University of Strasbourg. For¬
merly a staff member of the department of
Hebrew at the University of Paris VIII, he is an
associate professor at the Martin Buber Institute,
Brussels, and teaches at the Ecole des hautes
études en sciences sociales, Paris. He is the
author of several published works in the field of
Hebrew studies.
33
