The farewell
by Par Lagerkvist
THEY came to the lake and crossed the narrow railway
line that ran along the shore. At that late hour there
were no trains. Just as at a level crossing the railway
lines seem to vanish on either side into the distance, so
everything appeared deserted. A lone track-watchman
wended his way home in the gathering darkness, while in the
distance could be heard the sound of a track maintenance
trolley receding into the forest.
The road had become muddy at the edge of the lake and
the girl's rubber boots sank into the slime. They had to take
to the bank, walking side by side, her delicate hand in his. He
was aware of her warmth, of her breathing. They walked on
in a long silence. Could he be in love with her?
A long line of wagons came towards them pulled by tired
horses with drooping heads. The men on the wagons seemed
to be asleep. They were travelling herring-vendors, come
from the coast some eleven miles away, on their way to
tomorrow's market. With their victuals in baskets and bot¬
tles of spirits beside them, they slept, the moonlight glinting
on the silvery scales on the loads of fish behind them.
It was late time to go home. But they halted for a
moment to look at the lake. Suddenly all was light. The
moonlight enveloped her, lighting up her face and her entire
body. Once again she was bathed in a halo of light and the
worn material of her cloak seemed to glow just as it had
before, during the meeting. Everywhere that the light
touched her it unveiled some facet of her.
He looked at her as though he were in love with her. She
radiated an aura of absolute purity. Her pale features
seemed not to be of this world; but there was no ecstatic
transfiguration, no exaltation of passion, no rapture. They
were at peace, nothing more.
She gave the impression that there was nothing animal in
her. Why?
He sensed suddenly, obscurely, that there was something
hopeless in this purity, this goodness, in the light that
surrounded her, something that he seemed to recognize.
Yes, she reminded him of something he had encountered
before.
What was so terrifying about such people was that quality
they had which conjured up the image of perfection, which
seemed to want to impose its own certainty, its total serenity.
Once one discovered it, everything seemed even more
bleak. Suddenly a warmth was revealed that life could not
offer, yet which rendered life itself even more difficult to
bear.
How long had they been there? It was time to go.
They hastened back towards the town. Anders felt an urge
to escape from her, to blaspheme, to deny his beliefs, to
destroy something within her. But they continued in silence.
The roads were deserted. He accompanied her as far as
the forge, to which was attached an annexe, a hovel in which
she lived. He felt a wave of nausea at finding himself near the
wall behind which they had bellowed and brayed. They
parted. She entered the ramshackle building as if it were a
house fit for humans to live in.
When he reached home he had an overwhelming feeling of
relief.
So ended his early youth. Nothing was left but lies,
confusion, disintegration.
Extract from Gast hos verkligheten, by Par Lagerkvist, which
has been translated from the original Swedish into French by
Vincent Fournier and published in the Unesco Collection by
Editions Stock under the title L'Exil de la Terre.
21
