Pictures in our heads
o
©
by Otto Klineberg
THERE are very few, if any, among
us who have not succumbed to the
temptation to stereotype nations.
One might almost describe the tendency as
inevitable, or at least very nearly so. But if
we are asked how it originates, we would
not easily find a suitable answer.
One of the earliest careful studies of this
tendency was made by Katz and Braly, in
1932, in connexion with the stereotypes
held by Princeton University students.
We may summarize the results by indicat¬
ing the three or four characteristics most
commonly ascribed to each nationality.
These included, for the Germans: scientifi¬
cally-minded, industrious, stolid; the Ita¬
lians, impulsive, artistic, passionate; Neg¬
roes, superstitious, lazy, happy-go-lucky,
ignorant; the Irish, pugnacious, quick-tem¬
pered, witty; the English, sportsmanlike,
intelligent, conventional; the Jews, shrewd,
mercenary, industrious; the Americans, in¬
dustrious, intelligent, materialistic, ambi¬
tious; the Chinese, superstitious, sly, con¬
servative; the Japanese, intelligent, indus¬
trious, progressive; the Turks, cruel, re¬
ligious, treacherous.
A study conducted in nine countries
under the auspices of Unesco in 1948 and
1949, showed that such stereotyped think¬
ing could easily be elicited almost any¬
where. In each country approximately
1,000 respondents, representing a cross-
section of the population, were given a list
of twelve traits, and asked to choose those
which they thought were most applicable to
themselves, to Americans, to Russians, and
in some cases, to two'or three other national
groups as well.
The British, for example, thought of
Americans as primarily progressive, con¬
ceited, generous, peace-loving, intelligent,
practical. The Americans regarded the
British as intelligent, hard-working, brave,
peace-loving, conceited and self -
controlled.
The "self-image" is also revealing. The
British saw themselves as peace-loving,
brave, hard-working, intelligent; the
French saw themselves as intelligent,
peace-loving, generous, and brave; the
Americans saw themselves as peace-loving,
generous, intelligent and progressive. All
the groups agreed on one item: their own
nation was the most peace-loving of them
all.
There is a good deal of evidence that
stereotypes may develop without any ker¬
nel of truth whatsoever. We all know how
widespread is the notion that intelligent
people have high foreheads, yet scientific
investigation in this field has failed to reveal
any such relationship. The stereotype of the
criminal as bearing in his features the mark
of his criminality is widely accepted, but it is
equally without foundation.
The American sociologist La Piere stu¬
died the attitudes of residents of California
towards first and second generation Arme¬
nian immigrants in Fresno County in that
State. There was almost complete agree¬
ment that these Armenians had more than
their share of faults, and the general atti¬
tude toward them was relatively unfriendly.
La Piere proceeded to question non-
Armenians as to the reasons for their anti¬
pathies, and he was able to classify the
answers into three stereotypes. In the first
place, it was stated that Armenians were
treacherous, lying, deceitful. In actual fact,
when measured by the criterion of business
integrity, the Armenian merchants turned
out to be equal and frequently superior to
others.
In the second place, they were alleged to
be parasites, making excessive demands
upon charitable organizations, free clinics,
etc. Actually, such demands by them were
less than half of what would be expected in
terms of their proportion of the population.
Finally, it was said that they had an in¬
ferior code of morality, and they were al¬
ways getting into trouble with the law. In
fact, police records showed that they
appeared in only 1.5 per cent of Police
Court cases, although they were about 6 per
cent of the population.
La Piere concludes that all of these
stereotypes have one factor in common,
namely, that they are definitely false.
June 1955
OTTO KLINEBERG, Canadian psychologist
and anthropologist, is one of the world's leading
authorities on questions of race and psychology
and on race relations. Among his many pub¬
lished works are Race Differences and The
Human Dimension in International Relations.
Cartoon specially drawn for the Unesco
Courier in 1955 by an Indian artist, A.M.
Abraham.
16
