The powers
of language
by Claude Hagège
FOR the sake of simplicity, let us di¬
vide the powers of language into two
categories: internal and external.
The former concerns language as a system
and its relationship with those who use it
and whose attitudes of mind and activities
are shaped by it. The latter has to do with
the use of language in the activity of speech
or parole, and the capabilities that this con¬
fers on its users.
Language is older than the individual.
From birth to adulthood, we have no choice
but to learn it. True, the individual can also
steer language in a particular direction: in¬
deed, it is he who shapes it and causes it to
change by the way in which he uses it. But
this process is spread over very long
periods. In what linguists call synchrony,
that is, the time in which the user is actually
living, he seems to be a receptive substance
on which language stamps its indelible im¬
print. That imprint shows itself in two
essential ways: in representation of the real
world, and in the sphere of psycho-social
symbolism and nationalism.
We can all see for ourselves, in our daily
lives, that different languages construct
different images of the universe. Far from
mirroring the world's phenomena in a way
that is universally identical, languages tend
to organize them according to their own
ever-changing systems of classification,
reinventing and even creating them so that
they exert considerable influence over the
way in which each community thinks about
these phenomena.
Some would even claim that there is a
causal link between language and world-
view. Such a link, for example, provides the
basis for the so-called Sapir-Whorf
hypothesis, named after two twentieth-cen¬
tury linguists who most openly defended it.
"It is quite an illusion," wrote Edward Sapir
(1884-1939), "to imagine that one adjusts to
reality essentially without the use of lan¬
guage, and that language is merely an in¬
cidental means of solving specific problems
of communication or reflection. The fact of
the matter is that the 'real world' is to a
large extent unconsciously built up on the
language habits of different cultural
groups." (1) Benjamin Lee Whorf (1897-
1941), Sapir's pupil, believed that we cut up
nature along "the lines drawn by our lan¬
guage (...) No individual is free to describe
18
nature with absolute impartiaUty; on the
contrary, he is forced to submit to certain
modes of interpretation, even when he be¬
lieves he is free." (2) Whorf adds that the
Hopi Indians, who Uve on the desert
plateaux of northern Arizona, are quite
unable to imagine such places as heaven or
hell as described by missionaries.
The Jesuits in China ran into difficulties
which were probably similar. Their experi¬
ence prompts a number of doubts about the
universality of the ten grammatical categor¬
ies which Aristotle established and which
are still used as guidelines for research by
many Hnguists. "What Aristotle gives us as
a checklist of universal and immutable con¬
ditions is merely the conceptual projection
of a particular linguistic state (...) Beyond
the terms of the Aristotelians, and tran¬
scending this categorization, there stretches
the concept of 'being' which encompasses
everything (...). Greek not only has a verb
'to be' (which is by no means a necessity in
every language), but it has developed whol¬
ly distinctive uses for this verb."^
So we find that the existence of a verb "to
be" in Greek and the way in which Greek
maps out grammatical categories in the uni¬
verse of the sayable have given rise to the
grammar which is used by all Western ling¬
uists and which is artificially overlaid on the
languages of other parts of the world.
Father Matteo Ricci could find nothing bet¬
ter than the expression "Lord of the Sky" to
make the concept of God acceptable to the
Chinese. He encountered a very thorny
problem in his attempts at adaptation, for
"Chinese thought (...) does not deal in posi¬
tive and negative, being and non-being, but
in contraries which follow one another in
succession, combine and complement one
another (...). Using the Chinese language
brings other thought processes into play,
and develops other abilities, than those
which have been given pride of place in the
West".w The same problem arose concern¬
ing the concept of substance, of the adjec¬
tive (which is a verb in Chinese), and of
everything in language which gives form to
representation.
We all pay less attention to that which our
language does not name, even if we are
quite capable of conceiving of it. The power
of objects and concepts over individuals is
much greater when language gives them a

of the Buddha Vajra-
sattva (possessor of the vajra, a thunder¬
bolt or diamond) by the sculptor Zanaba-
zar (1635-1723), one of the masters of
Mongolfan religious art. In one hand the
Buddha Is holding a vajra (symbol of the
maleprinciple) andin the othera smallbell
(symbol of the female principle); his head
Is very slightly tilted to the left. The statue
Is In the Cholfin lama temple museum,
Ulaanbaatar.
Photo © All Rights Reserved
In his book L'Homme de Paroles, Claude
Hagège writes that "The autonomy of the
written word establishes it as an end in
itself. (...) Disposed on a flat surface, writ¬
ing can exploit the possibilities of com¬
binations between directions: vertical,
horizontal, left to right, right to left." The
French poet Guillaume Apollinaire (1880-
1918) considered his famous Calligram¬
mes, as "an idealization ofpoetry (...) and a
form of typographical precision at a time
when the careerof typography is ending in
a blaze of glory..." Above, Apollinaire's
calligramme II Pleut.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 18
name than when it does not. Nevertheless,
this power of language should not be over¬
estimated. We may feel some reservations
at Nietzsche's enthusiasm when he writes,
in order to explain "the strange family re¬
semblance shared by all Hindu, Greek and
German thought", that "when there is ling¬
uistic kinship, it is inevitable that a common
grammatically-based philosophy (...) pre¬
disposes thought to produce philosophical
systems which develop along the same
lines". All we can say, and this is already a
large claim, is that the parallels between
language structures and thought patterns in
substantially differing cultures are suffi¬
ciently regular to appeal to the observer's
imagination.
Psycho-social symbolism and nationalism
constitute another sphere in which the pow¬
ers of language operate. The use of a lan¬
guage is experienced by the individual as an
umbilical cord to which he owes his identity
and even his existence. Language is much
more than the straightforward tool that it
would be if we were to accept the reduction¬
ist definition which sees it as a mere instru¬
ment of communication.
What is true of the individual is even
more so of the community elevated to the
status of a nation. A Hungarian linguist
writes: "In 'minor' countries which are pre¬
vented by statistical and geographical cir¬
cumstances from aspiring to the rank of
great powers, there is often a certain cult of
the national language and of various other
components of the national and folk heri¬
tage, on which patriotic feeling feeds and
thrives". (5) There is a Hungarian proverb,
likewise, which says: "nyelvében él a nem-
zet", or "a nation lives through its lan¬
guage".
Language, then, has the power to rally
support for a national cause that it em¬
bodies more effectively than any other com¬
ponent of the culture. This can be seen in
the nationalist claims of many minorities
which appeal for justification to their dis¬
tinctive languages: Catalans, Berbers,
Ukrainians, Kurds, Tibetans, Bretons,
Welsh, Basques and Macedonians. And
nationalism which arms groups to defend
their culture by defending their language
can take such violent forms as military
clashes, rebellion in the world of school
against the obligation to teach children in an
alien tongue, and demonstrations. Such
reactions have occurred in the past in India
and in Greece (where, in 1901, the con¬
servative uprising against the translation of
the New Testament into demotic resulted in
several deaths).
Some great nations impose their lan¬
guage through the power that it derives
from their own power. This is true today of
the United States of America, and it is also
true on the scale of that largest of countries,
the Soviet Union. The Indian languages of
North America have all yielded to the press¬
ure of American English, and those which,
like Navajo in Arizona, are still spoken in
scattered village groups are exceedingly
rare and, in any case, threatened. In the
Soviet Union, Koryak in north-eastern
Siberia, Chechen, Ingush, Circassian,
Abkhasian of the Caucasus, Udmurt, the
Turkic languages such as Kirghiz or Uzbek,
and many other languages such as Chere-
miss of the Volga basin, the Samoyed di¬
alects spoken by the nomads of the Lower
Ob, and Zyryan of the Pechora basin all
23

^ these languages seem helpless before the
onslaught 


of Russian, which they absorb
haphazardly, with a great many uncon¬
trolled borrowings from it.
As they become aware of the powers of
language. States set up official planning
machinery. History is, as a result, studded
with the foundation of academies for a great
many languages: Italy (Academy of La
Crusca, 1582), Germany (1617, 1633,
1641), France (1635), Spain (1713), Sweden
(1786), Hungary (1825), Romania (1879),
Syria (1919), Egypt (1932) and Israel
(1953). These bodies are set up in order to
harness the power of language in a rational
manner, by singhng out national languages
in cases of multilingualism, by pubUshing
lists of officially recognized neologisms,
thereby defending the prevailing idea of the
purity of the language, by systematizing
spelling or reforming it, as the case may be,
by compiling lexicons of dialects regarded
as the most archaic (as in the case of Turkey
under Atatürk), and by compiling grammar
books and dictionaries.
The intemal power of language pertains
not to a system but to an activity. We are
concerned here with what Hnguists call
parole. It is not a matter of chance if those
who use speech for purposes of command,
in all organized stmctures, starting with
that of the State, are nearly always highly
attentive to questions of language. In their
support for or participation in scholarly re¬
search, governments are very eager for
standardization, and, when it suits them,
for Hnguistic reform. This is no innocent
flirtation on the part of lovers of words and
phrases, but very definitely a political acti¬
vity. This is brought out by expUcit state¬
ments of position, such as that of Stalin in
the famous Pravda article which, in 1950,
put an end to the reign of the linguist Marr,
whose linguistic theories, dominating the
Soviet scene, had long been a hindrance to
all progress: "As regards Marxism in ling¬
uistics", wrote Stalin in the article, "... this
is a matter which concerns me personally".
Indeed, political regimes which rest on a
particular way of manipulating parole are,
in a way, logocracies, i.e. systems which
build their dominion on the power of words.
In fiction, Orwell's newspeak was the very
essence of a "language" aimed at eradicat¬
ing all unorthodox thought by banishing the
names which might sustain it. In the real
world, logocracies abound. To varying de¬
grees, all political power is tempted to ex¬
ploit the force of words that have been
drained of their meaning and moulded into
stereotypes, in order to disguise the facts.
Officialese provides some examples of
special techniques. One of these, which has
already been studied, consists of replacing
the greatest possible number of verbs and
adjectives by nouns, thereby manipulating
parole to avoid the head-on confrontation
with reality which the views of verbs would
convey. For example, in the shift from my
views are right to the rightness of my views,
there is a real transition from an assertion,
which might call forth criticism, to an impli¬
cit assumption, which purports to reflect
something already evident. The user of this
type of parole thereby not only sidesteps
explicit responsibility for a claim: he also
dodges any objections. For it is much less
easy for a listener to disagree with the un¬
finished sentence that begins: the rightness
of my views, than with a complete sentence:
my views are right.
With his "object poems", the Czech artist
Jirl Kolar seeks to make poetry "Imme¬
diately clear to everyone" and to fulfil his
prediction that "one day It will t)ecome
possible to make poetry out of anything at
all." As the materials of his art he uses
small objects such as razorblades, match¬
boxes, keys, and remnants of fabrics as If
they were the embodiment of words. In
collages such as The Apple (1967), atmve,
he Incorporates all thegraphic techniques
invented by man: fragments of ancient
manuscripts, letters, dictionaries, and va¬
rious forms of writing: Arabic, Hebraic,
Chinese, Persian, Gothic, Cyrillic, Latin
and Greek.
"The oral style is a literary genre in Its own
right. It is a cultural tradition which seems
to Justify the creation of a term, orature,
which would be symmetrical to that of
literature (...), In the sense that it preserves
the monuments of a culture but leaves no
material trace." (Claude Hagège,
L'Homme de Paroles/ Above, 40-cm-high
ceremonial carved axe of the Lelo people
of Zaire symbolizes thepower of language
and the spoken word. Lett, wooden stool
adorned with an ancestor-figure (height 76
cm) Is used by the latmui people of Papua-
New Guinea as a ceremonial chair during
debates atiout myths and genealogies.
24

In some languages, words say expUcitly
that they confer power, whereas, in others,
that distinctive capacity 


of language to be a
secret power, and hence a power inevitably
attractive to dictatorships, usually reluctant
to be identified as such, is not expUcitly
stated. Náhuatl, the language of the Aztecs,
belonged to the former category: "He who
in Mexico City was caUed 'emperor' bore
the title tlatoani, 'he who speaks', from the
verb tlatoa, 'to speak'; the same root is to be
found in words connected with speech, such
as tlatolli, 'language', and in words con¬
nected vrith power, such as tlatocan, which
designates the supreme council, the place
where one speaks and from which authority
emanates. It is no accident that the
sovereign is known as tlatoani: at the root of
his power is the art of speaking, the palavers
in council, the skill and dignity of those
high-flown and colourful speeches so great¬
ly appreciated by the Aztecs". ^*^
So, whether by virtue of the pressure that
language exerts from birth on the mental
representations of the person who speaks it
in his natural environment, and whose
thought it fashions, or whether by virtue of
the use to which language-in-action can be
put, i.e.paro/e, for purposes ofdomination,
the powers of language are universally man¬
ifest. The human science which studies
them, linguistics, is necessarily also a study
of the innermost being of humanity. The
human race, which has brought nature
under its yoke, transforms biological data
by making a persevering and thorough
study of their properties and of ways of
acting on them.
The human race acts in the same way on
language. What about the machines with
which the computer revolution and studies
of artificial intelligence are lavishly sup¬
plying the market? WiU human beings find
in these no more than a pale reflection of
their inimitable abilities, or will they see
new masters coming to mle them, after the
fashion of the sorcerer's apprentice, victim
of his own inventions? Only time will tell.
But the Unguist who studies the power of
natural languages has a number of reasons
to beUeve that the power of artificial lan¬
guages is not something that will develop
overnight.
/. E. Sapir, "The Status of Linguistics oj a Science",
Language, 5, 1929. p. 209 (207-214)
2. B.L. Whorf, Language, Thought and Reality, New
York, The Technology Press, 1956.
3. E. Benveniste, "Catégories de Pensée et Catégories de
Langue", Les Etudes Philosophiques, 4, 1958, reprinted
in Problèmes de Linguistique Générale, Paris, Galli¬
mard, 1966, pp. 70-71 (63-74).
4. J. Gemet, Chine et Christianisme: Action et Réac¬
tion, Paris, Gallimard, "Bibliothèque des Histoires",
1982, pp. 326-327.
5. 1. Erdôdi, as reported by G. Barczi, A magyar nyelv
életrajza (Budapest 1975), Etudes Finno-ougriennes 12,
1976, p. 304 (304-307).
6. J. Soustelle, La Vie Quotidienne des Aztèques à la
Veille de la Conquête Espagnole, Paris, Hachette, 1955,
p. 114.
CLAUDE HAGEGE, French university teacher,
is director of studies at the Ecole Pratique des
Hautes Etudes and a member of the language
laboratory of the National Centre of Scientific
Research (CNRS). He is the author of 10 books
on language, the most recent of which is
L'Homme de Paroles (1986). His linguistic re¬
search has taken him from Africa to Oceania,
from Europe to the Arab worldand from China to
the Indian reserves of the United States.
