A voice that speaks
across the centuries
by Shalom Rosenberg
EIGHT hundred and fifty years after
his birth, Maimonides is still in
some ways an enigmatic figure, and
research into his writings is a detective story
that passionately divides scholars and scien¬
tists.
There are various reasons for this, some
of them subjective. In the Jewish tradition,
for example, Maimonides has become a
"Rorschach ink blot" onto which people
project their ideals, and sometimes
though very seldom their enmity.
On the one hand, Maimonides' profound
and encyclopaedic knowledge, the depth
and scope of his writings, have made him a
central authority for experts in many dif¬
ferent fields. On the other hand, his per¬
sonal integrity and dedication, his commit¬
ment to the future of his people, have given
him a great significance to large numbers of
men and women, not only as a focus of
identification but as a caring teacher. He
has certainly become, as the name of his
main philosophical work implies, the
"Guide", but not only of the perplexed.
Indeed, everyone who has studied his works
has interpreted them in his own image and
according to his own level of understanding.
This subjective picture is, however, only
a partial representation of the whole truth.
Great controversy, between even the most
dispassionate modern scholars, is caused by
the fact that Maimonides wrote in a special
way. He saw himself continuing the Biblical
and Talmudic tradition of writing on two
levels. The Bible and the Talmud are,
according to him, books written for the
masses, yet they have an inner level that
speaks to the philosophers and those who
have advanced beyond the masses.
The principal idea characterizing Mai¬
monides' interpretation of the Scriptures is
that the texts are relevant to all people at all
times. His Biblical-philosophical exegesis
took four variables into consideration.
First, the linguistic component, whereby
Detail of a miniature from a manuscript
of Maimonides' Mishne Torah, copied in
Portugal in 1472, today preserved in the
Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Mai¬
monides is represented clutching a roll of
parchment, possibly the Mishne Torah
itself.
revelation is transmitted through a lan¬
guage, the semantic and syntactic charac¬
teristics of which cannot be ignored.
Second, the historical perspective, by
which Biblical issues and stories can only be
understood in the light of their particular
historical situations; taking into account,
for example, the nature of a society that
practises idolatry, or one that is not scien¬
tifically advanced.
Philosophy may therefore be taught using
one of two methods: the Greek way, in
technical language and by constructing sys¬
tems that can only be understood after a
lengthy initiation; or the Hebrew way, by
encoding philosophy in a symbolic text and
transmitting the key of interpretation from
teacher to disciple.
The third variable in Maimonides' inter¬
pretation of the Scriptures is the psychologi¬
cal dimension prophecy and revelation
take place through the mediation of human
beings. Anthropological and psychological
characteristics are reflected in the very con¬
tent of revelation.
A fourth variable, Sod (secret), is the use
of esotericism as a teaching aid. The sacred
texts must take into consideration the exis- ^
/
'
Q
©
21

O ' d¡ v k*4BMC >«»% ijV».
- -
Ci. 5-"- «1/7
o
©
Pages from twoparchmentmanuscripts of
the Mishne Torah. Right, a master teaching
from his pulpitas depicted in a manuscript
illuminated in northern Italy In the second
half of the 15th century. Above, page from
a manuscript copied in German rabbinical
script by a scribe called Selomo.
^9h< .^tr*:^*^^-
": ;
^V"
tence of many people who are incapable of
attaining philosophical perfection and
whose exposure to metaphysical truths may
be dangerous for them and for society.
Maimonides applied this method to his
own writings. In the introduction to his
major work, The Guide of the Perplexed, he
deliberately warns the reader that esoteric
views are concealed in his book in such a
way that only those who study the whole
text will be able to find them. Hesees this as
the inner meaning of the Sage's saying:
"...apples of gold in settings of silver"
(Proverbs, chapter XXV, verse 11). The
"silver" structure of the Guide was imme¬
diately obvious and admired, but the nature
of the inner "golden" content is still being
debated.
As a result of its author's method, Mai¬
monides' book has an impressive architec¬
tonic structure which connects all its parts.
One constantly finds new secret doors lead¬
ing to an unmapped labyrinth of cross-refer¬
ences and varied hints, a guide to the hidden
philosophical treasure sometimes dif¬
ferent treasures for different readers.
Maimonides was a great philosopher. To
fully understand his system the reader
would be obliged to abandon his contempo¬
rary world-view and adopt the medieval
scientific and philosophic mentality. It is
important to note, however, that his teach¬
ings nevertheless still have relevance today.
They are undoubtedly controversial; Mai¬
monides never intended to be "popular". A
meaningful presentation of Maimonidean
thought would entail translating more of his
ideas into our modern vocabulary.
In an attempt to summarize his ideals of
human behaviour, I would present them as
a scale of four values which need to be
attained sequentially: Society, Self-realiz¬
ation, Transcendence and Politics. Such a
sequence will allow better understanding of
each stage.
Further clarification can also be achieved
by using a theatrical analogy. We can con¬
sider a play from three different angles. It
can be understood as the realization of the
instructions of the script; or, from the stand¬
point of the director, as the realization of a
certain situation on the stage; or as psycho-
drama, wherein the play's central function
lies in the influence it has on the actors. In
the same way, ethics can be understood
either as deontological, as the fulfilment of
the ethical categorical imperatives; or as
utilitarian, fulfilling a social function; or as a
means of self-transformation.
Society. The first condition of human
development is the existence of a healthy
society that assures the basic freedoms of
the individual. Maimonides thought that
human beings are, as Aristotle wrote,
"social by nature". But people are individ¬
uals, distinct and different from one
another. This is a divine blessing but also an
imminent danger. The political structure is
the instrument through which society gov¬
erns itself and provides a possibility for the
individual to develop.
Maimonides severely criticized the
authoritarian and fanatical regimes of his
time, and yearned for a return to the ancient
Biblical and Greek systems in which true
religion, science and philosophy could
flourish. His own experiences of wander¬
ings and persecution bear witness to his sin¬
cerity.
This is the first version of ethics: social
ethics, our duties in society.
Self-realization. Society is not an end in
itself. There is no such entity as a "people-
by-itself". A people, a nation, is above all a
construction in which the real elements are
the individuals. Society has to enable the
development and full self-realization of
each of its members. However, Mai¬
monides did not believe that this self-
realization involves an arbitrary choice. A
"human essence" exists, and people have to
find it. The central imperative is "Grow!",
and society has to make this possible.
22

Here we find Maimonides' version of eth¬
ics as self-transformation, the idea of indi¬
vidual ethics moulded on the model of the
psychodrama. Ethics must enable people to
grow, to develop all their faculties,
especially their intellectual faculties. Only
then can the individual attain the central
human aim, the knowledge of truth. Rea¬
son is the divine image that resides in every
one of us.
The ideas presented up to this point can
be illustrated with Maimonides' exposition
of the Paradise story. The Biblical story
seems to present a fools' paradise in which
suffering came to the world when Adam ate
the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge. This,
however, is an incorrect interpretation. The
Paradise story is an archetypical representa¬
tion of the human condition. True knowl¬
edge and, as we shall see later, the pos¬
sibility of transcending the human condition
are represented by the Tree of Life. The
knowledge of the Tree of Knowledge is not
the knowledge of true and false , but of good
and evil.
Without going too deeply into the
ramifications of Maimonides' explanation,
it is clear that two types of knowledge are
presented here: objective, rational knowl¬
edge as opposed to subjectively distorted
systems constructed by rampant, uncon¬
trolled imagination. The Paradise story is
not set in the outside world, and in historical
time, but in our own souls. A continuous
struggle takes place between Adam and the
serpent the representation of irrational
forces in man. As Goya masterfully por¬
trayed it, dreams of reason engender
monsters.
Accordingly, the Messianic age does not
mean changes in the laws of nature, but
according to Maimonides represents the
age when people will be cured from their
spiritual blindness which makes them harm¬
ful to their fellow men as well as to them¬
selves.
Transcendence. Had Maimonides
remained at this stage in his thought, his
teachings would be very similar to those of
other rationalistic systems in the history of
philosophy. However, he used the philo¬
sophical background of his time which
treated the possibility of conjunction with a
supra-human reality, the "Active Intellect"
of medieval tradition. The implication of
this philosophy is that beyond natural dis¬
cursive rational activity there is an addi¬
tional epistemological category, the intui¬
tive way of prophecy, and the ultimate
possibility of conjunction with what tran¬
scends common human experience.
We cannot say whether or not Mai¬
monides accepted the reality of mystical ex¬
perience, and I would instead prefer to
speak of some form of meta-intellectual
experience, modelled on Biblical prophecy
and attaining its highest level with Moses.
According to the rabbis, Moses died the
"death by a kiss". This kiss, as in the alle¬
gory of the Song of Songs, is the true
immortality, the union of the soul with tran¬
scendence.
Politics. "In the Ways of the Lord." At this
stage, Maimonides' thought resembles that
of many mystical thinkers, and he might
have succumbed to the temptation of those
Page from a manuscript of the Mishne
Torah copied in Cologne (Germany) In
1294-1296 AD by Nathan ben Shimon ha-
Levi and completed in the same city in
1413. The miniatures appear to come from
the Cambrai region of France or the mid-
Rhine and date from the end of the 13th or
the beginning of the 14th century.
Below, portrait of Maimonides (left) with
the Jewish philosopher Isaac Abravanel
(1437-1508 AD) in an annotated edition of
The Guide of the Perplexed published in
1904 in Vilna (now Vilnius, Lithuanian
SSR).
jfi~
û'Z'c; rm
H
i
*
m
|
Ä
.TtllST ':k -*'" IS	.
.: :;
- in : ,1-m"