"Education", says the report of the Inter¬
national Commission on the Development
of Education, "has the power to cultivate
or stifle creativity." This is what a young
Spanish artist and teacherattempted to do
in his art class at the High School of
Lugones, near Oviedo (Asturias) : his
pupils listened to a piece of classical
music after which, with no further guid¬
ance, they drew images and impressions
evoked by the music. Their drawings often
surprisedby theirquality, considering that
they were the work of culturally underpri¬
vileged children of 10 to 12, whose first
experience of art was acquired in these
classes. Above, "The Rite of Spring" by
Stravinsky as seen by 11-year-old Maria
Paz Martinez. Right, the same composer's
"Fireworks" as interpreted by Leonor
Huerta Rodriguez, aged 10.



A 21-point programme
for a global strategy
in education
In 1971, Unesco set up an International Commission on the Develop¬
ment of Education to carry out an unparalleled world-wide inquiry. The
Commission's purpose was to devise a global approach to educational
problems; to rethink the objectives and methodology of education in
the light of development needs and of individual aspirations; and to
provide ideas for national educational strategies and for international
co-operation. The members of the Commission were Messrs. Edgar
Faure (Chairman), Felipe Herrera, Abdul-Razzak Kaddoura, Henri
Lopes, Arthur Vladimirovitch Petrovsky, Majid Rahnema and Frederick
Champion Ward. Summarized below in 21 points are the conclusions
of the Commission's report.
Lifelong education should be the key¬
stone of all educational policies in the
years ahead, in industrially-developed as
well as developing countries.
O
Artificial or outdated barriers between
different branches and levels of educa¬
tion and between formal and non-formal
education should be abolished.
Lifelong education presupposes a
complete restructuration of education.
Education must cease being confined
within school walls. Education should
become a true mass movement.
Education for pre-school-age children
should be a major objective for educa¬
tional strategies in the 1970s.
O
©
Education should be provided in many
ways. What counts is not how a person
has been educated, but what real know¬
ledge he or she has gained.
Millions of children and young persons
are still deprived of education. Universal
basic education, geared to national
needs and resources, should be a prim¬
ary objective of educational policies for
the 1 970s.
33

Rigid distinctions between different
branches of education should be re¬
moved. Education, from primary and
secondary levels, should have a com¬
bined theoretical, technological, practical
and manual character.
O
Education should aim not only to train
young people for specific jobs, but also
equip them to adapt to a variety of
occupations.
Responsibility for technical training
should not fall exclusively on the school
system. It should be shared by schools,
business, industry and out-of-school
education.
©
Higher education should be expanded
and made varied enough to meet indi¬
vidual and community needs. Traditional
attitudes towards the university must
change.
34
O
Access to different types of education
and employment should depend only on
a person's knowledge, capacities and
aptitudes.
©
Development of adult education, in
and out of school, should be a priority
objective of educational strategies during
the next ten years.
©
All literacy teaching should be geared
to a country's objectives in social and
economic development.
©
Aids to self-education, including lan¬
guage laboratories, libraries, data banks
and audio-visual equipment, should be
integrated into all education systems.
©
Education systems should be conceived
and planned in terms of possibilities offered
by new educational techniques.
Giving free rein to their imagination, pupils
of the High SchoolatLugones (see caption
previous page) express on paper the im¬
pressions evoked for them by (above)
Johann Sebastian Bach's "Air on the G
String" (Miguel Cortina Garcia, aged 11);
"Spring" (above right) from Vivaldi's "The
Four Seasons" (Maria Pilar Sanjosé Cal¬
derón, aged 11); and, (right) "The New
World Symphony" by Dvorak (Emilio Pra¬
do Sanchez, aged 12).
©
Teacher training programmes should
make full use of the latest teaching aids
and methods.
©
All hierarchical differences between
teachers in primary schools, technical
colleges, secondary schools and univer¬
sities should be abolished.
©
Teachers should be trained to be edu¬
cators rather than specialists in the
transmission of knowledge.

©
Skilled auxiliaries from the trades and
professions (workers, technicians and
executives) should be brought in to
teach in schools. Students should also
participate, educating themselves while
teaching others.
©
Contrary to traditional practice, teaching
should adapt itself to the learner. The stu¬
dent should have greater freedom to decide
for himself what he wants to learn and how
and where to learn it.
©
Students and the public as a whole
should be given a greater say in deci¬
sions affecting education.
November 1972
35
