Disabled characters
in search of an author
by Tordis Orjasaeter
IT is important for handicapped chil¬
dren to meet themselves in chil¬
dren's books, to see pictures and
read about children like themselves,
their lives, problems, feelings, circum¬
stances. And it is important for other
children to get acquainted with handicap¬
ped children.
Mentally retarded, physically handicap¬
ped or other disabled children almost never
see children like themselves on television or
in films, unless the programme specifically
concerns handicapped children. They
almost never belong to their environments
in the mass media as naturally as other
children do.
During the last decade quite a few
books have appeared about handicapped
children, but many of them are not good
enough. They often activate our mechan¬
isms of rejection and make integration
even more difficult. Because literature
influences us for better or for worse,
especially when we are children, it is im¬
portant to evaluate it critically.
There is the hidden rejection found in
many well-intentioned books where heal¬
thy young people who meet handicapped
persons are filled with gratitude for their
own good health. The underlying atti¬
tude is that the normal thing is to be
healthy, beautiful and charming and the
handicap somehow is a kind of punish¬
ment for our sins.
The blind characters in children's
books are mostly girls it seems so suit¬
able that girls should be sweet and gen¬
tle and play the piano. The characters in
wheelchairs are mostly boys, extraordi¬
narily clever boys, the best companions
anyone can think of and such excellent
referees in a football or baseball game.
The handicap is compensated far beyond
reasonable limits.
There are so many misleading books
about mentally handicapped children.
Some typical examples: many authors
use the description ill when they write
about mentally retarded children. They
are not ill, no more than other children,
unless they have measles or colds or
something like that. They are not ill,
they are retarded in their mental de¬
velopment.
We need books containing good
psychological descriptions of the hand¬
icapped person as one of the main char¬
acters, and books where handicapped
children belong to their environment as
naturally as do other people. Happily,
books exist in which the author shows
both insight and poetic power.
Most children's books about the hand¬
icapped tell us about children with
physical or sensory handicaps, and the
authors' intention is quite obviously to
make the readers identify themselves
with these children. Books about mental¬
ly handicapped children ¡ire fewer in
number and mostly written from the
point of view of a sister or brother.
During the last decade we have seen a
number of photographic picture books
about handicapped children. Children
who read them are usually as fascinated
by this documentary material as by fic¬
tion. It acquaints them with handicapped
children in their daily life. Such books
are often excellent for handicapped chil¬
dren as well; they can look at pictures of
and read about children who look like
themselves and have to struggle with
some of the same frustrations.
Especially interesting are picture books
made by authors or artists who are
themselves parents or siblings of hand¬
icapped children, using their personal ex¬
perience and love, trying to tell other
children how it can be for a family to
have a handicapped son or daughter, sis¬
ter or brother.
June 1981
TORDIS ORJASAETER, of Norway, associate
professor at the Norwegian Advanced College
for Special Education, is the author of several
books on children's literature. This article has
been extracted from a background paper pre¬
pared for a Seminar on Books and Disabled
Children, organized by Unesco in co-operation
with the Bologna Children's Book Fair in April
1981.
43
