'Cinema Novo
A cultural revolution
on the screen
by Paulo Antonio Paranaguá
The Black, the peasant, the favelado
(shanty-town dweller) and the Indian are
"outsiders" who have been brought to life
on the screen by Cinema Novo. This scene
is from Carlos Diegues's film A grande
cidade (1966).
'C
INEMA Novo', or the New
Cinema of Brazil, was hailed
by its main spokesman and
theorist, the Brazilian director Glauber
Rocha, as an authentic revolution in both
expression and production, two closely
connected aspects of an art which is also
an industry.
Expression. Forty years after the Brazi¬
lian Modernist movement of 1922
attempted to lay the foundations of a
distinct Brazilian aesthetic in literature
and the plastic arts, Cinema Novo aspired
to define a truly Brazilian form of ex¬
pression in film. Hitherto, Brazilian film¬
makers had contented themselves with
local themes and characters, and in the
process of film-making itself, usually con
sidered as a purely technical operation,
had stuck to the conventional formulae of
Hollywood and the European cinema.
They turned out comedies, melodramas
and musical comedies replete with clichés
inherited from the dominant modes of
film production. In this way a dichotomy
between form and content was created,
and film-makers had no choice but to
present local reality through established
cinematographic conventions which they
regarded as ideal.
Cinema Novo transformed this situa¬
tion by seeking to develop a Brazilian
film language which would be in harmony
with the other forms of expression of
Brazilian culture and particularly with
the most innovative creative trends in
narrative, drama, the plastic arts and
music.
The best example of that stylistic in¬
novation, and of a form of nationalism
which by no means implies xenophobia or
a rejection of foreign influences, is still
Deus e o diabo na terra do sol ("Black
God White Devil"), made by Glauber
Rocha in 1963. This film succeeds in
integrating a whole series of disparate
elements: the montage technique of
Eisenstein and the poetry of the literatura
de cordel of northeastern Brazil (see page
27); the rich texture of Visconti's films
and the dynamic quality of Westerns; the
preoccupations of the social
documentary and the choreography of
samurai films; the psychological intro-^
33

spection of Stanislavsky and the distanc¬
ing of Brecht; the choral complexity of
opera; the lyricism of the Bachianas bra¬
sileñas of Villa-Lobos and the simplicity
of folk melodies; specific details about
Rocha's native region; and the general
problems of underdevelopment.
Glauber Rocha interwove all these ele¬
ments to produce an original, personal
creation, just as a writer such as Guimar¬
äes Rosa used the folk themes and tradi¬
tions of his own region. Glauber Rocha
showed that this approach was suitable
not only for analysing bygone situations
and handling traditional issues, but also
for describing the modern world. His film
Terra em transe ("Earth Entranced") of
1967 is a dissection of the political world
at that time, showing the manipulations
of populism, the messianic temptation of
guerrilla warfare and the conflicts
between élites. It contributed to the
national debate with an acuteness and
lucidity seldom achieved on film.
Production. Here too Cinema Novo re¬
jected imitation, which had hitherto been
regarded as inevitable in film production.
This innovatory movement emerged
from critical thinking about the failure of
attempts to transplant to Brazil the kind
of film industry found in the industrially
developed countries. The colonization of
the Brazilian cinema was not only a con¬
sequence of the domination of the market
by foreign output; it was also an alienat¬
ing attempt to transplant a method of
production-line filming in vast studios
with large teams of technicians, based on
the star system and the conventions of the
Hollywood film.
The new Brazilian cinema took under¬
development as its starting point and de¬
vised production formulae which were
better suited to the circumstances. It re¬
turned to the tradition of craftsmanship
established by the pioneers of film, abo¬
lished the frontiers between fiction and
documentary, and explored new chan¬
nels of distribution.
Because of these two revolutionary de¬
partures, in expression and in produc¬
tion, Cinema Novo stood out as an
alternative model for the emergent cine¬
mas of Latin America and the Third
World as a whole, as did its quest for
paths to economic and ideological decol¬
onization. Glauber Rocha expounded
the theory of the movement in such mani¬
festos as Urna estética da forne ("An Aes¬
thetics of Hunger") and Urna estética da
violencia ("An Aesthetics of Violence",
1965), and in many articles collected in
his book Revoluçâo do Cinema Novo
("The Revolution of Cinema Novo",
1981), which had a worldwide impact.
Nevertheless, this new approach to
film-making was not so much a formal
school as a movement for those who re
jected dogmatism. Although the influ¬
ence of Neorealism can be seen in such
early works as Nelson Pereira dos San¬
tos's Rio 40 graus ("Rio, 40 Degrees",
1955) and Rio zona norte ("Rio Northern
District", 1957), Cinema Novo diverged
from Neorealism and was fundamentally
in sympathy with Luis Buñuel's criticism
of the sentimentality of post-war Italian
cinema, while also rejecting the
stereotypes and Manichaeism of socialist
realism.
Pluralism. Cinema Novo's aesthetic
"non-alignment" was a guarantee of plur¬
alism and respect for the different out¬
looks and stylistic approaches of the film¬
makers, who freely claimed full responsi¬
bility for their films. The northeastern
region of Rocha's "Black God White
Devil" inspired such different and highly
personal films as Os fuzis ("The Rifles",
1964) by Ruy Guerra, Vidas secas ("Bar¬
ren Lives", 1963) by Nelson Pereira dos
Santos, and Säo Bernardo ("Saint Ber¬
nard", 1971) by Leon Hirszman. Joaquim
Pedro de Andrade swung from the unpre¬
tentious lyricism of O padre e a moça
("The Priest and the Girl", 1966) to the
unbridled tropicality of Macunaima
(1969). Cinema Novo explored urban life
in A grande cidade ("The Big City", 1966)
by Carlos Diegues, Ruy Guerra's Os
cafajestes ("The Beach of Desire", 1962),
and the mythical world of the Indians in |
Nelson Pereira dos Santos, a precursor of
the Brazilian Cinema Novo, belongs to a
generation influenced by the novels of
Jorge Amado and Graciliano Ramos. He
adapted two of Ramos's novels for the
screen: Vidas secas (1963), the story of a
family forced to leave their landbecause of
drought, and Memorias do cárcere (1984)
about the experiences of the great Brazi¬
lian writer during his time in prison. Right,
scene from Vidas secas.
34

r>
A
Above, still from Antonio das Mortes
(1969, full title O dragáo da maldade contra
o Santo Guerreiro "The Evil Dragon ver¬
sus the Holy Warrior") by the Brazilian film
director Glauber Rocha (1938-1981). The
charactersCoirana, spiritualheir or rein¬
carnation of the legendary bandit Lam-
piäo; Coriseo, the blond devil; the blind
landowner who tyrannizes the region; and
Antonio das Mortes, the slayer of out¬
laws the doubts, hesitations
and choices which confront the people of
the Sertâo. Glauber Rocha explained that
the film depicted "an ambiguous, trance-
like state of mind". Brazilian critics
thought that the film was dominated by a
surprising spirit of negation, compared
with its director's previous work in the
cinema.
Right, scene from "The Lion with Seven
Heads" (1970), whose original polyglot
title Der Leone Have Sept Cabeças (in Ger¬
man, Italian, English, French and Portu¬
guese) announces the political theme of
this film in which Glauber Rocha set out to
portrayallegorically the Third Worldstrug¬
gling for liberation from all kinds of im¬
perialism, personified in the film by a US
intelligence agent, a Portuguese
businessman, anda kind of white goddess
who devours Africa. The seven-headed
lion symbolizes the revolutionary spirit
which survives the loss of its leaders.
35

Gustavo Dahl's Uirá, um indio em busca
de Deus ("Uirá, an Indian in Search of
God", 1974), and portrayed the political
bewilderment of intellectuals in Paulo
César Saraceni's O desafio ("The Chal¬
lenge", 1965).
Cinema Novo was contemporary with
the French nouvelle vague, the indepen¬
dent cinema of North America, British
free cinema, Spanish and Argentine
nuevo cine, Cuban revolutionary cinema,
the birth of Black African cinema and
movements of renewal in countries as
different as Japan and Czechoslovakia.
Nevertheless, its true significance can
only be appreciated in the context of
Brazilian culture. The crisis in the tradi¬
tional production system created a cli¬
mate in which the new Brazilian cinema
and similar movements could be wel
comed and could achieve international
success.
The history of Brazilian cinema can be
summed up in two words: "before" and
"after" Cinema Novo. It must also be said
that our past would have slipped into
oblivion had it not been for the sense of
historical perspective created by Cinema
Novo, which enabled such masterpieces
of Brazilian cinema as Humberto
Mauro's Ganga bruta ("The Dross",
1933) and Mario Peixoto's Limite
("Boundary", 1929) to be saved for pos¬
terity. Glauber Rocha himself wrote a
Revisäo critica do cinema brasileiro ("Cri¬
tical Review of the Brazilian Cinema") in
1963. If Cinema Novo had not made a
breakthrough into modernity, Brazilian
cinema would have faded out, or would
have continued to languish in mediocrity.
The emergence of Cinema Novo is a
landmark in our cultural tradition. Let us
hope that this tradition of creativity, high
standards and freedom will help Brazil to
respond to the new challenges of televi¬
sion and the audio-visual media in a way
that lives up to our current hopes for
change and democratic participation .
PAULO ANTONIO PARANAGUA, Brazilian film
critic, is the author of a number of works on the
cinema in Spanish and French as well as Portu¬
guese, notably Cinema na América Latina (Latin
American Cinema, 1985), and the forthcoming
Historia do cinema brasileiro (History ofBrazilian
Cinema), and Le cinéma brésilien (Brazilian
Cinema). He is also coauthor ofles cinémas de
l'Amérique Latine (Latin American Cinemas,
1981), La historia y el cine (History of the Cine¬
ma, 1983), and the Dictionnaire Larousse du
cinéma (Larousse Dictionary of the Cinema,
1986), and a contributor to film magazines, in¬
cluding Positif, published in Paris.
Scene from Joaquim Pedro de Andrade's
Macunaima (1969). Based on the "parody-
novel" of the same title by the Modernist
writer Mario de Andrade, the film is an
example of the "tropicalist" element in
Brazilian art which finds expression in the
cinema, in theatre and in the work of
musicians such as Caetano Veloso and
Gilberto Gil.
36
