Land-locked islands
ISLAND States and land-locked States, in
spite of their different geographical situations,
possess one common feature their relative
isolation.
The world's land-locked countries are: in
Europe, the principality of Andorra, Austria, the
Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, Hungary, Liech¬
tenstein, Switzerland and Czechoslovakia; in
Africa, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Botswana,
Lesotho, Mali, Malawi, Niger, Uganda, the Cen¬
tral African Republic, Rwanda, Swaziland, Chad,
Zambia and Zimbabwe; in Asia, Afghanistan,
Bhutan, Nepal, the Lao People's Democratic
Republic and the Mongolian People's Republic;
in South America, Bolivia and Paraguay.
Some of these States owe their existence to
the preservation of a strong ethnic and cultural
originality and of forms of social and economic
organization which have enabled them to survive
in spite of outside pressures. A number of them
are set within a barrier of mountains: the Hima¬
layas in the case of Nepal and Bhutan, the
Drakensbergs in the case of Lesotho, and the
Alps in the case of Switzerland. Others were
deprived of access to the sea as a result of the
dislocation of the Austro-Hungarian, Spanish,
French, Belgian and British empires.
These countries form an extremely disparate
group. They differ in terms of history, their en¬
dowment of natural resources and their political
systems. Nevertheless they do share, especially
if they are developing countries, a number of
broad general features.
Land-locked States are, for example, general¬
ly speaking less wealthy, less populous and
smaller than coastal States. In addition, the prop
ortion of the working population engaged in agri¬
culture is much higher than that engaged in
industry and the services sector correspondingly
lower. Finally, perhaps because of the absence
of ports as centres of natural growth, the percen¬
tage of the population living in urban areas is far
lower than in coastal States.
The land-locked problem affects all aspects of
development, but its consequences are most
severe in the field of external trade. Most land¬
locked countries are remote from world markets;
imports and exports must be shipped through
another State, in some cases several States.
This gives rise to additional costs which reduce
the competitivity of their products on overseas
markets and have a negative effect on their
balance of payments as a result of higher import
bills and currency outflows.
Lack of access to the sea also causes legal,
administrative and political problems. Land-lock¬
ed countries have to negotiate to meet their
transit requirements, and the facilities provided
may not in every case be satisfactory because
the transit countries have their own development
priorities and problems, which are often acute.
They may, for example, impose cumbersome
documentary procedures and formalities in order
to safeguard their interests which could be
jeopardized by the diversion of transit cargoes to
their domestic markets. Transit countries may
also wish to limit the use of certain routes within
the context of an overall economic policy. Land¬
locked countries, furthermore, have to incur
additional storage expenses in order to maintain
inventories in ports or to anticipate possible inter¬
ruptions in transit-transport services. The fact
that they are at the mercy of technical incidents,
natural disasters, industrial disputes, political
troubles and even international conflicts, pro¬
vides some indication of their dependence and
the precariousness of their situation.
Fifteen of the land-locked developing coun¬
tries belong to the category of least developed
countries. Their remoteness from world markets
has compounded their problem of extreme
underdevelopment and made their economies
particularly vulnerable. They have been hard hit
by the overall deterioration of the world economy
in recent years, and by the natural disasters
which have stricken the greater part of Africa,
where most of them are located.
The international community has come to rec¬
ognize that land-locked developing countries
cannot overcome on their own the formidable
obstacles that face them. Several regional and
international organizations, including the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), have over the last decade been
actively seeking solutions to the special prob¬
lems faced by these countries.
Source: Progress in the implementation ofspecific action
related to the particular needs and problems of the land¬
locked developing countries, Report by the UNCTAD
secretariat to the Trade and Development Board and to
the General Assembly of the United Nations, October
1985.
a
33
