n
I ' 1' V ' i
w i >j>v\; La j^.aJU*«^ .^ *
< ' ^ :	'
ton Khaldun, born In Tunis in 1332, spent
much ofhis life in north Africa andAndalu¬
sia, and died in Cairo In 1406. His major
work, a universal history of the Arabs, the
Persians and the Berbers, is preceded by
the Muqaddimah (an introduction to his¬
tory), a French translation of which was
published in the Collection in 1967 under
the title Discours sur l'Histoire Univer¬
selle. Above, page of a velum manuscript
dating from 1733 of the Muqaddimah, in
which Ibn Khaldun sets forth a theory on
the evolution of human societies which
was farahead ofhis time. A philosopher of
history, Ibn Khaldun was also a a precur¬
sor of modern sociology.
The maqama ("assembly") was a literary
genre favoured by the high society of
Baghdad in the 10th century. Its form Is
that of a sketch in rhyming prose in which
modes of behaviour are caricatured in
racy, eloquently told anecdotes. Al-Harlrl
(1054-1122), the master of the genre, wrote
fifty outstanding maqamat in which he de¬
scribed the adventures of a vagabond,
Abu Zayd. These stories have been pub¬
lished in the Unesco Collection in German
under the title Die Verwandlungen des Abu
Seid von Serug (1966). Right, a Persian
caravanserai depicted in an illustration
from a manuscript of the maqamat in the
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris.



Tradition and experiment
in Arabic letters
by Abdellatif Laabi
THE world audience reached by
Arab literature has not always
been commensurate with the im¬
portance and originality of an ancient
literary tradition that is still very much
alive.
This literature is still widely regarded
as a domain for scholars and those who
are, for a variety of reasons, "lovers" of
. "-
the Arab world. In other words, although
it is acknowledged to have a prestigious
past, it is not so often recognized as
forming part of the contemporary literary
scene.
The Unesco Programme for the Trans¬
lation of Literary Works can make a big
contribution to re-establishing the dia¬
logue. Making national literatures known ^
* 4 \ *'
r
n ! ' " ] \-
f Í 1 ' r »lijlC'U
¡ i
1	L .L L .Uo.
-*
z
h
iJÄh
"1
Stell?. ^2<u2i¿c£2. í b£U _: q . L\^__J
17

©
Al-Ghazali (1058-1111) was one of the
greatestphilosophers of Islam. Convinced
that it was impossible to achieve certainty
by reason alone, he wrote a celebrated
treatise, Tahafut al-falasifa (The Incoher¬
ence of the Philosophers), to refute the
certainties of the philosophers ofhis time.
His work was in its turn attacked by Ibn
Rushd (Averroës) in his Tahafut al-tahafut
(The Incoherence of the Incoherence),
which has been translated Into English in
the Unesco Collection (1954). Several of
Al-Ghazali's works have been published in
the Collection in English, French and Spa¬
nish, including the mystical autobiogra¬
phy he wrote shortly before his death,
Erreur et Délivrance ("Error and Deliver¬
ance") published in French in 1959.
Above, the first page of a 13th-century
Persian manuscript ofa workbyAl-Ghaza¬
li, "The Way to Happiness", which illus¬
trated a posterdesignedbyAli Sarmadi for
a Round Table devoted to Al-Ghazali held
under Unesco auspices in Paris on 9 and
10 December 1985.
^ in major world languages is perhaps one
of the soundest ways of building bridges
between different cultural regions and
communicating specific visions of the
world to humanity as a whole.
In quantitative terms at least, Unesco's
achievements with regard to Arab
thought and literature are somewhat
modest. Some forty works have been
translated from Arabic into English,
French, German and Spanish, since the
programme was launched in the early
1950s.
But this effort has been concentrated
on the great masterpieces of Arab liter¬
ature, and it has speeded up consider¬
ably since the late 1970s.
Although initially priority was given to
the classical heritage and to its undis¬
puted masterpieces, modern and even
avant-garde literature has since been in¬
cluded. Thus the catalogue of the Un¬
esco Collection of Representative Works
enables the interested reader to travel
widely in the realms of Arab literature.
First, a tour in the strict geographical
sense, with the "Travels of Ibn
Batutah" (1) and "The Configuration of
the Earth" by Ibn Hauqal (2). These
travellers' accounts are far from being of
merely technical interest. In the Arab tra¬
dition, they are part of a special literary
genre, the Rihla (itinerary or journey) in
which the explorer also displays his liter¬
ary, historical and philosophical culture.
Next, a historical tour with Ibn Khal-
dûn's Muqaddimah ("Discourse on the
History of the Universe") (3). This is an
essential work whose contribution to
contemporary historical and sociological
thought on both sides of the Mediterra¬
nean has not yet been exhausted.
Thanks to the Muqadimmah, a work of
universal scope, a breakthrough was
made in the Arab and Maghreb context in
reinterpreting history with the aid of an
appropriate methodology.
A tour in the realm of pure thought with
the philosophical works of AI Farabi (4),
Ibn Rushd (Averroës) (5), Ibn Sina
(Avicenna) <6) and Al-Ghazali <7)think¬
ers nourished on Greek philosophy,
synthesists who transformed the so-
called age of the "Arab miracle" into an
era of light which continued to shine until
the time of the Western Renaissance.
And finally, in the strictly literary field, in
the works of the classical period, the
most outstanding of which is undoubted¬
ly "The Book of Misers" by AI Gahiz (8).
The Arab La Bruyère, although even
more witty, this man of encyclopaedic
culture died under an avalanche of the
books that packed his library. It was
through AI Gahiz that Arab prose re¬
ceived its letters of nobility no mean
achievement in view of the prestige and
supremacy of poetry in Arab literature,
from its origins until our own day. The
Maqamat ("Assemblies") of Al-Hariri (9),
which have been translated into German,
played a comparable role. They include
elements of the novel form which were
highly appreciated during the classical
period but which are not exploited to any
great extent by contemporary Arab
writers.
But however great its prestige, this
classical literature should not eclipse
twentieth-century Arab literature. New
literary genres have been developed,
especially in the novel, but poetry has
also evolved, gradually breaking away
from the constraints imposed by the rigid
forms of the qacida (poem).
It is perhaps in the Arab novel, which is
no more than fifty years old, that the signs
Taha Hussein (1889-1973) was one of the
leading figures of the modern movement
in Egyptian literature. The author of
poems, short stories and many essays on
political and social themes, he wrote an
autobiographyAl-Ayyam (Eng. trans., part
i, An Egyptian Childhood, 1932, andpart ii,
The Stream of Days, 1943) which was the
first contemporary Arabic literary work to
win acclaim in the West. Throughout his
life he sought to reconcile the exigencies
of classical Arabic literature and Western
cultural values. Extracts from his writings
have been published in the Unesco Collec¬
tion in French under the title Au-delà du Nil
(1977, "Beyond the Nile"). Above, photo
portrait of Taha Hussein appeared on the
cover of Mudhakkirat, a volume of
memoirs he published In 1967.
of change are most evident. For the Arab
writer, the novel is still an unexplored
continent and one would like to see Un¬
esco extend its efforts beyond the trans¬
lation of a handful of works by Tawfiq al
Hakim <10), Yusuf ldris(11) and Taha
Hussein (12). The works of such writers
as Najib Mahfuz and Tayeb Salih fully
deserve to be as well known as those, for
example, of the great Latin American
novelists.
There is a similar gap where pre-lsla-
mic and classical Arabic poetry is concer¬
ned. But the special attention given to
modern poetry, with translations of the
works of Adonis (13), Badr Shaker As-
Sayyab <14) and Mahmud Darwish (15), is
a cause for satisfaction. These count
amongst the founders of a school of Ara¬
bic poetry that is rooted in the heritage
but is also open to contemporary poetical
experiment.
ABDELLATIF LAABI is a Moroccan poet who
has translated many literary works from Arabic
into French, mainly for Unesco. He is the author
of a novel, Le Chemin des Ordalies (1982),
volumes of poetry including Le Règne de la
Barbarie (1980) and Sous la Bâillon, le Poème
(1981), and collections of essays, the most re¬
cent being La Brûlure de l'Interrogatoire (1985).
18
