Racism today:
Z>3> Albert Memmi 'Us' and 'Them'
AFTER twenty years of observation,
reflection, research and studies "in
the field", I am convinced that rac¬
ism is a rotten plank. I am not speaking only
of its moral aspect, but of its very logic.
Man's present biological nature de¬
veloped, and is still developing, in the
course of continuous cross-breeding proces¬
ses. In this context, therefore, the concept
of purity is no more than a metaphor, wish¬
ful thinking, fantasy. This is not to say that
men do not differ from each other. They do,
both culturally and even biologically. But,
surprisingly, the most recent scientific re¬
search reveals on the contrary that the dif¬
ferences are so fragmented that it is im¬
possible to make a given social group co¬
incide with any one biological profile. Nor is
the concept of superiority any more sustain¬
able on a functional level. There is nothing
to prove that biological superiority, assum¬
ing that it exists, leads to psychological or
cultural superiority. Finally, it is difficult to
see why any form of natural superiority
should involve economic or social advan¬
tages.
In order to survive, man seeks to defend
his integrity and his possessions and, on
occasions, to appropriate those of his neigh¬
bour, whether they be movable or immov¬
able property, food, raw materials, terri¬
tory, women, real or imaginary religious,
cultural or symbolic assets. Man is both
aggressor and the object of aggression, both
terrifying and terrified.
However, this aggressive rejection of
another is not yet exactly racism. The racist
way of thinking is based on this rejection,
and on pre-existing cultural and social facts.
It is evident that racism or, in other
words, alleged racial superiority based on
alleged biological purity, is no more than an
ideological apparatus, one among many ali¬
bis for domination and expropriation. For
this reason, I think it is necessary to point
out both this general character of a form of
human behaviour which is unfortunately
only too common, and the specific charac¬
ter of racism. Otherwise the false problems
associated with racism will continue to
obscure the permanent drama represented
by the aggressive rejection of others. To
make the distinction more clear, I have
proposed that this terrified, aggressive re¬
jection be designated by a new word, heter-
ophobia, and that the term racism be hence¬
forth reserved for that variety of heteropho-
bia which exploits the fear engendered by
biological and racial difference in order to
justify aggression and privilege. ... I there¬
fore suggested the following formulation,
which has been adopted by the Encyclo¬
paedia Universalis and which Unesco has
done me the honour of using as a basis for
its own definition: Racism is the gener¬
alized, permanent' exploitation of real or
imaginary biological differences, to the
advantage of the accuser and to the detriment
of his victim, for the purpose of justifying
aggression.
We can perceive what could constitute a
single criterion for replying to those closely
related questions which embarrass contem¬
porary consciences what connexion is
there between anti-semitism and the slave
trade? Can one speak of prejudice against
women or young people as forms of racism?
Is there also a form of racism affecting the
14

Dr. Martin Luther King, winner of the
1964 Nobel Peace Prize, addresses par¬
ticipants in a "Prayer Pilgrimage for
Freedom" in front of the Lincoln Memo¬
rial in Washington, D.C., in May 1957.
King was assassinated on 4 April 1968,
a victim of racism.
poor and oppressed? etc. To establish the
connexion between these forms of be¬
haviour, one has only to ask oneself what
advantage a particular aggressor could de¬
rive from them at the expense of a particular
victim.
There is an obvious correlation between
the black slave trade, which reached its
climax in the seventeenth century, and the
first arguments used in support of biological
racism. True, the first element of such a
demonstration can be found in certain
ancient writers. But these are isolated
cases, and where it was present at all, biolo¬
gical stigmatization played only a very
secondary role. This latter system of
argument, which obviously had mercantile
advantages, came into its own with the
growth of the slave trade.
Anti-semitism is of course very ancient,
but it was originally a religious or national
issue. It appeared as a racist doctrine only
much later, simultaneously with the relative
social emancipation of the Jews and their
consequent emergence as economic com¬
petitors.
In short, then, it is only relatively recently
that attempts have been made to provide a
systematic explanation of racism based on
an alleged science. At the end of the
nineteenth century educated Europe was
convinced that the human species was di¬
vided into superior and inferior races /see
Ernest Renan and the anthropologist Paul
Broca).
A comparison of these various doc¬
trines social and cultural as well as biolo¬
gical clearly reveals a constant factor,
irrespective of their specific characteristics
or local circumstances: in the name of a
biological or other form of superiority, one
human group believes itself entitled to
assert itself over another and to have re¬
course for that purpose even to violence and
murder.
Thus we find at the same time the answer
to the most recent questions with which
people are concerned. Racism was a conve¬
nient ideology for rising colonialism, for the
black slave trade and for anti-semitism. It
can still be useful on a wide scale. The
Algerian war, followed by the presence of
millions of immigrant workers in France
and throughout Europe, provided and still
provides favourable ground for "arabopho-
bia", renewed "negrophobia" and, more
generally, the aggressive rejection of im¬
migrants, which I also suggest be included
in the general concept of heterophobia
the complex of fear of others and aggres¬
siveness towards them .
November 1983
ALBERT MEMMI, Tunisian-born French writer,
is well qualified to describe the different man¬
ifestations of racism. Notable among his works
published in English are The Colonizer and the
Colonized (Souvenir Press, London, 1974) with
a preface by Jean-Paul Sanre, and The Pillar of
Salt (1955) with a preface by Albert Camus.

