Averroës and Maimonides,
philosophers of al-Andalus
by Miguel Cruz Hernández
CORDOBÁN society experienced an
authentic cultural renaissance in
the twelfth century. As excavations
have shown, the city had been an important
settlement since the days of the Phoeni¬
cians, as in antiquity the River Guadal¬
quivir was navigable as far as the Cordobán
ford.
The extensive Roman city was remark¬
able for its beauty and the fame of some
of its families, such as that of Seneca.
But it was Islam that established Córdoba
as the capital of al-Andalus Muslim
Andalusia and as the court of the
Umayyad monarchy, making it the pearl of
©
the western Arab world and the most
important, populous and wealthy city in
Europe until the twelfth century.
Its fertile valley and gardens, its rich soil
and the splendour of its palaces and
religious buildings, despite the vicissitudes
of war and other harsh strokes of fate, have
survived to the present day, as has the repu¬
tation of its people, famed for their knowl¬
edge and culture.
After the great fitna or civil war which
destroyed Córdoba at the downfall of the
Umayyad monarchy, the city was reduced
to the status of one more "petty kingdom"
of the Banü 'Abbäd, the Lords of Seville.
But the Almoravids and the Almohads
made it once again the capital of al-Andalus
and filled it with new leading lights in art,
science and literature, until its conquest by
the Christians. The Crusaders, in turn, were
impressed by the city's grandeur, thanks to
which the Great Mosque has survived to
this day.
After the Islamic conquest the three great
monotheistic religions existed side by side
in Córdoba: the Jewish, Christian and Mus¬
lim faiths. Remarkable tolerance reigned
between 711 and 1085, apart from isolated
incidents and the persecution of Christians
in the time of 'Abd al-Rahmän II. During
the Almoravid period (1085-1146) there
was greater intolerance of Christians and
Jews, aggravated in the former case by the
support given by the Andalusian
Mozarabs1" to the aceifa (military expedi¬
tion) led by King Alfonso VII of Castile.
After the Almohad occupation, Jews and
Christians were obliced to leave the terri-
The splendour of the Umayyad caliphate
ofal-Andalus reached its artistic apogee in
the Great Mosque (today the cathedral) of
Córdoba. Begun In 786 AD by 'Abd al-
Rahmän I, "the Immigrant", an Umayyad
leader who escaped from 'Abbäsid
Damascus and founded the emirate of
Córdoba, it was enlarged and enriched
over the centuries by his successors.
Opposite page, general view of Córdoba
with the old Jewish quarter and the Great
Mosque at centre and, In foreground, the
Roman bridge over the Guadalquivir. Left,
typical patio in the Jewish quarter, with
beyond the tower (formerly the minaret) of
the Great Mosque.
tory under their sway or to pretend, as did
the family of Maimonides, that they had
been converted to Islam.
Cultural co-existence was a very different
matter, although it worked to the advantage
of the dominant social group and was lim¬
ited to certain times and certain categories
of people. In the ruling classes, peaceful
co-existence was confined to kings, nobles
and scholars; where their subjects were con¬
cerned those who lived amicably side by
side were scholars, artists or craftworkers
working as architects, astronomers, ambas¬
sadors, landowners, mathematicians, doc¬
tors, philosophers, tax-collectors, transla¬
tors, etc. In fact throughout the Middle
Ages two major "established" cultures
existed in the Iberian peninsula: the Latin-
Christian and the Islamic. Judaism certainly
existed also, but Judaeo-Hebraic culture
was fundamentally centred on the syn¬
agogue. Far from diminishing its greatness,
this represents the greatest claim to glory of
the Jewish community. Having lost all real
political power since their exile to Babylon,
uprooted time and again from their lands,
the Jewish people not only preserved the
treasure of their faith and the testimony of
their customs, but made a home of their
countries of exile. No country seemed more
like a "second homeland" to them than
Sefarad, the name which they gave to the
Iberian peninsula. But this made it incum¬
bent on them to become integrated with the
prevailing social pattern, to use the lan¬
guage of their rulers and to assimilate the
knowledge and wisdom of other peo¬
ples in this case, to speak and write the
Arabic language and to master science and
philosophy as perfectly as Maimonides
did.
The importance of this great period of
cultural co-existence, which later (in the
second half of the twelfth century and in the
thirteenth century) bequeathed its benefits
to the medieval Christian world, is apparent
in the work of two outstanding men of
learning, both of whom were born in Cor¬
doba and wrote in Arabic: Averroës, a
Muslim, and Maimonides, a Jew.
1. Spanish Christians who lhed under Muslim rule,
while presen ing their religion and ecclesiastical organi¬
zation. Editor.

M*fc '¿0^<

Centre of political power and of cultural
and artistic development, the Córdoba of
the Umayyad caliphate was for centuries a
great focus of civilization. The caliphs
took pleasure in welcoming to their court
musicians, poets, architects and philo¬
sophers, who came sometimes from dis¬
tant countries, such as the great Persian
musician Ziryäb. Above, a painting which
portrays this cultural splendour, by the
Spanish artist Dionisio Baixeras (1862-
1943), in the University of Barcelona.
Seville, the Roman Hispalis, was one of the
principal urban centres of the civilization
ofal-Andalus. Averroës, a jurist by profes-
Fundación Juan March. Taken from Andalucía, Noguer publishers, Barcelona, 1980
sion, for a long time occupied the post of
qàdï or judge in the city. Below, detail of
the raisedaltarpiece ofSeville cathedral, a
representation in relief of the medieval
city; in background can be seen the cele¬
brated Giralda, the minaretof the vanished
mosque, today the tower of the Gothic
cathedral.
Averroës: a universal Andalusian. The
Banü Rushd family can be traced back for
six or more generations. Averroës' grand¬
father (450-520 AH/1058-1126 AD) known
as Abü l-Walld Muhammad b. Ahmad b.
Muhammad al-gidd, "the grandfather", to
distinguish him from his famous grandson,
was an outstanding jurist, chief qàdï (qädi
al-gamä') of Córdoba and adviser to the
Almoravid and Almohad rulers. Thanks to
his advice, the Mozarabs who lent their
assistance to the Christian aceifa of Alfonso
VII were only exiled, instead of being
executed according to custom. Several of
his works are still extant, including two
monumental legal encyclopaedias: The
Muqaddamät al mttmahhadät and the Kitâb
al-Tahsïl.
Averroës' father was called Abu 1-Qäsim
Ahmad Ibn Rushd (487-564 AH/1094-1168
AD) and he too was a jurist and chief qädi
of Córdoba. He took part in the educational
reform ordered by the Almohad rulers. His
son, Abu 1-Walïd Muhammad b. Ahmad b.
Muhammad al-hafïd, "the grandson", to
distinguish him from his grandfather, was
born in Córdoba in 520 AH/1126 AD, and
in due course was to become the greatest of
the Islamic philosophers and the most uni¬
versal of those born in the Iberian penin¬
sula.
From a very early age Averroës studied
the Arab humanities, Islamic law, medicine
and philosophy. He was so industrious that,
according to his biographers, he rested only
twice in his lifetime: on the day of his
father's death and on his own wedding day.
8

The igäza or licentia docendi, the equivalent
of a lecturer's diploma today, was probably
awarded to him between 1141 and 1146, and
he must have married between 1146 and
1153.
Towards the end of 1168, Ibn Tufayl, the
author of the famous work Risâla Hayy ibn
Yaqzän ("The Improvement of Human
Reason"), introduced Averroës to the
Almohad sultan Abü Ya'qüb Yüsuf, to
whom he was vizier and personal physician.
The sultan reassured Averroës concerning
his dedication to philosophy and even urged
him to write a commentary on Aristotle.
The monarch's protection was very impor¬
tant, as acknowledged by Averroës in dedi¬
cating his "Commentary on Plato's
Republic" to his successor. In 565 AH/1169
AD he was appointed qädlof Seville, where
he performed his duties to the satisfaction
of the Sevillians, who showed their
approval by interceding on his behalf when
he fell from favour. In 578 AH/1182 AD
Averroës was appointed chief qädi of Cor¬
doba and chief physician at the Almohad
court, positions in which he was confirmed
by the new sultan, Abu Yüsuf Ya'qüb
al-Mansür, in 580 AH/1184 AD.
After the battle of Alarcos (18 June
1195), at which the Almohad army crushed
their Christian opponents, the intolerant
alfaquies and ulemas (doctors of law and
Islamic theologians) of Córdoba denounced
Averroës, with the result that his works
were banned and he was exiled to Lucena
for some twenty months. In 595 AH/1198
AD the sultan pardoned him, restored his
position at court and took him with his reti¬
nue to Marrakesh, perhaps in order to pro¬
tect him from his Andalusian enemies. On
Thursday 9 safar of the year 595 AH (10
December 1198), at the age of seventy-two,
Averroës died in that Moroccan city. His
body was transported three months later to
Córdoba and buried in the cemetery of the
Banü 'Abbäd. The funeral must have been
a remarkable occasion, since the great mys¬
tic Ibn 'Arab! of Murcia tells us that he was
present; the mule which carried Averroës'
mortal remains was laden with the corpse
on one side and his books on the other as a
counterweight. Thanks to an extract from
the Kullïyât, we are able to deduce that he
died of the complications of arthritis, from
which he had suffered since his youth fol¬
lowing an attack of rheumatic fever which
had not been properly treated when he was
a child.
Averroës is thought to have had more
than five children. We know the names of
only two of them: Abü Muhammad 'Abd
Allah ibn Rushd, a doctor, philosopher and
qàdï, like his father; and Abu al-Qäsim
Muhammad ibn Rushd, who died in 612
AH/1215 AD and who also held the post of
qàdï. The names of the other sons are lost,
Because ofhis unorthodox ideas, towards
the end of his life Averroës was exiled to
Lucena, to the south ofCórdoba. The fami¬
ly of Maimonides also was linked with this
town, with its strong Jewish roots. Right,
arcades of the old synagogue, now the
church of Saint James.
but we know that they also held the position
of qädi in al-Andalus. Of his grandchildren
we have information about only one, Abu
l-'Abbâs Yahyä b. Qäsim ibn Rushd, who
was likewise a judge.
The writings of Averroës form an impres¬
sive corpus. As many as 127 works are
attributed to him, but he cannot have writ¬
ten more than 84; of these 55 are still fully
extant and parts of another eight have been
preserved. These works constitute a com¬
plete scientific, legal, medical, philosophi¬
cal and theoretical encyclopaedia. In accor¬
dance with a convention of medieval
scholarship, part of these works consists of
an exegesis of the body of doctrine inherited
from Antiquity (the Corpus aristotelicum in
philosophy, the Corpus galenicum in medi¬
cine, etc.). For this reason, the Christian
Schoolmen claimed that Averroës had writ¬
ten three types of commentaries on Aristo¬
tle (whereas in reality they are three exposi¬
tions of his philosophy), and called him
"The Commentator".
Besides such expositions of Aristotle,
Plato, Euclid and Galen, Averroës also
wrote many works from a more personal
approach, such as the Kitâb al-Kullïyât
("Book of the General Principles of Medi¬
cine"); the great legal encyclopaedia Kitâb
al-Bidäya; the famous defence of philoso¬
phy against more traditional theologians,
Tahäfut al-Tahäfut ("The Incoherence of
the Incoherence"), which was an attack on
The Incoherence of the Philosophers by
al-Ghazäli; and the theological works Fasl
al-Maqäl ("Decisive Treatise on the Har¬
mony of Religion and Philosophy"); and
Kashf 'an manähij (on the interpretation of
the revealed Scriptures).
Beneath the scholastic appearance typi¬
cal of the forms and method of medieval
scholarship lurks the distinction between
scientific and philosophical knowledge on
the one hand, and theology on the other,
together with the idea of human wisdom as
something which can exist independently,
and even the concept of an altogether secu¬
lar society. It is not surprising that when
Averroës' ideas were encountered by the
medieval Christians they caused real intel¬
lectual turmoil, and he was branded as an
atheist and a blasphemer.
At the same time, his writings on the
natural world and medicine contain numer¬
ous empirical observations concerning
astronomy, earthquakes, the growth of
plants, the meat and wool of sheep, and
even the food eaten in his time, for which he
gives some recipes for rehogo (a sim¬
mered meat dish), for humble fried eggs,
for a dish of aubergines and for barley
water, which are still typical of Spanish
cooking.
Averroës' great human qualities were
augmented by a strong affection for his
native Córdoba, which he regarded as the
most beautiful of places, and for his com¬
patriots, whom he held to be the most intel¬
ligent people of their time. By contrast, he
wrote with particular severity against
tyrants of all periods, especially his own.
"There is nothing worse than to be a
tyrant," he repeatedly wrote, and in his
social theory lie gave prominence to the
analysis of the well-known dialogue

between master and slave, of Platonic
origin, which Hegel was to make famous.
He was the first, and perhaps the only,
medieval thinker to criticize the status of
women in society, which "turned them into
cabbages" since it was impossible for them
to achieve complete personal and social
fulfilment. In his model society, the neces¬
sary order would come into being freely,
there would be no distinction between
"mine and thine", and no-one would be
treated as an outcast from the community of
all human beings.
Maimonides, "the Andalusian", the uni¬
versalJew. Averroës' twenty-month exile to
Lucena, a Cordobán town famous in the
past for its distinguished Jewish com¬
munity, gave rise to the legend that he and
Maimonides knew one another. Unfor¬
tunately this was not the case. The family of
Moses ben Maymün, who was known as
Maimonides and also as "Rambam" (an
anagram of Rabbi Moses ben Maymün),
had long been living in Córdoba. But when
Averroës arrived in Lucena, Maimonides
had been living in Cairo for thirty years.
The Banü Maymün held two unshake-
able convictions: that they were descended
from the line of King David and that they
had Andalusian roots. They were estab¬
lished in Córdoba, well known and
respected by the Cordobán Jewish com¬
munity. Rabbi Isaac ben Maymün, father of
Maimonides, begat him in that city where,
according to tradition, he was born in the
siesta hour on Saturday 14 nisán of the year
4896 of the Jewish calendar (30 March 1 135).
There he received instruction in the Arab and
Hebrew humanities and in the religion of
Abraham and Moses. But in 542 AH/1147
AD, as the Almohad army was marching
towards Córdoba, Rabbi Isaac and his fam¬
ily, including his two sons David and Moses,
left the city and took refuge in Granada,
where they lived until 1150. Their next
move was to Almería, where Moses ben
Maymün continued his education. But
when this city in its turn was menaced by the
Almoravids, Rabbi Isaac and his family
were obliged to leave it, at the beginning of
1160. They settled in Fez, where they had
outwardly to dissemble {'amûsîm) the faith
of Abraham and Moses, although in private
they strictly adhered to it. In Almería and
Fez, Maimonides finished his scientific,
In the year 1198 AD, Averroës, hisposition
restored at the Almohad court in Córdoba,
accompanied the sultan to Marrakesh,
where he died on the 10th of December
that same year. His body was taken back
and buried in Córdoba, his native city.
Above, the Place Djemaa El-Fna and its
famous market in Marrakesh.
The Moroccan city ofFez was an important
stage in the long, forced wanderings of
Maimonides and his family. During five
years there he completed his scientific
andphilosophical education and began to
write his books. Right, this old blocked-up
window in Maimonides' family house at
Fez was perhaps that of his study. Still
preserved in the façade are eight of the
twelve bronze bowls which embellished it
in the 12th century, which were apparently
used by the philosopher scientist for his
solar astronomical calculations. Above
right, library of the al-Qarawiyym mosque
(859 AD), the oldest and most important in
the city.
10

if
*~
UJ
O C '
il
CO o
© 8¡
0. D
O o
o S
£ j=
0. Ol
*
nvyt r
w .*
s : 'P
I
H i1
»MU
-Ä
Il 1
/x : ' »w
-> ^l^H BT
rt,3 4I HT-
' BW/
cr:
^~¿££x£A
11

philosophical and theological training, and
it was in Fez that he began to write the first
of his books.
Still fearing for their safety, Rabbi Isaac
and his family decided to emigrate to the
East, and on Saturday 4 iyar of the year
4927 (18 April 1165) they took ship for Pal¬
estine, reaching Akko (St. Jean d'Acre) on
3jiván (16 May) after a stormy voyage dur¬
ing which they almost lost their lives. They
spent six months in Akko, then visited
Jerusalem and Hebron in order to pray in
the ruins of the temple and at the tomb of
the patriarchs. According to tradition,
there were only four Jewish families living
in Jerusalem; the city was in ruins, to which
Maimonides seems to have been referring
when he said that such ruination was
brought about by men and their strife:
"May God give me strength in everything I
do and help me to keep my promises, and
may that for which I prayed, there in the
ruins, be granted to me, and may all Israel
soon see the Holy Land restored and res¬
cued from its decline."
The family of Rabbi Isaac left for Egypt,
where they lived for a time in Alexandria.
Maimonides was then thirty-one, and sor¬
row came to him again with the death of his
father, which raised the problem of his own
livelihood. Grief at his father's death was
eased by the countless testimonies of
respect which he received, even from lands
far distant from Egypt. The problem of
keeping body and soul together was solved
by his younger brother David, who used the
money inherited from his father to set him¬
self up as a merchant trading in precious
stones. It may have been the intransigence
of the Jewish "literalists" of Alexandria
which compelled Maimonides to leave that
city and travel to Fostat, or Old Cairo,
where he completed his great commentary
on the Mishna, in 1168.
But misfortune again befell Maimonides
with the death of his brother David, to
whom he had always been very close and
whom he would remember all his life, and
that of his wife which occurred shortly after¬
wards. Thus he was faced with the problem
of earning a living. Since he did not wish to
be a burden on the community, he decided
to support himself by working as a doctor.
He communicated this plan to al-Fädil,
vizier and royal secretary to the famous Sal-
adin (Salâh al-DIn), who appointed him
Court Physician, a position which added
lustre to his reputation. It may have been
around this time that Maimonides married
again, this time a sister of another royal
secretary, al-Mâtï, who himself married one
of Maimonides' sisters, with whom he had a
son called Ibrahim.
In 1177 Maimonides was appointed nag-
gib (ruler) of the Jewish community, which
meant personal recognition within that
community but was also an honour
bestowed by Saladin on the Jews, since the
post had been vacant for several years
owing to the irregular conduct of the last
incumbent. Maimonides never allowed the
Jews to call him by the title of naggib, but
the Arabs, undeterred by such modesty,
repeatedly mentioned his title when writing
of him. In carrying out his official duties,
Maimonides distinguished himself by his
integrity and his liberal attitudes. Despite
these heavy responsibilities and his unre¬
mitting work as a doctor, in 1180 he suc¬
ceeded in completing the Mishne Torah
("The Torah Reviewed"), begun twelve
years previously.
Maimonides' biographers describe his
long working day. He would rise at first
light and ride on horseback to the court,
which in those days was in Cairo, several
kilometres north of Fostat. He lectured on
philosophy and medicine and attended to
his patients at court. In the early afternoon
he returned home, dealt with official mat¬
ters and treated his many other patients,
most of whom were poor and needy. More
In 1165 Maimonides and his family took
ship at Ceuta for Palestine. After dis¬
embarking at St. Jean d'Acre, where they
stayed for a time, they visited Jerusalem
and other holy places of Judaism. Later
they left for Egypt, settling in Fostat (Old
Cairo). Here Maimonides wrote the major
part of his work and held Important posts,
notably that of physician to Saladin and
his court. Opposite below, the Ben Ezra
synagogue at Fostat, near the site of
Maimonides' house, where he and his
family may have worshipped. This page,
the AI Azhar mosque, construction of
which was begun in 970 AD.
12

than once there were so many of them, and
so great was his fatigue, that he was obliged
to lie down on his bed to conduct his medi¬
cal consultations.
Yet it was during this period of his life
(1185-1200) that he wrote the most univer¬
sal and grandiose of his works, The Guide of
the Perplexed (Dalâlat al-hairin), written in
Arabic as were virtually all his books and all
his letters. During this period (in 1190) the
writings of Averroës reached Egypt, as
Maimonides himself testifies. He took the
view that the Cordobán Muslim thinker
"interpreted Aristotle according to an
appropriate and reliable method". Never¬
theless, the Arab thinkers who really
influenced Maimonides were Mu'tazila,
al-Fârâbî and Avempace (Ibn Bâjja), and
possibly also the Andalusian Ibn Tufayl, in
view of the parallel approach adopted by
both philosophers in the introductions to
their most important works.
The fame of Maimonides, both for his
work and writings in the field of medicine
and for his Guide of the Perplexed, spread
throughout the Arab world and the Jewish
communities. In 1195, for example, a letter
arrived in Cairo from the Jewish community
of Lunel, in Provence, hailing his supreme
authority in rabbinics. It came at a time of
affliction, for Maimonides was ill and had
been the butt of accusations by the most
intransigent of his critics. But letters such as
this, and the high opinion of the sultan
al-Afdal, Saladin's elder son and successor,
brought him consolation for his mental and
physical sufferings. When the scholars of
Lunel received the copy of the Guide of the
Perplexed which they had requested, they
entrusted the Sephardic Jew Samuel ben
Tibbon with the task of translating it into
Hebrew. The task was an arduous one, but
on 30 November 1204 Samuel ben Tibbon
finished the translation, which in Hebrew
bore the title Môrè Nebûkhîn. Samuel ben
Tibbon had hoped to deliver the translation
personally into Maimonides' hands, but
during the night of 20 tebet of the year 4965
(13 December 1204), Moses ben Maymün
departed this life. According to his wishes,
his body was taken to Tiberias (Israel),
where he was buried.
The written works of Maimonides are
very extensive, chief among them being the
many medical writings (some of which have
been published for the first time in recent
years), the scientific learning of which is
proof of considerable advances in the care
of the sick comparable to the practices of
those Averroës called the "new Andalusian
doctors", in other words those of the Banü
Zuhr (Latin Avenzoar) family. Also of
great importance are his Commentary on
the Mishna, the impressive Mishne Torah,
and, above all, The Guide of the Perplexed,
the greatest landmark in Jewish writing
since the Scriptures. Soon after Mai¬
monides' death it was being said in Jewish
communities that "between Moses and
Moses, there is no one to choose but
Moses"; in other words, Maimonides is the
second Moses of the Jewish people.
MIGUEL CRUZ HERNANDEZ, of Spain, is pro¬
fessor of Islamic thought at the Autonomous
University of Madrid and formerly taught at the
Universities of Granada and Salamanca. Among
his manypublished works are Historia del pensa¬
miento en el mundo islámico ("History of
Thought in the Islamic World". 1981), Historiadel
pensamiento en al-Andalus ("History of Thought
in al-Andalus", 1985). and the forthcoming Aver¬
roës: Vida, obra, pensamiento e influencia
("Averroés: Ufe, Work. Thought and Influence").
In accordance with his wishes, the mortal
remains of Maimonides were transported
from Fostat to Tiberias (Israel) to be
buried. Below, epitaph in English and Heb¬
rew carved on his tomb, formerly unpro¬
tected, today covered by a small shelter. !
1 :
13
