2. Peace, disarmament and technology
by Luis Echeverría
WE consider peace to be an active
form of wisdom and negotiation,
and it is precisely for this reason
that it is essential for us to recognize that, in
our day and age, peace cannot be merely an
"institutionalized truce". Since 1945, each
truce, each agreement, each convention has
simply heralded a new impetus to the arms
race and accelerated development of the
military technology of the atomic era.
Although it is not the only cause, this has
been due in large part to a fundamental
reality the division of the world into
opposing blocs. In military and economic
terms, these blocs have been at the root of
the division of the world; furthermore, the
political conception of blocs, with their
ideological stratification, has hampered the
evolution of philosophical theory as well as
any progress in the parallel yet independent
process of philosophical reflection.
One practical consequence of this has
been the "colonization" of science, due
largely to the ideology of power and to the
ethically anomalous divorce of science itself
from its own historical effects. In practice
this has led to a methodological sectarian¬
ism according to which science must be¬
come the servant of military rather than
human priorities. This moral aberration,
the evidence of which we encounter daily,
characterizes the science of our time. It
presupposes that alignment into blocs is a
natural state of affairs; it also explains the
moral reaction of those scientists who have
broken with the established order and with
the military/industrial complex and whose
stance allows us to hope that there is a
future for mankind.
It is clear, therefore, that for this century
peace is going to be bound up with a new
formulation of the objectives of develop¬
ment. There will be no peace worthy of the
name so long as we fail to take advantage of
each period of ideological truce that occurs
"Disarmament implies, above all, a change
in the priorities of those countries princi¬
pally engaged in the arms race; and such a
change must involve a materialand dialec¬
tical transformation, both internal and ex¬
ternal, in the aims andobjectives thatmust
be set for contemporary development in
the name of solidarity and inter¬
dependence."
to alter the existing status quo of today's
world in other words, so long as we do not
adopt the principle of a genuine liquidation
of the dominant structurally-enshrined
violence.
To speak of peace and development as
one and the same phenomenon does not
mean merely to speak in abstract terms of a
purely moral proposition or to enter an
ideological labyrinth from which there is no
exit. On the contrary, it is to pose the crucial
question of the closing years of the twen¬
tieth century. Peace today is not simply the
opposite of war; it is the political and philo¬
sophical context for the practical achieve¬
ment of a new form of development giving
effect to the suspension of conflicts and
which will give rise to a new form of society
based on negotiation, self-examination and
liberty.
So long as this aspect of peace remains
less than perfectly clear, local conflicts and
wars of tactical and strategic attrition will
continue to be the determining factor in
international relations. In other words, the
nightmare threat of local conflicts develop¬
ing into a total, catastrophic war will con¬
tinue to hover over our heads.
Worse than this, if present conditions
persist, any purely national interest, any
selfish supranational goal will be seen,
ideologically, as a factor in military policy.
Structural violence will thus menace us
daily in forms ranging from fanatical terror¬
ism to local or regional conflicts, irrational
chain explosions which are no more than
the expression of a violent departure from
the principles of solidarity, justice and law.
It is incomprehensible that, each year,
expenditure on armaments should be
almost equal to the external debt (approx¬
imately 800,000 million dollars) of the de¬
veloping countries, whose populations at
present amount to 75 per cent of total world
population, a figure that will rise to 79 per
cent by the end of the century.
Rationally speaking, we cannot dissoci¬
ate the philosophical and political aspects of
the struggle for peace from the economic
choices proposed under the project for a
new international economic order.
In every respect, the interlinkage of
peace, disarmament and development
seems fundamental. It cannot, as is some¬
times maintained, be conceived in terms of
a purely mechanical transfer to the peoples
of the developing world of the resources at
present devoted to armaments.
Disarmament implies, above all, a
change in the priorities of those countries
principally engaged in the arms race; and

such a change must involve a material and
dialectical transformation, both internal
and external, in the aims and objectives that
must be set for contemporary development
in the name of solidarity and inter¬
dependence.
There is another essential underlying
question: that of the transfer of scientific
and military resources to a science whose
goal is peace. This would imply the greatest
revolution of the century the divorce of
science from power politics and the moral
regeneration of research by making it possi¬
ble for science and scientists to escape from
the clutches of the powerful military/indus¬
trial complex which dominates our age.
Disarmament would free massive re¬
sources for development. One possible
joint international venture could be the
exploration of the Arctic and Antarctic for
the benefit of humanity.
LUIS ECHEVERRÍA was President of Mexico
from 1970 to 1 976. Jurist, journalist and a former
professor of political science at the National
Autonomous UniversityofMexico, he is Director-
General of the Centre for Third World Economic
and Social Studies, Mexico City.
"In 1980, out of the 3 million scientists and
engineers employed world-wide in scien¬
tific laboratories, approximately half a mil¬
lion were specifically engaged in the de¬
velopment of new weapons systems. By
1981, those in the forefront of space tech¬
nology were believed to have acquired the
ability to survey virtually every square
metre of each other's territory, but the
world-widepool ofscientific and engineer¬
ing resources had barely begun to survey
the complex ecosystems of fast-dis¬
appearing tropical rain forests or the
menacing spread of the world's deserts."
(United Nations document, April 1986.) Be¬
low, this 600-year-old pine is a symbol of
nature conservation for the people of the
Republic ofKorea. The tree, growing some
100 kilometres south-east of Seoul, is pro¬
tected by a large cage. Legend has it that
the tree was given the official title of
cabinet minister by a 15th-century Korean
king, because it raised its branches in re¬
spect when he passed by.
/
.
I
Wl
¿m&.
@
. *-
»ill
