Science and music
An interview with Iannis Xenakis
Iannis Xenakis, besides being a musician
you are also an architect. How do you
account for these twin preoccupations?
I am not really an architect in the profes¬
sional sense of the term. When I worked
with Le Corbusier, a good many years ago, I
was involved in both activities at once. In
particular, I collaborated on the Cité
Radieuse residential complex in Marseilles,
the Convent of Sainte-Marie-de-La-
Tourette in Eveux-sur-1'ArbresIe, near
Lyons, and the city of Chandigarh in India.
And in 1958 I designed the Philips Pavilion
at the World's Fair in Brussels. But since
then I have been concerned with making
music, and occasionally, when the oppor¬
tunity arises, with architecture.
What is your most recent project?
The plan for an experimental concert hall
that I designed with the architect Jean-
Louis Veret. It was short-listed for the Cité
de la Musique music community centre at
La Villette, in Paris, but was not the win¬
ning design. This concert hall is entirely
different from a conventional one. It is a
sort of potato-shape, so as to avoid being
circular, which is very bad acoustically. So it
has a rounded, oval shape, with walls that
bulge slightly. Instead of a fixed floor, there
are cubes one metre wide, each of which
can accommodate two people: the contours
can thus be modified and the levels can be
varied by as much as six metres. This makes
several combinations possible: groupings in
the centre, or several groupings to left and
right, or, again, a traditional stage. The
instrumental performers can accordingly be
placed in the middle, on a platform of
cubes, with the audience all around them.
But it is also possible to shift the focus away
from the centre, or, on the contrary, to
keep everything on one side only. Every¬
thing is possible. Running around the inside
of the walls there is a spiral gallery which
can accommodate the audience and also
musicians, so as to produce a three-dimen¬
sional soundscape. The walls themselves
are perforated with panels which can vary in
their degree of absorbency to obtain the
right degree of reverberation. Moreover,
this entire volume can be made to com¬
municate with another, much larger
volume, which contains it and which opens
outwards, thereby creating a great many
new possibilities for performances. But this
is not mobile architecture. Mobile
architecture never works, because the
machinery gets jammed.
Why is there such a link, in your opinion,
between these two areas of creative activity,
music and architecture?

2 2
ra u.
Because architecture is a three-dimensional
space in which we live. Humps and hollows
are very important, in sound as well as in
the visual sphere. The handling of propor¬
tions is essential here. The best architecture
has to do not with decoration but with plain
proportions and volumes. Architecture is
the bare bones. Architecture is something
visual. And in the visual sphere there are
components which relate to what we call the
rational sphere, which is also part of music.
Whether we like it or not, there is a bridge
between architecture and music. It is based
on our mental structures, which are the
same in both cases. Composers, for exam¬
ple, have used symmetrical patterns which
also exist in architecture. If we want to
discover the equal and symmetrical parts of
a rectangle, the most informative way of
proceeding is to rotate it. There are four
directions in which a rectangle can be tur¬
ned, and no more than four.' Such trans¬
formations also exist in music: this is what
was invented in the melodic field during the
Renaissance. You take a melody: (a) you
read it upside down; (b) you invert it in
relation to the intervals; (c) that which rose
towards the upper part of the scale now
descends towards the lower, and vice versa.
To this you must add (d) the recurrence of
the inversion, which was used by the
polyphonists of the Renaissance and which
also occurs in serial music. In this example,
we find the same four transformations car¬
ried out in architecture and in music.
Another example is the Philips Pavilion.
To design this I used ideas borrowed from
the orchestral music that I was composing at
Above, the Philips Pavilion at the 1958
Brussels Exposition, designed by Iannis
Xenakis in what was then a totally new
architectural form composed of hyperbo¬
lic paraboloids. The world premier of
Poème Electronique by the composer
Edgard Várese (1883-1965), with a film by
Le Corbusier, was held in the pavilion dur¬
ing the Exposition.

^ the time. I wanted to create changeable
spaces, which could be continuously altered
by the displacement of a straight line. This
produces hyperbolic paraboloids in
architecture and masses of glissandos in
music.
Can you give any examples from history of
such a convergence, or even coincidence,
between architectural and musical patterns?
Bartok used the golden section to achieve
his harmonies. The golden section is taken
from the visual sphere. It is a geometrical
proportion, with the additional property
that each term is the sum of the previous
two terms. From the Egyptian pyramids to
the Greek temples, it was used in
architecture as a sort of miraculous key to
the creation of something beautiful.
But for you this correspondence is fun¬
damental?
Goethe said: "Architecture is frozen
music. " If we attempt to go further than this
literary form of words in order to make a
more objective claim, we soon come to
mental structures which fall into the group
category. The rotation of rectangles or
melodies are groups of transformations.
And in fact group theory deals with sym¬
metries, down to the infinitely small level of
particles this is the only means whereby
particles can be identified.
There are thus several levels of corres¬
pondence. The vaguest is the literary level,
that of Goethe; I have mentioned another,
more objective level, with my example of
groups; there are others of a different type
such as that of forming space either in sound
or in architecture by using the acoustic axis
such as glissandos, or the numerical axis.
But there are other possible approaches.
Rhythm, for example. What is rhythm? It
consists of chosen points along an axis,
namely, the axis of time. The musician mea¬
sures time as the walker counts milestones.
The same thing is found in architecture
with a façade, for example. And piano keys
are also architecture. They are regulated in
a constant manner. In one case it is a matter
"" of time , and in the other, of space. So there
is a correspondence between the two. And
this is possible because there is an under¬
lying mental structure which mathemati¬
cians call an "order structure".
Stretching across the top ofpages 4 to 8 Is
the score of" Mycènes Alpha (1978), apiece
of music created by Iannis Xenakis on the
UPIC, a composing machine he invented
(see photo opposite page). The work lasts
approximately 10 minutes.
So in your experiments as a composer, you
draw on experiments in physics, among
other things?
Admittedly, I have not carried out such
experiments myself, but I know that they
are so defined. The surprising thing is that
order structures, isomorphic mapping and
group theory originated with mathemati¬
cians. They created, as it were, a more
searching experimental psychology than the
psychologists of the nineteenth century.
Much later, researchers such as Jean Piaget
discovered that the development of mental
structures in children coincides with these
definitions in mathematics and physics.
In your work as a musician, informatics
plays an important part because of the new
possibilities it opens up. You have even in¬
vented a music-composing machine, the
UPIC. Can you tell us about it?
In the laboratory that I set up twenty years
ago, we developed a system whereby any¬
body at all can compose music by drawing.
It is both a tool for composers and acoustics
experts and a teaching aid for children, who
can learn to think in music without having to
be trained in musical notation learning by
direct experience, in other words. This
could not have been done without informa¬
tics, which yielded possibilities comparable
to those brought by the invention of writing:
preserving thought in symbols. Here, we
can use our machine to preserve musical
thought, since we can also store it.
Do children remain free and unaffected by
the conditioning of a specific musical lan¬
guage?
They do. For example, an Indian or
Balinese child who has learned the tradi¬
tional music of his village will start to think
musically in a different way if he or she uses
this machine. Children can imitate Bach
without having learned musical notation.
Gradually the child assimilates this and
fashions his or her own environment in a
particular style.
How do you use computers at present?
In Diatope (1977), the entire programme of
laser beams and electronic flashes co-ordin¬
ated with the music, which was also pro¬
duced by computer, had been devised by
programming in computation centres.
There were 1,600 electronic lights which
could flash on and off individually in one
twenty-fifth of a second. This cannot be
done by hand: it is too fast and the numbers
are too high. Furthermore, computers and
other new technology available to us can
produce light, so that it becomes possible to
transpose the musical composition into the
visual sphere and experiment with shapes
and movements. The effects of light be¬
come like visible sounds. You can play with
them just as you play with sounds, but in a
spatial dimension instead. The morpholo¬
gical techniques (creating moving or sta¬
tionary shapes) are often the same as in
music. For example, if you want a cloud of
points of light to appear and disappear, you
need to introduce the calculus of prob¬
ability, as I did with sounds. It is the same
technique. But not everything is con¬
vertible...
It should be borne in mind that computer
technology is only a tool. If I use mathema¬
tical functions or even sometimes physical
theories in music, it is because there is a
profound connexion between music and
numbers. All of Pythagorean theory, of
course, is based on this thesis. But it is a
truth which derives from our own mental
structure, nothing more. Once you have
grasped this principle, it is easy to make use
of whole chunks of mathematical thought,
which is already present in music and even,
in some cases, at a much more advanced
stage than in mathematics.
For example, consider what happened
when musicians in the tenth century in¬
vented musical notation, no longer relying
on the vague indications of neumes, but
using the staff and calibrated units of the
characteristics of sound: pitch and duration.
In doing this they transformed sensations
which have nothing to do with spatial sensa¬
tions into spatial notation.
Four hundred years before Nicole

Oresme and six centuries before the analy¬
tical geometry of Descartes! Music was
ahead of its time. I do not know whether
Oresme or Descartes were influenced by
musical notation, which did exactly what
they did, and yielded even more abundant
possibilities, since pitch and duration have
nothing to do with space, whereas these two
thinkers were working in space. This is only
one instance where musicians, without
knowing what they were doing, have stolen
a march on knowledge and invention in
other areas.
Do you see no sharp dividing line between
traditional musical thinking and the most
modern aspects of contemporary music?
None. There is even a fairly smooth con¬
tinuum which has resulted, for example, in
serial music. The escape from tonal func¬
tions made possible by "dodecaphony", and
later by serial music, was only relative, since
Schoenberg and the Vienna School adopted
self-imposed restrictions in returning to
manipulations of the polyphonic type that
came in with the Renaissance. This was the
criticism that I levelled at the serialist school
in the 1950s. If Schoenberg had been famil¬
iar with the science of his day, including
philosophy, physics and mathematics, he
would have introduced the calculus of prob¬
ability.
So the musician should keep up to date with
contemporary knowledge?
Yes. Of course, this is increasingly difficult.
But even without a thorough knowledge of
every field, he should be familiar with as
Iannis Xenakis with the composing
machine he Invented in 1975 and which
has since won wide acclaim. Known as the
UPIC (Unité Polyagogique Informatique du
CEMAMu), the machine makes it possible
"to compose music through drawing, even
without any knowledge of music or infor¬
matics", with a stylet on the electro¬
magnetic table. It brings musical creation
within reach of everyone and is a useful
educational tool. It enshrines one of the
composer's major preoccupations, the re¬
lationship between forms created in space
and those created in time.

Drawings by Iannis Xenakis of a theatre
and concert hall which he designed in
association with the French architect
Jean-Louis Veret. The building consists of
two volumes: a large multi-purpose area
enclosed by a thin concrete shell (8), in¬
side which is the "potato-shaped" ex¬
perimental music room itself, with its
wood-covered concrete walls. The two
areas communicate by means of pivoting
acoustic panels (1). The building opens
out through sheets of "wavy" glass (4)
onto an elevated platform (6). The project,
initially intended for the "Cité de la Musi¬
que" at La Villette, in Paris, breaks with all
previous conceptions of what a concert
hall should be, and is designed to "receive
music, musicians, their technological
equipment and the audience in three
dimensions".
View from the "Fontaine aux Lions' General access ramp
8
1) Pivoting acoustic panel:
2) Interior ramp for audience, performers,
projection, sound and lighting equipment
3) "Potato-shaped" experimental concert hall
4) Sheets of "wavy" glass
8) Hyperbolic paraboloid shells (thin layer)
5) Helicoid general access and
performance ramp: mJn entrance
9) Outside ramp for movement
\ around the potato-shaped hall
10) Variable relief floor
11) Cloakrooms, rehearsal rooms,
dressing rooms, lifts, etc.
12) Helicoid general access and performance ramp
7) Stage for open-air events
Cité de la Musique, La Villette
Experimental concert hall
and theatre, March 1984
©
O)
ç
ï
(0
O

^ many elements as possible. For the essential
core of knowledge and this is what is mar¬
vellous is easy to impart. For example, if
one talks about degree of order or disorder,
many people know what this means , but not
explicitly. Now, in a film like Battleship
Potemkin (1925), Eisenstein was perhaps
the first to create a mobile art of this kind:
he artistically directs drifting masses of indi¬
viduals, statistical events, since we see
crowds moving one way and then another.
This procedure was followed by other film¬
makers in their turn, notably Abel Gance in
his Napoleon (1926). If you tell people: this
is what happens with clouds or galaxies or
intrastellar gases, they understand im¬
mediately. I believe that there are fun¬
damental concepts which are communi¬
cable.
How do you account for the central place of
scientific thought in your musical aesthetic?
I drew my early inspiration from the culture
of ancient Greece, and especially that of
Athens in the fifth and fourth centuries BC.
This was a period of extraordinary creativ¬
ity in the history of humankind. It saw the
birth of mathematics as we now know it.
From a structural point of view, this ax¬
iomatic, Euclidian science is still continuing
today. There has been no break.
Then there was philosophy. The other
day, I was reading an article about the
formation of the universe. It said that the
whole of science up till now has been based
on causality. But, today, we are starting to
ask the following question: can the universe
have emerged from nothing, without a
cause? Astrophysicists are tending to think
that it did. Accordingly, and this is the
interesting point, the Parmenidean tradi¬
tion is capable of changing and developing.
Besides these influences, there were my
contacts with certain individuals such as Le
Corbusier and Messiaen. Even if he is not a
mathematician, Olivier Messiaen has a kind
of affinity with numbers. This is apparent in
his "modes of limited transposition", and in
his love of Hindu and Greek rhythm sys¬
tems. These two categories of music,
moreover, are mathematical par excellence.
In the sphere of rhythm, which is the hand¬
ling of temporal number in the pure state,
no music has developed further than per¬
cussion in India. African types of percus¬
sion, which are different, are also remark¬
able. With these kinds of music, I feel per¬
fectly at home. I would even say, perhaps,
that I have felt Western music to be more
"exotic" than these .
IANNIS XENAKIS, of Greek origin, is an interna¬
tionally known composer who is also a mathe¬
matician and architect. A former professor at the
University of Indiana, he currently teaches at the
University of Paris I and is director of the Centre
d'Etudes de Mathématique et Automatique
Musicale (C.E.M.A.Mu.) in Paris, which he
founded in 1966. His prolific output of over sixty
works, some of them already classics, includes
every form of musical composition. Among his
works composed in recent years are: Polytope
de Cluny, electronic and laser ray music (1972);
Cendrées, for choir and orchestra (1973); Ais, for
baritone, percussion and orchestra (1980) and
Shaar, for string orchestra (1982). This autumn
his Keqrops, a work for piano and orchestra, will
be performed for the first time, by the New York
Philharmonic Orchestra.

