3. The cost of peace
by Michael S.O. Olisa
THERE are two conflicting ap¬
proaches to the question of peace.
One postulates the existence of an
ideal world. The other is more realistic. In
an ideal world an immediate end to the arms
race and to ideological confrontation would
be possible. Total acceptance of the neces¬
sary conditions for disarmament would lead
to a world without war in which the re¬
sources of all nations would be channelled
to non-military production and distribu¬
tion. All nuclear weapons would be des¬
troyed and further production banned; use
of non-nuclear arms would be restricted or
prohibited; the North-South conflict would
be virtually eliminated, with the industrially
advanced countries giving a large measure
of genuine economic assistance to the de¬
veloping world.
The realistic approach is different and
less optimistic. It is based on the assumption
that struggle and ideological polarization,
backed by advances in weapons science and
technology will be stepped up. In these
circumstances efforts towards disarmament
will meet an increasing number of obstacles
and frustrations.
These arguments point clearly to the
futility and unattainability of the ideal
world concept. At the same time they
underline the necessity for collective re¬
search by the world community into the
most practicable options for the rest of this
century and for the next.
In this connexion it is instructive to look
at some options which have been put for¬
ward within the United Nations system. In a
1984 report to the General Assembly, the
Secretary-General outlined three scenarios
relevant to the prospects of peace by the
year 2000. Although these scenarios are
based on the economic aspects of the arms
race and disarmament, they are directly
linked to the central issue of world peace
today and tomorrow.
The baseline scenario assumes that the
share of military outlay in gross national
product (GNP) and the geographical dis¬
tribution of military industry will be roughly
the same throughout the period 1970-2000.
The second scenario envisages an accel¬
eration in the arms race, with a hypothetical
doubling of the share of GNP for military
outlays by the year 2000 in comparison with
the baseline of 1970.
The third, a disarmament scenario,
assumes that United States and Soviet milit¬
ary spending as projected under the base¬
line scenario will fall by one third between
1970 and 1990 and by a further third by
2000. It also assumes that the relatively
wealthy regions of the world will transfer a
fraction of their hypothetical savings from
disarmament to the poorest regions.
An important issue raised by these sce¬
narios is that of the cost ofpeace, as opposed
"The cost of war is the continued alloca¬
tion of massive resources to armaments
production, the possible outbreak of wars
and the consequent need to continue pro¬
duction for replacement purposes." Left,
Slapende Mars, (Mars Asleep) by the
Dutch painter Hendrik Terbrugghen (1588-
1629). Mars is the god of war in classical
Roman mythology.
8

"The cost ofpeace ... will face a variety of
challenges arising from the conversion of
resources to non-military uses, the rede¬
ployment of a massive labour force from
armaments and support industries ... and
the reallocation to the world's poorer
countries of some of the resources re¬
leased from arms production." Right, a
patchwork picture created by a Kenyan
woman from scraps ofmaterial In different
colours and textures.
W/\A,
©
to the cost of war. The cost of war is the
continued allocation of massive resources
to armaments production; the possible out¬
break of wars and the consequent need to
continue production for replacement pur¬
poses.
The cost of peace implies a reversal of
these trends, a process which will face a
variety of challenges arising from the con¬
version of resources to non-military uses,
the redeployment of a massive labour force
from armaments and support industries;
plant conversion; the hostility of powerful
interest groups deprived of huge profits;
and the reallocation to the world's poorer
countries of some of the resources released
from arms production.
It is both significant and highly encourag¬
ing that positive and optimistic attitudes
exist towards these problems, especially in
non-governmental circles, suggesting
strongly that the cost of peace will not be
too great a burden. These positive indica¬
tors also suggest that it is not the objective,
material factors in the peace package dis¬
location, conversion and reallocation of the
resources hitherto invested in war which
constitute the main barriers to peace, but
rather the subjective, psychological factors
arising from contemporary economic and
political problems. In other words, the hu¬
man factor is the most serious threat to
world peace.
However, there is no dearth of public
expressions of concern and desire for peace
from world leaders and governments. Un¬
fortunately, disarmament negotiations con¬
tinue to flounder because nations dread
unilateral disarmament. They are not sure
that their opponents v\»>uld follow their
lead; they fear that their rivals may strike
first; they feverishly continue arms produc¬
tion because they suspect that the other side
has outstripped them. This "balance of sus¬
picion" results in the continuation of activi¬
ties which encourage war and threaten
peace.
MICHAEL S.O. OLISA, Nigerian political scien¬
tist and lecturer at the University of Nigeria,
Nsukka, is Director of the Nigerian Institute for
Peace Research. His published works include
Political Culture and Stability among Traditional
Ibo (7977) and Problems of National Identifica¬
tion and Unity in Nigeria (1971).


