Life from space
Does life on Earth have its origins in comets?
by Chandra Wickramasinghe
Since 1962, astronomers Professor Chandra Wickrama¬
singhe and Sir Fred Hoyle have been studying the nature of
interstellar dust and have concluded that terrestrial life had
its origins in the gas and dust clouds of space. Life, they
believe, in direct contradiction to Darwinian theory, was
derived from and continues to be driven by sources outside
the Earth (see the Unesco Courier, May 1982). Although their
conclusions are strongly contested by other scientists, initial
appraisal of data obtained from the study of Halley's comet
appears to lend support to at least some aspects of their
viewpoint.
COMETS are inextricably linked with
the history of the Earth. Cometary
bodies, as well as debris from them
in the form of fine dust particles, have been
colliding with the Earth from the very ear¬
liest days of its existence as a planet some
4,600 million years ago. It is now clear that
volatile materials from comets, including
water, contributed in significant measure to
the primordial oceans and atmosphere.
Cometary impacts and the acquisition of
cometary material did not, however, stop in
distant geological time. As recently as 1908,
a comet, or part of a comet, collided with
the Earth in the Tunguska Valley of Siberia,
exploding at a height of 8.5 kilometres in
the atmosphere and devastating hundreds
of square kilometres of taiga forest.
The entire Solar System today is sur¬
rounded by a spherical halo of some
thousands of millions of comets located at a
distance of about a tenth of a light-year (a
light-year is the distance light travels in a
year about 10 million million kilometres).
Passing stars cause cometary objects from
this halo to become deflected into orbits
that bring them to the inner regions of the
Solar System at the rate of about one or two
a year. The Earth is well and truly entwined
within these orbits so material shed from
these comets must be reaching us quite
plentifully. This material becomes trapped
in the Earth's upper atmosphere, adding
steadily to the store of terrestrial volatile
materials. Fluctuations must occur in the
rate of in-fall of cometary debris over long
periods of geological time. It is now widely
believed that significant increases in this
rate would trigger the onset of episodes of
global glaciations (ice ages) such as are
known to have occurred.
A typical comet, such as Halley's comet,
has a mass of some 100,000 million tons and
a direct hit from such an object would have
dramatic consequences for our planet. For¬
tunately, such collisions are exceedingly
rare, occurring at intervals averaging about
300 million years, coinciding approximately
with the time intervals between successive
bursts in the evolution of terrestrial life.
Smaller comets are more numerous and
could collide more frequently.
This much is more or less agreed upon by
most scientists. A less popular view, advo¬
cated by the British astronomer Sir Fred
Hoyle and myself, is that comets were also
responsible for the importation of organic
molecules that contributed to the origin of
life on our planet. We have further sug¬
gested that the Earth continues to receive
ready-formed living structures such as bac¬
teria and viruses even at the present time.
From 1975 onwards, we have accumu¬
lated evidence to support our view that
organic dust grains, including organic po¬
lymers (large chains of carbon-based orga¬
nic molecules), exist on a vast cosmic scale.
These dust grains populate the clouds of gas
that exist between stars and give rise to the
visual effect of dark patches and striations
(1) The adjective "organic" is often commonly used to
mean "living", in the sense that a plant, a tree or a human
being is "living"; chemists employ it in a restricted sense to
describe compounds containing carbon combined with
hydrogen. All living things contain carbon and hydrogen
and thus are organic, but not all things that contain
carbon and hydrogen are living. "Biological" means "of
or relating to life or living things".
seen against the diffuse light of the Milky
Way. In 1981, through a combination of
laboratory studies, mathematical computa¬
tions and astronomical observation, we ar¬
rived at the conclusion that the bulk of
cosmic dust was not merely organic but
distinctly biological in character ^.
In a series of publications we have pre¬
sented arguments to support the theory that
life on Earth had its origins in comets and
that evolution is controlled by the con¬
tinuing input ofcometary material. Because
the injection of comets from the outer Solar
System is sporadic, this input of cometary
material is not expected to be uniform and
regular in time, and so the effect on evolu¬
tion will also be sporadic. This sporadic
characteristic clearly shows up in the fossil
record which traces the evolution of terrest¬
rial life.
A dramatic example is provided by the
extinction of the dinosaurs 65 million years
ago. It has recently been argued by many
scientists that this event was caused by a
comet which shrouded the Earth in a halo of
fine particles. These particles acted like a
smog that darkened the skies for decades
and caused withering of plankton and plants
and the demise of all large creatures that fed
on plants.
Sir Fred Hoyle and I believe that such a
purely physical cause is unlikely in view of
the fact that the extinction of the dinosaurs
also coincided with an extinction of a large
fraction of the genera of all plants, animals
and micro-organisms and the emergence of
several brand new orders of living forms.
We identify this extinction/speciation event
of 65 million years ago with a genetic storm
that resulted from an exceptionally large
new crop of comets that were injected into
the inner regions of the Solar System.
The first clear-cut detections of organic
molecules hydrogen cyanide (HCN) and
methyl cyanide (CH3CN) came from
observations of comet Kohoutek, in 1973
and 1974. But cometary theories came
under very much closer scrutiny in March
this year when, as the culminating point of
the International Halley Watch, the Euro¬
pean space satellite Giotto penetrated to
within a few hundred kilometres of the
nucleus of Halley's comet (see the Unesco
Courier, March 1986).
The payload of Giotto included a variety
33

^ of scientific experiments and a video
camera that was intended to send back col¬
our pictures of the comet's nucleus. Earlier
in March, the Soviet space satellite Vega 2
successfully accomplished a similar mission.
Pictures of the comet's nucleus, taken by
Vega 2 from a distance of several thousand
kilometres, showed tentative indications
that it may be split into at least two frag¬
ments. Giotto might have been able to settle
this matter but for an unfortunate hitch in
communications that occurred seconds be¬
fore the moment of closest approach. In the
event, the best pictures we have is of the
nucleus surrounded by a peanut-shaped
shroud of obscuring dust.
What is to be learned from the first
appraisals of the data sent back by the va¬
rious missions to comet Halley?
Our organic theory of comets predicts
that cometary nuclei must develop a highly
porous mesh-like surface layer of polymeric
particles. Evaporation of material on a
large scale can only occur from places on the
surface where this surface layer becomes
abraded or broken. A consequence is that
cometary nuclei must have exceedingly
black, non-reflective surfaces, a property
we predicted only weeks before the Giotto
encounter.
The Giotto pictures showed a few places
where the nucleus could be seen through
"holes" in the dust halo, and the surface
showed up as amazingly black Giotto in¬
vestigators described it as being "blacker
than the blackest coal". This was indeed a
triumph for the organic model.
More triumphs were to follow. Giotto's
particle impact analyser was equipped to
determine the chemical make-up of the
cometary dust particles by measuring the
distribution of the masses of atoms within
them. J. Kissel, the principal investigator
on this experiment, reported on 17 March
that analysis of one per cent of the total data
record indicated that the dust was made up .
of the elements carbon, oxygen, nitrogen
and hydrogen with very much smaller
amounts of other chemical elements. Two
logical possibilities follow from this data.
These atoms can exist in the form of volatile
ices such as water, carbon dioxide and
ammonia together with simple hydrocar¬
bons such as methane, or they could occur
in the form of highly stable organic
polymers. Since, in other experiments, the
temperature of these particles was mea¬
sured at 125 degrees Celsius, well above the
boiling points of ices and simple hydrocar¬
bons, it follows that the cometary particles
could only be made of organic polymers.
Both Vega 2 and Giotto experiments indi¬
cated that hydrogen atoms, hydroxyl radic¬
als and water molecules were also released
quite liberally from the comet. However,
the amounts of these substances were not
inconsistent with the water associated with
living cells (60 per cent by volume of such
cells is water). Significantly there was no
evidence whatever for a halo of icy particles
around the nucleus which is predicted by
the widely accepted "dirty snowball" com¬
etary theory first propounded by US astro¬
nomer Fred Whipple.
On the morning of 30 June 1908, a huge
aerial explosion with an energy equivalent
to that of 10 to 15 megatons of TNT devas¬
tated some 2,000 square kilometres of
pine forest (left) near the Tunguska River
In central Siberia. The explosion Is
thought to have been caused by a comet,
ora fragment ofa comet, colliding with the
Earth. An object such as this would have
disintegrated in the Earth's atmosphere
creating a fireball and a powerful blast
wave but no crater.
Scarcely two weeks after the Giotto ren¬
dezvous an important observation of the
comet in the infra-red region of the spec¬
trum was made by astronomers Dayal
Wickramasinghe and David Allen, using
the 154-inch Anglo-Australian telescope at
Siding Springs, New South Wales. They
discovered remarkably strong signals due to
emission from heated organic dust over the
wavelength range from 2 to 4 micrometres.
Basic structures of organic molecules in¬
volving linkages between carbon and hyd¬
rogen atoms (CH bonds) absorb and emit
radiation at wavelengths near 3.4 mic¬
rometres; for any assembly of complex
organic molecules such as bacterium this
absorption band is in general very broad
and takes on a highly distinctive profile.
The most remarkable fact that emerged was
that the profile of this emission from Hal¬
ley's comet matched precisely the be¬
haviour of a dried-out bacterium as mea¬
sured in the laboratory.
Although a full appraisal of the recent
observations of comet Halley cannot yet be
offered, it is already clear that a few quite
remarkable facts have emerged. The comet
is clearly not an inorganic dirty snowball as
most astronomers had previously held. It is
organic. Within a mammoth chunk of orga¬
nic matter, some 8 kilometres long and 4
kilometres wide, a large proportion of wa¬
ter molecules and traces of other materials
are also trapped. Whether one likes it or
not, the organic material of the comet
occurs predominantly in the form of parti¬
cles whose absorption properties, sizes and
densities are identical to the predictions of a
bacterial model.
Interpreted in the most conservative
possible way, the latest discoveries indicate
at the very least that comets could have
provided the raw materials, the organic
building blocks from which life emerged on
the Earth. More realistically, in my view,
the data point in a decisive way to life in the
form of bacteria and viruses being con¬
tained in comets and brought by them to the
Earth.
NALIN CHANDRA WICKRAMASINGHE is pro¬
fessor of applied matriematics and astronomy at
University College, Cardiff, Wales, and Director
of the Institute of Fundamental Studies, Sri
Lanka. In 1962, while at Cambridge University,
Professor Wickramasinghe, who is ofSri Lankan
origin, was awarded the Powell Prize for English
poetry. His views on the space origins of terrest¬
rial life are fully developed in two books, Space
Travellers: the Bringers of Life and Evolution
from Space, of which he is the co-author with Sir
Fred Hoyle.
34
