The new frontiers
of the sea
SINCE the adoption of the Law of the Sea
Convention in 1 982, small island States
have been in charge of marine space
which is rich in potential resources and repre¬
sents several thousand times their land area.
The Convention, in addition to endorsing the
sovereignty of "archipelagic States" over
archipelagic waters, an endorsement which can
only strengthen the cohesion of these States,
establishes the jurisdiction of island States over
a vast Exclusive Economic Zone. Thus, the 33
coral islands of Kiribati, with a total land area of
approximately 728 km2 scattered over some 5
million km2 in the central Pacific, have an Exclu¬
sive Economic Zone of tens of millions of km2
over which to exercise their rights.
For small States lacking financial and technic¬
al resources, exploiting these new riches and
ensuring that their rights are respected over such
expanses is no easy matter. In addition, it now
seems unlikely that the much-discussed ex¬
ploitation of the mineral resources of the oceans,
such as manganese nodules, will be profitable
before the next century. As far as fishing re¬
sources are concerned, it is difficult for small
States to prevent the incursions of foreign fishing
fleets far better equipped than their own; nor can
they compete commercially with big fishing con¬
cerns which are already firmly entrenched in
international markets.
They can, of course, grant fishing and pros¬
pecting concessions to foreign companies, and
this may bring in substantial revenues. Never¬
theless, there is a risk that they will negotiate
from a position of weakness, notably through a
lack of technical and scientific resources, and
that they will not always have the means to
guarantee the exclusivity of the concessions
they will be offering.
But one of the great merits of the Convention is
that it creates favourable conditions for the ex¬
ploitation of marine resources, which may help to
reduce the dependence of small countries in the
fields of energy and food. Mariculture, for in¬
stance, opens up interesting possibilities for cul¬
tivating profitable species such as pearl oysters
and abalone, edible fish, and algae for the manu¬
facture of fertilizer, fuel and food for human and
animal consumption.
But it is above all through regional co-opera¬
tion (as in the creation of joint fishing concerns)
and through international co-operation, which
may help them to partially overcome their scien¬
tific and technological handicaps, that small is¬
land States will have the best opportunities to
profit from their Exclusive Economic Zones in the
near future.
Unesco's Intergovernmental Océanographie
Commission is among the leading international
organizations with responsibilities in this field. Its
programme on marine sciences and on non¬
living marine resources seeks, notably, to lay the
scientific foundations for the rational prospection
and management of mineral resources in coastal
zones. The Commission is also making efforts to
strengthen the capacities of its Member States in
the fields of marine science and technology.
12

