Breakthroughs in brain research
by David Ottoson
IN the last two decades there has been a
dramatic development in brain research,
only rivalled by the advances in molecular
biology in the early 1 950s and the progress in
physics at the beginning of this century. The
introduction of new biophysical arid bioche¬
mical techniques has made it possible to
tackle problems that until recently were
beyond experimental investigation. All evi¬
dence indicates that these techniques will
open up a world hitherto unknown to us and
give us new insight into the complexity of the
higher functions of the brain. This develop¬
ment is at present progressing at a rapid rate,
but the results already obtained have pro¬
vided us with unprecedented data on many
aspects of the brain involving information pro¬
cessing, perception, brain control of pain,
neurotransmitter actions, brain plasticity, re¬
generation, learning, memory, behaviour and
emotion.
The major breakthrough in our understand¬
ing of the higher functions of the brain was the
discovery of Roger Sperry, Professor of
Psychology at the California Institute of Tech¬
nology, of the functional specialization of the
two hemispheres of the brain. Since the two
hemispheres are anatomically almost identi¬
cal, it had long been generally assumed that in
principle the two brain halves had similar func¬
tions. However, it is interesting to note that as
early as 1861 it was demonstrated by a
French neurologist, Pierre-Paul Broca, that
the centre for speech is localized in the left
hemisphere. When presenting his observa¬
tions to the Société d'Anthropologie in Paris,
he made the now famous dictum: "Nous par-
Ions avec l'hémisphère gauche".
Later observations, particularly on soldiers
wounded in the two world wars, indicated that
the two hemispheres have different functions
also in other aspects, but the functional differ¬
ences between them remained largely un¬
known until the early 1 950s when Roger Sper¬
ry made his pioneering discoveries which
soon received world-wide attention and for
which in 1981 he was awarded the Nobel
Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
Sperry's research thus established that
each of the two hemispheres are specialized,
each having its own specific functional char¬
acteristics. The left hemisphere is analytical,
sequential and rational while the right is syn¬
thetic, holistic and intuitive. The left hemi
sphere is, to quote Sperry, "the more aggres¬
sive, executive, leading hemisphere with con¬
trol of the motor system". This is the hemi¬
sphere that we mainly see in action and the
one with which we communicate. The right
hemisphere is "the silent passenger who
leaves the driving of behaviour to the left
hemisphere". The right hemisphere cannot
express itself in language, is therefore unable
to communicate any experience of perception
or consciousness.
More recently a number of new methods
have been employed for the study of brain
functions which have given us new and excit¬
ing insights into the performance of the brain
in health and disease. One of these tech¬
niques provides for measurements of the re¬
gional blood flow in the brain. With this tech¬
nique it has been demonstrated that at rest in
a quiet room, the cerebral flow is the same in
the two hemispheres. It is interesting to note
that the highest flow is found in the frontal
lobe. Simple visual perception consisting of
opening the eyes results in an increase in the
primary visual area of the cortex, while visual
stimuli which require discrimination tasks are
followed by an increase in other areas.
22

Tête nucléaire d'un ange (1952), by Salvador Dali.
23

e
©
E
Cerebral blood flow measurements have
also provided interesting information on re¬
gional activation of the brain during voluntary
movements in man. When programming a
sequence of movements without actually ex¬
ecuting them, there is a selective increase in a
special area called the supplementary motor
area. During the execution of a movement
there is in addition an increase in another
area, the so-called primary motor area. This
suggests that the command for the movement
is executed by the supplementary motor area,
while the execution of the movement is carried
out by the primary motor area.
Equally interesting are the results of studies
of cerebral blood flow during the focusing of
attention. It is of particular interest from a
clinical point of view that cerebral blood flow
measurements have demonstrated abnormal
patterns of blood flow in mental diseases such
as organic dementia and schizophrenia.
These findings encourage the belief that this
method and other modern approaches to the
analysis of higher brain functions may also
provide a deeper understanding of the brain
mechanisms in mental disorders.
Visual field Visual field
'right/ \ left 1
Still another method, positron emission
tomography (PET), provides a new and
powerful tool for the study of higher brain
functions. In positron emission tomography a
chemical compound is labelled with radioac¬
tive isotope that decays by emitting positrons
with the emission of gamma rays as a result.
The gamma rays are recorded by a circular
array of detectors placed around the head and
a computer reconstructs the distribution of
radioactivity and displays it as a colour-coded
image on a TV screen. With this technique it is
possible to see how different regions of the
brain are activated during various kinds of
mental activities. Thus it has been demon¬
strated that certain regions of the left hemi¬
sphere are activated when a person listens to
someone speaking to him. When listening to
music, regions in the right hemisphere be¬
come active. However, if the patient is asked
to tell what particular piece of music is played
or to say the name of the composer, the
activity shifts over to the left (analytical)
hemisphere.
The famous Russian physiologist Pavlov is
supposed to have said that mankind can be
divided into artists and thinkers. It would be
tempting, in view of the new knowledge that
recent advances in brain research have
brought us, to believe that in artists the right
holistic hemisphere is the dominating one
while in thinkers the left analytical hemisphere
is dominant. However, it is important to
emphasize that the hemispheric differences
are quantitative rather than qualitative in
many aspects and that care should be taken
in classifying individuals or groups as being
dominated by the left or the right hemisphere.
It is equally clear that the brain only reaches
its full potential capacity by the functional
co-operation of the two hemispheres. This
new insight has important implications for the
understanding of higher cognitive functions
and has practical applications in many fields
of social life and most particularly in educa¬
tion. Recent developments in various areas of
brain research provide strong evidence that in
teaching attention should be given to the spe¬
cific functions of the two hemispheres and
both of them should be given the opportunities
to fully develop their inherent faculties.
Most educational systems in the Western
world have until now been directed mainly
towards the training of the left hemispheric
capacities. In view of our expanding know¬
ledge of hemispheric processing it is impor¬
tant that the information provided by brain
research should be integrated into the educa¬
tional system. As our knowledge of the func¬
tions of the brain develops, teaching methods
should be modified to meet the specific needs
not only of the normal individual but also of
those with hemispheric dysfunctions in order
that they may be given the opportunities to
develop the full functional capacities of their
brains.
Corpus callosum region
Language
The study of the functions of the left and
right cerebral hemispheres has made
great progress due to the "split brain"
technique, which consists in cutting the
nerve fibres (primarily the corpus callo¬
sum) which Interconnect the two hemi¬
spheres. In the early 1960s, this surgical
technique was applied to several patients
suffering from severe epilepsy by a team
of specialists led by the U.S. neurophy¬
siology Dr. Roger W. Sperry (Nobel Prize
for Physiology or Medicine, 1981) and led
to a series of remarkable observations of
the functioning ofeach hemisphere separ¬
ately. It proved possible, in particular, to
locate linguistic capacities essentially in
the left brain hemisphere and to establish
that the righthemisphere has superiorabi¬
lities In the field of vision and the recogni¬
tion ofshapes. Thus, in the drawing above,
the "right hemisphere" person (someone
whose left hemisphere is inoperative)
sees the flower, makes the gesture of
smelling it, but cannot say its name.
Diagram above shows how visual fields
and visual centres of the brain are related.
Cutting optic chiasm and corpus callosum
leaves each eye feeding information to
one side of the brain only and eliminates
the normal overlap of visual fields. 1. left
eye-ball; 2. right eyeball; 3. optic chiasm;
4. left hemisphere; 5. right hemisphere; 6.
lateral geniculate body; 7. optic tract; 8.
right-half visual field; 9. left-half visual
field.
DAVID GUSTAV OTTOSON, Swedish medical
doctor, has been since 1984 Special Adviser on
scientific questions to the Director-General of
Unesco. Former head of the department ofphy¬
siology at the Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
president of the Nobel Committee for Physiology
or Medicine, and honorary professor at the Beij¬
ing Medical University, China, he is a member of
the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and of
several international medical associations, in¬
cluding the International Brain Research
Organization (IBRO) of which he is Secretary-
General.
24
