1986: Year of Peace/ 10
m)
Among the events marking the Internation¬
al Year of Peace, a Congress of Intellectuals
for the Peaceful Future of the World was held
in Warsaw (Poland) in January 1 986. The 250
participants included scientists, writers and
artists from 54 countries representing all the
world regions. The discussions, devoted to
the main dangers threatening international
peace and security, ended with the proclama¬
tion of a Message, salient passages of which
are published below.
WE, intellectuals, have assembled in
the heroic city of Warsaw, city of
peace, to defend the peaceful future
of the world. Anxiety about the destiny of the
world has brought us here. Anxiety about our
homes and cities, anxiety about our science
and culture. The threat of total annihilation
hangs over us. Differences of outlook notwith¬
standing, we express in our diverse lan¬
guages our common conviction that our prime
task is to defend the universal values of cul¬
ture. At this decisive moment in history we
declare ourselves in favour of life. We declare
ourselves in favour of peace and co-oper¬
ation, against war and the arms race which
leads to war.
Weapons will not preserve our future. We
are convinced that the production and accu¬
mulation of weapons of mass extermination
cannot be justified by the needs of national or
International security. Weapons are an unim¬
aginable waste of the world's material and
intellectual resources. They lead to greater
inequalities in the level and quality of life. We
declare our support for disarmament in all its
aspects. The threat of the extension of
weapons into space fills us with anxiety and
terror.
A durable peace depends on the renuncia¬
tion of force in international relations and on
the peaceful settlement of all conflicts, the
establishment of confidence and détente, and
disarmament. With this in view we must stop
the race leading to the destruction of our
civilization, to the annihilation of the spiritual
and material heritage of humanity.
In the nuclear era, an armed conflict would
solve no problem. There would be neither
victors nor vanquished. Peace is our fun¬
damental common value. The right to life, to
live in peace, is the right which underlies all
human rights, the first condition for the
realization of political, social, economic and
cultural rights.
Peace is also threatened by the aggrava¬
tion of injustices in economic relationships. In
spite of enormous advances made within our
civilization, the numbers of the hungry, the
homeless, the unemployed, and the sick are
growing.
The survival of humanity thus depends on
finding urgent solutions to crises with
worldwide ramifications: the food and energy
crises, crises of ecology and massive debt.
Common global problems will only be solved
through global co-operation.
Wars are born in the hearts and minds of
men. The construction of peace begins with
education in the spirit of peace, with the pre¬
paration of peoples to live in peace.
Science and technology create a better
world as long as they contribute to the creative
development of man and not to his destruc¬
tion. We declare ourselves in favour of free¬
dom of scientific research and of the general
availability of the achievements of world
science.
We express the hope that literature, the arts
and education will play a greater role in the
formation of human attitudes.
We consider that nothing divides us in our
aspiration to provide present and future gen¬
erations with the opportunity to live in peaceful
conditions, to live a life worthy of man.
We hope that the International Year of
Peace will bring, in conformity with the spirit of
Geneva, a decisive improvement in the rela¬
tions between East and West and an end to
wars on all the continents.
We support the efforts of the United Nations
in favour of international security and peaceful
co-operation between States. These efforts
spring from the ideals of the Charter of the
United Nations and conform to the expecta¬
tions of peoples.
Gathered at the Congress of Intellectuals in
Warsaw, we appeal:
for renunciation of force in international
relations, for an end to the arms race, for
renunciation of space weapons programmes,
for the liquidation of atomic weapons during
this century;
for the International Year of Peace to mark
the start of an era of Peace on our Earth.
