The angry young men
of Oceania
by Albert Wendt
These bird of paradise feathers form part
ofan intricate headdress worn by the peo¬
ple of the New Guinea highlands. The rela¬
tionship between birds and men is strong¬
ly expressed in the oral literature andart of
the Oceanian peoples.
22

IN our various groping ways we are all in
search of that haven, that Hawaiki
(mythical homeland of the Maori peo¬
ple) where our hearts will find meaning.
Our dead are woven into our souls like
the hypnotic music of bone flutes; we can
never escape them. If we let them they can
help illuminate us to ourselves and to one
another. They can be the source of new¬
found pride, self-respect and wisdom. Con¬
versely, they can be the aitu (evil spirit or
ghost) that will continue to destroy us by
blinding us to the beauty we are so capable
of becoming as individuals, cultures,
nations. We must try to exorcise these aitu
both old and modern.
Photo © Camera Press, London
There is no state of cultural purity (or
perfect state of cultural "goodness") from
which there is decline; usage determines
authenticity. There was no Fall, no sun¬
tanned Noble Savages existing in South Sea
paradises, no Golden Age, except in Holly¬
wood films, in the insanely romantic litera¬
ture and art produced by outsiders about
the Pacific, in the breathless sermons of our
self-styled romantic revolutionaries.
Our quest should not be for a revival of
our past cultures but for the creation of new
cultures which are free of the taint of col¬
onialism and based firmly on our own pasts.
The quest should be for a new Oceania.
Many of us are guilty whether we are
aware of it or not of perpetuating the
destructive colonial chill, and are doing so
in the avowed interest of "preserving our
racial and cultural purity" (whatever that
means).
To advocate that in order to be a "true
Samoan", for example, one must be a "full-
blooded Samoan" and behave, think,
dance, talk, dress and believe in a certain
prescribed way (and that the prescribed way
has not changed since time immemorial) is
being racist, callously totalitarian, and stu¬
pid. This is a prescription for cultural stag¬
nation, an invitation for a culture to choke
in its own body odour, juices, and excreta.
There are no "true interpreters" or
"sacred guardians" of any culture. We are
all entitled to our truths, insights, and intu¬
itions into an interpretation of our cultures.
To varying degrees, we as individuals all
live in limbo within our cultures: there are
many aspects of our ways of life that we
cannot subscribe to or live comfortably
with. We all conform to some extent, but
the life-blood of any culture is the diverse
contributions of its varied sub-cultures.
The population of our region is only just
over five million but we possess a cultural
diversity as varied as any other in the world.
There is also a multiplicity of social, econo¬
mic and political systems all undergoing
different stages of decolonization, ranging
from politically independent nations (West¬
ern Samoa, Fiji, Papua New Guinea,
Tonga, Nauru) through self-governing ones
(the Solomons, the Gilberts, Tuvalu) and
colonies (mainly French and American) to
our oppressed aboriginal brothers in
Australia.
If as yet we may not be the most artistical¬
ly creative region in our spaceship, we pos¬
sess the potential to become so. There are
more than 1,200 indigenous languages plus
English, French, Hindi, Spanish, and va¬
rious forms of pidgin to catch and interpret
the void with, reinterpret our past with,
create new sociological visions of Oceania
with, compose songs and poems and plays
and other oral and written literature with.
We also possess numerous other forms of
artistic expression: hundreds of dance
styles; wood and stone sculpture and carv¬
ings; artifacts as various as our cultures;
pottery, painting and tattooing. We have a
fabulous treasure house of traditional
motifs, themes, styles, material which we
can use in contemporary forms to express
our uniqueness, identity, pain, joy and our
own visions of Oceania and the earth .
February 1976
ALBERT WENDT, of Western Samoa, is a
writer, poet, and specialist in Oceanian literature.
23
