An eye of the angel in The Virgin of the
Rocks, executed by Leonardo in Milan
about 1483 (Louvre Museum, Paris)
An eye of Mona Lisa. Leonardo began work on the painting
about 1501 and finished it more than fouryears later (Louvre
Museum, Paris)



Leonardo da Vinci, or
by Carlo Pedreta
L
IMBS which are not in exercise
must be drawn without showing
the play of muscles. And if you
do otherwise, you will have imitated a
sack of nuts rather than a human
figure."
This is one of the notes on painting found
in the second of the recently discovered
Madrid Manuscripts of Leonardo da Vinci,
dating from the first years of the sixteenth
century.
All the elements of Leonardo's paint¬
ing are present in the theories expressed
in this manuscript. Another series of
notes, in addition to those on form and
colour, deals with light and shadow and
the smooth transition from light to sha¬
dow, which is the true essence of the
famous Leonardo sfumato.
When in the first period of his activity
Leonardo was dealing with the problem
of light and shadow he conceived of ob¬
jects in terms of geometrical entities and
was mainly concerned with the study of
the gradations and degrees of intensity
of the shadows.
After 1500 his main concern becomes
the study of light and shadow on objects
placed in the open air, thus taking into
account colour and reflections. Light be¬
comes the vehicle that blends the ele¬
ments of landscape into a harmony of
transitions from colour to colour, and
this Leonardo calls "grace".
The human figure, too, becomes part
of the landscape (one thinks of the
Mona Lisa, The Virgin and St. Anne,
Leda) and thus participates in the phe¬
nomena of reflection, refraction and in¬
terplay of coloured shadows, as is the
case with every other object placed
under the light of the sky. What can be
seen under the projection of a roof is
also to be seen under the chin of a hu¬
man face.
One of Leonardo's most beautiful
observations pertains to the way a hu¬
man face should be represented. He
advises the painter to arrange the setting
so as to achieve the most delicate sfuma¬
to effects in the shadows, what he calls
"the gracefulness of shadows, smoothly
deprived of every sharp contour".
The setting is provided by the walls of
the houses flanking the street, through
which the light penetrates light made of
air without brightness, a golden, diffuse
light such as that of Giorgione.
Now, says Leonardo, "light ends upon
the pavement of the street and rebounds
with reflected motion at the shadowy
parts of the faces, brightening them con¬
siderably. And the length of the
aforementioned light of the sky created
by the boundaries of the roofs hanging
over the street illuminates almost as far
as the beginning of the shadows which
are underneath the projections of the
face, and so it is gradually changed into
The smile of the angel in The Virgin of the Rocks The smile of Mona Lisa

An eye of St. John the Baptist, painted by Leonardo about
1509 (Louvre Museum, Paris)
An eye of the lady In the portrait known as the Belle
Ferronnière (Louvre Museum, Paris)



he glory of painting
brightness, until it ends under the chin
with imperceptible shadows all over."
Most interesting is the "unpredictable
Leonardo", the Leonardo who cannot be
anticipated, because the notes he writes
are nothing but the record of the move¬
ments of his mind, so that his precepts
to the painter do not have the stiffness
of academic teaching but the freshness of
a revelation, evocative of the space that
opens up in the background of his paint¬
ings:
"What I would remind you of, con¬
cerning faces, is that you should consider
how, at varying distances, different qual¬
ities of the shadows are lost and that
only the main spots are left, that is, the
pits of the eye and the like: and finally
the face remains dark, because the
lights, which are small compared with
the medium shadows, are absorbed by
darkness. For this reason, at a distance,
the qualities and quantities of the main
lights and shadows are consumed, and
everything blends into a medium sha¬
dow. And this is why trees and all ob¬
jects appear darker at a distance than if
the same objects were near the eye.
From this obscurity on, the air which is
between the eye and the object causes
the object to become brighter and to
turn towards blue. But it turns bluish
rather in the shadows than in the lumi¬
nous parts, where one can see better the
true quality of the colours."
October 1974
CARLO PEDRETTI is the author of many
books on Leonardo. This article is inspired by
a chapter on the "Notes on Painting in the
Madrid Manuscripts", published in his book
Leonardo da Vinci Inédito (Leonardo da Vin¬
ci's unpublished works), published in Italian
by Barbera Editore, Florence, 1968.
In the manuscript known as Codex Madrid
II, Leonardo states that the human face
and body are defined by the light sur¬
rounding them. He notes that reflectedand
refracted light as well as coloured sha¬
dows are all what he calls "the truth of
colours". This may explain the affinity be¬
tween the many faces hepainted which the
photographic enlargements on this dou¬
ble page clearly reveal, especially Leonar¬
do's rendering of the eyes and the smile.
The enlargements show how skilfully
Leonardo played with light and shadow in
order to achieve his enigmatic smile and
beautifully expressive eyes (thousands of
pages have been written about Mona
Lisa's smile). In Codex Madrid II, Leonardo
advises the painter to strive for a subtle
blend of shadows which he describes as
"the gracefulness of shadows, smoothly
deprived of every sharp contour". By so
doing he has given us his secret ofhow he
achieved such delicately nuanced forms
in his models.
The smile of St. John the Baptist The smile of the Belle Ferronnière Photos Louvre Museum, Paris
