On translation
Text © Reproduction prohibited
by Octavio Paz
EACH text is unique, yet at the same
time it is the translation of another
text. No text is entirely original, be¬
cause language itself is essentially a trans¬
lation. In the first place, it translates from
the non-verbal world. Then, too, each sign,
each sentence, is the translation of another
sign, another sentence. This reasoning may
even be reversed without losing any of its
force and we may assert that all texts are
original because every translation is dif¬
ferent. To a certain extent every translation
is an original invention and thus constitutes
a unique text.
The original text never reappears in the
other language: this would be impossible.
Nevertheless, it is always present because,
although the translation does not explicitly
state as much, it refers to the original text
constantly, or else converts it into a verbal
object that differs from it, yet reproduces it
by metonymy or metaphor. Both of these,
as distinct from explanatory or free trans¬
lations, are strict forms that are not incom¬
patible with exactness. Metonymy is an in¬
direct description; metaphor is a verbal
equation.
Poetry has always been considered the
form- of writing that lends itself least to
translation. This prejudice is surprising
when we stop to think that many of the best
poems in every Western language are trans¬
lations, and that many of these translations
have been made by outstanding poets.
The reason why many poets are unable to
translate poetry is not purely psychological
in nature though the cult of self does enter
into it but functional. Poetic translation is
an operation similar to poetic creation, ex¬
cept that it is executed in reverse.
Meaning tends to be univocal in prose,
whereas one of the characteristics of poetry ,
as has often been noted, and possibly its
chief quality, is that it retains the several
meanings of a word. In reality, this is a
property of language in general. Poetry ac¬
centuates it, but it is also to be found in
everyday speech and even in prose.
The poet, caught up in the whirl of lan¬
guage which is a constant verbal coming
and going selects a few words, or is
selected by them. He fashions his poem by
combining them and it then becomes a ver¬
bal object made up of irreplaceable and
irremovable signs. The translator's starting
point is not language in motion, which is the
poet's raw material, but the fixed language
of the poem. It is a frozen language, and yet
it is quite alive. His operation is the oppo¬
site of the poet's. He is not called upon to
forge an unchangeable text with changing
signs, but to take that text apart, set the
signs in motion again and return them to the
language. Up to this point the translator's
work is similar to that of a reader or critic,
since every reading is a translation, and
every criticism is, or begins by being, an
interpretation.
Reading, however, is a translation within
the same language and criticism is a free
version, or more exactly a transposition, of
the poem. For the critic a poem is the
jumping-off place towards another text, his
own, whereas the translator, using another
language and different signs, must compose
a poem similar to the original.
Thus at the second stage the translator's
activity is comparable to that of the poet,
but with this important difference: when the
poet writes, he does not know what his
poem is going to be like; when the translator
translates, he knows that his poem must
reproduce the poem he has before him.
Translation and creation are twin oper¬
ations. As the cases of Baudelaire and
Pound show, it is often impossible to dis¬
tinguish translation from creation.
Below, detail of Metamorphosis II. 1940, a
work by the well-known Netherlands artist
M.C. Escher. In this masterly feat of
graphic transformation, the artist imper¬
ceptibly changes bees into birds by way of
fish. Above, the same engraving reversed.
Moreover, there is a constant give and take
between them, a continual and mutual cre¬
ative influence. The great ages of poetry in
the West have been preceded or accompa¬
nied by the interweaving of various poetic
traditions. These cross-currents have some¬
times taken the form of imitation and at
other times that of translation.
Critics study "influences", but this term is
equivocal. All styles have been trans-
linguistic.
Styles are collective and pass from one
language to another; written works, rooted
in their verbal soil, are unique. They are
unique but not isolated, for each of them is
born and lives in relation to other works in
different languages.
In every period European poets and
now those of the two Americas as well
write the same poem in their several lan¬
guages, and each of these versions is like¬
wise an original and different poem.
The synchronization may not be perfect,
but if we withdraw a certain distance, we
find that we are listening to a concert in
which the musicians, playing different in¬
struments and without following any
orchestra leader or score, are composing a
collective work in which improvisation is
inseparable from translation, and invention
is closely bound up with imitation. Occa¬
sionally one of the musicians launches into
an inspired solo. The others soon take their
cue from him and then go on to introduce
variations, while the original motif becomes
lost in the new creation .
February 1975
OCTAVIO PAZ, Mexican poet, essayist and
translator, is one of the outstanding writers in the
Spanish language. He has published several
volumes ofpoetry such as Libertad bajo palabra
(Liberty on Parole). English translations of his
essays include Labyrinth of Solitude (1961),
Claude Lévi-Strauss: An Introduction (1972),
and Alternating Current (1973).
