From the heart of Eastern Europe
by Edgar Reichman
THE history of the peoples of East¬
ern Europe has been marked by
terrifying upheavals, not least of
which were the after-effects of the great
migrations. The Lay of Igor's Campaign,
a monumental work acknowledged by all
the great Slav literatures, dates back to
the twelfth century. In the sixteenth cen¬
tury Jan Kochanowski laid the founda¬
tions of a humanist Polish culture. Two
centuries later, the Moldavian Prince
Cantemir recounted the rise and decline
of the Ottoman empire. And yet, in the
age of Villon, Cervantes and
Shakespeare, published literature was
rare, largely comprising sacred writings
in Slavonic, folk-tales and historical
chronicles, the work of printers scattered
from the Balkans to the Urals. At this
period, the rich and original Slav culture
was essentially oral.
With the advent of the nineteenth cen¬
tury, the extension of the Gutenberg
galaxy fostered the emergence of nation¬
al feeling, from Sofia to Prague and War¬
saw, from Budapest to Kiev. The militant
Polish poet Adam Mickiewicz opposed
both Tsarist absolutism and Austrian au¬
thority. Sandor Petofi(1), also a poet,
gave vehement expression to the aspira¬
tions of the Magyars. In Transylvania, the
movement known as the Transylvanian
school stressed the Latin origin of the
Romanian language and people, while
on the other side of the Carpathians,
Mihail Eminescu(2) shaped the language
into the form it has today. The work of the
Ukrainian Taras Shevchenko(3), a freed
serf who was to die for his struggle
against serfdom, marks the beginnings
of a literature that is, unfortunately, still
little known. In Shalom Aleichem(4), the
Jews also found their bard, who restored
the beauty of Yiddish, later enhanced by
Isaac Bashevis Singer. It is to these au¬
thors belonging to languages and litera¬
tures which are not widely known and to
which we owe such writers as Capek,
Andric(5), Ady(6) and Arghezi, that the
publishing effort of the Unesco Collection
of Representative Works is devoted.
Consequently it should come as no sur¬
prise that such great giants of world liter-
'. '; y
i i
1
=
ature as Gogol, Chekhov, Tolstoy, Dos¬
toievsky, Esenin, Pushkin, Mayakovsky,
Musil, Kafka, and Canetti are not on the
list.
Then came the twentieth century. In
October 1917 the guns of the battleship
Aurora, anchored off Petrograd, hailed
the birth of a new world. Weeds were
ineluctably spreading in the ruins of the
Dual Monarchy and of the empire of the
autocratic Tsars. Hungarians and Roma¬
nians, Czechs and Slovaks, Slovenes,
Serbo-Croats and Bulgarians had long
been writing in their national languages,
thereby enriching the heritage of
humanity(7). Today as in the past they
express their rejection of tyranny and the
arbitrary, hatred of war, attachment to
Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani (1658-1725),
knownas "the Father ofGeorgia", devoted
his life to letters, politics and religion. One
of his major achievements was the com¬
pilation of a dictionary of the Georgian
language. In addition to many religious
writings, he left a remarkable account of a
"Journey in Europe" which he made on a
diplomatic mission to the courts of Louis
XIV of France and Pope Clement XI and
which was the firstpiece of travel writing in
Georgian literature. The culmination ofhis
literary career was "The Truth of Lying", a
collection of stories, parables, fables,
maxims and riddles which is one of the
great works of Georgian prose. Left, illus¬
tration from the French translation, pub¬
lished in the Collection in 1984 under the
title Vérité du Mensonge.
Journalist and novelist, the Polish writer
Boleslaw Prus (pseudonym ofAleksander
Glowacki, 1847-1912) wrote novels and
short stories remarkable for their graphic
depiction ofsocial conditions. A 3-volume
French version of Lalka (1890; "The Doll"),
considered to be his masterpiece, has
been published in the Unesco Collection
as La Poupée (1962, 1963, 1964). The
novel, set in Warsaw, gives a picture of the
whole of Polish society in the second half
of the 19th century. Written with a wealth of
observation and humour, it is the finest
Polish novel ofmanners of its time. Right,
view of the square of the Iron Gate in War-
sawby Bernardo Bellotto (1 720- 1 780), bet¬
terknown as Canaletto the Younger (not to
be confused with his uncle, Antonio Can¬
al famous Canaletto of Venice
scenes). Unrivalled In their precision,
Canaletto's paintings of Warsaw were a
priceless source of Information when the
old city was rebuilt after destruction dur¬
ing the Second World War.
27

_
Above painting of St. Nikita from the
monastery ofManasija, In Yugoslavia, fea¬
tured as thejacket illustration ofMarko the
Prince, Serbo-Croat Heroic Songs, a col¬
lection of orally transmitted Serbian
poems, many of them translated into En¬
glish for the first time in this work pub¬
lished in the Collection In 1984. They be¬
long to one of the richest epic traditions in
Europe. A legendary hero of this poetry,
Marko the Prince is a crafty and valiant
fighter with superhuman force, directly in¬
spired by a 14th-century historical figure,
Marko Kraljevich.
^ their country and also love of life in all its
diversity.
What they have to say is spoken from
the heart of European awareness, strick¬
en with wounds that are slow to heal.
Over forty years have elapsed since the
end of the Second World War. How can
we forget the martyrdom of those men
and women of culture murdered in cold
blood by the Nazis? They include the
Hungarian poet Miklós Radnóti(8), killed
on a forced march after the evacuation of
the camp where he had been a prisoner,
the Romanian writer Benjamin Fondané,
caught in Paris by the occupation and
deported to Auschwitz, the Polish educa¬
tor Janusz Korczak(9), sent to the gas
chambers of Treblinka with the orphans
under his protection, not to mention all
the others who disappeared in those
dreadful places stained with tears and
blood. A new generation of writers is now
emerging in Eastern Europe. Bold and
clear-sighted, they give us their distinc¬
tive vision of a complex and changing
situation, while at the same time they
bring us the hope of a golden age when
man will no longer be a savage slaught¬
erer of his fellow men.
EDGAR REICHMAN, of Romanian origin, has
been a member of the Unesco Secretariat since
1965. He writes for the magazine L'Arche and
the Paris daily newspaper Le Monde, where he
reviews literary works from the countries of east¬
ern Europe. He is the author of two novels, Le
Dénonciateur (1963) and Le Rendez-vous de
Kronstadt (1934).
Portrait of Anton Pavlovich Chekhov
(1860-1904), the Russian playwright and
short-story writer whose works rank
among the great classics of world liter¬
ature. A collection ofhis stories and plays
translated into Persian was published in
the Collection in 1962.
Nartskij epos ('The Book of Heroes,
Legends of the Narts") is one of the most
celebrated traditional works of the
Ossetes, the last descendants of the
ancient Scythians, who were driven back
into the mountains of the Caucasus during
the great invasions. Pathos, comedy and
the grandiose are mingled in this vast can¬
vas of epic stories in verse and prose
which tell of fabulous heroes, the Narts.
The Collection includes a selection of the
stories translated into French and Italian.
Below, cover illustration of the Italian ver¬
sion, II Libro degli Eroi, Leggene sui Narti.
Above, the Hungarian lyric poet Miklós
Radnóti (1909-1944). Of Jewish origin,
Radnóti wrote manyofhispoems in labour
camps where he was imprisoned during
the Second World War. In autumn 1944,
the camp where he was held in Yugoslavia
was evacuated as the Nazi troops re¬
treated, and Radnóti was ordered to march
towards Austria through Hungary where,
unable to walk any further, he was shot.
His lastpoems were found in the pocket of
his coat when his corpse was exhumed. At
a time when, as he wrote, "poets die" and
"reason disintegrates", Radnóti sought
order, harmony, and intellectual clarity,
qualities displayed inpoetry which reveals
his pronounced taste for classicism. A
selection of his poems, Marche Forcée,
was published in the Collection in French
(1975).
Lm2
f ís
f.'-
28
