1986: Year of Peace/ 7
Over 400 representatives of 1 1 5 interna¬
tional non-governmental organizations
and 71 national organizations from 36
countries attended "Together for
Peace", a Conference held in Geneva
from 20 to 24 January 1986 to mark the
International Year of Peace. Topics dis¬
cussed at the Conference, held under
the auspices of the Board of the Confer¬
ence of Non-Governmental Organiza¬
tions in Consultative Status with the
Economic and Social Council of the Un¬
ited Nations, included questions of dis¬
armament, development, social prog¬
ress, justice, human rights, satisfaction
of basic human needs, and preparation
of societies for life in peace. At the end
of the Conference, the following appeal
was adopted by acclamation.
We appeal to all people of the world to join in a
common pursuit of peace.
With just a decade and a half for this century
to come to a close, we are convinced of the
duty and obligation of all people to make
concerted efforts to usher in a world of peace
as the new century opens. We are convinced
that it can be done, that the present danger¬
ous trends in world affairs can be stopped and
reversed. We see signs of hope in the new
spirit of dialogue and openness among lead¬
ers of nations and in the determination of the
people to attain peace.
We do not have to recount the threats to
peace. The race towards nuclear catastrophe
is keeping up its momentum. As if the earth
and the oceans can no longer bear the weight
of weapons outer space is explored for sta¬
tioning of arms. Hundreds are killed every day
by non-nuclear weapons. Hunger takes its
daily toll of thousands. Millions are deprived of
basic human needs and fundamental human
rights. Millions still groan under domination
and exploitation. Apartheid continues, de¬
nying justice, destroying people and destabi¬
lizing nations.
We appeal therefore to work together for a
world of peace, not where war is merely
absent, not where human survival is just pos¬
sible, but where justice prevails and human
dignity is upheld.
We reiterate that the nuclear arms race
constitutes the greatest threat to peace and
survival. Our appeal therefore assumes a
special urgency in this regard. ...
As we pledge to work together for disarma¬
ment we appeal to all to join in and support
efforts for an immediate end to all nuclear
weapon tests, a comprehensive test ban
treaty, the prevention of an arms race in outer
space, elimination of chemical weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction, and
substantial reduction in conventional
weaponry. We believe that it is possible to
implement a systematic and credible pro¬
gramme for the elimination of nuclear
weapons by the end of the century.
We believe that peace is inextricably inter¬
linked with development and social progress
and that its foundation is justice. Deprivation
and disparity are threats to peace. We there¬
fore call for a strategic development initiative
for a new international economic order that
ensures just economic relations between and
within nations. We further appeal for genuine
respect of the rights of people to decide their
own destiny, their rights to self-determination
and interdependent development, non-in¬
terference in their internal affairs, in conditions
of security and social progress.
We emphasize that the exercise of human
rights and freedoms is an essential element of
peace. Violations of them are a major cause of
armed conflicts. The fuller the rights that every
person enjoys in society, the more stable that
society will be; the fullerthe implementation of
human rights globally, the more stable inter¬
national relations will be. ...
We recognize that peace is an essential
requirement for the satisfaction of basic hu¬
man needs such as food, shelter, health, edu¬
cation, labour and environment. As we com¬
mend recent co-operative actions across con¬
tinents to meet emergency needs for food, we
appeal for more systematic and concerted
attempts to prevent death by starvation and
for the adoption of long-term policies national¬
ly and internationally to ensure food for all.
We call for joint actions to promote substan¬
tial reduction of military expenditures with a
view to rectifying the current distortion in the
use of resources. We agree that every gun
that is made, every warship launched, every
rocket fired, signifies in the final sense a theft
from those who hunger and are not fed, those
who are cold and are not clothed.
Recognizing the importance of preparation
of societies for life in peace we call for a new
orientation in education, science, culture, reli¬
gion and mass media towards peace-making.
The resources available in these areas can
be more constructively utilized for peace. ...
Nations must seek peace together. We can
only create a common future if we can cope
with the common crisis we face and build
peace on the basis of the concept of common
security. We appeal for a greater commitment
to international co-operation for which the uni¬
versal instrument is the United Nations. We
pledge our continued support to the United
Nations and its agencies. ...
We realize that the odds are tremendous.
But we are confident that the determination of
the people to achieve peace will prevail. We
have optimism and hope because we are
together for peace. It is in that spirit that we
renew our commitment to peace and invite
you all, all peoples of the world, to join in the
challenging tasks ahead.
