His n' Hers
by Elisabeth Badinter
The changing relationship
WE have known for a long time that
the organization of any particular
society is influenced by the defini¬
tion of the sexes and the distinction drawn
between them. But we have realized only
recently that the identity of each sex is not
so easy to pin down, and that definitions
evolve in accordance with the different
types of culture known to us, scientific dis¬
coveries and ideological revolutions. Our
nature is not considered immutable, either
socially or biologically. As we approach the
end of the century, the substantial progress
made in biology and genetics is radically
challenging the roles, responsibilities and
specific characteristics attributed to each
sex; and yet, scarcely twenty years ago,
these were thought to be "beyond dispute".
We can safely say, with a few minor ex¬
ceptions, that the definition of the sexes and
their respective functions remained un¬
changed in the West from the beginning of
the nineteenth century to the 1960s. The
role distinction, raised in some cases to the
status of uncompromising dualism on a
strongly hierarchical model, lasted
throughout this period, appealing for its
justification to nature, religion and customs
alleged to have existed since the dawn of
time. The woman bore children and took
care of the home. The man set out to con¬
quer the world and was responsible for the
survival of his family, by satisfying their
needs in peacetime and by going to war
when necessary.
The entire world order rested on the
divergence of the sexes. Any overlapping or
confusion between the roles was seen as a
threat to the time-honoured order of things.
It was felt to be against nature, a deviation
from the norm.
Sex roles were determined according to
the "place" appropriate to each. Woman's
place was, first and foremost, in the home.
The outside world, i.e. workshops, factor¬
ies and business firms, belonged to men.
This sex-based division of the world (pri¬
vate and public) gave rise to a strict dicho¬
tomy between the attitudes which conferred
on each its special identity. The woman,
sequestered at home, "cared, nurtured and
conserved". To do this, she had no need to
be daring, ambitious, tough or competitive.
The man, on the other hand, competing
with his fellow men, was caught up every
day in the stmggle for survival, and hence
developed those characteristics which were
thought natural in a man.
Today, many women go out to work, and
their reasons for doing so have changed
considerably. Besides the traditional finan¬
cial incentives, we find ambition and per¬
sonal fulfilment motivating those in the
"Passivity, patience (...) are no longer the
salient characteristics of the female sex. "
Right, detail ofJhe Departure of the Volun¬
teers of 1792 (also known as La Marseil¬
laise;, a high-reliefsculpture by the French
sculptor Francois Rude (1784-1855) which
adorns the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.
most favourable circumstances, and the
wish to have a social life and to get out of
their domestic isolation influencing others.
But, for all women, work is connected with
the desire for independence. Above all,
they do not wish to be forced to live with a
man whom they can no longer tolerate ; they
want to reclaim their freedom without un¬
duly harming their standard of living.
Whether we like it or not, these shared
experiences profoundly alter the rela¬
tionship between the sexes and the specific
definition of each. The change assuredly
makes for greater equality, but also,
perhaps, for a degree of fraternal similarity.
By dint of experiencing the same situations
as the other, one learns to react as he does,
and although he may thereby lose some of
his mystery, he gains in being better under¬
stood.
Furthermore, contraception has made it
possible to keep motherhood at bay. Now
that it is neither a physiological necessity
nor a moral obligation, child-bearing is no
longer endured but chosen. It thus becomes
something contingent and voluntary; it is no
longer left to "chance" in the form of
nature.
Late twentieth-century woman is no
longer automatically to be regarded as a
14

between the sexes in the Western World
mother. For the first time in our history,
women are allowed to find fulfilment in
spheres other than procreation. One reason
for this development is probably women's
increased life expectancy. Active mother¬
hood no longer takes up more than an aver¬
age of fifteen years in a woman's life, and is
one stage among others in female existence.
This change of attitude towards child-
bearing has gone hand in hand with a mod¬
ification of the stereotypes of female iden¬
tity; moreover, there has been a change in
those which, not so long ago, still defined
male identity. Passivity, patience, devotion
and altruism are no longer the salient char¬
acteristics of the female sex. For one thing,
women no longer recognize themselves in
this summary description, which conceals
other, equally real characteristics, once
thought to belong exclusively to the male:
ambition, activity, selfishness and indepen¬
dence. For another, because for the past ten
or fifteen years women have tirelessly urged
their companions to share in the joys and
duties of "mothering", men in turn are dis¬
playing virtues which used to be considered
feminine: genUeness, devotion and atten-
tiveness to small children. It is undeniable
that young fathers who take care of their
newbom offspring quickly acquire a body
language and set of attitudes, concerns and
feeHngs which in the past were alleged to
"come naturaUy" to women.
In reaHty, and within a very short time,
the specific characteristics of fatherhood
and motherhood have begun to converge. It
is no longer the mother alone who shows
affection, and the father is no longer the
exclusive embodiment of authority, law and
the outside world. All these roles are shared
between the sexes, and attitudes vary more
according to personal temperament than in
alignment with sexual differences.
If women no longer define themselves as
mothers first and foremost, nor do they
recognize themselves any longer as wives.
Their lives are an altemation between
celibacy and togetherness, with the result
that autonomy is taking precedence over
complementarity, and women, like men,
are coming to define themselves as beings in
their own right and no longer, as formerly,
in terms of another person. The bi-polar
relationship is still sought after by both men
and women, but is nevertheless losing
ground, in actuality, to periods of soHtude.
This new lifestyle is conducive to the
emergence of new psychological and social
characteristics in both sexes. Men and
"The level of civilization attained by the
different human societies Isproportionate
to the independence enjoyed by women in
these societies," wrote Flora Tristan
(1803-1844), the pioneer French feminist
andsocialist (right) in her book Pérégrlna-
tlons d'une Parla (1838). The daughter of a
Peruvian nobleman and a Frenchwoman,
she married the engraver and lithographer
André Chazal and was tfie grandmother of
Peut Gauguin (1848-1903).
women are tending to express that "other
half of themselves which their upbringing
in the past would have taught them they
must repress. Archetypal androgyny has
returned, sweeping before it the inequality
of the sexes and their strict comple¬
mentarity.
Another new development is eroding the
age-old stereotype of the male warrior, an
image that we find confronting us as far
back as we are able to trace it in history.
Today, the threat of nuclear war on a world
scale renders meaningless to us the warrior
virtues attributed to men when we try to
imagine the future. We see ourselves, men
and women, rightly or wrongly, as the im¬
mediate victims of such a war, with neither
the time nor the ability to defend ourselves
individually. The spectre of the atomic
bomb emphasizes still more the idea of fate,
passivity and the indistinguishability of the
sexes. On the one hand, men would be as
passive as women. On the other, the person
to "press the button" might equally well be
female or male.
Apart from this apocalyptic image of
war, other forms of modem warfare have
brought us pictures of women, and even
children, carrying weapons. This image, is
no longer startling: it shows that war is no
15

^ longer the prerogative of men and that ac¬
tion or passivity are Hkewise no longer the
property of one sex rather than the other.
Oddly enough, male identity has not so
far given rise to as much discussion and
controversy as that of females. And yet we
venture to predict that male identity will be
a major issue in the next half-century.
Women seem to have interiorized male
othemess without thereby abandoning their
traditional female identity. Twentieth-cen¬
tury Western woman is truly an androgy¬
nous creature. She is both virile and femi¬
nine, and she sHps out of one role and into
another according to the time of day or at
different times in her life. She is unwilling to
forgo anything, and walks a tightrope by
no means always easy to do between her
female and male desires. By turns passive
and active, devoted mothers and ambitious
egoists, gentle and aggressive, patient and
commanding, modern women have shuf¬
fled the identity cards that they were dealt.
In this period of upheaval brought about
by women, men's resistance, not to say
uneasiness, is immediately apparent. The
changes occurring in their partners and the
latter's new demands are forcing them to
caU their traditional model in question. The
fact that women can do everything men can
do, and that they have claimed men's time-
honoured characteristics for themselves, is
often felt by men as an experience of dispos¬
session and loss with which they are unable
to come to terms.
Trapped between an outdated model
which women no longer want and a new
model which men seem to fear, many men
are reacting by fleeing from women and
from family responsibilities.
Their difficulty in fully assimilating
female otherness and in expressing it out¬
wardly without any inhibitions stems from
the threat that they feel to their viriUty. This
dilemma does not seem to affect women in
the same way. The most convincing ex¬
planation for this male conflict is given by
the American psychoanalyst Robert J. Stol-
ler. Disagreeing with Freud, he claims that
"male" identity is not the stronger or the
more natural of the two. Throughout the
first few months of life, the male newbom
"Because for the past 10 or 15 years
women have tirelessly urged their com¬
panions to share in the Joys and duties of
'mothering' (...) young fathers in turn are
taking care of their newborn offspring and
quickly acquiring a body language and set
of attitudes, concerns and feelings which
In thepast were alleged to 'come naturally'
to women." Below, "Men's roles as
fathers," a photo used by Sweden's
National Social Security Office in a cam¬
paign to facilitate the leave of fathers to
take care of their children.
16

baby identifies strongly with his mother,
with whom he lives in a state of symbiosis.
Sexual differentiation, therefore, is
achieved only as the culmination of an "in¬
tense and painful struggle to break away
from this symbiosis. The male child must
thus "de-identify himself with his mother"
in order to jettison his female nature and
develop his subsequent gender identity:
maleness. But, observes StoUer, maleness
is always under latent threat from the ex¬
perience of bliss with the mother. Hence
men's much greater fear of androgyny,
which is experienced as a danger of
homosexuality, i.e. a loss of virility.
The dawn of the third millennium is co¬
inciding with an extraordinary reversal in
the power structure.
Not only will the patriarchal system be
dead and buried in most of the industrial¬
ized West, but we shall see the birth of a
new imbalance in the relations between the
sexes, this time exclusively to women's
advantage.
Women may at last be sharing control of
the outside world with their male compan¬
ions as they create and produce on an equal
footing with them. But the fact is that they
also have absolute control over procre¬
ation. They can, at any time, refuse to have
children. Tomorrow, thanks to sperm
banks, they will be able to produce children
without men's active assistance. But the
contrary is not trae. A man still needs a
woman's body in order to procreate. The
complementary relationship between the
sexes that seemed incontrovertible where
procreation was concerned is now being
challenged. And when we consider that
biologists and geneticists predict that before
long it will be possible to fertilize a female
nucleus without any need for a spermata-
zoon, we can see how close we have come to
achieving the powerful age-old fantasy of
parthenogenesis: in this case feminine.
Even if women in the third millennium
refrain from using this inordinate power, it
is probable that men will be painfully aware
of their possible eviction from the process of
fertilization and of the new imbalance in
their disfavour. There are probably hard
times ahead for men. Perhaps they will
experience an even greater feeling of loss of
identity, uniqueness and necessity. So it is
by no means absurd to suppose that they
will do all they can to win back some of their
power. Already, biologists are predicting
the incredible possibility that men will be
able to "carry" a child, within less than half
a century. The hypothesis no longer belongs
to the realm of science fiction. It will soon
call for some entirely new thinking about
the relationship between the sexes, their
identity and their equality.
To be continued in the third millennium.
ELISABETH BADINTER, ofFrance, was trained
as a philosopher and directs a seminar on the
history andpsychology of the family at the Ecole
Polytechnique, Paris. She is the author of,
L'Amour en plus, oA Emilie, Emilie une Femme
du 18e Siècle, and of the forthcoming L'Un est
l'Autre, a studyof the relations between men and
women. The above article has been extracted
from a paper entitled "Le Rapport des Sexes:
Egalité, Différence, Altérité", which Elisabeth
Badinter presented to an international seminar
on the new roles of men and women in private
and public life, held in Athens under Unesco
auspices from 26 to 29 November 1985.
17
