New nations
of Africa
by Basil Davidson
I
.fr&'J
tm'rf'M
t . I A, V** '*# *" '*<«
FOR the handsome equatorial island
of Sao Tomé, with its smaller neigh¬
bour Principe, independence, in
1975, signalled a fortunate end to a sad and
violent history. Sparsely settled by Portu¬
guese in the second half of the fifteenth
century, these tropical islands some 300
kilometres west of Gabon and Equatorial
Guinea became, almost at once, a centre of
the Atlantic slave trade and the scene of a
slave economy based on crops for export, of
which cocoa was to be the most valuable.
Populated initially as a fief of the Portu¬
guese Crown, and later by traders and plan¬
ters from Portugal, the islands gave birth to
a people of mixed origins filhos da terra,
"sons of the country" whose formal loyal¬
ty was to Portugal but whose inner identity
remained local to the islands.
As in the larger Cape Verde archipelago
to the north, where history took much the
same course, the "sons of the country" were
rapidly outnumbered by African captives
brought in as slave labour from the neigh¬
bouring mainland, but chiefly from the
lands which became Angola. When slavery
fell gradually away in the nineteenth cen¬
tury, the same continuous import of main¬
land Africans and Cape Verdeans was en¬
sured to the cocoa plantations by new if
concealed forms of enslavement or, as it
was called, "contract labour". This import
went on for decades.
One consequence of this strange history
was that the people of Sao Tomé and Prin¬
cipe became, and have since remained, an
authentically African people, even though
the mythologies of Portuguese imperialism
have preferred to present them as actually
or potentially "Portuguese". Another con¬
sequence was that they shared in the aspira¬
tions and the struggle for independence,
t
Cocoa galore. The principal cash crop of
Sao Tomé and Principe, cocoa provides
80%-90% of the country's exportearnings.
The cocoa and coffee plantations intro¬
duced in the late 19th centuryby the Portu¬
guese colonists are today being rehabili¬
tated by the government. Agricultural co¬
operatives are also being created and
crops diversified in an attempt to reduce
dependence on the fluctuating world
cocoa market and on Imported foodstuffs.
29

from Portugal and its empire, of all the
African peoples subjected by the soldiers
and administrators of Lisbon. In 1975 the
Portuguese administration withdrew with¬
out warfare, and most of the white popula¬
tion left the islands, leaving fewer than 100
whites in that notable year of anti-colonial
change. The newly-formed Republic at
once joined the loosely-organized grouping
of "ex-Portuguese" African countries.
The instrument of independence was a
nationalist movement, Movimento de
Libertaçâo de Sao Tomé e Príncipe, whose
leading members had spent the final years
of Portuguese rule in exile, chiefly in
Gabon. Some 10,000 Angolan "contract
workers" went home to their own country
and its new freedoms, while most of the
Cape Verdean workers made the same
choice. Left without any form of modern
development, the economy of the islands
has thus required urgent reconstruction,
while, at the same time, the nationalists
have had to cope with the problems of
nation-building in circumstances of often
acute difficulty. After a number of troubles
and disputes, the early 1980s brought stabil¬
ity under a government which has ensured
good relations with Angola, within the
framework of the Organization of African
Unity, and an effort to use foreign aid from
diverse sources, whether in East or West.
©
BOTSWANA is the ancient country of
the BaTswana or Tswana people, a
modern State and member of the
community of nations which has developed
from a long but markedly successful strug¬
gle for mastery of a most difficult environ¬
ment. Far back in time, at least fifteen
centuries ago, early ancestors of the major¬
ity of the BaTswana came into this arid
plateau from plains and highlands to the
east, explored its potential for raising cattle,
and began to settle here. They were not the
first people to live in this wide Kalahari
region, for Stone Age hunters of Khoi ori¬
gins ("Bushmen" in white parlance) had
long preceded them. But they were the first
people, supported by their iron-making and
food-producing skills, to form long-term
settlements and villages.
Their achievement was to discover and
develop a mode of life which could meet the
challenge of an always low rainfall, limited
pasture, and natural obstacles to survival
that were inherent in the conditions they
encountered. Given such obstacles, the
BaTswana have repeatedly succeeded by
means of great persistence, ingenuity and
courage. In modern times their total num¬
bers, consisting chiefly of eight large ethnic
groups (all of the Bantu-language family)
and of several smaller ones, have steadily
grown in size. Although varying among
THE REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA
Date of independence
30 September 1966
Unesco date of entry
16 January 1980
Capital
Gaborone
Area
600,372 km2
Population
1,050,000(1984)
Gross national product (per capita)
(US$1983)
908
Economic activities
Agriculture: sorghum; maize; millet; beans;
sunflowers
Stockraising
Industry: meat; other food products; clothing;
textiles; metal products; building materials
Mines: diamond; copper; nickel; coal
Languages
English, Setswana
An eye to business. With its rich "pipes" of
industrial diamonds and gem stones dis¬
covered in the last 20 years, Botswana
became in the early 1980s the world's
fourth largest diamond producer.
THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF SAO
TOME AND PRINCIPE
Date of independence
12 July 1975
Unesco date of entry
22 January 1980
Capital
Sao Tomé
Area
964 km2
Population
95,000 (1984)
Gross national product (per capita)
(US$ 1983)
306
Economic activities
Agriculture: cocoa; bananas; coconut palm;
oil-palm
Fishing
Industry: beer; bread; cooking oils
Language
Portuguese
30

Botswana village women dressed in a
style imported in the 19th century by the
Rhenish Missionary Society.
themselves, their underlying cultures are
closely related to each other, and their
sense of identity is powerfully expressed in
their Botswana nationhood. While their
economy has remained largely pastoral,
they also depend to a small extent on crop
cultivation. Important mineral discoveries
have lately begun to provide new sources of
national wealth.
One of the world's richest diamond
"pipes" more or less "vertical" rock seams
"sewn" with industrial diamonds and gem
stones was found at Orapa in 1967 and
began to yield four years later. Another
such "pipe" was then discovered nearby at
Letlhakane, and a third, possibly richer
still, not long after at Jwaneng, where pro¬
duction opened in 1982. By late in the
1980s, it was thought, these three diamond
mines would yield as much as 20 per cent of
world-wide production. Diamonds bring a
valuable and unexpected source of revenue
to an otherwise poorly-endowed economy.
Other mineral sources of revenue, no¬
tably copper and nickel, have yet to meet
initial expectations of profit, but Bots¬
wana's large deposits of coal are thought to
total some 400 million tonnes. While coal
mining remains at a relatively early stage,
most of what is now produced is already an
indispensable source of thermally-pro¬
duced electric power. Recent mineral sur¬
veys have indicated the probable or certain
presence of manganese and other useful
ores, including uranium. Generally,
however, this "mineral revolution" has yet
to get into its stride, while its "spread" of
resultant benefits so far reaches only a part
of the population. The government's prog¬
rammes of development intend to alter this
situation. The years immediately ahead
should see progress in this direction.
Independence brought gains but also
problems after colonial Bechuanaland be¬
came independent Botswana in 1966. But in
facing this challenge the country's political
parties and their constituent institutions
have borne witness to a quiet confidence in
this people's ability to translate problems
into solutions. Whatever new difficulties
have come or may now come from their
neighbour to the south, the South African
apartheid State in its endemic instability,
the BaTswana have had the advantage of a
very instructive history during the imperial¬
ist period. The birth of their State has not
been easy, and they have had to learn the
lessons of a stern realism. Their present
leaders, moreover, can look back to several
notable predecessors, notably the Chief
Khama Khama the Great, as he is not
unreasonably called during the late
nineteenth century, and, more recently, his
descendant Chief Tskedi Khama.
These men proved able to meet and
somewhat mitigate the brusque onset of the
"modern world" in the abrasive form of
British and South African imperialism. For
much of the early colonial period the coun¬
try then known as Bechuanaland was seen
by leading British imperialists, above all
Cecil John Rhodes, as little more than a
"Suez Canal towards the North". Khama
and his successors were able to use this
perception as a means of avoiding complete
colonial enclosure, and to keep most of
their country as a "protectorate" which
allowed a wide margin for their own politic¬
al control. Modern Botswana leaders have
shown the same political skill in affirming
and in buttressing their country's national
independence. Here is an African country
and people that have repeatedly shown how
to develop weakness into strength.
31

THE REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE
Date of independence
18 April 1980
Unesco date of entry
22 September 1980
Capital
Harare
Area
390,580 km2
Population
7,980,000(1984)
Gross national product (per capita)
(US$1983)
740
Economic activities
Agriculture: tobacco; maize; cotton; sugar;
wheat; soya; coffee
Industry: agro-food products; chemicals; textiles
Mines: gold; asbestos; nickel; copper; silver;
emeralds; cobalt; chrome; coal
Languages
English; Chishona; Slndebele
Aerial view of modern Harare (formerly
Salisbury), capital of Zimbabwe. The city
(pop. 656,000 at the 1982 census) derives
its name from that ofChiefNeharawe, who,
with his people, occupied the site when it
was seized in 1890 by the British South
Africa Company's Pioneer Column.
NAMED after its famous stone ruins,
medieval in date and wholly African
in conception and construction, the
splendid country of Zimbabwe may be said
to stand at the heart of southern African
history. Every important stage in that his¬
tory, over many centuries, has left its strong
and often dramatic mark upon this people
and their land; and this remains as likely to
be true in the future as it has been in the
past. Zimbabwe, in a large historical sense,
epitomizes all the challenges and ventures
of the African south, whether for worse or
for better, in despair or in vivid hope.
Compared with Botswana, Zimbabwe
has been blessed by nature, being a land of
wide pastures, pleasant hills and flowing
rivers, adequate though seldom abundant
rainfall except in times of cyclical drought,
and fruitful human settlement. Since inde¬
pendence came in 1980, democratic policies
have begun to overcome the gross inequali¬
ties of ownership of land and wealth, as
between a small minority of white settlers
and a large majority of indigenous Africans,
that were imposed, often manu militari,
during colonial occupation.
The ancient history of Zimbabwe was
largely the epic struggle of its Shona people
to tame this land for human settlement and
to shape and evolve effective means of self-
government. Iron Age settlement began
here some eighteen centuries ago. But it
was in the tenth century, or soon after, that
the origins of Shona society began to pro¬
duce the cultures and traditions which have
governed the Shona down to modern times.
Shortly after AD 1000, the earliest stone-
built centres of self-government were raised
on sites which, later on, became famous for
the grandeur of their conception and the
strength with which they were built. By
1300 or somewhat earlier, using the plenti¬
ful granite of the southeastern plateau,
powerful rulers had their courts and centres
of government at various places. The best
known of these, and certainly the most im¬
pressive, was at Great Zimbabwe, as later
generations have understandably named it.
This cluster of Zimbabwe kingdoms, so
named after a Shona term for a stone build¬
ing, stretched across the central plateau
down towards the coastland of Mozam¬
bique, and, like other large structures of
African authority in medieval times, de¬
rived from the dynamics of an internal de¬
velopment as well as from the stimulus of
long-distance trade. Very competent metal¬
workers and miners, these people were able
to locate and extract gold from many sur¬
face or near-surface seams across their
plateau and its eastern hills. At least from
the tenth century AD, they were trading
this gold to the city-States of the East Afri¬
can coast, notably those of the Swahili who,
in turn, exchanged the gold for Indian cot¬
tons and other useful imports from the
countries of the East. These old kingdoms
were thus an integral and even an essential
part of the whole network of Eastern trade
before the onset of European discovery in
1498.
Although a few Europeans, chiefly Por¬
tuguese, were able to penetrate these inland
kingdoms during the sixteenth century, and
later to make small settlements along the
Right, Zimbabweans waiting in the polling
queues during the February 1980 election,
in which a new Constitution guaranteed
universal adult suffrage. The new State of
Zimbabwe became legally independent on
18 April 1980.
middle and lower Zambezi river, no lasting
impact from the outside world struck the
body of the plateau until the 1830s.
Announcing a time of upheaval, warrior
groups of the Ndebele (Matabele) people
then came north over the Limpopo river
from their troubled homeland in the Zulu
empire. Searching for a new homeland of
their own, the Ndebele invaded the wester¬
ly Shona kingdoms and settled in the Mato-
po hills, with their capital at Bulawayo. To
begin with they proved dangerous neigh¬
bours, but settlement gradually rubbed off
the edges of their aggressiveness.
But new arrivals in the 1880s again
announced a time of trouble; and now the
time would be long and the trouble would
be great. As part of Britain's imperial
"drive to the north", white soldiers and
settlers from South Africa were able to take
possession of all the country of the Shona
and the Ndebele. They were stubbornly
resisted, but the automatic firearms of the
invaders ensured an eventual success. The
country was enclosed in the British empire
under the name of Southern Rhodesia,
although ruled until the 1920s by the British
South Africa Company which Cecil Rhodes
had formed for the purpose.
Lasting until 1980, this colonial period
produced a white dictatorship, severely
racist, on lines that were essentially the
same as those already formed in South Afri¬
ca. Only a daring and often painful counter-
violence could overthrow that dictatorship:
begun in the 1960s, this was the war of
liberation which was crowned by independ¬
ence six years ago. Since then this united
people has begun to make its own history
once more, fortified by its long traditions of
independent development before the com¬
ing of the Europeans, and determined to
regenerate and modernize the old ancestral
cultures which rose in the remote past.
BASIL DAVIDSON, British writer and historian,
is an authority on African history and current
affairs. His many books on Africa include Libera¬
tion of Guiñé (1969), In the Eye of the Storm:
Angola's People (1972), Africa in Modern Socie¬
ty (1980) and Modern Africa (1983). He is the
author oí Africa, a series of eight television prog¬
rammes first shown in the United Kingdom in
1984 and since networked in thirty countries.
99
