Tongues
that span
the centuries
by Amadou Hampâté Bâ THE Bambara tradition of the Komo
(one of the great initiation schools of
the Mande group of peoples of Mali)
teaches that the Word, Kuma, is a fun¬
damental force emanating from the Sup¬
reme Being himself Maa Ngala, creator of
all things. It is the instrument of creation:
"That which Maa Ngala says, is!" proclaims
the cantor, the singing priest of the god
Komo.
The story of Genesis used to be taught
during the sixty-three-day retreat imposed
on the circumcised in their twenty-first
year, and then twenty-one years were spent
in deeper and deeper study of it.
After the initiation, the recital of the
primordial genesis would begin:
"There was nothing except a Being,
That Being was a living Emptiness,
Brooding potentially over contingent
existences.
Infinite Time was the Abode of that One
Being.
The One Being gave himself the name
Maa Ngala.
Maa Ngala wished to be known.
52

It would be virtually impossible to over¬
emphasize the importance of the oral
tradition in Africa where, it has been said,
whenever an old man dies a whole library
disappears with him. In societies that have
oral rather than written records, it is by
word of mouth that the guardians of the
collective memory hand down from one
generation to the nextstories, legends and
poetry, society's moral values and re¬
ligion, the mastery of occult forces, the
secrets of initiation into different crafts, as
well as detailed accounts of actual events
of yesterday or today. Left, an African
griot, or musician-entertainer. Griots are
leading transmitters of the African oral
tradition.
So he created Fan,
A wondrous Egg with nine divisions,
And into it he introduced the nine
fundamental
States of existence.
"When this primordial Egg came to
hatch, it gave birth to twenty marvellous
beings that made up the whole of the uni¬
verse, the sum total of existing forces and
possible knowledge.
"But alas! None of those first twenty
creatures proved fit to become the inter¬
locutor (Kuma-nyon) that Maa Ngala had
craved.
"So he took a bit of each of these twenty
existing creatures and mixed them; and
then, blowing a spark of his own fiery
breath into the mixture, he created a new
Being, Man, to whom he gave a part of his
own name: Maa. And so this new being,
through his name and through the divine
spark introduced into him, contained some¬
thing of Maa Ngala himself."
Synthesis of all that exists, pre-eminent
receptacle of the supreme Force and conflu¬
ence of all existing forces, Maa, Man, re¬
ceived as his legacy a part of the divine
creative power, the gift of Mind and the
Word.
Maa Ngala taught Maa, his interlocutor,
the laws according to which all the elements
of the cosmos were formed and continue to
exist. He installed him as guardian of his
universe and charged him with watching
over the maintenance of universal Har¬
mony. That is why it weighs heavy, being
Maa.
Initiated by his creator, Maa later passed
all that he had learned on to his descen¬
dants; and that was the beginning of the
great chain of initiatory oral transmission of
which the order of Komo (unlike the orders
of Nama, Kore, and so on in Mali) claims to
beacontinuator.
August-September 1979
AMADOU HAMPATE BA, Malian writer, is a
specialist in African history, cosmogony and liter¬
ature. He is the author of many articles and
books, including L'Empire peul du Macina (The
Peul Empire ofMacina), Les Religions africaines
traditionnelles (Traditional African Religions)
and L'Etrange destin de Wangrin (Wangrin's
Strange Destiny), a work which won the Grand
Prix of Black African Literature in 1974.

