The genesis
IN the beginning there was nothing at
all. Space, time and the matter of the
Universe we live in were created
together in a superdense fireball, some
15,000 million years ago, a fireball which
we call the "Big Bang". As the Universe
expanded and cooled, matter became
spread more thinly until huge clouds of
hydrogen gas began to clump together,
breaking up and collapsing inwards to
form stars and galaxies. By about 10,000
million years ago, galaxies like our own
Milky Way system, each containing up to
a few thousand million stars, were estab¬
lished as the basic units of the Universe.
Within each galaxy stars are born, live
and die, wheeling their long orbits
around the galaxy's centre, while the
galaxies themselves are carried ever
farther apart as the Universe continues to
expand.
Our Sun and Solar System are typical
products of the galactic environment, but
our Sun was not one of the first stars to
shine in the cosmic night. Those earliest
stars contained only hydrogen and a little
helium; all the other elements have been
created by nuclear reactions inside stars
and scattered through space when those
first stars exploded. So when our Sun
formed, only a little over 4,500 million
years ago, it formed out of a cloud of
hydrogen gas well laced with other mate¬
rials such as iron, carbon, oxygen and
nitrogen materials that settled out of
the collapsing gas cloud to form the
planets.
The planets of the Solar System differ
from one another chiefly because of their
distances from the Sun. Those closest to
the forming young Sun were subjected to
the greatest heat, and this drove off into
space many light materials. This is why
Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars are
small, rocky objects. Far out from the
Sun's furnace, however, even light gases
such as methane and ammonia could be
trapped and held by a forming planet. So
the giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus
and Neptune, probably contain the same
amount of rocky material as the Earth,
but this is buried deep beneath the vast
layers of their gaseous atmospheres.
They need not concern us here, but it is
interesting and informative to make some
comparisons between our own home in
space, Planet Earth, and our nearest
neighbours, Venus and Mars.
The small cloud of material that col¬
lapsed to form our planet, within the
greater cloud that was collapsing to form
the Solar System, was probably made up
chiefly of silicon compounds, iron oxides
and magnesium oxides, with just a small
trace of all the other elements, including
those that are so important to life.
As the Earth formed, it grew hot. First,
gravitational energy was turned to heat as
particles rained down and smashed into
the proto-planet. In addition, radioactive
elements inside the core of the growing
planet contributed their share of warmth
as they decayed into stable elements a
process which continues at a slower rate
today.
The young, iron-rich planet must have
been largely molten in the first tens or
hundreds of millions of years after it
formed, and as a result molten globules of
iron forced their way downwards to the
core of the Earth through the lighter,
rocky material, which was left to float on
top and provide a solid skin as the crust
cooled. The material of the crust on
which we live is not typical of the material
that makes up the bulk of the Earth and
the material of the atmosphere that we
breathe is even less representative of the
whole planet.
The crust of the Earth contains 6 per
cent iron, but the planet as a whole con¬
tains 35 per cent; silicon, which makes up
only 15 per cent of the mass of the planet,
forms 28 per cent of the crust, combined
with oxygen to make silicate rocks. The
lightest rocks, chiefly granite, make up
the bulk of the continents, but the ocean
floor consists of basalt, which is rather
heavier.
From the surface to the centre, the
Earth is layered like an onion, with the
lightest material on the outside and the
most dense material at the core. And this
process of segregation was more or less
completed by 3,900 million years ago,
just 600 million years after the planet
formed. Geophysicists know this because
they have been able to date the oldest
rocks of the Earth's crust, using measure¬
ments of their residual radioactivity; and
they know about the layered structure of
the planet from studies of earthquake
waves, which are bent and distorted by
the different layers.
However, no more than the broad out¬
lines of the picture of the Earth's interior
can be determined in this way. The
pioneering geophysicist Sir Edward Bul-
lard once told me that "determining the
structure of the Earth by studying earth¬
quakes is like a blind man trying to deter¬
mine the structure of a grand piano solely
by listening to the sound it makes when
pushed down a flight of stairs". And it is ''^,.
true that scientists know more about the '^
composition of distant stars than about
the Earth deep below our feet after all,
we can actually see the stars!
But we do at least have the broad out¬
lines of a picture of the Earth's interior.
Starting from the surface, we live on a
rocky ball with an average radius of 6,372
kilometres, slightly flattened at the poles.
The outer skin, or the crust, represents
only 0.6 per cent of the volume of the
planet. Below the crust, which varies in
thickness from 5 to 35 kilometres, there is
a sharp boundary called the Mohorovicic
Discontinuity, or Moho.
This marks the top of the mantle, a
layer which goes down to a depth of 2,900
kilometres and takes up 82 per cent of the
volume of the Earth. Near the top, the
mantle is partly molten, with a consisten¬
cy like thick porridge, or slushy, melting
ice. This region of weakness, called the
asthenosphere, is of great importance be¬
cause the crust above can move over it,
leaving the continents free to wander
around the globe (see page 10). On a
broader scale, the mantle seems to be
made up of three zones , the upper mantle
being about 370 kilometres thick and
separated by a transition zone about 600
kilometres thick from the lower mantle,
which is itself 1,900 kilometres in thick-
ness.
Evolution of the Earth from a cloud ofgas
and dust to a rocky planet

of the Earth by John Gribbin

^ Below the mantle lies the core an
outer core 2,100 kilometres thick and the
inner core itself, with a radius of just
1,370 kilometres, at the centre of the
Earth. The outer core is the region of
liquid iron, where the Earth's magnetic
field is generated.
Venus and Mars are rocky planets like
the Earth and formed in much the same
way. But our planet is covered by oceans
of water, whereas Mars is a cold, dry
planet with a thin atmosphere and Venus
has a superdense atmosphere covering a
baking hot surface. These differences
seem to be a direct result of the differ¬
ences in the distance of the planets from
the Sun.
All three planets, astronomers and
geophysicists now believe, had no atmos¬
phere immediately after they cooled.
Any gases that were present as they
formed were driven off by the heat of the
Sun. Simple physics tells us the tempera¬
ture of the surface of each of the three
rocky balls, at their different distances
from the Sun, once the Sun had settled
down to a steady brightness. For Venus,
the stable temperature, where incoming
heat from the Sun is exactly balanced by
outgoing radiation, is 87 degrees Centi¬
grade, and for Mars the figure is -30
degrees Centigrade. These figures, re¬
member, are for airless planets. ^


1. crust granite (continents)
basalt (oceans)
2. mantle peridotite (and denser forms)
3. outer core iron (liquid)
4. Inner core iron (solid)



On each planet an atmosphere began
to form when carbon dioxide and water
vapour were produced by volcanic activ¬
ity (it may seem surprising, but one of the
main things that emerges from the fiery
furnace of a volcano is water vapour).
Although 87 degrees Centigrade is still
below the boiling point of water, the
temperature on Venus was already high
enough for a great deal of water vapour
from volcanic outgassing to stay in the
atmosphere with carbon dioxide.
Both water vapour and carbon dioxide
are very efficient at trapping infra-red
radiation the process is called the
"greenhouse effect". So less heat could
escape from the planet into space and as a
result its temperature quickly rose above
the boiling point of water, and then still
higher as still more water vapour joined
the atmosphere. From then on, all pro¬
duction of volcanic gases thickened the
atmosphere and strengthened this green¬
house effect. On Mars the opposite hap¬
pened. Water may have flowed briefly on
the planet, but it soon froze. Venus is a
hot desert; Mars is a cold desert. But
Earth is different.
On our planet the temperature was
high enough for liquid water to flow, but
not so high that water vapour could cause
a runaway greenhouse effect. Quite the
reverse the warm waters of the young
oceans dissolved carbon dioxide out of
the air, leaving a much thinner atmos¬
phere than on Venus, while white clouds
in the sky reflected away some of the
incoming solar heat and let the planet
cool. It is no coincidence, astronomers
believe, that the mass of all the carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere of Venus today
is roughly the same as the mass of carbon
dioxide locked up in carbonate rocks,
such as limestone, laid down from the
oceans around the Earth.
If our Sun had been a little warmer,
Earth too might have been a superhot
desert with a thick, carbon dioxide
atmosphere but if that were so, then
Mars would be warm enough for water to
flow and life to flourish. Or suppose the
Sun were a little cooler; our Earth might
have ended up like Mars but Venus
could have become a pleasant planet of
oceans and cloudy blue skies. If you are
not fussy about exactly which planet you
settle on, the implication seems to be that
an Earth-like planet is an almost inevit¬
able counterpart of every Sun-like star.
In the case of our Solar System, it just
happens to have been the third planet out
from the Sun that was, by about 3,500
million years ago, already in possession
of oceans of water, continents, a carbon
dioxide atmosphere and a comfortable
temperature. The scene was set for the
emergence of life, and for life itself to
begin to change the environment of the
planet but that is another story.
8

What of the future? Our Sun has ex¬
isted in a more or less steady state for
4,000 million years, keeping hot as it
burns hydrogen fuel into helium in its
interior. Eventually the supply of hyd¬
rogen will be exhausted. When it is, the
inner part of the Sun will collapse slightly
and become still hotter as helium is fused
by nuclear reactions into carbon. This
greater internal heat will cause the outer
layers of the Sun to expand and it will
become a red giant star, engulfing the
inner planets and burning them to cin¬
ders. But there is no need to panic. Our
Sun is only halfway through its life-cycle,
scarcely into middle-age, and "eventual¬
ly", in this case, means not for another
4,000 million years or more. The fate of
mankind lies in its own hands, not in the
stars.
JOHN GRIBBIN, British astrophys,cist and sci¬
ence writer, former member of the Science Poli¬
cy Research Unit of the University of Sussex,
England, is physics consultant to the magazine
New Scientist. He has written many books on
astronomy, geophysics and climatic change, as
well as two novels, and in 1974 he received the
United Kingdom's premier science-writing
award. His books on astrophysics include White
Holes (1977), Timewarps (1979), Genesis: The
Origins of Man and the Universe (1981), and
Spacewarps (1983).

