Physicians and the nuclear
threat
by Bernard Lown
IN December 1980, six physicians, three
from the Soviet Union and three from
the United States, met in Geneva to
establish the International Physicians for
the Prevention of Nuclear War (IPPNW),
and in December 1985 we travelled to Oslo
to receive the Nobel Peace Prize.
I believe that this extraordinary achieve¬
ment and recognition relates to the cogency
and the urgency of the issue being ad¬
dressed by these physicians. It is also due to
the fact, as the Nobel Committee pointed
out, that the IPPNW has been "spreading
authoritative information by creating an
awareness of the catastrophic consequences
of atomic warfare".
We have resisted being sidetracked onto
other issues, no matter how morally com¬
pelling. Combating the nuclear threat has
been our exclusive preoccupation, since we
are dedicated to the proposition that to
ensure the conditions of life we must pre¬
vent the conditions of death. Ultimately, we
believe people must come to terms with the
fact that the struggle is not between diffe¬
rent national destinies or between opposing
ideologies, but rather between catastrophe
and survival. All nations share a linked
destiny nuclear weapons are their com¬
mon enemy.
IPPNW has emphasized a number of cri¬
tical conclusions.
Firstly, that no public health hazard ever
faced by humankind equals the threat of
nuclear war. Never before has man posses¬
sed the destructive resources to make this
planet uninhabitable.
Secondly, that modern medicine has no¬
thing to offer, not even a token benefit, in
the event of nuclear war.
Thirdly, while no national interest would
justify nuclear war, sober appraisals suggest
that we have created a technology which is
increasingly out of human control. Ulti¬
mately the bomb, the robot and the compu¬
ter pre-empt man's decision-making role
and take command.
Fourthly, even if war is prevented, the
arms race is exacting an enormous econo¬
mic, psychological and moral toll.
The current global economic crisis results
The officialposter of the International Year
ofPeace, showing the face ofa youth with,
superimposed, the faces of men, women
and children from all over the world. De¬
signed by the American artist Neil Wald-
man, it won first prize in the International
Year of Peace poster competition orga¬
nized by the United Nations.
largely from the mortgaging of scarce world
resources to the military. One might use the
metaphor of a metronome. Listen to a met¬
ronome set at a rate of sixty beats per
minute, imagine the sound of a pulse every
second. Every two seconds the pulse con¬
veys the message that a child has died of a
disease that could have been prevented by
immunization, by providing adequate food
and a safe water supply. With each in¬
tervening beat of the metronome, also
every two seconds, a child is permanently
crippled physically or mentally by a pre¬
ventable illness and is destined to live the
rest of its life with severe disability. Thus,
with each beat of the metronome, a child is
either killed or maimed byta preventable
affliction: 120,000 children, *the same num¬
ber of victims claimed by the first atomic
bomb, are dying every three days.
With each second's pulse, the metro¬
nome proclaims another message, a mes¬
sage of waste. Each beat conveys the spend
ing every second of $25,000 on arms; $1.5
million every minute.
Compounding the tragedy is the fact that
even a small transfer of the funds being
spent on arms to health and social needs
would result in extraordinary permanent,
long-lasting benefit, serving all of human¬
kind . Three hours of world arms spending is
equivalent to the total cost of the twenty-
year campaign to eradicate smallpox, one of
the great achievements of twentieth-cen¬
tury medicine. Half a day of world arms
spending would pay for the full immuniza¬
tion of children against common infectious
disease that now claims 3.5 million lives
annually. Four days of world arms spending
would pay for five years of a malaria control
programme, addressing what is probably
the world's greatest cause of morbidity. Six
months of world arms spending would pay
for a twenty-year programme providing
essential food and health needs in all the
developing countries.
As you listen to the metaphorical metro¬
nome pulsing at one beat every second, it
conveys a third message, that of the extra¬
ordinary danger in which the world finds
itself. Nuclear weapon stockpiles are now
equivalent to 16,000 million tons of TNT. If
each metronome beat represents the explo¬
sion of a ton of dynamite, the din of explo¬
sions would be continuously heard for 500
years.
For a cardiologist, the metronome con¬
veys a fourth message. It evokes the beating
of the human heart. We must ask ourselves
whether we will let the heartbeat of human¬
ity stop, or struggle to make certain that it
pulses for an eternity to come.
BERNARD LOWN, of the USA, is professor of
cardiology at the Harvard School of Public
Health. With Academician Evgeny Chazov of the
USSR, he is co-president of International Physi¬
cians for the Prevention of Nuclear War
(IPPNW), which was awarded the 1984 Unesco
Prize for Peace Education and the 1985 Nobel
Peace Prize. The article published here consists
of extracts from Prof. Lown's address to a
Unesco International Consultation on higher
education and problems relating to peace, held
in Athens in January 1986 (see opposite page).
19
