The Pugwash movement
by Joseph Rotblat
THE direct initiative for the Pugwash
Movement came not from a scientist
but from the British philosopher Ber¬
trand Russell. In 1955, the world situation
appeared highly dangerous and the outlook
for mankind very gloomy. The development of
the hydrogen bomb in the United States and
the Soviet Union marked the start of the nu¬
clear arms race, with both sides manufactur¬
ing and testing bombs of ever-increasing des¬
tructive power. Even at that time, before the
advent of ballistic missiles, these bombs deli¬
vered by manned aircraft could annihilate the
largest centres of population. In the climate of
intense mistrust, fear, and hostile propaganda
which then prevailed, it seemed highly prob¬
able that the cold war would change into a hot
war in which civilization would be destroyed.
It was in these circumstances that the Rus¬
sell-Einstein Manifesto was born. Russell
conceived the idea that the scientific com¬
munity should be actively concerned about
the dangers to humanity which arose largely
through the work of scientists. At that time the
greatest living scientist was Albert Einstein,
and Russell wrote to him with the idea of
convening a conference of eminent scientists
for this purpose. Einstein immediately agreed
and asked Russell to prepare a draft of a
suitable statement. This Russell did and in
April 1 955 sent it to Einstein for his signature.
Later that month, Russell was flying from
Rome to Paris, when the pilot announced to
the passengers that Einstein had died. Rus¬
sell was shattered, because he feared that
without Einstein's sponsorship the whole pro¬
ject would collapse. But when Russell arrived
at his hotel in Paris, a letter with Einstein's
signature to the statement was waiting for
him. Signing it had been one of the last acts of
the great scientist's life. In this dramatic way
the Pugwash Movement began. The signa¬
tures of nine other scientists from six coun¬
tries were obtained, and on 9 July 1955 the
Manifesto was issued at a press conference
held at Caxton Hall in London.
The press conference was attended by a
very large number of media representatives
from all over the world; it was a great success
and received huge publicity. This in turn
brought a flood of letters and cables from
individuals and groups endorsing the Mani¬
festo and offering help. One of the letters was
from Mr. Cyrus Eaton, a Canadian-American
industrialist, offering to finance the confer¬
ence of scientists which was called for in the
Manifesto, and suggesting that it be held at his
birthplace, Pugwash, a small fishing village in
Nova Scotia.
In his offer of help Eaton made it clear that
while the participants would be his guests
they would be completely independent; that
the preparatory work and organization would
be handled by Russell and his colleagues,
and that the conduct and proceedings of the
Conference would be left entirely to the parti¬
cipants.
The first of the series of conferences of
scientists held under the aegis of the Russell-
Einstein Manifesto took place in Pugwash in
July 1957. The twenty-two participants came
from ten countries, including the United
States, the United Kingdom, France, the
Soviet Union, China and Poland. The work
was divided among three committees, with
the following topics: hazards arising from the
use of atomic energy in peace and war; con¬
trol of nuclear weapons; and the social
responsibility of scientists.
The possible hazard from the radioactive
fall-out from nuclear weapons tests was a
Peace on the singing constellation of the waters
Jostling like the shoulders of the crowd
Peace in the sea's waves of goodwill
Peace on the resting place of the foundering
Peace on the drums of arrogance and the darkened pupils
And if I am the interpreter of the waves
Peace also on me.
Vicente Huidobro (Chile)
Monumento al mar
Ascn&pe . KUTHULA ^P
* ANyilale ÄNM
» Suguru Runyararo #>
AMAHORO peAc^AfWr
-KE.4-*» 17 \w*u it-*-. (/
4/no4*_- mthunlam/
TERbOlJ** I I
KEAMANAN **y* PAIX '
' "-> 6ARIS
/
Baric
13

[edzole
LAFFI 5ß
¡f^-PACE
fH/frfo«.o
FRIEDEN PAZ
***
v\n/l . L. . e.~
PEACE «a^o^f ^
Kf\Ovç^D i
Nútifafa /) .C6*6-
A/*6Ab[
-i'
Frieden
major issue at that time, and it was of con¬
siderable importance that such an internation¬
al group of scientists, covering a wide range of
political opinion, managed to reach unani¬
mous agreement on the quantitative assess¬
ment of the consequences of large-scale test¬
ing of nuclear weapons. The most controver¬
sial issue was the discussion in the committee
on the control of nuclear weapons, because
this included the whole area of arms limita¬
tions and reductions, and the steps needed to
achieve general and complete disarmament,
topics which were to occupy most of the time
of future Pugwash Conferences. But there
was unanimous agreement that scientists can
and ought to contribute to the debate on these
problems.
The committee on the social responsibility
of scientists was also unanimous in its find¬
ings, which took the form of a statement of
common beliefs. The fact that a long
statement, dealing in some detail with the
most controversial issues of the day, and
setting out the role and responsibility of scien¬
tists, was accepted by such a diverse group of
scientists, was in itself of great significance.
This was probably the first time that a truly
international conference, organized by scien¬
tists, with participants from East and West,
had been convened to discuss not purely
technical matters but the social implications of
scientific discovery.
The first Pugwash Conference proved that
scientists have a common purpose which can
transcend national frontiers without violating
basic loyalties. It had shown that, by virtue of
their training and their knowledge, scientists
are capable of discussing objectively the com-
'plex problems which have arisen from the
progress of science, with the aim of finding a
solution to these problems.
The realization of this unanimity of intent
decided the participants to make further
efforts in the same direction. For this purpose,
a Continuing Committee of five persons was
set up at the end of the Conference, with
instructions to organize further conferences of
a similar nature. This was the go-ahead for the
setting up of a Movement of Scientists, which
takes its name "The Pugwash Conferences
on Science and World Affairs" from the venue
of the first meeting.
Since then, the following characteristics of
Pugwash have gradually evolved: partici¬
pants in conferences and meetings are invited
in their personal capacity and represent no¬
body but themselves; they are scientists (this
term being used in its broadest sense) and
cover a wide spectrum of ideological and
geographical groupings within the scientific
community; the debates in Pugwash meet¬
ings are conducted in the scientific spirit; as a
private and independent entity, Pugwash
does not usually undertake joint action with
other organizations, except the United Na¬
tions and its specialized agencies, such as
Unesco.
The role and responsibility of scientists has
always been a matter of special concern for
Unesco: the Preamble to its Constitution con¬
tains the famous declaration "...since wars
begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of
men that the defences of peace must be
constructed." In 1982, Unesco organized
jointly with Pugwash a symposium on the
theme of "Scientists, the Arms Race and Dis¬
armament", the conclusions and recom¬
mendations of which set forth specific tasks
for scientists to undertake in the fulfilment of
their social obligations. These recommenda¬
tions are based on the development of ideas
put forward in Pugwash Conferences since
1957.
One unique characteristic of Pugwash is
absence of rigidity in its make-up and a mini¬
mum of formalized structure. There is no writ¬
ten constitution and no formal membership;
any scientist who has attended a Pugwash
conference automatically becomes a "Pug-
washite". However, being without a constitu
tion is not the same as acting entirely arbitrar¬
ily. In the course of time certain guiding princi¬
ples have evolved. These are usually re¬
viewed every five years at the Quinquennial
Conference, which serves as a kind of Gener¬
al Assembly, which all who have participated
in at least two Pugwash conferences in the
past are entitled to attend.
Although the largest attendance so far, at
the 1 977 Quinquennial, was 223, it has never
been the intention to confine the Movement's
activities to a small group of scientists. One
way of involving more participants has been to
set up national Pugwash groups, and by 1982
such groups existed in thirty-six countries. An
example of a regular activity by a national
group is the International Summer School of
Disarmament and Arms Control organized
biennially by the Italian Pugwash Group.
There are also Pugwashites in thirty-nine
other countries, but they are not numerous
enough to form national groups. In such
cases, regional groups are set up such as
those which exist today for Africa and Latin
America.
Today the Pugwash Movement is estab¬
lished as an important and effective channel
of communication between scientists for the
study and discussion of many of the complex
issues which confront mankind at the present
time. Participation in these conferences by
eminent scientists from East and West, North
and South, and the constructive proposals
which have emerged from the discussions,
particularly in relation to disarmament, have
secured for the Pugwash Conferences the
respect of the scientific community, of gov¬
ernments, and of many sectors of society. The
name "Pugwash" has become a symbol of
successful international debate on controver¬
sial issues, and the conferences are cited as a
model for similar efforts in other fields.
The success of the Pugwash Conferences
is the result of resolute efforts of a group of
scientists determined to retain an indepen¬
dent and unbiased outlook, and anxious to
build and consolidate international under¬
standing and co-operation. The Conferences
have shown that it is possible to apply the
scientific approach, which has proved so suc¬
cessful in science and technology, to prob¬
lems which are only indirectly related to sci¬
ence. They have shown that even when deal¬
ing with highly controversial matters, it is
possible to tell the truth without being abusive,
to be candid without trying to embarrass, pro¬
vided that there is a common approach based
on scientific objectivity and mutual respect.
JOSEPH ROTBLAT, of the United Kingdom, isa
foundermember of the Pugwash Movement, and
was its first Secretary-General (1957- 1973). To¬
day Professor Emeritus of Physics at the Uni¬
versity of London, he has campaigned for many
years in favour ofarms control and disarmament.
He is the author of numerous publications on
world affairs, nuclear energy and the quest for
peace, including the official history of Pugwash.
He was general editor of Scientists, the Arms
Race and Disarmament, a Unesco-Pugwash
Symposium published by Unesco in 1982. The
present text has been extracted from the author's
contribution to a series of studies which Unesco
is publishing on the origins ofpeace movements
in different parts of the world.
1A
