Open letter from a Capilano Indian:
1 was born 1,000 years ago'
This letterfrom Dan George, chief of the Capilano Indians of
British Columbia, Canada, was read at a symposium on the
economic development of the Arctic and the future of Eskimo
societies, by Father André-Pierre Steinmann, of Puvirnituq,
New Quebec.
My very good dear friends,
I was born a thousand years ago, born in a culture of bows
and arrows. But within the span of half a lifetime I was flung
across the ages to the culture of the atom bomb.
I was born when people loved nature and spoke to it as
though it has a soul: I can remember going up Indian River
with my father when I was very young. I can remember him
watching the sunlight fires on Mount Pé-Né-Né. I can remem¬
ber him singing his thanks to it as he often did, singing the
Indian word "thanks" very very softly.
And the new people came, more and more people came,
like a crushing rushing wave they came, hurling the years
aside, and suddenly I found myself a young man in the midst
of the twentieth century.
I found myself and my people adrift in this new age but not
a part of it, engulfed by its rushing tide but only as a captive
eddy going round and round. On little reserves and plots of
land, we floated in a kind of grey unreality, ashamed of our
culture which you ridiculed, unsure of who we were and
where we were going, uncertain of our grip on the present,
weak in our hope of the future.
We did not have time to adjust to the startling upheaval
around us; we seem to have lost what we had without finding a
replacement.
Do you know what it is like to be without moorings? Do you
know what it is like to live in surroundings that are ugly? It
depresses man, for man must be surrounded by the beautiful
if his soul is to grow.
Do you know what it is like to have your race belittled, and
have you been made aware of the fact that you are only a
burden to the country? Maybe we did not have the skills to
make a meaningful contribution, but no one would wait for us
to catch up. We were shrugged aside because we were dumb
and could never learn.
What is it like to be without pride in your race? Pride in
your family? Pride and confidence in yourself?
And now, you hold out your hand and you beckon to me to
come over: "Come and integrate," you say, but how can I
come? I am naked and ashamed; how can I come in dignity? I
have no presents, I have no gifts. What is there in my culture
you value? My poor treasure you can only scorn. Am I then to
come as a beggar and receive all from your omnipotent hand?
Somehow, I must wait. I must find myself. I must wait until
you need something that is me.
Pity I can do without. My manhood, I cannot do without.
Can we talk of integration until there is social integration?
Until there is integration of hearts and minds you have only a
physical presence and the walls are high as the mountain
range.
Come with me to the playground of an integrated school.
Look, it is recess time, the students pour through the doors.
Soon , over there, is a group of white students, and over there,
near the fence, a group of native students.
What do we want? We want first of all to be respected and
to feel we are people of worth; we want an equal opportunity
to succeed in life.
Let no one forget it: we are a people with special rights
guaranteed to us by promises and treaties. We do not beg for
these rights, nor do we thank you for them because, God help
us, the price we paid was exorbitant. We paid for them with
our culture, our dignity and our self-respect.
I know that in your heart you wish you could help. I wonder
if there is much you can do, and yet there is a lot you can do.
When you meet my children, respect each one for what he is: a
child and your brother.
Dan George
January 1975
26
