1 986: International Year of Peace/1 2
A tribute to Paulo Freiré
ON 16 September, the Director-General of
Unesco, Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow,
presented the 1986 Unesco Prize for
Peace Education to the Brazilian educator Paulo
Freiré at a ceremony held at Unesco's Paris
headquarters. The Prize was awarded on the
recommendation of an international jury, the
International Commission for Peace in the Minds
of Men.
In an address made on the occasion of the
award, Mr. M'Bow noted that "The celebrated
Brazilian educator Paulo Freiré has worked for
the past forty years with unflagging determina¬
tion and devotion to provide literacy training and
education for the neediest population groups
thereby enabling them to take an active part in
the struggle against poverty, the eradication of
which is one of the key preconditions for the
establishment of a lasting peace. ...
"The determination and courage with which he
has worked over the decades frequently in
close collaboration with Unesco to bring into
operation a system of education that is truly for
the people and to ensure that the broadest
masses have access to a life of freedom and
creativity have, by the same token, furthered
both the ideals enshrined in our Constitution and
the goals of the Prize for Peace Education, and
amply justify his choice as this year's prize¬
winner."
In his acceptance speech, Professor Freiré
talked about his work. "It is true," he said, "that
the direction of everything that I have tried to do
during many years in education, in my own coun¬
try and elsewhere, can only be understood by
those who are interested in the historic, social,
cultural and political conditions of my work as an
educator. By this I mean that however great my
personal input to teaching and research may be,
it does not entirely account for my approach,
which can only be explained in social terms.
"Ever since my youth this conviction has con¬
ditioned me to face with humility the results and
the development of my efforts in the field of
education. That is why I neither overvalue nor
underestimate my contribution towards the up¬
holding of a progressive practice and theory of
education.
"I have always been very self-critical in my
own research, and constantly try to learn while
teaching. I have never drawn a dichotomy be¬
tween teaching and learning. I have always in¬
sisted on the seriousness of the act of teaching,
which requires from the teacher a degree of
competence in the subject-matter and the way in
which it is taught, as well as political clarity
regarding the choice of those who should benefit
from education. I can only conceive of teaching
as a complex whole: it cannot exist without
teachers, students, syllabuses, methods, objec¬
tives and purposes. Throughout history, educa¬
tional practices and theories have appeared
which have at times favoured the teacher or tne
student, the content or the method.
"When I speak of learning to teach, I do not
mean to diminish in any way the professionalism
of the teacher. However, it is impossible to deny
that, while teaching, one learns from the
students' doubts, from their often uncritical view
of the act of learning and from the relationship
they have with their teacher.
"As Unesco offers me this challenging tribute, I
cannot forget how far I have come in the course
of my teaching career, always open to the chal¬
lenges held out to me by students, whether
young academics from different cities of the
world, agricultural labourers, or urban factory-
workers from many countries.
"At this moment, in my office in Säo Paulo,
while I fill these pages with words which I shall
soon be reading, my memories irresistibly take
me back to places that I have visited or experi¬
ences that I have had during my life. Many of
these memories are crowded with people of
diverse origins Latin American or African
peasants; North American or Latin American
Indians; Blacks from North American ghettoes;
groups called "aborigines" by the Whites of Aus¬
tralia, New Zealand or the South Pacific islands;
Spanish, Portuguese or Italian urban workers
whom I met in Geneva or Paris during my exile;
university students from Latin America, Europe,
the United States, Africa and Asia. Peoples who
struggle and find their liberty, others who fail, in
Africa, Central America, the Caribbean and Latin
America.
"I owe a great debt to many of these men,
women and young people, to the fears they
express when learning a fundamental lesson
with me, to their doubts and their innocence.
Their fears and their uncertainties, but also their
convictions, which I do not always share, have
helped me to see more clearly, to know more
about things I thought I already knew only too
well. This is so because I have exercised my
boundless curiosity on their convictions and un¬
certainties, their doubts and fears, their fragmen¬
tary knowledge of the world, and whenever I
reflect on educational practice, this helps me
learn to think clearly and to work better.
"In my experience with urban and rural work¬
ers, it has also become obvious to me that a less
naive view of life does not necessarily mean a
commitment to the struggle to change the world,
much less a commitment to change for its own
sake, as the idealist would have it.
"Anonymous, suffering, exploited people have
taught me above all that peace is fundamental,
essential, but in order to achieve peace a strug¬
gle is required. Peace is built and created by
overcoming social imbalances. Peace is built
and created by the continuous construction of
social justice. That is why I do not believe in any
effort to establish so-called 'peace education'
which, instead of unveiling the injustices of the
world, covers them up and tries to blindfold its
victims.
"On the other hand, the kind of education that I
advocate is rigorous, serious, fully democratic
and progressive; education which, in its concern
with what the students are learning, challenges
and critically assesses them."
