An illiterate
in Paris
An interview by
Marguerite Duras
Text © Reproduction prohibited.
In countries where free and compulsory education has been applied for gener¬
ations, illiteracy is no national problem. Yet in all countries, even the most ad¬
vanced, a small residue remains of adults who, for one reason or another, have
never learned to read or write. What is the position of the few who have somehow
slipped through the network of compulsory education? What does it mean to be an
adult illiterate in a society where life is organized on the assumption that everybody
can read and write? The French writer Marguerite Duras decided to find out and
managed to discover a middle-aged woman factory worker living at Romainville, a
suburb of Paris, who could neither read nor write. The answers she gives in the
interview published below reveal the poignant drama of an illiterate person living in
a modern capital and the tragedy of being cut off from written communication.
Are there any words which you can recognize
even though you cannot read them?
Yes, three words. The names of the two
Underground stations on the line I take every
day: 'Lilas' and 'Chatelet' and my maiden
name.
Could you pick them out from a group of
other words?
I could recognize them from about a dozen
others, I think.
What do they look like to you ... like
drawings?
Yes, like pictures, if you want. 'Lilas' is a tall
word it's almost as tall as it is wide and it's
pretty. The word 'Chatelet' is too long, and it's
not so pretty. When you see it, you know it's
not the same as the word 'Lilas'.
When you tried to learn to read, did it seem
difficult to you?
You can't imagine what it's like. It's terrible.
Can you give me an idea of what you mean
exactly?
I don't really know. Maybe because every¬
thing is so ... so small. I'm sorry, I'm not very
good at explaining things.
It must be quite a difficult thing foryou to live
in a city like Paris and to get around from one
place to another without being able to read.
Oh, if you've got a tongue in your head you
can get anywhere you want.
How do you manage exactly?
Well, I do a lot of asking. And then I use my
head. It's funny how quick you pick up things
and remember what you see. Much quicker
than other people. It's like a blind person.
There are places where you know where you
are. Then, I ask people.
Do you have to stop and ask your way
often?
Oh, about ten times when I come into Paris
from Romainville on an errand or something.
There are all those Underground station
names. They mix you up. You have to take
another train back, ask again ... and then
there are the names of the streets, the shop
names and the numbers.
The numbers?
I can't read them. When I get my pay or go
shopping, I can count the figures in my head,
but I can't read them.
Don't you ever tell people that you can't
read?
No, never! I always say that I forgot my
glasses.
But there must be times when you can't
avoid it?
Yes, sometimes. When they ask me to sign
my name at the factory or in the Town Hall. But
I go red when I have to say it. If you were in my
shoes you'd know what I mean.
How do you manage in your job?
When I'm being hired, I keep it to myself.
And I always hope to get away with it. It works
most of the time, except when there are time-
slips to fill in. The rest of the time I make
believe I can read.
Everywhere?
Yes, everywhere. In the factory, in the
shops, I look at the labels and the scales and
make believe that I'm reading them. I'm so
afraid that peopple are cheating me, too. I'm
always suspicious.
Does it bother you in your work?
No, I'm a good worker. I've got to be more
careful than the others. I use my head and I'm
careful. I don't have any trouble there.
What about your shopping for food and
things?
I know all the colours of all the brands I use.
When I want to change a brand I ask one of my
friends to come with me. After that I remember
the colours of the new brand. You've got to
have a good memory if you're like me.
What do you do for amusement? Do you
like the cinema?
No, I don't. It's too fast and I don't under¬
stand the way they talk. The pictures always
start with a lot of writing. People read letters
and you see it on the screen. Then they look
sad or happy and I don't understand why. But I
do go to the theatre.
Why the theatre?
You've got time to listen. They tell you
everything they're doing. There's no writing.
They talk slow. I understand better.
Any other amusements?
I like to go to the country and I like to watch
sports. You know I'm no more stupid than
anybody else, but when you can't read you're
like a child.
Do you ever forget that you can't read?
No, I can't. As soon as I walk out of the
house I think about it all the time. It tires you
out and makes you waste time. You never
want people to notice it ... that's what you think
about all the time. You're always afraid.
March 1958
32
