African
childhood
by Cámara Laye
KOUROUSSA in Guinea, West
Africa, my birthplace and the
traditional home of my fore¬
bears, is a typical Malinke village; the
Djeliba River which flows past it domin¬
ates the life of its mainly agricultural
population. Kouroussa is situated some
700 kilometres from the coast and is
reached by train or automobile.
In my childhood, Kouroussa was a
cluster of round banco (clay-walled) huts
topped by conical thatched roofs. The
village housed various kapila, or ex¬
tended families, bound together by a love
that welded them into united, close-knit
groups.
From my studies of the oral tradition of
West Africa, undertaken over the past
twenty years, I know today that Tabon
Wana Fran Cámara was an ancestor of
mine. He was a contemporary of the
great kings and leaders of the Mandingo,
a people formed of a confederation of
tribes which constituted the basis of the
Malian empire.
According to our elders, the snake
spirit of our race belonged first to Fran
Cámara and made him a skilled and re¬
spected craftsman. As a child I was taken
by my father to see the snake spirit whom
I got to know very well. The source of my
father's skill in the shaping of wood and
the working of metal, the snake spirit was
also his trusted adviser in the art of con¬
trolling his colleagues.
In those days men protected them¬
selves with all manner of greegrees
(charms); it was a time of revealers of
things hidden, and of healers, some of
whom could really heal.
A child in Kouroussa did not belong to
his parents but to his lineage group which
was responsible for him and took care of
his education. The individual remained
linked to the group which was held to
have given him life, and it was within the
group that he continued to live.
This solidarity, or rather this source of
life, made itself felt on important occa¬
sions.
Should a villager fall ill, the men and
women would visit the sufferer on the
way to work in the fields in the morning
and again on their return in the evening.
But it was above all at the time of a death
that the solidarity of Kouroussa was seen
at its best. Work was abandoned so that
everyone could lavish attention on the
one who was dying and on his or her
family.
Today, many of the ancient customs
are unsuited to the modern age and have
had to be abandoned. But the solidarity
arising from these exchanges created a
current of sympathy and was a positive
aspect of traditional society. Solidarity
was a vital force that existed in all African
villages.
In the past, the face, the figure or the
animal that took shape from the wood in
our sculptor's hands and the varied out¬
put of our sculptor-ironsmiths were im¬
bued with mystery and were designed for
use in worship and magic. It was a time
when the sculptor-ironsmith was not
merely a craftsman, but a sorcerer, a
priest in constant contact with fire, which
he used first to melt the ore and then to
breathe shape into the metal. It was a
time when the hoe was not merely a tool
for turning the soil, but an instrument
which controlled the earth and the har¬
vest.
And though these skills have never
been completely lost, they have, inevi¬
tably, become rarer in a society whose
ancient animism has been confronted
with new ideas.
March 1979
CÁMARA LAYE (1928-1980), Guiñean writer,
attended the Qur'anic school and the French
primary school at Kouroussa in northern Guinea,
and later continued his studies in Paris. He told
the story of his childhood in Africa in L'Enfant
Noir (The Black Child).
Evoking the harmony of traditional ways
oflife in Africa, the Togolese sociologistF.
N'Sougan Agblemagnon wrote that "All
form part of a single whole which is
Nature. ... People must live in the world of
Nature, co-ordinating their rhythms with
those of Nature. This is a form of happi¬
ness which African children learn In their
earliestyears." Right, musician of the Bas-
sari people (Republic of Guinea).
40

