Drilling
into the unknown
by Yevgeni Kozlovski
1
THE structure of the Earth reflects the
long history of its evolution. By re¬
constructing this history scientists
hope to find the key to such processes as the
formation of the Earth's crust, volcanism,
and the upheavals, subsidences and foldings
which led to the development, on the
Earth's surface and in its sub-stratum, of
conditions which favoured the formation,
accumulation and preservation of useful
minerals.
In the Soviet Union, study of the complex
physical and physico-chemical processes
which take place within the Earth's hard
crust and the upper layers of the mantle is
undertaken within the framework of a vast,
integrated programme for the exploration
of the "basement" of the country using
geological, geophysical and geochemical
methods as well as deep and very deep
drilling.
The particularity of this programme is
that it focuses on the study of the Earth's
crust within the limits of the continental
zone where most of the planet's useful
minerals are concentrated. Geophysical ex¬
plorations are being conducted along the
system of profiles traversing the entire terri¬
tory of the USSR, and deep and very deep
drilling is being undertaken at their points
of intersection.
In this way it has been possible to explore
the Mohorovicic Discontinuity (the bound¬
ary between the Earth's crust and the man¬
tle) and to obtain new data on the structure
and physical properties of the upper man-
16

tie, to identify zones where important frac¬
tures occur in the Earth's crust and deter¬
mine their extent, and to pinpoint the
boundaries and structure in depth of major
tectonic elements which may be the site of
concentrations of mineral ores, oil or gas.
At the heart of the programme is the
exploration of the deep structure of the
continental crust, on whose layers is im¬
printed, as on the pages of a book, the
whole story of its formation. The first drill¬
ing was made in the Kola Peninsula, on the
fringe of the Baltic Shield, which is com¬
posed of ancient crystalline rock dating
back to Precambrian time. The Kola drill¬
ing has thrown some new light on the evolu¬
tion and structure of the early continental
crust of the Earth as a whole, since similar
formations are widely distributed in other
parts of the globe in India, North Amer¬
ica, South Africa, Western Australia,
Antarctica and Greenland. Very deep drill¬
ing explorations being carried out in the
USA, Canada and the Federal Republic of
Germany are also contributing to our know¬
ledge of the deep horizons of the Earth in
areas potentially rich in mineral raw
materials.
The direct observations made possible by
these drillings have provided the founda¬
tions of the first factually-based model of
the continental crust and have led to a
The Kola Peninsula in the far north of
the USSR Is the site of the first very
deep drilling made as part of an ambi¬
tious programme aimed at exploring the
deep structure of the continental crust
and seeking areas potentially rich in
mineral, oil or gas deposits. Left, the
drilling rig and the accompanying build¬
ings and workshops which house the
industrial and technical services. The
drilling rig is clad with corrugated iron
sheeting to maintain a constant positive
temperature in this bleak Arctic environ¬
ment.
Right, the new sophisticated and fully
automated URALMACH 15000 drilling
plant, which incorporates the very latest
technology, is capable of drilling down
to a depth of 15 kilometres. The derrick
is 86 metres high and has a hoisting
capacity of 400 tons.
revision of earlier notions about the evolu¬
tion and structure of the Earth's depths.
The Kola drillings have resulted in a
series of unexpected and very interesting
discoveries.
One of our objectives was to bore
through the so-called granitic layer (the
upper part of the consolidated crust) to
reach a basaltic layer whose existence had
been deduced from geophysical data. Geo-
physicists had observed sharp variations in
the speed of seismic waves at great depths,
and, since these waves travel faster through
granite than through basalt, these varia¬
tions were thought to indicate a transition in
the Earth's crust from a granitic to a basaltic
layer. But this was no more than conjecture
because, unlike the granitic layer, identified
with the Archaean granitoid gneiss which is
widely distributed over the surface of the
continents, the basaltic layer does not
emerge on the surface.
The Kola drilling was the first ever to
bore through the line where the seismic
waves undergo a sharp change of speed. But
contrary to expectations, no basaltic layer ^
17

^ was discovered. It became apparent that the
variations in the speed of diffusion of the
seismic waves was related, not to a transi¬
tion from a granitic to a basaltic layer, but to
the decompaction of the rock which occurs
at great depths.
This phenomenon is due to the fact that,
under the effect of the high pressure and
temperatures existing at great depths, water
is released from the crystalline network of
minerals and, because of the enclosed
space, exerts pressure on the rock, leading
to Assuring and consequently decompac¬
tion. It turned out that the decompacted
zone had subsisted over a long period.
The discovery of the phenomenon of
"hydrogenous decompaction" not only
makes it possible to explain the geological
character of certain boundary zones which
reflect seismic waves at great depths, the
nature of hydrothermal fluids, and the
mechanism of tectonic deformations, it also
radically alters our ideas about the hydro-
logical cycle in continental conditions and
of the structure of the underground hydro¬
sphere,
The drilling provided extremely interest¬
ing information not only for geologists but
also for biologists. It was discovered that
. the deep horizons which had been thought
to be "dead" since the beginning of time
had actively participated at some stage in
the biological processes which took place in
the depths of the Earth.
Isotopic carbon analysis revealed two
sources of carbonic gas the first connected
with the mantle and found mainly in
Archaean rocks, the second of biogenic
origin and found predominantly in Protero¬
zoic rock, in which petrified remains of
micro-organisms (micro-fossils) estimated
to be thousands of millions of years old,
were also found.
This was not an isolated discovery.
Seventeen species of micro-organisms were
found, bearing witness to an extensive de¬
velopment of biogenic processes on our
planet in earliest times. Thus biological life
started on Earth much earlier than had
previously been estimated.
Data supplied by direct measurement of
temperatures at great depths have obliged
us to revise our concepts regarding present
and geohistorical variations of temperature
in the bowels of the Earth. It was previously
thought that in regions of slight tectonic
activity temperature rise in relation to
depth increase was insignificant. However,
although it was expected during the Kola
drilling that the temperature at a depth of
ten kilometres would be about 100 degrees
Centigrade, it turned out in fact to be
almost double this estimate, at 180 degrees
Centigrade. It was established that during
the Proterozoic era the géothermie gradient
(the temperature increase per 100 metres of
depth) was five times higher than it is today.
Study of the thermic regime in the bowels
of the Earth also provided an answer to a
question that has long preoccupied scien¬
tists what is the contribution of the mantle
and of radioactive decay of elements in
rocks to the overall heat flow in the interior
of the Earth? It was established that the
mantle was the chief source of ascending
heat.
Finally, the existence of underground wa¬
ter inside the old crystalline massifs at prac¬
tically all the levels reached was proved for
the first time. Inflows of highly mineralized
water saturated with bromine, iodine and
heavy metals were discovered, as well as
gases circulating through the crystalline
rocks in the zones of tectonic deformation.
At depths of 6.5 to 9.5 kilometres, zones of
low temperature hydrothermal mineraliza¬
tion (copper, lead, zinc, nickel, silver), pre¬
viously considered to be primarily near-
surface formations, were discovered.
The large number of mineral associations
discovered in the rock strata traversed dur¬
ing the drilling confirms the possibility that
mineral deposits may be present in indus¬
trially viable accumulations.
We were also led to revise our ideas
about the physical state and properties of
rocks at great depths. It emerged that rock
fissures do not disappear as depth increases.
This journey towards the centre of the
Earth the first to such a great depth (15
kilometres) was made possible by the em¬
ployment of radically new types of drilling
technology and equipment. This vast
undertaking necessitated the creation of a
unique type of drilling installation the
URALMACH 15000.
Drilling was effected by the open-shaft
(untubed) method. This considerably im¬
proved the quality and accuracy of geo¬
physical measurements. The reconnaiss¬
ance operations were conducted, not with
steel tubes, but with extra-strong heat-resis¬
tant tubes made from specially-developed
light alloys capable of withstanding temper¬
atures of 230 to 250 degrees Centigrade.
The specially-designed, highly efficient
rock-blasting and turbo-drills were pow¬
ered by the energy of the drilling liquid
pumped into the well. A completely new
type of apparatus was built to draw rock
samples from great depths intact and pre¬
served in their original orientation.
The programme for the study of the sub¬
terranean structure in depth provides for
exploration throughout the territory of the
Soviet Union. Drillings at very great depth
are at present being conducted in the Trans-
caucasus, the Urals, the Krivoi'-Rog Basin
and the Muruntauski region of Central
Asia. A drilling is being set up in the Tiu-
men district of Western Siberia.
The data provided by them will make it
possible, firstly, to assess the oil, gas and
ore-bearing potential of deep horizons and,
secondly, to elucidate the essential ques¬
tions relating to the tectonic evolution of
the Earth in the light of the continental drift
hypothesis. The programme provides for
special experimental and theoretical studies
concerning the elaboration of a general
theory of the evolution and structure of the
Earth's tectonosphere. The journey into
the Earth's past, undertaken by scientists to
decipher its evolution, will continue.
YEVGENI KOZLOVSKI, of the Soviet Union, is
head of the interdepartmental council of the
USSR State Committee ofScience and Technol¬
ogy for the study of the deep layers of the Earth
and for very deep drilling. Holder of the Lenin
Prize, he is the chief editor of a monograph on
deep drilling in the Kola Peninsula, and of the
world's first Encyclopaedia of Mining.
