A message
to world youth
YOUNG people form a considerable and ever-increasing proportion
of the world population. Inevitably they are concerned by all the
problems arising from the present and future of humanity. None of
the major questions of our time can be answered without the active
involvement of young people.
Young people constitute 45 per cent of the world's population today and
their numbers are continuing to grow. There were 730 million fifteen- to
twenty-four-year-olds in 1975, and this figure should rise to 1,180 million by
the year 2000 an increase of 60 per cent in twenty-five years.
If the role and impact of youth in national life vary from country to
country, young people in many cases share a number of common preoccu¬
pations, fears and aspirations.
In many countries young people are particularly exposed to such prob¬
lems as unemployment, hunger, delinquency, drugs, violence and racism,
all of which are rooted in the tensions and uncertainties of today. But young
people are also endowed with imagination, enthusiasm, and courage,
qualities which may contribute to the changes which prove necessary; they
stand at the meeting-point of continuity and change, tradition and progress.
The different groups of young people must have the opportunity to
participate fully in all aspects of the economic, political, educational,
cultural, and scientific life of the society in which they live, and to exercise
freely in it the qualities which are theirs.
Unesco, which places action in favour of young people at the heart of its
programmes, notably those concerned with education and training, is
making its contribution to the achievement of this goal.
Unesco's efforts in this field are focused on three main objectives:
stimulating research on young people in the different world regions;
promoting the diffusion and exchange of information about and for young
people; contributing to the formulation of policies and the application of
programmes which will encourage the participation of young people in all
aspects of the life of societies .
January 1985
TU'*' böty
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
