The human factor
in African development
by Jean-Paul Ngoupandé
WHEN the peoples of the develop¬
ing countries aspire to develop¬
ment, what they really want is to
attain the normal condition of any form of
human existence, whether collective or in¬
dividual, namely to be able to choose their
course, to be responsible for their destiny,
and hence to control all action concerning
their lives. In Sartrian terms, they want to
be able to act instead of being acted upon.
The firm if inarticulate resistance of the
peoples of developing countries to develop¬
ment controlled from abroad is now well
known. It is a commonplace to say that the
only certain result of twenty-five years' de¬
velopment in the developing countries is
that the development graft has not taken. In
the great majority of cases the graft is re¬
jected because the populations concerned
have a basically conflictual relationship
2
©
with "projects". Mr Helmut Eggers, of the
Directorate-General for Development at
the Commission of the European Com¬
munities, noted recently that a review of
experiments carried out over the years in
the field of financial and technical co-opera¬
tion for development, notably for rural de¬
velopment, revealed the "self-evident
truth" that the operations funded were not
viable. As a large number of such opera-
In May 1986 the United Nations General
Assembly met in special session at min¬
isterial level "to consider in depth the cri¬
tical economic situation in Africa". On this
occasion Unesco published a document
entitled Getting to the Roots of the Prob¬
lem, which describes what Unesco is
doing, within its fields of competence, to
help to build African economies on solid
and lasting foundations. The Introduction
to the document draws attention to the
growing acceptance of "a conception of
development which goes beyond the mere
listing of parameters relating solely to
growth and material goods", and which
takes human fulfilment as its ultimate
goal. The document emphasizes that a de¬
velopmentprocess ofthis kind is not feasi¬
ble "unless account Is taken of the cultural
dimension, which in turn implies taking
account of, and even ifneed be transcend¬
ing and integrating into the movement of
innovation, the sociological characteris¬
tics and deep traditional roots of the peo¬
ples concerned." Left, oil-rig worker at
Port Harcourt, theport ofsouth-east Niger¬
ia in the Niger Basin.
29

tions do not survive when external funding
comes to an end, their impact on the capac¬
ity for self-development of the rural groups
concerned is insignificant, non-existent or
negative.
This can be verified in the field.
"Development aid" leads to scenes of rack
and ruin: miracles of engineering which are
now abandoned factories; rusting machines
which in some cases need only a fuse or a
washer to work; land recently occupied by a
"project" overgrown with vegetation; the
spectacle of desolation which follows the
departure of the "experts", sometimes giv¬
ing the landscape of a developing country
the strange appearance of an old industrial¬
ized country whereas in fact industrializa¬
tion has only just begun.
The explanation is that since man is fun¬
damentally free, he aspires to be himself,
and it is useless for anyone else to try to
make him happy against his will.
Human fulfilment, the achievement of
freedom in the field of economics, means
being able to choose what one produces, to
know why one produces it, and to know
how it is produced. The cultivation of mil¬
let, corn or sorghum presents no problems
to peasants in the least developed countries
because these are the crops they want, and
because they know thé practical reasons for
growing these crops. If on the other hand
they must be continually persuaded to grow
cotton, tobacco or even coffee, it is because
these crops are imposed on them and they
see no clear advantage for themselves in
growing them. It is significant that the most
stubborn resistance to development con¬
trolled from elsewhere comes from rural
people: they are the ones who have been the
least affected by the great cultural changes
effected by contact with industrial societies,
and they are therefore the ones who aspire
most to be themselves. As they account for
between 75 and 90 per cent of the popula¬
tion in the developing countries, it is clear
that they represent a tremendous force of
inertia.
In the least developed countries, which
are primarily agricultural countries, the im¬
pact of this inertia on production is obvious:
most of the labour force is unenthusiastic
and feels unconcerned by its own work.
And if famine is again invading these coun¬
tries today, in these times of overproduc¬
tion, it is not only because of worsening
climatic conditions. The vagaries of the
weather are nothing new to Black Africa.
Far be it from us to insinuate that there was
no famine in precolonial Africa.
"Despite the development policies which
she has followed, Africa remains the conti¬
nent where per capita income ... is the
lowest ... Everywhere the basic needs of
mankind ... are very poorly met ... In our
opinion, It is much less the theory and the
policies ofdevelopment which are in ques¬
tion than the institutional frameworks in
which they are implemented (instability of
exports, high degree of economic balkan¬
ization and nationalism, excessive facili¬
ties accorded to transnational corpor¬
ations, etc.). In Africa these conditions act
as a brake on growth and lead to increas¬
ing dependence on developed countries
..." (Science économique et développe¬
ment endogène, "Economie Science and
Endogenous Development", Unesco,
1986). Right, drought in Mali, 1983. On the
banks of the Niger River, men hack at the
dried out soil in order to build dams to
capture hoped-for rainwater.
30

^ ^
) \T
;
2
©I
~'\) v*
>l
However, as the twentieth century draws
to a close, with the world having achieved
an unprecedented level of technological
progress, no one would suggest that climatic
difficulties alone can explain famine. There
are admittedly civil wars which disrupt pro¬
duction because of insecurity, mass popula¬
tion movements and the depletion of
peasants' reserves in order to feed armies.
But the most important thing in our opinion
is the lack of motivation of peasants to grow
crops and observe production standards
which they have not chosen. Endemic
famine or chronic malnutrition in countries
where there is neither civil war nor extreme
variations in climate, abundantly prove that
the human factor is still crucial.
In a country such as the Central African
Republic the drift from the land occurs
chiefly in regions where the old cash crops
inherited from colonial times are dominant.
These crops are identified in the peasants'
minds with forced labour and the overseer's
whip, even though these came to an end
twenty-five years ago. Cotton-growing
areas have been so drained of labour that
output has been affected, since virtually
none but elderly workers remain. A recent
survey carried out by a Bangui young peo¬
ple's newspaper revealed that the vast
majority of the young would prefer to starve
to death in the capital rather than return to
the countryside.
Food aid also tends to make both con¬
sumption and production dependent on ex¬
ternal factors, and thus removes responsi¬
bility from indigenous producers. Food aid
is closely related to the key problem of
self-sufficiency in food production. Theo¬
retically this is a goal sought by everyone,
but the conditions for achieving it are close¬
ly linked to the mobilization of the rural
world.
Food aid alienates the peasant and places
him in a situation of enforced inferiority,
powerless in the face of his destiny, his
environment, and nature. It will be argued
that such aid makes it possible to save hu¬
man lives which would be inevitably lost
without it. This is true; just as it is also true
that the by no means well-off men and
women in Europe who make the effort to
show their human solidarity are not all in¬
spired by Machiavellian motives. No one
doubts the good faith of donors who have
nothing to do with political or economic
"decision-making" circles. However, food
aid has a serious long-term effect on the
viability of African agricultural production,
which has become accustomed to relying on
the outside world to bridge gaps in output.
Still worse is the harmful effect of this
"In the least developed countries ofAfrica
those responsible for promoting develop¬
ment have been reduced to such a state of
enforced inferiority that theyare caught up
in a vicious circle. If development is to be
achieved, it must be achieved by the Afri¬
cans themselves; but since the Africans
are still suffering from the after-effects of
submission, and have no confidence in
their own human resources, it follows that
the aim of development must be to free
them from this psychological block."
Above, workers in a Tanganyikan diamond
mine, 1948. The country gained independ¬
ence in 1961, and together with the former
Sultanate of Zanzibar formed the United
Republic of Tanzania in 1964.
31

African agriculture:
the road to recovery
The Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO) issued, on the
occasion of its 14th Regional Conference
for Africa in September 1 986, the results of
a far-reaching study on the food and agri¬
cultural crisis in Africa which the FAO initi¬
ated in 1984. The study, African Agricul¬
ture: The Next Twenty-Five Years, pro¬
vides a close analysis of the causes of this
situation and recommends practical mea¬
sures that would make a recovery feasible.
Contrary to widespread belief, drought
is not the only cause of the suffering and
famine which affect so many African coun¬
tries. The problem is rooted in a crisis
which has been undermining agriculture
for over twenty years. Per capita food pro¬
duction has decreased by almost 20 per
cent since 1961 and, although they were
practically self-sufficient ten or twenty
years ago, most African countries are to¬
day incapable of feeding themselves. If
current trends persist, the food situation in
Africa by the year 2010 will be even worse
than it was at the most critical juncture of
the 1983-1985 famine (see Figure 1).
Six factors, according to the authors of
the FAO study, are mainly responsible for
the crisis: a bias in government policy
against agriculture (to which most coun¬
tries devote less than 10 per cent of their
budgets); high population growth rates
(with an urban population growing much
more rapidly than the rural population); a
decline in the rate at which arable land and
harvested area are being developed (see
Figure 2); a lack of technological change,
which is leading to a widespread stagna¬
tion or even decline in crop yields; acceler¬
ated degradation of the environment; an
external economic environment that is
making it more and more difficult for most
African countries to balance their budgets.
Many remedies have been suggested,
including various forms of aid to farmers
V
(notably incentive policies), institutional
reforms and the improvement of infras¬
tructures (roads, railways, ports). Special
attention is being given to the protection
and development of natural resources.
To halt the degradation of agricultural
land, for which man is the main culprit,
action has already been taken in a number
of African countries (including Somalia,
Kenya, Malawi, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Morocco and Lesotho) in many cases with
highly positive results, suggesting that
under certain conditions African agricul¬
ture could be more productive than it is at
present.
To take one example, on the Mossi
Plateau of Burkina Faso, simple techni¬
ques of water harvesting have enabled
village co-operatives and farmers to bring
abandoned land back into production; in
several villages rice yields have doubled.
This successful experiment, if it was ex¬
tended, would allow the exploitation of
millions of hectares of potential plough-
land in the semi-arid regions of the con¬
tinent.
M
(
©
When they became independent, most
African countries inherited poorly de¬
veloped transport networks designed pri¬
marily to export commodities to the home
ports of the former colonialpowers. Today
African agriculture urgently requires an
efficient infrastructure for supply and dis¬
tribution. Above, working on a railway line
at Ouagadougou, capital of Burkina Faso.
Figure 1
Self-sufficiency if trends continue*
'assuming projected deficits are met by net imports
Figure 2
Trends for arable land development (percentages)
North Africa
^^^"
.:.'. -i
| 1 	
West Africa
- .- ^i^^
j 1
Central Africa
3 [ : r!4 - - J:»:J-!^^^W.: -:Z¿ZZ+y }<:. -.".. - - . /f^
£ | ... n ... . 1
Sudano-Sahel
; ,- y ..- :: v..
£ i	 1
East Africa
-.-,. y- .\; ;-.
f 		 Ï
South Africa
1	 1
North Africa
West Africa
Central Africa
Sudano-Sahel
South Africa
0 0.5
BB11969-1971 F/iS.-fl 1979- 1981 I 12010 [ 1961-1963 to 1971-1973 I I 1971-1973 to 1981-1983
Source: African Agriculture: The Next 25 Years, Main Report, © FAO, Rome, 1986
32

dependency on the creativity of the African
peoples and their determination to cope
with the vagaries of nature.
Increasing numbers of Africans now
think that nothing is more degrading than to
be in permanent receipt of food aid and
believe that Africans themselves should be
able to meet their basic food requirements.
It is understandable to call for international
solidarity when an exceptionally serious dis¬
aster occurs, but the continued showering
of African countries with foreign foodstuffs
can give no cause for satisfaction. It is only
by fully pledging their labour and their re¬
sponsibility, and by being constantly faced
with their responsibilities as human beings,
that Africans will overcome their terrible
century-old handicap of defeatism, of lack
of confidence in themselves and their des¬
tiny.
In the least developed countries of Africa
those responsible for promoting develop¬
ment have been reduced to such a state of
enforced inferiority that they are caught up
in a vicious circle. If development is to be
achieved, it must be achieved by the Afri¬
cans themselves; but since the Africans are
still suffering from the after-effects of sub¬
mission, and have no confidence in their
own human resources, it follows that the
aim of development must be to free them
from this psychological block.
One of the least frequently mentioned
factors of dehumanization is the slave-
trade. Its extent, duration and especially its
cruelty were such that it has left immeasur¬
able psychological after-effects in Black
Africa. In terms of extent and numbers of
victims, its impact affected the entire con¬
tinent; it lasted for more than three centur¬
ies and was characterized by great brutality.
Folk imagery still vehicles the phantasms
born of the shock of this experience. The
slave trade also explains the limited territo¬
rial settlement of populations which for
more than three centuries were continually
forced to flee. This led to the incessant
migratory movements in the seventeenth,
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries which,
in certain regions of Central Africa, histo¬
rians find it impossible to disentangle.
Fear has become a kind of second nature
to people who live in a climate of perma¬
nent insecurity. The continuing oppression
of post-colonial Black African dictatorships
maintained and sometimes increased this
fear.
This then is the post-colonial Black man,
who is now responsible for promoting de¬
velopment: he is traumatized; he has lost
confidence in himself, in his destiny, in his
human capabilities.
Any talk of development which today
fails to take account of this terrible burden
borne by post-colonial Black Africa is simp¬
ly preaching in the wilderness. The impossi¬
bility of achieving economic take-off brings
us back to the most important question: the
human question. Psychological blocks, the
after-effects of traumatism caused by
aggression, oppression and humiliation, are
the first obstacle to mobilization for de¬
velopment. Statistics, projects, plans, bi¬
lateral or multilateral aid have for twenty-
five years come up against this insurmount¬
able wall of human despair.
It is possible to break this vicious circle by
stating the problem of development in a
different way from that defined by econo¬
mists. In economic theory, development
means increasing material production in
order to lead to the liberation of man. To
posit this relationship of cause and effect
between the production of material wealth
and emancipation is to enter a vicious circle.
But by positing development as both mate¬
rial increase and human emancipation, in
our view it becomes possible to avoid this
vicious circle.
By transforming their environment in
order to increase material production and
improve their living conditions, people
transform themselves, and take one step
towards their liberation. Emancipation is
not simply the outcome of the material
results achieved, nor simply a result of the
material wealth provided by development;
it is a part of the very process by which
Black Africans change their material con¬
dition, and therefore goes hand in hand
with the process of material production.
But this is only possible on one vital
condition: that the process of material pro¬
duction should be initiated and conducted
by the Black African himself. This means
that by his own efforts, by trial and error,
the experience he acquires and the progress
he makes, Black African man will gradually
learn to know his own capabilities, and thus
regain confidence in himself when he re¬
alizes that he is capable of creating. It is
from the ordeal of success or failure,
whether immediate or in the long term, that
he will learn, and through that ordeal he will
transform himself.
JEAN-PAUL NGOUPANDE is the Minister of
Education of the Central African Republic and
former head of the faculty of letters and human
sciences of the University ofBangui. The present
article has been extracted from a study "The
Aims of Development in the Context of the Least
Developed Countries ", which was presented to a
specialist meeting on "The Aims of Develop¬
ment", held in Budapest, Hungary, in October
1986. The meeting was one of a series of semi¬
nars on philosophical aspects of development
which Unesco has organized since 1978.
The analysis of developmentprocesses in
different social and cultural contexts is
one of Unesco's major preoccupations. In
November this year an international meet¬
ing of experts is being held at Unesco's
Paris HQ on the theme of "Poverty and
Progress". The meeting, organized by Un¬
esco in co-operation with the United Na¬
tions University, will examine from a wide
range of viewpoints the problems of
poverty, marginalization and exclusion
caused by certain development proces¬
ses. Right, coal-mining village in Bihar,
one of India's leading mineral-producing
States.
33
