MY excellent friend, M. Félix Regamey, has recently published in this
same journal a very interesting article entitled: Le Japon vu par un
artiste.
I have known and esteemed M. Félix Regamey for a long time, first as a friend,
later as an artist and a keen Orientalist. ...
Well, I was greatly surprised by his article in the Revue bleue. I realized that M.
Regamey has not seen China. True, he has been there, but I am obliged to say to
him what he said to Pierre Loti: "Port-of-call observations are risky."
As soon as he sat down on his folding-stool in a Canton street to make some
sketches of this interesting and, indeed, unique city, the great artist was imme¬
diately discouraged both by the curiosity of the crowd around him and by the
remarks they made about his actions and gestures. So he quickly returned to his
ship and made for Japan, where he stayed longer and was better received, so that,
on his return to France, he placed Japan above China. This, it must be allowed, is
quite natural. I would not even take the liberty of reproaching him for it, since he
had seen very little of China and a lot of Japan.
But I must say that, had I acted like M. Regamey, if a few unpleasant incidents
had sufficed to deprive me of the wish to continue, I should never have got to
know Europe. I remember that when I first went to Berlin, in 1877, 1 was strolling
one day in the Kaiser-Gallerie something like the Passage de l'Opéra. I was soon
surrounded by such a crowd that the gallery was literally blocked. To escape from
this stifling curiosity I was obliged to go into a shop and beg the owner to send for
the police in order to clear the way for me.
The crowd was very noisy. They were making all kinds of remarks in German ,
which I did not yet know. I was less perceptive than my friend Regamey, who
realized at once that the Chinese being spoken around him in similar encounters
was full of "contemptuous or grotesque abuse".
And this was not an isolated case. When China opened a legation in Berlin, my
compatriots were followed around, surrounded and jostled so much by curious
passers-by, especially by children, that the rector of the university had to have a
special article added to the school regulations saying: "It is forbidden to follow
and annoy the Chinese."
One day in Paris, when I was admiring a painting of the Flemish school in the
Louvre, two ladies who, it seemed to me, had just come up from the provinces,
wagered loudly behind me that I was a woman . I think it was the prettier of the two
who lost the bet. ...
Such incidents would have discouraged M. Regamey, but they amused me. For
I know that, side by side with this idle curiosity, which is typical of ignorant people
of all races and countries, one finds everywhere the politeness and hospitality of
those who know what consideration is due to a foreigner. It is this good side of the
public which should be seen and appreciated.
True artists are as rare in my country as elsewhere. Those who are less good
have the modesty not to show themselves. But in a general way art forms part of
our education. Together with handwriting, we learn as children to draw and paint
watercolours. The teacher thinks his pupils know nothing until they are able to
draw a cloud chased by the winds which is more difficult to capture than a man
falling off a roof. True, the models are not so scarce, there are wind and clouds
everywhere, whereas men falling off roofs, of which M. Regamey speaks, are
not, I think, encountered very often, except at the Ambigu in M. Zola's play
L'Assommoir. ...
I agree that Chinese children just like Japanese ones, whatever M. Regamey
may say are often frightened and cry if they see a foreigner. But what's strange
about that? I appeal to any father. If M. Regamey had children, he would have
seen them run off as children do, at the sight of a new face, and cry if they were
obliged to stay. Such have been the fashions, laws and habits of children in all ages
and in all countries. It is not the "foreigner" who frightens them, but the
"unfamiliar". Thus, in China as elsewhere, babies are devoid of any anti-interna¬
tional instinct. I beg the reader's pardon for having invented this horrible word.



A Chinese
general in Paris
by Chen Jitong
General Chen Jitong, a scholar from a
traditional background and a noted
calligrapher, was for several years
Chinese military attaché in Paris. While
there, he struck up a friendship with a
number of Western writers and artists,
notably with the French painter Félix
Regamey, who had brought back to
France many sketches and portraits of life
in Japan and other countries he had
visited. In 1890 Regamey published an
article in a French magazine about his
visits to Japan and China. The article
brought a vigorous and ironic rebuke
from the General, an extract from which
appears here. Chen Jitong had already
published, in French, a book in praise of
China entitled Les Chinois peints par
eux-mêmes ("The Chinese as they see
themselves"), Paris 1884.
CD
3
CD
5!
La Chine vue par un artisteRéponse à M. Félix
Regamey, Revue bleue, Paris, 29 November 1890.
Watercolour by the French painter Félix
Regamey (1844-1 907), sketched from
life in 1874 and used as an illustration
forPromenades japonaises, a book by
Emile Guimet, founder of the Museum
ofAsian Art in Paris which bears his
name.
(3
®
f
T
ft
31
