The notion of health
by Paul Gigase
AT first sight, the concept of health
seems perfectly straightforward. In
1946, the World Health Organiza¬
tion (WHO) set forth the following defini¬
tion in the preamble to its Constitution:
"Health is a state of complete physical,
mental and social well-being and not merely
the absence of disease or infirmity."
However, this definition is qualified in the
next paragraph, which speaks of the "high¬
est attainable standard of health" as a fun¬
damental human right, thus taking into
account limiting circumstances such as con¬
genital handicap, or the serious con¬
sequences of disease or accident.
The WHO definition reflected a reaction
against the usual view of health as the mere
absence of disease. Nevertheless, it implies
that there is such a thing as a universal, ideal
state of health. Is this really the case? How
is health perceived by sick people, medical
staff and ancillaries, non-professional
health workers and even healers?
A doctor is interested in disease: in other
words, in a deviation from the somatic or
psychic norm, which he or she is able to
bring to light, sometimes without the
patient's knowledge. A doctor will often be
less concerned about the way in which a
patient perceives and interprets his or her
disease, and this attitude is encouraged by
the impressive advances made in medical
technology. However, what is abnormal is
only a deviation from a statistical average,
and the greater the number of parameters
on which the assessment of the state of
health is based, the more chances there are
that subnormal values will emerge, without
necessarily indicating a state of disease.
Moreover, these criteria are not absolute:
malaria, for example, causes an "abnor¬
mal" swelling of the spleen in infected chil¬
dren, which is in fact a sign of the body's
healthy defensive reaction to the disease. In
regions where malaria is endemic, it would
be more alarming to note the absence of any
swelling of the spleen in these children!
When the cause of a disease is well
known, the doctor will attempt either to use
preventive measures or to diagnose the dis¬
ease as early as possible, at a time when
treatment will still be effective and will not
leave irreversible after-effects. This is prim¬
ary or secondary prevention. Doctors will
accordingly ask their patients to give up
some habits or adopt new ones in other
words, to change their way of life to a cer¬
tain extent, in the knowledge that the effort
required will benefit only some of them, as
in the case of smokers and lung cancer. But
the patient sees in this only a restriction of
his or her immediate well-being for the sake
of a remote and hypothetical improvement
in health.
Sick peoples' perception of their disease
is shaped by the disturbances that it causes
in their everyday well-being. Their percep¬
tion of the disease, their awareness of that
perception and the form that their reaction
takes belong in a particular context and find
expression in behaviour which would be
incomprehensible to any professional who

Schistosomiasis (also known as bilharziasls
after its discoverer Theodor Bilharz) is a parasi¬
tic disease which affects about 200 million peo¬
ple in many tropical and subtropical developing
countries. The disease is transmitted via fresh¬
water snails which carry and spread the para¬
site. Blood in the urine, kidney damage, bladder
cancer and liver failure are some effects of the
disease. Today schistosomiasis can be diag¬
nosed using simple, low-cost techniques to
detect parasite eggs in the urine or faeces and
patients can be treated immediately with an
orally taken drug. Left, children with urine sam¬
ples line up for testing. Above, health education
drawing used to help people understand the dis¬
ease and discourage them from contaminating
water.
the walls of the bladder; they are acquired,
in tropical regions, through contact with
water polluted by the urine of infected sub¬
jects. The more numerous the worms, the
more acute the symptoms of the disease.
The symptoms appear primarily in the form
of haematuria, or the presence of blood in
the urine, which becomes red either per¬
manently, or after physical effort. In a
region where urinary schistosomiasis does
not exist, haematuria is a somewhat rare
and always alarming symptom.
In regions where urinary schistosomiasis
is endemic, on the other hand, most of the
population is infected, and haematuria is
frequent . Schoolchildren particularly
boys, who are more readily allowed by their
parents to bathe and play in water are the
worst affected. As a result, their urine often
becomes red at puberty. Hence the idea,
tenacious in certain ethnic groups, that the
presence of blood in boys' urine is the
equivalent of menstruation in girls, and that
its absence, rather, would be abnormal at
that age.
As the children grow older, their contacts
with' water become fewer; similarly, the
quantity of worms of which they are carriers
diminishes, and so does the haematuria.
They are eventually cured, although some
of them suffer from serious after-effects of
their infection and , if no treatment is given ,
they may die of these much later. No con¬
nection is made between these later deaths
and haematuria in childhood, a fact which
accounts for the off-hand attitude displayed
towards this symptom.
Haematuria in a young person in a region
where urinary schistosomiasis is endemic is
almost certainly due, whatever form it
takes, to infection by flatworms. However,
people may perceive it as several different
disorders, having a variety of causes. In
West Africa, for example, short attacks of
haematuria are often attributed to exhaust¬
ing work or to the consumption of indigesti¬
ble food. Some symptoms may be inter¬
preted as signs of a venereal disease caught
by stepping in the urine of an infected per¬
son or animal, or of a liver disease passed on
Malaria is one of the world's most widespread,
devastating diseases. More than half the world's
population lives in endemic areas, and an esti¬
mated 8 to 9 million people die from the disease
every year. Earlier hopes of eradicating malaria
with drugs and insecticides were dashed by the
development and spread of drug-resistant
malaria parasites and of insecticide-resistant
mosquitos carrying the parasites. Now the
emphasis is on control, rather than eradication.
Strong hopes are pinned on new drugs, vaccines
and novel vector control methods. Right,
malaria surveillance workers in India take blood
samples from suspected cases.
failed to take that context into account,
especially since it often happens that no
objective cause is found for the feeling of
being unwell. Awareness of disease is a
function of previous experience, of some¬
thing unusual, of the average standard of
health enjoyed by other people, of the
beliefs and traditions current in the com¬
munity, of the ethnic, religious and ideo¬
logical affinities of the sick person in
short, of a network of cultural factors.
Let us imagine, for example, that I sud¬
denly and unexpectedly find that I have
aged thirty or forty years. At the very least,
I will feel unwell, or even really ill, whereas
my state will seem quite normal to me when
I have reached that age by natural degrees.
Similarly, the side-effects of pregnancy are
much more tolerable as such than if they
were to occur in other circumstances.
Urinary schistosomiasis provides a good
example of the ways in which a disease may
be perceived. This condition is caused by
small flatworms which attach themselves to

Still endemic in many tropical countries, mainly
in Africa, Asia and Latin America, leprosy
affects nearly 11 million people. Research into
the causes, treatment and prevention of leprosy
has been slowed down because scientists have
so far been unable to grow in laboratory condi¬
tions the bacillus that causes the disease. The
discovery that the bacillus could be grown in
large numbers in the nine-banded armadillo,
above, was an important step forward in the
study of immunity to leprosy and opened the way
to new developments in the search for a leprosy
vaccine.
River blindness (onchocerciasis) is caused by
minute worms transmitted to humans by small
black flies that breed in fast-flowing water. An
estimated 40 million people are affected,
mainly in Africa. To control river blindness in
West Africa helicopters spray blackfly breeding
sites with larviclde chemicals as part of the
Onchocerciasis Control Programme (OCP) car¬
ried out by WHO. In 1984 OCP launched an
experimental project using satellite tele-
transmissions to determine in advance how
much insecticide must be used at different
points. Transmitters were set up to register the
depth and flow-rates of several rivers. They send
this information via satellite to a receiving sta¬
tion where it is processed by computer and given
to the pilots before they take off. Above, a data
transmitter affixed to a bridge. In background,
an OCP helicopter.
either by flies or by a pregnant woman to
her child if she breaks certain taboos. Each
manifestation of the symptom is given a
specific form of traditional treatment.
The importance attached to a health
problem may not be the same for the indi¬
vidual as for the community. The serious¬
ness of a disease depends on many factors,
such as frequency of occurrence, the num¬
ber of deaths that it causes, the age at which
it is most common, or the temporary or
permanent disability that it may cause. A
disease or disorders which are very wide¬
spread will be felt to be a problem of greater
concern to the individual than a deadly dis¬
ease which affects only a small number of
people, even if the latter is, objectively, a
more urgent problem; and preventive mea¬
sures will be more readily accepted in the
former than in the latter case.
So doctors and their patients do not speak
the same language, and this is a fundamen¬
tal cause of the universal malaise in medi¬
cine. The developing countries have opted
resolutely for a policy of primary health
care, in accordance with the recommenda¬
tions of the Alma-Ata Declaration.1 Par¬
ticipation by the population is an essential
part of this grass-roots strategy. The prob¬
lem is how to make the best use of limited
resources to meet the needs assessed by
professionals and the demands expressed
by the population. When someone per¬
ceives that he or she has a health problem,
this should, according to the planners' way
of thinking, induce the patient to turn to the
established system for help.
But reactions to discomfort or disease are
not always predictable. The possibilities are
legion: people may have recourse to their
families, friends, hawkers of medicines,
healers, herbalists, fortune-tellers,
charlatans, and so on. Equally numerous
1. In 1977, {he World Health Assembly, the governing
body of WHO, adopted a universal aim: "Health for all
by the year 2000." In 1978, an International Conference
held in Alma-Ata (USSR) declared that Primary Health
Care was the means of achieving that aim. Health care
systems based on urban medical facilities had been
judged disappointing. A new strategy, founded on basic
medical care and health education, and giving priority to
rural areas, was to be followed. Editor.
are the obstacles blocking access to the
health services: distance, financial circum¬
stances, and the social and cultural gap
between those dispensing medical treat¬
ment and those seeking it.
Traditional or popular medicine is more
readily available; it speaks a language com¬
prehensible to patients and follows a logic
that they can understand. So it is hardly
surprising that alternative medicine is so
popular, both in the developing countries
and in the industrialized countries. Patients
are often more satisfied with it than with
conventional medicine, even if objectively
it does not improve their state of health. A
less marked difference in social status, the
emphasis placed on explaining causes and
the way in which these explanations tally
with the patient's own views on the circum¬
stances and mechanisms of his or her dis¬
ease are all valid reasons for the popularity
of alternative medicine. The fashion for
diets or other recipes for health, often ill-
judged, which are advocated in the media
by non-specialists, suggests that this
popularity may also spread to preventive
medicine.
It would be wrong to suppose, par¬
ticularly in preventive medicine, that
health at least as long as a person has
it is always at the top of that person's scale
of values. More often, social advantages
and convenience and comfort in everyday
life are put first.
All this points to two conclusions: first,
that it is necessary, before setting up a sys¬
tem of health care, to evaluate all its
aspects, including the way in which its inten¬
ded beneficiaries perceive health and dis¬
ease. Secondly, doctors should treat and
prevent disease not only as they see it, but
also as the patient experiences it, which is,
indeed, something that good doctors have
always done.
PAUL GIGASE, of Belgium, is a specialist in
tropical diseases and professor at the Institute of
Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, and at the Univer¬
sity of Ghent. He is president of the Belgian
Tropical Medicine Society and has served as
consultant to the World Health Organization
(WHO).
