Domina
and de
by Nguyen van Khoa
1 . ATD is the acronym for Aide à toute détresse ("Aid for all distress").
POST-COLONIAL society has, up
till now, proved unable to gener¬
ate the momentum that would
carry it forward on the path of progress.
The reason is that, although political in¬
dependence has been achieved, the
framework of dependence and domina¬
tion established under the colonial sys¬
tem remains intact and, with the appear¬
ance on the scene of international capi¬
talism, has, in fact, grown even stronger.
Under these circumstances it is ex¬
ceedingly difficult to surmount the obsta¬
cles of all kinds that stand in the way of
autonomous development.
Vis-à-vis the developed countries, the
newly-independent nations are un¬
doubtedly still in a situation of structural
dependence in that, rather than being
definable in terms of submission of the
weaker to the stronger, the relationship
between the two partners reflects a
structural imbalance. There is imbalance
of power (the industrialized countries
have greater opportunities of influencing
international economic relations), im¬
balance in financial resources (Third
World countries need capital inflow from
outside), imbalance in technological
capacity (Third World countries also
need technological input from the rich
countries) and, finally, imbalance in the
structure of production (industrial econo¬
mies on the one hand as against agricul¬
tural economies on the other).
This dependence favours the domina¬
tion of the stronger partner. Since the end
of the Second World War, imperialist
domination has replaced colonial
domination in the newly-independent
countries. This domination is exerted in
two ways: by the pressure of the Western
industrialized countries and through the
activities of transnational companies, the
effect of whose ever-growing penetration
24

tion
privation
and implantation in the poor countries is
the consolidation of the new situation of
an international division of labour.
The imperialist States and the trans¬
national companies are assuming new
roles in their relations with the dependent
States by means of economic assistance,
technical aid and political and military
supervision. In a dependent State, lack¬
ing political will and, above all, economic
resources, a bloated administrative sys¬
tem develops which becomes the instru¬
ment through which the outsiders wield
their influence. Since economic policy is
no longer in the hands of the dependent
country and strategic decisions are not
taken internally but in accordance with
the aims of the transnational companies,
new imbalances appear. Thus disparities
arise between reliance on sophisticated
technology and minimal use of local raw
materials (assembly and packaging indus¬
tries), between foreign capital-intensive
production and minimal use of local man¬
power, between development of industry
and agricultural stagnation (which results
in increased dependence upon imported
food), and between uncontrolled urban
growth and abandonment of rural areas.
Furthermore, this imperialist domina¬
tion is reproduced within the dependent
country. External imperialism is sup-
"The deeply rational character of accom¬
modation [to poverty] lies behind, at least
in part, the central instruction of the prin¬
cipal world religions. All, without excep¬
tion, urge acquiescence, some in remark¬
ably specific form," writes the American
economist John Kenneth Galbraith in his
bookThe Nature of Mass Poverty. Right, a
Vietnamese village boy.
25

ported by an internal colonialism and
outside interests are linked to the in¬
terests of certain internal social groups
who see in this dependence a way of
maintaining and improving their own
status.
In the poor countries those factors that
favour the raising of the standard of living
are lacking. This is due to the operation
of the circular mechanism of the "equilib¬
rium of poverty".1 The mechanism works
like this: life at or near the subsistence
level leaves no margin for saving, and
without saving there is no possibility of
capital accumulation and investment;
without capital the rural economy cannot
itself fund the investment to improve
agricultural technology and the produc¬
tivity of the primary sector; stagnation of
the economy, which prohibits rising in¬
come, makes saving impossible.
1. See The Nature ofMass Poverty, Harvard University
Press, 1979, by John Kenneth Galbraith, from which the
quotations in this article are taken.
In the countries of the Third World,
the "equilibrium of poverty" has led to
the emergence of the "culture of pov¬
erty". The rural version of this is basically
the same as that encountered in the urban
areas whose negative characteristics it
shares, although in the rural areas certain
characteristics (such as the rejection of
innovation and "accommodation to pov¬
erty") are stronger or more pronounced.
Rejection of innovation is due to fear
of failure. Any innovation involves a cer¬
tain risk of failure, but in the context of
the poor countries the risk is particularly
serious. For an affluent Western farmer,
to take a risk and to fail, while it may be
regrettable, rarely entails real physical
deprivation and certainly will not put his
life in jeopardy. For a Third World family
living at the bare subsistence level,
however, "failure means hunger, poss¬
ibly death. So regarded, risk is not some¬
thing to be accepted casually".
All that remains is to accommodate to
poverty, to resign oneself to it and accept
it as inevitable. Such acceptance of
poverty by no means implies weakness of
character; on the contrary, it is "a pro¬
foundly rational response". "It is more
civilized, more intelligent, as well as
more plausible, that people, out of the
experience of centuries, should reconcile
themselves to what has for so long been
the inevitable." "It is, more specifically, a
formula for making the best of a usually
hopeless situation." "The deeply rational
character of accommodation lies behind,
at least in part, the central instruction of
the principal world religions. All, without
exception, urge acquiescence [ in the in¬
evitability of poverty], some in remark¬
ably specific form."
NGUYEN VAN KHOA is a Vietnamese-born
educator who is currently an external lecturer in
research and documentation at the University of
Paris. He has a special interest in the sociology
of development.

