For subsistence farmers in
developing countries,
biotechnology has
much to offer.
But will the potential
be fulfilled?
r*4 3fcM ^ -
Grains
of hope
'*p ----- \ . *3
*-.W^* *fautes** '
» »<
/3y ¿V/wa/tf C. Wo// FROM 1920 to 1950, agriculture in
industrial countries was dominated
by mechanical technologies that
dramatically increased the amount of food
that could be produced per worker and per
hour. Shortly after the Second World War,
the mechanical age gave way to the chemi¬
cal age as farmers worldwide began to adopt
artificial fertilizers and synthetic chemical
pesticides, which vastly expanded their har¬
vests per acre. Biotechnologies shift the
focus of research toward crop plants them¬
selves.
So far, advances have been made in
industrial countries, where public scrutiny
is intense. The environmental risks posed
by releasing gene-spliced microbes or plants
into the environment remain poorly under¬
stood. Developing regulations and
guidelines for the newly emerging tech¬
nologies has led to a contentious public
debate about genetic engineering. In the
United States, debate has centred on pro¬
posals to release bacteria modified to retard
the formation of frost on strawberry and
potato plants (see photo page 16). Because
the bacteria could reproduce in the natural
environment and thus spread beyond the
fields where they were released, predicting
environmental impacts is both more crucial
and more complex a task than with many
other technologies. Developing the "pre¬
dictive ecology" that critics say is necessary
for thorough environmental review, and
drawing up regulations that guard against
the uncertainties, will slow the marketing of
commercial biotechnology products to
farmers in industrial countries.
The genetic engineering of plants is far
more complex than modifying microbes,
but it is also less controversial on environ¬
mental grounds. Crops with modified traits
are under a farmer's direct control, and
their reproduction and spread in the
environment are both slower and more pre¬
dictable. Crop characteristics such as
drought-tolerance, ability to withstand salty
water, and pest resistance the traits that
have always concerned breeders are a
likely focus of the new technologies.
Given the ability to modify virtually any
plant characteristic and to tailor plants in
precisely defined ways, biotechnology
would seem to offer tools well-suited to
agricultural development strategies that
emphasize resource efficiency and farm¬
ing's internal resources. For example, it
should eventually be possible to modify a
plant's physiology to improve its efficiency
in photosynthesis, enabling grains to pro-
22

.#<; «Hkf ^ ** *"***
'
duce more carbohydrate and thus higher
yields. The adaptations that allow some
plants to lose very little water through their
leaves in transpiration, transferred to more
widely grown crops, could reduce irrigation
needs. Developments like these could
indeed reduce pressures on marginal lands
and perhaps eliminate the need for costly
capital investments in water supply
projects.
There is nothing in the nature of bio¬
technologies that renders them inherently
appropriate to a strategy of efficiency and
regeneration, however. Many biotechnol¬
ogy innovations pose trade-offs rather than
clear-cut benefits. Although increasing
photosynthetic efficiency could increase
yields, it would also be likely to lead to
accelerated depletion of soil nutrients and
heavier dependence on artificial fertilizers.
The most significant factor that will affect
the direction of agricultural biotechnology
is the rapid shift of research from the public
to the private sector. This is especially evi¬
dent in the United States. For nearly a cen¬
tury, public agricultural experiment sta¬
tions and land grant universities sponsored
by the US Department of Agriculture
(USDA) performed most agricultural
research. Private seed companies often use
the plant varieties developed by govern¬
ment-supported breeders. Over the last
three decades, however, the private sector
has assumed control of research efforts. Pri¬
vate companies now administer two-thirds
of US agricultural research.
In biotechnology, the deck is stacked
even further in favour of the private sector.
USDA's Agricultural Research Service and
Co-operative State Research Service sup¬
port most work in agricultural biotechnol¬
ogy, and these two federal programmes
spent less than $90 million on biotechnol¬
ogy research in 1984-85. Monsanto, which
has the largest but by no means the only
plant biotechnology research programme
among private US corporations, has
already invested $100 million in agricul¬
tural biotechnology development. Bio¬
technologies that affect agriculture in the
years ahead will have a decidedly private-
sector cast. With the important exceptions
of mechanization and the development of
hybrid corn, that has not generally been
true of important innovations in agricul¬
ture.
Leaving research priorities to the mar¬
ketplace may eclipse promising oppor¬
tunities. Research efforts on crcps will be
proportional to the value of the crop and the
Farmers in developing countries growing
food for their families on marginal land are
vulnerable to crop failure, erratic water
supply and natural catastrophes. The
potential of biotechnology in allowing the
rapid development of new crop varieties
and hybrids that are resistant to stresses
such as soil salinity and drought could be
an important step towards meeting the
needs of these subsistence farmers, who
are largely unable to afford the costly in¬
puts of fuel, artificial fertilizer and machin¬
ery on which past advances in agriculture
have been based and whose crops have
until quite recently been neglected by re¬
search. Above, hoeing millet in Mauritania.
23


Below, cassava (manioc) plants are protected from pests by ventilated bags as part of a
biological pest-control project being carried out at the International Institute of Tropical
Agriculture (UTA) at Ibadan (Nigeria). Some 200 million Africans rely on cassava for about
50 per cent of their calories. The UTA has developed disease-resistant cassava varieties
for distribution in a number of African countries.
size of the market. Because improving
crops for small farmers in developing coun¬
tries means producing low-cost agronomic
innovations, many of which must be site-
specific and thus not suitable for mass-mar¬
keting, crop improvement for the vast
majority of the world's farmers offers little
profit. Few private companies are likely to
enter such an unpromising market. Con¬
sequently, investigations of minor crops
like sorghum and millet, grown primarily by
Third World subsistence farmers, will be
neglected.
National research programmes and the
international research centres have an
obvious stake in applying biotechnology.
Refinements in plant breeding, tech¬
nologies for germplasm storage and for
plant evaluation and propagation, and new
alternatives in pest control, are exactly the
kinds of innovations scientists need to
extend research on developing-country
food crops. It took decades of work to pro¬
duce high-yielding varieties of wheat and
rice. With biotechnology, comparable
improvements in millet, sorghum, cassava,
or tropical legumes could come more
quickly.
The private sector domination of bio¬
technology raises questions about the role
new technologies will play in international
research programmes. Private companies
may become competitors with the interna¬
tional agricultural research centres spon¬
sored by the Washington-based Con¬
sultative Group on International Agri¬
cultural Research (CGIAR), particularly
when it comes to improvements in major,
widely traded crops like wheat and rice. The
full exchange of scientific information that
is essential to the international centres may
be curtailed if it appears to compromise
proprietary corporate research. Moreover,
international centres may increasingly have
to purchase or license new technologies that
24
were formerly freely available through
public channels. Finally, private firms will
compete with the centres for scientific tal¬
ent, and the centres may be unable to match
the salaries, facilities and security that cor¬
porate laboratories offer.
Uncertainties cloud the national bio¬
technology programmes as well. A few
developing countries, notably Indonesia,
the Philippines, and Thailand, have estab¬
lished national programmes in agricultural
biotechnology. The Philippines views its
programme as the first step towards an
industrialization strategy based on biolog¬
ical materials that can help free the country
from dependence on imported oil. Philip¬
pine scientists hope to use crop residues and
byproducts as raw materials to produce
liquid fuels and industrial chemicals, and to
develop food-processing industries with
biotechnology methods. W.G. Padolina, of
the National Institute of Biotechnology and
Applied Microbiology at the University of
the Philippines, writes, "The national strat¬
egy is to transform biomass biologically into
food, fuel, fertilizers and chemicals."
Achieving these goals is certain to be
costly. Few countries can afford the invest¬
ment in equipment that major biotechnol¬
ogy programmes entail, and some countries
lack sufficient numbers of trained scientists
to staff such programmes. Agricultural bio¬
technology contrasts sharply in this regard
with conventional plant breeding pro¬
grammes, which require relatively modest
capital investment.
EDWARD C. WOLF is a Sen/or Researcher with
WorldWatch Institute, Washington, D.C., a non¬
profit research organization which was created
to focus attention on global problems and is
funded by private foundations and United Na¬
tions organizations. The above article and the
box, right, have been extracted from Beyond the
Green Revolution: New Approaches for Third
World Agriculture, a WorldWatch Paper pub¬
lished in late 1986. m
