Learning to live
by Nicole Friderich
PERSEVERANCE is a quality shared
by all concerned with the problem of
drugs. The men and women
involved in law enforcement do not let
themselves be disheartened by the fact that
only between 10 and 15 per cent of the illicit
drug traffic is intercepted as a result of their
work. They continue their efforts, seek new
methods, draw benefit from modern tech¬
niques, and realize the importance of active
co-operation with those who are engaged in
scientific research into the different drugs,
treat drug users, or attempt through educa¬
tion to limit the harm caused by drugs and
prevent drug abuse.
The scientists who study the chemical
composition of legal and illegal drugs and
their physical and psychological effects
(about which in many cases we still know
very little), therapists, doctors and
psychologists, are continuing their work
and in some cases making essential
discoveries, such as that of endorphins a
decade ago.
Neither these specialists nor social work¬
ers allow themselves to be discouraged by
the fact that their devotion only achieves a
"cure" in 30 per cent of treated cases of
dependence on so-called hard drugs or on
alcohol, which may be put in this category.
They reflect on experiments that have been
carried out, learn from their failures as well
as their successes, compare their results,
improve their methods, and unflaggingly
help those who are trying to free themselves
from the grip of drugs. Organizations such
as Alcoholics Anonymous, whose members
have succeeded in overcoming their depen¬
dence on certain substances, support and
encourage those who have been unable to
do so, and consider that their work should
be a continuing effort. The families and
friends of drug users often search unremit¬
tingly for a solution, sometimes ready to
"Nothing if not constructive, the role of
educators, teachers, parents and youth
leaders is to help the young and less
young to develop their character and
strengthen their intellectual, emotional
and moral resources, to learn to learn and
to learn to be."
believe in a miracle; their task is a hard
one.
Educators, teachers, parents and youth
leaders are playing an active role in these
joint efforts. Their co-operation is sought
by everyone, from therapists to enforce¬
ment agents and government authorities,,
since the importance of their preventive
efforts is appreciated. Nothing if not con¬
structive, their role is to help the young and
less young to develop their character and

strengthen their intellectual, emotional and
moral resources, to learn to learn and to
learn to be.
Professional educators have been trained
to do this; they understand the theory and
practice of teaching, psychology and techni¬
cal skills. Family members have usually not
had such an initiation. In their day-in, day-
out task of bringing up young children, pos¬
sibly not their own, to live a life which in
many cases they hope will be better than
theirs, they rely on their personal experi¬
ence, their love, their moral or religious
principles.
Efforts, notably those carried out by
Unesco, to encourage all those involved in
education in the broadest sense to take part
in what has been called preventive educa¬
tion, are already bearing fruit. Those con¬
cerned with education have become aware
of the role they can play and have spared
neither their efforts nor their good will.
Most of them have volunteered their help
but have often asked "What can we do?"
One of the first tasks has been to show
them the preventive effects of what they
were already doing: character training, the
development of a critical approach, deci¬
sion-making capacities, respect for princi¬
ples, and understanding of psychological
mechanisms; and, of course, the transmis¬
sion of knowledge of the nature and the
effects of certain substances which are
already studied as part of some school
programmes or which have a domestic use.
It has also been necessary, and this is an
essential task, to demystify the idea of drugs
as magical and evil substances which have
incomprehensible effects and are totally
alien to their experience. Many parents and
educators have come to understand the
problems more fully after thinking honestly
and frankly about the use of legal drugs
which they take or see others take. Why do
people smoke, drink, take tranquillizers,
stimulants and medicines which give them a
sense of well-being? Are they seeking
energy, relaxation, pleasure, an escape
from stress? The phenomenon of depen¬
dence is not unfamiliar to those who have
watched someone try to stop smoking or
drinking, or have witnessed the anguish of a
person deprived of his or her usual sleeping
pill or tranquillizer.
Educators have thus become more fully
aware of what they already knew and have
defined what they want to find out. They
are not by any means seeking an
encyclopaedic knowledge of the world's
countless drugs (new drugs to cure illness
appear every day and each one is potentially
beneficial or dangerous). But they do wish
to be fully informed about the substances
used in their own countries and environ¬
ments, products which certain groups or
younger generations know more about than
they do from their own experience,
however biased or incomplete such "knowl¬
edge" may be.
Parents and teachers have also made it
clear that they want to know how to act in
time, before it's "too late". They have
asked to be informed about the signs and
symptoms of drug taking and quickly
realized that the most important thing they
can do is to be attentive to the difficulties
which seem to be faced by young or older
people in their family or school. They have
also asked for help in forming relationships
with those in distress and in making contact
with those who are at risk of turning to
drugs (or to other expedients).
Techniques for opening up channels of
communication have been put forward to
educators and they have developed others
for themselves. Some have discovered the
importance of active education methods,
pupil participation and learning by doing.
This has had a beneficial effect on their
teaching as a whole. The efforts made by
educators to confront an immediate prob¬
lem have committed them to action and in
some cases encouraged them to adopt less
theoretical approaches.
But their work has not always been
crowned with success. Their methods, some
imported from other cultures or borrowed
from other contexts, have not always been
effective. In some cases quick and easily
quantifiable results were expected. "Eval¬
uations" have been made without taking
into account the objectives which had been
set and which could have been achieved
with the means available. The authorities,
in some cases, and, very often, those who
agreed to finance preventive education
experiments, have insisted on rapid and
spectacular results forgetting that the
education of a human being takes years and
that people are free agents and, have
attempted to apply to prevention strict cost-
benefit criteria.
Far from being discouraged, parents and
educators have continued their work. They
have formed groups, shared their discov¬
eries, experiences, disappointments and
successes. They have exchanged their
ideas and the role of an organization like
Unesco has been of inestimable value in this
respect. This role is still developing. In all
the world regions, in situations where the
pattern of drug use varies widely, a growing
number of initiatives in favour of preventive
education are being taken. Experience and
innovation are complementary. No one
ever claims that a definitive solution has
been found. Problems are being patiently
solved as and when they arise.
Educators, families and youth leaders
will continue their work. They will not
abandon their efforts to prevent drug abuse
since in the final analysis their motivation is
love for those in their care and whom they
wish to help through education to "learn to
live".
Unesco
NICOLE FRIDERICH is a consultant in the field
ofpreventive education at Unesco Headquarters
in Paris and in various countries. She was for
many years responsible for Unesco's pro¬
gramme for equality of educational opportunity
for girls and women, and from 1972 to 1983
headed Unesco's section for education concern¬
ing problems associated with the use of drugs.
She is a co-author of a new Unesco book, Edu¬
cating Against Drug Abuse.
