The sea within us
by Dan Behrman
Traditional method of tuna fishing off the
coast of southern Spain. As the shoals of
fish move from the warm Mediterranean
waters towards the Atlantic the fishermen
trap them in large nets stretched between
their small wooden boats. The giant fish
are then hooked and pulled aboard.
THE sea flows inside us literally.
In our blood as in seawater, the
proportion of dissolved salts is the
same: 3.5 per cent. Like all other forms of
life, we emerged from the sea, yet despite
such links, our attitude towards it is
ambivalent. The sea inspires awe and
fear, it is so unlike the landmasses that we
inhabit. The vastness and solitude we
now associate with outer space have
always been present at sea. Even close to
land, the surf waits to take its toll.
With the ending of the Ice Age 10,000
years ago and the subsequent rise in sea
level, peoples everywhere found them¬
selves driven back by the invading waters.
Peninsulas became islands, the land
bridge between Asia and North America
was swamped and early coastal settle¬
ments drowned on what is today's conti¬
nental shelf. The story of the Flood is
found in cultures worldwide; perhaps dim
memories of the encroaching sea gave
birth to the legend of Atlantis sinking
beneath the waters.
But the ocean gave life as well as taking
life away. Fish were plentiful and easy
game; archaeological finds along the
western coast of Europe include Stone
Age bone fish hooks big enough to catch
deep sea fish. The seine nets, the trolling
gear and the traps devised by the Inuit
23

©
*gM
mittens, for if he slipped, he was a gone
man. All the boats were hoisted in on
deck and there was nothing to be lowered
for him. We had need of every finger God
had given us. . . . Frequently we were obli¬
ged to leave off altogether and take to
beating our hands upon the sail, to keep
them from freezing." Such Olympic
exploits were part of the daily business of
moving passengers and cargo.
Until the end of sail, a seaman's life was
a constant flirtation with death. And
now? Kipling's "call of the off-shore wind
and the voice of the deep-sea rain" can
still be heard, but can it be answered?
Hardly, on the automated tankers and
cargo carriers of today. Noel Mostert,
author oiSupership, describes such a ves¬
sel: "One felt the arid metal acreage
spreading invisibly all around, and its
impact was one of menace: a mechanical
desert of indefinable purpose imposed
upon the sea's own emptiness, and with
forms and shapes that had no reassuring
familiarity; it was filled with wind signs,
not those of masts and rigging but of
abandoned structures upon a plain, and
there was no comfort even from the sea."
Mostert perhaps saw his vessel as a pre¬
cursor of unmanned ships of the future,
sailing under remote control.
There are still those who must seek
the sea fishermen, oceanographers,
divers and they are of a different breed.
The attitudes of small-scale fishermen
have not changed over time. They still
live in small egalitarian communities
where growth is not a goal and informa¬
tion is shared in co-operative net¬
works.
Above, the "Triton", an early breathing
apparatus for divers, named after the son
of the sea god Poseidon. In Greek mythol¬
ogy, Triton lived with his parents in a
golden palace in the depths of the sea.
people of the Arctic in a similar culture
are still used by fishermen today, with
little change in their basic principles.
Attitudes to the sea have been divided
since the earliest times. Some sailed for
trading purposes, endeavouring to spend
as little time on the water as possible and,
at first, to stay within sight of land. They
belonged to the civilizations huddled
around the Mediterranean. Then there
were the sea-peoples, the dwellers on the
ocean, who sought the sea, who returned
to its womb.
They did not shrink from the sea but
embarked upon it in frail coracles or out¬
rigger canoes. And the sea repaid them.
Its waves could be read to indicate the
proximity of land, in the wake of an island
breasting the tidal stream. The skies told
their story by day and by night; there
were nearly always clouds over islands
and mariners set their course by the stars.
Even birds could show in which direction
the land lay, and surf breaking on rocks
over the horizon threw up a telltale haze.
Physical conditions on shipboard in the
days of sail were extremely hard. No one
has described a seaman's life better than
Richard Dana in his narrative Two Years
Before the Mast, published in 1840 and
still a classic. Dana signed on as an ordi¬
nary seaman aboard a vessel bound for
California around Cape Horn, an
unheard-of move for a university gradu¬
ate of good family. In a storm off Cape
Horn, the sailors went aloft to take in the
mainsail : "We had tofist the sail with bare
hands. No one could trust himself to use
24

Right, two women aquanauts, a botanist
and a zoologist, carry out an experiment,
on fish behaviour as part of a U.S. marine
research programme on the sea bed. The
scientists lived for two weeks in a 4-room
habitat at a depth of 15 m in the Caribbean
near St. John Island (Virgin Islands).
Left, a diver about to take the plunge from
HMS Tedworth, protected by the cumber¬
some type of diving suit used in the
1930s.
Sociologists observe that fishermen
tend to defer their pleasures and ritualize
their risk-taking behaviour. Risks there
are: the death rate of fishermen is seven
times higher than the average. And they
are a vanishing species, as booming
leisure activities encroach on their
beaches and shellfish beds.
Not all fishing fits these descriptions.
Big trawlers are more like factories, as
William W. Warner points out in Distant
Water: "Not since the great age of whal¬
ing have men stayed at sea for such
protracted periods . . . and no whaler ever,
suffered the continuous and exhausting
work schedules of the modern distant
water fisherman." Despite their size,
these ships fell victim to storms,
especially in winter when they were top
heavy with ice. Adoption of200-mile eco¬
nomic zones shut them out of rich shelf
waters and rendered them obsolete.
Warner sees a future with smaller
medium-range ships such as "autoliners"
that can handle 15,000-hook lines
entirely by machine.
Oceanographers are another variant of
the human species found only at sea: not
only must they survive aboard small ships
but they must do scientific work as well,
collecting data with precision. I once
went out on an Icelandic research ship
and took my turn taking Nansen bottles'
off a wire as they were winched in. All
waste motion had been eliminated from
this series of movements that had to be
repeated tens of times a day, hundreds of
times a voyage. The captain, his big
tousled head stuck out of the port window
of the bridge, made a special effort to
keep the wire within my easy reach. With
the help of propellers and rudder, he
could move his 800 tons of ship literally by
the inch in the empty grey water.
I thought of the oceanographer on this
voyage, Svend Malmberg, reading the
thermometers on his Nansen bottles to an
accuracy of a hundredth of a degree,
when I came across an account of the
contrasting life on board an oil rig 200
kilometres out in the Gulf of Mexico with
four 2,000-horsepower generators roar¬
ing night and day. Crew members worked
seven 12-hour shifts on this platform,
then hoped that bad weather would not
hold up their relief. Drilling for oil is
probably the least nautical of all occupa¬
tions pursued at sea, but it is not neces¬
sarily the safest. Oil rigs cannot run from
a Gulf hurricane or a North Sea storm.
Divers, too, are essential to these cities
on the sea when it comes to finishing up a
wellhead or troubleshooting on the bot¬
tom. One of the oldest of the maritime
trades is here put to good use by one of
the newest. Divers were going down for
pearls in the Babylonia of 4,500 years
ago, using the breathhold technique that
now allows them to stay under for 4 min¬
utes at depths of up to 45 metres (the
record for such diving is 90 metres).
In the nineteenth century, diving suits
fed by compressed air from the surface
were invented, allowing divers to spend
more time on the bottom but bringing in
the danger of the bends, that painful and
potentially fatal condition engendered by
nitrogen bubbles forming in the blood.
Now that man was moving in this totally
alien environment he had to adapt to it,
to the lack of oxygen, to the cold, to the
distortion of vision by water pressure on
the eyes.
He did this with the hard-hat diver's
suit invented in 1819 by a German engi¬
neer, Augustus Siebe, that still left the
diver attached to the surface. Then in
1942, the Frenchmen Jacques Cousteau
and Emile Gagnan came up with their
independent breathing device, the Aqua¬
lung, and the scuba2 diver was born. Here
was a new animal, free-swimming into the
depths.
It was soon apparent that many
psychological and physiological adjust¬
ments had to be made. Nitrogen under
pressure in the divers' air led to "rapture
of the deep" or the so-called "martini
effect" (each 15 metres of depth equals
one dry martini). An oxygen-helium
breathing mixture took care of this but
created new problems: a high-pitched
"Donald Duck" voice and extreme
cold.
Diving tables were developed to show
1. Metal water-sampling bottle equipped with closing
valves and a mercury thermometer to record tempera¬
ture at specified depths.
2. Scuba = self-contained underwater breathing
apparatus
25

how much time was needed in
decompression for a stay at a given depth.
Once a diver is "saturated" at his depth,
the decompression time is the same no
matter how long he stays there. Under¬
standing of this principle led to the first
attempts to colonize the sea floor, the
underwater habitats of the 1960s and the
1970s. Unlike man-in-space missions that
demand rocketry within the capability of
only a few nations, man-in-the-sea
experiments could be carried out by a
number of countries. Among them were
France, the United States, the Soviet
Union, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many, Israel, Poland, Czechoslovakia
and Canada (which set some kind of a
record with an "underwater Volks¬
wagen" costing only $15,000).
The, French were first to develop a
manned underwater station, with Cou-
steau's Conshelf, then the U.S. Sealab
was constructed. All sorts of problems
arose in the habitats. Humidity gave rise
to infections, particularly in the ear, and
wounds were slow to heal. Cooking could
be tricky dough just will not rise in a
high pressure environment and if a can of
fizzy drink is opened the bubbles go
inward. (Some habitats solved all this by
having their meals sent down from the
surface in containers.) Cuisine may not
be all that important, since many aqua-
nauts reported a loss of their sense of
smell and taste.
It has been found that during the first
five days of habitat living, people show
signs of stress which then go away only to
reappear after fifteen days. Life under
the sea is shipboard or submarine life car¬
ried to an extreme. Like space travellers,
aquanauts occasionally resented "ground
control" at the surface with its constant
monitoring of their behaviour. The tele¬
phone could be a hated intruder, con¬
stantly interrupting their routine.
And people had to get on well
together. In one habitat, scientists at first
found themselves at odds with seamen
doing simulated salvage work, but they
ironed out their differences. Everyone
would probably agree with the Soviets
aboard Chernomor, who in 1971 reported
in the newspaper Izvestiya: "The
psychological problems caused by the
confinement of several men together for
long periods of time was of great concern
before the start of the programme . Under
these conditions it is well-known that
men may tend to find fault with each
other, that a man's silence may be taken
for sullenness, a very neat man may be
accused of being fussy. ... There were
some problems aboard the Chernomor
during the first few weeks but soon the
crew came to appreciate the abilities of
the other members and no new problems
arose."
There have been no recent experi¬
ments in underwater living. Instead of
remaining on the bottom, divers can now
be brought to the surface in personnel
transfer capsules and live in pressurized
deck chambers until they go down again.
But there will always be underwater
explorers, just as there were navigators
on the surface. Perhaps they will benefit
from that ultimate transformation, the
invention of an artificial gill through
which the diver's blood will flow and take
up oxygen from the water, as fish do.
Then the age of the sea people will have
truly begun.
DAN BEHRMAN is an American author and
journalist who frequently contributed to the
Unesco Courier during his many years as a
Unesco science writer. He is the author of a
number of books on oceanography including
The New World of the Oceans (Little, Brown and
Co., Boston) and Assault on the Largest
Unknown, The' International Indian Ocean Expe¬
dition 1959-65 (Unesco, 1981).
An engineer makes a tour of inspection
inside one of the legs ofa naturalgas drill¬
ing rig in the North Sea.
26
