Grenoble
France's high-powered
mountain city
by Pierre Frappât LOCATED in southeastern France
between the massifs of Belle-
donne, Chartreuse and the Ver-
cors, Grenoble is the biggest city in the
Alps, demographically speaking. Although
it made its name as a dynamic Alpine city by
hosting the 1968 Winter Olympics, Greno¬
ble today is primarily an industrial city.
Its most famous son, Stendhal, the author
of Le Rouge et le Noir, wrote at the begin¬
ning of the nineteenth century: "Everything
that is low and flat in the bourgeois spirit
reminds me of Grenoble; everything that
reminds me of Grenoble fills me with hor¬
ror; no, horror is too noble a word: with
nausea." In Stendhal's time Grenoble had
only 20,000 inhabitants; today, counting the
outer suburbs, it is a conurbation with a
population of between 400,000 and
525,000; and everything, or almost every¬
thing, has changed.
The spectacular expansion of Grenoble is
the result of two waves of industrialization.
The first was linked to hydroelectric power,
and was triggered off in 1869 when the
engineer Aristide Berges (1833-1904) har¬
nessed the energy potential of a high water¬
fall at Lancey near Grenoble. Hydroelectric
power was to stimulate the development of
a wide range of industrial activities, inclu¬
ding electro-metallurgy, boilermaking and
the manufacture of electrical equipment,
some of which still go on today. The second
wave of industrialization took place in the
1950s and 1960s, and is associated with the
French scientist Louis Néel (Nobel Prize for
Physics, 1970), who founded the Grenoble
Centre for Nuclear Studies. While a highly
diversified pattern of industry continued to
exist, there was an increasing emphasis on
research which encouraged the rapid
growth of the electronics industry.
In the space of twenty years, the popula¬
tion of Grenoble almost tripled, rising from
147,000 in 1954 to 388,000 in 1975. At this
Afore than halfof the workingpopulation of
Grenoble are employed in industry. Lett,
an employee ofa leading French electrical
company whose activities are centred on
Grenoble and the surrounding region.
period Grenoble led all other French cities
in demographic growth.
Immigration was the essential factor in
this population growth. At first the new
migrants came from the nearby mountains
of the historic French province of Dau-
phiné, which underwent rapid depopula¬
tion in the second half of the nineteenth
century. The Pre-Alps of Chartreuse and
the Vercors, but above all, the Matheysine
plateau and the Oisans massif south of Gre¬
noble, and even the more distant massifs of
the Briançonnais and the Maurienne, sent
what were in many cases the most enterpri¬
sing members of their population to try
their luck in the flourishing city. Whereas
the people of Savoy, another nearby pro¬
vince, left the region (winning a name for
themselves as "little chimney-sweeps" in
Paris) the mountain people of the Dauphiné
found their openings nearer home.
However, the mountains only provided a
quarter of the new population of Grenoble.
Most of the immigrants came from else¬
where in France or abroad, as part of an
influx that illustrated the growing attraction
of Grenoble. The newcomers filled the
ranks of the two social groups that are
characteristic of Grenoble: the industrial
workers who constituted as much as 42 per
cent of the labour force in 1968(31 percent
today), and the higher executives and
supervisory staff who today make up some
32 per cent of the city's working popula¬
tion.
Immigrants of non-French origin were an
important source of industrial labour. Bet¬
ween the wars the non-French element was
already substantial (18 per cent of the popu¬
lation). Today foreigners may constitute no
more than 13 or 14 per cent of the total, but
many of them are well integrated, especially
the Italians, who mostly originate from sou¬
thern Italy. Several thousand Grenoblois
originate from the little town of Corato in
Apulia. The Italians of Grenoble are stron¬
gly attached to their identity; they have
their own Catholic parish, a radio station
broadcasting in Italian, and even a Juventus
supporters' club which crosses the Alps to
attend football matches in Turin. But today
the most numerous foreigners are Alge¬
rians, Tunisians and Moroccans. Attracted
16

to Grenoble at a time when big public works
projects were in full swing, they are tending
to settle in the city, many of them with big
families. They now account for about 5 per
cent of the population.
The very high percentage of executives
and supervisory staff, which is the salient
feature of Grenoble society, is due to the
large number of technicians, engineers,
researchers and teachers employed in high-
technology industrial activities, research
centres and universities. Grenoble was one
of the first French cities to refute the pessi¬
mistic thesis advanced by the economist
Jean-François Gravier in 1947 in his book
Paris et le Désert Français; it became, espe¬
cially in the 1960s, a centre of social, cultu¬
ral and political initiatives.
In the last ten years new trends have
appeared as a result of which Grenoble has
lost its distinctive character in demography
and in many other fields. The balance of
migration is now negative and the popula¬
tion has stabilized. It is true that more
people are leaving the city than before
Grenoble has always been a place where
--*- -,.
.'^SbHHHBB
people come and go but above all far
fewer are moving in. The mountains no lon¬
ger send emigrants, the influx from other
countries has slowed to a trickle.
On the other hand, continuing executive
and other immigration from within France
shows that Grenoble has not lost its power
to attract, in spite of an economic crisis from
whose effects it is to some extent, but not
entirely, spared. Non-French companies,
international laboratories and universities
have also attracted highly qualified people
from outside France who have brought Gre¬
noble a degree of international standing and
added to the diversity of a city whose site at
the foot of magnificent mountains has
always been a crossroads and meeting place
of peoples.
PIERRE FRAPPAT, of France, is an economics
teacher in Grenoble and a contributor to the
Rhône-Alpes regional edition of the French daily
Le Monde. His published works include Greno¬
ble, le mythe blessé
Photo © A. Muñoz de Pablos, Paris
Above, view of Grenoble and its river, the
Isère, against a backcloth ofsnowy moun¬
tains.
17
