WE had reached the dessert, in other words, we were rinsing out our
bowls with buttered tea when the two Lamas, so-called merchants,
reappeared. "The regent," they said, "is waiting for you at his palace.
He wants to speak to you."...
There was no longer any doubt about our situation. The Government intended
to take an interest in us. But for what purpose? Was it to do us good or to do us ill?
To free us or to keep us prisoner? To let us live or to have us killed? "Let us go and
see the regent," we said to ourselves, "and for the rest, God's will be done!"
Having put on our finest gowns and our imposing fox-fur bonnets, we said to an
attendant, "Let us go!"
"What about this young man?" he asked, pointing to Samdadchiemba, who
turned his eyes upon him in a most unfriendly way.
"This young man? He is our servant. He will look after the house during our
absence."
"It's not that. He must come too. The regent wants to see all three of you."
By way of toilet, Samdadchiemba shook his great sheepskin gown, tilted a little
black fur hat over his ear in a very cocky fashion and, after padlocking the door of
our dwelling, we all set forth together.
After charging along for five or six minutes we came to the palace of the first
Kalon, regent of Tibet. We crossed a large courtyard where many Lamas and
Chinese were gathered. When they saw us appear they began to whisper. We were
made to stop in front of a gilded double door whose leaves were ajar. The master
of ceremonies went along a small corridor on the left and almost at once the door
opened. At the end of a simply decorated room we saw a figure seated cross-
legged on a thick cushion covered with a tiger-skin. It was the regent.
As soon as we were seated, the regent began to contemplate us at length in
silence and with keen interest. He bent his head, now to the right, now to the left,
and smiled at us with a mixture of mockery and benevolence . Finally we found this
kind of pantomime so funny that we could no longer refrain from laughing.
"Good!" we said to ourselves in French, in a low voice, "this gentleman seems
to be good-natured enough. Our case will succeed."
"Ah," said the regent, in a voice full of affability. "What language are you
speaking? I did not understand what you said."
"We are speaking the language of our country."
"Come, repeat aloud what.you have just whispered."
"We were saying: this gentleman seems to be good-natured enough."
"Do you understand this language?" he asked, turning to those standing behind
him. They all bowed together and said they did not.
"You see, no one here understands the language of your country. Translate
your words into Tibetan."
"We were saying that there was much kindness in the face of the first Kalon."
"Ah, so you think I am kind? But I am very cruel. Is it not true that I am very
cruel?" said he, turning to his followers. They began to smile but did not reply.
"You are right," the regent continued. "I am kind, for kindness is the duty of a
Kalon . I must be kind to my people and also to strangers . " Then he made us a long
speech of which we understood very little.
When he had finished we told him that, not being sufficiently familiar with the
Tibetan language, we had not fully understood what he had said. The regent
beckoned to a Chinese, who stepped forward and translated his speech, which can
be summarized as follows: we had been summoned without the slightest intention
of molesting us. Because of the conflicting rumours which had been circulating
about us since our arrival in Lha-Ssa, the regent had decided to question us
himself in order to find out where we came from. "We are from the West," we told
the regent. "From Calcutta?" "No, our country is called France." "You are
perhaps from Peling?" "No, we are French." "Can you write?" "Better than we
can speak."
The regent turned away and spoke briefly to a Lama, who disappeared and
returned a moment later with paper, ink and a bamboo stylus.
"Here is somepaper," the regent said to us. "Write something."
"In which language? In Tibetan?"
"No, write some characters of your country's language."
One of us took the paper on his knees and wrote the following sentence: What
does it profit a man to gain the whole world if he loses his soul?
"Ah, so these are the characters of your country! I have never seen anything
like them. And what is the meaning ofthat?" We wrote the translation in Tibetan,
Tartar and Chinese and had it handed to him. "I was not deceived," he said. "You
are men of great learning. You can write in all tongues and the thoughts you
express are as profound as those to be found in the books of prayer." Then,
shaking his head slowly, he repeated: "What does itprofit a man to gain the whole
world if he loses his soul?" m



Filgrims and
A visit to the
regent of Tibet
by Régis-Evariste Hue
In 1846, the Lazarist missionary Régis-
Evariste Hue (1814-1860) became the first
Frenchman to enter Tibet. Determined,
adaptable and with a passion for
discovery, Hue successfully overcame the
many obstacles he encountered during his
travels in Mongolia, Tibet and China.
The story of his experiences, in which
Hue shows himself to be a remarkable
explorer and ethnologist, is today a
classic. Commissioned to take Christianity
to "Tartary" (Mongolia), Hue realized
that if he was to convert the people to
Christianity he wouldfirst have to study
Buddhism. He reached the capital of
Tibet, the holy city ofLhasa, after eight
months ofperilous wandering
accompanied by a young converted lama
named Samdadchiemba, a camel, a white
horse, and a dog named Arsalan.
I
1
C/>
Father Régis-Evariste Hue in Chinese dress.
Souvenirs d'un voyage dans la Tartarie et le Thibet,
pendant les années 1844. 1845 et 1846, par M. Hue,
ancien missionaire apostolique, edited by Gaumc Frères
et J. Duprcy, Paris, 1868.
25
