Psychic sports
by Alexandra David-Néel
Anarchist, Buddhist, Orientalist, explorer
and writer, Alexandra David-Néel (1868-
1969) was a woman of indomitable energy
and strength of character. Adventurous
both as a thinker and as a traveller, this
prototype of modern woman made many
journeys in the East, above all in Tibet,
and became the first European woman to
enter Lhasa and spend some time there.
She was the author of several works about
her travels and about Buddhism, notably
Mystiques et magiciens du Tibet (1929),
from which the extract published here is
taken. In it she describes the practice of
toumo,'psychic exertions whereby the
lamas (spiritual leaders in Tibetan
Buddhism) generate heat.
©
Alexandra David-Néel
dressed asa Tibetan
pilgrim and beggar,
carrying her belongings
Top her back. She was
wearing this outfit when
she entered Lhasa in
1924.
Experts in the art of toumo.
A kind of examination sometimes concludes the students' period of training
in toumo. On a moonlit winter's night, those who think they are capable of
passing the test go with their masters to the edge of anunfrozen stream. If
there is no running water in the region, a hole is pierced in the ice. The chosen
night is one of those when a violent wind is blowing. Such nights are not rare in
Tibet.
The candidates for the title of respa* sit down cross-legged on the ground,
36

Footloose and
completely naked. Sheets are plunged in the freezing water; they freeze and
emerge stiff. Each of the pupils wraps himself in a sheet which he is required to
unfreeze and dry on his body. As soon as the sheet is dry it is again plunged in the
water and the candidate again wraps himself in it. The operation goes on in this
way until daybreak. He who has dried most sheets is proclaimed the winner.
It is said that some manage to dry as many as forty sheets in the course of a night.
Exaggeration must be taken into account and also the size of the sheets which in
some cases may be very small and purely symbolic. However, there is no doubt
that the respas really do dry on themselves several pieces of fabric the size of a big
shawl. I have seen this with my own eyes.
It is necessary to dry at least three in order to be recognized as a true respa
worthy of wearing the white cotton skirt which marks out the toumo graduates. At
any rate this was the original rule but it is doubtful whether it is very strictly
observed in our time. ...
In addition to the sheet-drying test there are several others. One involves sitting
down in the snow. The amount of snow which melts beneath the respa and the
area which melts around him denotes the degree of heat which he radiates.
It is difficult to get a totally accurate idea of the importance of the results of
toumo. Nevertheless they seem proven. Hermits live entirely naked or covered
with a thin garment all through the winter, in the midst of snow at high altitudes. I
am not the only one to have seen them. Members of the expedition which tried to
climb Mount Everest have seen some of these anchorites from a distance. As for
me, to the slight extent to which I have practised toumo, I have obtained striking
results.
Mystiques et magiciens du Tibet. Editions Pion, Paris,
1929.
Helmet thought to have
belonged to King Srong-
brtsan-sgam-po, founder
of the unified Kingdom of
Tibet in the 7th century.
This and other little-
known Tibetan artefacts
feature in a "Treasures of
Tibet" exhibition which is
being held at the Natural
History Museum, Paris,
from April to October
1987.
t > 'i^.ayiwi.iMajpijiHwiBiMii^
