Baroque as a worldphilosophy
BY EDOUARD GLISSANT
THE baroque style made its
appearance in the West at the very
moment that a certain idea of
Nature that it was homogeneous, harmo¬
nious and comprehensible was gaining
ground. Rationalism refined this concept
which fitted in well with its growing ambi¬
tion to dominate reality. It seemed, more¬
over, that Nature could be artificially
reproduced, imitation of reality going hand
in hand with knowledge of it.
Imitation of Nature as an objective
assumes that, underlying outward
appearance and inherent in it, there is a "pro¬
fundity", an unassailable truth, artistic
representations of which approximate more
closely as they systematize their imitation of
reality and discover its rules. The revolution
represented by the introduction of perspec¬
tive during the quattrocento can thus, per¬
haps, be seen as part of the search for this
profundity.
It was against this current that the baroque
"diversion" began to make itself felt.
Baroque art was a reaction against the
rationalist claim to penetrate the mysteries of
the known in one single, incisive, uniform
movement. The stone with which baroque
art disturbed the rationalist pool was an
affirmation that knowledge is never fully
acquired, a fact that gives it all its value. Thus
the techniques of baroque art were to favour
"breadth" to the detriment of "depth".
In its historical context, the baroque
diversion thus presupposes a new heroic
quality of knowledge, resolutely turning its
back on the goal of attempting to epitomize
the substance of the world in a series of
representative (or imitative) harmonies. On
the contrary, baroque art or style was to turn
to contrast, to circumvolution, to prolifera¬
tion, to everything that contradicted the soi-
disant oneness of the known and the
knower, to everything that exalted quantity
repeated to infinity and totality eternally
renewed.
In its historical setting, therefore, baroque
art is a reaction against a natural order, natu¬
rally proffered as evidence. When the con¬
ception of Nature evolved, at the same time
that the world was opening up to Western
man and that science was bringing the splen¬
did ordering of Nature into question, the
thrust of baroque art was itself also to
become generalized, ceasing to be no more
than a reaction. Baroque art, the art of
expansion, was itself materially to expand.
The first manifestation of this expansion
was undoubtedly to be seen in Latin-Amer¬
ican art, so close to Iberian and Flemish
' Baroque, yet so intimately interwoven with
indigenous elements, daringly introduced
into the baroque concert. These elements
were no longer seen to enter as revolutionary
disfigurements of reality, but as inputs of a
novel kind. No longer simply the negation
of a concept, baroque art has given its sanc¬
tion to a new schema (soon to be a new
concept) of Nature, to which it is attuned.
Cross-fertilization is the determinant of
this evolution, and the pursuits of baroque
art are at one with the dizzying adventure of
cross-fertilization of cultures, styles and
tongues. With the generalization of this
cross-fertilization, the Baroque has finally
achieved its "natural" condition. It
announces to the world the growing contact
between a diversity of "natures". It is in
sympathy with this world movement and is
no longer content to be merely a reaction
against a philosophy or an aesthetic. It is the
sum and result of all aesthetic theories, of all
philosophies. In short, Baroque is neither an
art nor a style, but a being-in-the-world.
The modern scientific view of reality coin¬
cides with and confirms this expansion of the
Baroque. Science does, indeed, assert that"
reality cannot be defined in terms of outward
appearances and that it has to be examined
"in depth", but it also accepts that knowl¬
edge is never wholly acquired and that it
would be absurd to claim that its essentials
can be grasped at a single stroke. Science has
entered the era of the uncertainty principle,
retaining, nevertheless, a form of rationalism
which henceforth abjures paralysing,
mechanical, once-and-for-all dogmatism.
Its conceptions of Nature are "expanding",
becoming relative, problematical. It is mov¬
ing, that is, in the selfsame direction towards
which the Baroque tends.
Similarly, human nature is no longer
thought of in terms of a clear-cut, universal
model. The concept of being-in-the-world
implies the sum total of all types of being-
in-society. There is no unique, recognized
model. All human cultures have had their
classical periods, eras of dogmatic certainty
from which they must all emerge together.
In this sense the "profundities" revealed by
science, psychology and sociology counter
triumphantly the metaphysical "profun¬
dity" emphasized by Western classicism
alone. Herein lies the very key to the univer-
salization of the Baroque.
One might, then, sum up by saying that
there has been a "naturalization" of the
Baroque, not simply as an art form or style,
but as a way of living out the diversity-unity
of the world; that this naturalization takes
the Baroque out of the limited context of
Counter-Reformation flamboyance, of
revolt against the constraints of a tradition,
to give it a universal quality as the embodi¬
ment of "interrelating"; and that, in this
sense, the Baroque of history foreshadowed,
in astonishingly prophetic fashion, the
upheavals that mark the world of today.
Finally, a recent characteristic of contem¬
porary art, defined by Walter Benjamin as
"technically reproducible art", seems to
confirm this movement towards universal-
©
ization. The ability to make exact copies,
made possible by modern techniques, has
changed the whole course of future develop¬
ment of the arts. Not only has the con¬
ception of Nature become relative, the
notion of the metaphysical oneness of a mas¬
terpiece has been swept away. In the present
state of diversity, not only does a work of art
combine profundity with expansion, it is
itself subject to a fundamental expansion
which, thanks to increasingly perfected
methods of reproduction, adds infinitely to
its significance.
EDOUARD GLISSANT, of Martinique, is the
author of many volumes of poems, novels and
essays, including La lézarde, L'intention poétique
and Le discours antillais. He has also published a
play, Monsieur Toussaint. In 1967 he founded the
Institut Martiniquais d'Etudes at Fort-de-France.
Since 1981 he has been editor-in-chief of the Un¬
esco Courier. His latest novel, Mahagony, has just
been published.
Although the notion of the Baroque is primarily
associated with a specific period in the cultural
history of the Christian West, the 17th and 18th
centuries, some writers have wondered whether
it could not be applied in afar wider context to
describe a surge ofvitality, movement and emo¬
tional force of the kind which periodically
causes an upheaval in the arts. The Spanish
critic Eugenio d'Ors has suggested that the
Baroque may be an essential component of in¬
telligence and sensibility, a "stylistic constant"
which recurs throughout history. Such a thesis
could help to explain the affinities that can be
observed between Western Baroque and other
forms ofartistic expression that have appeared
at different periods in countries far distantfrom
each other. 1. 13th-century Gate of Victory in
the temple complex of Angkor Thorn, Kam¬
puchea. 2. Church ofthe Sagrada Familia (Holy
Family), Barcelona, by the Catalan architect
Antonio Gaudt, begun in 1883 and never com¬
pleted. 3. Tomb built for himself by Ferdinand
Cheval, French postman and self-taught artist
famed for the "Ideal Palace" he built (after
seeing it in a dream) between 1879 and 1912 at
Hauterives, Drame, France. 4. Colourful car¬
nival scene from Trinidad and Tobago (West
Indies). 5. The Cuban poet and novelist José
Lezama Lima (1910-1976) who, like many
Latin American writers, considered himself a
baroque author, and claimed affinities with the
Spanish baroque poet Góngora.
18
