TRAVEUmG__LIGHT
Coping with weightlessness in space
by Oleg G. Gazenko
IT is just over a quarter of a century
since man first ventured into space.
An assessment of the achievements
of astronautics so far indicates that man
now,has a firm foothold in the realm of
space travel and that the human factor
will be decisive in the conquest of outer
space.
Today systematic study is being made
of all aspects of the Universe, with pri¬
ority being given to the exploration of the
Earth from space and to the use of space
technology to solve many of the problems
of our planet.
Every space flight makes an important
contribution to this enterprise, furthering
the study of the Earth's natural resources
and of the world ocean, the application of
new technologies and the development of
new products (especially pharmaceutical
compounds and biological substances
which are difficult or impossible to ob¬
tain on Earth because of the effects of
gravity) and the monitoring of the
environment.
Cosmonauts are remaining in space for.
longer and longer periods and are
required to perform increasingly numer¬
ous and complex tasks, including man¬
oeuvres outside their spacecraft, which
call for continual progress in medical
research to ensure that space travellers
remain healthy and capable of working at
full capacity.
Already, the findings of such research
have opened up new perspectives on the
workings of the human organism, leading
notably to a greater understanding of the
general laws governing adaptation to the
environment, and above all adaptation to
such an unusual condition as weightless¬
ness, which man does not experience on
Earth.
Throughout its long evolution the
human body has never had occasion to
make use of mechanisms capable of com¬
pensating for absence of gravity. On the
contrary, the whole evolutionary process
has been to fight against the force of grav¬
ity, in order to survive in the continual
heaviness imposed by the Earth's gravita¬
tional pull. Gravity influenced the
development of the structures and func¬
tions of the cardio-vascular system, the
motor system and the central nervous
system.
The degree of adjustment that we have
attained, which makes us human, is thus a
logical development, and the individual
in the course of his life is capable of refin¬
ing and improving that adaptation, just as
he can lose it, at least in part, usually
through ageing or illness. However it has
been observed that this can also happen
to young, healthy subjects when they
travel in space and experience weight¬
lessness.
Before the first manned space flight,
some scientists claimed that man would
be incapable of working in a state of
weightlessness. They even went so far as
to declare that a normal human being
would be psychologically unable to cope
with the state of weightlessness and the
cosmic void. The space flight of Yury
Gagarin resoundingly disproved these
pessimistic predictions and, by showing
On board the U.S. Space Shuttle Columbia, gjl
The astronaut at left tries out a sleeping @|
bag, while another, right, equipped with g-
suction cups on the soles of his shoes, ^
floats with two cameras in a state of |
weightlessness. è
that human beings can indeed journey
through space, flung open the gateway to
the stars.
How does weightlessness influence the
human organism? What changes does it
produce, and what shocks can it cause
against which preventive measures
should be taken?
Weightlessness first of all produces a
sensation of disequilibrium and of float¬
ing, due to a disruption in the normal
functioning of sense organs such as the
vestibular apparatus of the inner ear,
sight, touch and muscle awareness. The
cosmonaut has the impression of flying
upside down or falling. Sometimes this is
accompanied by disagreeable and very
uncomfortable sensations of giddiness,
weakness or nausea. The form and dura¬
tion of these symptoms vary greatly from
one individual to another. On more than
200 space flights, two-thirds of the sub¬
jects experienced them to some extent,
lasting for periods ranging from a few
hours to several days. Subsequently the
symptoms wear off, only to reappear, as a
rule, for the first few hours or days after
returning to the Earth's gravitational
field.
The absence of gravity subjects the car-
12

dio-vascular system to a redistribution of
the total amount of blood in the body:
instead of accumulating in the lower part
of the body, the blood tends to rise into
the thoracic and cephalic regions. This
modifies the regulation of the heart and
the metabolism of the cardiac muscle,
which gradually weakens, and also causes
a loss of tone and elasticity in the veins of
the legs. If this state is prolonged, the
absence of blood pressure causes a deteri¬
oration in the reactions of the cardio-vas-
cular system to physical effort or to move¬
ment, and it starts to "run down".
As the influence of weightlessness con¬
tinues, other forms of reaction emerge,
owing to the lack of demands made on the
bones and muscles. Indeed, without grav¬
ity, no effort is required to move around
inside the space station or to shift objects
from one place to another. A gradual
functional atrophy of the muscles occurs,
starting with those which are used to com¬
bat gravity, hold certain positions and
compensate for the Earth's gravitational
pull during movement. This leads to a
partial wastage of the muscle mass,
especially the muscles of the legs and
back.
Decalcification of bone tissue occurs
through loss of calcium salts and phos¬
phorus, but this has never reached alarm¬
ing levels, even on the longest space
flights. However, if effective measures
are not taken, decalcification could
become a serious obstacle to longer man¬
ned space flights.
These phenomena and other phys¬
iological reactions to weightlessness are
primarily functional and do not constitute
a threat to cosmonauts' health.
Furthermore, it is abundantly clear
that human adaptation to the state of
weightlessness signifies, to some extent, a
loss of adaptation to the conditions of life
on Earth. A rather singular situation then
arises: the more complete the adaptation
to weightlessness, the more difficult is the
process of .readaptation after re-entry.
All cosmonauts who have spent time in
orbit are familiar with this experience.
How far this process can be a threat to
their health is difficult to determine.
Adequate scientific evidence is lacking to
enable a valid judgement to be made,
since for all space flights lasting more
than three weeks various methods have
been used to protect the cosmonauts
from the negative influence of weight¬
lessness.
In view of the increasing duration of
space flights, doctors have been obliged
to devise ways and means of counteract¬
ing too great an adaptation to weightless¬
ness, in order to ensure that the mecha¬
nisms indispensable to life governed by
the Earth's gravitational field continue to
function effectively. It has been neces¬
sary to prevent the body's systems from
"forgetting" their terrestrial vocation and
to "remind" them of their, role on
Earth.
These measures include, first and fore¬
most, physical training on bicycles and
moving running-tracks to tone up the
muscles. During long space flights, cos¬
monauts walk approximately 5 kilo¬
metres a day, and cycle for some 10 kilo¬
metres. The amount of exercise depends
on the day in the training cycle, the dura¬
tion of the flight and the individual
characteristics of the body. Additional
exercises using extensors and other
apparatus can also be carried out if
necessary.
To prevent circulatory disorders, the
cosmonauts have to exercise while nega¬
tive pressure is applied to the lower part
of the body. They put on a special gar
ment like a pair of baggy trousers made of
stretch fabric, in which a vacuum pump
establishes a permanent degree of nega¬
tive pressure. As a result the blood flows
into the lower parts of the body, where
the blood pressure rises to the same level
as on Earth. This stimulates circulation in
the legs and prevents reduction of the
ability to stand upright which tends to
affect cosmonauts returning to Earth.
During the last few days of the flight
the cosmonauts take in salt-water solu¬
tions, causing fluid retention and an
increase in the volume of blood. This also
makes it easier for them to maintain an
upright stance on their return. Another
very important preventive measure is to
add an extra ration of vitamins and trace
elements to the diet.
In the future, recourse will very proba¬
bly be had to artificial gravity, but this is a
complex problem which calls for very
careful study, through experiments both
on Earth and in space.
Above, two cosmonauts take a shower on
board the orbiting Soviet space station
Salyut 7.
Left, a cosmonaut (foreground) works out
on an ergometric bicycle in the Soviet
space station Salyut 7. This type of exer¬
cise is vital to enable the body to readapt
to Earth's gravity after a time spent in
space.
Much is now known about the body's
reactions to weightlessness, and how
these reactions come about is largely
understood. The general impression is
that man is capable of adapting satisfac¬
torily to a prolonged state of weightless¬
ness, then of re-adapting to gravity and
smoothly returning to a normal and use¬
ful life on Earth.
However, since human health and
safety are at stake, it is important to
assess each new step in space exploration
with meticulous accuracy, and to pay the
closest possible attention to the smallest
details in the growing store of experience.
Nothing must be overlooked, from the
remote consequences of space flights
already undertaken to the difficulties and
complications likely to be faced on future
flights. Science, especially biological and
medical research in space, has a long way
to go in order to perfect knowledge of
Man and the Universe and penetrate the
complexities of the interaction between
the two, thereby helping to achieve a har¬
monious relationship.
OLEG GEORGIEVICH GAZENKO, Soviet sci¬
entist, is director of the Institute of Medical and
Biological Problems and president of the Soviet
I. P. Pavlov Society. He is an active member of
the Academy of Sciences of the USSR and of the
"Man in Space Studies" Committee of the Inter¬
national Academy ofAstronautics. The author of
over 200 scientific studies, he was Soviet editor
of a Soviet/U.S. publication, Foundations of
Space Biology and Medicine (7975, in Russian
and English). He was a recipient of the USSR
State Prize in 1978 and the Guggenheim Inter¬
national Astronautics Award in 1975.
13
