The role of MAB
in urban systems
research
Foodfor thought
Is one answer to hunger, under-employment
and poor quality of life among the urban poor
to be found in our own backyards?
Concern about urban development centres
on the sustainability of urban systems, both as
suitable habitats for mankind and in terms of
their ecological and support systems.
With its worldwide research network, MAB
is uniquely well placed to carry out compara¬
tive studies of the environmental and social
effects of rapid urban expansion. The data
already acquired from case studies of such
widely differing cities as Kuala Lumpur,
Rome, Barcelona, Sao Paulo, Mexico City,
Beijing, Frankfurt-am-Main, Dakar, Khar¬
toum and Lae (Papua-New Guinea) provide a
firm scientific basis for the development of
guidelines for planners and decision-makers
faced with problems of rapid urban growth in
other parts of the world.
The change from a mainly rural to a pre¬
dominantly urban habitat for the majority of
the world population demands major
psychological and physiological adjustments
at both the individual and the community
levels.
Many MAB projects contain a strong social
science input to ensure that the vital social,
psychological and physiological aspects of
"total environment" are not overlooked.
Involvement of all sections of local popula¬
tions^ local personalities, women's and youth
groups, decision-makers, etc. as well as
on-the-spot training of local technicians, is also
an integral part of most MAB projects.
Cities are in many ways dangerous and
"unnatural" biological habitats for mankind,
yet they are the "natural" homes of human
culture and creativity.
Conservation in itself is not enough; it must
also contribute to the development and the
improvement of man's relationship with his
environment. In seeking to ensure a viable
future for cities as the major human habitat,
MAB is fulfilling one of its most fundamental
objectives.
IN a notable passage in his satirical work
Candide, the French philosopher and
writer Voltaire declared "Il faut cultiver
notre jardin" (We must cultivate our
garden), a phrase that might well have
been adopted as the motto of a remarkable
research project undertaken by the Centro
de Estudios Urbanos y Regionales
(CEUR), Argentina, and backed by the
United Nations University and Unesco/
MAB.
Voltaire, of course, was referring to the
Individual, spiritual garden which each of us
must cultivate if we are to become self-
reliant and realize our full potential. A report
on the first stage of the project, published in
1 986 under the title Agricultura Urbana y
Periurbana en el Gran Buenos Aires
(Urban and Perl-urban Agriculture in
Greater Buenos Aires), goes a step further
than Voltaire. After detailing the results of a
thorough evaluation of the economic, social
and environmental consequences of urban
and peri-urban agriculture for self-con¬
sumption ¡n the Greater Buenos Aires
region, it comes to the conclusion that the
literal cultivation of back gardens, unused
building lots and green spaces on the out¬
skirts of our great cities might offer some of
the urban poor a way of escape from the
trap of hunger, under-employment and
wretched living conditions.
The report points out that, at com¬
paratively low cost, urban gardening for
self-consumption could have the following
desirable effects:
Make quickly available to the section of
the population in greatest need a supply of
highly nutritive food which the normal work¬
ings of the food market denies them.
A cultivated backyard plot in a workers' barrio in Greater Buenos Aires
Increase the real Incomes of poor urban
families.
Make use of urban resources now lying
¡die (vacant land, some household wastes,
the unused working capacity of the under¬
employed).
Provide opportunities for re-cycllng
urban wastes in soil reclamation projects
for the provision of new gardens.
Improve the quality* of life in the most
deprived urban areas.
Inculcate a sense of pride, self-reliance,
community spirit and liberty by offering the
urban poor an opportunity to act positively
on their own behalf.
For local authorities faced with the huge
expenditures required by traditional
Improvement schemes, the urban garden
proposal offers an effective, low-cost
opportunity to improve rapidly the lot of the
urban poor for whom they are responsible.
It has been estimated that, on average, a
plot of land of 40 or 50 square metres would
be sufficient to provide a family of, say, two
adults and four children with all their needs
in fresh vegetables and other green
foodstuffs. The labour input needed to
achieve this would amount to the equiv¬
alent of one and a half days work a week
which could be shared by all the members
of the family.
It might be objected that, as has some¬
times been the case with imports of food for
famine relief in Africa, the Introduction of
new sources of food supply would distort
food markets to the detriment of rural
farmers.
This objection melts away under closer
scrutiny. Standard methods of stimulating
food production rarely benefit the hard core
urban poor, who remain outside the normal
food market chain because they simply
have not the resources to enter the market
as buyers.
Brazil, for example, has become the
world's third largest exporter of meat, after
the United States of America and the Euro¬
pean Community, yet 25 per cent of its pop¬
ulation still lives at the poverty line and does
not benefit from the country's increased
meat production. India and China have
recently become net exporters of cereals,
yet it is far from being the case that every¬
one living in those countries ¡s adequately
nourished.
Clearly, urban gardening for self-con¬
sumption is not a panacea for all the ¡lis of
modern urban life. However, if combined
with other initiatives being studied within
the larger framework of the CEUR project
on Alternative Strategies for Improving
Food and Energy Availability in Cities, ¡t
offers more than a glimmer of hope for the
millions of urban poor now held in the icy
grip of poverty.
o
©
12
