Fair copies
Modern replicas
ofancient vessels
The sea trials of full-scale replicas of a num¬
ber of ancient ships have successfully de¬
monstrated the seaworthiness of early craft
as well as contributed to our knowledge of
naval construction techniques and the art of
navigation. (1) In 1987, for the first time in
over 2,000 years, a trireme of the Greek
navy cut through the waters of the
Mediterranean. The trireme, a reputedly
invincible, fast and manoeuvrable warship
with three tiers of oarsmen on each side, was
fundamental to the naval strength ofAncient
Greece. The modern replica, named Olym¬
pia, was built in a Greek naval shipyard to a
design by a team of British researchers. As
no remains of a trireme have ever been
found, the designers relied on descriptions
by classical writers, surviving illustrations
of the ships, and experience gained from
other ancient shipwrecks. The warship, 37
m long and over 5 m broad, displaces 1.5 m
ofwater for 45 tons weight and is armed with
a bronze ram at the bow. She soon showed
her paces, reaching a speed of 7 knots in her
first sea trials, propelled by a crew of almost
200 rowers. Use of the trireme will lead to a
better understanding of the tactics employed
by the Ancient Greek fleet. The Sohar (see
colour page left) is a replica of an 8th-cen-
tury Arab trading ship or boom. In this
vessel, with a crew including 8 Omani sea¬
men, navigator Tim Severin made a 7-
month voyage of almost 10,000 km, from
Muscat to Canton, following the route of
Sindbad, the legendary Arab sailor and hero
of The Thousand and One Nights. (2) Tim
Severin uses an early Arab navigation in¬
strument, the kamal. A wooden rectangle
pierced by a knotted string, the kamal is a
kind of sextant for calculating latitude from
the position of a selected star above the
horizon. (3) The Kyrenia II, an authentic
replica of a Greek merchantman which went
down off Kyrenia (Cyprus) 2,300 years ago,
is the culmination of a 20-year research
programme carried out on the wrecked ship
under the direction of the Institute of Nautic¬
al Archaeology (INA). The Kyrenia Ship
(see also page 14) is the best preserved vessel
of its period yet found. Thanks to knowledge
gained during the long and painstaking re¬
construction of the ship, which can be seen
today in the city of Kyrenia, a replica was
built in a Greek shipyard, using ancient
techniques. The 14-m-long Kyrenia II has
already made several successful voyages.
