Technology and the marine
archaeologist by Charles Mazel
/ "pyAVY Jones meets the com-
* I I puter." "High Tech Treasure
M-J Hunt." These headlines from
articles on recent finds of important ship¬
wrecks are signs of the growing role of
sophisticated equipment in the location and
excavation of historic underwater sites. The
privateer De Braak, lost in 1798 with a
fortune in treasure reported aboard, was
found just off the shore of Lewes, De¬
laware, USA, by side-scan sonar. The site
of what is probably the pirate vessel
Whidah, sunk on the outer shore of Cape
Cod in 1717, was located by magnetometer.
In both cases, precision navigation played a
vital role.
The applications of technology go far
beyond the search phase of any project.
Sites must be excavated carefully, with pre¬
cise mapping and recording of the locations
of all objects found. Underwater work
raises difficulties unlike those encountered
on land. Besides the obvious problem of
breathing, there are limitations in com¬
munications, visibility, and movement, to
name a few. One of the early tasks of mod¬
ern marine archaeology was to develop
tools whose performance would match or
exceed those being used at land sites. That
goal generally has been achieved.
Just because a search or site mapping
operation uses all the latest electronic giz¬
mos and computer-controlled whatsits does
not mean that it is going about the project in
the right way. Proper technology should not
be confused with proper technique. Tech¬
nology is just the hardware, electronic or
otherwise, that is used for the job. Tech-
©
nique is the way in which that equipment is
used.
The question of technique should come
into play as soon as a project is conceived.
One factor in the initial planning of a job is
the selection of the appropriate technology.
And, even if the proper equipment is selec¬
ted, all efforts may fail if it is not used
properly. For example, running a sonar
search with inadequate navigational control
is poor technique and could lead to failure.
The right way to go about a project is to a)
succeed, and b) spend as little money and
time as possible in doing so. Both too much
and too little technology can be a problem.
Without proper technique, success be¬
comes a matter of luck. Proper selection of
tools and methods is playing an increasingly
important role in finding shipwrecks and
other sites and in carrying out the excava¬
tion and providing documentation.
The role of research as the first phase in
any search project cannot be overempha¬
sized. The inexpensive hours spent in librar¬
ies and archives can save many expensive
and difficult hours searching on the water.
A survivor's report that "the wreck is lo¬
cated in two fathoms of water, two leagues
south of the river mouth" may sound like a
good lead until the researcher learns that a
"league" has meant different things in diffe¬
rent times and places, and the river mouth,
not to mention the position of the beach
itself, may have moved a great distance in
the time since the original disaster. A se¬
rious student of the art will learn much
about the history of how one measures
time, distance, and position.
The most commonly used instruments for
searching in the oceans are the side-scan
sonar, the sub-bottom profiler, and the
magnetometer. These generally can be
called high tech. Other methods, just as
good, fall under the categories low tech, no
The manned deep-water submersible
Alvin, of the Woods Hole Océanographie
Institution (USA), with its mother ship,
Atlantis II. In 1986 Alvin explored the
wreck of the Titanic 4,000 metres beneath
the North Atlantic. Much advanced tech¬
nology is available for marine archaeology
but its use on a routine basis is often
limited because of prohibitive costs.
m
i
.émr	,
alia
**>
15

ï
CO
o
16
tech, and plumb luck. The great majority of
finds have resulted from methods as simple
as talking to local sponge divers, or spend¬
ing long hours in a small boat with a hand-
operated coring device.
Side-scan sonars and sub-bottom profil¬
ers are acoustic devices that use sound
waves to produce a hard-copy, graphic re¬
cord of the sea floor and underlying
sediments. Both instruments are portable
and utilize battery power. They can be
operated from small boats, thus making it
possible to mount search operations in diffi¬
cult or remote locations.
In the side-scan sonar, a torpedo-shaped
"towfish" transmits pulses of high-frequen¬
cy sound (50 to 500 kilohertz) out to both
sides. The pulses are transmitted in a nar¬
row beam in the horizontal plane, giving
good resolution, and a broad beam in the
vertical plane, providing wide coverage.
Sound is returned to the sonar from the
texture of the sea floor and by reflections
from targets. The returns from successive
pulses are printed side by side on the paper
record, producing a very detailed view of
the sea floor, similar to an aerial photo¬
graph. A side-scan can produce an image of
the sea floor more than 300 metres out on
both sides of the tow path.
Side-scan sonar produces a detailed
graphic image of the surface of the sea floor.
Areas of rock, sand, mud, or other material
can be distinguished. If an archaeological
site leaves some visible trace on the sea
floor, it can be found by side-scan sonar. If a
wreck is relatively intact, the sonar image
may be clear enough to allow identification
from the sonar record alone. In some cases,
indirect indications, such as a difference in
material type, may be enough to point to a
site location even if no portion of the wreck
itself is exposed. A side-scan sonar unit
cannot detect sites that are completely
buried beneath the sea floor. Extremely
rocky or irregular bottoms can make it hard
to interpret sonar returns.
The sub-bottom profiler utilizes low-fre¬
quency sound (3.5 to 12 kilohertz) to pene¬
trate bottom sediments. A pulse of sound is
directed vertically down into the bottom.
At each interface between different types of
sediment layers some of the sound energy
continues on and some is reflected. As the
device is towed along, a cross-sectional view
of the sea floor is generated, showing the
different layers and the underlying bed¬
rock. If there are buried hull remains, they
can show up as a localized reflection below
the bottom.
A sub-bottom profiler can be used to
locate sites that are completely buried.
Drawing shows 4 methods of geophysical
surveying under water. (1) The proton
magnetometer detects variations in the
earth's magnetic field, which is distorted
by objects of a ferrous nature such as
cannon, iron shot or steel hulls. (2) Side-
scan sonar detects variations of projec¬
tions above the sea-bed. A "fish" towed
behind the boat transmits a fan-shaped
beam of acoustic energy perpendicular to
its path, and rock outcrops, sandwaves,
wrecks and other projections are recorded
on a continuous graph (see front cover).
(3) The sub-bottom profiler is an acoustic
transmitter which sends out into the sea¬
bed sound pulses which bounce back
from underlying strata or buried objects.
All 3 devices, when used simultaneously,
can detect objects lying on or below the
sea-bed and distinguish ferrous and non-
ferrous anomalies, thus helping
archaeologists to distinguish early timber
structures from later metal wrecks. (4)
Another system is the Remotely Operated
Vehicle (ROV). Equipped with low-light
videos and cameras, such highly man¬
oeuvrable unmanned submersibles are
connected to a mother vessel by a cable
through which they receive electricity and
commands from their human pilot and
transmit pictures and data.

A mosaic of X-ray photos of a concretion
helps to guide a technician in the process
of chipping off the overlay from iron arte¬
facts recovered from a 16th-century ship¬
wreck off the coast of Texas, USA.
Since it looks directly down, it covers only a
narrow path underneath the search vessel.
This makes it an inefficient tool for general
searching. The sub-bottom profiler can be
used effectively to help define the site limits
and geology once the primary location is
found by other means.
In some cases, a magnetometer should be
used either instead of or along with a side-
scan sonar or sub-bottom profiler. The
magnetometer is a passive device that mea¬
sures the strength of the local magnetic
field. It has been the primary search tool for
treasure hunters and others looking for
Spanish vessels in the New World, where
most wrecks are broken up and buried in
sand or coral.
The spinning Earth behaves much like a
bar magnet, with a north and south magne¬
tic pole. At any point on the Earth there will
be some natural magnetic field strength,
influenced by the local geology. Concentra¬
tions of ferrous material such as iron
anchors, cannon, or ships' fittings will al¬
ter that field, producing what is termed a
magnetic anomaly (or variation). It does
not matter whether the iron material is
buried or exposed. The shape and size of
the anomaly give clues to the mass of iron
producing it and the depth of burial.
The unit of measurement of magnetic
field strength is the gamma. The Earth's
natural magnetic field ranges from 30,000
to 60,000 gammas, depending on the loca¬
tion. Modern magnetometers can detect
anomalies in the local field of less than 1
gamma. Although there are several types of
magnetometer available (cesium, rubi
dium, flux-gate), the one most commonly
used for marine search applications is the
proton precession magnetometer. These
units are relatively small, simple and
robust, and are well suited to field oper¬
ations.
A magnetometer consists of a sensor, a
chart recorder, an interconnecting cable,
and a power supply. The units are portable
and are easily adapted to virtually any
search vessel. The sensor is generally towed
behind the search vessel, although for some
shallow-water operations magnetometer
sensors have been mounted on a boom on
the bow of a small boat or even suspended
from a helicopter. A boat that is not made
out of steel is preferred, but any vessel can
be used if there is enough cable to get the
magnetometer out of the of the
vessel's own magnetic field.
The strength of an object's magnetic field
decreases with the cube of the distance from
the object. This means that the magneto¬
meter sensor must be towed relatively close
to the object in order to detect it, depending
of course on the amount of metal involved.
As a rough guide, a large steel wreck can be
detected at a range of 120 to 180 metres, a
site with scattered iron anchors and cannon
at 80 to 100 metres, an isolated iron cannon
at 30 metres, and an individual small iron
object at 3 to 5 metres. Skilled operators are
able to use magnetometer readings to put a
marker buoy directly on top of the source of
an anomaly.
Magnetometers are useful for finding any
site that has iron structures, artefacts, or
associated minerals. Since it does not mat¬
ter whether or how deeply the material is
covered, magnetometers are particularly
appropriate for locating vessels that are
buried or located in areas that are unfavour¬
able for sonar searching.
Magnetometers are not able to detect
non-ferrous materials, so it is necessary as
part of the research process to determine
whether and how much of such material
may be on a site. Bronze cannon, for exam¬
ple, cannot be detected.
With all these search tools, it is vital to
have precision navigation. That is the only
way one can know that the entire search
area has been covered with a reasonable
degree of accuracy. It is also needed to
return to any contacts found with the search
instruments.
The future is already here in terms of
available technology. Computers, sub¬
mersible vehicles, satellite mapping systems
and the like, are in widespread use. It is
their application to marine archaeology that
is somewhat lagging. In large measure, this
can be attributed to the prohibitive cost of
using these systems on a routine basis.
The major change in search technology is
likely to be an increasing success rate for
site location. The basic technology is in a
relatively advanced state of development.
Continued advances will be made in select¬
ing the best equipment for a job and car¬
rying out the search properly. As the equip¬
ment and techniques are refined, they will
play an important role in site identification,
as opposed to simply site location.
Aerial and satellite imaging, whether by
photography or multi-spectral imaging, will
be more widely used. Satellite images have
already disclosed previously unknown reef
structures and sandbars that might contain
shipwreck sites. Shipwrecks can sometimes
be seen in high-altitude photographs.
Photography using optimized film/filter
combinations could maximize water
penetration and bottom contrast.
Pulsed lasers are being used ex¬
perimentally, to make hydrographie
measurements from aircraft. As the tech¬
nology advances, it will become possible to
survey large areas of the bottom at pre¬
viously unheard-of rates. Anomalies will be
found that are caused by shipwreck sites.
The possibility of finding shipwrecks in
deep water has been recognized since the
1960s. Under the right conditions, wood
and other organic materials suffer little de¬
terioration at great depths.
The future will see continued progress in
the ability to locate such sites. More impor¬
tantly, technology will provide the means to
investigate such sites more efficiently. Un¬
manned, remotely operated vehicles have

18
already performed television and photo¬
graphic inspections of several sites. One-
atmosphere diving "suits" now commonly
used in the offshore oil industry provide the
archaeologist with direct access to sites at
ever-increasing depths, with no danger of
decompression sickness.
Improvements also continue to be made
in the ability to document sites rapidly and
accurately. New film and camera technolo¬
gies make it easier to obtain high-quality
photographs for documentation.
A new mapping system is currently
undergoing field trials. It promises to great¬
ly reduce, the time needed to make,
measurements. The system uses acoustic
signals to replace measuring tapes. The
diver holds a wand-like device wherever he
wants a measurement. When he pulls a
trigger, acoustic pulses travel out to receiv¬
ers at carefully surveyed locations. The
travel time of the pulses is converted into a
distance measurement by a computer on the
surface, which then calculates the location
of the point in space. To achieve the neces¬
sary accuracy of less than a centimetre, the
system must continually measure and adjust
for the speed of sound in the water. The
equipment is compact and portable. The
system is so fast and accurate that the diver
can sign his name on the computer screen
simply by holding down the trigger and
"writing" with the wand.
As computers become smaller, cheaper,
and more powerful, they are increasingly
being used in the field of underwater
archaeology. This is not to say that
archaeologists have not been using com¬
puters. University mainframe computers
have been used for a number of years for
archaeological database management
storing, sorting, analysing and displaying
information on artefacts and sites. The data
are brought in from the field on standard
reporting forms. Recently, however, more
and more archaeologists have been taking
either terminals or small computers into the
field so that data can be sent back to the
mainframe computer over telephone lines
on a daily basis.
With the advent of portable, battery-
powered microcomputers, field uses are
starting to go far beyond simple cataloguing
tasks. Underwater measurements can be
entered into the computer on site to be
converted into useful co-ordinates for im¬
mediate plotting or display on a graphics
screen. This provides both on-the-spot
error checking and a tool for site planning.
The role of computers as an integral part of
archaeological fieldwork is one that should
show rapid development in the next few
years.
CHARLES MAZEL, of the USA, is an ocean
engineer who is technical director of the non¬
profit Maritime Archaeological and Historical Re¬
search Unit, based in Maine. He is presently a
consultant on ocean survey and electronics pro¬
jects and is developing new equipment for under¬
water photography. This article was first pub¬
lished in Oceanus magazine (vol. 28, no. 1,
Spring 1985) published by the Woods Hole
Océanographie Institution, Massachusetts.
Colour page opposite
A sunken ship is a "time capsule" of life at
sea, frozen at a moment in the past.
These 3 photos show a silver pocket watch
recovered by Australian archaeologists
from the remains of HMS Pandora, which "
foundered on Australia's Great Barrier
Reef on 29 August 1791 with the loss of 35
men. Pandora had been sent to Tahiti in
1790 by the British Admiralty to capture
the mutineers who had seized HMS Bounty
the previous year and "bring them to con¬
dign punishment". She went down on her
return voyage to England with 14
mutineers manacled inside a deckhouse
cell.
The watch, thought to have belonged to
the ship's surgeon because it had a
second hand useful for taking a patient's
pulse, was brought up in a wet container.
An X-ray showed that most of its works
were still intact. It had stopped at 12 min¬
utes and 20 seconds past 11. Pandora
sank at 6:30 A.M. and so the watch may
have been stopped by the shock of impact
when the ship hit the reef the night before
or by rising waters when she began to fill.
Remarkably preserved, the watch was
conserved and restored by Jon Carpenter,
conservator of the Pandora expedition,
and rebuilt nearly to working condition
(below right) by an antiquarian watch¬
maker, Hugh Whitwell.
Photo © Patrick Baker/Western Australian Maritime Museum
Photo © Jon Carpenter/Western Australian Maritime Museum
Photo © Jim Brandenburg, Minneapolis
