Solo to the Pole
An interview with Jean-Louis Etienne
On 11 May 1986, forty-year-old
Jean-Louis Etienne, a French
nutritionist and doctor specializing
in the care of athletes, reached the
North Pole after a solitary hike last¬
ing sixty-three days. Wearing cross¬
country skis and pulling an ultra¬
light sledge, he had covered 750
kilometres in temperatures as low
as -52°C and in winds of up to 100
kilometres an hour. The Unesco
Courier talked to him about his
exploit.
What motivated you to undertake your soli¬
tary walk to the North Pole? Was it the
challenge of a great sporting achievement,
or was it the scientific interest of an experi¬
ment designed to measure the limits of
human resistance in an extreme environ¬
ment?
It was neither. The fact is that such motives
are often advanced to give respectability to
a taste for adventure, a love of open spaces
and the pleasures of discovery. There is
really no need to go such a long way just to
carry out a scientific experiment. It would
be perfectly possible to set up a cold cham¬
ber right here in Paris and live in it for three
weeks, or two months, at a temperature of
-47°C. For me, to go to the North Pole was a
dream, just as earlier I had dreamed of
climbing Mount Everest, rounding Cape
Horn, or sailing round the world. It was also
a human and, above all, a technological
challenge.
What exactly do you mean by that? What
equipment did you take with you?
The North Pole is located in the centre of an
ocean of ice, the Arctic, but it is no skating
rink! The terrain is very uneven. The ice is
cracked, sheets are superimposed on sheets
or collide and compress to form ridges. You
can never see the horizon, and your pro¬
gress is constantly hampered by the ice
which can be completely churned up for
kilometres on end. It is rather as if you
decided to cross Paris in a straight line by
walking across the roof-tops. What is more,
this extremely difficult terrain is only
accessible for about two months of the year,
between the beginning of March, when the
Polar day dawns, and mid-May, when the
ice-pack begins to break up as summer
approaches. It is a real race against time,
and to travel fast you have to travel light. To
equip myself for this undertaking I made
use of materials that have the best low-tem¬
perature performance. With the aid of an
30
v¿ií» w
i ,
K

©I
engineer friend of mine , I perfected a sledge
made of Kevlar, a light but very tough poly¬
mer which is being increasingly used in
aeronautics. The sledge was 2.20 metres
long by 60 centimetres wide and weighed 3
kilograms. I managed to get the load down
to 50 kilograms. To keep my bearings on the
ice-pack I carried with me a small Kevlar-
encased safety-beacon-cum-radio-emitter,
the signal from which was picked up by
satellite and transmitted to a computer at
the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales
(National Space Studies Centre) in
Toulouse, France. Michel Franco, who was
acting as my back-up at our base camp at
Resolute Bay on Cornwallis Island in the far
north of Canada, questioned the computer
by telephone every evening and then
informed me of my position. The beacon-
emitter was powered by lithium batteries
which are capable of withstanding
extremely low temperatures.
Did you also use a compass?
No. The magnetic pole, to which compass
needles point, is some 1,500 kilometres
from the geographical pole through which
passes the axis of rotation of the Earth, and
it was to this "true" North Pole that I was
heading. Furthermore, compasses are dis¬
oriented by the magnetic fields in this
region. Here the sun is the only guide. I
therefore had a watch made on which the
hour hand made only one complete revolu¬
tion in twenty-four hours. Knowing that the
sun is in the east at 0600 hours, in the south
at 1200 hours, in the west at 1800 hours and
On his expedition to the North Pole Jean-
Louis Etienne took specially designed
lightweight equipment weighing 50 kg,
left. His sledge weighed only 3 kg.
in the north at 2400 hours, all I had to do to
find my bearings was to point the hour hand
in the direction of the sun.
Why did you travel on skis?
Skis are indispensable. The ice-pack is
fractured and there are crevasses every¬
where, into which it is easy to fall unless you
take great care. Skis enable you to cross
them. In most places the ice-pack is from 2
to 3 metres thick, but where it breaks the
water freezes again forming a very thin skin
of ice. Skis spread your weight over a larger
surface and enable you to walk over very
recently-formed ice. I used nordic cross¬
country skis to the undersides ofwhich I had
stuck synthetic anti-slip skins. In the past,
people used sealskins for this purpose
because of the rigidity of the seal's body-
hair which enables it to climb on ice without
slipping. When, once a fortnight, Michel
Franco brought me fresh supplies by aero¬
plane, he would also fit me out with new
skins.
What did you have to eat?
Drawing on the recorded experience of pre¬
vious polar expeditions, I had concocted
some special food rations. At the beginning
I allowed myself a daily ration of 4,000 calo¬
ries. However, this proved to be insufficient
and I was somewhat hungry, so I stepped up
my daily ration to 5,000 calories. My meals
for a day were vacuum-packed in bags of
about 1 kilogram. As this was dried food I
would melt some ice to go with it (only
newly-formed ice is salty; old surface ice
loses its salt by gravity). I would heat up the
water on a petrol cooker (at those tempera¬
tures gas is unusable) and pour it on the
dried food to produce a kind of porridge. In
the evenings my supper consisted of soup
and a freeze-dried pre-cooked dish.
The surface of the ice-floe is rugged. The
blocks of ice fracture, collide against each
other and impact to form walls extending
over several km.
Did you also draw on the cold weather sur¬
vival techniques of the inhabitants of the far
north? Did you, for example, dress in their
fashion?
Not at all. These people are hunters who
live in encampments, do not travel far and
do not go in for comparable, long-lasting
physical or sporting activities. They are not
interested in the North Pole, where there is
nothing and where life is not possible, and
they have never been there. In this they are
similar to the Nepalese who would not
dream ofclimbing Everest. As far as dress is
concerned, clothes are now made that are
much warmer and much lighter than tradi¬
tional Eskimo clothing. The clothes I wore
were made of Qualofil, a synthetic fibre
with very good insulating qualities.
Your journey lasted sixty-three days. Can
you describe a typical day?
I used to get up at four in the morning and
set off at six. I would walk for eight to ten
hours a day, until about three or four in the
afternoon. Then I would stop, switch on my
beacon-emitter and put up my tent. After
that I would have a snack and rest until
seven, when I would contact Michel Franco
by radio. After that I would write up my log
book, have my evening meal and go to
bed.
Weren't you ever afraid that you might go to
sleep in the cold and never wake up again?
No. When you are in good physical shape,
as I was, you are always first woken up by
31

Nutritionist and medical doctor, Jean-
Louis Etienne devised the contents of
compact rations to provide him with 5,000
calories a day. The food was freeze-drled
and vacuum-packed in numbered packets
each weighing 1 kg. Supplies were flown to
him every two weeks.
the cold. You only die of cold if you are ill,
or tired for example, after being stuck for
several days on a mountain ledge. In that
case, after a long struggle, you get
exhausted and there is a danger of falling
asleep for good.
Did you manage to warm yourself up in your
tent?
No. The temperatures in the tent varied
between -52°C and -20°C. I had to take
great care, before going to bed, to brush off
the frozen perspiration which covered me
like a skin under my watertight clothing and
which could, during the night, have brought
on a chill. I used to make myself a hot water
bottle with a 1-litre aluminium bottle which
I would fill with boiling water and hold
against myself inside my sleeping-bag.
Did you suffer from solitude in those vast
frozen expanses?
Solitude is not a handicap, it is a fantastic
force which enables you to bring all your
resources fully into play. Going to the
North Pole is no joyride. You have to be on
the look-out all the time. You have to pick
your route and avoid falling and injuring
yourself. You are living permanently on the
razor's edge. At the same time, however,
you can give free rein to your imagination.
Blocks of ice are transformed into mountain
peaks, into towers or cathedrals. Some¬
times I would say to myself: I shall go on to
that house ... to that mountain ... After
about three weeks to a month, when you
have got into your stride and the landscape
starts to seem monotonous, other thoughts
take over. I have never thought so much
about my childhood and my family. And
then there was God ... the God of the Arc¬
tic, the God of the Pole, of whom I
demanded right of passage. It was, as it
we're, a sort of journey of initiation. Yet I
never felt any anxiety.
But did you feel fear?
Yes, twice. Once when I saw the tracks of a
bear, and then when the ice gave way under
my feet. My reflex was to fall flat on the
sheet ice and to crawl. Only afterwards did
I realize that I might have had a serious
accident.
When you got back, did you undergo a series
of medical examinations?
Yes. I had lost six kilograms. The most
important test was an evaluation of my
adaptation to the cold. As I had done before
I set out, I underwent tests in a cold cham¬
ber. I stayed in the chamber, naked, for two
hours, in a temperature of 1°C and in an
airstream of a speed of 8 metres per second ,
which is the equivalent of a temperature of
-10"C. My internal temperature and my
consumption of oxygen was then measured.
Before setting out, over a period of two
hours, I had maintained a temperature of
37°C at the cost of a certain consumption of
energy. On my return, it was observed that
my temperature went down progressively to
35.5"C before my body began to fight
against the cold, and that my energy con¬
sumption was considerably lower. In other
words, I had become accustomed to living
at a below normal temperature and, from
the point of view of energy expenditure, my
two hours in the cold chamber had been
very economical. Like primitive man, or
like nomads who sleep in the open air, my
body's thermoregulatory mechanism had
adapted to hypothermic (low tempera¬
ture) conditions. Thus, modern man,
accustomed to high temperatures, can
return fairly rapidly to the physical ther¬
moregulatory comportment of his primitive
ancestors.
Has this experiment of yours added to the
sum of scientific knowledge?
From it I have gained a medical observation
on human adaptation to cold, as well as a
nutritional study the rations I developed
are now being used in France by the men of
the Chasseurs Alpins Regiment and by par¬
ticipants in the Paris-Dakar car rally. The
watch I developed has been put on the mar¬
ket and the tests using the beacon-emitter
supplied by the Centre National d'Etudes
Spatiales are considered to be conclusive. I
have also worked with Professor Jouvet, of
Lyon, on the subject of sleep. In fact, con¬
trary to all expectations, I slept very well
throughout my journey. But it must be
repeated that scientific research, and par¬
ticularly medical research, should be based
on a large number of experiments. No valid
observations can be based on a single case.
Most of all, I have the impression that, in
the eyes of young people, I have taken over
the role of those who first aroused in me my
passion for adventure.
After the North Pole, you now plan to cross
the Antarctic.
This time I shall not be alone. I shall have
three travelling companions, two Amer¬
icans and someone from the Soviet Union.
We shall also have two dog teams. We shall
cross the continent, keeping in contact with
a polar sailing vessel which will hug the
coast and transmit the pictures we shall be
sending. This expedition, planned for 1989-
1990, will coincide with the expiry of the
Antarctic Treaty (1961-1991) which regul¬
ates the status of the Antarctic. We want to
focus attention on this immense territory
which, under 2,000 metres of ice, contains
great mineral wealth which in four years
time will belong to no one. It is our hope
that all industrial or strategic exploitation of
the continent will be excluded and that it
will retain its international status and its
vocation as a land of scientific research.
Above all, our hope is that it will remain a
land of silence.
32
