The Alpine culture
of Slovenia
by Matjaz Kmecl
THE Slovenes are a Slavic people
who settled long ago in the south¬
eastern part of the Alps, in a
region where the jagged limestone peaks
of the Julian and Savinian Alps slope
down towards the Dinarides, and to some
extent in the plain of Pannonia. Nowa¬
days, the vast majority of the Slovenes
live in Slovenia, the most northerly of the
Yugoslav republics, although another
substantial group has its cultural and his¬
torical centre at Klagenfurt (Celovec) in
southern Austria. There is also a group in
an area of north-eastern Italy stretching
from Trieste to the Carnic Alps, and a
small Slovene community in Hungary.
There are some two million Slovenes in
these areas; if the members of the far-
flung Slovene diaspora are counted, they
number between two and a half and three
million.
This region, opening onto the Adriatic
in the south, forms an east-west corridor
through which many peoples have passed
in the course of history. Those who
crossed it in a southeasterly direction
include the Romans, the Crusaders, and
the armies of Napoleon and Hitler; those
who struck westwards include the Rus¬
sian General Suvorov and the armies of
Austria. In the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, the region lay on the route of
Turkish incursions into central Europe
from the south.
The ancient "amber road" and many
medieval trade routes passed through
Slovene territory, which was also a con¬
duit through which many ideas of the Ital¬
ian Renaissance spread eastwards. The
Slovenes played an important role in the
foundation of the university of Vienna,
and after the Reformation were instru¬
mental in taking Protestant. ideas and
writings into the Balkans. Around 1560,
Ljubljana, the Slovene capital, already
had its own printing press, and the first
Slovene translation of the Bible appeared
in 1584.
In short, Alpine Slovenia on the Adria¬
tic was a staging-post between the Roman
and Germanic worlds of western Europe
and the Slavic east, between Venice and
Vienna, Italy and St. Petersburg.
Under these influences, an original
Slovene culture took shape over more
than a thousand years. Among its many
creative figures were Herman Sclavus of
Carinthia, a monk, astronomer and theo¬
logian who translated the Qur'an into
Latin in the twelfth century and dreamt of
bringing about a synthesis of Islam,
Christianity and the paganism of Anti-
Above, Yugoslavia's highest peak, Mount
Triglav (2,864 m) dominates a popular
mountaineering and winter sports region
of the Julian Alps in Slovenia. The sacred
mountain of the Slovenes, Mt. Triglav ("the
three heads") is also a pilgrimage centre.
In the words of the Slovene writer Julius
Kugy, "Triglav is not a mountain but a
kingdom. "
quity; the great sixteenth-century poly-
phonist Jakob Handl (also known as
Jakob Carniolus Gallus, 1550-1591);
Anton Jansa (1743-1773), one of the
founders of modern European apicul¬
ture; the mathematician Jurij Vega
(1754-1802), who revised the logarithmic
tables; Marko Anton Plencic (1705-
1786), who discovered the principle of
microbial contamination; Friderik Jernej
Baraga (1797-1868), linguist, missionary

Covered racks for drying hay (right) are a
familiar feature of the landscape in the Slo¬
vene Alps where the rainy climate often
prevents hay from drying in the fields after
being mown. The racks are made from a
piece of fencing topped with a roof. In
another variant, not shown here, the roof
rests on two pieces of fencing which
enclose a sheltered space where the far¬
mers store their tools. ^

and bishop, who was one of the first
authors of grammars and dictionaries of
the amerindian languages of North
America; and many more, scattered
around the world.
It was not until 1918 that the Slovenes
were enabled to have their own univer¬
sity, but for centuries before that Slovene
scholars and students had made a brilliant
contribution to European university life,
and even today there are many Slovene
intellectuals and artists in universities and
scientific institutions all over the world.
The nineteenth-century French writer
Charles Nodier, an admirer of the poly¬
glot Slovene culture, pointed out how as a
result of their cultural history all Slovenes
mastered two or three living languages in
addition to their own.
Slovenia is a densely wooded region:
half its area, or more than one million
hectares, is covered with forest. Its
wealth of animal life includes bears,
wolves, ibex, marmots and chamois, and
its plant life is equally abundant (some
seventy endemic species). There are
many natural caves in the limestone Karst
region.
Characteristic features of the land¬
scape are small Baroque and pre-
Baroque churches built on the uplands,
covered racks with harp-shaped roofs to
shelter the hay from the rain which falls
when the south wind meets the barrier of
the Alps, and castles in varying states of
preservation.
Traditional forms of art and craftsman¬
ship still survive. They include lacework
from the town of Idrija, naive paintings
which have been used to decorate bee¬
hives for two centuries, and regional cos¬
tumes. Male and female choirs such as the
Slovene Octet sing serious pieces of
music a cappella, and instrumentalists
play versions of the Alpine tunes known
in central Europe as the music of Upper
Carniola (Carniola is the ancient name
for Slovenia), which have been moderni¬
zed by groups such as the Avsenik
Quintet.
Among its achievements in the fine arts
Slovenia can point to the school of archi¬
tecture founded by the Slovene architect
Joze Plecnik (1872-1957); the Impressio¬
nists of central Europe, notably the
painter Anton Azbe (1862-1905), who
founded a school of painting in Munich in
1891 at which almost all the leading Slav
Impressionists studied, as well as Wassily
Kandinsky and Nadezda Petrovic (1873-
1915); and the Ljubljana school of
graphic art. The major figures of Slovene
literature include France Preseren (1800-
1849), who had affinities with Byron and
Pushkin, and is considered to be the
greatest Slovene poet; the prose writer
Ivan Cankar (1876-1918), creator of the
psychological short novel and of social
drama, and the short story writer Ciril
Kosmac (1910-1980).
An episode from recent history may
help to explain how such a small people
has managed to survive without losing its
identity and its language. The Slovenes
gave proof of their tenacity during the
Second World War when they mobilized
an army of partisans in their mountain
fastnesses and maintained a backbone of
national institutions. Then in 1945 the
Republic of Slovenia was created within
the Socialist Federal. Republic of
Yugoslavia. As the emblem of their coun¬
try the Slovenes chose their highest
mountain, Mount Triglav (almost 2,900
metres high), "the three heads" which
has nourished a host of their legends and
beliefs since they became an Alpine peo¬
ple almost 1,500 years ago.
One of the last massifs in the eastern
Alps, Mount Triglav is the sacred moun¬
tain of the Slovenes; one of its heads
looks to heaven, another to earth and the
third to the underworld.
MATJAZ KMECL, Yugoslav playwright and
essayist, teaches history and the theory of litera¬
ture at the University of Ljubljana. His published
works include Mala literarna teorija (1978,
"Concise Literary Theory") and Rojstvo slovens-
kega romana (1981, "Birth of the Slovene
Novel").
23
