Subterranean experiments on the rhythms imposed by the solar day
PHYSIOLOGISTS since the time of
Hippocrates and probably even ear¬
lier have demonstrated the impor¬
tant ways in which man is conditioned by
environmental rhythms, especially the
twenty-four-hour alternation of night and
day.
In man, as in other animals and plants,
rhythmic variations in a whole range of
physiological functions alternation be¬
tween sleep and waking activity, formation
of glycogen (animal starch) in the liver,
temperature change, metabolism, for
example occur regularly every twenty-
four hours.
Known as "circadian rhythms" (from the
Latin circa: "about", and dies: "day"),
these more or less independent or inter¬
dependent rhythmic variations, operating
throughout the day/night cycle, constitute
the mechanism that is termed man's "bio¬
logical clock".
These circadian rhythms are of consid¬
erable importance. If they are interrupted
or too rapidly or abruptly thrown out of
phase, serious physical and psychological
troubles can result. It is common knowl¬
edge that total deprivation of sleep over a
period of several days is certain to entail
marked deterioration in mental and physi¬
cal performance. After an east/west or west/
east flight of only a few hours it may take a
passenger's rectal temperature rhythm as
long as fifteen days to adapt to the appropri¬
ate rhythm of the new local time.
It is generally held that, under normal
conditions on earth, environmental factors,
and especially the alternation of night and
day, act as phase-setters or synchronizers
which maintain the coincidence between
human circadian rhythms and the local
twenty-four-hour time scale. What,
however, would happen to our biological
rhythms, to the bundle of nerve cells whose
precise location in the brain is now being
established and which register the periodic
signals of the environment, were those sig¬
nals to be suppressed?
Botanists and biologists have known for a
long time that cycles of about twenty-four
hours continue in many plants and animals
even when they are kept either in total
obscurity or in continuous light. However,
concentrated research on the adaptation of
the human organism to an aperiodic
environment, that is to say to an environ¬
ment in which the normal phase setters or
synchronizers are lacking, only began in
earnest in 1962.
The three main situations in which these
conditions apply are those in which people
find themselves living for long periods in
space, underground or under water. Would
the human organism continue to show evi¬
dence of regulation by circadian rhythms
once deprived of the environmental syn¬
chronizers it had known throughout the mil¬
lions of years of human evolution? Are
there, in fact, other rhythms specific to the
human organism?
This was the crux of my long-term experi¬
ments, deep iq an underground cave, which
have added to our knowledge of how man
adapts to a timeless, aperiodic environ¬
ment. These experiments have shown how
14

Left, Michel Siffre's subterranean camp in
Midnight Cave (Texas). The ergometric
bicycle enabled him to study heart fatigue
patterns during his confinement.
complex that adaptation is and how much it
varies from individual to individual, and
have afforded a better understanding of the
mechanism of human circadian rhythms.
Without synchronizers, without time
"landmarks", whether natural (alternation
of day and night) or artificial (clocks or
watches), each individual's internal
rhythms appear to be, but in fact are not,
synchronized with the rhythms of local
times on Earth.
The most important findings concern two
distinct fields of interest the evolution of
the sleeping/waking cycle and of other phys¬
iological functions (such as temperature
and cardiac rhythms), and the internal
structure of sleep itself, which lies within
the field of neurophysiology.
With regard to the sleeping/waking cycle,
all the long-term (two to six months) experi¬
ments I carried out between 1962 and 1972
seem to point in the direction of a lengthen¬
ing of the cycle, that is to say, a lengthening
of the interval between two waking periods
and two sleeping periods. This has been
confirmed by the experiments carried out
by all the other research teams (mainly Ger¬
man, British and American) who have
worked on this problem, even though these
were of shorter duration (about one
month).
Although those who have written on this
subject seem to be agreed on a statistical
average for the sleeping/waking cycle of
around twenty-five hours, this has little sig¬
nificance with regard to the individual. My
long-term experiments have brought out
clearly the multi-faceted nature of a particu¬
lar rhythm and its unreproducibility over a
given period of time. This has been demon¬
strated in spectacular fashion by the fact
that whereas for some individuals the sleep¬
ing/waking cycle changes within a few days
from twenty-four to forty-eight hours
(thirty-four to thirty-six hours of continuous
waking activity and fourteen to twelve
hours of sleep), for others this may not hap¬
pen for several months. A comparison
between my 1962 experiment (when I was
isolated on the underground glacier at
Scarasson in France from 16 July to 17 Sep¬
tember) and my second experiment in 1972
(205 days alone in Midnight Cave, Texas)
shows clearly the unreproducibility of the
sleeping/waking cycle.
A significant outcome of this spon¬
taneous change from a twenty-four-hour to
a forty-eight-hour cycle is that for just a
third more sleep than is normal under
ordinary conditions of life it is possible to
Before descending into Midnight Cave,
where he remained alone, cut off from
the solar day, for 205 days in 1972, the
French speleologist Michel Siffre mea¬
sures his respiration rate in the surface
laboratory.
double the period of waking activity, a very
considerable potential increase in creative
activity, entirely naturally and without hav¬
ing recourse to any form of drug, for a
period of several weeks.
Desynchronization of the circadian
rhythm of sleep and waking activity is paral¬
leled in most of the other physiological
rhythms examined, such as the cardiac
rhythm, the rhythm of the rectal tempera¬
ture, of potassium and of the hydroxycor-
ticosteroid hormones.
I believe that this desynchronization is an
adaptive response by the organism to the
aperiodicity of the environment. This
brings me to the second group of important
findings concerning the structure of sleep in
a timeless situation. We were the first to
undertake such studies which were carried
out in 1966. Under a forty-eight-hour sleep¬
ing/waking cycle the human organism the¬
oretically builds up a sleep deficiency or
debt. The question then arises as to which of
the major stages of sleep (see below) is
reduced to compensate for the abnormal
(thirty-six-hour) period of waking activity.
Progress in this field of research was only
made possible by underground, atemporal
experiments. Previous experiments on
sleep had been carried out within the con¬
text of local time and of a circadian (twenty-
four-hour) sleeping/waking cycle. Con¬
sequently, the natural variations in the vari¬
ous stages of which sleep consists could only
be very limited. The relative proportions of
what is known as REM (Rapid Eye Move¬
ment) sleep and the four other stages of
sleep could only vary minimally around the
mean average, which itself varied according
to the individual concerned and the time of
the year.
However, the spontaneous changes in
periodicity of the sleeping/waking cycle
(cycles of 12, 24, 26, 28, 36, 48, 60 and even
72 hours) occurring within the framework
of my "out of time", aperiodic experiments
revealed the natural evolution of the time
devoted to each stage of sleep, especially to
REM sleep and to what is known as Stage 4
sleep (deep sleep), as a function of total
sleep and in relation to the biological cycles
and the waking period.
In short, the neurophysiological adapta¬
tion of the human organism in an "out of
time" setting is marked by profound modi¬
fications in the internal structure of sleep,
which vary from individual to individual,
and which can be summarized as follows:
Whatever the duration of the sleeping/
waking cycle, the proportion of REM sleep
can be accurately forecast since there is a
precise linear correlation between REM
sleep and total sleep, of which it is a func¬
tion. This phenomenon was observed for
the first time in man during my experiments
underground.
When the period of continuous waking
activity doubles (rising from 16 to 34 or 36
hours), total sleeping time does not double.
However, REM sleep increases in a ratio of
about one to ten to the length of waking
activity.
The change from a circadian to a forty-
eight-hour sleeping/waking rhythm does
not affect the period (some 90 minutes) of
REM sleep, which remains stable.
To conclude this brief survey of the time
factor in human adaptation, it should be
recognized that it is an imperative necessity
for ever more penetrating studies to be car¬
ried out on the desynchronization of circa¬
dian rhythms in order to increase man's vig¬
ilance and operational capacities. The study
of the desynchronization of the biological
clock is all the more essential in that
unavoidable desynchronization creates
fatigue in many situations in modern life
night work (total inversion of the cycle),
work in revolving shifts (continuous and
prolonged desynchronization), east/west
and west/east travel (involving almost con¬
tinuous desynchronization for certain per¬
sonnel), life around airports and other sites
with high sound levels, work in exceptional
surroundings (missile silos, tanks, sub¬
marine-spotting aircraft, nuclear submar¬
ines, spacecraft and space laboratories).
Finally, when the organism is syn¬
chronized (that is to say, when it is subject
to the normal circadian rhythm of twenty-
four hours), the effect of many medicines
varies according to the time of day that they
are taken. Consequently, any change in the
periodicity of the sleeping/waking cycle
(resulting, for example, from an east/west
or west/east jet flight) or of the organism's
other rhythms, could have repercussions on
the action of the medicine, altering or even
reversing its therapeutic effect.
MICHEL SIFFRE, French speleologist, devised
and carried out the first major experiments in
voluntary human confinement. These experi¬
ments, effected in caves in France and the
United States, produced new information relat¬
ing to biological rhythms, psychological time,
sleep and dreams. He is the author of some 50
scientific papers, 8 books and 5 films.
15
