Fighting words
The myth of the 'hereditary enemy :
IN his essay "The Writer's Profes¬
sion",1 Elias Canetti (Nobel Prize
for Literature, 1981) quotes an
anonymous author who wrote, a week
before the outbreak of the Second World
War: "... everything is over. If I were
really a writer, I would have to be able to
prevent the war!"
Canetti's immediate response is not
unlike my own reaction and that of many
others to the Slovene P.E.N. Centre's
proposal to create a "writers for peace"
committee: "an example of the blustering
that has discredited the word writer and
filled us with mistrust as soon as a mem¬
ber of the guild beats his breast and comes
out with his colossal intentions."
But Canetti then has second thoughts
and causes me to follow suit. In the sad¬
ness of the poet's statement, in its admis¬
sion of failure, there is the affirmation of
a responsibility the sincerity of which can¬
not be doubted. Canetti admits that a
situation in which war becomes inevitable
can be created through "words, deliber¬
ate and used over and over again, mis¬
used words", and then goes on to ask: "If
words can do so much why cannot
words hinder it [war]?" And he adds
and here too I think he is speaking
directly to us writers "It is not at all
surprising that a man who deals with
words more than other people do will also
expect more of words and their effect."
Of course wars have always originated
in conflicts of interest. However, even
this statement of the obvious should be
analysed, since the term interest is as fath¬
omless as life itself. Was it really in the
best interests of the Greeks to send their
heroes en masse to sack Troy and retrieve
Helen, even if the beauty of the princess
should be seen as an image for strategic
positions and trade monopolies? Can
there be any doubt that he who argues
most eloquently and persuasively will
always win his case?
1. "The Writer's Profession", in The Conscience of
Words by Elias Canetti, translated from German by
Joachim Ncugroschcl, André Deutsch. London. 1986.
by Jean Blot
Photo © International P.E.N, London
The logo of International P.E.N. (Poets and
Playwrights, Essayists and Editors, and
Novelists), a world association of writers
founded in London in 1921, which today
has over 10,000 members from all conti¬
nents and around 90 centres worldwide.
More recent events demonstrate that
"interests" are not necessarily related to
obvious factors. I have never been able to
get anyone to explain where the interests
of William II's Germany lay in the First
World War, of which it was to a large
extent the cause and architect, although I
have been assured that competition
between German and Serbian pork had
something to do with it.
Who would ever agree to lay down his
life for a pig or to sell more pork? Sub¬
stitute gold, oil, roads or rivers for this
perhaps unjustly despised animal, and
the question remains just as scandalous.
To mask interests, to present them in
such a way that they appear vital and that
people will agree to risk their lives to
defend them, a vast operation of verbal
camouflage is needed to transform reality
into emotion, passion, enthusiasm. Such
a task calls for the gifts of the poet and
writer.
Wars have always been preceded by
vast battalions of words. As writers, we
have a nebulous influence over the vested
interests that lie at the root of conflicts,
but over the battalions of words which
precede, mask and transfigure these
"War, my children, serves to defend our
Interests," reads the caption to this car¬
toon published during the First World War
in a 1915 issue of the Italian newspaper
Avanti.
interests, our control is direct, our
responsibility is great. It is all the greater
since in the past our talents have often
been used in the interests of belligerence.
War precedes peace in the sense that the
fear that underlies it and of which it is the
projection and the theatre precedes cour¬
age. In the infancy of the species and of
the individual, the stranger immediately
inspires dread. The poet and writer is a
child of depths and origins. He is most at
home on very ancient ground. Myth suits
us better than enlightenment.
If vested interests must wear a mask in
order to arm and deceive those who serve
them, their first ally will be the atavistic
fear of the other, of the stranger. Those
who serve such interests will mobilize this
archaic fear and direct it along lines which
suit them. Since experience alone shows
that the world is habitable, the unknown
is felt as a threat.
We thought men were white. But
here's someone who is yellow or black.
We thought men were small and thin . But
here's someone who's tall and fat. We
thought men had turned-up noses. Here's
someone with an aquiline nose. This
hooked nose, this belly, this stature, this
swarthy skin are bound to mean trouble
for me, since, in my inexperience, they
Photo © All Rights Reserved
25

frighten me! From my fear I project the
evil they have in store for me.
And what's more, these nightmarish
creatures, whom later, slightly reassured,
I shall regard as caricatures of humanity,
speak no human language. Can these
grunts really be a language? And if they
do attempt to speak in human language,
by which I mean the language that / speak
and understand, they violate, deform and
destroy it. In the violence they inflict on
my language I see the hatred which moti¬
vates them and which they will soon be
venting on me. Thus in Balzac there are
whole pages of mimicry of Jewish or Ger¬
man accents; they are not crimes but per¬
haps they should be considered as
offences of war and racism. The person is
hated through his accent, and through
him the human group to which he
belongs.
Bo'dy, language, accent. Every custom
or habit is impregnated with values con¬
sciously or unconsciously held. These val¬
ues express and sustain the identity of the
group and the individual who belongs to
it. Who am I but a man who does not eat
pork? If another man eats pork in my
presence, is he trying to show me his iden¬
tity or to attack mine? It boils down to the
same thing. For the wine drinker, the
beer drinker is suspect. Eating habits are
rooted in the depths of the psyche.
The English reputation for coldness
owes much to the fact that English people
only shake hands on exceptional occa¬
sions; the French reputation for sensual
or sexual excess to the fact that the
French kiss in the street. All these factors
and many more will be taken up by vested
interests when they need to mobilize one
group against another, to describe an
enemy who is both frightful and des¬
picable since everything about him
what he drinks, eats, his clothing, his
behaviour proves that he does not
belong to humanity.
So far I have only spoken of inex¬
perience. We should not forget the
manipulation of experience. For cen¬
turies, in a relatively stabilized world,
peoples have lived side by side, but pro¬
foundly isolated by mutual incomprehen¬
sion of their respective languages,
customs and values. Each conflict, in
spite of the disappointment bred by its
outcome, almost as great among the vic¬
tors as among the vanquished, in spite of
the immediately evident absurdity of its
result, prepares and heralds the next.
Experience confirms my obscure intui¬
tion that the stranger is dangerous. I
thought I had unmasked an assassin. And
that's exactly what he is. My share in the
crime is all the more quickly forgotten, if
it is not concealed, since the people
around me, starting with writers and
poets, are talking only of heroism. They
will translate vague intuitions into words,
images and verses, and populate the
unconscious with the features of the
hereditary enemy. If I have doubts, I shall
find certainty in their work.
If we writers have done much to create
the hereditary enemy and exclude him
from humanity, to prove that he kills and
to justify killing him, we can do as much
to destroy the myth. It is up to us, and we
alone possess this power, to make the
stranger a familiar figure , to eradicate the
fear which he naturally provokes.
The process of identification dear to
the novelist is of great importance here. It
is for us to reveal the hereditary or poten¬
tial enemy from the inside, as if we were
what he is. Is it really possible, on reading
Tolstoy, to believe for a second that a
Russian only removes the dagger from
between his teeth when he wants to
knock back a glass of vodka? That a Ger-
-
i
V
!
26

"Can there be any doubt that he who
argues most eloquently and persuasively
will always win his case?" Above, public
meeting in Paris, 1954.
"If we writers have done much to create the
hereditary enemy ... we can do as much to
destroy the myth. " Left, Fight with Sticks, a
work (c.1820) by the Spanish artist Fran¬
cisco Goya (1746-1828).
man is nothing but beer, sausage and bay¬
onets when we read Werther or Elective
Affinities? The literatures of countries
other than our own can play an immens^
role; it is our duty to make them better
known. The conflicts which divide us
doubtless remain. But they have become
human conflicts to which human solu¬
tions must be found.
The role played by our own literatures
is even more important. Norman Mailer's
novel The Naked and the Dead enabled
me to imagine for the first time what it
was like to be a young Japanese during
the war in the Pacific. The Lover, by the
Israeli writer Abraham B. Yehoshua,
gave me an idea of the feelings a young
Arab could have about the Israeli
bourgeoisie.
But so far I have only discussed the
simplest issue, the type of conflict which
we rightly think of as belonging to the
past. Modern wars, whether local or the
total war which we dare not even imag¬
ine, have or will have different founda
tions: racial wars, class wars, ideological
wars. Today it is easy to reconcile the
French and the Germans, the British and
the Americans. We only talk so openly
because the divisions between them are a
thing of the past. But who will dare
explain the Capitalist to the Bolshevik,
the proletarian to the bourgeois, and vice
versa? Who will dare proclaim, in the
conflict that divides them, their opposing
and equal humanity? The one excludes
the other from humanity. It is behind this
verbal mirage that the reality of war
announces itself. An impossible task,
perhaps. But if we refuse to shoulder it,
we can no longer talk of writers for peace.
Let us begin with the basic issues. Paci¬
fists and non-pacifists both wish for
peace. It is only the ways and means of
maintaining peace that divide them.
Some consider that peace can only be
assured by a balance of weaponry. Others
are in favour of a calculated risk and
believe that partial disarmament in a sit¬
uation of overarmament may bring about
27

Unesco poster depicting a detail from The
Pigeons of Saint Mark, oil on canvas (1949)
by the Portuguese-born painter Maria
Elena Vieira da Silva.
a general movement of which peace, and
all peoples, will be the beneficiaries. The
choice of means divides them, but the
goal is the same. This must be proclaimed
time and time again.
It would be a mistake to forget that the
unanimous clamour for peace is a recent
phenomenon. Elias Canetti has pointed
out that humanity must fear the experi¬
ences that it has not yet had, the setbacks
it has not yet faced. He suggests that it is
easier today to exterminate an entire
population than it is to burn a single per¬
son on a fire in a public place. This is why
the apocalyptic experience of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki should not be forgotten.
There is another instinct, the instinct of
the survival of the species. It has
awakened, it reveals itself in a way which
is often confused and odious. We must
listen to it, express its mystery, capture
this spring of hope where it rises in the
depths of night, and use it to irrigate our
works and our inspiration. Other inclina¬
tions which come naturally to writers are
favourable to our project. War is only
possible in the abstract. It is for writers to
depict the horrors of war as concretely as
possible and to see that they are not con¬
cealed. Another natural inclination
comes to our aid. Men and women of
sensibility, we take more pleasure than
most in diversity. This delight in the
diversity and wealth of the human species
should be captured and communicated in
a spate of joy which will soon wash fear
away.
JEAN BLOT is the pen name of the French writer
Alexandre Blokh, who is Secretary of Internation¬
al P.E.N, a world association of writers. Critic,
essayist, translator and specialist in Russian
literature, he is the author of a number of novels
including Les cosmopolites (7976, "The Cosmo¬
politans") and Gris du ciel (1981, "Sky-Grey"). In
1986 he published the first biography of the
Swiss writer Albert Cohen, and Ivan Gontcharov
ou le réalisme impossible ("Ivan Goncharov or
Impossible Realism"). The above article is an
edited and abridged version of an address that
he gave last year in Bled, Slovenia (Yugoslavia),
during a meeting of International P.E.N's Writers
for Peace Committee, on the theme of "The
Hereditary Enemy".
28
