The pictures on these two pages give an
illustration of the Visual Impact Analysis
Method and the results obtained. They show
the locality of Dybäck on the south coast of
Sweden and its development from Mesolithic
forest.
Right: Mesolithic landscape of Dybäck. The
Baltic Sea level was then about 4 metres above
the present level. The animals shown are all
species that have been identified in excavation
material. The existence of the human settle¬
ment was inferred from a large number of
finds in and around the estuary. The vegeta¬
tion was closed forest, densest in the wetter
areas, thinning out to a shrub ofoak and pine
along the coast. The hydrology is based on
topography, evidence of peat in some areas
and the evidence of 18th and early 19th cen¬
tury maps.
.... iilB^^s.,
JA¿rí
*V~.-
«Sr
-¡ ... - - , *,-* ' ' ¿¿TL*?' _
.*- f
;
iViiîi



Painting
the future
Using 'Visual Impact Analysis',
Swedish MAB scientists and
artists are charting future changes
in their country's landscape
*+JH
TOWARDS the end of 1986, the
Riksdag, the Swedish Parliament,
was the setting for an art exhibition
with a difference.
Consisting of a series of attractive water-
colour landscapes, the exhibition was
designed to bring home to the nation's
leaders the visual impact that their deci¬
sions could have upon the Swedish land¬
scape.
The watercolours were, however, much
more than an artist's personal impression
of what might lie ahead. They were the fruit
of a serious scientific research project
which started ¡n 1 978 under the aegis of the
Swedish National MAB Committee and the
Committee of Future-oriented Research
(both under the Swedish Council for Plan¬
ning and Co-ordination of Research).
The Swedish landscape has undergone
major changes since 1940. Approximately
a quarter of all agricultural land has been
taken out of production and has reverted
naturally to forest or been planted with con¬
ifers. Rapid urbanization, road building, the
construction of recreational housing and
the development of Industrial sites along
What will thefuture bringfor this landscape?
Two visualizations are presented here the
two energy scenarios, "Nuclear Sweden" and
"Solar Sweden".
Right: "Nuclear Sweden" in 2015. Picture
shows a nuclear power station with four 100
MW reactors. Location and configuration are
based on the Barsebäckplant and information
supplied by Sydkraft AB. The road is as pro¬
jected in long-term roadplans. Land use out¬
side the immediate vicinity of the power sta¬
tion is assumed not to be radically altered.
18
as
**_ *Çi:-*-»'v. .- _
A

*---v
-
¿e/r: Dybäck in 1980. The landscape is domi¬
nated by the agricultural activity ofthe Manor
(centre right of picture) with its pattern of
large consolidated fields. In the middle dis¬
tance, left andfar distance the pattern ofagri¬
culture is dominated by smallerfarms laid out
in the land reform of1824. A summer housing
development can be seen along the shore
above the fishing village ofHörte, which was
constructed in 1937.
the coast have also contributed to this
transformation.
The object of the Swedish MAB study
was to develop a method of Visual Impact
Analysis and to test it on a number of
localities in Sweden, using scenarios pro¬
duced by others, so that it could be incor¬
porated Into the planning and decision¬
making process.
The first step was to select from a num¬
ber of previously completed future studies
dealing with forestry, energy and agricul¬
ture those scenarios that were sufficiently
detailed to enable their visual impacts to be
deduced with reasonable precision.
Four such future studies were deemed to
fulfil these conditions: two alternative
energy scenarios, "Nuclear Sweden" and
"Solar Sweden", presented by a project
group of the Secretariat for Future Studies;
a "High-Yield Alternative" for Swedish for¬
estry, produced by a government commis¬
sion on the future of Swedish forestry;
and an alternative agricultural scenario
produced by the Swedish Agricultural
University.
The Visual Impact Analysis method is
divided into three basic stages: (a) the
analysis of a scenario and its application to
a given locality; (b) the Integration of
information Into instructions for the pro¬
duction of pictures; (c) the production and
successive modification of a series of visual
impact pictures.
Once a locality has been chosen, a thor¬
ough study of all the background material is
made Including a historical reconstruction
of the development of the landscape. Infor¬
mation on the geology, hydrology, past and
present vegetation and land use of the area
is gathered and a search is made in local,
regional and national archives for maps
and other documentary evidence.
Specialists from a wide range of disci¬
plines are consulted concerning the back¬
ground material and reconstructions and a
series of aerial and ground photographs
are taken and drawings made at different
times of the year.
Field studies are made and checked
against maps and other documentary evi¬
dence and all this background material is
integrated into a series of maps and trans¬
parencies and superimposed on the aerial
-.-;.
ÇKi*W
¿ n¡
-ru.
'*
>... , . -'-
"" '
©
photographs. Similar methods are used in
elaborating the "portraits of the future".
The degree of confidence that can be
placed in these reconstructions varies, of
course, with the type of evidence available.
With regard to the future projections and
Visual Impact Analyses, the assumptions
of the respective scenarios are followed
whenever these are explicit.
None of them involves technology or
practices that are not now current and they
all assume a "surprise-free" future. In the
forestry alternatives, for example, normal
and orderly forest development after plant¬
ing is assumed.
A master perspective is used for each
locality for the production of a complete
series of pictures. The time of the year ¡s
also held constant.
The artist draws preliminary pictures
from the background material and the mas¬
ter perspective ¡s produced by watercolour
on a drawing. In fact, acrylic paint is used
for these "watercolours" so that changes
can be made later if necessary.
The pictures are then reviewed by a num¬
ber of the experts who were consulted on
the background material as well as by other
independent experts. On the basis of their
assessments the original pictures may be
modified or new ones made.
Left: "Solar Sweden" in 2015. Wind power
development with a station of4 MW wind tur¬
bines. Height about 100 metres, blade length
80 metres. The configuration follows
guidelines for location proposed by the
National Board for Energy Source Develop¬
ment. Cables are laid underground, but this
would not be the case in less favourable soil
conditions.
19
