An age of exuberance, drama and
disenchantment
BY PETER SKRINE
WHAT does Baroque mean? There
are many overlapping definitions.
To some scholars and art histo¬
rians who have written well about it,
Baroque signifies a mode of European paint¬
ing, a style of architecture, a cultural phe¬
nomenon which found its most effective
expression in the fine arts and the applied
arts. To them, and rightly so, it is above all
something visual.
But to many other scholars and literary
historians, Baroque means an attitude to life
which arose out of that great revival of
cultural energy and aesthetic values known
as the Renaissance, from which it was sepa¬
rated by the deep spiritual and religious
crises which are associated with the Protes¬
tant Reformation.
As a result, baroque literature, which
flowered in the 1620s and 1630s and reached
its zenith around 1660, is characterized by
sharp contrasts and antitheses: its authors
delight in the sensual beauty of things and
are fond of describing them in opulent, even
flowery, detail, but they are also capable of
brooding darkly on the deeper mysteries of
life and eternity. Its playwrights extol heroic
valour and steadfastness, but enjoy the colli¬
sion between such virtues and the passions of
the heart, which they evoke with extraordin¬
ary vigour, eloquence and verve. These
qualities may be seen in the plays of the
German baroque poet Casper von Lohens-
tein (1635-1683) and even in those of his
French contemporary Jean Racine (1639-
1699).
The baroque attitude to life found elo¬
quent expression in literature and music as
well as in architecture and painting. In all
these arts it manifests itself most obviously
in a dynamic relationship between underly¬
ing control of form, a strong desire to create
a sense of movement, and a delight in orna¬
mental detail. In countries where it has left
strong and indelible traces, there is a natural
tendency to rate it highly and to describe the'
finest products of seventeenth-century art
and literature as baroque without further
definition. This is often the case in Italy,
Spain and the Latin-American countries,
and in Austria, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many, the German Democratic Republic,
and Czechoslovakia.
In England and France, however, there is
a deeply ingrained and understandable reluc¬
tance to accept the term. Indeed, all coun¬
tries with strong Protestant Christian tradi¬
tions, like England and the United States,
tend to regard the Baroque as a typically
Roman Catholic phenomenon, as something
alien to their own culture. The case of
France, however, reveals how complex the
situation really is, for there the Baroque
coincided with what the French are justly
proud of calling their "classical age", which
rightly or wrongly they see as its antithesis.
The Baroque developed at different speeds
and different levels of intensity in different
places. Some areas of art and literature might
be more affected by it than others and some¬
times, too, it could coalesce more or less
naturally with indigenous traditions and
ways of being. Italy, already the home of the
Renaissance, played a large part in its emer¬
gence and its radiation to other parts of
Europe. But should we locate its sources
there alone? There are also valid arguments
for seeing the Baroque as the expression of a
state of mind and an attitude to the world
which arose simultaneously in many dif¬
ferent parts of Europe and which even had
counterparts in other, more distant places
such as the Iran of Shah Abbas (1587-1629),
the China of the early Ch'ing Dynasty and
the Japan of the great dramatist Chikamatsu
(1653-1725).
But let us stay in Christian Western
Europe. There two significant factors were
perhaps more responsible than any others
for the rise of the Baroque. One was the
emergent concept of absolute monarchy, the
other was the popularity of play-acting and
theatre. Europe had not witnessed these
things on such a scale since the emperors and
vast amphitheatres of the ancient Roman
Empire, one thousand years before. When
absolutism and the theatre came together,
and powerful seventeenth-century sov¬
ereigns commanded that splendid perfor¬
mances of plays be given in their magnificent
new palaces, the Baroque was more strik¬
ingly in evidence than anywhere else
except in the ceremonies and imposing
buildings of the Roman Catholic church.
The Church's claim to universal spiritual
authority and its highly-developed sense of
occasion made it a generous patron of
baroque artists, musicians and poets. It
would be impossible to overstress the
importance of royal prestige, spiritual values
and dramatic display in Europe's baroque
achievement.
A pervasive image captures the baroque
age's view of the human condition and its
love of the theatrical : the world as a stage. To
the English speaker this image recalls Shake¬
speare because it occurs in his comedy As
You Like It. But the same notion can be
found in all the major literatures of Europe.
The rich seaport of Amsterdam opened its
municipal playhouse in 1638; over its door
could be read a couplet by the great Dutch
poet of the age, Vondel, which proclaimed
"The world's a stage: each plays his role and
gets his just reward".
Meanwhile in Holland's political and
CONTINUED PAGE 7
The baroque period has been called "the golden
age of the clock-maker's art", and an acute
awareness of time slipping by is a recurrent
theme in great works ofcontemporary literature
such as Shakespeare's plays and the sonnets
of the Spanish poet Francisco Quevedo. Above,
L'habit d'horlogère, an early 18th-century en¬
graving showing a pendulum clock, an inven¬
tion of the baroque age.
Baroque art is characterized by a sense ofactiv¬
ity and movement which contrasts with the
order and restraint ofclassicism. To escapefrom
the rigidity of orderly rectangular areas inher¬
ited by the Renaissance from Greco-Roman
Antiquity, baroque architects often used twisted
columns, the mostfamous examples ofwhich are
those designed by the Italian architect, sculptor
andpainter Gian Lorenzo Bernini (1598-1680)
for the bronze baldacchino or canopy (right)
over the high altar in St. Peter's basilica, Rome.
The dramatic 34-metre-high baldacchino was
commissioned by Pope Urban VIII and built
between 1624 and 1633 beneath the great dome
designed by Michelangelo.

M?
rttfj V
11* 41

The world's a stage
"All the world's a stage", says a character in
Shakespeare's comedy As You Like It, and the
Spanish dramatist Calderón de la Barca entitled
one of his early works El Gran Teatro del
Mundo (The Great Theatre ofthe World). Such
theatrical images of the human condition per¬
vade the baroque age, which saw an extraordin¬
ary flowering of the dramatic arts, the magnifi¬
cence of Roman Catholic Church ceremonies
and the pomp of absolute monarchies. In addi¬
tion to Shakespeare and Calderón, other great
17th-century dramatists ofwestern Europe were
Corneille, Racine añd Moliere in France, and
Lope de Vega in Spain. Baroque stage sets were
designed, and new forms of theatre machinery
were developed for the staging of spectacular
productions. Above, decor by the Italian stage
designer Giacomo Torelli for a production of
Corneille's musical tragedy Andromède. Left, a
scene from a performance of Calderón'splay La
vida es sueño (Life is a Dream) at a French
drama festival.

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 4
commercial rival, Spain, Vondel's contem¬
porary Calderón de la Barca was writing his
famous masterpiece El Gran Teatro del
Mundo, the play which gives the image of the
world as a stage its supreme baroque inter¬
pretation: for here God Almighty is himself
the author of the play which is produced on
the stage of our human world after the cur¬
tain of chaos has risen. This play is acted
extempore by the various men and women to
whom its parts are given: ambitious king and
beautiful woman, overworked peasant and
bullied beggar, wise religious person and
complacent rich man, they may be stereo¬
types, yet they are caught up so realistically
in the act of living that they seem to come to
life before our very eyes. Of course their
performances turn out less well than God
had hoped, and divine Grace, the prompter,
has a very difficult task with such all-too-
human actors. But fortunately God is also an
indulgent author and spectator. The climax
of Calderón's play, like the massive Spanish
altarpieces of the period, confronts its spec¬
tators with the timeless message central to
the Christian faith: the sacrifice of Christ
and mankind's redemption as seen through
the eyes of a post-Reformation Spanish
Roman Catholic poet with a truly baroque
imagination.
Baroque men and women were always
conscious that the eyes of God and the world
were upon them. But this did not lead to self-
consciousness in the modern post-Romantic
sense. Instead it fostered a sense of self-
esteem and an awareness of the importance
of cutting a figure in the world, of projecting
an image as meaningful as those conveyed by
the painting, sculpture and drama of the
period. Maybe the painted portraits of the
Baroque, like its stage productions and the
descriptive passages in its profuse pastoral
and courtly romances, did not seem as unre¬
alistic to their contemporaries as they per¬
haps now seem to us.
Like painted portraits, baroque palaces
reflect their builders' views of themselves.
They are panegyrics in stone, and their pur¬
pose was to extol the virtues and victories of
those who lived in them. In order to laud
their names and magnify their deeds,
baroque princes also required the services of
writers, who were usually ready to place
their talents at the disposal of their patrons
and to praise them in fulsome odes, light-
hearted wedding poems and sonorous epi¬
taphs, all written to order. Financial reasons
certainly had a part to play in this, but one
senses the presence of profounder and more
compelling motives. There are times when
the balance between meaning and hollow
bombast, triumph and despair, is so finely
caught that the desire of baroque artists to
exalt great men and their achievements can
strike us as a heroic show of defiance and
a bold attempt to drown their sense of
insecurity.
A note of disenchantment was present in
the Baroque right from the start. Its fond¬
ness for play-acting and for the metaphor of
the stage reveals its deep-seated awareness
that appearances are all illusion. Its flam
boyant praise of great men and heroes as in
the plays of the French Corneille, the
English Dryden and the German
Gryphius may just have been an attempt to
postpone the oblivion that must finally
engulf all things, even the greatest. Amidst
all the colour, glitter and extrovert joy of
living so characteristic of the baroque
period, there was a darker and more search¬
ing side to its literature. "Chaque instant de
la vie est un pas vers la mort," the Roman
emperor Titus realizes in the last act of Cor-
neille's late tragedy The et Bérénice
(1670).
But when the play is over, what then? The
people who inhabited the baroque world
could never entirely forget that life is pre¬
carious and short indeed in comparison to
the certainty and finality of death: "Death,
in itself, is nothing; but we fear to be we
know not what, we know not where," says
the Indian hero of John Dryden's heroic
play Aureng-Zebe (1675).
War, famine and plague were common
occurrences for people then: for instance the
Thirty Years War devastated the German-
speaking areas of Europe between 1618 and
1648, and plague ravaged London and many
other cities in 1665. A few years later, Hans
Jakob Christopher von Grimmelshausen, a
German soldier who had served in that war,
produced one of the masterpieces of baroque
prose fiction, a novel called Simplidssimus,
which has been translated into many lan¬
guages and which expresses its author's first¬
hand experience of prosperity and adversity
in a fascinating fusion of narrative forms and
styles ranging from the picaresque tradition
of the Spanish satirical novel of low life to the
fashionable courtly romance in which the
hero's adventures finally turn out to have an
underlying design and purpose.
In various parts of Europe men were gaz¬
ing heavenward at the mysteries of a universe
which was growing daily vaster thanks to the
newly invented telescope, and trying to
comprehend the harmonies which they
knew must underlie it. Kepler's scientific
emphasis on elliptical motion, and his obser¬
vation that the heavenly bodies can form
constant patterns despite the fact that they
are never static, have many features in com¬
mon with the restless movement, the ellipti¬
cal shapes and the formal designs which
underlie all baroque architecture, art and lit¬
erature. The recognition of fundamental
laws and transcendental order made it possi¬
ble for them to accept that this brief and
fragile life of ours, this vale of tears, is a mere
illusion, yet prevented them from lapsing
into dark despair at the inevitable fact of
mortality. Even in the delightful innocent
pastoral world of Arcadia, peopled with
pretty nymphs and love-lorn shepherds,
which baroque writers never tired of evok¬
ing, death could never be entirely ruled
out.
But it was not of death, perhaps, that
baroque writers most complained, but of
Time, under the fatal shadow of whose
wings all things decay and wither. The cen¬
tury which saw the invention of the pen
dulum clock and the balance-spring mecha¬
nism in watches was growing more and more
aware of the passing of time of time mea¬
sured not just in seasons, months and days,
but in hours, minutes and even seconds. The
pressure which all modern people know
came as something of a shock to the seven¬
teenth century. To own an hour-glass or
pocket-watch was a first step towards the
acute consciousness of fleeting time which
quickly became a major preoccupation of the
period. It became a frequent theme for
poets, and in some more thoughtful writers
it was to engender a feeling of metaphysical
dread.
But the acute awareness of rapacious time
forever slipping by and taking with it all the
things we love and value most; the universal
sense of the vanity of all earthly things which
poets and preachers reiterated in all the
cultural languages of Europe; the tomb
always waiting just around the corner as a
reminder that flesh is mortal and that man is
dust: all this paradoxically led to an extraor¬
dinary capacity for living and enjoying life.
This paradox is to be found at the heart of
countless baroque poems in which poets
encouraged men and women to gather
rosebuds while the summer lasted, to love
one another and to be in love, and to appreci¬
ate the colourful masquerade of life. Their
knowledge that it would all end like a dream
served to put life in perspective and to
enhance its value for those on whom fortune
smiled. Famous examples are to be found in
all the literatures of Europe: in John Donne
and Herrick, in the French poet Ronsard's
admirers Hooft and Opitz in the Nether¬
lands and Germany, and in the complex and
Pain and suffering are frequently portrayed in
religious drama, painting and above aü sculp¬
ture of the baroque age. Spanish baroque reli¬
gious carvings are particularly notable for their
sometimes macabre depictions of Christ, the
Virgin Mary and other figures of the Passion
story in paroxysms ofgrief. Below, the severed
head of St. John the Baptist (c. 1625) by the
Cordobán sculptor Juan de Mesa (Seville
cathedral).

The works ofShakespeare (left), while not strict¬
ly speaking baroque, often reflect the spirit of
the age in their explosive violence and in their
preoccupation with appearance and reality and
with dramatic illusion. The SpanishpoetLuis de
Góngora y Argote (centre) was a master of a
highly ornamental, labyrinthine style which be¬
came known as "gongorism". Like its Italian
equivalent "marinismo" (named after the Ita¬
lian Giambattista Marino), it echoed contem¬
porary trends in the plastic arts. Engraving,
bottom left, is the frontispiece illustration of a
17th-century edition of Simplicissimus, a'mas-
terwork ofbaroqueprose by the German writer
Grimmehhausen.
jfoaiiUT.mnriT i tnuiram u ""VrrT
'3
.'¡."-vii.- ,Vr r tr: "*
MWm
sophisticated verse of Marino in Italy and
Góngora in Spain.
Despite its emphasis on the transience of
all earthly things, baroque culture produced
works of literature which can attain
unparalleled vitality and intensity. But this
only becomes fully evident if one can under¬
stand the meaning of the words in which
baroque poems, plays and novels are writ¬
ten and sometimes their hidden meanings,
too ! Otherwise, the rich interplay of images,
metaphors and conceits which baroque
writers delighted in inventing may some¬
times seem to readers today to amount to
nonsense.
Only in performance can baroque plays
and operas capture our whole attention and
enthral us with their sights and sounds, their
appeal to ear and eye, the mind and the imag¬
ination. Yet performances are rare, and most
of them have to take place in the imagina¬
tions of sympathetic readers or of listeners to
recordings. Only when we are actually
standing in the baroque churches and palaces
which can be found all over Western Europe
and in many of its former overseas colonial
possessions can we come to appreciate the
powerful claims that the Baroque makes on
us.
Modern readers and spectators may think
that much is fake: they may find it as hard to
relate to the far-fetched metaphors and florid
sentiments expressed by baroque love poets
as to the exaggerated poses of carved and
painted statues. But sometimes, even now,
we can still register the impact of a love
sonnet or a funerary ode, a heroic tragedy or
a deftly turned comedy, and marvel at the
audacity with which these artists three cen¬
turies ago reflected a world not yet deprived
of its sense of delight and wonder and gave
expression to Europe's last comprehensive
vision of a universe not yet bereft of its
divinity.
PETER SKRINE, of the United Kingdom,
teaches German language and literature at the
University of Manchester, and specializes in the
poetry and drama of the seventeenth century. He
has written many articles on these and other sub¬
jects and is the author of a book on seventeenth-
century literature and culture in Europe, entitled
The Baroque (Methuen, London and New York,
1978).
Rubens
the magnificent
While baroque art did not take root in the
northern Netherlands, it blossomed in the south
(what is now Belgium) above all in 17th-century
painting. Baroque art is at its most luminous and
sensual in the work ofPeterPaulRubens, which
celebrates life in all its forms. Through Rubens,
who knew Italy well and paid a long visit to
Spain, Antwerp became a centre ofthe artsfrom
which a taste for baroque painting spread
throughout Europe. Right, The Last Judgment
(1616), a work by Rubens which is today pre¬
served in Munich. Compared with the work
which inspired it, Michelangelo's Last Judg¬
ment in the Sistine Chapel, Rubens' painting
appears typically baroque by virtue of the ex¬
aggerated dynamism of its figures and the vio¬
lent effects of contrast.
