Sustainable development
by Bernd von Droste
Conservation and development are
two sides of the same coin
A quarter of a century has passed
since American biologist Rachel
Carson sat down to write The Silent
Spring, a book which was to become a
watershed in the brief history of ecology.
The graphic picture she drew of a world in
which, as a result of the indiscriminate use
of pesticides, the song of birds at spring¬
time would be lost for ever, captured the
imagination of the public. Suddenly there
was a new awareness of the intricate rela¬
tionships that link living organisms and their
environment, of man's oneness with nature
and the extent of his influence over it.
More importantly, perhaps, The Silent
Spring drew attention to the fact that there
were limits to the absorptive and regenera¬
tive powers of nature; whilst man had
always manipulated his environment, he
could no longer use it as an unfailing,
bottomless sink for pollutants and man-
generated wastes.
It is difficult today to believe that we
should still have needed to be reminded of
these seemingly self-evident facts. After all,
as far back as Aristotle's day, Theo-
phrastus, his disciple and successor as
head of the Lyceum in Athens, had written
at length about the inter-relationships
between organisms and their non-living
environment, and the idea of the unity of
organisms and environment has long been
a part of many religions.
For centuries, however, botanists and
biologists, geologists and demographers,
went their separate ways, and it was not
until the latter part of the nineteenth century
that the German zoologist Ernst Haeckel,
Right, a stretch ofthe GreatBarrierReefand,
above, a close up view of part of the most
remarkable coralformation in the world. The
Reef is inscribed as a World Heritage site.
tt
@

T "V
r

The Simen Nationalpark and World Heritage
site, Ethiopia
the man who coined the term oekologie,
once again stressed the importance of "the
relation of the animal both to its organic as
well as to its inorganic environment".
Strangely enough, Haeckelian oekologie
was overshadowed rather than enhanced
by the Darwinian revolution and,
throughout the early part of this century,
ecological research was based on the
scantiest of theoretical foundations. It was
not until 1942, when R.L. Lindeman
developed his theory of the hierarchical
trophic (food chain) structure of eco¬
systems, which laid emphasis on the flow of
energy through ecosystems, that ecology
started to become an organized modern
science.
The subsequent development of compu¬
ters and of new techniques, such as label¬
ling with radio-isotopes, stimulated studies
of both energy and nutrient cycling through
ecosystems, and, as a result, the eco¬
system, as a functional unit made up of
interacting biotic (living) and abiotic (non¬
living) components through which energy
flows, became one of the unifying concepts
of ecology and the focus of much ecological
research.
This was a great step forward, but it was
not enough. The multidisciplinary approach
to research came up against serious diffi¬
culties. The research time span for a bota¬
nist studying crop succession, for example,
could be a matter of months, whereas that
required for, say, a forester, or a biologist
concerned with population dynamics, could
run into decades. Similar problems arose
over the size of the ecosystem under study.
Furthermore, despite Rachel Carson's
warning, there remained a tendency to look
at ecosystems from the "outside" and thus
to overlook the vital feature of man's impact
on ecosystems.
Two events were to help change all this:
the launching, in 1971, of Unesco's Man
and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme, and
the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment, held in Stockholm in
1.972, both of which stressed the role of
man as a major environmental force.
The MAB Programme went further; it
stressed the need for an integrated, inter¬
disciplinary rather than mu/f/'-disciplinary
approach and brought the social sciences
into ecological research as an equal part¬
ner with the natural sciences. As a result,
the past fifteen years have seen the imple-

mentation of a wide range of pilot projects
throughout the world, the building up of
research facilities in the developing world,
the accumulation of an impressive quantity
of environmental data and the forging of an
exciting new research tool an interna¬
tional network of biosphere reserves.
Underlying all this work was a new con¬
cept of fundamental importance the con¬
cept of "conservation for sustainable
development". In other words, ecologists in
MAB were no longer saying "Stop doing
that or you will destroy the environment".
Rather they were saying "Try doing this and
you can enjoy the benefits of development
and conserve the environment".
Nevertheless, as a Scientific Advisory
Panel pointed out to the International
Co-ordinating Council of MAB at Its ninth
session held in Paris in October 1986, a
number of theoretical and practical prob¬
lems remain.
One major problem has been the tend¬
ency to disregard the evolving nature of
ecosystems. We have tended to look at
ecosystems as the outcome of evolution
rather than as being constantly subject to
evolutionary processes. Disturbance in an
ecosystem may well be a moulding, driving
force in an evolutionary sense rather than a
destructive force.
In turn this attitude tends to colour our
approach to environmental "conservation"
or "restoration", words which seem to imply
a return to a pre-existing state, when we
should perhaps be thinking in terms of
achieving a new equilibrium equally if not
more beneficial to man.
On the more practical side, the Panel
proposed to build on past achievements in
a number of ways. It suggested that:
fuller use should be made of data from
the biosphere reserve network in the
development of comparative studies of
ecosystem functioning, such as the com¬
parative study now being undertaken on
the improvement of tropical soil fertility
through biological processes.
increased emphasis should be given to
approaches for handling the management
and re-development of ecological
resources degraded by man.
research on the changing relationships
between economic driving forces and ecol¬
ogical systems should be intensified.
greater use should be made of sophisti¬
cated modern risk assessment methods to
provide guidance for policy-makers con¬
cerning investment and resource use.
expert systems should be established
which could offer decision-makers rapid,
easy access to relevant information from
the vast wealth of ecological research data
already accumulated.
Finally, the Panel emphasized the com¬
plexity and increasingly global extent of
man's impact on the environment, in par¬
ticular where environmental disturbance is
concerned. What once were local incidents
of pollution confined to one watershed or air
basin now tend to involve many nations, as
witness the Chernobyl incident and the
growing problem of acid rain.
All this underlines the fact that the MAB
Programme itself is an evolving system,
and this implies not simply change, but also
the selection of successful trends and the
elimination of undesirable or ineffective
components.
The opening chapter of Our Common
Future, the recently published report of the
World Commission on Environment and
Development (often referred to as The
Brundtland Report, after its Chairman, Gro
Harlem Brundtland, Prime Minister of Nor¬
way) contains these words:
"Humanity has the ability to make
development sustainable to ensure that it
meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future genera¬
tions to meet their own needs. ... Technol¬
ogy and social organization can both be
managed and improved to make way for a
new era of economic growth. The Commis¬
sion believes that widespread poverty is no
longer inevitable. Poverty is not only an evil
in itself, but sustainable development
requires meeting the basic needs of all and
extending to all the opportunity to fulfil their
aspirations for a better life. A world in which
poverty is endemic will always be prone to
ecological and other catastrophes."
It is the proud aim of Unesco's Man and
the Biosphere (MAB) Programme to do all
In its power to ensure that such catastro¬
phes do not occur.
BERND VON DROSTE is Secretary to the Inter-
national Co-ordinating Council tor the Man and
the Biosphere (MAB) Programme and Directorol
Unesco's Division of Ecological Sciences.
The GalapagosArchipelago, Ecuador, is both
a MAB biosphere reserve and a World
Heritage site.
Left, the Durmitor National Park and MAB
biosphere reserve, Yugoslavia
