THERE were about forty of us altogether, all in Japanese dress, and we
must have been a curious sight walking around London and Paris with two
swords hanging at our side. Before we left Japan we were told that we
would have the greatest difficulty in getting supplies abroad. So we were provided
with several hundred boxes of white rice for the journey, and to light the corridors
in inns at night we were given dozens of specially made "metal lanterns"
lanterns with two square legs, surrounded by mesh plus a whole assortment of
portable lanterns, candelabra, standing lanterns and candles. In short, what was
loaded onto the ship was doubtless intended to correspond to what a daimyô and
his retinue would need in the coaching inns of the Tôkaidô.
On our arrival in Paris, and after the customary salutations, the first request
made to the official who received us was that the accommodation of the atten¬
dants should not be too far away from the residence of the heads of mission , which
meant that the latter did not feel very secure and intended to keep their escort
close at hand. Our host immediately agreed and asked how many of us there were.
When he learned that there were some thirty of us he replied that if there were not
more of us than that, ten or twenty groups like ours could be put up in a single
hotel. This reply left us flabbergasted. Whereupon we were conducted to the
hotel where we were to stay. This was the Hôtel du Louvre, at the very gates of the
Palace, an imposing five-storey building containing no less than six hundred
rooms and with a staff of over five hundred. It could easily accommodate a
thousand guests, so that the Japanese mission passed unnoticed there and our sole
concern was not to get lost in the corridors. Warm air circulated in the rooms,
where neither stove nor radiator was to be seen. Rooms and corridors were
lighted by countless gaslamps and one hardly noticed the coming of night. Every



Diplomats
under surveillance
by Fukuzawa Yukichi
The Japanese official mission which visited
Europein 1862. Fukuzawa Yukichi, the
interpreter, is standing second from right.
In 1862, a Japanese official mission
visited several European capitals:
London, The Hague, Berlin, St.
Petersburg and Paris (twice). The young
interpreter who accompanied them was
Fukuzawa Yukichi (1835-1901), who in
his Autobiography described the trip,
which took place at the time of the Meiji
Restoration when the Japanese
government wished to bring the country
out of its isolation. In 1866, Fukuzawa
published Seiyö jijo ("Conditions in the
West"), a major work which made him
the most important writer of the new
Japan. He later wrote many popular
educational works in which he explained
Western culture to the Japanese public,
and was a dedicated educator whose
school, "Keiö Gijuku", was granted
university status in 1903.
27

Men of letters
4
«
kind of food from the seas and mountains was available in the dining room to
satisfy our appetites, and the worst detractors of the barbarous West forgot their
prejudices while enjoying these exquisite dishes. So we were hampered by all this
baggage that we had been dragging around with us since we had left Japan.
Obviously there was no question of lighting our lanterns in the hotel corridors or
of cooking our rice in the kitchens. We ended up therefore by presenting all our
material, starting with the rice, to one of the minor officials in the reception
committee, a man named Lambert, and we considered ourselves fortunate that he
deigned to accept it.
Our ignorance of local customs caused us not a few difficulties over which we
had many a good laugh. A waiter whom we sent out for tobacco understood
"sugar" for "cigar", and brought us sugar. Our doctor thought he had bought
ginseng, which turned out to be powdered ginger.
At that time Japan was a closed world, and there was something laughable
about the precautions taken to prevent our meeting foreigners, even though we
were in a foreign country. The three emissaries were Takenushi, Matsudaira and
Kyogoku. The last-named was responsible for our surveillance and he had several
specially trained agents for this purpose. Since these kept a constant eye on their
companions, it was very difficult to meet foreigners. We were all Bakufu officials
but there were three of us who thought alike and pursued the same objective
Mitsukui Shûbei, Matsuki Kôan and myself. We had been students together and
already at that time were inseparable, trying to see everything that was to be seen.
Our good agents did not seem to appreciate this overmuch, especially since all
three of us were of inferior rank and , what was worse, read Western books a fact
which prompted them to be on their guard. The orders were, therefore, that
whenever we wanted to go out we had to take one of the agents with us, who
followed us everywhere. Nevertheless, we had no treasonable intentions and
there was no reason to fear that we would betray any State secrets! To be always
followed by an agent of strange appearance was, therefore, simply annoying. This
was bad enough, but when our henchman had something else to do we could not
go out either! This was a great nuisance. On such occasions I would say to my
friends, "Pooh, it's nothing! It's as though we were doing the tour of Europe
bringing our tightly closed Japan along with us!" This made us all laugh.

