Twentyyears
ofcultural co-operation
by Emmanuel Pouchepadass
m
x
\
\
1
Photo Michel Claude/Unesco
THE Declaration of the Principles of
International Cultural Co-operation
unanimously adopted by Unesco's
General Conference on 4 November 1966
is twenty years old. The celebration of this
anniversary late last year was one of many
events which marked the International Year
of Peace at Unesco, in Member States and
in the United Nations system.
The Declaration is founded on the belief
that culture is a particularly important factor
in the development of understanding be¬
tween people and societies, and that inter¬
national solidarity can be strengthened in
important respects by a recognition of the
interdependence of the world community.
Cultural co-operation has acquired a
new impetus at all levels in the past twenty
years. Cultural exchanges have grown in
number and variety. Many joint projects
involving several countries have been
accomplished within and between the diffe¬
rent world regions, especially in the fields of
North-South, South-South and European
co-operation.
Recent initiatives at regional and sub-
regional level have focused on the study of
languages and cultures (in Latin America,
the Caribbean, Central Asia and the Arctic
regions); the training of cultural staff (in
West Africa and Latin America); and the
joint organization of festivals and other
artistic and cultural events. One of the most
interesting aspects of sub-regional co-op¬
eration is the growth of contacts between
universities and research institutes (e.g., in
the Caribbean sub-region).
Latin America has decided to create a
common market for books and is consider¬
ing the introduction of an educational televi¬
sion system. Several West African coun¬
tries have launched operations for the res¬
cue and development of archaeological
sites, notably while hydraulic engineering
projects were being carried out.
Joint projects concerning the non-
material cultural heritage, particularly stu¬
dies of languages and oral traditions, have
also been initiated, with the support of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
Unesco, as part of a ten-year Plan for the
systematic study of African languages and
oral traditions. A number of African univer¬
sities have joined forces in the collection
and study of traditional African music and
dance. In the field of cinema and the media,
there is a growing number of co-produc¬
tions, not only between industrialized coun¬
tries but also in the context of North-South
co-operation.
National Theatre of Vietnam performance
at Unesco Headquarters, Paris, in March
1984.
But the best example of international
cultural co-operation is doubtless the
launching, under the joint auspices of the
United Nations and Unesco, of a World
Decade for Cultural Development which
will begin in 1 988 after being proclaimed by
the General Assembly of the United
Nations. The Decade will call for deter¬
mined, sustained joint action by Member
States of the organizations of the United
Nations system, especially those of
Unesco, and by international non¬
governmental organizations, in order to
meet the challenges confronting mankind
in the late twentieth century.
EMMANUEL POUCHEPADASS joined Unesco
in 1971 as director of the Division of Cultural
Development, after a career in the Indian dip¬
lomatic service. From 1977 to 1981 he was
director of Unesco's Division of Cultural Studies
and of the International Fund for the Promotion of
Culture.
