Law and the underwater heritage
by Lyndel V. Prott
and Patrick J. O'Keefe
*****
24
AN international consensus is de¬
veloping that States should take
special steps to ensure the protec¬
tion of their underwater heritage. Apart
from international agreements by which
States have undertaken actively to ensure
the protection of the cultural heritage
generally, such as the European Conven¬
tion on the Protection of the Archaeological
Heritage; Unesco Convention for the Pro¬
tection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict; Unesco Convention on the
Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the
Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Own¬
ership of Cultural Property; Unesco Con¬
vention Concerning the Protection of the
World Cultural and Natural Heritage; OAS
(Organization of American States) Con¬
vention on the Protection of the Archaeolo¬
gical, Historical and Artistic Heritage of the
American Nations, there is also a Unesco
Recommendation which deals specifically
with the underwater cultural heritage. This
is the Recommendation on International
Principles Applicable to Archaeological
Excavations (1956). It applies to "any re¬
search aimed at the discovery of objects of
archaeological character" whether on land
"or on the bed or in the subsoil of inland or
territorial waters of a Member State".
The Recommendation includes some de¬
tailed provisions on the control of excava¬
tions, the admission of foreigners for
archaeological work, the keeping of a cen¬
tral register of important sites, the forma¬
tion of collections, disposal of finds, rights
and duties of the excavator, documentation
of excavations and the suppression of clan¬
destine excavations. The Recommenda¬
tion, according to the Constitution and
Rules of Procedure of Unesco, obliges
Member States of Unesco to implement it
and to report the methods taken to give
effect to it. European and other States
bordering the Mediterranean should also be
aware of a major initiative of the Council of
Europe to strengthen legal protection of the
underwater cultural heritage in the Euro¬
pean and Mediterranean areas.
In studying all these materials, States
may not only feel a responsibility or an
obligation to legislate promptly on this
issue, but will also find guidance as to the
type of provisions that should be included.
There are two legislation schemes which
have been very widely used to provide
permanent legal protection: these are, first,
the extension of general antiquities legisla¬
tion to underwater finds and, second, the
drafting of special legislation solely to cover
submarine antiquities (meaning those
under the sea) or other antiquities under
water where these are significant. Certain
schemes have been based on the extension
of other types of legislation to cover the
underwater cultural heritage: most of these
appear to have some disadvantage.
The major advantage in having specific
legislation on the underwater cultural herit¬
age is the practical one of easy accessibility.
For the most part, those who do damage to
shipwrecks are divers, fishermen or em¬
ployees of oil or cable-laying companies
involved in underwater operations. Many
of these have little legal knowledge.
Divers, both amateur and professional,
and particularly those interested in ship¬
wrecks, are often said to be of independent
character, resourceful and sceptical of au¬
thority. They come from a variety of back¬
grounds, from the highly educated to the
lowly. Nevertheless, they have a common
tendency to regard what they find under
water as their own, a product of their skill
and effort and something that only they can
work on, by whatever means they consider
fit. It is important to seek their co-operation
and not to arouse their resentment.
On the other hand, fishermen in most
cases do damage by dragging their nets
along the sea bottom, scattering surface
remains and obliterating sites, as well as
raising objects in their nets. In recent years,
the surveying and trenching of the sea floor
for pipelines or cables has led to the unin¬
tentional discovery of many wrecks. It is
important that such finds be reported and
identified, and requirements to that effect
should be written into every national permit
system.
Philippines law provides that any
accidental discoveries made "in the course
of agricultural and engineering works,
mineral and marine explorations" shall be
reported and further work immediately sus¬
pended. Norway and Thailand have also
expressly created a duty to report for such
operators. In all cases, the best protection
of the underwater cultural heritage lies in
education and in persuasion of the diver,
fisherman, oil worker or cable layer of the
cultural value of what is found or noticed.
This will be done most easily if reference
can be made to a single piece of legislation
which is easily accessible physically and
associated by name: one in which rights and
duties are set out concisely, without ambi¬
guity or the need to refer to other legal
provisions.
The extension of general antiquities leg
islation to the underwater cultural heritage
is an alternative which has been adopted by
some States which already have compre¬
hensive legislation on land antiquities (e.g.
Greece and Turkey). There is no legal
reason why the cover provided by general
antiquities legislation should not be as
strong: the advantages of specific legislation
are, as we have mentioned, practical ones.
There are a number of other States that
have not made the extension specifically
" but whose system of classification and pro¬
tection would be suitable to cover impor¬
tant finds. Such an extension of existing
legislation would not, however, ensure
accessibility and publicity. Nor is this pat¬
tern of action helpful where general anti¬
quities legislation is not so well developed.
Although many States have comprehen¬
sive legislation to protect the underwater
cultural heritage, and even those that do not
have other legislative weapons in hand to
protect them from the spoliator, the cultu¬
ral authorities should not become com¬
placent. Many will recognize that there are
much stronger provisions that could be
and should be included in their national
legislation. This is an urgent task for all
national cultural authorities in countries
where the underwater cultural heritage is
under threat. There are two other impor¬
tant tasks which would increase legal pro¬
tection: one, the signing of international
agreements on this subject; the other, the
requiring of all those working on the sea¬
bed for any purpose to observe and report
finds of interest. The best level of protec¬
tion will be achieved by a judicious blend of
strong legal provisions and an effort to
make people everywhere aware of the incal¬
culable value of the cultural inheritance of
man.
LYNDEL V. PROTT is Reader in International
Law and Jurisprudence at the University of Syd¬
ney, where her husband, PATRICK J.
O'KEEFE, is Senior Lecturer in Law. They are
co-authors of a report for the Council of Europe
on legal protection of the underwater cultural
heritage (1978), and are currently engaged on a
majorproject to collect, analyse and comment on
national and international laws on the protection
of the cultural heritage round the world. The
results of their research will eventually be pub¬
lished in 5 volumes, the first of which, Law and
the Cultural Heritage, appeared in 1983
(Professional Books, Abingdon, UK). The above
article is an extract from "Law and the underwa¬
ter heritage ", a chapter which they contributed to
Protection ot the Underwater Heritage, a collec¬
tive work published by Unesco in 1981.
