Getting to the top
Above, the Vrsic Pass in the People's
Republic ofSlovenia (Yugoslavia) crosses
the Julian Alps not far from Yugoslavia's
frontier with Italy and Austria. The moun¬
tains towering above the pass, some 2,400
metres high, are rocky bastions of jagged
dolomltlc limestone. For centuries such
magnificent Alpine scenery filled travel¬
lers with fear and even revulsion.
ANYONE who studies the history
of the opening up of the Alps
might by forgiven for thinking
that until the eighteenth century these
mountains were a deserted wilderness.
Writers on the subject are fond of quoting
from early travellers who describe the
mountains as "dreadful", "repellent",
even "hideous" stretches of bare rock and
ice, reactions which today seem astonish¬
ing. Such was the accepted view from
Roman times until the eighteenth cen¬
tury. The great Italian poet and humanist
Petrarch, who in 1336 wrote an enthusias¬
tic description of a journey he had made
to Mont Ventoux in Provence, was for
centuries a notable exception to this gen¬
eral rule. Even the Zürich municipal doc¬
tor Johann Jakob Scheuchzer (1672-
1733), otherwise an enlightened scientist
and scholar who is regarded as one of the
founders of modern paleontology,
seriously maintained that the mountains
harboured dragons!
This was how the mountains appeared
to the occasional travellers from out¬
side scholars, merchants, soldiers
who came from the lowland cities and
towns. However, a history of the Alps
written "from the inside" would tell a dif¬
ferent story. Many big Alpine valleys
were already inhabited in pre-Roman
times, and it is clear that this mountain
population had a different, much more
natural, relationship with the mountains
where they lived. By the early Middle
Ages, many valley farmers owned "alps" ,
pastures high up on the sides of the val-
In this terrifying depiction ofan avalanche
from a 16th-century chronicle, a massive
ball of debris and flailing branches
crushes everything in its path.
24

The conquest of the great peaks
by Peter Meyer
leys where they grazed their cattle during
the summer. From the twelfth to the fif¬
teenth century still higher mountain
regions up to about 1,600 metres
were permanently settled and farmed, in
many cases by the Walser, an ethnic
group which migrated from the Swiss
Valais and established farming commu¬
nities in wide areas of the central Alpine
region (see article page 14). It is also
known that at a very early stage a number
of Alpine passes were regularly used for
trading and also occasionally for mili¬
tary purposes. Finally, the Alps were
mined for salt, iron ore, and silver, an
activity which brought wealth to some
and provided a means of subsistence for
many more.
This mountain world cannot, there¬
fore, have been as terrible as the trav¬
ellers' tales cited above would have us
believe. But even if there are no dragons,
life in the mountains is hard even today,
full of privations and fraught with danger.
It is also true that until very recently the
snow-covered peaks, which are for us the
most important and fascinating feature of
the mountain landscape, were of no inter¬
est to anybody. Until the eighteenth cen¬
tury, they were shown on maps in a very
summary fashion and many were
unnamed. Only villages, passes and
Alpine pastures were indicated. Even
where the description "mountain" or its
Latin equivalent mons appears, it usually
signifies not a mountain but a pass or a
pasture. Perhaps one or two peaks had
been climbed by local people, but such
ascents had not been reported and so the
world took no notice.
The eighteenth century brought a big
change, marked at the outset by a new
approach to nature. People became not
only more sensitive to the attractions of
nature, but also, under the influence of
the writings of authors such as Albrecht
von Haller (1708-1777) and Jean-Jacques
Rousseau (1712-1778), showed a fresh
interest in the real or imaginary charms of
country life. Stimulated by this romantic
longing, the European élite then began to
travel to the Alps, thus laying the founda¬
tions for Alpine tourism, which expanded
rapidly in the nineteenth century.
Once the attractiveness of mountains
and their inhabitants was recognized,
sporting feats soon began to be accom¬
plished, the first of which was doubtless
the ascent of Mont Blanc (4,807 metres)
in 1786 by a doctor, Michel Paccard, and
a hunter and mountain guide from Cham-
onix, Jacques Balmat. Thus the conquest
of the highest Alpine peak took place,
not at the end but right at the beginning of
a long series of mountaineering exploits.
(The ascent was repeated in the following
year by a leading Geneva naturalist,
Horace-Benedict de Saussure [1740-
1799] who inaugurated the era of scien¬
tific research in the Alps with a series of
interesting experiments and measure¬
ments, including the barometric deter¬
mination of the height of the peak.)
After the conquest of Mont Blanc,
mountaineers turned to other of the high¬
est and most challenging Alpine peaks.
This humorous depiction of "An Alp-
climber" kitted out for a mountaineering
expedition appeared as an illustration in
Mark Twain 's travel book A Tramp Abroad
(1880). The Alpine tourist is carrying an
alpenstock, a long iron-tipped stick once
widely used by hikers and mountain¬
eers.
The first to be conquered almost a
quarter of a century after Mont Blanc
were the two highest Austrian peaks: the
3,797-metre-high Grossglockner (1800)
and, four years later, the Ortler (3,905
metres, now in Italy). The latter would
probably have been climbed first were it
not for the fact that people then believed
the Grossglockner to be the higher of the
two. The ascent of the Grossglockner was
a full-scale expedition in which sixty-two
persons took part. The Ortler ascent was
much more like modern Alpine moun¬
taineering in the sense that the chamois
hunter Joseph Pichler who made the
ascent was accompanied by only two fel¬
low climbers.
These achievements were soon fol¬
lowed by other feats, outstanding among
which were the first ascent of the
Jungfrau (4,158 metres) in the Bernese
Drawing of the "Lindwurm ", an evil dragon
which, according to a legend from the tiny
Alpine country of Liechtenstein, once ter¬
rorized the people of Mais, a little town
near the Rhine. After vainly trying to get rid
of the Lindwurm, the townsfolk begged the
Virgin Mary to help them. Their prayers
were answered and the dragon disappea¬
red from the face of the earth. (Even today,
certain crevices in the rocky cliffs over¬
looking Mais are known as "dragon
holes. ") Located between Switzerland and
Austria, Liechtenstein is an independent
principality (160 km2) with a German-
speaking Catholic population. The capital
is Vaduz (5,000 inhabitants).
Photo from Sagen aus Liechtenstein ("Tales from Liechtens¬
tein") by Otto Seger, Jahrbuch des Historischen Vereins für das
Fürstentum Liechtenstein, 1 966

->j;
s
x
©
S
j.
.y- /
'.h-
r*1 '
1
.-
-/*;.
... >:
-
Alps in 1811 by two industrialists and nat¬
uralists from Aarau, Johann Rudolf and
Hieronymus Meyer, and the first ascent
of the Zugspitze (2,962 metres), Ger¬
many's highest peak, in 1820, as part of a
cartographical mission by Lieutenant
Karl Naus and two companions. These
expeditions were followed in 1850 by the
ascent of the Piz Bernina (4,049 metres),
the only peak in the Eastern Alps higher
than 4,000 metres and in 1855 by the first
ascent of Switzerland's highest peak, the
4,634-metre Dufourspitze in the Monte
Rosa massif. In 1865 the first ascent of the
Matterhorn (4,478 metres), reputedly the
most beautiful mountain in the Alps, hit
the headlines because a tragic accident
occurred during the descent, in which
four members of the expedition, led by
the Englishman Edward Whymper, per¬
ished. This was the first catastrophe of
the early days of Alpine climbing but
typical of this sport it acted not as a
deterrent but as a spur to further feats by
climbers who, after the highest peaks had
been conquered, began to undertake
ever more difficult climbs.
Mí
rr
©
Above, Storm Breaking over a Village in
the Foothills of the Alps, a drawing by Leo¬
nardo da Vinci (1452-1519). With Pieter
Bruegel the Elder and Albrecht Dürer (see
colour pages), who both crossed the Alps
on their way to Italy, Leonardo was among
the first European painters to depict the
grandeur of high mountain scenery.
Drawing of the Via Mala by Johann Wolf¬
gang von Goethe (1749-1832), dated 1
June 1 788. This Alpine route leading to the
Splügen Pass was extensively used in
medieval times, although it was known as
"the bad road" because of the gorges
through which itpassed. It has come back
into use since the opening of the San Ber¬
nardino road tunnel.
<
The Geneva-born writer and philosopher
Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778) was
one of the first Europeans to celebrate the
beauty of mountains. Engraving, left, by
the French artist Jean-Michel Moreau the
Younger, illustrates an episode from Emile
(1762), Rousseau's treatise on education.
It shows Rousseau and the Savoyard
vicar, a composite portrait of two priests
whom Rousseau had known, contempla¬
ting the river Po and the Alpine range
beyond.
Vi
The conquest of peaks gave way to that
of certain rock facesin 1872 the 2,000-
metre east face of Monte Rosa, and in
1881 the almost equally high east face of
the Watzmann. The first winter ascent of
Mont Blanc was made in 1876 by an
Englishwoman, Mary Isabella Straton,
accompanied by guides from Cham-
onix.
In the nineteenth century moun¬
taineering began to spread from Europe
to other continents. The volcanic moun¬
tains of Mexico were conquered at a very
early date Popocatepetl (5,452 metres)
in 1827, the Pico de Orizaba (5,700
metres) in 1851, Iztaccihuatl (5,286
metres) in 1889. The highest mountains
26

Competitors in a cross-country ski mara¬
thon in the Engadine, Switzerland, trace
their way like ants across the snowy land¬
scape. Cross-country skiing was prac¬
tised before the development of Alpine, or
downhill, skiing.
I »t'*4 ;
*
1*'í,;'i«ffr

in Africa, Kilimanjaro (5,895 metres)
and Mount Kenya (5,200 metres), were
climbed for the first time towards the end
of the nineteenth century.
In our time, mountains everywhere
have become places of refuge, not only
for many animal and plant species, but
also for millions of human beings in
search of relaxation from the stress of the
modern world. Winter, previously
endured as a season of cold, darkness and
privation, has suddenly become attrac¬
tive. And in few places does winter, apart
from its dangers, display so many pleas¬
ant features as in the mountains. The
snow is better and more plentiful than in
the lowlands, and there are more sun
shine and fresh air, commodities for
which there was already a great demand
in industrialized, urbanized Europe of
the mid-nineteenth century.
Again it was the British who gave the
lead. When they first started to slide
down the Swiss mountainsides on long,
narrow laths of wood, they drew smiles
from the local people. But soon they were
being eagerly imitated. Naturally they
could not have foreseen the extraordin¬
ary popularity which skiiing would even¬
tually achieve. By the 1930s there was
already a boom in winter sports, but it
was cut short by the Second World War.
As soon as the War was over, winter tour¬
ism began to develop more rapidly than
2
Jtt M
v n» KU Di m
...
*r.
The traditional Alpine house
ever. Other forms of winter sport, such as
curling, tobogganing, ice-skating, and
cross-country skiing, soon developed
alongside downhill skiing, but none of
them has ever equalled the latter in popu¬
larity.
Nowadays the Alps this sweep of
mountains extending for 1,200 kilo¬
metres from Vienna to Nice have
reached saturation point. People must
realize that they cannot get all they want
from this unique region unless they
accept certain disciplines. Development
possibilities are now exhausted. The
space still available belongs to nature, to
the world of Alpine plants and animals.
Only if they are allowed to live and
breathe will the Alps survive as an irre¬
placeable recreation area.
PETER MEYER is a Swiss musicologist and
specialist in German and English literature. He
has been active in publishing since 1964, and is
the publisher of an illustrated work entitled Das
Grosse ADAC-Alpenbuch ("The Big ADAC Book
oh the Alps"), and the bi-monthly magazine
Berge ("Mountains").
Five examples of traditional domestic architecture in the Swiss Alps. (1) An apartment J
house for two families at Evolène in the canton of Valais, built in 1543. (2) House with a
steeply sloping roof at Einsiedeln, canton of Schwyz, dating from 1802. (3) Two-family |
house with adjoining living quarters at Ernen in the Valais. It dates from 1686. (4) Another <S
two-family house with separate entrances at Lenk, canton ofBerne. It was built in 1 777. (5) J
Group of stone-roofed houses including a large house for two families, at Vrin, canton of 3
Graubünden. «
28
