r
v
Automation and microsurgery
THERE are almost 30 million blind peo¬
ple in the world and nearly 1 ,000 mil¬
lion others who have to wear specta¬
cles. The revolution now under way in the
treatment of such common eye diseases as
cataract, myopia, hyperopia and glaucoma is
associated with achievements in eye micro¬
surgery.
The first implantation of an artificial lens in
the eye took place in the late 1 940s, but unfor¬
tunately, early implantation attempts proved a
failure, with the result that the technique came
to be regarded as scientifically unsound.
However, research in this direction continued
in the USSR and the technique was not only
"rehabilitated" and perfected, but also came
to be used on a mass scale.
Artificial lens implantation is now one of the
most widespread surgical operations in the
world. There are numerous kinds of artificial
lenses, of which a posterior-chamber lens
implanted In a very narrow space between the
iris and the capsule of the removed lens, has
proved to be most effective. Various models of
this kind of lens have been developed since
1975. The most popular is the posterior-
chamber lens which is fixed directly within the
capsule of the natural lens. As the artificial
lens does not come into contact with any
structure inside the eye, such as the iris, the
patient recovers more quickly. Nearly two mil¬
lion posterior-chamber lenses have already
been implanted throughout the world.
However, we are not yet satisfied with the
existing models, of intraocular lenses.
Research is going on to make the artificial lens
lighter and more pliable, and to ensure a per¬
fectly smooth surface. Until recently all lenses
were made of acrylic plastic, the physical and
chemical properties of which did not allow the
by Svyatoslav Fedorov
A team of surgeons apply assembly line princi¬
ples in the "Clear Sight" operating theatre
(above)at the Moscow Scientific Research
Institute of Eye .Microsurgery.
production of a light, pliable yet durable artifi¬
cial lens. Then silicones (biologically inert
polymers) were discovered. They meet all the
necessary requirements, since they are elas¬
tic, have a high chemjcal and heat resistance,
and are already widely used in medicine, par¬
ticularly in haematology and cosmetic sur¬
gery. The major advantage of a silicone lens is
that patients are no longer faced with post¬
operative complications which can follow the
implantation of a hard acrylic plastic lens.
It is now possible to envisage intraocular
lenses made of liquid silicone, which could be
injected into the lens capsule and polymerized
there without losing their elasticity.
The next step in the intraocular correction of
vision may be an artificial lens equipped with a
solar battery which will provide it with refrac¬
tive power, i.e. the ability to accommodate or
adjust its thickness for far or near vision. A
person with such a controllable lens will not
have to wear spectacles at all, whereas today
people with artificial lenses still have to wear
them while working or reading.
Myopia, or nearsightedness, affects some
800 million people. A technique for surgical
correction of myopia has been developed in
the Scientific Research Institute of Eye Micro¬
surgery in Moscow. It consists of cutting a
collagen molecule, which causes it to
regenerate itself, i.e. produce a new molecule
33

to replace the destroyed one, thus changing
the elastic properties of the cornea. Under
intraocular pressure, the portion of the cornea
at the site of the cut becomes convex and the
central part flattens. As a result, the image is
properly focused on the retina. Using this
method, we correct myopia of -1 to -14
dioptres.1 Twenty-five thousand such opera¬
tions have been performed at our Institute,
and nearly 300,000 throughout the world.
Molecular surgery opens up unprecedented
opportunities for the treatment of other organs
as well.
For several years we have also been suc¬
cessfully treating hyperopia, or farsighted¬
ness, with surgical techniques. Today, we are
able to correct the vision of those wearing-
spectacles of +1 to +8 dioptres.
Contemporary medicine has a great need
for more reliable and efficient methods of
treatment, including the establishment of
large "health factories" specializing in therapy
of major diseases. The introduction of the
industrial principle into health care involves
the division of the process into stages, each of
which is the responsibility of a specialist. This
principle is applied at the Institute, where the
work is distributed among surgical teams in an
operating theatre which we call the "auto¬
mated sight-recovery line" or "clear sight con¬
veyor". As each surgeon finishes part of the
operation, a signal is given and the operating
table smoothly moves to the next surgeon.
It may seem rather inhuman to move a
patient like a component along an assembly
line, but each operation is carried out accord¬
ing to an individual plan prepared after a pre¬
liminary check-up. A computer designates the
optimum surgical procedure, predicts the
result of the operation and determines to what
extent the eyesight of each patient can be
improved.
The same surgical team carries out the pre¬
liminary check-up, performs the operation and
provides post-operative treatment. Television
1 . Dioptre: unit for measuring the refractive power of a
lens. Editor.
monitors transmit each stage of the operation
in colour, which is particularly important for
ophthalmic surgeons. A video camera
attached to the surgical microscope films
everything the surgeon sees and automat¬
ically records the operation.
The number of operative and post-opera¬
tive complications has decreased nearly ten¬
fold using this automated approach, while
each surgeon's productivity has increased
five-fold. Furthermore, the industrial principle,
while ensuring the excellent quality of surgery,
is very economical. Thus resources can be
used to improve the facilities of the complex
and to increase the number of patients
treated.
Future developments in the industrializa¬
tion of medicine include a project for a new
out-patient clinic equipped with a diagnostic
conveyor which would provide maximum
comfort while reducing the time of examina¬
tion from two days to two hours. A robot which
would be able to treat myopia better than a
surgeon is also at the design stage. But can
the human eye be entrusted to an "unin¬
telligent" robot? Yes, because the freedom of
movement of the human hand is approx¬
imately 1 2°, an "excessive" freedom which is
conducive to error. But a robot possessing
only 2° or 3° of freedom of movement can be
programmed to exercise a predetermined
pressure on the eye and will be able to move
its hand only within accurately verified limits.
Continuous feedback is also possible during
the operation to exclude any unexpected
complications during surgery, for example,
the robot could transmit information on the
thickness of the cornea.
SVYATOSLAV FEDOROV, the founder of
Soviet eye microsurgery research, is Director
General of the Scientific Research Institute of
Eye Microsurgery in Moscow. A corresponding
member of the USSR Academy of Medical Sci¬
ences, he is the author ofmore than 300 publica¬
tions, including "Artificial Lens Implantation"
(1977), and the co-author, with E. Yegorova, of
"Surgical Treatment of Traumatic Cataract"
(1983).
