Baroque in the Slav countries
BY GEORGII D. GATCHEV
RUSSIA was no exception to the rule
whereby the baroque style was
transmitted from country to country
by itinerant artists and craftsmen. Among
the baroque artists who worked in Russia
was the French sculptor Etienne Maurice
Falconet, who executed the equestrian statue
of Peter the Great in Leningrad, while the
Italian architect Bartolomeo Francesco
Rastrelli was the country's most brilliant
exponent of baroque architecture. Il Gesù,
the famous Jesuit church in Rome, was a
source of inspiration for many churches in
the Ukraine as well as in Latin America.
With its formal complexity and technical
refinements, far removed from the spon¬
taneity of Rousseauism or the Romantic
taste for simplicity and naturalism, baroque
art lent itself to this form of transmission. In
the seventeenth century, mathematical dis¬
coveries crossed frontiers in the same way,
just as they do today, in a kind of scientific
and technological internationalism.
The characteristics of Slav Baroque are
linked to the historical and cultural tradi¬
tions of the different regions in which the
Slavs had settled. The Baroque left a very
strong imprint among the Catholic Slav peo¬
ples of Poland and Dalmatia, just as it did in
Protestant, Germanic Bohemia. Its influ¬
ence was less marked among people of the
Orthodox faith in the Ukraine, Byelorussia
and Russia, and was felt least of all by the
Serbian and Bulgarian peoples under Otto¬
man domination.
In creative terms, the Slav contribution to
European Baroque is more evident in litera¬
ture than in the fine arts. In the sixteenth
century the Polish poet Mikolaj Szarzynski
(1550-1581) expressed the anguish of man's

isolation in the world and the tragic need for
spiritual choice imposed by the conflict
between Reformation and Counter-
Reformation.
Osman, an epic work by the Croatian poet
Ivan Gundulic (c. 1589-1638), presents a
completely different vision of reality, evok¬
ing the cultural and religious confrontation
between East and West through a wealth of
images from the external world.
One aspect of baroque culture, common
to the vast majority of the Polish nobility
and known as "Sarmatianism", had echoes in
Hungary, Romania, and in the Ukraine.
Polish contacts through wars and trade with
Turks, Crimean Tartars and Persians led to
this rather unusual synthesis of eastern and
western elements, which was expressed in

Left, baroque inspiration can be seen in this
calligram by the Russian poet Simon Polotzki
(1629-1680). Entitled "The Eagle ofRussia", the
heart-shapedpoem is dedicated to the TsarAle¬
xis on thé occasion of his 30th birthday.
Photo taken from Le baroque dans les civilisations slaves,
Moscow 1982 © Nauka Publishers
interior decoration, costume, manners and
the art of oratory. Court theatre was also
influenced by the Baroque, notably the plays
of Ursula Radziwill, who had married into
the Polish royal family, which was of
Lithuanian origin. In her "Tale of Prince
Adolf", for example, borrowings from clas¬
sical mythology and mannered French liter¬
ature are transformed into a magnificent
"primitive" art form.
Notable aspects of Byelorussian and
Ukrainian painting are the unique seven¬
teenth- and eighteenth-century funerary
portraits on metal, a.nd parsuni (a corruption
of "person") art, inspired by icon painting.
While the painters used some processes
favoured by baroque artists (contrast of light
and dark, effects of perspective), they
refused to idealize their subjects: beauty
spots, scars or deformities were meticu¬
lously painted, in an attempt to immortalize
the flesh, which though doomed to decom¬
position concealed a soul bound for eternity.
GEORGII DMITRIEVITCH GATCHEV,
Soviet historian and art critic, is a researcher with
the Institute ofSlavonic and Balkan Studies ofthe
USSR Academy ofSciences. His many publications
include "Creation, Life, Art" (1980) and "The
Image in Russian Artistic Culture" (1981).
