Paradise lost
Bulimia, anorexia
UNTIL modern times, melancholy
was always regarded by Western
medicine as the worst enemy of a
"well-ordered", harmonious life, in
which the humours were perfectly bal¬
anced, especially in the blood, which was
held to be the very "food of life". It was
possible to govern the body and maintain
its balance by keeping a rein on desires,
by a wise and prudent administration of
the "treasure of life" on which the quality
and length of human existence depend.
The key to life was thought to lie in the
phenomenology of nutrition, in the
mysterious "faculties" and "virtues" of
food. Natural scientists of the old school
saw clearly that the body was responsible
for its actions to none but itself neither
to moral standards nor to religious laws.
The ancient Delphic precept "Know
thyself" was extended to cover know¬
ledge of the physical as well as the inner
life. Governance of the passions was
united to control over the body's hidden
drives and rhythms and over the world of
desires and needs. Self-knowledge meant
taking good care of oneself.
In this conception of the well-bal¬
anced, consciously ordered life, the only
limitation on the enjoyment of pleasures
was that prudent, carefully controlled ba
lance of the biological and physiological
functions which was the basis of physical
wisdom.
At the centre of this system of vigilant
self-regard was moderation in eating, or
dietetics, which became the absolute
arbiter of the fate of the body and the
harmony of the mind. The delicate ba¬
lance of the four humours, on which the
marvellous edifice of the human body
reposed, could be upset not only by foods
which were unsuited to the individual
"temperament" or by ignorance of the
"nature of foods", but also by incorrect
proportions and by an unreasonable ex¬
cess or insufficiency of certain foods.
If that balance was upset, the hell of the
disorder and corruption of the humours
opened up before the feet (and in the
blood) of the immoderate man who was
hungry or the exhausted man who had no
appetite. The moderate, balanced
nourishment of the body, which gov¬
erned the balance of the mind, was upset
by such extravagant forms of alimentary
deviationism. The destabilization of the
healthy diet caused irreparable harm to
the governance of the soul and psyche. It
is no accident that our forebears thought
that the paradise of delights was identical
with unspoiled, incorruptible Eden
( -
V
Walking Man (c. 1950), oil on paper by the
Swiss painter and sculptor Alberto
Giacometti (1901-1966).
28

Too much
and too little
Detail from "The Fight between Carnival
and Lent", by the Flemish painter Pieter
Bruegel the Elder (c. 1525-1569).



and drug addiction
s
©
"Palaeolithic Venus" unearthed at Dolni
Vestonice (Czechoslovakia) Is made of a
mixture of clay and powdered bone (11.4
cm).
where the perfect moderation of the
humours before Adam's fall brought
the scourge of imbalance and immodera¬
tion into the world warded off both
sickness and evil. Paradoxically,
however, dreams of Eden or the dread of
falling into the infernal abyss provoked a
short circuit in the form of food neuroses
and upset the delicate system of the phy¬
siological order.
Even today, the dietary pattern and the
fragile mechanism of self-control can be
disturbed either by alienating fears or by
excessive, inordinate desires. When this
happens, compensatory or renunciatory
attitudes towards food are bound to be
produced.
The appetite for sweet, sugary things
that appeal to the senses, and the plea¬
sure of gormandizing, are greatly stimu¬
lated by the unconscious desire to recre¬
ate artificially the Eden-like happiness of
our dreams, and to recapture in some way
the delights of the honey, manna and
milk enjoyed by our remote ancestors.
The uncontrolled bulimia of high-calorie
diets is caused by the tormenting dream
of re-creation. It is due to a desire to
retrieve, through the consumption of res¬
torative, invigorating nutrients, a place in
paradise lost, to take refuge in the uncon-
by Piero Camporesi
taminated, contented womb of Mother
Earth, to counteract the squandering of
life during the daily round, and to ex¬
orcize the grim uncertainties of the future
by means of food.
For centuries, the vain hope of being
able to prevent entropy and the dissipa¬
tion of heat and energy has kept alive the
myth of the tonic, the fortifying cordial,
the miraculous elixir of youth which will
restore the life-force and bring back lost
happiness.
Anorexia, on the other hand, express¬
es a premature, much-feared descent into
an underworld of darkness and bitter¬
ness, hunger and thirst. It marks the de¬
feat of the libido by the death instincts
and a surrender to the decay of the flesh.
It is a symptom of an irresistible desire to
taste the perverse pleasures of the death
throes by deliberately and gradually anti¬
cipating the moment of decomposition.
In the allegory of the drama, the battle
between fat, jovial, cheerful, sanguine
Carnival and dismal, melancholy, emaci¬
ated Lent, symbolized the conflict be¬
tween the two great principles that gov¬
ern life (Dante's two "great powers") and
preside over the destiny of the world, the
two temptations, and the call of the nega¬
tive and the positive: the rift between
29

*'fc^
M-' -Jl
'% Ir 43
1 ^>jkil
©
"The Ham Lunch" (detall) by the French
painter Nicolas Lancret (1690-1743).
night and day, the stages of life which
alternate between the two opposite poles
of intensification and diminution of the
vital forces.
The dream of longevity, of returning to
the age of the patriarchs, the various
formulae and secrets for delaying the
onset of old age and lengthening the life¬
span, as well as the opposite temptation
to shorten life, to reject it by freeing
oneself from the primordial life instinct,
and to lighten the weight of the flesh once
and for all both these impulses are ex¬
pressed in a pathological appetite or the
lack of it, and quantified accordingly.
Both originate in the logic of lack and
absence, in yearning for lost happiness.
For some, happiness was to be recovered
at all costs; while for others, it was
irretrievable.
Scepticism about life, failure to achieve
fulfilment, a frustrating awareness of the
wretched limitations of the human con¬
dition, confined in both space and time
such are the motives behind the desper¬
ate search for alternative solutions. They
lead people to build dream factories for
themselves, producing artificial paradises
to push back the narrow confines of
biological necessity and put back the
clock of life, of history and of inevitable
social change.
In all ages and all cultures, man has felt
the need to recreate a time which is non-
temporal or timeless, outside history, and
to regain an Eden-like condition in a
different place, to invent a different
abode by going back to the prehistory of
the ego, to divide man's earthly lifetime
into an infinite number of ages and to
reconstruct it according to a new geomet¬
ry. This need has led to a long and drama¬
tic search for "mediators of oblivion",
ranging from food and drink that produce
euphoria, to tonics and cordials that bring
elation and conviviality, philtres and
other magic potions, and insidious hallu¬
cinogenic substances.
Ritual drugs (fungi, herbs, leaves)
have been used in some religious prac¬
tices to help people expand their con¬
sciousness, explore the realms of the un¬
seen world by embarking on imaginary
journeys, and make contact with the
celestial spirits that preside over the cos¬
mic order. (The fumes of the tobacco
used by Amerindian cultures and of the
incense used in the Christian liturgy are
like frail olfactory threads intended to
make communication easier and help
people to understand messages from the
unknowable.) These drugs have long
been a potent means of magical and reli¬
gious communication. Institutionalized
by the liturgy and ordered by the sacred
calendar, the hallucinogens used in
worship were deeply rooted in the collec¬
tive culture of the social group which used
them and kept them under control.
Society today is largely desacralized;
and now that the regulated use of drugs for
a specific purpose has been abandoned
their consumption has become a danger¬
ous experiment undertaken by individuals,
a desperate attempt at personal escape, an
act of negation that marks the disintegra¬
tion of the tribe and a lawless attempt to
escape from the body of society envisaged
as a grey, oppressive prison, without light,
colour or fragrance.
PIERO CAMPORESI, Italian cultural historian
and essayist, is professor of Italian literature at
the University of Bologna and visiting professor
at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences
Sociales in Paris. He has published a number of
works on the anthropology of literature and the
history of popular cultures, which have been
translated Into several languages.
30
