How should
we attack the
drugproblem? At<
by Giuseppe di Gennaro
THE increase in drug dependence
among young people is creating
exacting new problems for educa¬
tors, who need to grasp the true nature and
scope of the phenomenon in order to carry
out their duties.
The non-medical use of drugs has always
existed, but in forms which have little in
common with drug dependence among
young people as we know it today.
Historical and anthropological research
has shown that in the past drug-taking was
almost always confined to adults. Adoles¬
cents were never involved. Drugs were
taken sporadically for mystical, religious or
ritual purposes, and only by certain groups
and in certain circumstances. The impor¬
tant thing about the practice and purpose of
these forms of drug taking was the absence
of dependence.
Later, when morphine, heroin and
cocaine began to be used, there were cases
of addiction among adults, but until the
mid-1960s the numbers involved were so
small that the phenomenon never reached a
socially significant scale and on the whole
attracted little attention.
It was not until the late 1960s that drug
abuse began to make inroads among young
people and children and eventually became
a world problem, as uncontrollable waves
of epidemic proportions swept from con¬
tinent to continent.
It is therefore both mistaken and dan¬
gerous to assume that the present situation
is simply the continuation of the past. It is
mistaken because only today have drugs
become a culture which everyone must
face. It is dangerous because it makes peo¬
ple less vigilant and encourages passivity
and acceptance. We expect that the damage
will be limited and that the community will
continue to take things in its stride as it has
done over the centuries.
Educators must take stock of the dangers
that drugs represent for children and ado¬
lescents today, foresee possible future
developments, understand the causes of the
situation and the forces underlying it, and
introduce appropriate remedial measures
into the educational process. This is an
arduous task, as can be seen from the per¬
sistence and increasing gravity of drug
dependence in spite of the determination of
many educators and the hard work they
have done in the last twenty years.
The subject has been exhaustively dis¬
cussed. Whole libraries of books have been
devoted to it, written by specialists in every
branch of knowledge; research has been
carried out by highly qualified authorities
and organizations; innumerable con¬
ferences and meetings have been held, both
local and international; but the guidelines
for reliable and effective educational
defence measures have still not been clearly
and unequivocally defined.
It is thus vital to continue our efforts to
understand the situation and deal with it
more effectively. The purpose of this article
is to stimulate critical reflection about cer¬
tain widely held beliefs. There is a risk that
such beliefs may be considered to be abso¬
lutely true, although they are not, and be
taken, wrongly, as a basis for educational
theory and practice, now and in the future.
These beliefs all stem from the assump¬
tion that drug dependence among young
people is due to factors caused by the
changes and tensions of modern society. In
accordance with this assumption various sit¬
uations have been singled out and blamed
for the spread of drugs. An exhaustive list of
these situations would be extremely long
and is unnecessary for our purpose. We
shall merely point out certain widely
accepted allegations.
The first comes under the heading of
i
\
\
I
1
\
!
This French poster is a stiff from a short
f/7m produced for showing on TV and in
cinemas as part of an anti-drug campaign.
Intended for 10- to 13-year-olds, the film
was made to encourage young people to
resist approaches from drug-pushers.
10

»«8**
"youthful protest". It has been maintained
that young people at a certain stage refused
to be dominated by the adult culture, which
in their view was entangled with profit-mak¬
ing and the status quo, and reacted against
the idea of being excluded from the con¬
struction of the future society in which they
would have to live. This reaction turned
into confrontation and struggle, and the
anger that in some countries culminated in
the disturbances of 1968 was accompanied
by the development of a general attitude of
rejection of adult behaviour and values.
Drug abuse was essentially a deliberate
insult and provocation on the part of young
people towards adults.
The correlation between the spread of
drug dependence and youthful protest
seemed convincing because the connection
appeared to be logical and because the two
phenomena occurred at the same time.
Youthful protest lost its impetus within a
few years and was inevitably followed by a
general feeling of defeat, resignation and
disengagement from society. This second
phase was also accompanied by drug depen¬
dence. Specialists have stressed the impor¬
tance of detachment and the flight from
reality in drug abuse, and have proposed
another causal hypothesis without paying
much attention to the fact that it is the
antithesis of the first.
Meanwhile, in some societies an extreme
form of consumerism was developing at a
time of general social well-being and at
the same time drug dependence among
young people assumed greater proportions.
Again the two phenomena were seen by
some to be related; this paved the way for
the theory that drug dependence was due to
well-being and excess. It was only later that
underdevelopment, poverty and drugs
came to be associated, and sparked off a
search for other causes.
Various theories continued to be put for¬
ward. Some assertions were so general as to
be irrefutable since they were impossible to
verify empirically. One was the claim that
drug dependence is the result of the collapse
of traditional values.
Other theories based on the simultaneous
occurrence of spreading drug dependence
and certain forms of social change were
refuted by the observation that the same
social conditions did not always give rise to
similar phenomena. One of the most impor¬
tant of these theories claimed that there was
a relation between the loosening of family
ties and drug dependence. This theory, of
course, originated in highly industrialized
11

ft has been suggested that the spread of
drug dependence is due to the loosening
of traditional family ties. However, some
doubt was cast on this theory when drug
dependence was observed among young
people in a context of stable family struc¬
tures. Above, Family Group (1945-1949) by
the British sculptor Henry Moore.
countries, where the family has been
affected by the demands made by the level
of organization and by the tensions of indus¬
trialized society.
The family and especially the parents
were blamed for this tragedy. Today, many
people question their culpability, having
seen situations in which the epidemic of
drug-taking on the part of young people has
appeared in a context characterized by
social and economic immobility and the sta¬
bility of family structures.
Lastly, the idea that there is a causal link
between unemployment and drugs has
recently been disproved by the spread of
drug dependence among workers.
Logically enough, whenever one of these
theories was put forward, those concerned
with the prevention and treatment of drug
dependence took action against the sup¬
posed causes of the phenomenon. In con¬
sequence, for more than twenty years we
have seen a feverish succession of prescrip¬
tions and measures intended to tackle a
wide variety of different "causes". Every¬
one agrees that education is an essential
tool in combating drug dependence, above
all as a means of prevention. However, it
has lost its bearings and is now at the centre
of a heated argument that is fed by alternat¬
ing aetiological "credos".
The inability of the family and the school
to perform their respective educational
functions has been castigated by the suppor¬
ters of these different theories, who main¬
tain that certain factors are the cause or at
least contribute to the cause that corre¬
sponds to their particular theories. The fol¬
lowing remarks are intended to help these
two great forces which are under accusa¬
tion the family and the school to
rediscover their bearings and to perform
their difficult task successfully, each in its
own sphere of responsibilities and each
applying its own methods.
Although family upbringing and school
education have much in common as regards
their dynamic and their aims, there are
important differences between them.
By family upbringing we mean the natu¬
ral process by which parents and other
members of the family nucleus transmit to
their children a number of messages, by
word, action and behaviour. Such messages
give, more or less directly, an indication of
what "should be" in other words, guid¬
ance for living and an idea of the behaviour
that is expected of young people.
School education, on the other hand, is
an institutional process designed to inte¬
grate the process of family upbringing. In
school education trained professionals
transmit messages which are meant to
inform their pupils and influence their
behaviour by means of the values and ideals
that they assimilate.
The process of family upbringing is
largely unconscious, and in the mechanism
whereby messages are transmitted and
received the emotional or affective element
is usually more potent than the intellectual
or cognitive element. School education, on
the other hand, is a conscious process,
although the emotional or affective element
may play an important part in it.
The two educational processes, for all
12

their differences, have one thing in com¬
mon: they interact with a series of influ¬
ences originating in the circumstances of the
young person's life. It is clear that the effect
of identical educational processes will vary
as a result of different external influences. It
is generally realized that the influence of
friends, or the "peer group", is extremely
powerful in this respect, especially at cer¬
tain stages of adolescence.
If the influence of the peer group conveys
the values of an alien or hostile culture, it
will encourage and strengthen attitudes of
confrontation and opposition to the
authority of parents and teachers, together
with rejection of the culture to which the
family and the school owe allegiance.
Instead of being a part of the growing-up
process, when adolescents assert their own
personalities and attempt to throw off the
bonds of parental authority, this stage may
on the contrary become an opportunity for
messages from alien and hostile cultural
sources to enter their minds. The young
person's personality becomes a battle-field,
in which the more powerful influences can
be expected to prevail.
How does the peer group transmit the
messages of the drug culture while the
school and the vast majority of families
belong to a different culture? To answer this
question, we need to know where the drug
culture comes from and what sustains it.
The idea that young people themselves
create the drug culture because of weak¬
nesses in family upbringing and school edu¬
cation is thoughtless and superficial. Relia¬
ble research findings now indicate that the
drug culture is the outcome of shrewd
manipulation by the many persons who
work for the barons of the drug traffic.
Preventive education against the abuse of
legal or illegal drugs is at the heart of
Unesco's action against drug depen¬
dence. Below, schoolchildren in Singa¬
pore examine the diseased lung of a dead
smoker.
These powerful figures possess very consid¬
erable financial resources and highly effi¬
cient and far-reaching organizations. Just as
the great fashion centres and the producers
of other consumer goods create and impose
a culture that aspires to the acquisition of
such products, so those who control the vast
drug market create and impose a culture
that leads inevitably to drug abuse and the
spread of drug dependence. In this market,
young people are not active agents; they are
conditioned customers.
If this is true, it is false and unjust to
blame the family or the school, and it is
pointless to look for causal factors among
social phenomena or tensions. Drug depen¬
dence springs from the drug culture, which,
in its turn, is created by drug traffickers and
their battalions of propagandists.
The family and the school should realize
this; they should stop feeling guilty and
should understand that, in the present state
of affairs, if they wish to protect young peo¬
ple they must do more than generate and
transmit traditional positive influences.
Drug abuse will not be beaten unless the
drug culture is beaten too, and this means
waging a determined struggle against illicit
drug production and trafficking and against
the powerful criminal syndicates that grow
rich in this way. .
Of course the family and the school have
a role to play, but their efforts will be inade¬
quate if not fruitless unless government
institutions and the resources of the com¬
munity are mobilized to defeat those
responsible for the scourge of drug
dependence.
Drug taking is no recent phenomenon, and
drug abuse has been resisted throughout
history. In an episode from the Sirat
Baybars, a folk account of the life of
Baybars I, a 13th-century Mamluk Sultan
of Egypt and Syria, Baybars attacks cor¬
ruption, crime, prostitution and hashish
smoking in the Cairo slums. Above and
below, details of cover illustrations from 2
volumes of a new French translation of
this vast work of some 36,000 pages.
GIUSEPPE DI GENNARO, Italian jurist, has
been Executive Director of the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control (UNFDAC) since
1982. He was previously Chairman of the UN
Commission on Narcotic Drugs and frequently
served as a UN consultant. In his own country he
has been a judge, and occupied various high-
level posts in the Italian Ministry of Justice. He is
the author of numerous anieles and reports on
drug problems, criminology and other legal
matters.
13
