China's health
/
MANY people appreciate the
subtle and delicious flavours of
Chinese food and drink, but
few are aware of the important role they
play in preventing illness, curing disease
and preserving health.
Over thousands of years the Chinese
people have learned that many foods
have a medicinal value. During the
period of the Longshan culture 4,000
years ago, our ancestors learned how to
make wine for drinking, for use as a
condiment, as a medicine for invigorating
the blood, nourishing the qi (vital ener¬
gy), warming the stomach, and keeping
out the cold. The lower part of the orig¬
inal Chinese character signifying doctor
and healing ( ^ ) contains the character
for wine ( jgjj = jjjf ), illustrating the point
that "food and medicine originate from
the same source; a food is also a
medicine".
Professional food doctors already ex¬
isted in China during the Zhou Dynasty
(c. 11th century-221 BC), and The Canon
of Medicine, the first work of Chinese
traditional medicine written in the Spring
and Autumn Period (770-476 BC) stated
that food as well as medicine should be
used in the treatment of disease. Bain
Que, an eminent doctor who lived during
the Warring States Period (475-221 BC),
used food treatment before prescribing
medicines. The Peaceful Holy Benevolent
Prescriptions, a work written during the
Sung Dynasty (960-1279) gave recipes for
the treatment of twenty-eight diseases
with instructions for the preparation of
appropriate foods. Porridges made with
different nutrients were prescribed for
different illnesses: black bean porridge
for oedema; almond porridge for coughs;
fish porridge for dysentery.
Over forty years' experience as a clinic¬
al dietician have taught me how success¬
ful food treatment can be. As a mother I
feel special concern for women during
childbirth, and pay great attention to the
restoration of their health after delivery.
I once looked after a fragile young
woman who weighed less than 50 kg be¬
fore she became pregnant. She was wor¬
ried that she would not be able to with¬
stand the strain of childbirth. I drew up
Left, preparation of fish as depicted by a
sculptor of the Han Dynasty (3rd century
BC). Right, making pasta by hand in mod¬
ern China.
24

food tradition
by Li Ruifen
special menus for her in accordance with
Chinese traditional practice stewed hen
without soya sauce, eggs in glutinous rice
wine, millet porridge with brown sugar
and sesame, and other re (hot by nature)
foods. Within a few months she had re¬
covered, even though she breast-fed her
baby. In fact, she became much healthier
than before.
According to traditional Chinese
medical theory, the physical constitution
of a woman after childbirth is xu (weak),
han (cold by nature), and her internal
organs do not function normally. Such
patients should take either wen (warm by
nature) or re foods to obtain vital energy
and to restore the balance within the
body. On the other hand, pork, duck,
mung beans and other han foods are not
suitable for women after childbirth.
I have also advised hundreds of
mothers on a suitable diet for their
babies. One pale-looking premature
baby was so weak that it lacked even the
energy to suck. It is generally believed
that only in rare cases can such weak
babies survive. This particular baby was
placed under my care. First of all, I fed it
the thick liquid skimmed from rice por¬
ridge to provide it with the calories it
needed. (Doctors practising Chinese tra¬
ditional medicine assert that rice is sweet
and neutral by nature, and is easily
absorbed in the spleen and kidney. Li
Shizhen, a famous doctor of the Ming
Dynasty (1368-1644) said, "Skinny and
dark babies fed on the thick liquid from
rice porridge become plump and white
after a hundred days".)
Then I gradually added milk powder,
egg yolks, fish paste and bean soup to the
baby's diet to provide amino acids, and
liquids from vegetables and fruit as a
source of vitamins and minerals. The
baby was fed very small amounts at first,
and then gradually increasing quantities,
and from eating a single kind of food
progressed to eating many different
kinds. In less than a hundred days, the
baby was heavier than other babies of the
same age. When it was six months old, I
cut down on its starch intake to control its
weight and added more vegetables and
fruit to the diet. By the time the child was
one year old, it was healthy and lively. In
China, some mothers are always afraid
that their babies may be hungry and so
they overfeed them with protein-rich
foods. The results are unsatisfactory as
overfeeding harms the digestive system.
Old people often come to me for advice
on how to eat to prolong life, and I always
quote them a rule laid down by the re¬
nowned Doctor Sun Simiao of the T'ang
Dynasty (618-907) which recommends
"many small meals". This is good advice
for older people whose physical faculties
are gradually failing. They should take
light meals with little sugar, little salt, and
not much fat. I also advise them to eat
two or three snacks between their three
regular daily meals. At each meal, they
25

should stop eating before their stomachs
are full, and should include at least twen¬
ty and if possible between thirty and forty
different kinds of food in their daily diet
in order to obtain the many kinds of
nutrients they need.
Madame Zhang is an elderly writer
whose way of life I highly approve of.
Every day she eats some millet, dried
shredded corn, beans, peanuts or other
grain. A green leafy vegetable dish forms
part of every meal. One of her favourite
foods is bean curd. She does all she can to
maintain a balance between han and re
foods in her diet and a balance between
motion and rest in her daily activities. She
rises early and goes to bed early, and
often takes an outdoor stroll as well as
walking 7,000 paces around her rooms
each day. She also massages herself daily
and ^does some household chores.
Although she is in her eighties, Madame
Zhang is physically fit and mentally lucid
and is able to keep up with her writing.
I told her that the rate of metabolism is
slower for old people and that she should
add more protein to her diet. Instead of
dining on "four-legged animals" (cow,
pig, lamb, etc.), it was better to eat "two-
legged fowls" (chicken, duck or other
birds), "single-leg edible fungi"
(mushrooms) or "legless fish". Poultry
and fish have a high protein content, are
low in fats and their short fibres are easy
on the digestive system. Fungi are a rich
source of plant protein.
Once I made a special "eight-treasures
duck" for Madame Zhang. This is a high¬
ly nourishing festive dish with a low fat
content. I used protein-rich plants for the
stuffing xianggu mushrooms (which re¬
plenish vital energy, regulate blood cir
culation and reduce phlegm), lotus seeds
(which are credited with sedative prop¬
erties, strengthen the function of the
heart and reduce blood pressure) , sesame
(which nourishes and builds up the body
and moistens the intestines), Chinese
dates (which reinforce the spleen, nor¬
malize the functions of the stomach,
nourish vital energy and replenish body
fluids), chestnuts (which nourish the
spleen, invigorate the functions of the
stomach, reinforce the kidney and invigo¬
rate blood circulation), gingko seeds
(which warm the lungs, nourish vital
energy, check asthma and act as a detox-
icant) , peanuts (which enliven the spleen,
normalize the function of the stomach,
moisten the lungs, stop coughing), bam¬
boo shoots (which clear up internal heat,
reduce phlegm, regulate the stomach,
moisten the intestines) and glutinous
rice. Thus the combination of these foods
with duck (nourishing to the yin1 and an
eliminator of dampness) makes an excel¬
lent dish for the aged.
I usually follow our traditional method
of selecting appropriate foods which will
gradually restore the physical strength of
my patients, especially those who are cri¬
tically ill. The patient must first acquire
enough calories to maintain life, to im¬
prove resistance against disease and
strengthen the immune defence system in
order to increase the opportunities for
recovery.
Some years ago I treated a woman who
had undergone an operation for stomach
cancer. It was found that the cancer had
spread to all the lymph nodes. The doc¬
tors predicted that the patient had only
three months to live. At the time the
patient was undergoing chemotherapy
which seriously impaired her health. She
was constantly vomiting as a reaction to
the chemotherapy and lost between 2 and
3 kg after each course of treatment.
I decided not to make her eat in the
morning when she had her chemotherapy
treatment which caused her to vomit. But
after 4 o'clock in the afternoon when the
climax of the toxic effect of chemother¬
apy had passed, she was put on a special
diet which included her favourite foods.
For a patient in her condition, every
mouthful counted and so she was con¬
stantly fed until night. The next morning,
when chemotherapy continued, she was
given a slice of ginger to suck to prevent
vomiting and to warm the spleen and the
stomach. With such care, though the pa¬
tient underwent eight courses of che¬
motherapy treatment in over a year, she
gained more than 10 kg in weight. She
lived five years longer than predicted.
Chinese traditional medicine insists
that diet should vary according to the
individual. The human body needs a cer¬
tain amount of all kinds of food, but the
amount taken must be based on such
factors as age, physical constitution, diet¬
ary habit and climate. Over-eating or
starvation must be avoided to protect the
spleen and the stomach. By proper use of
food to build up the body, it will be
possible to give priority to the prevention
of disease.
According to Chinese traditional medi¬
cine, the physical constitution of the hu-
Regional traditions of Chinese cooking re¬
flect climate, customs and natural pro¬
duce. In Shanghai, below, and elsewhere
in eastern China, people are fond of hot,
spicy dishes while the people of western
China tend to prefer tart flavours.
"

Photos Dai Jiming © Xinhua News Agency, Beijing
Three specialities of traditional Chinese cuisine: above, shrimps,
strips ofmeatand vegetables are simmered in soup kept boiling in
a pot heated by burning charcoal; top right, "turnips in chicken
soup" accompanied by bamboo shoots and ham; right, "Hudie
Su", butterfly-shaped pastries.
man body is classified as yin, yang,2 xu,
han. Food materials are han, re, bu (re¬
plenishing) or xie (reducing) in nature,
and taste sweet, sour, bitter, salty or hot.
Selection of foods must be made accord¬
ing to the season and the climate and the
corresponding relation between them.
Doctors of Chinese traditional medicine
classify the four seasons as spring-warm,
summer-hot, autumn-dry, winter-cold
and believe that the physical condition of
a person undergoes corresponding
changes in the different seasons. Unless
appropriate changes are made in their
diet, people are likely to fall ill.
Since there is a release of vital energy
and the qi (vital energy) and blood tend
to rise to the surface in spring, people
should eat more vegetables and less fats
at this time of year. Hot, pungent foods
must be avoided. In summer, there is
usually a loss of appetite and a slackening
in the function of the digestive system.
Thus it is desirable to take tart foods and
other innately cold foods to facilitate the
removal of toxic heat within the body.
With the arrival of autumn and cool
weather, people regain their appetite. In
this season a reasonable amount of hot
and pungent foods serves to expel inter¬
nal residual summer heat. When winter
comes, the rate of metabolism rises and
thus more hot and pungent rich foods
may be included in the diet.
The styles of Chinese cooking have
been developed according to the geog¬
raphical location, customs and habits,
and the material resources of the diffe¬
rent parts of our country. The people of
the Sichuan Basin, for example, are fond
of peppery foods. This can be related to
the fact that they live in an area which is
damp all the year round. Hot peppery
foods help to remove dampness within
the body and thus restore its inner balan¬
ce. In our country, the southerners are
fond of sweet foods while the northerners
prefer salty fare; easterners favour hot
foods and westerners like tart flavours.
The reasons for this variation in the local
flavours may be found in differences of
climate, geographical characteristics and
material resources.
Chinese food treatment is based on the
hypothesis that "if there is genuine ener¬
gy within the body, diseases will not be
able to attack". Prevention is of primary
importance. Treatment after a person
falls ill comes next. Food treatment is too
complicated a subject to be expounded in
a short article, and I shall leave the last
word to a distinguished thirteenth-cen¬
tury doctor, Chen Zhi, who wrote that
"regardless of hundreds and thousands of
kinds of edible foods found on land and in
the sea, their five colours,3 five tastes and
their natures oihan re, buxie are inherent
in the yin yang and the five elements4" .
1. Yin the female or negative principle.
2. Yang the male or positive principle.
3. Five colours blue, red, yellow, white, black.
4. Five elements wood, fire, earth, metal and water
with their characteristic properties an ancient philo¬
sophical concept to explain the composition and phe¬
nomenon of the physical universe. Later used in tradi¬
tional medicine to expound the unity of the human body
and the natural world and the physiological and patholo¬
gical relationship between the internal organs.
LI RUIFEN, Chinese dietician, is deputy manag¬
ing director of the Beijing Gastronomy and Nutri¬
tion Research Association and deputy director of
the Beijing Nutrition Association.
27
