The world's homeless millions
"More than 1,000 million people a quar¬
ter of the world populationare either
literallyhomeless or live in extremelypoor
housing and unhealthy environments.
About 100 million people have no shelter
whatsoever; they sleep in the streets,
under bridges, on waste ground, In alleys
and doorways."
THE General Assembly of the
United Nations has declared 1987
the International Year of Shelter
for the Homeless. More than 1,000 mil¬
lion people a quarter of the world
population are either literally homeless
or live in extremely poor housing and
unhealthy environments. About 100 mil¬
lion people have no shelter whatsoever;
they sleep in the streets, under bridges,
on waste ground, in alleys and doorways.
The problem of inadequate housing is
universal. It is common to industrialized
and developing countries, to urban and
rural areas. Because of an unprecedented
urban explosion, the developing coun¬
tries are faced with the formidable task of
providing shelter, services and work in
cities for an additional 150,000 people
every day.
In the shanty-towns the urban poor live
in helpless insecurity, evicted repeatedly
from homes which are demolished before
-
~**~
their eyes and confronted by hostile offi¬
cials who refuse to recognize their ex¬
istence. Hostility breeds hostility. In
these mushrooming squatter colonies, a
generation of city-dwellers is growing up
with no stake in the present social order,
which they find unrelentingly oppressive.
Many of them hold society responsible
for their degraded lives; many also have
learned to live by preying upon it.
City after city has therefore turned into
a powder keg of crime and violence. Gov¬
ernments have responded by increasing
the numbers and powers of the police, a
policy which has at best treated the symp¬
toms of the crisis and not its causes. As a
result social peace has become more and
more fragile.
Many of the remedies chosen have
aggravated the disease. For example, the
authorities perceive that the quality of
housing in the cities is poor and that living
conditions are unhygienic. The solution
they adopt is to raise housing standards
through stricter enforcement of more
exacting building codes.
However, higher standards increase
the cost of construction and place legal
housing even further beyond the reach of
the urban poor, more and more of whom
are forced into shanty-towns and inner-
city slums. The authorities find that there
are too many squatters, clear their col¬
onies and raze their hovels to the ground.
Most governments have tried to re¬
house squatters in State-built housing.
This has not solved the problem either.
Not only has the pace of public construc¬
tion lagged far behind the growth of the
cities, but even State-built dwellings of
this kind have proved far too expensive
for the poor. The authorities have there¬
fore been forced to subsidize the poor
and have quickly found that the cost is far
too high. This dismal failure has often led
them to avoid the problem of providing
shelter by pretending that it has ceased to
exist.
Hectic urban growth and the rising de¬
mand for housing push up rents to levels
far higher than what the poor, and even
18

large sections of the middle class, can
pay. The authorities respond by imposing
rent control, a solution which makes in¬
vestment in housing uneconomic and
dries up the supply of new dwelling units,
thus increasing the pressure on existing
units and accelerating the growth of
squatter colonies.
Most obstacles to the provision of shel¬
ter are man-made, rooted in laws and
economic conditions. The removal of
these hurdles involves first of all guaran¬
teeing the urban poor a secure title to
plots of land, however small these may
be; secondly, allowing them to build
whatever kind of housing they can afford
and leaving them free to improve it when
their means permit; thirdly, meeting their
need for sanitation and safe drinking wa¬
ter in the cheapest way possible; and
lastly giving them access to financial and
technical assistance in building their
homes.
In the search for low cost options,
architects and shelter planners have
found that the best way to start is by
taking a hard look at a country's tradi¬
tional architecture and construction
methods. This approach, once practised
exclusively by imaginative architects, has
now been widely adopted by shelter plan¬
ners and is yielding rich dividends. Un¬
baked clay bricks are, for example, not
only considerably cheaper than cement
blocks or fired bricks, they are also much
better thermal insulators.
The second important lesson that plan¬
ners have learned is that if shelter can be
brought within the means of the poor,
then instead of being a drag on the eco¬
nomy, investment in housing for low-
income groups can become a powerful
and sustained stimulus for economic
growth in a developing country.
If they are to solve the shelter problem
the developing countries must mobilize
the savings of the poor to finance the
construction of their own homes. Not
only must private builders become in¬
volved as entrepreneurs in building
houses for low-income groups, but the
output of the building materials industry
must be reoriented to meet the need for
cheap building materials.
This does not mean that the industry
should accept low profit returns on the
production and sale of these materials. It
implies that the industry must be given
the technological support needed to pro¬
duce cheap building materials for low-
cost housing. A final but very important
point is that the success and viability of
shelter projects depend heavily on the
involvement of the beneficiaries.
The urban and rural poor have shown a
tremendous capacity to improve their
housing conditions with little or no exter¬
nal assistance thus demonstrating the
need for policies aimed at "helping the
poor to help themselves", a need being
increasingly recognized by governments
in their development policies and pro¬
grammes.
This approach to human settlement
policies is increasingly being adopted by
the governments of developing countries.
Thus there is hope that current trends can
be reversed, that present conditions are
not unchangeable and that this formid¬
able challenge can still be met.
19
