The poetry
of llya Chavchavadze
by Gaston Bouatchidzé and Edouard Glissant

Gaston Bouatchidzé: The work of llya
Chavchavadze (1837-1907) fits naturally
into the literary tradition of Georgia, the
origins of which can be traced back to the
fifth century. The poetical works which pre¬
ceded and paved the way for his own
include, first and foremost, The Knight in
the Panther's Skin by Shota Rustaveli
(twelfth century), the Davitiani by David
Guramishvili (eighteenth century) and the
poetry of the romantic Nikoloz Baratashvili
(first half of the nineteenth century).
However, the period spanned by the life of
llya Chavchavadze coincides with a unique
chapter in the history of the country. The
poet sets out to be its chronicler, and both
his poetic inspiration and his craft are influ¬
enced by this, being shaped by the dictates
of the author's views, if Rustaveli is the
master of epic and philosophical poetry, a
virtuoso of richly musical and varied verse,
Guramishvili the craftsman of the most
wide-ranging poetic metre and of con¬
structions that are both brilliant and strik¬
ing, and Baratashvili the lyricist of suffering
and melancholy, the poetry of llya
Chavchavadze is outstanding in its deliber
ate purity of form and transparency, in
keeping with his generous breadth ofvision.
Clarity and directness of impact are the
essential characteristics of his work.
Edouard Glissant: The poetry of
Chavchavadze does, indeed, have the
power and refinement to be found in all
literature which strikes a strong popular
chord and marks a new departure. In this
respect it is reminiscent of the French six¬
teenth-century poets such as Jean de
Sponde or Jean-Baptiste Chassignet. At the
same time, it is almost symbolist in its musi¬
cal qualities, and speaks, besides, with the
perfectly controlled voice of modernity.
Here we find a lyrical encounter between
personal feeling and collective destiny.
G.B.: I should like, in this connection, to
Still from the 1958 Soviet film "The Widow
Otarova", which was adapted for the screen
from llya Chavchavadze-'s 1887 novel describ¬
ing the misery of serfdom and the decline of
the feudal system.
31

recall the variety of llya Chavchavadze's
writings: the poet in him is closely seconded
by the prose writer, and the publicist goes
hand in hand with the militant humanist and
organizer of various aspects of community
life. This means that the same, or similar,
themes run through his work, and, as it
were, resonate in sympathy with the preoc¬
cupations of the century, and in particular
those of writers such as Pushkin, Victor
Hugo and Tolstoy. Those themes include,
for example, humanism (including the
demand to abolish the death penalty),
social justice, truth at all costs, fervent
patriotism and the need to educate and
enlighten the people.
E.G.: Such poetry is remarkably relevant
today. I am thinking of the quotation from
Leibniz that Chavchavadze chose as an
introduction to his poem Mother Georgia:
"The present, born of the past, in turn
begets the future." Historical memory, with
all its light and shade, is the background to
all identity, particularly in the present age,
when different cultures and civilizations
impinge on one another. Poetry throughout
the world needs both the universal and the
particular. Here again, I think that
Chavchavadze affords an instructive exam¬
ple. Moreover, the "tone" of the language is
The Poet
/ do not sing for singing's sake,
As does the bird upon the tree;
Nor was it for sweet sounds alone
That God created me.
God chooses me; the people shape
And temper me for my vocation,
And I commune with God, that I
May rise and lead my nation.
My heart burns with a holy flame
That all my strength I may employ
To serve my people faithfully
In sorrow and in joy.
O let my people's suffering
Be branded on my soul, I ask
And let my heart, through good and ill,
Be equal to its task!
If in my heart the spark divine
Will kindle fire to banish fears,
Then I will raise my people up,
And I will dry their tears!
Pavlovsk,
23 July 1860
Poem
The soulless life is not
A gift that falls like rain:
What merely lives and dies
Returns to dust again.
A soul that yearns to act
Lights up our path, our goals,
And makes them Infinite
Like He who gives us souls.
Blest is the man whose life
With noble deeds doth shine,
For, mortal, he shall drink
Of the immortal wine.
St. Petersburg,
1860
audible through the translation. But I sup¬
pose that, as in the case of Pushkin, much of
the melody is necessarily lost?
G.B.: In this respect I might offer for com¬
parison my previous experience as a transla¬
tor of Georgian poetry into French. In
translating Rustaveli's The Knight in the
Panther's Skin (to be co-published by
Publications Orientalistes de France and
Raduga of Moscow in 1988), I kept to the
single rhyme of the quatrains and tried, as
far as possible, to transpose the music of the
verses. On the other hand, in the case of a
modern poet, Galaktion Tabidze, whose
"Skull with Artistic Flowers" will be
published this year in Tbilisi in a bilingual
(Georgian-French) edition, I dispensed
with rhyme in order to keep more closely to
the poet's variations of rhythm. With llya
Chavchavadze the problem was primarily
one of maintaining the structures suited to
his form of poetic expression, and rendering
his tone, which is both sober and vigorous.
E.G.: That sobriety reveals both the grace
of a language and the charm of the poet. I
hope that the translations which will appear
in the different language editions of the
Courier will make our readers want to
become better acquainted with the poetry
of Chavchavadze.
Night
When the feverish din of the busy day is
hushed,
And the droning voices of Evil at last are
still,
And, cradled beneath the sky, the village
sleeps,
Then, southern night! on you 1 gaze my fill.
(1857-1861)
Poem
My hopes are crushed and all my dreams are
fled
All lost, all gone. I am alone again.
The arrow loosed from love's despairing
bow,
Piercing my heart, surrendered me to pain.
Cursed by our meeting, in an ill-starred
hour.
Where was this paragon of virtue bred?
And you, my heart, erstwhile subdued and
calm,
What force was this that made you raise the
dead?
All that I amis hersshe is not mine.
And she holds out, adoringly, to sate
Another's thirst, her heady cup of love,
While I can only rail against my fate.
To whom shall I confide my tale of woe?
The door is barred, and I am left outside.
My sickness has no cure, and there can be
No words to comfort me, when hope has
died.
(1877)
Translated into French from the Georgian by Gaston
Bouatchidzé
GASTON BOUATCHIDZE, of the USSR, is a
doctor of philology specializing In French lan¬
guage and literature. A member of the Union of
Writers of the Georgian SSR, he teaches at
Tbilisi State University.

