An interview with Yozo Shiozaki



A 'communications society'
A Unesco Courier interview with
Mr. Yozo Shiozaki, President of
Dentsu France S.A., a subsidiary
of Japan's largest communications
agency, Dentsu Incorporated,
on the part played by the media
in cultural life.
14
Which are the dominant media in Japan
today?
Of the four "mass media" newspapers,
magazines, television and radio the most
powerful is television. There are two chan¬
nels run by the State-owned Japan Broad¬
casting Corporation (NHK), and five com¬
mercial networks. Of the 39 million
households in Japan, 99.7 per cent own at
least one TV set, and the average individu¬
al watches three to five hours daily. Japa¬
nese people are also avid readers. Five
newspapers are read nationwide, two of
them (Yomiuri Shimbun and Asahi Shim-
bun) by over 7 million households each.
Japan's newspaper circulation figures are
among the highest in the world, and read¬
ership is very stable because of the high
percentage of subscribers, who have their
papers delivered to the home. Until the
1970s, newspapers tended to publish arti¬
cles on mainly political and economic top¬
ics written for a predominantly male read¬
ership. But recently more editorial effort
has gone into home life, women's pages,
sport and entertainment. Over 2,000
monthly and 70 weekly magazines are also
published. Radio, which was forced into
the background in the early days of televi¬
sion, has made a comeback with the in¬
troduction of commercial stations, nearly
half of which operate around the clock,
especially in urban areas.
Above, two stills from a publicity film for a
Japanese publisher, announcing the simulta¬
neous publication in 12 countries of a set of
encyclopaedias on the animal world. The
film was awarded the Grand Prix at Cannes
International Advertising Festival 1987.
A forest of shimmering neon signs towers
above street level in the Ginza district of To¬
kyo, left.
What is the role of the media in cultural
life?
The contribution of the media has changed
along with social developments and now
includes the conception and co-ordination
of cultural events as a link between private
industry and the public. For example, as a
communications agency we were one of
the major promoters of both the 1 964 To¬
kyo Olympics and of Expo 70 in Osaka.
More recently, we played a major role in
organizing, producing and promoting the
1985 International Exposition at Tsukuba
on the theme "Science and Technology for
Man at Home", which was sponsored by
the Japanese Government and twenty-
eight private corporations. The mass pub¬
licity given to this event encouraged some
20 million people to visit the displays, and
they found that high tech developments
were perhaps not as remote from their
daily lives as they had thought.
Which other activities attract private
sponsorship and extensive media pro¬
motion?
The first official sumo wrestling tournament
outside Japan, for example, which was
sponsored by a television network in 1 986.
The Japanese people were delighted that
a sumo tournament should take place
abroad, because the sport is very close to
the roots of their national identity. Probably
everyone in Japan watches the wrestling
bouts which are broadcast on the State
television network every day during tour¬
nament seasons. It's a spiritual sport, more
akin to the mind than to the body. Similar
coverage is given to baseball, as the Yomi¬
uri actually owns the "Giants", a famous
baseball team in Japan. A year ago the first
concert hall in Japan to be devoted to
classical music was opened in the centre
of Tokyo, sponsored by a beverage manu¬
facturer and distributor. Other cultural and
educational activities which attract spon¬
sorship are theatre and cinema perform¬
ances, art exhibitions, courses for the pub¬
lic, creation of green spaces in cities,
publishing, scholarships and international
exchanges, to name but a few. The activ-

¡ties of Japanese companies abroad are a
new trend in this booming phenomenon.
Another good example of such commercial
enterprise is a series of events entitled
"Close-up of Japan", sponsored by a large
Japanese group. In an attempt to introduce
Japan's modern culture to other countries,
this programme was held in San Francisco
in 1983, London in 1985, and Paris in
1987.
Have the Japanese people now
achieved a lifestyle which reconciles
the influence of Western culture with
their own traditions?
By and large, yes. At the end of the Second
World War, Japan in many respects was
indeed learning from the West, particularly
from the United States, about education,
culture, business ways, and so on. Now
things have definitely changed. The Japa¬
nese are striving to express their own iden¬
tity in culture, fashion and many other
fields and I have a feeling that perhaps this
new identity is in a small way beginning to
influence the West. Up until now perhaps
Japanese people were too involved in eco¬
nomic affairs, in pushing up their GNP, to
do much else, but if they want any kind of
self-fulfilment they now have to divert
some of their attention from economic af¬
fairs into building up their cultural heritage.
They have made a strict reappraisal of
their lifestyle and they wonder whether
materialism, the mere fact of owning
things, of consuming things, is going to be
enough to bring them happiness.
Do you consider that Japan is the lead¬
ing communications society today?
If you consider the technical aspects, such
as press readership, TV watching habits,
the number of telephones or computers,
Japan certainly is as much an information
and communications society as, for exam¬
ple, the United States. But it is also true
thai-Japan has just started privatizing its
telecommunications systems, and there is
still plenty of room for development. Our
company, for example, is now working on
advanced software for cable and satellite
broadcasting, and this year we have set up
a new subsidiary, the "Dentsu Institute for
Human Studies". One of the first themes
that this Institute will be working on is
"Searching for the Identity of Japan". A
symposium on this subject was organized
recently, as one of the numerous activities
to be developed in the future. We are in the
throes of a major upheaval in society. Per¬
haps the Japanese people were the first to
see this and to search for ways to cope
with it, and perhaps in this respect they can
be said to be holding the mirror to show
the world what the twenty-first century
may be like.
Left, a Yokozuna (grand champion) of sumo. This ancient style of
wrestling, thought to have originated in Japan nearly 2,000 years ago,
has close associations with the Shinto religion. Today sumo is a mass
spectator sport, at which several hundred specially selected athletes
make their living. Six major championships are held annually, attract¬
ing immense crowds and massive media coverage.
Characters from a Japanese cartoon film,
Come Down from the Tree, Bunna, which
was created for the celebrations marking the
30th anniversary of Japan's admission to the
United Nations in 1956. The modern fable on
which the film is based, by the well-known
Japanese writer Tsutomu Minakami, relates
how Bunna the frog learns of the interdepen¬
dence of all living beings.
Photo © Tokyu Agency International, Inc.
