úiscovereú
Saved by the
Indians
£2 by Jacques Cartier
S
O
O
(S One of the most important exploits by
early European explorers in America was
the discovery of the St. Lawrence River in
1535 by the Breton sailor Jacques Cartier
(1491-1557). The Indian guides and
interpreters who accompanied him during
his explorations of Canada were
invaluable allies. They taught Cartier
about the country's geography and
resources, andfamiliarized him with
Indian customs and language. On his
secondjourney, during a long and severe
Canadian winter based in Stadaconé [the
Indian name for Quebec], an epidemic of
scurvy claimed the lives of many of his
men. One ofCartier's interpreters showed
him the antidote: a herbal tea rich in
vitamin C.
ONE day, our captain, seeing the sickness gaining such a hold and his men
so severely stricken by it, set out from the fort and, walking on the ice, saw
approaching him a company of people from Stadaconé, and among them
Dom Agaya, whom the captain had seen ten or twelve days previously sorely
distempered, with the same sickness from which his men were suffering; for one of
his legs was so swollen at the knee, that it was the thickness of the body of a two-
year-old child, wholly nerveless, while his teeth were loose and decayed and his
gums rotting and foul. The captain, seeing Dom Agaya healthy and nimble, was
overjoyed, hoping to learn from him how he had been cured, in order that he
might bring help and succour to his men. And when they drew near to the fort, the
captain asked him how he had been cured of his sickness. Dom Agaya replied that
he had been cured with the juice of the leaves of a tree and the crushed leaves
thereof, and that this was the sole remedy for the sickness. The captain then
inquired of him whether there might not be such trees nearby, and whether he
would show him some, that he might heal his servant, who had fallen sick of the
disease in Canada while dwelling in the house of Lord Donnacona; for he did not
wish to reveal how many of his companions were sick. Then Dom Agaya sent two
women with our captain to seek out such trees, and they brought back nine or ten
branches; and they showed us that the bark and the leaves must be pounded and
then boiled in water; that water must then be drunk one day in two, and the
residue placed on the sick and swollen legs; and they told us that this tree cured all
disease. In their language they call this tree annedda.*
Soon afterwards the captain had a brew made for the sick men to drink, and
none wished to try it, save one or two, who boldly put it to the test. As soon as they
had drunk of it, they felt relief forthwith, which was indeed a miraculous thing; for
of all the diseases afflicting them, they were cured and recovered their health,
after having drunk twice or thrice of the brew; so much so that one of the
companions who had been sick of the pox for five or six years before this new
sickness was altogether cured by this medicine. When these things were seen and
known, there was such a press for the said medicine that the men would have
murdered one another for it; so that a tree, as tall and broad as any I have ever
seen, was used up in less than a week, and wrought such an effect, that if all the
physicians of Louvain and Montpellier had been present, with all the drugs of
Alexandria, they would not have done in a year what that tree accomplished in a
week; for we had such advantage of it, that all who made use of it were cured, and
recovered their health, praise be to God.
Jacques Cartier meets a group
of Indians on the banks of the
St. Lawrence River, during
his second expedition to Canada,
in 1535.
* It has not been possible to determine exactly which
tree was used, but it is generally thought to have been
the Canadian hemlock spruce.
Voyages au Canada. A vec les relations des voyages en
Amérique de Gonneville, Verrazano el Roberval.

