Marathon Man
by Bredo Berntsen
LONG-DISTANCE running has
enjoyed a popular revival in
recent years, and runners such as
Paavo Nurmi, Emil Zatopek, Abebe
Bikila and Grethe Waitz are household
names. But it was 150 years ago that the
greatest runner of all time was at the peak
of his career. He was a Norwegian named
Mensen Ernst.
His real name was Mons Monsen Oyri.
He was the son of a poor tenant farmer
from Leikanger on the Sognefjord where
he was born in 1795. He lived there until
he was about fifteen years old, when he
moved to the town of Bergen. He went to
sea, and won his first competitive run in
Cape Province in 1813.
As a seaman and adventurer he visited
the American, African, Asian and Aus¬
tralian continents, acquiring along the
way survival skills that were later to help
him navigate, wheedle and bluff his way
through his extraordinary journeys. The
only surviving contemporary portrait of
the "Running King", as he was known in
Norwegian, shows him cradling a sex¬
tant.
In 1818 he arrived in London. It is here
that he officially became a "pedestrian",
a runner or walker who covered long dis¬
tances in return for money. Here he also
took his professional name, Mensen
Ernst. His subsequent career was to last
for twenty-five years.
His first important run was in the spring
of 1819, from London to Portsmouth (116
kilometres) in nine hours. His popularity
was assured when he then covered the 240
kilometres from London to Liverpool in
thirty-two hours.
After a time he began to long for the
Continent, however, and in 1820 crossed
the Channel again, travelling on foot to
Annenrode manor in Mühlhausen (in
what is now the German Democratic
Republic), where he made a number of
life-long friends. From then on he lived as
a professional runner, and his fame as the
greatest runner of all time spread quickly
as he ran from city to city Berlin,
Prague, Rome across the Continent. In
1826 he put on a demonstration in
Copenhagen, where the high fees he
earned included 100 "daler" from the
Danish King Frederick VI. Ironically, his
native Norway was one of the few coun¬
tries through which he never ran.
After some years Mensen Ernst came
to see himself as something of an interna¬
tionalist. He became a genuine traveller,
curious about foreign cultures and
customs; he learned to speak French,
English and German well, and knew
some Italian and Turkish.
The only surviving contemporary portrait
of Mensen Ernst
In 1832, aged thirty-seven, Ernst went
to Paris in order to plan an audacious run
to Moscow. Among those who helped
him organize the stakes was a Swedish
diplomat, Count Löwenhielm. Ernst was
to receive 3,800 francs if he covered the
distance in fifteen days. He left Paris on
11 June, arriving in Kaiserlantern two
days later. "I felt I was sailing ... on my
two unique frigates," he was quoted
later, in a German book about him writ¬
ten in 1838. "Those who witnessed my
running considered me eccentric, or else
a fool, or possessed by the devil."
On 18 June he crossed the Polish river
Vistula and next day was in Russia. He
actually reached Moscow a day earlier
than expected. The commander there
had prepared to greet him, but because of
Ernst's early arrival and the ragged state
of his clothing he was taken at first for a
beggar. He had covered about 2,500 kilo¬
metres, or more than 170 kilometres
daily.
How did Ernst adapt to the extreme
conditions encountered on his journeys,
the burning sun, cold winds, pouring
rain? We know that he had a strict set of
rules that he followed all his life. He stuck
to a simple diet, for example: mostly
bread and cheese, a few vegetables, less
frequently cold meat; but he never ate
warm food. He also preferred to sleep
outdoors, believing that lying on hard
ground kept the body supple. If he did
sleep indoors it was always on a hard
bench, never a soft bed. His only weak¬
ness was for wine, which he used to drink
by the bottle even on his runs, but with no
apparent ill effects.
By the time he returned to Paris from
his Moscow run, Mensen Ernst was a
hero. He had become a living legend who
attracted rapturous audiences of thou¬
sands.
In 1833, he set out from Munich for
Old London Bridge in the early 19th cen¬
tury, around the time when Mensen Ernst
began his running career.
33

Nauplion, then the capital of the newly
founded state of Greece. He suggested to
King Ludwig I and Queen Thérèse that
he carry documents for their son, Otto I
of Greece, and after a delay of some
months his offer was accepted. His depar¬
ture on 6 June was cheered by a crowd of
20,000 outside Nymphenburg Palace.
This was a particularly dramatic jour¬
ney, partly because of the rugged land¬
scape, partly because of some unusually
severe problems Ernst encountered
along the way. In Montenegro he was set
upon by five robbers wielding pistols and
swords; as well as his money, they took
his maps, compass and quadrant, but for¬
tunately not the letters. He managed to
find his way to the town of Cattaro, where
he got food and drink, new maps and
compass, and started out again only to
be arrested as a spy. He spent three days
in jail before he was freed by the Pasha of
Janina, who "looked more like a Western
general than an Oriental Pasha", as Ernst
later said.
ÍT///.'V.,-»rt- i
On 1 July he stood outside the King's
residence in Nauplion to receive his
award of 1,000 guilders. He had covered
2,700 kilometres in just over twenty-four
days. Allowing about four days' delay for
various mishaps, he had done the run in
twenty days, or about 135 kilometres
daily. These statistics are so extraordin¬
ary that we are lucky to have contempo¬
rary sources to verify them.
Ernst's third and most dramatic project
began with an offer by British merchants
of the East India Company in Con¬
stantinople: £150 to carry important doc¬
uments to Calcutta. He left on 28 July
1836. The vigorous Norwegian had
thought the journey would take perhaps
six weeks; in fact he did it in four, on a
route that took him through Anatolia,
and finally across the Indian sub-con¬
tinent.
On his twenty-eight-day return jour¬
ney he took a more northerly route:
Lahore, across Persia to the Caspian Sea,
Teheran, Tabriz, and up to the Black
The desert near Theben, north of Syene
(now Aswan) in southeast Egypt, where
the great runner died from dysentery in
1843.
Sea. He covered about 8,300 kilometres
in fifty-nine days, 150 kilometres daily
allowing for a three-day rest in Cal¬
cutta.
The newspapers of his day praised his
achievement in completing the Asiatic
tour. The Times on 24 March stressed
"the unquestionable certificates" held by
Ernst.
His fourth epic run was to be his last. It
began when the German author, proprie¬
tor and adventurer, Count Hermann von
Pückler-Muskau, thirty years before
Stanley and Livingstone, asked him to
find the source of the White Nile. Count
Hermann had a keen interest in running
stemming from a visit to Greece in 1837,
when he had watched the Marathon and
heard about the Norwegian's exploits
four years previously.
Ernst left the Count's estate in Prussian
Silesia on 11 May, 1842. He passed Con¬
stantinople and reached Jerusalem in
thirty days, and then ran the 500 kilo¬
metres to Cairo. After some months in
Cairo he headed south along the Nile.
But now his luck had run out. He suc¬
cumbed to dysentery on 22 January 1843,
ending his legendary career in the desert
near Syene, now Aswan. Ten years later a
Norwegian newspaper declared: "The
world will never see his like again." Nor
has it!
BREDO BERNTSEN, of Norway, is deputy
librarian at the University of Oslo. He is the
author of a book about the life and times of Men-
sen Ernst, Loperkongen (The Running King",
Oslo, 1986), and of many other articles and
books including Naturvernets historie i Norge
(1977, "The History of Nature Conservation in
Norway").
