The swimming
postman
by Alexander von Humboldt
When thirty-year-old Alexander von
Humboldt set offfor South America in
1799, with his friend Aimé Bonpland, he
had already studied a vast range of
subjects, including botany, chemistry,
mineralogy, and galvanism the theories
of the Italian physiologist Luigi Galvani.
Naturalist, explorer, geographer and
geologist, historian andpolitician, this
Prussian baron (1769-1859) and polymath
qualifies, through the objectivity of his
descriptions of the Indians, as a founder
ofAmerican anthropology, ethnology and
archaeology. In 1802 he was in Peru,
where he mapped the volcanoes around
Quito (today the capital ofEcuador),
almost reached the summit ofChimborazo
(6,272 metres), described the remains of
the Inca Empire, and stayedfor a short
time in the Amazon region, where he may
have seen the swimming postman.
Humboldt later reached the coast of the
Pacific, where he discovered the famous
cold oceanic current which was
subsequently named after him.
Alexander von
Humboldt and his
friend and
travelling
companion, the
French naturalist
Aimé Bonpland
(1773-1858),
observe a shower
ofshooting stars on
the coast of South
Américain 1799.
THE inhabitants have a very singular way of using the lower reaches of the
Rio Guancabamba, at the place where there are a great many waterfalls, in
order to enable the area to communicate with the sea-coasts to the south.
To speed on their way the few letters that are sent from Truxillo to the province of
Jaén de Bracamoros, they use a swimming messenger. In two days, this unusual
postman, who is as a rule a young Indian, swims down from Pomahuaca to
Tomependa, following first the Rio Chamaya, the name given to the Rio Guan¬
cabamba in its lower reaches , and then the River Amazon . He carefully wraps the
few letters that he must carry in a large piece of cotton cloth which he rolls like a
turban around his head. When he reaches the waterfalls he swims ashore and
enters the river again lower down, walking through the woods that shade its
banks. In order to swim for so long without becoming exhausted, he often
encircles one of his arms with a strip of very light wood (ceyba, palo de balsa) of
the Bombacaceae family. Sometimes, too, he swims in company with one of his
friends. Neither of them need worry about food and lodging, since they are sure to
receive a hospitable welcome in the huts scattered among the splendid huertas of
Pucará or Cavico, densely fringed with fruit trees.
The Rio Chamaya is not, fortunately, infested with crocodiles. In the Marañón
itself, these animals do not travel further upstream than the Mayasi cataract;
being indolent by nature, they prefer quieter waters. I have observed that from
the ford or paso of Pucará to the point where the Rio Chamaya flows into the
River Amazon, below the village of Choros (that is, over a distance not exceeding
22 leagues), there is a gradient of 542 metres. The governor of the province of
Jaén de Bracamoros has assured me that the letters thus transported seldom get
wet and are seldom lost. I myself, shortly after my return from Mexico to Paris,
received a letter from Tomependa which had followed this route. It is the custom
among many Indian communities living on the banks of the Marañón to travel in
the same way, swimming downstream in a group. I once counted in the river the
heads of thirty or forty men , women and children of the Xibaros tribe , just as they
were arriving in Tomependa. The "swimming postman" returns on foot up the
steep path of the páramo del Paredón. u
14
