Women on the sidelines
by Amadou Moustapha Diop
THE social exclusion of women in
the countries of the. Third World
has its origin in patriarchal institu¬
tions whose standards, values and models
are exclusively controlled by men.
Ideological constructions subject women
to a "constant reversal of values".
According to this institutional
framework, woman is negatively branded
from birth. "Biologically, motherhood
sets her apart; ethically, her impurity iso¬
lates her; metaphysically, her very being
is guilty, and the great religions systema¬
tize her condemnation: original sin in
Christianity, and reincarnation in the
body of a woman as punishment for a
misspent life in Hinduism".1 Nor should
we overlook Islam, which elaborately de¬
marcates the territory of the two sexes:
the interior of the house, the indoor
world, is the woman's realm, and she
herself is the secret domain of man; the
outdoors is men's field of action and a
strictly male preserve. And "any overlap¬
ping of these spaces is restricted and con¬
trolled by a host of rituals".2
Thus the traditional reproductive and
nurturing role is one of the major obsta¬
cles to women's participation in society.
This socio-biological role is a hindrance
in that it forces women imprisoned in
the straitjacket of their responsibilities
towards their children3 to put up with
mere "pin money", starvation wages in
the agro-industries of the Third World
countries: "The international division of
labour classes them as working mothers,
working wives and working sisters. The
profits of national and international cor¬
porations are swollen thanks to the con¬
cept of 'wives' earnings', which provides
ideological justification for both the
With These Hands, a film, produced and
directed by Chris Sheppard and Claude
Sauvageot, presents the stories of three
women from three African countries:
Kenya, Zimbabwe and Burkina Faso. One
of the most surprising facts revealed by
the film is that women, not men, grow 75%
of Africa's foodas well as finding time
for their domestic chores. Zenabou Bam-
bara (left on photo opposite) of Burkina
Faso, declares: "We wish the men would
help. But a man is ashamed to do women 's
work."
20

existence and the injustice of unequal pay
for the two sexes."1 The gravitation to¬
wards sub-proletarian work is caused by
women's inferior position in the rural
world, and by the family's assumption
that domestic work is a woman's natural
lot, which is treated as non-existent at
national level becauses it is not produc¬
tive work, and hence cannot feature in
the statistics of the decision-makers and
planners.4 Furthermore, women are dep¬
rived of the means of production: under
common law they cannot inherit land,
and so their access to agriculture depends
on the fulfilment of duly pre-established
social conditions a woman must be mar¬
ried, or at least have a recognized status
in the community.
In Femmes du tiers monde, x J. Bissillat
and M. Fiéloux describe one case of the
total exclusion of Senegalese women
from the system of land ownership. In
1979, SAED, the body responsible for
development of the middle region of the
Senegal Valley, decided to organize a
"village lottery for farmers, so that they
might all, regardless of their status
whether formerly slaves, craftworkers or
'masters' have a chance to win in the
distribution of plots of land on the out
skirts of the village where irrigation was
planned. But this exercise in fair play ran
into trouble. Whatever her status as a
wife, single woman or de facto head of a
household no woman was entitled to
receive a plot of land in her own name.
The only way around the difficulty was
for the most needy among them, such as a
widow with four children to support, to
give a fictitious name for the head of the
family, with the villagers' consent: that of
a five-year-old son or a deceased relative,
for example."
Even the usufruct of plots of land con¬
ceded to a woman by her husband be¬
comes precarious with the development
of cash crops, which are "increasingly
taking over the best land, encroaching on
areas formerly set aside for food crops".
Cash crops have destroyed the former
balance of duties and obligations; the old
methods of sharing have fallen into dis¬
use. Cash crops enhance the prestige and
power of men. Women, although they
play an active part in agricultural work,
find their status radically changing; they
become an over-exploited sub-proletar¬
iat since they still continue to tend the
food crops and underpaid wage-
earners. A Dioula woman (Senegal), for
example, after working on her husband's
groundnut plantations, is entitled to
"one-twentieth of the money that he
makes from the harvest".
Trapped in the labour of growing food,
rural women are cut off from the econo¬
mic circuits, and accordingly have no ac¬
cess to co-operatives or to loans. If any¬
one condescends to grant a woman a
loan, it will be at a prohibitively high rate
of interest. For example, Burkina-be
women were offered "a loan access
scheme. But then the paradox became
starkly apparent, because they were com¬
pelled to accept a repayment rate fixed by
the men, slightly higher than the official
rate".
Women perform nearly 80 per cent of
agricultural work in Africa, and yet as
economic partners they are non-existent.
For example, Wolof women (Senegal)
"are kept at a safe distance from the
knowledge, contacts and skills that are
held in the highest esteem. No pro¬
gramme caters for them, whether literacy
teaching or agricultural extension
work".5 When trading institutes do admit
women, they train them in altogether
marginal activities whose usefulness to
the community is negligible. "Rather
21

Poverty and progress
than being taught the new cultivation and
management techniques which ... they
are perfectly capable of learning, they are
given lessons in embroidery, sewing,
knitting and cookery."
Like the traditional societies of India
and China, African societies obey the
rules of "institutionalized subordina¬
tion", under which women have internal¬
ized three types of submission: "Before
marriage, obey your father. After mar¬
riage, obey your husband. After your
husband dies, obey your son."4
This system of subordination and "an-
drocentrism" has unfortunate implica¬
tions which result in discrimination in the
areas of food and health. On the subject
of Indian women, ill-nourished and re¬
ceiving inferior health care, it has been
noted that "while there is a higher inci¬
dence of diseases caused by malnutrition
among women, the hospital rate of
admission and treatment of young^-and
adult males for these diseases is larger."4
This exclusion and deprivation of rights
on "biological" grounds opens the door
to other forms of marginalization, in
education in particular: the number of
illiterate women is increasing; when girls
are not "drop-outs, push-outs and left-
outs", they are to be found in "tradi¬
tional, ornamental fields of education"
considered to be "feminine".
In the political sphere, despite the fact
that some women hold senior positions,
most play very little part in politics, be¬
cause they have never been properly
taught and because of the social pressures
whereby "unmarried girls [in India] are
socially and culturally prohibited from
free mingling with males . . . owing to their
parents' fear of a reduction of their
'value' in the marriage market".3 Custom
demands that a married woman follow
her dharma, which is "to be subservient
to her husband, take care of his needs,
make him happy, bear and rear his chil¬
dren". After this taxing ordeal, how can a
woman find time to involve herself in
politics? Surely her everyday household
drudgery is already the first barrier to any
kind of participation in the life of the
community.
1 . Jeanne Bissillat and Michèle Fiéloux. Femmes du tiers
monde, Paris, Le Sycomore, 1983.
2. Fatima Mcrnissi. Sexe, idéologie, islam, Paris, Tierce,
1983.
3. D. Radha Devi and M. Ravindran. "Women's Work
in India", International Social Science Journal, Volume
XXXV, No. 4, 1983.
4. Govind Kelkar. Comparative analysis of Indian and
Chinese experiences of institutionalization of popular
participation in development (in particularfor women),
Unesco, 1979.
5. Claudine Vidal. Les femmes wolof dans un milieu
rural en mutation: marginalisation ou intégration?, un¬
published doctoral thesis, Paris, 1981.
AMADOU MOUSTAPHA DIOP, Senegalese
specialist in migration problems, is engaged in
research with the French Centre for the Study of
International Relations. He also lectures at the
National Institute of Oriental Languages and
Civilizations, Paris.
