Hybrids for the year 2000
by Raissa G. Butenko and Zlata B. Shamina
THE cultivation of plant tissues, cells
and protoplasts has not only helped
us to learn much that is new and
surprising about the metabolism, genetics
and capacity of the plant cell to fulfil dif¬
ferent development programmes. It has
also served as a basis for creating new tech¬
nologies in agriculture and industry that are
essentially different from the traditional
ones. Some of these technologies are now
being commercially applied, others will be
used in the very near future and others in
the more distant future.
Many important medicinal plants grow¬
ing in natural conditions are becoming
scarce, and supplies of them are limited.
Consequently, their collection as medicinal
raw material may lead to the complete dis¬
appearance of certain varieties. Moreover,
the plantation cultivation of suitable wild
Ceff cultures can be a source for the manu¬
facture of medical products derived from
plants. Ginseng (Panax schinseng), be¬
low, is one plant which Soviet and
Japanese scientists have cultured in this
manner. Its generic name, Panax, is de¬
rived from the same Greek word as "pa¬
nacea". In the East ginseng has from time
immemorial been considered a cure for
many ills.
plants takes up valuable space which could
otherwise be sown with agricultural crops.
A solution to this problem has been
found in the industrial cultivation of medici¬
nal plant cell cultures on similar lines to
cultures of micro-organism products. Using
the classical methods of microbial genetics,
productive stems of ginseng, a relict plant
growing in a limited area of the Far East,
were obtained. These stems, possessing
qualities that reduce fatigue and enhance
physical resistance, are being cultivated in
biochemical factories. They give a high
yield of biomass containing physiologically
active substances. The elaboration of indus¬
trial techniques for the intensive cultivation
of medicinal plant cells has proved profit¬
able, and it is now the turn of other cell
cultures such as Dioscorea and
Rauwolfia.
Apart from the traditional methods of
breeding micro-organisms, there are new
approaches to obtaining productive stems,
in particular the hybridization of partners
which are actively self-propagating and pos¬
sess a high degree of biosynthesis. So far, as
a result of induced mutagenesis and the
optimization of culture conditions, stems
with a generally high level of productivity
have been obtained. In some cases the con¬
tent of biologically active substances was
not lower than in the original plant.
Many vegetatively propagated agri¬
cultural plants accumulate pathogens,
especially viruses, which it is impossible to
get rid of by the usual propagation methods.
But the cultivation of meristematic tips not
only frees the future plant from infection
but enables an unlimited quantity of off¬
spring to be obtained from a single mer¬
istem. This technique, known as clonal
micropropagation , is being widely practised
all over the world for potatoes, ornamental
plants and berry bushes.
Although it is much more difficult for
woody species to regenerate plants from
micro-shoots, conditions have been created
in the Soviet Union for the mass production
of poplar and aspen clones as well as those
of tea plants and citrus trees. This is of great
value since it makes it possible to take start¬
ing material from élite specimens and
obtain within a few years entire groves of
high quality trees that are completely iden¬
tical to the original.
Clonal micropropagation is also
extremely important for the preservation of
genetic resources both scarce, disappear¬
ing species and unique genotypes obtained
through hybridization and mutagenesis.
Clonal micropropagation is now becoming
one of the stages of the breeding process for
sugar-beet, cereal hybrids and pasture
grasses.
The use of haploids in breeding is very
important, especially for the selection of
constant hybrids. Using traditional meth¬
ods, stable forms combining useful charac¬
teristics can be obtained within ten or
eleven years. The breeding of first-genera¬
tion hybrid anthers shortens this process by
a third or a quarter. With this method new
varieties of barley, triticale, tobacco, prom¬
ising original varieties of potato and many
other agricultural plants have been
obtained in the USSR. The new technique
considerably simplifies and shortens the
breeding process.
The art of obtaining so-called somaclonal
variations a broad' variety of plant
régénérants is an achievement of cell biol¬
ogy. From amongst the somaclones it is pos¬
sible to breed forms which retain all the
positive characteristics of the variety but
with the sought-for addition of certain nec¬
essary, especially viable traits. It is difficult
to obtain such a combination of agri¬
culturally valuable traits through the tradi¬
tional breeding methods. But plants com¬
bining high productivity with resistance to
fungi and viruses have been bred from
potato somaclones at potato institutes in the
USSR. The combination of precocity with
longer grains, which it was impossible to
achieve by the usual method of breeding
round-grained rice plants, has proved to be
possible in the rice somaclone. Somaclone
variations clearly provide excellent material
for breeding plants that are both productive
and resistant to stress.
The cases cited above show what has
been achieved by modern biotechnology.
They are examples of the practical applica¬
tions which have been adopted in agricul¬
ture in the Soviet Union and which have
also won a place in industry. Amongst those
orientations which hold out hopes of early
success, that is, those which have passed
laboratory tests but have not yet been
widely introduced, cell breeding is the most
promising. The obtaining of guaranteed
harvests in zones where agriculture is
exposed to risks is perhaps the most serious
problem facing agriculture today. This
implies the creation of strains of the princi¬
pal food plants that are resistant to diseases,
pests, herbicides and unfavourable environ¬
mental factors. In the Soviet Union the
most important qualities are immunity to
salty soils, drought and frost. Breeding at
the cell level enables conditions to be cre¬
ated in which all cells except the resistant
20

The organisms in the culture dish, top, are
anthers (tiny sacs of pollen). When placed
in a nutrient solution they form a callus,
above left, and can then be regenerated
into whole haploid plants, above right.
(See page 6).
ones perish and the surviving cells represent
potential plants. Thus, by cultivating cells in
media with a high concentration of salt, it is
possible to obtain salt-resistant plants. This
makes it possible, together with somaclonal
variants, to conduct controlled breeding of
modified cell lines and subsequently of
modified plants with particularly valuable
traits.
The present level and rate of develop¬
ment in breeding imposes a search for new
methods and parent strains for creating
varieties which will hold out prospects for
the next century. There is already an acute
need for new approaches which will ensure
success later on. The way is being opened
for recourse to wild varieties containing val¬
uable genes, for the mutation of genetic
material by combining somatic cells from
early ancestors. There are already examples
of the utilization of somatic hybrids of culti
vated and wild potatoes. Thanks to a syn¬
thesis of the parents' characteristics, one of
them was "endowed", through the transfer
of cytoplasmic genes, with resistance to
viral diseases.
The creation of "cybrids", hybrid strains
which have received the cytoplasms of both
parents and the nucleus of one of them, is
considered to be even more promising. The
possibilities for such constructions are the¬
oretically unlimited. It is possible to trans¬
form a cell by transferring to it not only the
nucleus, cytoplasm or individual organelles
of the other partner, but individual genes
previously cloned in bacteria.
Much of this may seem fanciful, but the
fact that a broad scheme for the implemen¬
tation of these processes has already been
elaborated is due to the imagination of
researchers. The next step will be the cre¬
ation of a transformation technique. The
first characteristics obtained through the
transfer of individual genes will apparently
be resistance to herbicides and to certain
stresses and possibly a heightened bio-
synthetic activity if cell ferments of a bio¬
synthesis of physiologically active sub¬
stances are isolated.
The cloning of individual genes seems to
be a real possibility for the near future, but
the transfer of integral characteristics will
be a more long-term task, for the accom¬
plishment of which it will be necessary to
learn how to isolate and clone regulatory
genes. At present, the solution of this prob¬
lem seems to be far-fetched and distant. But
it is not so long since most of the techniques
now in use in agriculture were treated as the
fantasies of biologists and other scientists.
RAISSA GEORGIEVNA BUTENKO is a leading
Soviet cell biologist and plant physiologist who
has carried out extensive research into the use of
plant tissue and cell cultures for scientific and
practical purposes. A corresponding member of
the USSR Academy of Sciences and of the
All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences, she
is head of the cell biology and biotechnology
department of the Academy's Institute of Plant
Physiology and the author of some 300 publis¬
hed scientific papers.
2LATA BORISOVNA SHAMINA is a leading
Soviet specialist in cell biology and plant gene¬
tics. She is the author of over 100 published
scientific papers.
21
