THE city of Bidar is guarded at night by a thousand men under the fortress
commander. They are mounted, wear armour and each of them carries a
torch.
I sold my stallion in Bidar. He had cost me sixty-eight futun. I had fed him for a
year.
In Bidar one can see snakes twelve feet long slithering through the streets.
I arrived in Bidar from Kodangal for the feast of St. Philip, and I sold my
stallion for Christmas. I remained in Bidar until Lent. I made the acquaintance of
many Indians there. I told them my religion not Muslim but Isâ-dîni, Chris¬
tian and that my name was Athanasius but that my Muslim name was Khoja
Yusuf Khorasani. They didn't try to hide from me, either to eat, to do business or
for their mana, or for anything else. Likewise, they did not hide their women from
me.
I asked them about their religion and they said, "We believe in Adam."
According to them the But are Adam and all his descendants. Altogether there
are eighty-four religions in India, and they all believe in the But. ...
In May, I celebrated Easter in the Muslim city of Bidar .... The Muslims for
their part celebrated Baghrâm on a Wednesday in May. I began the Lenten fast on
the first day of April. Oh faithful Christians, he who travels much in many lands
commits many sins and loses his Christian faith. And I, Athanasius, poor servant
of God, have suffered greatly for my religion. Already four Lents have passed and
four Easters, and I, a sinner, know neither Easter nor when Lent is, nor Christmas
nor the other feasts. I know neither Wednesday nor Friday. I have no book. When
they robbed me they took my books. Because of all these misfortunes I went to
India, for I had nothing to take back to Russia, I had no goods left. In the first
year, I celebrated Easter at Nâïn, in the second at Chapakur in Mazanderan, in
the third at Hormuz and in the fourth at Bidar in India, amongst the Muslims. And
I wept much for the faith, the Christian faith.
Malik the Muslim strongly pressed me to adopt the Muslim faith. I said to him,
"Sir, tu namâz qïlar-sàn, man da namâz qïlar-man; tu bes namâz qïlar-siz, man da
3 qïlar-man; man gharîb e sän în-jây [you pray and I pray too. You say five
prayers, I say three. I am a stranger; you are in your own country here]."
And he said, "In truth, you claim that you are not a Muslim, but you do not
know the Christian religion."
Then I began to think a lot and I said to myself, "Woe to me, accursed. I have
strayed far from the path of truth and do not know the way back! Here I am
walking alone! O Lord my God, master of all things, creator of heaven and earth,
do not turn your face away from your servant because I am indeed close to
misfortune. Lord, behold me, have pity on me your creature. Do not let me stray
from the way of truth. Put me O Lord on your right road since I have done nothing
which could please you in this misfortune, O Lord, since I have spent all my days
in evil. Allah perverdigâr Allah kerim Allah rahîm Allah kerim Allah rahîm
Allah câlîm alculamâ [God the protector, generous God, merciful God, God the
wisest of the wise]. I have spent four Easters in Muslim lands and have not
renounced my Christian faith. Only God knows what will happen. Lord my God, I
put my trust in thee. Save me, Lord my God."



Reflections on
solitude
by Athanasius Nikitin
The travels ofAthanasius Nikitin, a
Russian merchantfrom the town of Tver
(today Kalinin), lastedfrom 1466 until
1472, the year in which he died near
Smolensk. After trading in the Turkish
countries on the borders of the Caspian
Sea and travelling through Iran, he lived
for almost three years in India. Nikitin
left a short account of his journeys,
including a notable description of his
experiences in the Bahmani Kingdom of
the Deccan Plateau where he livedfor a
time in the town ofBidar, in which
evocations of the landscape are mingled
with practical information on food, prices
and travel. His book is also a reflection
on solitude: during his sojourn in Muslim
and Hindu India, the Christian merchant
felt that he was losing his identity.
Still from Journey Beyond Three Seas (1958),
a Sov/ef-ind/an film by Vassili Pronin and
Ahrmat Abhat based on Athanasius Nikitin 's
traveljournal. Oleg Strijenov is seen in the role
of the 15th-century Russian merchant and
traveller.
15
