The anthropology
Food,
culture
and society
UNLESS they satisfy their needs for food, living creatures
cannot survive. Human beings, however, appear to differ
slightly from other animals in the solutions they have de¬
vised for this problem. Thanks to our physiological omnivorousness
and our nature as social animals with a culture, a sense of symbolism
and the ability to create a favourable micro-environment for our¬
selves, we can live equally well in the polar regions and in the
equatorial rain forests. We may wonder, however, whether our
efforts to adapt to the symbolic standards dictated by our culture are
always in keeping with our optimum biological adaptation, either in
the short term_as. individuals pr in the long term as members of the
human species.
Food is one field in which biology and culture are to some extent
out of step. Human beings are equipped with internal regulatory
food-consumption mechanisms whose purpose is to maintain certain
balanced states in the organism; but these mechanisms are often
faulty.
In industrialized societies evidence of this phenomenon can be
seen in the pathological consequences of an overabundant food
supply. Although their lifestyle is tending to reduce their energy
output, people eagerly consume animal proteins, fatty and sugary
food, stimulants and intoxicants whose nutritional value is, to say
the least, questionable.
Is this a recent development, specific to urban societies which are
located in a man-made environment, alienated from natural
rhythms, and have not had time to adapt to new types of stress? This
is by no means certain. Where food is concerned we must beware of
ecological providentialism and of the belief that in traditional
societies people naturally consume the diet that is physiologically
best for them.
As the American anthropologist Margaret Mead once pointed
out, human societies make a selection from the potential range of
foodstuffs which are provided by their environment and brought
within their reach by the technical resources at their disposal. The
survival of a human group obviously depends on a diet which
satisfies its members' nutritional needs. However, the level of
satisfaction of those needs, the definition of which is a matter of
controversy, varies from one society to another both qualitatively
and quantitatively.
It often happens that some available foodstuffs are either neg¬
lected or used to meet other needs. The example most often given is
that of the Hindu populations of India, whose respect for animal life
leads them , for religious and philosophical reasons , to practise more
or less strict forms of vegetarianism. Pastoral peoples, who might be
thought to eat large quantities of milk and meat, usually consume
these foodstuffs sparingly. Cattle are used primarily to provide
other forms of satisfaction, as a bride-price, for example.
Many African population groups live in climatic zones where
cereal farming is possible, but they choose instead to grow tubers,
especially cassava, which is less nutritious. People eat according to
patterns prescribed by the societies to which they belong. Their
culture determines the range of what is edible and imposes the
dietary taboos which, when necessary, serve to distinguish their
society from others.
The discrepancy between what is recommended by the culture
and what is nutritionally indispensable is most strikingly apparent in
the nourishment given to children after weaning. They are nearly
always given what is thought to be the best possible nourishment,
and are lucky if this provides them with the ration of protein they
need to guarantee their growth and resistance to infection. In most
cases, children are looked upon as small adults, and they receive a
ration appropriate to their size but not to their specific needs for
protein.
Populations afflicted with malnutrition for reasons which may
include dysfunctional cultural choices, also undoubtedly pay a price
in terms of death-rates (especially child mortality), physical de¬
velopment and longevity. The influence of malnutrition is,
however, often difficult to disentangle from that of the major
endemic diseases. In traditional societies there is a marked differ¬
ence between known potential food resources and those which are
actually used. Subsistence is usually based on a small number of
foodstuffs of plant origin which, even in most hunting and fishing
communities, provide nearly all the calories in the diet. The diet of
traditional societies is extremely monotonous; perhaps familiarity is
a source of comfort. Variations are the result of seasonal fluctua¬
tions of resources.
What reasons underlie the choice of what have been called

"supercultural" foods? Both practical (and possibly nutritional) and
symbolic considerations, notably the quest for prestige or for identi¬
fication with an envied model, should be taken into account. These
foods are often treated as divine gifts. The acts of cultivation and
their accompanying rituals give form and pattern to the com¬
munity's yearly round.
Eating habits, likes and dislikes are formed by the sense-impress¬
ions conveyed by the flavour, smell and texture of certain foods and
the dishes of which they form part. These preparations provide the
basis for human gastronomy and for the food of the gods, since
offerings and sacrifices are a special means of communicating with
the transcendent. Not only vegetable foods are used in this context.
Meat comes into the diet through celebration: its consumption
nearly always has a festive or ritual aspect. Blood is seen as an
essential ingredient in Vedic sacrifices, in the Christian mass, and in
the cutting of a chicken's throat as an offering to the ancestors in
African ceremonies.
The esteem in which certain foods and dishes are held by different
human groups is no indication of their real nutritional value, which
is, as it were, a bonus. What is usually sought is a food which rapidly
produces a feeling of repletion. One example, the thick porridge
made from unsifted flour by the Massa people of Cameroon,
contains a large quantity of indigestible carbohydrate which is filling
but interferes with the assimilation of the other nutrients in the food
ration.
Man is not a frugal animal. Some specialists believe that human
beings are among the mammals with the greatest propensity to store
fats. In most traditional societies, the quest for a full stomach,
participation in a banquet to which both the living and the dead are
invited and its digestion in common with other people, are among
the main lubricants of social relations and provide a means of
communication.
by Igor de Garine
"What have been called 'supercultural' foods are often treated as
divine gifts. The acts of cultivation and their accompanying rituals
give form and pattern to the community's yearly round." Left, a
Chadian farmer holds a cluster of sorghum.
In the first hours of life a child comes into contact with the flavours
and textures typical of the foods eaten by the group to which it
belongs. Although taste remains something distinctive and indi¬
vidual, it is imprinted from birth with the stamp of a culture. A
child's emotional response to the foods that its culture considers to
be good is part of the process whereby it is integrated into society.
Without a doubt, the relative plasticity of early eating habits is a
factor that must be taken into account when considering the future
of our species. If the survival of a group depends on it, or for other
reasons, it is possible to profoundly modify the eating habits of the
members of that group, provided that a start is made at birth.
Although the connection between food and physical health may
not be clearly perceived, all societies to some extent attribute
magical medicinal properties to food. The general principle is that
the body and the mind should be given the foods that are most
appropriate, both materially and symbolically. The tendency in the
West is to follow the Galenic theory of medicine, whereby ingested
foods are converted into humours on whose balanced relationship
the health of the individual depends. In India and China, the
systems ofcorrespondence are extremely complex , and in the choice
of food account is taken both of the fundamental elements of the
Universe and of contingent matters such as place, season, time and
the distinctive characteristics of each person (see article page 24).
"Tell me what you eat and I will tell you what you are," wrote
Anthelme Brillat-Savarin (1755-1826) in his celebrated work on
gastronomy La physiologie du goût, (English translation, The Phy¬
siology of Taste, 1925). Food consumption expresses the status of
individuals according to a whole range of criteria (age, sex, social
and economic status) within a society in a particular spatial and
temporal context, which is itself in contact with other self-contained
societies. It provides a counterpoint to most other overt social
characteristics and may, as the French anthropologist Claude Lévi-
Strauss has suggested , unconsciously reveal the underlying structure
of societies.
Eating is a form of expression whereby a person in a sense acts out

his or her position in a particular society. For this reason, the quest
for prestige and distinction is a constant feature of the dynamic of
food selection. This dynamic operates between individuals, between
groups within a society, and between traditional societies today
faced with the overwhelming influence of urban industrial civiliza¬
tion. Monetary income has doubtless become the main variable that
influences food consumption, but the dynamic of choice has by no
means been brought under control. Any understanding of the
process calls for considerable knowledge of local problems and the
complexities of their historical background.
One example will suffice. In northern Cameroon, the Massa, the
Toubouri and the Fulbe live side by side in approximately the same
ecological setting. They can grow the same crops, but until recently
some Massa were willing to forgo the benefits of dry-season trans¬
planted sorghum, although they knew about it. They based their
rejection of this crop on a religious argument (the curse of Mother
Earth on upstart innovators) probably wishing to defend their
cultural authenticity by distinguishing themselves from the other
two peoples. Today, traditional beliefs and antagonisms have faded
and the Massa are more inclined to see themselves as members of
the Cameroonian nation. They have adopted dry-season trans¬
planted sorghum and are tending to abandon their own varieties of
red'sorghum for strains which produce white flour, and for rice,
which was the food of both the wealthiest peoples in the towns and of
the Fulbe, who were historically dominant in the region.
This example shows that the influence of industrial civilization is
not all-powerful and that local cultures (which are separate) also
provide role models for neighbouring populations. This factor is
seldom turned to account for development purposes.
Even if a standardization of everyday eating habits is taking place,
linked to the trend towards a single world food economy, local food
consumption patterns continue to flourish and traditional foodstuffs
continue to be produced. Developing countries can probably free
themselves to some extent from the need to import foodstuffs if they
are willing to make an effort to promote indigenous products on a
par with the efforts made to promote imported commodities.
One of the many reasons for fostering a degree of attachment to
local foods is that self-sufficiency in food production is still an ideal
situation for rural societies where money is too scarce a commodity
to be wasted on food. The other reasons are symbolic. Individuals
are emotionally attached to their childhood eating habits which are
usually imbued with their traditional culture. The perpetuation of
the traditional style of nourishment in daily life or in the calendar of
festivities is a pledge of authenticity and social cohesion and a
defence against outside aggression. This phenomenon is also found
among emigrants. It has been pointed out that consumers fall into
two categories: those who see a Golden Age in the past and uphold
traditional cuisine, and those who envisage a Golden Age in the
future and put their trust in scientifically approved nutrients. This
dichotomy can also be observed in developing countries.
Preparation of taro gruel, a ceremonial
dish consumed during festivities and
rituals in the Melanesian archipelago of
Vanuatu.
Right, lamas of the Tamang people of
Nepal partake of a ritual meal.
Far left, ancient Greek cantharus or drink¬
ing vessel in the form of a satyr's head
decorated with a sacrificial scene (5th cen¬
tury BC).
Left, fragment of a ceramic urn in the form
of the young god of maize is from the
pre-Columbian city of Monte Albán in Mex¬
ico. (Zapotee civilization, c. 500-750).

Admittedly, the advent of urban industrial civilization has made a
big difference to the relationship between people and what they eat.
This relationship is now independent of time and space. In some
societies, those who can afford to do so can eat or drink anything,
any time, anywhere and in any quantity. Food choices have become
more individualized. Less repressed than they were by material
constraints and the search for food, personal tastes are being more
strongly expressed.
Anxiety about food has taken a new form. Seasonal hunger and
the search for a full stomach have given way to a permanent and
legitimate quest for pleasure in eating as a means of easing tensions
whose origins specialists in the psychopathology of eating interpret
as expressions of a nostalgic desire to return to the womb.
Food production has become monetarized, and food is now, as it
were, secular. This does not mean that food has lost its symbolic
value or its social significance. Although there is something anarchic
in our habits of nibbling, it is still the person who runs the household,
or, nowadays, the restaurant-owner or canteen manager who
chooses what food is consumed at meals.
This choice is determined by many criteria whose range, thanks to
advances in communication, has steadily widened. Urban industrial
civilization encompasses many subcultures. Every social group has
its own range of foods which helps to express its values and lifestyle.
In accordance with a wide variety of criteria, each group makes a
choice from the countless resources available to it, and this reduces
the likelihood of a uniform worldwide food model, the establish¬
ment ofwhich sometimes seems to be imminent.
IGOR DE GARINE, French ethnologist and specialist in the study of food
and nutrition in relation to culture and ecology, is currently director of
research at the National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS), Paris,
where he heads a research team on "differential food anthropology". A
former head of the food habits section of FAO's Nutrition Division, he is the
author of around a hundred scientific anieles and studies in French and
English, and of eleven ethnographic documentary films.
1,
