Vive la
différence!
by Yuan Zuzhi
A member ofan illustriousfamily of
Chinese literati, Yuan Zuzhi (1827-1898)
visitedEurope in 1883 in the entourage ofa
group ofChinesepoliticians, andsome time
laterpublisheda briefguide containing
useful informationfor travellers to Western
Europe. The extractpublishedhere is taken
from a long comparison between Chinese
andEuropean civilization which Yuan
Zuzhi wrote in the mid-1880s. Not without
humour, he seeks to reveal the goodpoints
ofChinese civilization.
*W
rESTERN customs are not without similarities to those of China,
and if at times they diverge a little, it is not surprising in view of the
tens of thousands of // which separate these two regions of the
world. But they can be in complete contrast, a few examples of which follow: in
China, the place of honour is on the left, in the West it is on the right. Men are held
in higher regard than women on Chinese soil; in the West it is the other way
round.
"On Chinese soil, doors and windows are left wide open; in the West, doors and
gateways are there to be closed. In China, people find it more comfortable to
change out of their formal clothes before sitting down to table, while in the West it
is impossible to attend a banquet without dressing for the occasion. It is the same
in the home. In China, the role of women is to serve and care for others; in the
West, it is they who give the orders: the husband obeys.
"In China, a man's place is out of doors, a woman's, inside the house: what is
said indoors never goes beyond the walls of the inner apartments; what is said
outside does not enter the home. This is why a woman who stays at home and
never goes out is highly regarded for her fine virtue. In the West, the women think
of nothing but going out; the streets are full of their skirts and their jewellery.
They mingle with passers-by and travellers. The husband has no right to stop his
wife from going out; if he does so, he risks being prosecuted and thrown into
prison. In China, people of the opposite sex must not touch one another while
handing something over; in the West, when a man and woman shake hands it is
only an expression of respect.
"In China, we consider it obscene to kiss with the lips; in the West, a close
embrace and a kiss on the mouth is a gesture of politeness and of respect. ...
"In China, drinking cold water is advised against in order to avoid stomach¬
ache, while in the West it is a way of dealing with the heat. In China, wine is
warmed before drinking; in the West, it is only drunk chilled. In China the main
dishes are served first and the soup comes afterwards; in the West the soup is the
first course. ... In China, the eating of beef is avoided because that animal is
28

essential for work. In the West, the horse is used for work and the ox is only for
eating.
"In China, women dress to protect their bodies; they would feel the greatest
shame if they exposed any part of themselves. In the West they uncover their
shoulders and their breast, but do not allow their underwear to be seen. ...
"In China people do not talk while they are eating; gossips are made fun of. In
the West, people think you are ill if you do not talk during a meal. ...
"In China, young people do not let their beards or side whiskers grow; it is only
when they reach maturity that they give up shaving. In the West, it is the other way
round.
"The Chinese could never have hair on their faces; Westerners' faces are
covered with hair.
"In China, it would be impolite to appear bare-headed; on the contrary,
people's headwear is chosen to fit the occasion; in the West, it is considered
correct to take off one's hat. ...
"The Chinese bend their fingers to count on them, while Westerners straighten
them out. ...
"The Chinese peel vegetables or fruit with the knife-blade facing away from
them; in the West, it is turned inwards. ...
"In China, when the head of the household has people to dinner, the mistress
retires and does not meet the guests. In the West, she must not only keep them
company, but shake the hand of the guest of honour and take his arm on sitting
down and on leaving the table.
"In China, when people meet, they normally ask one another's name before
talking about the weather. In the West, people plunge into conversation without
troubling about such niceties , and only exchange visiting cards if the talk naturally
leads them to do so.
At the heightof fashion: a French ladyof 1910
and a Chinese lady of 1930.
CD
3
CD
CD
3
"In China, the upper floors of a house are the most respectable, contrary to
practice in the West, where the servants usually live on the fourth or fifth floors.
"In China, women's hair is admired for its sheen,for the subtle way in which it is
groomed, and for its blackness. In the West, people like curly or wavy hair worn
loose, and a deep yellow shade. Chinese ladies pride themselves on letting their
nails grow long and pointed; Western ladies take pains to trim theirs and think
their nails beautiful when they are rounded like the end of a mallet.
"In China, white is the colour of mourning and red that of marriage and joy. In
the West, white stands for joy, while black is the colour of mourning. In China,
the hands and face are washed after a meal; in the West, before.
"In China, black is worn to do dirty jobs, in the West, it is the colour of formal
dress.
"Chinese women would feel humiliated and insulted to be watched and
appraised. In the West, women are flattered to be observed and inspected by all
and sundry and take this as a compliment.
"The Chinese court prides itself on endeavouring to reduce taxes and lighten
duties, while in the West people unhesitatingly accept arbitrary taxation and
exorbitant impositions. In China, rich families fill their stores and attics, while in
the West the wealthy invest their money outside.
"In China, women but not men are repelled by the idea of showing their naked
bodies; in the West, the opposite is the case.
"The listing of these contrasts could go on indefinitely ..."
Nouvelles lettres édifiantes et curieuses d' Extrême-Occi¬
dent par des voyageurs lettrés chinois à la Belle Epoque.
Editions Seghers, Paris, 1986.
29
