Return of the griffon
z
J"
f
w
I
The griffon vulture is one of several species
being re-introduced into the Cévennes Biosphere Reserve
in southern France
THE road from Nîmes to Florae, head¬
quarters of the Cévennes Biosphere
Reserve, winds into the southern
highlands of the French central mountains.
Skirting terraced hillsides and deep
ravines, with jagged mountains looming
above, it seems to be leading the visitor
back into another age, when life was harsh
yet man was still in close communion with
nature.
Geologically and ecologically diverse,
the Cévennes region is an ideal site for a
biosphere reserve. Spread over some
300,000 hectares, it Includes a granitic
massif to the north, a schist zone ¡n the
centre, a schist and granite mountain to the
south and a limestone plateau to the
west.
Mont Lozère, the northern granitic mas¬
sif, is 40 kilometres long and 15 kilometres
wide, reaching 1 ,700 metres at its highest
point. The central schist valley is slashed by
valleys opening towards the Mediterranean
basin. Aigoual, the composite mountain to
the south, ¡s a high zone cut by an important
hydrographie network. The sedimentary
plateaux of Causse de Sauveterre, Causse
Mejean and Causse Noir, to the west, are
rolling regions bounded by deep canyons.
The geology, geographic location and
great range of elevations mean that many
kinds of vegetation are present, including
sub-Mediterranean and Mediterranean for¬
est, Atlantic forest, middle European moun¬
tain forest, shrub and grass moors and rock
vegetation. In general, the flora is sub-
Mediterranean.
The Cévennes contains 50 species of
mammals, 1 50 species of birds, 30 species
of reptiles and amphibians and 20 species
of fish. Rare or threatened species include
the golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos), the
peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus), and
the eagle owl (Bubo bubo). Attempts are
being made to re-Introduce some species,
including griffon, beaver and capercaillie.
Already a dozen or more great griffon vul¬
tures can, from time to time, be seen in
majestic flight against the dramatic back¬
drop of the mountain slopes.
The Interest of the Cévennes as a bio¬
sphere reserve lies not only in its rich flora
and fauna but also ¡n the character of its
diverse landscapes, where the natural and
the cultural heritages are intricately mixed.
The region shows many signs of human
occupation dating back centuries. The orig¬
inal forest was destroyed in Roman times to
provide firewood for the great pottery kilns
of Banassac and La Graufesenque. This
deforestation led to the development of an
architecture of superimposed vaulting
capable of supporting heavy roofs of lime¬
stone tiles.
Traditional rural architecture, dating back
to the seventeenth century, ¡s based mainly
on local geological materials (schist, gra¬
nite, limestone) which are still the basis of
today's buildings, such as the elèdes, used
13

The Cévennes
Biosphere
Reserve and
National Park
Inhabitants are encouraged to respect tradi¬
tional building styles and methods (right and
below). Any additional cost involved is borne
by the National Park.
Biosphere reserve functions
Biosphere reserves can be
envisaged as geographic
"hubs" for conservation of
landscapes containing the
characteristic ecosystems ofa
given biogeographic region
and for ecological monitor¬
ing, research, education,
demonstration and training
relating to the wise use of
these ecosystems. Right, a
schematic zonation of a bio¬
sphere reserve. In this zona¬
tion the core area is strictly
protected. The buffer zone
can be used for regulated,
non-destructive activities and
is strictly delineated. The
transition area covers other
biosphere reserve functions
including such activities
as experimental research,
traditional use, and re¬
habilitation.
Key (both diagrams)
ER = Experimental Research
TU = Traditional Use
RA = Rehabilitation
TA = Co-operation
(Transition Area)
XX = Human Settlements
Facilities for: R = Research
E = Education
T = Tourism
M = Monitoring
Diagrams source: M. Bâtisse, 1986
WET^F '
I
o
©
for drying chestnuts, and the magnaneries,
where silkworms were once raised.
The schistose area of the Cévennes ¡s a
difficult area for human settlement because
of its steep slopes. For centuries people
have climbed these slopes carrying the soil
that each Mediterranean storm washed
down into the valleys. Patiently and with
great effort they built terracing and hamlets
on the mountain sides.
This long and extraordinary Interplay
between man and nature was recognized
by the French authorities and led, in 1970,
to the creation of the Cévennes National
Park. Like other French National Parks, the
Cévennes Park has a central zone, ¡n which
some 600 people live, where Park officials
have extensive statutory powers (supervi¬
sion of hunting, building licences, traffic,
etc.), and a peripheral zone ¡n which they
can advise and attempt to influence the
communities within the zone to conserve
natural features.
In the field of architecture, for example,
the park administration asks farmers to
respect traditional building methods and
pays the difference between the cost of a
contemporary construction and a tradi¬
tional one.
As far as agriculture is concerned,
environmental planning helps farmers to
improve their profits without damaging the
environment. Farmers also sometimes
work directly for the Park under special con¬
tract, at times when they are not too busy
¡n their own fields, on such projects as
clearing undergrowth to prevent forest
fires and restoring communal buildings ¡n
the villages.
The similarities between the objectives of
the Cévennes National Park and those of
the MAB International biosphere reserve
network are evident, and ¡n 1984 the Park
was designated a biosphere reserve.
14

A rocky landscape typical of parts of the
Cévennes
Arid and semi-arid zones
This has enabled it to deal more effec¬
tively with a number of ecological problems.
For example, the boundaries of the Park
had been established on the basis of
administrative and political demarcations,
which rarely coincide with ecological limits.
As a biosphere reserve, Its new boundaries
have been drawn up according to such cri¬
teria as geological patterns and vegetation
distribution.
Furthermore, scientific objectives are
often better defined in a biosphere reserve
and are related directly to human uses. In
addition, the Park now has access to the
vast MAB data base compiled from
research undertaken in biosphere reserves
all over the world.
Within the framework of the MAB Interna¬
tional network of biosphere reserves, a suit¬
able policy ¡s being developed for the
environment outside the central zone of the
National Park.
The objectives of the Action Plan for Bio¬
sphere Reserves have been enthusi¬
astically adopted and this was reflected in a
workshop on the Implementation of the
Action Plan for Biosphere Reserves in the
Mediterranean Region, organized by the
French MAB Committee and held at Florae
in September 1986. Some fifty specialists
from eight countries (Algeria, Egypt,
France, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Turkey and
Tunisia) attended, including representa¬
tives from two other French biosphere
reserves: Fango, in Corsica, and the
Camargue.
A recurrent theme of the Florae work¬
shop was that consideration of the human
element was vital to the understanding and
better conservation of Mediterranean land¬
scapes. Biosphere reserves like the
Cévennes can give a lead in testing ways of
conserving landscapes that have long been
shaped by the hand of man.
