I
i
I
HOL
' _ 111
The stately heritage
of Portuguese Baroque
BY JOSE-AUGUSTO FRANCA
Colour page left
Above: interior ofthe church ofthe Third Order
of St. Francis, Salvador, Brazil. With its gilded
sculptures and mouldings, this early 18th-cen¬
tury church is typical of Brazilian and Portu¬
guese architecture. (See article page 39.)
Photo Moisnard © Explorer, Paris
Below left: the "Angel with the Arquebus"
(Peru). This typical figure of Andean baroque
art is here shown in an anonymous 18th-
century painting of the Cuzco School. (See arti¬
cle page 36.)
Photo © Rojas Mix, Paris. Manuel Mujica Crallo Collection
Below right: glazed andpainted tile or azulejo
from the stairway of the pilgrimage church of
Nossa Senhora dos Remedios (1750-1760),
Lamego, Portugal. The azulejo is an essential
decorative feature in Portuguese architecture
and is also widely found in Spain and Brazil.
Photo S. Marmounier © CEDRI, Paris
PORTUGUESE Baroque did not
really come into its own until the
young King John V (1706-1750), his
coffers filled with the recently discovered
treasures of Brazil, determined to make a
symbolic affirmation of his power with the
ambitious project of the monastery-palace-
church of Mafra, on the construction of
which, from 1717, all the resources of the
kingdom were to be concentrated.
J.F. Ludwig (known as Ludovice in Por¬
tugal), a Swabian goldsmith and architect
who had spent some time in Italy, drew up a
series of plans for Mafra, each more gran¬
diose than the one before, which were
inspired by St. Peter's, Rome, and by the
Roman architecture of the Italian architect
Carlo Fontana and his school. The monu¬
mental construction, said to be "greater than
the kingdom", is undoubtedly one of the
finest examples of the whole series of
Germano-Italian monastery-palace-church
complexes.
Manor houses and palatial family seats such as
that of the Mateus family at Vila Real, above,
display the elegance ofPortuguese 18th-century
secular architecture.
Just two years after work was started at
"Mafra, John V summoned the Piedmontese
architect Filippo Juvarra to Lisbon and
asked him to draw up plans for a royal palace
and a patriarchal church. Frustrated by the
length of time completion of such a building
operation would take, the king decided
instead to enlarge and embellish the palace
that Philip II of Spain (who was also king of
Portugal) had had built after 1580 on the
banks of the Tagus.
The Hungarian Carlos Mardel proposed a
series of elegant monumental fountains to
adorn the capital. Meanwhile, in 1747,
Mateus Vicente, a Portuguese architect
trained at Mafra, began work on a country
residence for the king's younger brother, at
27

o
©
Queluz, near Lisbon. The façade of this
building, in which hints of Rococo could
already be discerned, was the country's sec¬
ond major example of southern Baroque.
Shortly before his death, John V ordered
the superb chapel of St. John the Baptist,
designed by Luigi Vanvitelli in a style which
foreshadowed the classical revival, to be
brought from Rome and installed in the
Jesuit church of St. Roch. Like the
patriarchal church, this chapel became a ver¬
itable museum of religious jewellery and
plate supplied by Roman workshops.
John V acquired his tastes from and shared
his orders between Rome and Paris, the'
"Eternal City" supplying his needs in the
religious field while Louis XV's capital met
his secular requirements. Two Frenchmen,
the illustrious silversmith Thomas Germain
and the great scholar and collector Pierre
Jean Mariette, were official suppliers to the
Portuguese crown. The latter supplied the
patron-king with a huge collection of
engravings, lost, unfortunately, in the earth¬
quake of 1755, which destroyed John V's
capital and all its riches, five years after his
death.
The city, which rose again rapidly follow¬
ing this catastrophe, thanks to the
"enlightened" policies of the Marquis of
Pombal, reflected the latter's rational, bour¬
geois taste rather than the Baroque of the
preceding generation.
In the north of the country, however,
where the old landed nobility was
entrenched, far from the court, a different
form of Baroque developed which made use
of the exceptional plastic qualities of granite.
The Tuscan Niccoló Nasoni (and later his
disciple Figueiredo de Seixas) was the most
influential architect of Porto, where he set¬
tled in 1725. The church of the Clérigos
(1731-1749), whose graceful tower was to
become the emblem of the city, and the
Freixo and the Sao-Joao-Novo mansions,
are among the buildings that typify the late
baroque style specific to this part of the
country, a style that with its rococo touches
is somewhat reminiscent of that of Central
Europe.
Towards the middle of the century, at
Braga, not far from Porto, the architect A.
Soares erected three important monumental
buildings the church of Falperra, the
Town Hall, and the Raio mansion whose
façade is the most intricately worked of all
Portuguese civic architecture of the period.
Indeed, country houses and manors (solares)
were the field of predilection for sculptural
late Baroque. In the homes of the Lobo-
Machado family (at Guimaräes), the Mal-
heiro (Viana do Castelo) and the Mateus
(Vila Real) the varied range of Portuguese art
of the period 1730 to 1770 finds its most
original expression.
In the Azores, in Madeira, in India,
Macao and especially, in Brazil, Portuguese
baroque architecture took root and left its
mark.
Although Portuguese painting and sculp¬
ture of this period are of only secondary
interest, in spite of the import of paintings
and statues by the finest Roman artists to
decorate Mafra, two decorative creations
gave an original stamp to Portuguese
Baroque azulejos (painted faience tiles)
and talha (gilded carved wood).
The talha of the altars, spreading out
along the walls, provided the ideal décor for
the "all-gold" church, both a practical and a
Right, peristyle of the palace-monastery of
Mafra, epitome of Portuguese Baroque which
flourished in the 18th century during the reign of
KingJohn V, who built Mafra near Lisbon in a
bid to match the Escorial ofPhilip II of Spain
(see photo page 16). Above, the façade of the
church of Santa Casa da Misericordia at Viseu.
Churches of this kind were copied with varying
degrees of accuracy in Brazil, a Portuguese col¬
ony until the early 19th century.
semantic proposition fundamental to Por¬
tuguese Baroque. The talha harmonized
with the plain blue on a white background of
the azulejos which tiled the walls of cloisters,
staircases, rooms, even the vaulted ceilings
of churches, replacing pictures and tapes¬
tries. The religious themes and scenes from
daily life that they depicted were copied
from imported engravings and were framed
with painted, trompe l'oeil imitations of rich
architectural mouldings.
Thus, from the monumental carved stone
of Mafra to the scintilla of gilded carved
wood and the thousand reflections of
painted tiles, Portuguese Baroque, erected
to the glory of John V, was a celebration of
both the sacred and the sensual.
JOSE-AUGUSTO FRANCA, Portuguese histo¬
rian and art critic, is a professor at the New Uni¬
versity of Lisbon and an associate professor at the
University of Paris III. He is president of the
International Association of Art Critics and a
member of the International Committee for the
History of Art. He is the author o/Une ville des
lumières: la Lisbonne de Pombal (1965).
28
