/
Q
LU
O
©
Beringia
32
During the last 2 million years, vast accu¬
mulations of ice covered extensive parts of
the Earth and melted again about 20 times,
each Ice Age lasting around 100,000 years.
Each time that the ice sheets reached their
maximum extent, the additional volume of
water extracted from the ocean was about 40
million cubic kilometres. This resulted in a
drop in sea level of about 100 metres.
Archaeologists have been aware for several
decades that the lower sea levels during the
Ice Ages created a larger living space for
Stone Age tribes of the Palaeolithic (over
10,000 years ago), and that migrations be¬
tween continents and islands were promoted
by the creation of "land bridges" or narrow
straits. Marine archaeologists are now
studying submerged prehistoric sites on the
continental shelf and have established
beyond doubt that human occupation did
take place below the present sea level. Study
of "land bridges" may shed new light on one
of the most important (and still poorly
understood) processes of human history, the
colonization of the Earth's continents by
early man after his evolution in East Africa
1.5 million years ago. In the following art¬
icle, a Soviet specialist, Nikolai N. Dikov,
describes one of these land bridges, the
ancient landmass known as Beringia which
in prehistoric times stretched from Siberia
to Alaska.



A prehistoric
'intercontinental highway'
between Asia
and America by Nikolai N. Dikov
UNLIKE the mysterious Atlantis, Be¬
ringia actually existed. Like Atlan¬
tis, it was submerged by the sea.
This happened gradually about 10,000 years
ago, as the huge glaciers of the last great Ice
Age melted. The level of the Pacific Ocean
rose as much as 200 metres at that time, and
the vast depression between Chukotka and
Alaska was inundated. Since then, the wa¬
ters of the Bering and Chukotkan seas and
of the Bering Strait, which joins them, have
intermingled here.
The honour of making the definitive dis¬
covery (in the 1960s) of this huge land-mass
which is now under water belongs to the
U.S. geologist David M. Hopkins, although
the actual term "Beringia" was first used by
a Soviet palaeozoologist, Petr P. Sushkin,

View of the globe showing connections
between the continents at times of low sea
level during the Ice Ages, and the general
directions of human migrations over mil¬
lions of years.
in 1925, and as long as 200 years ago a
Russian academician, Stepan P. Krashenin-
nikov, had a general idea that there was
some such land route between Asia and
America.
Subsequent scientific investigations con¬
firmed the existence of Beringia and en¬
abled us to chart the course of its rivers and
lakes and to get an idea of what its climate
and its fauna and flora must have been like.
It was a flat plain, woody in the south, and
with tundra and steppes in the north, where
herds of mammoths and bison, wild horses
and reindeer grazed.
Curiously enough, Beringia appeared
above water more than once during the Ice
Ages, when much of the world's water be¬
came concentrated in sheets of ice and as a
result extensive shallows along the coasts
(shelfs) became dry land. Glacial and in¬
terglacial periods alternated, and when the
temperature rose, the ice melted and a strait
appeared between Asia and America,
where there had previously been dry land.
At the beginning and end of the Ice Ages,
each of which lasted several thousand
years, there was a fairly wide bridge of land
between the west and east parts of the sheet
of ice. In these periods, too, there was a
direct route by which animals and people
could migrate from Asia to the interior of
America, which was covered with glaciers.
The main interest that Beringia holds for
archaeologists lies in the question of the
original settlement of America from Asia.
In the L'ilt that has accumulated at the
bottom of the sea, archaeologists expect to
find tracks of Stone Age men who passed
through on their way from Asia to America.
Underwater operations are to begin very
soon, but for the time being intensive
archaeological prospecting and excavation
work is being done on the approaches to the
submerged land of Beringia, in Chukotka,
Kamchatka, and Alaska. These investiga¬
tions are giving us1 some idea of the stages in
the migration of populations through Be¬
ringia and of the nature of their culture.
They are also helping us to work out our
strategy for the underwater archaeological
searches that are to be undertaken, which
will take account of the topographic and
stratigraphie characteristics of the ancient
sites that have been discovered in the im¬
mediate approaches to Beringia.
Systematic searching was begun by the
author of this article in 1961, after he had
worked out a programme for archaeological
investigations in the north-east with a view
to solving the problem of the peopling of
America. The excavations carried out so far
have revealed a large number of
Palaeolithic sites in Kamchatka and Chu¬
kotka, which are now the basic source of
information for our study of the peopling of
America through Beringia.
Every year brings fresh evidence that this
region, which was subsequently cut off from
the centres of ancient civilization, was at
that time not a backward, outlying part of
the world but one of its great highways
which, with Beringia, formed a wide bridge
between what are now Asia and North
America.
Data obtained by Soviet and U.S.
archaeologists enable us to distinguish, with
different degrees of precision , four stages in
the peopling of Beringia.
The first stage is as yet in many respects
hypothetical, but logically necessary. It
appears to correspond either to the penulti¬
mate Ice Age, known as the Ziryansk Ice
Age (70,000-50,000 years ago) or to the
beginning of the last Ice Age, known as the
Sartansk Ice Age (28,000-20,000 years
ago). This is the stage to which we may
attribute both extremely ancient relicts that
have been found in America, including
roughly chipped pebbles, and what appear
to be prototypes of these ancient relicts
which have been found at sites in the Soviet
Far East in Chukotka and elsewhere.
The second stage, which is also largely
hypothetical, corresponds to the period be¬
tween 14,000 and 20,000 years ago when
Sartansk glaciation was most extensive and
Beringia itself reached its maximum size.
At this stage, its tundra-steppes, which
were populated with megafauna, were a
single natural zone, cut off from its sur¬
roundings by glaciers to the west and east
and by the relatively warm Pacific Ocean to
the south.
In this closed-in region it was probably
some time before there was any differentia¬
tion between the two cultural zones the
continental zone, where huge mammals
were hunted in the tundra-steppes, and the
north Pacific zone, near the coast, where
hunters, öf whom little is known as yet,
exploited the sea's resources in a sporadic
fashion. Technologically, this was still
a united zone with a relatively uniform
culture.
The third stage, which is quite clearly
defined, corresponds to the dispersal to the
western approaches of Beringia, in Kam-
G
Z
Z
©
33

w
BP
View of the excavations (foreground) of
the Ushki Palaeolithic site in Kamchatka.
Around photo, stone implements un¬
earthed on the site.
34
chatka, of the early Ushki culture, which is
dated around 13,000-14,000 years ago and
possibly earlier, judging by palaeo-magne-
tic dating. From this period on we can make
fairly definite assertions about the cultural
connections between Asia and America by
way of Beringia and also, perhaps, about
population migration, when we think of the
astonishing resemblance of Ushki stemmed
bifacial stone points for missiles to those
found in sites in the State of Washington, in
the north-west of the USA.
This was the last period when cultural
connections and perhaps population migra¬
tions were possible entirely over dry land,
because up to the beginning of the thir¬
teenth millennium Beringia was not divided
by a strait. The north-west coast of North
America could also be used to get from
Beringia to America, which was covered
with glaciers, for at that time the glaciers
had somewhat diminished in volume and
were no longer a hindrance to population
migration along the Pacific coast, particu¬
larly for populations which engaged in hunt¬
ing, fishing and gathering, as in the early
Ushki culture.
The fourth and much more clearly de¬
fined stage corresponds to the very end of
the Sartansk Ice Age (12,000,-10,000 years
ago). It is connected with the further ero¬
sion and ecological reconstruction of Be¬
ringia the broadening of the strait be¬
tween Chukotka and Alaska, the gradual
swamping of the tundra-steppes and the
reduction of the diversity of species and the
number of megafauna. The main flow of
migration to Beringia did not pass by the
north route in the direction of Yakutia
(although this cannot be entirely excluded)
but by a south Pacific route in the direction
of the northern part of what is now the
Soviet Far East.
Here there came into being a new culture
which was based on fishing and bison-hunt¬
ing and could readily adapt to the new
ecological conditions. This was the Late
Ushki culture, which has been extensively
studied in Kamchatka. It is characterized by
large settlements, at the largest of which
some thirty dwellings have already been
excavated. These dwellings are quite diffe¬
rent from the large double tents of the early
Ushki culture.
There are also marked differences in
stone implements. As well as the bifacial
leaf-shaped non-stemmed points of mis¬
siles, forms of ornament much favoured by
the Aleutians and the Eskimos have been
found. A domestic dog burial has already
been found, that of a dog like a husky. It is
one of the most ancient burials in the
Palaeolithic. Wedge-shaped cores are com¬
monly found. They are yet another indica¬
tion that there is a certain affinity between
the Ushki culture and the Denali culture in
Alaska, where the latter played its part in
the formation of the proto-Eskimo Aleuts.
When the proto-Eskimo Aleuts reached
the southern part of Beringia, they de¬
veloped sea hunting more and more inten¬
sively. A factor that facilitated this was the
considerable diminution in the size of Be¬
ringia (starting about 12,000 years ago). A
strait gradually appeared, and boats had to
be used to reach the eastern side.
The Palaeolithic sites in Chukotka may
be seen as intermediary stopping places on
the way from Kamchatka to Beringia and
beyond it to America. The same wedge-
shaped cores and bifacial weapon points
have been found in them as in the Late
Ushki culture in Kamchatka and the Denali
culture in Alaska. This shows that popula¬
tion movement direct from Chukotka to
Alaska took place 12,000-10,000 years ago,
when Beringia began to get considerably
smaller, until finally there was a strait where
it had once been.
Underwater archaeologists working in
the submerged land of Beringia can expect
to make fascinating discoveries. They can
use the latest diving equipment available on
vessels such as the Academician Nes-
meyanov, which is registered at the Far East
Department of the USSR Academy of Sci¬
ences. This vessel is equipped with the latest
apparatus including a system for the adap¬
tive training of divers and remote control by
television communication. It can carry out
underwater operations at a depth of up to
300 metres.
As to the method of carrying out under¬
water investigations, what we have said
about the pattern of the distribution of
ancient sites in the parts of Beringia that
were not submerged suggests that it would
be advisable to begin possibly by drill¬
ing near the mouths of the river beds that
have been found on the shelf. The success of
these investigations is bound to be of great
international scientific importance.
NIKOLAI NIKOLAEVICH DIKOV is a corres-
ponding member of the USSR Academy of Sci¬
ences and director of the archaeology, history
and ethnography laboratory of the North-East
Scientific Research. Institute of the Academy's
Far East Department. He is the author of 7
monographs, including "Ancient Culture of
North-East Asia" (2 volumes) and over 150 sci¬
entific papers.
