The Japanese
and Western music
38
UNTIL recently, one of the many dis¬
paraging clichés used by critics
when speaking of the appearance
of Japanese artists in the front ranks of the
world art scene, was that they were "im¬
itators". They forgot that, to the Japanese,
the work of Western artists often seems to
suffer from a lack of maturity and to be
contaminated with the virus of excessive
originality.
In Shinto, a religion which still has con¬
siderable influence on everyday life in Ja¬
pan, there is no clear-cut distinction be¬
tween the divine and the human, which are
linked by a principle of continuous animis¬
tic generation. In the words of the Japa¬
nese composer and musicologist Akira
Tamba, "The living man's god is his de¬
ceased ancestor and, when he dies, he in
turn will become the protective deity of his
descendants." It is easy to appreciate,
therefore, that Japanese artists do not sub¬
scribe to the idea of individual intellectual
ownership with which Western creative art¬
ists are sometimes obsessed. Masters of
traditional Japanese music, painters, cal-
ligraphers and actors all share the knowl¬
edge which they have acquired and devel¬
oped throughout their lives with their pupils
who, in turn, hand down this common stock
of culture to their own successors ...
However relevant they may be, these
observations are not sufficient in them¬
selves to explain why Japan, after the
terrible turning-point in history represented
CONTINUED PAGE 40
by Luisa Futoransky
Western classical music is highly popular in
Japan today, and leading Japanese exponents
such as lite celebrated conductor Seiji Ozawa
often top the bill at concert halls all over the
world. This enthusiasm can be traced back
over a century to the Meiji Restoration, which
marked the opening of Japan to the West.
Above, a Japanese print produced in 1887 bv
Kanenobo depicts young people dressed in
European style taking a singing lesson.

.2 ¿¿c
. à
'Living National Treasures'
Each country has its own way ofpaying tribute to those who enshrine its
culture, and Japan is no exception. The country honours its most
outstanding living artists and craftsmen by conferring on them the li'le of
"bearers of intangible and important cultural properties". Recipients of
the honour are granted an annual allowance to enable them to work,
exhibit and transmit their arts and skills to young apprentices. They are
venerated and known affectionately as Ningen Kokuhö. ' Living National
Treasures". Five of them are shown here. (1) Fumiko Yonekawa is the
leading exponent of the koto, a kind of zither originally found in China.
The instrument is over 2 metres long and has 13 strings made of spun silk
or nylon. (2) Toyozo Arakawa, one of Japan's most celebrated crafts¬
men, has revived ancient pottery techniques and creates magnificent
ceramics on his farm deep in the countryside. (3) Kako Moriguchi has
been making beautiful kimonos for the last 50 years using dyes and
techniques dating from the 17th century. It may take up to 6 months to
make a kimono. (4) Eislürö Abe is one of the few surviving Japanese
masters of the 1 , 300-year-old art of making paper by hand. He works
'done at home, collecting the wood he uses as raw material and personally
supervising ¡he kiln. (5) Lacquerwork is the speciality of Gonroke
Matsuda. He uses powdered gold sprinkled from a flute-like tool, the
tsu-tsu. as well as the shells of quails' eggs. When decorating a box with
floral motifs, he may use up to 650 shells.
I !

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 38
The shamisen (below), a 3-stringed plucked
lute, is a traditional instrument which is often
used to accompany the koto, or zither. Al¬
though the passion for Western music persists,
recent years have seen a revival of interest in
Japan's traditional music. This has stimulated
the production of typical Japanese instruments
such as the shakuhachi (bamboo finie), the
koto and the shamisen. More and more Japa¬
nese children are learning to play these in¬
struments.
by Hiroshima and the end of the Second
World War, having started virtually from
scratch as far as Western music is con¬
cerned, should have become the leading
manufacturer of top-quality musical instru¬
ments; nor why the Japanese have be¬
come increasingly involved in the enter¬
tainment business and popular music; nor
why, in classical music, Japanese instru¬
mentalists, conductors and soloists should
have come to occupy a leading place in the
world's concert halls.
There can be no doubt that Japan has
superimposed European ways on its own
models, especially in the arts and in educa¬
tion. The reasons for this are bound up with
sociology, philosophy and cultural policy,
and lie beyond the scope of this article.
What is clear, however, is that Western
music has gained such a foothold that in
popular parlance it has become synony¬
mous with "music" in general. As a result,
when the Japanese wish to refer to tradi¬
tional music, they feel compelled to add the
word "Japanese", in order to avoid misun¬
derstandings.
This does not mean that the practice of
traditional music and interest in it have
disappeared altogether. Following a period
of apparent eclipse at the end of the 1 960s,
as a result of the craze for jazz, rock and
other musical forms which were taking the
world by storm, the study of traditional
instruments such as the shakuhachi, the
koto and the shamisen has been steadily
gaining ground in recent years, as is borne
out by the number of such instruments
being manufactured and sold. However, in
terms of public concerts and other events,
traditional Japanese music accounts for no
more than 10 per cent of musical activities
in Japan, although it should not be forgot¬
ten that such music has always been
"semi-public" in the sense that it is primar¬
ily based on the close relationship between
master and pupils and that traditional con¬
certs are usually attended by groups of
friends and connoisseurs. Unlike other cul¬
tural events, they attract a faithful following
which does not need to be prodded by
advertising, and is not a prey to the vicissi¬
tudes of fashion.
Any attempt to study the interest
aroused by music in Japan would be in¬
complete if no allowance was made for the
leading role played by women. Although
this phenomenon is not confined to Japan,
it is an acknowledged fact that, in the
middle and upper-middle classes, the
study of music used to, and to some extent
still does today, bring social prestige. Japa¬
nese custom required young women of
marriageable age to round off their educa¬
tion by taking lessons in flower arrange¬
ment, the tea ceremony, calligraphy or
traditional dancing, or else by learning to
play a traditional instrument. This formed
the beginning of a close relationship be¬
tween master and pupil which lasted for
the rest of the master's life.
With the increasingly rapid pace of
Westernization in the 1950s, more and
more people began to learn to play the
piano, violin or harp. However, the surpris¬
ing thing was that young people were not
content with occasional private lessons.
The taste and passion for music assumed
such proportions that veritable musical uni¬
versities began to flourish. Today. Japan
has about 150 institutions, including con¬
servatoires, academies, universities and
US-style colleges offering high-quality mu¬
sical instruction. Some of them are vast
institutions with their own nursery schools,
orchestras, opera groups, summer camps,
and primary and secondary schools.
Statistics recently published show that
some 10,000 young people with higher-
grade diplomas, roughly 90 per cent of
them women, enter the music market
every year. Some of them become teach¬
ers at the universities where they them¬
selves studied: many others teach in small

local conservatoires or simply pass on their
love of music to their children. However,
more and more of them are keen on pursu¬
ing their studies in the leading European
centres in the hope of launching an in¬
ternational career. Rising living standards
have enabled an increasing number of
Japanese families to send their children to
study in Europe, where school fees are
often much lower than in Japan. More than
300 Japanese pupils are studying music or
singing in Vienna alone.
The proverbial Japanese qualities of
consistency, hard work and constant In¬
tellectual curiosity, coupled with submis-
siveness to one's teachers, also help to
explain this phenomenal musical success.
It should come as no surprise that in the
Federal Republic of Germany, for exam¬
ple, there are currently more than 250
Japanese musicians occupying permanent
posts in orchestras.
Quite apart from the undoubted quality
of Japanese artists, one of the reasons for
the number of Japanese on the internation¬
al orchestral and operatic scene lies in the
shortcomings of Japan's cultural infras¬
tructure which is unable to absorb the large
number of good professionals coming onto
the market. There are few regular orches¬
tras and only two or three of them are
subsidized by local municipalities.
Until only very recently, plans for orga¬
nizing a national opera company had not
materialized. Owing to the very high cost of
staging opera, it is understandable that
such an outstanding opera group as Niki-
kai, in addition to depending on private
sponsorship, should have three casts for
each production. For the right to take part,
each member of the company is required
to sell a large number of tickets. Hence,
there are obviously good reasons why tal¬
ented young people should compete
fiercely for a place on the international
scene. Yet again the old adage that "no
man is a prophet in his own country" is
shown to be valid the world over.
I shall let the Japanese musicologist
Mamoru Watanabe have the last word on
the Japanese passion for Western music.
In one of his books on the subject, he
indulges in an ironical jest when he asks:
"Why do the Japanese like European mu¬
sic? ... Why shouldn't we? It is beautiful
music and it is natural for us to like it."B
LUISA FUTORANSKY, Argentine writer, edited
and presented a Spanish-language radio pro¬
gramme for the international service ol NHK. the
Japanese nation-wide broadcasting company,
between 1976 and 1980. when she also taught
opera at the Tokyo music academy Musashino
Ongaku Daigaku. Among her recent publica¬
tions are a novel. De P a Pa (1986). and a
volume of poetry. La sanguina (1987).
Shóhei Ôoka (boni 1909) first became known as a writer through works such as
F'uryo-ki (1948: Prisoner of War. 1967), which were based on his wartime
experiences. He is also the author of essays and novels, notably Kaei (1958-59) a
tenderly-drawn portrait of a woman. In Yônen (1973; "Childhood Years") and
Shoiien (1975; "Years of Youth"), he has written about his early life with his
characteristically direct style and sharp sense of observation. Above, a scene from
Kon lchikawa'sfilm Nobi (1959; l-'ircs on the Plain) adapted from a short story with
the same title (1953). in which Ôoka denounces the horrors of war.

