UNICEF
at forty
ON 11 December 1986 UNICEF, the
United Nations Children's Fund,
celebrated its 40th anniversary.
Forty years is a short time when set
against the changes needed to protect the
world's children from death, hunger and
sickness, and to eradicate illiteracy and suf¬
fering. Every six seconds somewhere in the
world a child dies or becomes handicapped
as the result of an illness against which he
could have been vaccinated. Most of each
day's 40,000 child deaths could be avoided.
Much thus remains to be done. But in the
last forty years, UNICEF has carried out
action programmes in many fields:
Aid to orphans and malnourished chil¬
dren in Europe in the aftermath of the
Second World War, and today in the de¬
veloping world;
Emergency aid to millions of children in
Palestine, Kampuchea, Bangladesh, Peru,
Ethiopia and elsewhere;
Long-term development projects in
almost all Third World countries (UNICEF
is currently active in 113 developing coun¬
tries);
Co-operation in efforts to eradicate dis¬
eases such as yaws and smallpox;
Launching new methods of child protec-
PhotO UNICEF
tion with the participation of local popula¬
tions;
Training hundreds of thousands of per¬
sons in teaching, agriculture, childbirth
methods, hygiene, etc.;
Provision throughout the world of medic¬
al and school supplies, water pumps, and
hundreds of thousands of tonnes of equip¬
ment;
Application at country and local levels of
new technical measures relating to vaccina¬
tion, child care, breast-feeding and oral re¬
hydration therapy;
Telling the public through UNICEF
national committees and their teams of
volunteers about new techniques for solving
child welfare problems.
UNICEF is wholly financed by voluntary
contributions from governments and pri¬
vate individuals. 75% of its resources are
provided by governments and 25% from
fund-raising campaigns and the sale of
greetings cards and stationery. This year's
all-the-year-round greeting cards are now
available at UNICEF sales points through¬
out the world. In addition to the cards
UNICEF is also offering a variety of other
stationery including correspondence fol¬
ders, postcards, gift labels, and birth
announcement cards, as well as educational
games (jigsaw puzzles and models) and
other gifts. Above, a poster created by the
Belgian artist Jean-Michel Folon to mark
the 40th anniversary of UNICEF.
