A large foreigner
in search of space
by James Kirkup
M
A crowd of rush-hour passengers being packed
into a subway train by an attendant
| OST Japanese subway and com¬
muter trains have their seats in
the form of long benches on each
side of the carriage. They are quite com¬
fortably upholstered in hard-wearing
green, red or blue plush. I suspect that the
reason for such seating arrangements is to
allow as many people as possible to stand
during the rush hours, which in the big
cities seem to last all day long. People
queue up quite docilely on the platforms
facing the sign on the opposite platform,
just above the tracks, indicating exactly
where the train doors will open automat¬
ically: and Japanese trains always stop
exactly in the correct place.
26
But as soon as the doors open, there is a
general stampede to enter the cars and get
a seat. Passengers who want to get off
sometimes have difficulty in doing so, and
have to fight their way out against the solid
mass of those desperate to get on. Small
children, perhaps trained by their parents,
are expert queue-jumpers who insinuate
themselves into the trains before less
quick-footed grown-ups and bag whatever
empty seats there may be. Nor do they
intend to give them up to their elders and
betters. Each carriage has a few seats
marked "Silver Seats" ostensibly for Ja¬
pan's rapidly-ageing silver-haired popula¬
tion, but these signs are never observed.
This kind of behaviour, in a people re¬
nowned for politeness, used to puzzle me.
Where are the exquisite manners of the tea
ceremony and the grand social occasion,
the almost Quaker-like self-effacement of
the audience at the Nô theatre or of the
practitioners of Zen meditation? But now I
understand that all this rushing and push¬
ing to get the last vacant seat on the
subway is a national characteristic owing
its existence simply to the lack of space in
Japan for each individual. A subway seat,
to most Japanese, represents a bit of that
precious space that has to be conquered
and hung on to by hook or by crook: if you
don't seize it, someone else will.
Japanese people have the enviable gift
of being able to sleep anywhere, at any
time of the day. One can observe this
unique ability especially in trains: someone
will grab a seat, fold his arms, lower his
head and at once drift off into the Land of
Nod. No one ever disturbs a sleeper, even
though he may be taking up more space on
the seat than an individual is entitled to.
Quite often such sleepers abandon their
heads on the convenient shoulders of the
stranger sitting next to them: when this
happens to me, I am very happy, for I
consider it a privilege to support a sleep¬
er's head in a land where foreigners are
often kept at arm's length. Some young
Lack of space is a persistent problem for
Japanese society and living quarters are often
cramped. Right, photomontage of a modern
prefabricated apartment block.


28
people, not as shameless as the children
sprawling on the seats, pretend to sleep in
order to avoid giving up their hard-won
space to some feeble old lady or gentle¬
man hanging hopefully over them from the
white plastic rings dangling like gymnastic
equipment from the roof of the carriage.
But there is another, subtler reason why
young people do not willingly give up their
seats to the elderly and the infirm. On the
rare occasions when I have seen a young
man or woman do so, usually abruptly,
without grace, the unusual action draws
astonished looks from the other passen¬
gers and no Japanese likes to attract
attention. Moreover, the old lady to whom
the seat Is offered will not accept it with a
simple bow or word of thanks: instead she
will make quite a performance of it, bowing
and smiling repeatedly at this now highly
embarrassed youth and uttering a flow of
very high-class expressions of gratitude
and long formula phrases of noble-sound¬
ing politeness before allowing herself final¬
ly to accept the offer and settle herself,
straight-backed, on the very edge of the
seat, continuing to nod and smile at the
young man who is trying to move as far
away from her as possible in the packed
train. If he cannot move, and is stuck in
front of the beneficiary of his well-bred
behaviour, the old lady may insist on carry¬
ing his sports bag or attaché case on her
knees. Many a youth has got off the train at
the next stop in order to escape such
attentions from the delighted senior citizen,
resolving, as he waits for the next train to
his destination, never to give up his seat to
anyone again.
Those who are unsuccessful in obtain¬
ing a seat try to obtain the next best
thing a steel pole, handle or strap to hold
on to. The white plastic rings, often grubby
with newsprint, are also expressions of
desired territory, and some people insist on
hanging on to two of them, one in each
hand, in order to assert their territorial right
to a modicum of personal space. And they
hang on to their plastic rings to the very last
moment, even after the train has stopped
at their destination, when they finally de¬
cide reluctantly to let the ring go: I have
often been struck sharply over the nose by
one of these suddenly-abandoned rings as
I follow its former possessor off the train.
The Japanese go on about their lack of
space all the time. The unfortunate term
"rabbit hutches" has been applied by
Western critics to the exiguous space of
houses and apartments in Japan, to the
amusement of the Japanese, who believe
there is a rabbit, not a man, in the moon.
Space is at a premium because of the
abnormally high price of available land for
building, a price that has recently been
reaching dizzying heights. Yet Western
critics seem to forget that in the West, too,
there are many people living in conditions
worse than any rabbit hutch, living entire
lives in a single hotel room or bed-sitter or
caravan.
The Japanese at least make the very
best of what little space they have in their
houses. A six-mat tatami room can be
made to look quite spacious if the only
furniture in it is one small low table, and if
the seats, in the form of five (never six) flat
square cushions are neatly stacked in a
corner. The only other objects in such a
traditional room, still found in even the
most modern "manshuns" or apartments,
might be a hanging scroll and a flower
arrangement. True luxury is the sense of
uncluttered space.
Unfortunately, many houses and apart¬
ments now have several "Western-style"
rooms with wooden, carpeted floors, and
such rooms are usually overflowing with
cumbersome Western furniture, pianos,
organs, sideboards and all the latest la¬
bour-saving devices and electronic gad¬
gets. Such rooms, with their furniture
draped in antimacassars, look curiously
Victorian In their un-Japanese clutter of
bibelots and étagères and bird-cages.
There is hardly space to swing a cat.
The Japanese are being urged to buy
more Japanese products in order to reduce
the very high level of their savings, help the
languishing economy and regulate the bal¬
ance of payments.
But they have no more room in which to
put new purchases, unless they throw out
perfectly good items that the latest prod¬
ucts have made slightly out of date. Not far
from the spacious apartment I, as an extra-
large foreigner, am allowed to occupy,
there is a small graveyard of used TV sets,
washing machines, refrigerators, radios,
computers and piles of other still quite
usable junk cast out by this throw-away
society desperate to find space for the
never-ending flow of new products. Poor
foreigners can often be seen scavenging
among all this valuable rubbish, retrieving
items for their own crowded apartments or
for sale or barter in the second-hand shops
that have at last begun to be popular.
My own three rooms, living room and
kitchen contain only the minimum of mod¬
est furniture, but my space is awash with
books, magazines and all the scribbled
chaos of a poet's life. I have tried offering
all my manuscripts and notebooks to Japa¬
nese university libraries, but they, too, are
short of space and have trouble in accom¬
modating even a fraction of the thousands
of books and periodicals published in Ja¬
pan every month. Ordinary household
trash is collected twice a week, but one
cannot put out anything bulky, so about
once every ten days there is a special
bottles-and-cans collection, all carefully
sorted and graded.
Traditional arts like the tea ceremony
and flower arrangement are elegant and
beautiful attempts to impose temporary or¬
der and spaciousness on chaos and
crowding. And even in the rush hour I have
often observed gracious manners on the
packed trains, as when someone seeing
that people are not sitting quite close
enough together will stand in front of those
seated and give an appealing little bow,
whereupon the others will squeeze togeth¬
er to make room for another. I have
learned this technique myself. But only too
often, when a space has been made for
me, I find I am too big for it a somewhat
embarrassing situation but one which ap¬
peals to the good-natured sense of humour
of the Japanese. At such moments, I rather
enjoy the lack of space: but it's awful if my
neighbour kindly gets up to give me his
own precious room on the bench. I can
only bow my thanks and sit with lowered
head on the edge of my seat until the next
stop.
JAMES KIRKUP, a British poet and translator
who has lived in Japan since 1958, is professor
of comparative literature at Kyoto University of
Foreign Studies. He is the author of many prose
works on Japan and the Far East and of many
volumes of poetry, the most recent of which is
The Sense of the Visit (Sceptre Press, 1984).
Much of his work has been translated into Japa¬
nese. With the contemporary Japanese com¬
poser Minoro Miki he created the first kabuki
opera, An Actor's Revenge, the most recent
production of which was in April 1987 at Mun¬
ster, Fed. Rep. of Germany.
