SURVIVAL
Human adaptation
to extreme conditions
by FelixZ. Meerson
ADAPTATION, in human beings
and in animals, is a process
whereby the organism gradually
acquires resistance to certain factors in its
environment and consequently the
capacity to live in conditions previously
incompatible with life, and to solve pre¬
viously unsolved problems.
"To live in conditions previously
incompatible with life" can mean com¬
plete adaptation, allowing a wide range
of physical and intellectual activity as well
as the perpetuation of the species in con¬
ditions of polar cold, desert heat or short¬
age of oxygen at high altitudes, just as it
can mean a far from complete adaptation
which permits only survival for a more or
less extended period.
Likewise, "to solve previously
unsolved problems" includes resolution
of elementary problems, such as how to
avoid attacks by predators by standing
stock still a passive defence reflex or
of more complex ones, such as travelling
in space or controlling the life processes
of the organism.
All these adaptive mechanisms have
one feature in common: although in the
initial phase of adaptation to any new
factor the organism is close to the limits of
its capacities, the manner in which it
solves the problem is far from perfect.
However, if the person or animal con¬
cerned survives, and the causal agent of
adaptation continues to be active, the
possibilities open to the organism
increase and the extreme or urgent stage
is replaced by one of effective, stable
adaptation.
This transformation is the crucial
moment in the whole process, and it often
has' remarkable consequences, as in the
case of the experiments carried out by a
Peruvian scientist who "lifted" in a pres¬
surized chamber a group of people, some
of whom were already adapted to high
altitudes while others were not. When the
pressure was equivalent to that at an alti¬
tude of 7,000 metres the novices lost con¬
sciousness, while the others continued
playing chess.
Similarly, a healthy but untrained per¬
son can run a few hundred metres at the
most without stopping to rest, whereas a
trained runner can cover more than 40
kilometres. The cold weather which hit
Western Europe in the winter of 1986-87
had catastrophic effects in some countries
and caused a number of deaths. During
the same period in Verkhoyansk, a town
in eastern Siberia and one of the coldest
places on Earth, eight- to nine-year-old
children continued going to school in
temperatures of -57 °C and herds of
thoroughbred horses grazed as usual,
watched over by their herdsmen.
In the field of intellectual activity,
where adaptive reactions are qual¬
itatively more complex, the transition
from the stage of extreme tension to that
of stable adaptation is manifested in an

In 1984 a group of walkers crossed a part
of the Kara-Kum desert in the Turkmen
S.S.R. during a Soviet experiment on life in
desert regions. The walkers were not
allowed to drink water during this
endurance test, which was closely
monitored by doctors. Right, a doctor
examines two walkers during a rest
period.
In 1979, a seven-man Soviet expedition
reached the North Pole after a 1,500 km
trek on skis across drifting ice. The expedi¬
tion, which took two and a half months,
made a notable contribution to knowledge
about life in Arctic regions (see the Unesco
Courier, January 1980). A ceremony (be¬
low) was organized at the Pole to celebrate
the achievement.
'*tri i
equally striking manner. This transfor¬
mation of an unadapted organism into an
adapted one is well known, and has been
described in detail.
Two interrelated series of phenomena
develop in the organism faced with a new
situation. In the first series there is a rapid
development in the function of the sys¬
tem most directly concerned in the adap¬
tation process, for example the organs of
movement, blood circulation or respira¬
tion when a physical effort is involved, or
specialized parts of the brain during train¬
ing and acquisition of new skills. The cells
react by increasing the synthesis of
nucleic acids and proteins, and a selective
development of the structures limiting
the function occurs. Thus, during adapta¬
tion to altitude or physical effort, the cor¬
onary arteries expand and there is a two
to threefold increase in the number of
"power stations" (mitochondria) in the
skeletal muscles. As a result, a series of
changes takes place in the cells of the
dominant system, that on which adapta¬
tion depends, which increases the phys¬
iological capacity of the system and forms
the material basis for the transition from
an extreme stage to genuine adapta¬
tion.
The second series of phenomena is the
well-known stress reaction discovered by
the Canadian biologist Hans Selye, which
he called "general adaptation syn¬
drome". It is now known that the stress
reaction manifested by the secretion of
adrenal hormones into the blood not only
mobilizes the organism's energy and
structural resources, but also ensures
their transfer from inactive systems to the
dominant system. In other words, the
reaction allows the vitally important
problem created by the environment to

be solved. When adaptation has been
achieved and the individual has become
accustomed to the cold, or learned to
solve mathematical problems or to play
the piano, the stress reaction disappears.
Adaptation to other physical or chemical
factors in the environment takes place in
the same way (e.g., gradual habituation
to increasing doses of poison).
Afterwards the organism can no longer
be damaged by the external factor to
which it has become adapted. It is
remarkable that the multiple reactions
set off by the process of adaptation to one
environmental factor frequently contain
components which heighten resistance to
other factors. Thus adaptation to an
insufficiency of oxygen strengthens the
organism's resistance to physical effort,
hallucinogens, epileptogens, factors pro¬
ducing high blood pressure, stress
damage to the heart, ischaemia (interrup¬
tion of the blood supply to an organ or
tissue), and even to ionizing radiation.
This opens up vast possibilities for the
utilization of adaptation in the preven¬
tion and treatment of diseases. Nowa¬
days, when extensive use and in some
cases abuse of medicines creates a real
possibility of dependence on them, it
would be useful to have doctors pre¬
scribe, not only medicines, but adapta¬
tion to a complex of individually selected
factors.
It is now known that external stress can
provoke or speed up the development of
gastric and duodenal ulcers, high blood
pressure, arteriosclerosis, ischaemic
heart ailments, diabetes, mental disor¬
ders, skin troubles and as has been
shown recently tumours.
Below, Soviet divers study the diffusion of
light underwater, during research in the
Indian Ocean conducted by the Marine
Biology Institute of the USSR Academy of
Sciences Centre for the Far East.
"
m
* -^*v-»v*~*>
«-«
w y
v
However, the role of stress in certain
pathological conditions is now so well
known that it may obscure the important
fact that most human beings and animals,
placed in extreme conditions from which
there is no escape, do not die but acquire
some degree of resistance which allows
them to survive until better times. Such
situations prolonged periods of hunger,
cold, natural catastrophes, interspecific
and intraspecific conflicts still occur
widely among animals in their natural
habitat.
More complex stress situations occur
just as frequently in human society. Dur¬
ing a relatively short historical era man
has survived periods of slavery, serfdom
and world war in such a way as to prove
the efficiency of his powers of adaptation .
Of course, the price of this adaptation has
been unjustifiably high, but these indis¬
putable facts inevitably lead to the con¬
clusion that the human organism must be

* -fc » "
»_ * * . ~*
endowed with efficient specialized mech¬
anisms that limit the reaction to stress and
prevent stress damage.
Research carried out in the last decade
has confirmed the existence of these
stress-inhibiting mechanisms. It has been
shown that under pressure from extreme
tensions, the stress reaction is accom¬
panied by intensified activity of the cen¬
tral stress-inhibiting systems. One exam¬
ple is the increased production in the
brain of morphine-like opiate peptides
and other substances which limit the
stress reaction. These substances
accumulate in the brain and neutralize
the stress-inducing excitation of the
nerve-centres.
The activity Of the stress inhibitors also
intensifies in the other organs, where sub¬
stances accumulate that limit the action
of stress hormones on the cells and pre¬
vent stress damage. The dual activity of
central and local stress inhibitors protects
the organism from gastric ulcers, heart
damage , impairment of immune systems ,
arrhythmia, and injury caused by chemi¬
cal factors.
These facts generally correspond to
what can be observed in everyday life.
People who have experienced terrible
ordeals acquire a certain resistance to the
wear and tear of life. Moreover, the pos¬
sibility can now be envisaged of employ¬
ing substances produced by stress-
inhibiting centres, equivalent substances
produced by synthesis, and the chemical
activators of such inhibiting systems, as
substitutes for the natural mechanisms of
adaptation, in order to protect the organ¬
ism from stress and other forms of
damage. This theory, now largely con¬
firmed by experiment, opens up highly
promising prospects for the prevention
and treatment of non-infectious diseases.
The little town of Verkhoyansk in eastern
Siberia (Yakut Autonomous S.S.R.) is one
of the coldest places on Earth. Common
winter temperatures of -60°C do not dis¬
turb the tenor of life. A hardy local breed of
horses Is raised on a Verkhoyansk farm,
above.
FELIX ZALMANOVICH MEERSON, Soviet
specialist in pathology, is president of the Spe¬
cialized Commission on the Pathophysiology of
Adaptation Processes attached to the Scientific
Council of the USSR Academy of Medicine. A
World Health Organization (WHO) expert and a
member of the editorial boards of several inter¬
national science journals, he is the author of 14
monographs, some of which have also been
published in the USA, the Fed. Rep. of Germany
and in Japan, and is co-editor-in-chief with Aca¬
demician Oleg G. Gazenko ofThe Physiology of
Adaptation Processes (1986). He was awarded
the USSR State Prize in 1978.
