Lake Baikal
The world's deepest lake holds one-fifth of the fresh water
on the surface of the Earth
LAKE Baikal, the world's deepest lake,
contains ¡n Its basin more than
23,000 cubic kilometres of fresh
water. This represents about 20 per cent of
the world's fresh water reserves and 80 per
cent of the total surface fresh water
reserves of the USSR. This is about the
same amount as is contained in all the five
North American Great Lakes put together.
The lake, into which 336 rivers and
streams flow, is home to some 2,600 spe¬
cies of plants and animals. Three-quarters
of these species as well as eleven
families and sub-families and ninety-six
genera are endemic to the lake.
Scientists at the Siberian branch of the
USSR Academy of Sciences, based at the
Limnologlcal Institute at Irkutsk, have been
studying Lake Baikal for many years and
have obtained a wealth of data on such
aspects as water inputs, nutrient flows,
sedimentation rates, trophic relationships,
benthlc and littoral fish communities, prod¬
uctivity of phytoplankton and Zooplankton,
and the effect of vertical stratification of the
water column on the distribution of organ¬
isms of all trophic groups. Quantitative
measures of biomass and productivity
include an estimated average total net
weight biomass of invertebrates of 750,000
tons, of which 40 per cent is comprised of
300 benthos.
Research has highlighted the dynamic
nature of the Baikal ecosystem and the
intricacy of the interactions between the
lake and its surroundings. Pollution through
water recycled by industrial (particularly
cellulose) plants is a major threat to water
quality, which in turn ¡s crucial to the plant
and animal communities living in the lake.
One cubic metre of re-circulated water from
a cellulose plant, normally diluted in more
than 1 ,000 cubic metres of lake water, is not
capable of supporting life. When it is con¬
sidered that some of the larger cellulose
plants are re-clrculatlng more than 300,000
cubic metres of water per day (water con¬
taining highly toxic components which,
even at low concentrations, may affect the
life and behaviour of living organisms), the
importance of the threat to the Lake Baikal
ecosystem can readily be appreciated.
It is in this context that Dr. G.I. Galazy
and fellow scientists from the Irkutsk
Institute have mounted a sustained public
education campaign to inform the Soviet
people about the uniqueness of Lake
Baikal, of the importance of its biota and of
the present and projected effects of human
activities on the lake.
Public awareness about these issues
has been raised throughout the Soviet
Union by a concerted programme involving
the press, television and radio and calling
30

on the skills of journalists, science writers
and other communications specialists.
At the same time, government officials
have been regularly informed about the sit¬
uation, and this whole process has trig¬
gered a change in attitudes towards the
economic policy in the Baikal drainage
basin and the conservation status of the
lake ecosystem.
In April 1986, as a result of these efforts
to change public opinion and policy, the
Lake Baikal Region Biosphere Reserve
was approved by the MAB Bureau as a new
addition to the international network of bio¬
sphere reserves. And on 2 April 1987, the
Government of the USSR Issued a new law
concerning the protection and redevelop¬
ment of Lake Baikal and Its surroundings,
as well as plans to close the cellulose
industry ¡n the area within the next five
years. The whole process is instructive of
how scientists' observations and under¬
standing can be put to good use in chang¬
ing policy, and underscores the role of
scientists in initiating and providing the
basic information for educational pro¬
grammes for the public at large.
