Cities a
THE urban tradition which arose in
Western Asia and spread across Eu¬
rope has handed down to us the im¬
age of a town or city standing out sharply
against a rural or natural background. Mod¬
ern urban development has blurred this con¬
trast by extending suburbs into the country¬
side and increasing the number of green
spaces in towns, but this trend has not gone
so far as to obliterate the antithesis that
Europeans unconsciously establish between
the town and nature. The city is still at one
pole, the symbol of a constructed and artificial
environment, and it is towards the opposite
pole, that of the natural world, that owners of
country cottages and holiday-makers are
constantly drawn even if that symbolic pole
is often, in reality, scarcely less artificial than
the town they leave behind them.
However, this typically European pattern is
not universal. In particular, it does not fit
Japan. Japanese towns and cities, if only
because they have never been systematical¬
ly enclosed by ramparts, have never been as
cut off from their rural surroundings as those
of Europe or China. Differences in population
density between town and country have, like¬
wise, always been relatively slight.
But the crucial factor is probably the signif¬
icance of towns and cities for Japanese peo¬
ple in the relationship between nature and
culture. Towards the end of the ancient peri¬
od (3rd to 7th centuries AD), the association
between towns and civilization was partic¬
ularly strong in Japan, since both had been
simultaneously introduced from China. How¬
ever, as a result of the relative suddenness of
their introduction, the urban phenomenon
and civilized manners (urbanity) were super¬
imposed on an indigenous view of nature
which was deeply animistic, and which repre¬
sented the cultural order and the natural or¬
der as a continuum. This strong inclination
was to exert a twofold influence on Japanese
urbanity: symbolically, on urban manners,
through the expression of a refined feeling for
nature in poetry and in architecture, and eco¬
logically, on the material components of the

urban environment, and in particular the cen¬
tral role that vegetation would play. Over the
centuries and right up to the present day, the
Japanese town has always given expression
to nature.
The courtly and the natural
The brilliant civilization of the Heian period
(8th to 12th centuries) revolved around the
Royal Court in Kyoto (then called Heian). This
was a time of flowering in the arts and litera¬
ture which produced the Genji monogatari,' a
masterpiece of world literature. Just as the
English word courtesy is derived from
"court", so the Japanese language would
describe elegant manners and delicacy of
taste by the word miyabi, derived from miya
meaning "royal palace". The word miyako
("capital", i.e. Heian) has the same origin.
And yet this homology points to a radical
difference of outlook. In English, words such
as "politeness" (from the Greek polis: town or
city), "civility" (from the Latin cives: citizen of
Rome) and "urbanity" (from the Latin word
urbs) suggest primarily relationships between
people in the artificial environment of town or
city. "Courtly" originally referred to the lan¬
guage of lovers. Miyabi has a quite different
connotation; it concerns not the essentially
polite or politic (from polis) relations between
human beings, but the sensitive and aes¬
thetic relationship of human beings with
nature.
Indeed, miyabi of which the Genji monog-
atari has left us a detailed description was
particularly apparent in the art of expressing a
feeling for nature in poetry, in dress or in
gardens. The criterion by which the town-
bred or civilized person was judged was his
or her capacity to fully appreciate cicadas, the
moon, or maple trees
Gardens and tea pavilions
By the closing years of the Heian period,
this expression of feeling for nature had be¬
come stylized. It was given a new lease of
life, however, by the experience of solitude in
"The basic model of a Shinto sanctuary ... is a wooden building sunounded by trees. On the
one hand, this sacred wood (chinju-no-mori) symbolizes the mountain forest, in the depths of
which is the fountain-head of divinity ... On the other, it is an ecological representation of
primeval nature, for since their vegetation must not be cut down, the chinju-no-mori have
become relics of the forest of shining leaves which once covered the plains of Japan. " I'holo
shows a Shinto temple at Kyoto.
I'holo Ï homas Hopkcr (£: M.iiMiiun. Pun*.
nature
by A ugustin Berque
the mountains, as is borne out by the poetry
of Saigyö,2 who deliberately abandoned the
life of the capital. New aesthetic values were
emerging which apparently had nothing to do
with the town: on the contrary. For example,
in his Höjö-ki,3 Kamo no Chömei gives a
blueprint for the hermit's life, in the precarious
shelter of a hut measuring "ten foot
square" only one-tenth of the size of the
house in Kyoto that he had left behind.
Two or three centuries later, in the Muro-
machi and Momoyama periods (14th to 16th
centuries), these supremely anti-urban mod¬
els would reach their highest form of expres¬
sion in the city, in the tea pavilion (chashltsu)
and the little garden leading to it (roji). By
virtue of its small size and the materials of
which it is made, the chashltsu is an urban
metaphor for the mountain shelter, a symbol
of the precariousness of life in this world.
Similarly, the roji is, with its stepping stones,
reminiscent of the harsh and rugged moun¬
tain track which leads to the pure realm of
Buddha-hood.
These forms of expression themselves
profoundly influenced the aesthetics of the
Japanese house, especially the seventeenth-
century warrior dwellings (büke yashiki) of
the capital of the shogun, Edo (the future
Tokyo). These dwellings served in their turn
as the prototype of the small detached
houses, each with its garden, in which many
of the inhabitants of Tokyo live today.
Life in the midst of nature has thus been
the inspiration for the ideal dwelling in the
world's biggest city and, to an even greater
extent in Japan's provincial towns, where
there is not such a shortage of space.
1. The Genji monogatari ("The Tale of Genji"), a
masterly novel in the classical Japanese tradition, was
written at the beginning of the 1 1 th century by Murasaki
Shikibu, a lady of the Heian Royal Court at Kyoto.
Packed with intrigue and character studies, the novel is
a remarkable evocation of aristocratic court society
written with an acute "sensitivity to things", in the words
of the 1 8th-century literary scholar Motoori Norinaga.
2. The Buddhist priest-poet Saigyö (1 1 1 8-1 1 90), one of
the most popular poets in Japan, was a great master of
the waka, a traditional Japanese poetic form of 31
syllables. His many works, inspired by his solitary
wanderings, expressed a love of nature and devotion to
Buddhism.
3. In Höjö-ki {The Ten Foot Square Hut, 1970), the
court poet turned Buddhist monk Kamo no Chömei
(1155-1216) gives a series of brief accounts of the
disasters that had befallen Kyoto during his lifetime,
followed by a contrasting description of the natural
beauty and peace of his hermit's life. 21

I
22
Ikebana, the art of Japanese flower arrange¬
ment, has highly developed conventions and a
complex symbolism. It began as a religious
ritual in which flowers were offered to the
Buddha, and, like the traditional Japanese tea
ceremony, is a combination of beauty and
austerity. In the words of one master of the art,
ikebana must "with a little water and a flower¬
ing branch, evoke flowing streams and vast
mountains" . Ikebana is still widely taught.
Earthquake resistant skyscrapers of concrete,
steel and glass dominate Tokyo's Shinjuku
business quarter, right.
Wilderness and sacred groves
All these forms of dwelling owe much to
Buddhism, and through Buddhism (among
other channels) to Chinese civilization. Nev¬
ertheless, the unique expression of the indig¬
enous animist heritage lives on, in partner¬
ship with the Shinto religion. The holy places
of Shinto range from a rock in a remote valley
to a sanctuary in the middle of Tokyo, and
from the bough of a tree to a sacred enclo¬
sure of several hectares: they are to be found
on every scale throughout Japan. Yet all have
one feature in common: they refer to nature,
which they express both symbolically,
through the mythology attaching to the divin¬
ities worshipped there, and ecologically,
through their vegetation.
The basic model of a Shinto sanctuary
(jinja), both in the towns and in the country¬
side, is a wooden building surrounded by
trees. On the one hand, this sacred wood
(chinju-no-mori) symbolizes the mountain for¬
est (yama), in the depths of which is the
fountain-head of divinity; the value attached
to depths (oku) is also expressed in the archi-
Ü	i

tecture of religious buildings. On the other
hand, it is an ecological representation of
primeval nature, for since their vegetation
must not be cut down, the chinju-no-mori
have become relics of the forest of shining
leaves which once covered the plains of Ja¬
pan (except in the North-East).
It is true that the sacred woods have not
been preserved as fully as they might have
been. Many have been nibbled away by mod¬
ern urban development. Nevertheless, in the
heart of the biggest cities they still keep
Japanese culture firmly rooted in the natural
world which was there before towns existed.
The heart of nature
Despite its love of nature, Japanese socie¬
ty has been unable to prevent, in our time, a
serious deterioration of its natural heritage,
particularly from an aesthetic point of view.
This development is only superficially a para¬
doxical one. Among its causes are the Japa¬
nese people's lack of interest in politics, in
other words, in the principles governing the
régime under which the deterioration in ques
tion took place. This is an attitude which, as
we have already seen, expresses a very
ancient and very deep-seated tendency in
Japanese culture.
All the same, the deterioration of the envi¬
ronment has aroused local protest in the form
of the so-called "residents' movements"
(jùmin undo) which proliferated in the late
1960s and eventually succeeded in introduc¬
ing strict legal measures for environmental
protection. Since then, partly as a result of
technological changes and the slow-down of
the economy, less damage is being caused
and there has been a corresponding slacken¬
ing of activity in the residents' movements.
The focus of interest has shifted towards
amenities, which are seen mainly in terms of
greenery. The Tokyo city authorities, for ex¬
ample, are currently implementing a pro¬
gramme to double the amount of green areas
in twenty years. In addition to these ecolog¬
ical improvements to the urban setting, many
inhabitants of Tokyo take out a symbolic
passport to the wilderness by purchasing
honorary citizenship in northern municipal¬
ities such as Hokkaido, which are there
by able to finance the preservation of their
forests.
The theme of nature thus tends to distract
attention from more specifically urban, and
thus even political, problems, such as what is
to be done with the large areas of public land
in the middle of Tokyo, that are being auc¬
tioned off piecemeal to replenish public
funds. The destiny of the heart of the city is
clearly of little interest to the suburban com¬
muters who, every evening, travel back in
their millions to their little houses in a green
setting.
A sense of place
The urban phenomenon is so closely
bound up with the highest values of European
society, such as democracy and civilization,
that it is difficult for a European to imagine
that towns can express other values, or even
that such values can be expressed in other
ways than by towns. However, these conno¬
tations are by no means universal: many
societies (some of which originated in Europe
itself) are untouched by them. Japan is one of
these societies.
The material similarities between the ways
in which human dwellings are clustered to¬
gether in towns and cities throughout the
world tend to disguise the fact that conurba¬
tions differ from one another just as human
societies do.
Instead of confining ourselves to formal
comparisons, and expatiating on the relative
lack of public forums or political debate in
Japanese towns and cities, it would be more
profitable to remember the underlying pro¬
pensities of the culture in question, and to see
that the Japanese counterpart to the Europe¬
an public forum the arena of political dis¬
course, identifiable by its colonnades and
belfries may well be none other than the
sacred grove a place that offers a way back
to primeval nature, typified by the trunks and
foliage of ancient trees; and we should re¬
member that, in both cases, the society in
question is doing no more than giving urban
expression to its own first and guiding princi¬
ple: in one place, the Word; in the other,
Nature.
AUGUSTIN BERQUE, of France, is professor of
cultural geography at the Ecole des Hautes
Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Paris, where he
has also been director of research on modern
Japan. He is currently French Director of the
Maison Franco-Japonaise in Tokyo. Among his
published works on Japanese themes are Vivre
l'espace au Japon (1982) and (as co-author) La
qualité de la ville: urbanité française, urbanité
nippone, 1987. 23
