A priceless heritage of universal value
Nature and culture
The World Heritage emblem symbolizing the
interdependence ofcultural and naturalprop¬
erties. Tassili n'Ajjer, Algeria, famedfor its
rock paintings (above), is both a World
Heritage site and a biosphere reserve.
THE Convention for the Protection of
the World's Natural and Cultural
Heritage, more commonly known as
The World Heritage Convention, was
adopted by Unesco's General Conference
in November 1972 and came Into force in
December 1975 after ratification by twenty
nations. As of mld-1987 there are 247
natural and cultural sites on the World
Heritage List and the Convention has been
ratified or accepted by 95 States.
The Convention marks a new departure
in international co-operation, setting up a
system whereby the international com¬
munity can participate actively ¡n protecting
those parts of the natural and cultural
heritage that are agreed to be of great uni¬
versal value.
Traditionally, the preservation of cultural
heritage and the conservation of nature
have been regarded as two quite different
problems, with responsibility for the protec¬
tion of important cultural or natural sites
being considered as lying exclusively with
the country ¡n which they are located.
The Convention breaks hew ground by
linking together the protection of the
cultural heritage and the natural heritage
and in providing a permanent legal, finan¬
cial and administrative framework for inter¬
national co-operation in ensuring this pro¬
tection. It also introduces the new concept
of a "World Heritage" of natural and
cultural properties of universal value which
transcends all political or geographical
boundaries.
The underlying philosophy which
brought the Convention into being is that
there are some parts of the world's natural
and cultural heritage that are so excep¬
tional and of such scientific importance to
the world that their conservation and pro¬
tection for present and future generations is
a matter of concern not only to individual
nations but to the international community
as a whole.
Countries that are most richly endowed
with artistic, archaeological, palaeontologi-
cal, biological or ecological "treasures" are
not, however, always the most prosperous
and may have difficulty in providing ade¬
quate protection to this endowment.
Through the World Heritage Fund estab¬
lished under the Convention, any nation,
16

Inclusion of natural properties of
universal value on the World Heritage List
Under the World Heritage Convention, the
natural heritage is defined as:
Natural features consisting of physical and
biological formations or groups of such forma¬
tions which are of outstanding universal value
from the aesthetic or scientific point of view;
Geological and physiological formations and
precisely delineated areas which constitute the
habitat of threatened species of animals and
plants of outstanding universal value from the
point of view of science or conservation;
Natural sites or precisely delineated natural
areas of Outstanding universal value from the
point of view ofscience, conservation or natural
beauty.
Criteria
A natural heritage site, following the definition
above, which is submitted for inclusion in the
World Heritage List, will be considered to be of
outstanding universal value for the purposes of
the Convention when the Committee finds that
it meets one or more of the following criteria
and fulfils the conditions of integrity set out
below. Sites nominated should therefore:
1. be outstanding examples representing the
major stages of the Earth's evolutionary-
history;
2. be outstanding examples representing sig¬
nificant on-going geological processes, biolog¬
ical evolution and man's interaction with his
natural environment; as distinct from the
periods of the Earth's development, this
focuses upon on-going processes in the develop¬
ment of communities, of plants and animals,
land-forms and marine and freshwater bodies;
3. contain superlative natural phenomena, for¬
mations or features, such as outstanding exam¬
ples of the most important ecosystems, areas of
exceptional natural beauty, or exceptional
combinations of natural and cultural elements;
4. contain the most important and significant
natural habitats where threatened species of
animals or plants of outstanding universal
value from the point of view of science or con¬
servation still survive.
In addition to the above criteria, the sites
should also fulfil the following conditions of
integrity:
(a) The sites described in 1. should contain all
or most of the key interrelated and inter¬
dependent elements in their natural relation¬
ships; for example, an "Ice Age" area would be
expected to include the snow field, the glacier
itself and samples of cutting patterns, depo¬
sition and colonization (striations, moraines,
pioneer stages of plant succession, etc.).
(b) The sites described in 2. should have suffi¬
cient size and contain the necessary elements to
demonstrate the key aspects of the process and
to be self-perpetuating. For example, an area
of "tropical rain forest" may be expected to
include some variation in elevation above sea
level, changes in topography and soil types,
river banks or ox-bow lakes, to demonstrate
the diversity and complexity of the system.
(c) The sites described in 3. should contain
those ecosystem components required for the
continuity of the species or of the objects to be
conserved. This will vary according to the indi¬
vidual cases; for example, the protected area of
a waterfall would include all, or as much as
possible, of the supporting upstream water¬
shed; or a coral reef area would be provided
with control over siltation or pollution through
the stream flow or ocean currents which
provide its nutrients.
(d) The area containing threatened species as
described in 4. should be of sufficient size and
contain the necessary habitat requirements for
the survival of the species.
(e) In the case of migratory species, seasonal
sites necessary for their survival, wherever
they are located, should be adequately pro¬
tected. The Committee must receive
assurances that the necessary measures will be
taken to ensure that the species are adequately
protected throughout their full life cycle.
Agreements made in this connection, either
through adherence to international con¬
ventions or in the form of other multilateral or
bilateral arrangements, would provide this
assurance.
Each site should be evaluated relatively, that is,
it should be compared with other sites of the
same type, both inside and outside the State
Party's borders, within a biogeographic
province or migratory pattern.
institution or individual can contribute to the
protection of the heritage in countries
where national resources are insufficient.
Signatories to the Convention undertake
to help in the identification, protection, con¬
servation and preservation of world
heritage properties. They recognize that
the identification and safeguarding of those
parts of the heritage which are located on
their own territories is primarily their own
responsibility and agree to do all they can,
with their own resources and with any inter¬
national assistance they can obtain, to
ensure adequate protection. They agree,
amongst other things, to "adopt a general
policy which aims to give the cultural and
natural heritage a function in the life of the
community and to integrate protection of
the heritage into comprehensive planning
programmes".
The Convention ¡s administered by the
World Heritage Committee, composed of
twenty-one States elected at a General
Assembly of Member States held every two
The Ngorongoro Conservation Area (right),
United Republic of Tanzania, and the con¬
tiguous Serengeti National Park, are World
Heritage sites. Combined they form a single
biosphere reserve.
years. The Secretariat is provided by
Unesco and a number of its officials are
also members of the Man and the Bio¬
sphere (MAB) Secretariat, in particular
those concerned with biosphere reserves.
While the aims of, and criteria for selec
tion of World Heritage sites (see above)
and biosphere reserves are different, far
from being incompatible they are comple¬
mentary. Indeed, twenty-five World
Heritage natural sites also form part of the
MAB Biosphere Reserve Network.
