AS soon as I recovered and was able to think about the future, we resumed
our plans to continue our interrupted journey. We applied for permission
to go to Tashkurghan, the Pamirs and western China. We had to wait
sixteen years for it.
The women bring the meat. Behind them, through the opening in the yurt, we
can see the mountains, dazzling white against the dark sky. The meat is mutton
Marco Polo's mutton.* Not only is this a great honour; the meat really tastes like
meat.
The people who welcome us here are the same as those among whom we lived
seventeen years ago, but on the other side of the mountain. They welcome us with
the same hospitality and natural dignity. ... We are seated on a Tadzhik carpet of
great beauty, contemplating the dishes of meat and the great jars of curds set
before us.
I am happy. To be here makes the seventeen years of waiting worthwhile. And
from here the roads lead eastwards. Yet it will never be said of me that I followed
the steps of Marco Polo. What use is it to be the first foreigner to travel in the
Chinese Pamirs since 1949, what use is it to have made my way here by road and
river from the North Cape to the China Sea, what use is it to have toiled for twenty
years to achieve all this, when there will still be a few dozen kilometres of the road
over the passes between Afghanistan and China that I have not covered? To be
only a few dozen kilometres short of my goal is as if I have achieved nothing!
Perhaps I shall get permission if I wait another seventeen years. Pakistan once
promised to give me permission to make the ascent to Tashkurghan by this route,
and if I also get permission to cross the frontier of Afghanistan and go down to the
Vakhan region the journey will be done. And not only Marco Polo's journey, but
also the journeys of Fa Xian and Xuan Zang. That is what I dreamt of one summer
when I was eleven years old, in a loft in the Swedish countryside of that and
much else.
So perhaps I shall get permission, but by that time I shall certainly not be
capable of making the journey. Again we hear music; they are still dancing
outside. Above 4,000 metres the altitude starts to cause me problems. ... The
height of the pass we were going over was 4,700 metres. I went to have a look at
some tombs a little below the road. They were very similar to the tombs in the
valley near Tashkurghan, and they also reminded me of the tombs in the Bashgul
valley in Nuristan, beneath the Hindu Kush, to the south of these passes. So I had
the strength to get as far as this, but I shall certainly not be strong enough to do so
in ten or twenty years' time. Even if I got permission, I should be unable to cross
the Afghanistan passes, over there. They are even higher than these, here.
It is a strange feeling to be here, to listen to the music and to know that now it is
so far, but no further.
I took these notes in the camp east of Tashkurghan. The grey skies gave them a



Thoughts from
the roof of the
world
by Jan Myrdal
The Silk Road, followed by merchants
and travellers since ancient times, links
the West to the heart ofChina. From
childhood on, Jan Myrdal dreamt of
following in the footsteps of the great
medieval traveller Marco Polo. Myrdal is
a widely-travelled Swedish writer (born
1927) who has crossed Europe and Asia
in the footloose style associated with the
poets and writers of the American Beat
movement. In 1957 he set out for China
in a small car. He was near the Pamirs in
central Asia when he fell ill and had to
abandon the journey. From his hospital
bed his only thought was to continue the
journey. The story of his travels was
published in Sweden in 1977.
* There are many wild sheep which are very large
because their horns are easily six hands long, and from
these horns the shepherds make bowls for eating and the
fences where they stay with their animals during the
night." The Book of Marco Polo.
37

fancy free
c
?>
CO
o
o
o
In the little town of Tashkurghan (Afghanistan),
a caravaneer cooks rice for the evening meal.
Sidenvägen. En resa ¡ran höga Pamir och Hi genom
Sinkiang och Kansu. An English translation by A. Hen¬
ning has been published by Victor Gollancz Ltd.,
London, under the title Silk Road.
touch of sentimentality. Travelling has a dimension that is sometimes over¬
looked.
The great travellers who came here and later recorded their impressions are all
very objective and down-to-earth. They give perfectly convincing reasons for
their travels. They were trading, or they were seeking religious writings, or they
wanted to make sure that this really is the road to China. They were going to draw
maps. That's fine.
We, too, have our objective reasons. I read somewhere that the reason why I
travel is to describe what I see. That's fine too.
But this does not really explain why I have spent more months abroad than at
home in Sweden, in the last twenty years, and still less does it explain why the
great travellers whose accounts of their travels we admire so much undertook
their journeys.
For travelling has a third- dimension the strange, tormenting longing for
something beyond your reach ; setting out at dawn ; the pleasant feeling of exhaus¬
tion after crossing a mountain; the taste of the sea in your mouth before you can
see the sea; the smell of water and growing things when you are still in the desert;
reaching a town at dead of night, keeping still in the darkness and listening to new
sounds.
Travelling is more than seeing new things; it is leaving them, too. The traveller
not only opens doors , he closes them after him , never to,return . Yet when he shuts
his eyes he can always see the place he left forever. No town is as clearly visible at
night as a town you have left for ever.
And it is here, on the roof of the world, just when I realize that I shall never
finish the journey I began twenty years ago, that I see how powerful was my need
to set out, to go on, to go further, to leave places and to see more. Writing reports
and descriptions of what one has seen is a good thing; it is useful and sensible; but
in its third dimension it also seems to be the rationalization of a strong desire
whose roots reach down to the depths of human life.
