
Games, sports and traditions
ce
©
ce
m
ai
ABUNDANT documentation exists in
the form of paintings, sculpture and
writing ¡n some cases dating back
to very early times of the importance of
sports, rituals, dances and games in the
traditions of peoples all over the world.
The nature of these activities has been
influenced by the cultures of the peoples
which developed them and shaped them
The North American game of "earthball" is
the modern version of an ancient game
used ceremonially in certain cultures to
express an exuberant belief In the regen¬
erative forces of nature. Two teams take
part in an energetic but good-humoured
struggle forpossession ofa large ball rep¬
resenting the earth, above. A similargame
with symbolic andreligious significance is
still played in Japan. It is known as "the
ball-struggle of Hakozaki Shrine", and
takes place on 3 January each year in
Fukuoka City. The participants (left) are all
young men, clad only in loincloths, who
represent their home districts. A sacred
wooden ball is used in the game. In his
book Naked Festivals of Japan, Tamotsu
Yato writes: "The fighting mêlée gradually
moves in the return direction of the shrine,
while spectators and priests throw cold
water over the naked throng ... The side
that has possession of the ball as the
group enters the shrineprecincts wins and
has the honour of returning the ball to its
priest-custodian. "
into original creations through which the
body can "speak" its own language.
Celtic trials of strength; Afghan buzkashi;
Basque pelota; Korean tae kwon do; Afri¬
can wrestling; Japanese martial arts;
Caribbean limbo dancing; lumberjack con¬
tests in Canada; Moroccan fantasia; Rus¬
sian sombo wrestling; canoe racing and
water jousting these are just a few of the
many traditional sports and games still
practised today.
The world's rich diversity of games and
sports consists of forms of expression
which reflect the identity of each people and
form part of the cultural and artistic heritage
of humanity.
Paradoxically, however, the increasing
popularity of sport is itself jeopardizing the
existence of traditional games which are
too often held to be of minor or marginal
importance because they are confined to
certain localities or regions.
Today the attention of millions of tele¬
viewers around the world is monopolized
by some twenty games and sports, whose
hold is strengthened by the fascination ex¬
ercised by the small screen, the power of
the image and the cult of the heroes created
by the media. The threat of disappearance
or marginalization hangs over a whole set
of authentic popular cultures.
In response to the new awareness of the
value of these traditional games and sports
that has developed in the last few years,
Unesco's Intergovernmental Committee for
Physical Education and Sport (ICPES) has
recommended Member States to preserve
and make more widely known these origin¬
al manifestations of their national cultures.
As a result, a programme of World Fes¬
tivals of Games, Sports and Traditions,
organized in collaboration with the Interna¬
tional Fund for the Development of Physic¬
al Education and Sport (FIDEPS), is sche¬
duled to begin in mid-1987 in Asia and
Europe. A large number of organizations,
countries, towns and cities have already
expressed the wish to be associated with
this initiative. Similar festivals will be orga¬
nized periodically in other continents, so
that most of the traditional sports and
games still practised can be presented to
televiewers throughout the world.
The purpose of the Festivals, which will
include entertainments, public demonstra¬
tions, symposiums, exhibitions and film
shows, is to preserve the authentic nature
of each game.
The forthcoming World Decade for Cultu¬
ral Development (1988-1998) is bound to
draw attention to this renewal of interest in
traditional games and sports.
For further information about the World Festival of
Games, Sports and Traditions, please write to: Unesco/
FIDEPS, ED/SCM, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris,
France.
31
