In 1961, Nagisa Öshima adapted for the cinema Shiiku (1958; The Catch, 1959), a
collection of stories which had brought its author, Kenzaburö Oe (born 1935), a
major literary award, the Akutagawa Prize. Written in luxuriant, baroque prose,
novels such as Man'en gan'nen no futtoböru (1967; The Silent Cry, 1974) reflect a
preoccupation with Japanese history and politics. Öe's relationship with his mental¬
ly handicapped son has also played an important role in his work, notably in
Kojinteki-na taiken (1964; A Personal Matter, 1969) which has been translated
into many languages. He has published collections of stories, including Reintsuno
kiku onnatachi (1982), which contains experimental and autobiographical writing
focused on the image of a mythical tree.
CO
<5
-^
'i_
CS
o
Q.
E
S
c
o
o
o
Yutaka Haniya (born 1910), novelist and critic, has a special place
on the literary scene of modern Japan. From the early 1930s to
the end of the Second World War, he followed a path similar to
that taken by many left-wing Japanese intellectuals: clandestine
political activity, arrest and imprisonment (for over a year, in
1932-1933), then silence during the war years. While in prison
Haniya read the Critique of Pure Reason, and this encounter with
Kantian philosophy was a crucial experience for him. From it grew
his fascination with a logic which could defy the limits of reason. In
1945 he decided to devote his life to literature, and with a few
friends launched Kindai Bungaku ("Modern Literature"), a period¬
ical which for over twenty years would play a decisive role both in
ideological debate and in bringing important literary works to
public attention. His own long novel Shirei ("The Spirits of the
Dead") is certainly a literary milestone. This still unfinished work,
the first volume of which was published in 1948 and a second in
1976, is an attempt to describe in a five-day scenario the exist¬
ential quest of several characters who feel they are caught in a
mental trap, or in Haniya's own words, to "test the extent of the
vast and unique phoneme resounding from one side of the
cosmos to the other". After making a name as a novelist, from
1955 onwards Haniya attracted attention as an essayist and
through his forthright opinions on literature and politics expressed
in such works as Genshi no naka no seiji (1960; "Politics in the
Field of Hallucination"), a reflection on the origin and nature of
political power; Kage-e no sekai (1966; "The World of Chinese
Shadows"), an autobiographical account of his inner life up to the
age of 35; and Yami no naka no kuroi uma (1 970; "Black Horses
in the Gloom"), a collection of nine short stories, which are
variations on a theme: thought in dreams, thought in darkness,
thought in mirrors. These stories, in which highly abstract philo¬
sophical reflections are transformed by the power of the author's
imagination and poetic vision, reveal the same originality which
distinguishes "The Spirits of the Dead".
Kenji Nakagami (bom 1946) was the first writer of the postwar
generation to be awarded the Akutagawa Prize, for a short story
published in 1 975 entitled Misaki ("The Cape"). Still only 30 years
of age, he had reached a watershed in his work. Until then he had
chronicled the lives of the uprooted in stories which had been
published from 1966 onwards in various literary magazines and
portrayed young provincials who had, like himself, gone to live in
Tokyo in the mid-1 960s. His work since 1 975 has tended to focus
on the search for roots. Through his main character, a young man
called Akiyuki, Nakagami depicts the complex relationships of a
family community in his own region, the Kii Peninsula, where a
web of ancient beliefs and superstitions still keeps the living in
close contact with the dead. The sequels to Misaki, Karekinada
("The Sea of Dead Trees") published in 1977, and Hösenka
("Balsamine") published in 1980, which shows how events affect
the women of the family, form a trilogy, although the same main
character also appears in Chi no hate shijö no toki ("Supreme
Hours on the Edge of the Earth"), published in 1983. Not the least
important aspect of Nakagami's contribution to contemporary
literature is that his realistic accounts of the lives of the buraku-
min, ' from which he came, have helped to break the taboos which
oppress this despised group of people.
1. Burakumin (literally "people from the hamlets") is the name given to
groups such as tanners and certain kinds of butchers who were ostracized
by Japanese society during the Edo period, often because ol religious
taboos. A law was passed in early Meiji which abolished all discrimination
towards them, but the prejudices remain, especially as regards employ¬
ment or marriage prospects.
DOMINIQUE PALME, of France, is a writer and translator spe¬
cializing in Japanese language and literature. She is the author of
an essay on Japanese poetry, "Chansons pour l'enfance, un
poète japonais, Kitahara Hakushù" (1932; "Songs for Childhood:
Kitahara Hakushù, Japanese Poet").
44
