MEN, women and girls pierce the sides of their noses; they likewise pierce
their ears and their lower lips; some men also have stitching around their
necks, but not many, and each man has his lower lip split, so that at first
glance he seems to have two mouths. In the hole made in the side of the nose they
insert a long piece of bone, and those who own beads and coral dangle these from
their ears, their lips and their noses, and consider them altogether admirable and
the finest of ornaments. They never shave their chins, not all of them wear shirts,
their feet are bare, and indoors they go about wholly unclothed except for a scrap
of animal skin or flowers and grass which they wear around their waists, knotted in
front. They wear parkas made from the skins of beaver, fox or bear, feathers, or
the skins of Arctic hare, muskrat or lynx. There is a type of parka with a special
name which is made from the intestines of sea-lions, seals and whales. On their
heads they wear headgear fashioned out of pine roots and grass, plaited together
to form curved and concave wooden caps. To hunt marine animals they use
harpoons, which they hurl from platforms, and for warfare they have bows and
spears made of iron, copper, bone and stone. Their axes are of a special type,
consisting of a small piece of iron. Their pipes and knives are of iron and bone, and
their needles are of iron. ... Before our arrival, the women manufactured their
needles themselves. Thread is made of gut, and their crockery is made of wood,
the horns of wild sheep, clay or hollowed stone.
They have large and small boats which are made, not of planks but of skins,
sewn over the framework so as to be watertight, with just one opening, and these
they use to fish or to hunt marine fauna. In the rivers they fish by building small
dams with stones and impaling the fish on pointed implements similar to spears; in
the end of these is a notch into which they insert a stone or iron pin held in place
with bone pegs and attached by a length of gut to a piece of wood. In the gulfs and
bays hollowed out by the sea, they use harpoons to kill the larger fish when they
emerge from the water. They make fire by friction on wood; for lamps they use the
blubber of seals, bears, sea-lions or whales, which they burn in stone receptacles,
dipping lengths of grass into these to serve as wicks.
When visitors arrive, they greet them by daubing their own faces with red dye
and putting on their finest apparel; they beat tambourines and perform a dance,
brandishing their weapons of war; the guests themselves arrive as if for a battle.
As soon as they approach the banks, the hosts jump into the sea and wade chest
deep. They drag large and small boats onto the banks as fast as they can, and then
hurry to lift out their guests, whom they carry one by one on their backs to the
place chosen for the feast; there, they seat them in their allotted places, and all
remain silent until they have eaten and drunk to satiety. The first attention shown,
and the most keenly appreciated, is to give cold water to the guests, after which
Frontispiece ofa Russian edition of
Grigori Shelikhov's account ofhis
travels, published at St. Petersburg
(Leningrad) In 1 793.



A Russian on the
coast of Alaska
by Grigori Shelikhov
In 1740-1741 a party ofRussian explorers
with their Danish guide, Vitus Jonassen
Bering, discovered Alaska and the
Aleutian Islands. A fur trade was
established in anarchic conditions and
continued until it was organized on a
sounder basis by Grigori Shelikhov (1747-
1797), an enterprising Russian merchant.
Shelikhov assembled all the merchants
into a single "Company ofAmerica",
which set up trading posts on almost all
the Aleutian Islands. Between 1783 and
1786, Shelikhov comprehensively
explored the islands, of which he made
the first detailed and accurate maps. His
descriptions of the way of life of the
inhabitants and of their surroundings are
ethnographic documents ofgreat value.
The strait between Kodiak Island and the
Alaska Peninsula still bears his name.
13

discovered
S
O
o
"O
CD
¡5
"Peregrinations of the Russian merchant Grigori She¬
likhov from Okhotsk to the coasts of America by the
Eastern Ocean (1791)"



the boys serve out the food fat, a-mixture of fat's, seal, whale and sea-lion. They
also serve berries, and in particularjed whortleberries, cranberries, bilberries and
Arctic brambles, to which they add various roots; the berries are not mixed. They
also provide dried fish known as pokola, and the meat of various animals and
birds, according to the best that each has at his disposal. Salt is unknown to them.
Each dish and each drink must be tasted first by the head of the household,
otherwise the guests will not touch it; the occurrence ofpoisons is, apparently, not
unknown. When the head of the household has tasted each dish, he passes it to the
first of his guests, who helps himself and passes it on to his neighbour, and so on
from first to last. Anything left is sent back to the first, who sets it aside, and, when
they leave, the guests carry away all these leftovers with them.

