This depiction of an
Amazon as a
symbol ofAmerica
appears in a book
on world costumes,
published in 1784,
by the French
writerand artist
Jacques Grasset
de Saint-Sauveur
(1757-1810).
A hundred and fifty kilometres below the last village of the Tupinambas, as
one travels down the River Amazon, one comes upon a tributary to the
north which flows from the province of the Amazons, and which is known
to the local people as the Cumuriz. This river takes its name from the Indian
communities dwelling at its mouth. Above these are the Apotos . . . Then come the
Iagaris, and beyond them the Guacaris, the fortunate tribe that enjoys the favours
of the Amazons. The Guacaris have built their village on mountains of stupen¬
dous height (the Guyana Range). One mountain in this range is called Tac-
amiaba. Its summit rises well clear of the others, and it is barren, being constantly
buffeted by the winds. Here live the Amazons.
These women live together in isolation and protect themselves without any help
from men. However, at certain specific times of year they are visited by their
neighbours, the Guacaris. When the latter arrive, the Amazons run for their
weapons for fear of an ambush. But as soon as they recognize their friends, they,
all hurry down to meet the boats of the newcomers. Each woman takes a ham¬
mock from a boat and goes to hang it up in her home. Then she lies down and
awaits the men. A few days later, the Amazons' guests go home, returning
without fail the following season. The girls that are born of these unions are raised
by their mothers. They are taught to work and to bear arms. As for. the boys,
nobody knows exactly what becomes of them. I have been told by an Indian who,
in his youth, went with his father to one of these assignations, that the following
year the Amazons hand back to the children's fathers any males to whom they
have given birth. But, as a rule, it is thought that they put these male children to
death. I cannot be certain.
Be this as it may, these women own treasures that could enrich the whole world.
The mouth of the river on whose banks they live is situated 20° south of the
Equator.


In search of the
Amazons
by Cristobal de Acuña
According to ancient Greek mythology,
the Amazons were warlike huntresses
who burned off the right breasts of their
daughters so that they could use the bow
and arrow more freely. In the 16th
century, a Spanish explorer in South
America, Francisco de Orellana, claimed
that he hadfought against a band of
Indians resembling Amazons, and
accordingly the river Marañan, near
which this skirmish took place, was later
renamed the Amazon (although some
believe that the name is derivedfrom an
Indian word). When they heard this story,
several travellers in South America set out
in search of the Amazons. One of these
travellers was a learned Spanish Jesuit,
Father Cristóbal de Acuña (1597-1675),
who in 1639 took part in an early
expedition to explore the Amazon region.
(Even a century later, in the "Age of the
Enlightenment", a scientific explorer in
South America such as Charles Marie de
la Condamine still took the myth of the
Amazons seriously.)
Nuevo descubrimiento del gran río de las Amazonas el
quefuey se hizopor orden de su Majestad el año 1639por
las provincias de Quito en los Reynos del Perú, 1641.
("New discovery of the great river of the Amazons,
made on the order of His Majesty the year 1639 in the
provinces of Quito in the Kingdoms of Peru, 1641")
