by Jacques Brosse
IN ancient times, travellers modelled themselves on the
heroes whose great deeds were recounted in mythology. By
virtue of their semi-divine, semi-human origin, the heroes
had a mission to unite the unknown to the known and to bring
into communication the human world, the divine empyrean and
the Underworld of the dead . They were able to cross the thresh¬
old of the Underworld in both directions, and, indeed, this was
one of the ordeals that faced them, for, destined though they
were to be immortal, they nevertheless had to achieve immor¬
tality by travelling to the ends of the earth where no one before
them had ever set foot.
So it was that Heracles travelled to the Garden of the
Hesperides and then to the Underworld, Jason and his compan¬
ions sought the Golden Fleece, and the Trojan Aeneas, human
son of Aphrodite, wandered from Asia to Africa before foun¬
ding in Italy a small nation that one day would rule the world.
And then there is Ulysses, the prototype of so many travellers.
The story of his travels, the Odyssey, is the gateway to Greek
literature, but it was preceded, many centuries earlier, by the
Epic of Gilgamesh, the Sumerian hero who travelled far and
wide in search of immortality. Similarly, the earliest journeys
by the Chinese were made in search of the Isles of the Blest and
the Kunlun Mountains, the axis and centre of the world. Cer¬
tain divinities, too, set off on journeys, and human beings
awaited their return with impatience. Thus the Mexicans, to
their cost, mistook the army of the Conquistadors for the
retinue of Quetzalcoatl, the Plumed Serpent. The Hawaiians
inevitably interpreted the arrival in the bay of Kealakekua of
great ships laden with undreamed-of wealth as the return of the
god Lorono, whom they identified with the person of Captain
Cook, who perished, a victim of this misapprehension.
Traditionally, a journey is not so much an adventure as a
quest. It is true that the decision to leave one's country springs
from a desire to break away from familiar surroundings and the
sterile stagnation of habit, but an even more powerful factor is
determination to be free from one's old self, to embark on the
path of self-transformation. The stages of the journey corre¬
spond to a process of initiation: they beat time on the march
towards mystery; encounters with monsters are symbolic tests
to which the future initiate must submit. To his friends and

The traveller
and his quest
kindred, who admired his recklessness as they watched him go,
the returning traveller is no longer the same person. Still trailing
clouds of glory from the unknown, he has become a hero.
In extreme cases, the journey may entail no movement at all,
and be made wholly within the self. Sometimes it takes place in
a kind of waking dream, like Dante's descent into the circles of
Hell. There is a tradition of initiatory journeys which culmi¬
nates in Rabelais's Pantagruel, and Swift's Gulliver's Travels,
and includes the Quest for the Holy Grail. In the Grail story,
knightly exploits are of secondary importance, and the hero can
only achieve his aim the rediscovery of the lost vessel con¬
taining the blood of the Redeemer if his deeds are accom¬
panied by an inner metamorphosis. Lancelot and Perceval only
half understood this and failed, whereas Galahad ultimately
succeeded, but only by attaining so high a degree of selflessness
that he became the reflection of the object of the quest, Jesus
Christ. This is the moral of all journeys. They can succeed only
if the traveller, setting out in search of the Other, achieves
identification with that Other.
Such an esoteric meaning is also to be found in the Chinese
Passage through the
ice. An illustration front
A Voyage of Discovery .
. . for the Purpose of Ex¬
ploring Baffin's Bay in
which the Scottish navi¬
gator John Ross (1777-
1856) described his first
expedition in search ofa
northwest passage be¬
tween the Atlantic and
the Pacific, in 1818.
and Japanese tales which are probably based on the journey of
the Shaman, since Shamanism, later confined to Siberia, was
once known throughout Asia. However, it should at this point
be emphasized that when the Shaman engages in this dangerous
magical undertaking, he is not remotely concerned with per¬
sonal gain, but is acting as an intermediary between the human
community that he represents and the world of the gods, who
have chosen him for this office by giving him the power to enter
their celestial realm, denied to all others. Likewise, Dante
descends into the circles of Hell , and Galahad seeks the Grail in
order to report to others what they have seen and what others
cannot see: they reveal the unknown.
We may take these to be imaginary journeys, but this is only a
modern interpretation. In the ancient tales, myth and reality
are inextricably mingled, making any rationalist interpretation
very difficult, since it is not always possible to distinguish the
geographical from the symbolic, and a single item of informa¬
tion may be both at once. This is true of the Odyssey, and
perhaps even of the highly didactic Voyage ofBrendan, a tale of
adventure which was extremely popular in the Middle Ages;

©
Masked man from the Sandwich Islands
(today the Hawaii archipelago) as depicted
in the atlas of the third voyage (1 776-1780)
of the English navigator James Cook.
but it is also true, despite the fact that its authors were mer¬
chants, of the Periplus ofHannon, by the Carthaginian Hanno,
who in all likelihood explored the western coast of Africa as far
as the Gulf of Guinea around 450 B.C., and of the travels of
Marco Polo, which are also a "description of the world", and
hence a cosmology. We should, after all, remember that until
his death Christopher Columbus was convinced that he had
discovered, not the New World, but the islands of Japan and the
coasts of China.
Until the great transoceanic expeditions of the Renaissance,
every journey took place in two dimensions, one vertical, or, as
we would nowadays say, subjective, and the other horizontal,
situated in physical space, and hence objective. It should be
borne in mind that this ambiguity, which modern minds see as a
defect, then gave a journey its real meaning. How could it have
been otherwise in medieval Europe, where the typical travellers
were the pilgrim and his warlike counterpart the crusader?
These men travelled so far afield to seek forgiveness for their
sins and the certainty of salvation. What they found at the end
of their journey was their true home, Jerusalem or the New
Jerusalem. The few travellers' tales that have survived from this
period were written in this spirit; they are guides to pilgrimages
in the Holy Land.
Descriptions written by Chinese monks of their visits to the
holy places of Buddhism reflect similar preoccupations. But
these monks were scholars. On their journeys to India they
sought holy scriptures rather than relics, and writings such as
those chronicling the journeys of Fa Xian in the fifth century,
and of Yi Jing and especially of Xuan Zang in the seventh, are
remarkable historical and geographical documents.
It was for religious reasons, too, that the Arabs travelled
throughout the East. Muslims are virtually forced to become
travellers, since one of their obligations is to make the pil¬
grimage to Mecca at least once in a lifetime. Furthermore, since
the Arab presence had spread to a large part of the old con¬
tinent, the masters who were capable of passing on the oral
teachings essential to Islam were scattered. The faithful Mus¬
lim, eager to perfect his knowledge, was obliged to travel from
one to another, and hence to journey throughout the Islamic
world, but wherever he went he would find others of his faith to
understand and help him. As a result, we have, for example, the
records of the journeys of Ibn Djubayr, in the twelfth century,
and later those of Ibn Battuta, who in a quarter of a century
travelled across half the world.
Another consequence of the spread of Islam was the creation
by the Arabs, who were skilled merchants and excellent naviga¬
tors, of the only real international trade, by land and sea, of
medieval times, and in particular the spice trade. Merchants
who travelled as far as China and Indonesia gathered informa¬
tion which Arab geographers pieced together to form the most
comprehensive picture of the Orient of their day. Highly culti¬
vated men, these Muslim scholars were astronomers as well as
geographers, travellers as well as theorists. With them, travel
writing began to acquire investigative qualities. Their aim was
to be precise, rational one might almost say scientific on the
model of the "inquiry" (the true sense of the word historial) of
Herodotus in Greece, in the fifth century B.C., for the Arabs
were heirs to the Greeks. In the heart of the Middle Ages, the
Muslims were already modern travellers.
Our purpose in dwelling on the origins of travel writing has
been to describe the mentality of the earliest travellers, and
their status which set them apart from other members of
the community for they constitute the prototype of all later
travellers.
During the thirty years or so which elapsed between the
expeditions of Christopher Columbus and the first voyage
round the world in 1520-1522 by Magellan, a period which saw
the successive discoveries by Westerners of America, of the
route to India and of the Pacific Ocean, travel acquired an
entirely new meaning: it became secularized and limited to a
single dimension, the horizontal. The aim was no longer to
make contact with the Other World, but with other human
societies. But there was no feeling of fellowship with the mem¬
bers of these societies; they were pagans and first had to be
converted.
With few exceptions, sixteenth-century travellers tended to
be cast in the new mould of the conquistador. They were no
longer curious, cautious individuals, but leaders of armed expe¬
ditions, violent and avaricious, engaged simultaneously in the
forced conversion of indigenous populations, the conquest of
their land and the furtherance of their own interests. God and
the King, whom they served so well, owed them this reward.
These men were Portuguese and Spaniards, later Dutch, and
then British and French, the builders of colonial empires. Mis¬
sionaries and merchants followed close on their heels. The
image which they exported, and which they imposed on Amer¬
indians and Asians alike, was to be seen for many years by these
peoples as the very face of the Christian West.
And yet, on the fringes of this aggressive policy, the strong
impulse of curiosity reactivated by the Renaissance was still
flourishing: the humanist desire to know the whole universe in
all its natural and human diversity. This attitude is to be found
in the travelling naturalists, from the Frenchman Pierre Belon
and the Italian Prospero Alpini in the sixteenth century to the
Swede Peter Thunberg in the eighteenth century and the Scot
David Douglas at the beginning of the nineteenth. These mis¬
sions, which could not have been more peaceable, undertaken
individually by determined men whose whole lives were

devoted to increasing the store of human knowledge, are the
positive counterweight to a brutality that was often cynical.
Such a tendency, which indicates the existence of a new type
of traveller, is not always given much prominence by historians
of travel. It continued without interruption until the early nine¬
teenth century, reaching its apogee during the "Enlighten¬
ment", when, shortly after 1750, great sea-borne expeditions
set out to explore what remained to be discovered in the South¬
ern Hemisphere as far as the Antarctic continent, the existence
of which was hotly disputed. Their mission was to fill in the
empty spaces on the map, and to construct a fuller and more
accurate picture of the world.
Such was the achievement of Captain James Cook on his
three voyages. Like his immediate predecessor, Louis Antoine
de Bougainville, and like his successors who drew inspiration
from the methods he tested, Cook was accompanied by a skilled
team of scientists who were to draw up a systematic inventory,
hitherto lacking, of animal and plant life. Thanks to highly
detailed accounts of his voyages of discovery, we are familiar
with the young and enthusiastic scientists who willingly com¬
plied with the discipline that is indispensable at sea, enduring
harsh conditions and often facing mortal dangers.
It is remarkable that many of the survivors followed the
example of their model and hero Cook and immediately set out
on fresh voyages lasting between three and five years. The son
of a farmworker, and a sailor who rose from the ranks, Cook
was not only an experienced navigator, whose authority, was
tempered by his constant concern for the well-being of his crew.
More surprising, to us, is his generous attitude towards the
Engraving (c. 1857) by the French painter
Edgar Degas (1834-1917) shows Dante
and Virgil (crowned with laurel leaves, left)
at the gates of Hell, an episode from
Dante's Inferno.
peoples he visited. Not only did Cook never use violence except
when he saw no alternative, but he tried to understand totally
unfamiliar customs and beliefs with an unprecedented open-
mindedness and with such minute attention to detail that, auto-
didact though he was, he unwittingly founded the science of
ethnography, which involves hot only observation but also
dialogue.
However, Cook never went to the opposite extreme to the
colonialists he did not embrace the cult of the "noble savage"
as practised by late eighteenth-century "philosophers" such as
Jean-François de Galaup, comte de La Perouse, who for a while
shared their illusion, but who was forced to abandon it, and
would proclaim: "They write their books by the fireside, but I
have been travelling for thirty years," shortly before he and his
subordinates were massacred by these "children of nature".
Unfortunately, this golden age did not last long. The French¬
man Jules Sébastien César Dumont d'Urville, discoverer of the
Antarctic continent, and even his rivals, the American Charles
Wilkes and the Englishman James Clark Ross, were still, as late
as 1843, Cook's disciples. But with their deaths and with the
ending of the great voyages of discovery, a certain attitude of
mind disappeared. Humanitarian idealism gave way to the mer¬
cantile concerns of the rising bourgeoisie. All too often, the
religious missions aided and abetted the great powers and were
the vanguard of armed occupation.
Nevertheless, the fever of discovery and the admiration
aroused by natural rather than supernatural wonders continued
unabated in the scientific explorers, of whom Alexander von
Humboldt, in the early years of the nineteenth century, was an
outstanding example. He belonged to a rich and noble family
and was one of the last humanists to possess a truly universal
culture. As such, the Prussian Humboldt seems to be the
opposite of Cook, the empirical Englishman, and yet, in many
respects, they are alike and complementary. The Personal Nar¬
rative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions ofthe New Continent
During the Years 1799-1804 was long used as a model by over¬
land explorers, as were the Voyages of Cook by navigators.
Worthy heirs to both these men were the Englishman Charles
Darwin on board the Beagle, Henry Walter Bates and Alfred
Rüssel Wallace, hacking their way through the splendid, fear¬
some Amazon jungle, and, lastly, the solitary travellers who
penetrated to the unknown heart of the African continent, from
the Scot Mungo Park and the Frenchman René Caillié, to the
fearless missionary David Livingstone. But the death of
Livingstone in 1873 marked the passing of a certain type of
modest, disinterested hero, with qualities which even his imme¬
diate successor, the Anglo-American journalist Stanley, did not
embody.
From this time onwards, exploration increasingly came to
serve capitalist interests, and became the prelude to a new form
of subjection. Although the fascination was still alive in the last
of the explorers the discoverers of the polar regions their
adventures came increasingly to resemble sporting achieve¬
ments.
What remains of the spirit which inspired these adventurous
travellers, in an age when any tourist who takes a plane can cast
himself in the role of a hero? How far does contacj really go
between this new type of traveller, the modern tourist, and the
people he meets on his travels? How far, at heart, does he care
about such things? Perhaps the only future left for travel is
space exploration. But it is still too early to tell.
JACQUES BROSSE, French naturalist; has written many works on
exploration and travel, including Great Voyages of. Discovery: Circum¬
navigators and Scientists, 1 764-1 843 (English translation by Facts on File
Publications, New York/Oxford, 1983), and the first biography of the
French explorer Alexandra David-Néel, entitled Alexandra David-Neel,
L'aventure et la spiritualité (Retz, 1978).
