Signs of a new
individualism
The State, the family
and the company in Japan today
Right, a happy couple in a Tokyo park. A
decline in the birth-rate and the ageing of the
population (the Japanese longevity rate is
among the world's highest) are major recent
demographic trends in Japan. People are also
spending less time at the workplace and in the
family, and life-styles are becoming more
diversified.
1 . In the mid-19th century, in response to foreign press¬
ure. Japan ended over two centuries of isolation and
opened its ports to international trade. In 1 868. a strong
central government was restored, under the symbolic
authority ol the Emperor Meiji. This was a turning point
in Japanese history. The Unesco Couner published a
special issue in September-October 1968 to com¬
memorate the centenary of the Meiji Restoration.
by Masakazu Yamazaki
IT is generally agreed that the 1970s
were a crucial decade in contemporary
Japanese history, but it is less easy to
define their precise significance. The pre¬
ceding decade of the 1960s, by contrast,
left a clear-cut impression on all of us as a
time of dramatic change.
In the 1960s, the fruits of economic
growth were just beginning to be visible,
and the theme of growth was the central
concern both for those who sought to pro¬
mote it and for its opponents. Increasingly,
people felt that Japan had recovered from
the isolation following its defeat in the Sec¬
ond World War and that the postwar era
was over. "Internationalization" emerged
as a key goal for the new era.
The 1970s, by contrast, were a period
without heroic slogans, and the decade left
no memorial in the form of a major festival
or celebration. People began to talk of the
1970s as "an age of uncertainty", a phrase
borrowed from the title of a book by John
Kenneth Galbraith.
The changing image
of the State
One of the most notable changes that
took place in this period was the decline in
the ¡mage of the State. Of course, the State
has by no means lost its role as a func¬
tioning political system. But the 1970s saw
a rapid diminution of the State in individual
perception.
During the hundred-year process of
modernization and industrialization that
began with the Meiji Restoration of 18681,
the State was perceived as an immeasur¬
ably powerful force in determining national
attitudes. For the Japanese, modernization
dramatically changed the concept of the
nation, which ceased to refer simply to an
ethnic community, as it had in pre-modem
times, and came to describe an instrument
of collective purpose.
The State was greatly reinforced by its
use as an instrument of collective purpose
during the process of modernization. In
particular, modernization heightened peo¬
ple's feeling that their lives were dedicated
to the achievement of national goals. This
tendency reached its apogee during the
1960s when Japan moved into second
place in the market-economy countries in
terms of GNP.
The 1960s were also a decade of
remarkable achievements in foreign policy.
People were stirred by the success of the
negotiations for the return of Okinawa. The
1964 Tokyo Olympics and Expo 70 were
also national events, orchestrated by the
State before a world-wide audience. And
the people were able to witness these
events via the new nationwide medium of
television. If the 1960s were a time of
clear-cut goals, it was because the State
itself had clear objectives and played a
leading role in managing great national
events.
If we look more closely, however, we find
that the Japanese State was permitted to
follow such a dramatic course of action and
pursue a single goal with such fervour
because Japan was still a minor nation. In
the Meiji era, when Japan was an industri-

ally backward State, and in the late 1 940s,
when it was a country defeated in war, the
national goal of "catching up and over¬
taking" was almost entirely a domestic
concern.
An invisible limit in this process of ex¬
pansion was reached in the 1960s when
Japan's GNP reached the level referred to
above. Though a certain degree of eco¬
nomic growth would be tolerated subse¬
quently, dramatic advances would no long¬
er be possible in the international context.
As it turned out, the first oil crisis braked
Japan's economic growth during the
1970s, but it is reasonable to assume that
even if the oil crisis had not occurred,
something else would have happened to
curb the soaring growth rates of the
1960s.
Ironically, the peaking of Japan's nat¬
ional strength during the 1960s eventually
robbed the country of the opportunity for
bold action during the 1970s. The most
significant outcome was that the State lost
its fascination for the people and no longer
provided stimulation for their day-to-day
activities or encouragement in their lives as
individuals. The State ceased to be a
"combat force" working towards a major
objective and became instead a "technical
force" concerned with maintaining a del¬
icate balance among countless minor
problems. It was no longer an arena for
great celebrations but the realm of day-to¬
day administration.
The local community
Of course, the full implications of this
change were not apparent at the time. One
extremely symptomatic development,
however, was the sudden appearance of
the vogue phrase "the local era" at the
close of the 1970s. Local magazines be¬
gan to be produced for people living in
specific areas. The development of these
magazines, a revolutionary phenomenon
in the history of Japan's highly centralized
publishing industry, was paralleled by
growth in the circulation of local newspa¬
pers and in the number of young people
listening to local radio stations. These may
seem to be minor changes, but when it is
remembered that during the 1960s the
"The surplus in the work force stimulated the growth of the service industries, strengthening the
concept of consumption without production. " Below, the Tokyo Stock Exchange, one of the
world's leading financial centres.
\qsa&&&£K

I [-f i-, MM W»r»l»l
"The number of new publications increased
steadily throughout the 1970s. The range of
specialized and educational publications also
widened..." The Japanese are avid readers and
their practice of reading wherever and when¬
ever they can is so widespread that it has a
special name, tachi yomi (reading standing
up). Below, a young man browsing in a book¬
shop selling computer magazines.
"The State ceased to be a 'combat force' work¬
ing towards a major objective and became
instead a 'technical force' concerned with
maintaining a delicate balance among count¬
less minor problems. It is no longer an arena
for great celebrations but the realm of day-to¬
day administration. " Above, the traffic control
centre at police headquarters in Tokyo,
where 8 million vehicles ply through the
streets each day.
information media were almost totally
dominated by national television, it be¬
comes clear that a highly significant
and subtle shift had occurred in popular
interests.
New kinds of citizens' movements, led
by local government, also began to appear
throughout Japan in the 1970s. Tradition¬
ally, citizens' groups were formed on the
basis of political or ideological ties and
formed a mirror image of national politics.
But these new groups were much more
closely linked to the interests of their own
communities. Many were cultural in nature
and engaged primarily in recreational or
educational activities. Some went a step
further and sought to "promote local
development through "cultural.'» indus¬
tries". Community colleges, environmental
groups, civic choirs and local craft
groups all took on new significance and
began to serve as nuclei to encourage
residents to identify more closely with
their community.
Today we are seeing the emergence of a
milieu in which the individual, in the course
of his or her daily life, can relate to. the
group while maintaining a certain distance,
identifying with it on a more rational, multi¬
valent basis. In other words, people are
becoming more individualistic in their atti¬
tudes to everyday living and the individual¬
istic aspects ol society in general are
being strengthened. Seen in this light, the
changes that have, occurred in the
¡mage of the State are part of a wider trend.
A number of other symptomatic develop-

ments occurred during the 1970s, perhaps
by historical accident. All these changes, at
least externally, have served to move
Japanese people in the direction of greater
individualism.
More time to spare
The most important groupings in modern
Japan apart from the State are probably
the company and the family. Over the past
decade, both these institutions have un¬
dergone a quiet but nevertheless extre¬
mely far-reaching alteration.
In the 1970s, probably for the first time
since the Meiji Restoi^tion, the amount of
time that the Japanese spent in their work¬
places or with their families declined.
According to data published by the Min¬
istry of Labour, the six-day working week
was in force in 71 .4 per cent of workplaces
in 1970. By 1980, this figure had plummet¬
ed to 23.7 per cent, indicating a threefold
increase in the percentage of companies
letting workers have at least one free Sat¬
urday per month. Even more remarkable is
the fivefold increase in the number of com¬
panies adopting a five-day-week. Statistics
for the same period relating to the number
of paid holidays indicate a decline in the
percentage of companies allowing be¬
tween 1 and 14 days from 57.7 per cent to
25.1 per cent, while the percentage of
companies allowing 15 days or more
doubled.
Another widely reported phenomenon of
the 1970s is the dramatic reduction in the
amount of time married women spend on
housework and the proportionate increase
in the amount of free time at their disposal.
The main reasons for this trend are be¬
lieved to be the spread of electrical ap¬
pliances during the 1960s and the in¬
creased availability of child-care facilities.
The 1970s also saw the beginning of a
rapid upsurge in the service industries,
particularly the restaurant business, which
played a major role in accelerating what
has been called the "externalization of
housework". It was in this period too that
the nuclear family, the trend for which be¬
gan after the Second World War, became
the general rule, and the birth-rate
declined.
An ageing population
The ageing of the population is a major
change which is perhaps the most widely
discussed issue of recent times in Japan.
Its most direct impact can be seen in the
decline in the relative importance of the
workplace and the home. By 1976 Japan's
average life expectancy had climbed to 72
years for men and 77 for women. The
statistics are continuing to edge upward,
and the Japanese now rank among the
world's longest-lived peoples. This means
that a man who starts work at 20 and
retires at 55 is likely to spend less than half
his life in the communal milieu of the work¬
place. By the same token, even if a woman
has her first child in her mid-twenties and is
in her mid-fifties before the last of her
children leaves home, she will still devote
far less than half her life to the family. For
Japanese. of both sexes, this implies a
K * 4j ^m
"A threefold increase in the percentage of
companies letting workers have at least one
free Saturday per month" look place in Japan
between 1970 and 1980. Above, swimming
pool complex that can accommodate up to
30,000 people, at Körakuen amusement park
in central Tokyo.

8
more diversified range of relationships out¬
side the workplace and the family, as well
as more time spent alone.
The problems faced by middle-aged and
elderly people vary from person to person;
they are not amenable to solution by politi¬
cal action at group level or by across-the-
board government measures. An increase
in the number of elderly persons in the
population is thus more likely to encourage
the development of a society characterized
by diversification of perceptions, ideas and
life-styles.
The influence of this change will prob--
ably be felt most strongly in various forms
of fashion. We are unlikely to see the
emergence of major trends, either in ideol¬
ogy or in styles of dress, with the potential
to affect the whole of society. Even today, it
is possible to perceive a tendency toward
diversification in women's fashions and
popular music, and it is difficult to pick
out trends that characterize the era as it
was possible to do in the 1960s.
The shift towards consumption
Production and consumption have al¬
ways been two sides of the same coin:
neither can exist without the other. Yet
ever since industrialization began in the
seventeenth century, the principles that
have determined the fundamental patterns
of modern society have been drawn almost
exclusively from human relationships in
the area of productive activities.
Though the supremacy of production re¬
mains largely intact, a subtle change in
social values seems to have taken place in
the last decade. The most important factor
underlying this change has been affluence,
as symbolized by the emergence during
the 1960s of the saying "consumption is a
virtue", but the change is perhaps more
directly attributable to the energy crisis of
the 1970s and the introduction of elec¬
tronics technology.
The energy crisis forced consumers to
economize, but far more important was its
dampening effect on the creed of mass
production. Previously, the goal of incen¬
tives to consume had been to boost pro¬
duction, but now consumers were en¬
couraged to be more judicious so as not to
overstimulate production. Meanwhile, the
development of energy-efficient industries
and the automation of factories through
electronics produced a surplus in the
working population and also permitted the
production of goods better adapted to the
consumer market. The surplus in the work
force stimulated the growth of the service
industries, strengthening the concept of
consumption without production.
The 1970s were thus a period when the
social value of consumption steadily began
to increase. This, in itself the first such
change in three centuries, was accompa¬
nied by changes in the fabric of consumer
behaviour. Consumers began, first, to se¬
lect goods according to more individual
preferences and, second, to demand direct
personal services rather than material
goods.
Changes in the publishing industry typify
this trend. The number of new publications
increased steadily throughout the 1970s.
The range of specialized and educational
publications also widened in such fields as
philosophy, the social sciences and the
natural sciences. Along with the increase
in small-format paperback books, this
seems to contradict critics who talk of the
decline of reading and the spread of ig¬
norance. What we are seeing here, espe¬
cially in the case of magazines, is a typical
manifestation of the trend towards the pro¬
duction of small quantities of a wide range
of goods. This phenomenon is not merely
the effect of the relaxation of social ties but
a sign that the Japanese are beginning to
develop strong personal tastes.
The boom in cultural services
Perhaps even more significant is the fact
that people have begun to seek services in
the cultural sphere. People are demanding
a change in the way society treats them,
and the current boom in the service indus¬
tries is a symptom of this phenomenon.
Restaurants, hotels, travel agencies,
sports clubs, adult education courses, art
galleries, museums and theatre have
all begun to attract large numbers of
patrons; so have medical facilities and new
religions.
These facilities provide not the basic
physical necessities for survival but forms
of intellectual and emotional satisfaction, in
other words, "cultural services" in the
broadest sense of the term. They take
the form of the direct provision of services
from person to person, eliminating mech¬
anical means of transmission wherever
possible.
In the arts, for example, the spread of
reproductions and multivolume art series
has been paralleled by an increase in the
number of people interested in original
woodblock prints. In education, radio and
television broadcasts now compete with
well-attended lectures at community col¬
leges. This apparent shift in the trend of
cultural services from secondhand to first¬
hand experience may prove to be an im¬
portant transition in terms of the broad
perspective of cultural history.
Affirmation of identity
In pre-industrlal societies the majority of
people were treated as "nobodies". In the
industrialized democracies, all people are
respected equally, but since everyone is
treated in the same way, people have sim¬
ply become "anybody".
Today, however, many people are af¬
firming their identity, and societies capable
of responding to this affirmation are com¬
ing into being. Until now, Japanese society
has provided for this need in the context of
the family and in the small groups that form
within companies. People are treated as
individuals by their families and their col¬
leagues and superiors. The consensus is
that groups of this type function better in
Japan than in the Western countries and
that they have played an important role in
maintaining the psychological stability and
diligence of the Japanese people.
No doubt this view is still valid today, and
it is extremely unlikely that we will see a

dramatic decline in the role of the home or
workplace group. What is certain is that
opportunities for self-affirmation can no
longer be limited to these two areas.
People are beginning to seek a wider
range of opportunities for recognition in
society at large. Many such opportunities
are likely to be provided by places where
cultural services are purchased as com¬
modities, as well as in such mutual-service
contexts as discussion groups and volun¬
teer organizations.
In conclusion, we can deduce that the
various social changes that have occurred
since the 1970s stem from the emergence
of new aspirations concerning the self and
individualism. And although the overall pic¬
ture is still not clear, it is probable that the
individualism of the future will be totally
different in nature from that of the era of
industrialization. We can expect to see the
individualism of maturity, of flexible and
aesthetic interests and enlightened self-
expression, instead of the goal-oriented
individualism of competitiveness and rigid
beliefs.
MASAKAZU YAMAZAKI, Japanese educator,
teaches at Osaka University and is a former
guest professor at Columbia University, USA.
He is the author of several books, including a
study of contemporary art. This article has been
adapted from a text published in August 1983 in
the Japanese monthly magazine Chüö Köron.
Audacious architecture
"People have also begun to seek cultural services. Restaurants, hotels, travel agencies, sports clubs,
adult education courses, art galleries, museums ... have all begun to attract large numbers of
patrons. " Three examples of modern Japanese architecture are shown here: 1. The roofgarden of
Spiral, a Tokyo building designed by Fumihiko Maki for a clothes manufacturing company as a
centre for cultural as well as business activities. 2. Parabolic stainless steel roofs of the Fujisawa
Municipal Gymnasium, some 30 km from Tokyo, also by Fumihiko Maki. 3. The Museum of
Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, USA, designed by Arala Isozaki, is an audacious blend of
architectural styles using geometric elements.
