the farmer's Mr. Fixit
A Unesco programme
to promote biotechnology
for development
LUCERNE farmers in Kenya, bean-
growers in Latin America, and rice-
growers in Southeast Asia are
today being helped to boost their yields as a
result of a Unesco programme in which
micro-organisms are being used to
strengthen rural development.
The programme has been established at a
time when many developing countries are
facing the problem of how to increase food
production to feed their expanding popula¬
tions. The quality of food produced must be
sufficient to provide a balapced diet with an
adequate protein content. In response to
this challenge, several developing nations
have been expanding their agricultural
lands into areas that are only marginally
capable of sustaining productivity. Such
attempts are invariably limited by the avail¬
ability of nitrogen fertilizer, which plays a
vital role in maintaining the productivity of
the soil.
By the end of the third quarter of this
century, world food production was depen¬
dent on a supply of synthetically produced
nitrogen fertilizer amounting to 40 million
tonnes and costing US $8,000-10,000 mil¬
lion per year. By the year 2000, estimated
annual needs will be 160 million tonnes.
The cost of fertilizer nitrogen, especially to
the agrarian-oriented economies of the
developing countries which are often
beset by shortages of foreign currency, is
enormous.
Nitrogen constitutes four-fifths of the
earth's atmosphere and is freely available in
nature. Since the nineteenth century it has
been known that the roots of leguminous
plants, in association with certain bacteria,
are capable of extracting nitrogen from the
atmosphere in the process known as nitro¬
gen fixation. The plants concerned include
groundnut, pigeon pea, mung bean, soy¬
bean, lentil, French bean, lucerne, channel
clover, white clover and winged bean, to
mention just a few species that are often
grown in developing countries today.
The most important bacteria which are
capable of nitrogen fixation belong to the
genus Rhizobium. When the bacteria infect
the plants, they stimulate the formation of
nodules swellings on the roots. The bac¬
teria within these root nodules improve the
fertility of the soil for the host plant by
adding nitrogen compounds to it. (In 1975,
it was estimated that the total nitrogen fixed
naturally amounted to 175 million tonnes;
35 million tonnes are fixed by cropped
leguminous plants alone.)
In addition to Rhizobium, other micro¬
organisms at the heart of nitrogen-fixing
systems include the Azolla Anabaena sys¬
tem which has been used for centuries by
rice-growers in Asia (see Unesco Courier,
December 1984), and the Azotobacter,
which live independently in the soil, as well
as Spirillum and Clostridium, which are
associated with certain grasses (such as
sugar cane) and cereal crops.
To contribute to rural development by
promoting biological nitrogen fixation tech¬
niques in developing countries, Unesco has
established, with support from the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
and the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO), a number of
Microbiological Resources Centres (MIR-
CENs) in different parts of the world to
catalogue and preserve Rhizobium and
other micro-organisms of economic signifi¬
cance and to train local manpower in their
use. The Centres form part of a global net¬
work of MIRCENs which are concerned
with the application to development of a
whole range of biotechnological applica¬
tions, from the production of biogas to
biopharmaceuticals .
By inoculating seeds with cultures of an
appropriate Rhizobium species, or
cyanobacteria in the case of rice, it is possi¬
ble to increase the supply of nitrogen avail¬
able to the plants concerned. The produc¬
tion and use of such biofertilizers'can thus
greatly help both to increase the prod¬
uctivity levels of the planet's soil resource
and to conserve petroleum and its expen¬
sive technologically-processed products,
such as fertilizer.
In interaction with other international
programmes, schemes focused on the
development of biofertilizers or Rhizobium
inoculant material are already operating
through the MIRCEN network on a level of
regional co-operation in Latin America,
East Africa and Southeast Asia and the
Pacific, with additional support from FAO
and UNEP.
In the field of biological nitrogen fixation
by Edgar J. DaSilva,
J. Freiré,
A. Hillali
and S. O. Keya
Below, bilingual (English-Swahili) instruc¬
tions for farmers on a packet of fertilizer
produced from bacteria by a Unesco-sup-
ported Microbiological Resources Centre
(MIRCEN) in Kenya. The fertilizer, mixed
with the seeds of certain leguminous
plants such as beans or clover at sowing
time, helps the plants to increase their
intake of nitrogen from the atmosphere
which is essential for their growth.
(g LEGUME INOCULANT
Äj|3yS ^tf (lie<[ïi Itígiimen w use (üftnn«)' Ira* -Ik"
%3(X5i ¿¡ "mruw B»
éBSpgSÎËL rwAmMiNr. <» son sntío ». wh/wy
jSQWjfiraa (MM*« PHlMfCT
yijjfSjtfflf lAOttl» W «ÍBBUU»«f KABH* .M*U5
<?(?U?§»iS jKtvHtari en mmm
ni«« «019 MMfXM KM4Í*
CROP
BAfUH
USE BFRWf
DIRECTIONS FOR USE MAELEZO YA KUTUMIA
Us« onty (a ine orev rueufioner? or lWUu 1 Kv* hcM .Jl",-i>p«'i0*
Sit panai Rie oontew r* ¿u www vv» i» Mkui ;-ïiw# ni bt>
poctn' h jjttutenf t« 15 kg ->" % *» m:'/«»« «wr rMWp« \<imc>
we* Mu »i* «»Mal ot X« kh» iSB H k« \> . jrtuuas« ram
poo)«; well wtt* seeds motetHM -ucnauft! m* münyt. <wo «sjtuiaio
Wit) WOtW 'k sue« MMUltOP ufttfl Jl ujflji <¿a» -ilfHrtC' P'fw.iji. uw* ,uu
seeds wi urttamrv coaled ana sow yti KW »w*«' na upando mata
AOJO
ONYO
CAUTION
Mbégu (ft in.«)«-., i wtveyc
Inoculuterl seeds Inoculent sixwb </-\<-> .iw»kw '"in. n if«Apo jotu
O
Ü not be exposed to sunttgnt neu' i HO .ii' «0*' '" jHI/i>Û«iiH/1."V« te
Eß
<0 mixed win chemical fertilizers M own' M lí'iiow» urturB*
c
5 inoculan' supplie* only nittuuen Mcíxin)'- 'un .- wnso na
"35 therefore jpoty oll other iltruoei *i* inuyt »nao«:
T3
3 to the soli rirvH& BO Rinn rM'KJf» w*i
O
tffcHlQ«
.c
o
5
o
o
c
Û.
STORI IHIt PACHT UNI«R COOL PLACÍ UNTIL USE
VKKA PAMTI HII PAHAU PASIPO JOTO AU AJA KAU
27

UNESCO MIRCEN
international co-operation
Aim: Have young scientists contribute to research and
development in their own countries and promote
international co-operation by working with high-level
scientists in UNESCO training courses.
Mechanisms
1 MIRCENs
MIRCENsr Microbiological Resources Centres
A world-wide network
Aim: Collect, preserve and use microbial strains for
national development and international co-operation
_.T.V»1
GIAM
GIAM r Meetings of Scientists on Global Impacts
of Applied Microbiology
Aim: Strengthen research co-operation between
industrial and developing countries
Stimulate capacity-building for local research and
training
.1
3 Co-operation with U.N. Agencies and
non-governmental organizations
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNIDO United Nations Industrial DevelopmentlOrganization
ICRO* International Cell Research Organization
IFS International Foundation for Science
IOBB International Organization of Biotechnology and
Bioengineering
IUMS International Union of Microbiological Societies
WFCC World Federation for Culture Collections
* Panel on Microbiology and Biotechnology
4 Co-operation with regional organizations
ALAR Latin-American Association of Rhizobiology CEC Commission of the European Communities
AABNF African Association for Biological Nitrogen Fixation SANEM Southeast Asian Network on Microbiology
ABEGS Arab Bureau of Education forthe Gulf States
five MIRCENs are already operating, in
Kenya, Brazil, Hawaii, Beltsville, USA,
and Senegal. The broad responsibilities of
the MIRCENs for the East African and
West African regions include the collection,
identification, maintenance, testing and
distribution of rhizobial cultures compati¬
ble with local crops. Deployment of local
rhizobia inoculant technology and promo¬
tion of allied research are other activities.
Advice and guidance are provided
regionally to individuals and institutions
engaged in rhizobiology research.
The MIRCEN in Latin America, in a sim¬
ilar vein, promotes the identification of
leguminous germplasm of high symbiotic
capacity and soil-limiting factors; the opti¬
mal selection of efficient rhizobial strains
for soybean, clover, lucerne, lotus, peas,
beans and the cowpea group; optimization
of inoculant production for use in demon¬
stration plots and by small farmers; and the
quality control of inoculants for use by pri¬
vate and official laboratories.
The goals of the MIRCENs at Hawaii and
Beltsville, U.S.A., are to contribute
towards alleviating the dependence of
developing countries on chemically-derived
nitrogenous fertilizers. This is accom¬
plished through research to provide a
database to assess the benefits of utilization
of legume-based biological nitrogen fixa¬
tion (BNF) technologies; development and
delivery of validated BNF technologies that
are appropriate to the needs of, and circum¬
stances in, developing countries; and the
provision of support services.
In addition, the MIRCENs in Kenya and
Brazil are involved in the production of
inoculants for legume trials and for use by
farmers.
Inoculant production at the East African
MIRCEN has now been initiated using
strains tested by MIRCEN workers. Inocu¬
lants for eleven pasture legumes have been
supplied to FAO pasture agronomists in
Kenya. The MIRCEN in Brazil, on behalf
A technician at a Unesco-supported Mic-
robiological Resources Centre (MIRCEN)
In Brazil prepares materials for a training
course in the identification of bacteria
from which fertilizer can be produced.
of the Federal Government, is responsible
for the quality control of inoculants pro¬
duced in that country. An average of 100
samples are examined per year. On a lim¬
ited basis this service is also available to
institutions in the developing countries.
The BNF MIRCENs play a valuable role in
maintaining and distributing efficient cul¬
tures of Rhizobium. Collectively, over
3,000 strains are maintained in the
MIRCEN collections.
EDGAR J. DASILVA, Indian microbiologist, is a
former Vice-President of the World Federation of
Culture Collections (WFCC). The author of
several papers on the biotechnological applica¬
tions of micro-organisms, he is a member of
Unesco's Division of Scientific Research and
Higher Education, where he has been largely
responsible for the development and imple¬
mentation of Unesco's MIRCEN programme.
J. FREIRÉ, of Brazil, is director of the MIRCEN
and a professor of soil microbiology at the Uni-
versidade Federale do Rio Grande do Sul. A.
HILLALI, of Morocco, is a rh/zob/ologist at the
Institut Agronomique et Vétérinaire Hassan II, at
Rabat. He has been carrying out research and
consultancy work on the applications of rhizobial
biofertilizers at the West African MIRCEN at
Bambey, Senegal. S.O. KEYA, of Kenya, is
director of the MIRCEN atthe University of Nairo¬
bi, where he is head of the department of soil
science and dean of the faculty of agriculture.
28
