Investigation of a 17th-century man-of-war in the Baltic
by Lars Einarsson
T
| HE Swedish man of war HMS Kro-
nan ("The Royal Crown") was lost
in battle off the coast of south-east
Sweden on 1 June 1676. Her keel had been
laid in 1665 and she had been launched in
1668, entering service four years later in
1672. The first three-decked ship built in
Sweden, she displaced 2,140 tons. Her
length was 55 metres, and she carried 126
cannons. At the time of the disaster her
crew consisted of approximately 850 men.
In the mid-seventeenth century, Sweden
was a great power with the general strategic
ambition of controlling the Baltic Sea and
the shores around it, thus creating a closed
inner sea a "Mare Claustrum". In 1675
the Swedish provinces on continental
Europe were attacked by Brandenburg. In
the same year, war broke out between
Denmark and Sweden, and in the spring of
1676 the Swedish navy set sail for the south¬
ern Baltic in order to find and destroy the
Danish fleet which was ravaging the Swed¬
ish islands.
The first battle between the enemy fleets
was fought between the islands of
Bornholm and Rügen during the night of 25
May. In spite of the Swedish superiority in
numbers, the Danes escaped, and were a
few days later joined by a Dutch squadron.
The Dutch became a Danish ally to prevent
Sweden gaining total control of the
Baltic.
The Swedes had acted in confusion dur¬
ing the battle, and consequently the king
ordered the fleet to seek battle closer to the
Swedish mainland, hoping that a possible
disaster could be avoided if the ships could
seek refuge in Swedish ports.
On the morning of 1 June 1676, the Swed¬
ish fleet, over sixty ships strong, was sailing
northwards in a southwesterly gale along
the coast of Oland. Off the village of Hul-
terstad, the Svärdet ("The Royal Sword"),
the flagship of the second squadron, fired a
gunshot either as a signal to call the fleet
closer together, or as a request to turn
against the enemy who were closing up from
behind.
Without responding to the Svärdet's shot,
the Kronan turned with the wind without
taking in sail. Suddenly, the ship heeled

Jewelsfrom the
Crown
over and began to capsize. The crew tried
desperately to pull the guns in through the
gunports, but in vain. The ship capsized,
and shortly afterwards was shaken by an
explosion in which the starboard side was
blown to pieces. Within a few minutes, the
Kronan had sunk with the loss of 800 lives.
Only forty men survived the disaster.
The wreck of the Kronan caused total
confusion in the Swedish fleet. Only a few
ships remained to continue the battle,
among them the Svärdet, which fought
heroically for several hours before being set
on fire by a fireship. The result of the battle
was disastrous for the Swedes: the loss of
the two largest ships in the Swedish navy
and 1,500 seamen.
In the 1950s, Anders Franzen began a
programme to find twelve Swedish men-of-
war sunk in the Baltic in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. Franzen had real¬
ized that because of climatic and other natu¬
ral conditions, the Baltic is a treasure-house
for the underwater archaeologist.
First of- all, the Baltic is within the con¬
tinental shelf area and only parts of it are
Pieces of richly carved woodwork are
among the most notable finds made dur¬
ing excavations of the Kronan. Left, a cher¬
ub from the admiral's quarters photo¬
graphed as it lay among the wreckage.
Above left and right, another wooden cher¬
ub from the Kronan.
deeper than 100 metres. Both the coastal
waters and large areas of the sea bottom are
accessible for ordinary diving up to a
depth of 50 metres. Secondly, wood-des¬
troying organisms such as shipworm
(Teredo navalis) are less prevalent than in
warmer, saltier waters such as the
Mediterranean. In fact the whole of the
Baltic is free of damage by shipworm.
In 1956, Franzen discovered the Wasa in
the waters of Stockholm harbour where she
had sunk at the start of her maiden voyage
in 1628. After an unprecedented rescue
operation the Wasa was raised from the
sea-bed and towed away to a museum site in
1961 (see page 14).
In 1980, after making a systematic survey
including the use of side-scan sonar, proton-
magnetometer and low-light television,
Franzen and his team discovered the Kro¬
nan just over 6 nautical miles off the east
coast of Oland, at a depth of 26 metres.
The first sight which met the divers was
that of a broken wreck, not a Wasa. But the
sediments of the site would later prove to
contain thousands of artefacts originally be¬
longing to the crew, representing a seven¬
teenth century in miniature encapsulated
and deep frozen at noon on 1 June 1676.
In 1981, archaeological investigation of
the Kronan began, supervised by the Kal¬
mar County Museum. The investigated cen¬
tral area of the wrecksite is divided into
twenty squares of 10 metres a side. The
squares comprise a system of co-ordinates,
each corner being marked with a white
cross and identified with a letter-number
combination. These codes are needed to
Right, artist's impression of the Kronan.
The drawing, by Admiral Jacob Hägg, was
made in 1906. 27

28
describe the location of a recovered object
and are also helpful in photographic and
search-work.
A further refinement in excavation is the
use of a portable plastic grid, divided into
squares. The grid as a whole is fitted into
the general system of co-ordinates before
excavation is begun, and then makes the
work of describing the location of recovered
artefacts easier. This method is used in
combination with triangular measuring and
has proved to be efficient at this stage of the
excavation.
The actual excavation work is done with
an airlift, a sort of underwater vacuum
cleaner. It uses compressed air to draw up
the sediment, thus revealing objects and
parts of the ship, by preventing everything
from being obscured in a cloud of mud. The
divers pick up the objects recovered in this
way, while the sediment, sand and gravel
drawn up with the compressed air are sieved
on deck, so that smaller objects are also
recovered.
Important aids in the underwater docu¬
mentation process are waterproof sketching
equipment, underwater cameras and
perhaps most important an underwater
video camera. Documenting the excava¬
tions with low-light video is a very conve¬
nient method of obtaining maximum input
of immediate visual information at a re¬
latively low cost. Communication between
divers and the surface is carried out by diver
telephone.
Excavating and documenting the port side
of the Kronan, which lies flat on the sea¬
bed. The plastic grid divided into squares
enables the location of objects to be pre¬
cisely recorded. Upright forms in back¬
ground are broken deck-beams.
The divers use only dry-suits, meaning
they wear insulating overalls under their
diving suits and remain dry. This prevents
the diver from being exposed to the cold
waters of the Baltic, which seldom exceeds
8°C at this depth. This is a most important
safety measure.
Diving time at a depth of 26 metres with
compressed air is relatively limited. Each
diver does two descents a day, with an
effective diving time of from 50 to 70
minutes, depending on whether decom¬
pression in water is being used.
When the excavations began in 1981, the
first method used was to dig test-pits in
strategic areas of the wreck-site, in order to
determine the area of the find and the ship's
constructional elements. The archaeolog¬
ists immediately realized that a tremendous
number of artefacts were preserved in the
sediment and, thanks to the wood-preserv¬
ing conditions of the Baltic, noticed the
remarkable richness of the exposed parts of
the ship. Kronan clearly offered a unique
opportunity to study life on board a big
seventeenth-century battleship.
In 1984, after three seasons of excava¬
tions, a new method succeeded the test-pit
Plate and jugs from the Kronan

method. Continuous, systematic excava¬
tion starting from identified constructions
on the port side began. The choice of
method was based on the knowledge
obtained from the previous tests, which led
to a theory concerning the deterioration
process and the present state of the wreck.
At the time of the disaster, Kronan was
heading north in a strong south-western
gale. The ship turned with full sails, heeled
over on her port side, capsized and turned
around in the wind. This is proved by the
ship's position on the sea-bed. The great
explosion in the powder-storage room must
have blown the entire starboard side away,
since this was the direction of the shock-
wave. The vessel probably broke athwart-
ships at this stage, forward of the main
mast, which explains the absence of the
bow. Thus, approximately two-thirds of the
length of the port side, from the stern for-
"ward, is preserved.
After the explosion, Kronan sank rapid¬
ly. When she reached the sea floor, she
immediately rested on her port side. This is
indicated by in situ findings of internal port
side sculptures, originally decorating the
walls of the admiral's quarters, astern on
the upper gun-deck. The sculptures were
originally nailed to the wall with iron nails,
which rusted away soon after the ship¬
wreck. The sculptures still remain in their
original positions.
One consequence of this must be that the
external sculptures of the port side stern
castle are also likely to be still in their
original positions, embedded in the anaero¬
bic, glacial clay. We hope that future ex¬
cavations will prove this.
Since she was the first three-decked ship
ever built in Sweden, Kronan is likely to
show unique constructional details. Some
interesting features have already been
This carved wooden head was placed on
the sterncastle of the Kronan to frighten
the enemy.
observed. However, the outstanding asset
of Kronan is the tremendous richness of the
artefacts found on her. As of 1986, approx¬
imately 15 per cent of the area of the wreck-
site had been excavated. More than 12,000
artefacts have been salvaged. They range
from everyday utensils, personal belong¬
ings, weaponry, navigational instruments,
sculpture, and musical instruments to a
medicine chest and the largest find of gold
coins ever made in Sweden.
Perhaps the most interesting finds are the
sculptures which are in remarkably good
condition. One can still see in detail how the
artist has shaped the piece of wood with his
tools. The relatively gentle conservation
process of freeze-drying ensures that the
original features of the wooden sculptures
remain. The reconstruction of the sculptu¬
ral features of the Kronan is one of the
greatest achievements of the investigation.
Since the excavation began, a Kronan
exhibition has been open to the public at the
Kalmar County Museum. More than
200,000 people have seen the exhibition so
far.
Apart from the main archaeological pur¬
pose of the Kronan investigations, the site
has also become a melting pot for interna¬
tional underwater archaeology. Each year
marine archaeologists from different coun¬
tries and institutions are invited to take part
in the work and exchange experiences. The
Baltic in general, and Kronan in particular,
offer a unique opportunity for underwater
archaeological work under extremely good
conditions.
LARS EINARSSON is curator of the Kalmar
County Museum, Sweden, and chief
archaeologist of the Kronan project.
