by Bernard Dixon
The gene
revolution
Photo above shows the distinctive knot¬
like growths or nodules which form on the
roots ol legumes (plants of the pea family)
when they are infected by certain bacteria.
These bacteria, known as rhizobia, take
nitrogen from the air and change it into
forms the plants can use. One important
aim of research in biotechnology is to ex¬
tend this process of nitrogen fixation to
other crops by incorporating nitrogen-fix¬
ing genes into their genetic heritage. The
goal is proving difficult to attain.
GIVEN the mixture of benefits and
problems spawned by the first
Green Revolution two decades
ago (see box page 7) , it is not surprising that
both optimism and apprehension surround
the application of genetic engineering now
to agriculture tomorrow. Mixed reactions
are appropriate, because those develop¬
ments focused upon so-called recombi¬
nant DNA are destined to have even
more far-reaching effects than the tech¬
niques deployed in the first revolution.
Today's new wizardry could undoubtedly
transform agriculture throughout the
world. At the same time, its precision in
modifying living cells offers a stern chal¬
lenge to our prudence and wisdom.
At the centre of the stage is deoxy¬
ribonucleic acid (DNA), the material which
carries in coded form the hereditary instruc¬
tions responsible for the behaviour of cells
and the plants, animals or microbes of
which they are part. The astronomically
long DNA molecule can be subdivided into
regions genes which determine particu¬
lar characteristics. Recombinant DNA is
the name given to the product when a piece
of DNA from one organism is combined
artificially with that from another.
Genetic manipulation of this sort is the
basis for the boom that has occurred during
the past decade in biotechnology. Such
activities were, of course, possible pre¬
viously. Some, like the art of fermenting
sugar to make alcoholic drinks, are almost
as ancient as Man himself. Others, includ¬
ing the first mass production of antibiotics,
were developed earlier this century. But all
of these processes were based on organisms
as they occur in nature albeit with other,
equally natural, methods being used to
select high-yielding strains.
The arrival of recombinant DNA, how¬
ever, has altered the rules profoundly. It
13

has already greatly enhanced our specificity
and power in tailoring living organisms for
beneficial purposes. In future, it will extend
our range of options much further.
The breakthroughs which have led to this
historic watershed in the fabrication of
novel plants and microbes happened during
the early 1970s. The key discoveries were
made by molecular biologists who learned
how to splice into bacteria genes which they
had taken from other bacteria, and even
from totally unrelated animal or plant cells.
They first found out how to locate the par¬
ticular gene they wanted among the count¬
less numbers on the DNA of one organism.
Then they used natural catalysts called
enzymes to cut out that gene and "stitch" it
into a vector. This is usually a virus or a
plasmid (a piece of DNA that replicates
independently from the nucleus, the main
repository of DNA). The vector became a
vehicle for ferrying the selected DNA frag¬
ment into the recipient. Once inside its new
host, the foreign gene divided as the cell
divided leading to a clone of cells, each
containing exact copies of that gene.
Because the enzymes used for genetic
engineering are highly specific, genes can
be excised from one organism and placed in
another with extraordinary precision. Such
manipulations contrast sharply with the
much less predictable gene transfers that
occur in nature. They also make it possible
to splice genes that would be unlikely to
come together naturally. By mobilizing
pieces of DNA in this way, genetic engi¬
neers are beginning to create pedigree
microbes for a wide range of new purposes
in agriculture, medicine and industry.
Although genetic manipulation is taking
longer to perfect in plants, several tech¬
niques are now emerging. The most useful
so far is based on Agrobacterium tumefa-
ciens, a bacterium that causes crown galls
on many flowering plants. It contains a
tumour-inducing (Ti) plasmid which is
responsible for triggering the disorderly
growth that appears as ugly galls. Genetic
engineers have learned how to delete the Ti
plasmid's tumour-inducing genes and use it
as a vector with which to carry new genes
into plants.
A serious drawback so far is that while A.
tumefaciens infects potatoes, tomatoes, and
many forest trees, it does not normally
attack the monocotyledons such as cereals,
which are prime targets for genetic im¬
provement. Progress is being made,
however, and recent research indicates that
rice in particular can be manipulated using
the Ti plasmid. Alternative vectors and
other methods of transferring genes are also
being developed. One exciting possibility is
to use an electric current to promote the
incorporation of foreign DNA. This works
with maize cells, though scientists still have
to persuade the cells to develop into whole
plants.
One gene that has been transferred into
tobacco by A. tumefaciens comes from bac
teria and gives the plants the capacity to
produce a toxin that is lethal to insects. The
inbuilt insecticide makes the plants resistant
to insect attack and does not, of course,
have to be applied repeatedly. Some plants
can mobilize defences against virus infec¬
tion through a process analogous to immu¬
nization in animals, and this suggests
another route for genetic alteration. Incor¬
poration of one virus gene into tobacco has
helped to protect this plant against subse¬
quent inoculation with the entire virus.
Another development concerns
weeds a major limitation on crop hus¬
bandry in most countries. Although weeds
can be combatted using selective her¬
bicides, these often impair the growth of the
crop too. It is now possible, however, to
introduce resistance genes into tobacco and
petunia. One such manipulation results in
the synthesis of enzymes in the plant that
are no longer sensitive to the inhibitory
action of the herbicide glyphosate. Com¬
mercial companies now plan to market a
package containing both herbicide and
resistance seed.
Some 70 per cent of the world's intake of
dietary protein consists of cereal grains and
seeds of legumes. On their own, neither
cereals nor legumes can provide a balanced
diet for human consumption, because the
"storage proteins" they each contain are
deficient in one or more amino acids. Now,
added to analyses of the proteins in both
cereals and legumes, we have precise infor-
How to recombine DNA Drawing shows how a micro-organism (in this case a bacterium) is manipulated
to make it synthesize a desired substance. (1) A bacterium contains a plasmid,
which is a circularpiece ofDNA. This plasmid is isolated (2) and, with the help of
a restriction enzyme, opened in a precise spot (3). Meanwhile, with the help of
other restriction enzymes, the gene for synthesis of the desired substance is
isolated from the DNA ofanother organism (4). Still using enzymes, this gene is
grafted onto the previously openedplasmid (5). The plasmid is re-introduced
into a bacterium (6). The manipulated bacteria are put into a culture, where they
synthesize the desired substance. (7)
o
ó
14

mation about the DNA sequences coding
for them. This knowledge may well lead to
methods of altering those sequences or
introducing new genes that code for a more
balanced spectrum of amino acids.
The world's energy and food supplies rest
upon the ability of green plants to convert
atmospheric carbon dioxide into carbo¬
hydrates, fats and proteins, using light from
the sun. Unfortunately, the mechanism by
which they consume carbon dioxide is inef¬
ficient in those plants, such as wheat, barley
and potatoes, that are cultivated in tem¬
perate climes. Oxygen in the atmosphere
interferes with the first enzyme involved in
the assimilation of carbon dioxide. Consid¬
erable efforts are now being made to alter
the DNA sequence of the gene coding for
this enzyme, to prevent the deleterious
action of oxygen. Other researchers are try¬
ing to introduce into temperate zone
plants certain genes taken from maize,
which has a more efficient mechanism of
carbon dioxide uptake. In nature this
mechanism appears to operate only at
higher temperatures, but there are hopes of
"switching it on" in cooler areas.
Another atmospheric gas is the subject of
parallel efforts to make plants more effi¬
cient. Nitrogen constitutes 80 per cent of
the air, yet plants cannot use the gas
directly. Hence the heavy dependence of
modern intensive agriculture on fertil¬
izers nitrate, ammonia or urea syn¬
thesized by the chemical industry. Natural
nitrogen fixation depends in part on
rhizobia, bacteria that live symbiotically
with legumes such as peas, beans and
clover. The bacteria grow on sugars
provided by the plant, and are maintained
in characteristic nodules on the plant. There
they convert nitrogen directly into
ammonia, leading in turn to the synthesis of
plant proteins.
Molecular biologists have now isolated
and characterized several of the genes
required for nitrogen fixation. They have
found, however, that many more bacterial
and plant genes are involved than they first
imagined. This makes the manipulation of
those genes correspondingly more difficult.
So it will be some years before we can enjoy
the cost and energy savings that should
accrue by providing crops such as wheat and
maize with the ability to fix their own
nitrogen.
Drought and high temperatures are
unwelcome to all plants, despite being bet¬
ter tolerated by varieties that have evolved
in such environments. Desiccated soils also
often contain high levels of salts and metal¬
lic elements, which are toxic to plant
growth. Genetic engineers would dearly
like to fabricate plants resistant to such
stresses, but success is unlikely in the near
future. Before being able to identify the
relevant DNA sequences for transfer
between plants, they require a far better
understanding of the many ways in which
plants respond to their environment. An
additional problem may be the involvement
of several different genes, as with nitrogen
fixation. Drought resistance which depends
on a reduced area of leaf surface, for exam¬
ple, may be caused by the interaction of
multiple genes.
Microbes that contribute to healthy plant
growth are also on the drawing board for
genetic engineering. One possibility being
examined is the production and deliberate
release of rhizobia that fix nitrogen more
efficiently than natural strains. Other bacte¬
ria capable of forming nitrogen-fixing part¬
nerships with wheat and maize are also
being considered. A third type of prospect
follows the discovery by researchers at the
University of California, Berkeley, that
frost damage to strawberries is triggered by
bacteria which act as nucleii for the forma¬
tion of ice crystals on leaves. The cause is a
particular bacterial protein, the gene for
which the California biologists have learned
to delete. They believe they can prevent the
extremely costly frost damage by spraying
crops with this "ice minus" strain , which will
outgrow the natural flora.
A key area in biotechnology research is
concerned with the development of tech¬
niques for isolating genes of one plant and
introducing them into another as a means
of endowing the host plant with new char¬
acteristics such as higher protein content
or resistance to pests. One promising
technique for transferring genes uses
Plasmids (small pieces ofgenetic material)
from a bacterium which causes tumour
growths when it infects certain plants,
above. It is possible to delete the plasmid's
tumour-inducing genes and use the plas¬
mid to ferry new "useful" genes into
plants. Genes of a bean protein have been
transferred to the sunflower using this
method.
15

©
I
The use of genetic engineering in food
production offers many potential advan¬
tages. At the same time, questions have
been raised about the possible risks in¬
volved in releasing genetically modified
living organisms into the environment.
One case which led to widespread debate
and concern in the United States arose
from the development and use of geneti¬
cally modified microbes known as ice-
minus bacteria to protect strawberries
from frost damage. In photo, the leafat left
has been treated with ice-minus bacteria.
The leaf at right froze when dipped into
supercooled water.
Genetic engineering holds considerable
promise too in the improvement of "biolog¬
ical insecticides", microbes that attack pests
and have enormous ecological advantages
over their chemical counterparts. Bacillus
thuringiensis, for example, has been used
for many years to combat nuisance species,
but it and similar bacteria and viruses may
well be made more powerful by recombi¬
nant DNA. One possibility is illustrated by
the pine moth, which damages lodgepole
pine trees in northern Britain. In other parts
of the country, the moth is controlled natu¬
rally by a baculovirus that infects the cater¬
pillars. There are now plans to make the
virus more efficient at killing caterpillars
and to release it in the pine plantations. The
first experiments are being carried out with
a virus that has been altered only by having
a "marker" introduced into a non-coding
region of its DNA. This will allow
researchers to follow the virus's distribution
and survival after spraying. If all goes well,
the virus may be given a genè allowing it to
synthesize an insect-killing toxin. The
potential for this technique in other coun¬
tries, against other destructive insects, is
clear.
The safety of laboratory and industrial
activities using engineered organisms is
based on the idea of containment. Facilities
are graded according to the degree of risk.
New questions arise, however, when mi¬
crobes and plants are to be introduced into
the environment. There is concern, for
example, that weeds may be created acci¬
dentally and be inordinately difficult to
eradicate. If such a plant were drought-
resistant, herbicide-resistant, and frost-tol¬
erant, it might spread quickly over large
areas of agricultural land and be very diffi¬
cult to eradicate. As illustrated by the
Kudzu plant in Asia and the water hyacinth
in America, even natural weeds can cause
considerable havoc.
The prospect of genetically engineered
crops themselves becoming weeds is
remote, however, because crop varieties
cannot compete well with other plants when
left unattended. The inherent difficulties of
mobilizing plant genes also make it unlikely
that unwelcome varieties will be produced
accidentally. And there is always the pos¬
sibility of destroying by fire or other means
an engineered plant, released initially in a
defined area, that did create problems.
Nonetheless, field trials with novel plants,
particularly crops able to cross-fertilize with
weeds, need to be very carefully monitored.
Greater caution still is required with engi¬
neered microbes, which would be broadcast
in astronomical numbers and be impossible
to trace in their entirety should anything go
awry. But it is reassuring that no health,
environmental or other dangers have been
caused by recombinant organisms since
they were first fabricated over a decade ago.
Moreover, biologists now agree that there is
no significant difference between a microbe
that has received a new piece of DNA
through artificial manipulation and one that
has acquired the same DNA fragment
through natural mechanisms of gene trans¬
fer. Most experts argue that recombinant
DNA manoeuvres are intrinsically safer,
because they can be vastly more precise and
selective. Certain laboratory manipulations
are ruled out anyway by a priori predictions
that they would generate hazardous recom¬
binants.
Many researchers believe that tests with
recombinants should always be restricted to
closed environments such as greenhouses.
But these "microcosms" can never simulate
the richness of the natural biosphere. So
they can never provide conclusive evidence
about an organism's potential safety or per¬
formance in nature. The scientific con¬
sensus is now for a gradual approach, a
priori evidence about a released organism's
likely behaviour being used as the basis for
successively larger trials during which expe¬
rience and confidence are gathered about
how it actually does behave.
There is one other argument against the
much-publicized view in the USA that
organisms carrying recombinant DNA
should never be released for purposes such
as pest control. One third of the world's
crops are now lost through infection and
pestilence. It would be foolhardy not to
make use of an ecologically acceptable tech¬
nique capable of achieving even a modest
reduction in that toll.
BERNARD DIXON, British science writer and
consultant, is European editor of The Scientist
magazine and was formerly (1969-1979) editor
of the British scientific ¡ournalTUe New Scientist.
Notable among his published works are Magnifi¬
cent Microbes (1976), Invisible Allies (1976) and
(with G. Holister) Ideas of Science, Man and
Medicine (1986).
16
