The spice of life
by Thianar Ndoye and Malick M'Baye
A grain revolution
The impact of imported rice
on millet-based African civilizations
IN rural Africa today, drought and
desertification have wrought pro¬
found changes which have upset the
balance of the agrarian food-production
system.
For centuries, millet and sorghum were
the food staples that enabled the farmers
of the Sahel to achieve self-sufficiency in
an exchange economy. These farmers
domesticated and improved Pennisetum
spicatum, or bulrush millet, also known
as "pearl millet". Owing to its short
growth cycle, this crop draws the fullest
benefit from the short rainy season.
In the southern Sahel, millet is culti¬
vated as a supplement to sorghum, or
"great millet", which originated in the
Sudanese regions of tropical Africa. The
area under sorghum cultivation has ex¬
panded considerably in the tropical re¬
gions of other continents, and even in
warmer temperate countries. This cereal
is nowadays the staple food of more than
300 million people, most of whom live in
Africa, India and Central America.
Millet and sorghum have always been a
powerful link between the African far¬
mer and his environment . From a cultu¬
ral point of view, millet plays a central
role in the organization of community life
and in the interpenetrating systems of
kinship and values. Learning to grind
millet with the traditional pestle and mor¬
tar and to process it into an edible food¬
stuff was part of every girl's introduction
to the art of cooking.
The grain is dehusked by moistening
and pounding with a pestle and mortar.
After drying it is milled, by means of a
second and then a third pounding, each of
which is followed by winnowing. Then
comes the fermentation stage, achieved
by humidification, kneading, mixing and
even germination. The end product is
cooked in water and eaten with milk or a
sauce, types of nourishment which are
more liquid than solid.
Steaming became popular with the ad¬
vent of recipes for couscous from the
Maghreb peoples, who invented the tech¬
nique and utensils and transmitted them
to other cultures. The Senegalese cook
has improved the recipe by meticulously
working the flour by hand into a finer,
firmer texture. The resulting semolina is
then steamed, sealed with laalo (dried
baobab leaves, ground into powder) and
given a smoother consistency before
being soaked.
Recorded in every African's memory
are the working songs of women pound¬
ing millet, sung to the rhythm of the
thudding pestle as it crushes the grains
into flour. This millet or sorghum flour,
made into porridge, is an excellent res¬
torative for those who do hard manual
work, for women who have recently
given birth, and for convalescents.
Millet cakes are the first symbolic solid
food given when a child is weaned. And
couscous, thanks to traditional proces¬
sing techniques, will keep for several
months. It is the food on which nomad
peoples survived during their long jour¬
neys. Millet, a sacred cereal, is also
valued for its use in sacrifices connected
with the Islamic or animist traditions of
West African countries. In Africa dried
millet stalks are used as building mate¬
rials and as cattle fodder. Red sorghum is
used to make beer.
Sorghum and millet also have ex¬
change value in the rural African world
and are bartered for other foodstuffs.
The millet granary is a sign of wealth and
abundance, and has a mythical signifi¬
cance. It is a symbol of fertility and a link
between man and the earth. Thus it is
appropriate to speak of a "granary cul¬
ture", of the sacred characteristics of mil¬
let and, by extension, of all cereals.
Sorghum and millet may be traditional
cereals, but they are nevertheless full of
promise for the future, owing to their
capacity to resist drought. Today, in Cen¬
tral America and in the United States,
where high yields of sorghum are
obtained thanks to fertilizers and irriga¬
tion, it is used essentially for cattle feed.
In many countries facing food shortages,
millet and sorghum hold out a hope of
self-sufficiency.
However, rice has ousted millet and
sorghum from their economic and
mythical primacy, thereby increasing the
food crop deficit of many Sahel countries
and placing them in a vulnerable food
supply situation.
The changeover from millet to rice
took place in a particular historical con¬
text. The Portuguese introduced ground¬
nuts to Senegal in the fifteenth century,
and groundnut production was soon in¬
corporated into the cultural system and
Senegalese village women grind millet In
large wooden mortars before sifting the
flour from the bran.
8

A young Chadian woman prepares a thick
millet porridge, one of the staple foods of
the African savannah.
developed within a colonial market eco¬
nomy at the expense of the traditional
crops which had enabled the farmers to
be self-sufficient. To make good the food
deficit caused by the cultivation of
groundnuts, the colonial authorities
imported cheap broken rice from Indo¬
china.
New eating habits thus began to
appear. Rice was adopted by Senegalese
urban society and soon became fashion¬
able throughout the country as the cereal
to be eaten on festive occasions. It even¬
tually pushed into the background an
essential social and economic feature of
African granary civilizations. Urban soci¬
ety began to impose alternative ways of
life and styles of thought on the rural
population and, in particular, to revolu¬
tionize habits of food consumption
through the overwhelming acceptance of
rice served with fish or meat.
Unlike millet, the preparation of which
is a lengthy and laborious task, rice is
ready for cooking: this is surely the main
reason for its success. "Rice and fish"
cooked in oil is a typically Senegalese
recipe and may even be considered the
national dish of Senegal. Today it has
spread to all the countries of West Africa.
Rice and oil, essential to the preparation
of this dish, are increasingly important to
the economy. A complex network of
transactions has been established: the
farmer sells his groundnuts, purchases
rice with the proceeds, and buys back the
oil from the groundnuts that he has sold.
The terms of trade in these transactions
have deteriorated for the farmer. Rice
imports are increasing (approximately
300,000 tonnes a year), and oil produc¬
tion is no longer keeping pace, owing to
the poor harvests of recent years blighted
by drought.
But, contrary to all expectations, re¬
cent studies show that rural consumers
still favour a number of the traditional
millet recipes, a preference which high¬
lights the importance of food symbolism
to Black Africans and the crucial role
played by traditional forms of nourish¬
ment in cultural identity.
THIANAR NDOYE, of Senegal, was assistant
director of ORANA, a Dakar-based institute for
food and nutrition research in Africa, from 1952
to 1965. A co-founder of his country's food and
applied nutrition service, he played a leading role
in the WHO programme for nutrition education In
Senegal (1972-1982). He has carried out mis¬
sions as a consultant with Unesco, FAO and
WHO, and has published anieles in a number of
journals.
MALICK M'BAYE, of Senegal, is currently work¬
ing with Unesco's Division for the Study and
Planning of Development. The author of a num¬
ber of scientific studies on development, gene¬
tics and sexuality, he has carried out research
with the French National Centre for Scientific
Research (CNRS) and has taught at the Uni¬
versity of Toulouse.
©
