Men of letters
The Mabille, a fashionable Parisian dance-
hall of the mid- 1 9th century, as shown in an
engraving of 1867.



Dance-floor
democracy
by Domingo F. Sarmiento
Outspoken writer, tireless educator and
statesman, Domingo Faustino Sarmiento
(1811-1888) became President of the
Argentine Republic in 1868. He is the
author of a masterpiece of Spanish-
American literature, Facundo (1845), an
impassioned denunciation of dictatorship
in which he analysed what he saw as a
conflict in his country between
"civilization and barbarism". In 1846 he
was sent on an official mission to study
educational methods in Europe, returning
with materialfor a voluminous report On
the Education of the People, and a lively
account ofhis travels (Viajes), which was
published in 1849. Sarmiento's reflections
on equality inspired by his visits to
Parisian dance-halls assume fuller
significance in the light of his decision to
live in exile in Chile rather than under the
dictatorship ofJuan Manuel Rosas in
Argentina.
Viajes ("Travels") (1849), Vol.
Buenos Aires, 1955.
1, Hachette S.A.
THESE profound reflections made me think of the public dances of Paris,
which I attend from time to time as a distraction from the torments of
homesickness. I have neither the time , the inclination nor the means to lose
myself in these delightful frivolities, the enjoyment of which I envy in others. Ah,
if I only had forty thousand pesos, what a year I would give myself in Paris! With
what memories I would brighten up my old age! But I am sensible, and content
myself with observing, rather than scrounging from others as some people do.
The Paris dance-halls are public buildings rather like the theatres which they
attempt to outdo in sumptuousness, brilliance and style. The Rannelag
[Ranelagh] is comparable to the Italian operas as regards the quality of its
patrons. There I have come across Balzac, George Sand, Soulié and other leading
literary figures. The Château-Rouge is illuminated, at the end of each month, by
eighty thousand lamps; the Bal Maville [Bal Mabille] attracts the most famous
dancers; the Chaumière, paradise of Latin Quarter students, is a fortress at the
entrance to which even the policeman must leave his sword. Every other day these
public dance-halls open their doors to their thousands of customers. The men pay
an entrance fee on some days three francs, on others two, one franc fifty
centimes on a Monday and five francs at the end of the month, for the Grand
Festival. The ladies, who are always allowed in for nothing, come from all social
strata, behaving with more or less familiarity depending on the day of the week
and on their relationship with the men who pay either one franc fifty centimes or
five francs, according to their means. Very well-bred ladies go there to watch, and
young women of all classes are regular and passionate fans of one dance-hall or
another. The premises are decorated with exquisite taste: vases and statues tower
over masses of foliage and platforms of rare, sweet-smelling flowers, and by the
fiery light of the gaslamps, in asphalted avenues beneath swaying, multi-coloured
Chinese lanterns, quadrilles of two hundred couples execute frenetic polkas and
feverish waltzes. Here reputations are made, as important and European as that
of a Dumas or a Rachel . When La Rigolette stands up with her companion (who is
not Jerman), the whole company points her out, and the crowd of spectators
throng around her. English lords, Russian boyars and princes would pay up to a
hundred francs to be in the front line. The German orchestra begins to have an
effect on this whirlpool of bodies , who quiver with excitement and stamp their feet
to the dominant strains of the cornet. The dancing speeds up and becomes
animated and passionate, revealing the nature, the character of each dancer: the
dreamy, voluptuous languor of some, the extravagant, unreasonable violence of
others. La Rigolette becomes agitated, and, completely carried away, loses all
semblance of human shape or form. Her admirers close in around her, inciting her
with their applause, dizzying her with their cheers, until inspiration seizes the
prophetess in an explosion of passion, a poetic outburst of flashes of genius,
impossible cabrioles, bacchanalian contortions. ...
The dramatic intensity of these public dances has its positive side: they are
social levellers where the classes mix freely with one another. Ordinary women
rub shoulders with high-born young ladies, their manners become more refined
and people acquire a kind of unity and homogeneity. Among this company,
partaking of pleasures where they can drown their misery, the most humble of the
common people can have their little bit of happiness too.
30
