The city-builders of Islam
by Mohammed Allai Sinaceur
F'
jOR a Muslim ... the term 'Mother
Nature' defies translation. The
Muslim is no ecologist. ... Islam
took root in regions where nature is, gener¬
ally speaking, hostile to man. ... Its ideal is
the artificial world the city, the irrigation
system, the garden, which is introduced into
the home and represented in the design of a
carpet. The poetry of Islamic urban culture
speaks not of virgin landscapes but of the
flowers of the garden. ..."'
These words of the Islamist Josef van Ess
are a reminder of the value that the city
holds as we would expect of a great civi¬
lization for Islam, and above all for
Arabs. In the Islamic context, the con¬
notations of terms such as "city",
"urbanity", "urbanism", even "civility",
are so similar as to make these words vir¬
tually interchangeable. The city is the art of
living together. Islam, then, it might a priori
be concluded, is a founding, constructing
and urbanizing, rather than a conquering
civilization. Whereas relations between
other cities, as, for example, in ancient
Greece, were marked by rivalry, among
Islamic cities there existed a sense of mem
bership of an urban society with a shared
culture and way of life.
To understand this phenomenon we need
to examine the genesis of the Islamic city,
provided that we can find an example that is
sufficiently ancient and representative.
What better prototype could there be than
Al-Küfah (Iraq), the first city of Islam,
whose birth was recently related in a book
by the Tunisian historian Hichem Djaït?2
But first, a little historical background.
Küfah was founded in AH 17/AD 638, dur¬
ing the early years of the rise of Islam, five
years after the collapse of the kingdom of
the Lakhmids during the reign of Khosrow
II. Symbol and centre of the new Arab
sway, Küfah was constructed near al-Hîra,
the Lakhmid capital which for three cen¬
turies had dominated the region and whose
power and functions Küfah was eventually
to take over. The Islamic empire was
founded, and a decisive step forward in
human progress, the abandonment of
nomadism in favour of sedentary life, was
initiated.
Küfah drew its strength from the relative
financial autonomy of the new province. In
selecting its site, Caliph 'Umar I is said to
have decreed that no bahr (river) should
separate it from Medina. The first Islamic
city outside Arabia had to be in direct spa¬
tial contact with the homeland. This prere¬
quisite was later applied to other towns.
Only conditions that suited their camels,
said Caliph 'Umar, were right for Arabs
zones open to the steppe and in uninter¬
rupted contact with pastoral life.
Such, indeed, was the position of Küfah,
remote yet in contact, on the border of
steppe and cultivated land, and thus a focal
point of interchange and complementarity.
The first city of Islam, Küfah symbolized its
spirit: a civilization of borders and links, of
transition and mediation; for, in terms of
human geography, the role of Islam has
been to provide the "bridges", the
"railheads", the "termini" which link the
towns of the desert to the huge cities of the
North.
Some historians relate that, at the found¬
ing of the city, a site was marked out by
shooting arrows from a central point at
which were located the masdjid (mosque)
and the palace. Town-planning was born
20
1. Le christianisme et les religions du monde ("Chris¬
tianity and the Religions of the World") by Hans Küng
and Josef van Ess, Editions du Seuil, Paris, 1986.
2. Al-Küfa, naissance de la ville islamique ("Al-Küfah,
Birth of the Islamic City") by Hichem Djaït, Editions
Maisonneuve and Larose, Paris, 1986.
Right, the city of Aleppo (Arabic Halab) in
Syria as depicted In a miniature from
Nâsùh al-Matraki's Itinerary, a AH X /16th
century AD manuscript describing the
campaigns of Sultan Sulaymän the Magni¬
ficent Aleppo was a Hittite, Assyrian and
Hellenistic site before becoming one of the
great cities of Islam. The citadel, sur¬
rounded by a moat, Is built on a huge
mound In the centre of the city.
Left, map of Küfah at its apogee (AH 100-
120/AD 718-738) during the Umayyad
period
1 1 || : tribal plot (qatr a)
II : street (sikka)
i i : residence of an aristocrat (dar)
From Al-Küfa, naissance de la ville islamique by Hichem Djait,
Editions Maisonneuve & Larose, Paris, 1 986

m
r
!
t
I ; u
JE
N
>
i i
h j .. , i . , .
! ! A'ili « - "I1
as - -
tr pi r v^.^LDH
- 	 - : i^-;J it-x' ^ri^:.-IS , - AU
£ JlMí.] '»
Ni
ill - m&àÉM»
.il ,1m nu a r-î rëFitïS it
Z^áS
n ri * -
I
V
V~ Lj_,-	j_i	 t i-
'
-
te _i
e^*
&. .
.'li km*
s>
its jLLi H i i
un
» ?
û./ ' F; ' ^1
m rm
I ï
| r 1.-1	__	JB... î
HA-n
^w I .
, » «t»j^'"r:"
1 1 * * r y.c
il 1 1
I* Ia Al
\ i i
II
MMMmMÍ
1 inrli i ir^HJ'-j l 1 Lrutfüip *
i ; I ii r|
! i
0
cru*
rvt'i * #
i'i'in
iri^n [ ':rr,
M^-'! ' - *
iTT
I Uli
1 i Al
* .s
1
I
! » * j

ffluT
when the construction of permanent, mud-
brick buildings began. Considering that the
mosque was the first building to be marked
out and built at Küfah, that 'Umar I decreed
that houses should be limited to three
rooms and should not be too high, that
roads should be clearly defined and that
land should be allotted to the tribes in con¬
formity with the regulations, it is clear that
town-planning (takhtït) and civilization
(tamsir) went hand in hand, at the same
pace and on the same wave of progress, with
the aim of establishing a defined and
ordered space to which the Umayyads were
later to add the seal of truly monumental
constructions tuned to the harmonies of
other disciplines.
What was the source of this organiza¬
tional plan, of the juxtaposition of mosque
and palace? What were the origins of the
süq (market-place) which surrounded this
monumental complex and was built in such
a way as to respect both the plan and the
exigencies of the terrain? What precedent
was there for the immense public area
which, in 'Umar's day, could hold 4,000
horses? Every trace, every scrap of infor¬
mation must be examined if the impetus
that gave rise to the founding of this and
other Islamic cities is to be understood. We
must scrutinize everything that scholarly
erudition and comparative research can
reveal about that matrix of urban con¬
struction which is Küfah.
Küfah marked the advent of Islam the
mediator, the inheritor, the innovator. The
city itself was heir to a rich legacy, drawing
much from Babylon, the Mesopotamian,
oriental model, and from the cultural
heritage preserved in the twin city of
Seleucia on the Tigris/Ctesiphon, the Par¬
thian capital. As in these cities, the central
palace-mosque complex was a distinctive
feature, a veritable urban unit; however, in
Küfah this central unit never became an
isolated citadel as in Babylon, or later, in
Baghdad (Iraq), the circular city of the
'Abbäsids. If in later cities the palace was
moved to the outskirts, the mosque and the
market remained where they were, surviv¬
ing all transformations, specific and unvary¬
ing in location and status, the symbol of
centrality, the heart of the city.
Another heritage, another choice! Could
the Greek or Hellenistic city have influ¬
enced Küfah? The Greeks and the Romans
built their standard pattern cities in their
colonies, just as the Arabs built theirs on
the borders of Arabia. It is difficult to detect
any evidence of influence from this quarter.
Greeks, Romans and Arabs each assimil¬
ated and enriched foreign traditions, as
does any "torch-bearing" civilization.
The first Küfah was destroyed by fire,
perhaps because its builders had not suffi¬
ciently respected local environmental con¬
ditions. Those who rebuilt the city learned
from their first urban venture in the condi¬
tions of a new land, drawing inspiration
from their patrimony of ideas, but building
on the basis of their experience of their
surroundings. Legatees like the Persians,
22

's¡¿>
ff"""". 9^-.
i» f 	
III
Houses in the old city of San'à', capital of
the Yemen Arab Republic. Since 1986 the
old city of San'à' has been included on
Unesco's World Heritage List.
synthesizers like the Romans, the Arabs
were also innovators both in that, for them,
the act of founding a city was the outcome of
a reasoned project, and that in erecting a
structure they drew on the traditions of the
Arab city and on their own Arabian culture.
The Arabs had, indeed, experienced city
life long before they founded cities. In
founding Küfah they had behind them a
wealth of experience gained, it would seem,
in the north of the Arabian Peninsula. Long
before the coming of Islam, perhaps before
the development of written Arabic,
cuneiform inscriptions bear witness to the
existence of a whole Arab culture. This
ancient identity reached its zenith during
the first three centuries of Islam under the
enlightened impulsion of a universal faith
which led to the creation of cities, of a State,
of an Empire. Thus Arabism, in a non-tribal
sense, became co-extensive with Islam,
vehicle of universality.
The identification of Arabs with nomad¬
ism, so marked in the writings of the great
Arab historian Ibn Khaldun, is a com¬
paratively late phenomenon. Were the
formerly a sedentary people who
became nomads by accident? The answer is
a definite yes. For the Arabs, then, the city
is perhaps an environment regained which
became more and more clearly defined as
the Islamic era approached. With the
advent of Islam the Arabs found their his¬
toric destiny as builders and citizens. "On
the whole," wrote the French Islamist
William Marcáis, "the spread of Islam ...
found its expression ... in an extension of
urban life."3 However, the Arabs' cultural
background and bedouin roots, strength¬
ened by proximity to the desert-refuge,
gave them a spirit of resistance, a marginal
quality which left them open to the appeal
of nomadism, of a way of life more in tune
with nature than with culture. They
3. "L'islamisme et la vie urbaine", in Articles et con¬
ferences by William Marcáis.
Editions Adrien-Maisonneuve, Paris, 1961.
to ..
Î5
0-
E
1
m '
2|
©^
«j V
flj
* 1
fn the süq, the old market, of Marrakesh,
Morocco.
23

remained the greatest romantics of history
with a throbbing, irrepressible nostalgia
for, and innate identification with, the spirit
of nomadism.
Thus it was through Islam, revealed as it
was in an urban setting, that the Arabs were
able to fulfil their destiny as citizens. This
they accomplished all the more easily, defi¬
nitively, thanks to the examples of at-Tä'if
(in what is now Saudi Arabia), Yathrib
(pre-Islamic Medina) and Mecca. These
men, who had become nomads, knew that
the city too could defend itself, have its
share of culture, and be the symbol of unity.
The city, arising from some inner well-
spring of Arabism, was the fruit of the ter¬
ritorializing activities (paradoxical in these
nomads-by-accident who had become
nomads by temperament) of the tribes for
whom the city at times became the site and
primary source of innovation and the focus
of the urge to come together and to unite.
Küfah, then, drew on skills from many
sources, including those of the Yemen
which had already been tested out in the
Hejaz region in the heart of the Arabian
Peninsula, as witness the jabbänät (tribal
burial grounds) and the dur (houses) of the
nobles. Mecca provided a model of the
notion of the centre and of its pre-emi¬
nence. Even the marking out of the centre
of- Küfah by means of arrows was a
memento of the ritual involving arrows
practised in Mecca. More than this, the
notion of founding the city, of urban plan¬
ning, drew its inspiration and took as its
model the actions of Ibn Kilab Qussayy (a
5th-century prince of Mecca), ancestor,
builder, town-planner and architect.
At-Tä'if, too, provided another urban
model with its fortifications and city walls.
Finally, Medina offered the first example of
a twin central complex with its juxtaposition
of the house of power and the house of God ,
although, in the time of the Prophet,
authority was exercised from the mosque
itself.
It was only when the lessons of all these
models had been fully assimilated that the
new Islamic city arose on the fringes of the
desert. More than a polis (city), it was a
politeia (a whole social and political order).
It was a focal point at which life gathered
and then radiated outwards, flowing along
its streets and avenues. It encompassed the
areas earmarked for each tribe where they
could build their dwellings. Above all, it
was organized to meet economic needs,
with sites allocated to economic activity, the
sûqs which were a direct reminder of
Medina where the Messenger of God had
himself organized them, separating com¬
merce from prayer, market from mosque,
thus putting an end to the traditional, age-
old, oriental muddle. It was by this action
that the süq, until then a sort of fair, became
a distinctive feature of urban life.
All this is a far cry from the sententious
pronouncements of Orientalists anxious to
demonstrate, by their assessments of the
Islamic city, that the city in the full sense of
the term is really an exclusively European
phenomenon. How can' Küfah, with its
planned space, its urban sub-units, its politi¬
cal and religious centre, its well laid out
avenues and streets, be considered a hap
hazard construction? One should talk
rather in terms of an overall master-plan.
The rationale is so profound, especially in
the harmony achieved between human and
institutional needs, that the original outline
long remained, despite the later separation
of vocational and functional institutions, so
evident in the palace-city: "A universe of
courtyards, houses, public baths and
strange doorways, decorated in an extraor¬
dinarily rich style [such as] appeared in the
tale of 'The City of Copper' from The Thou¬
sand and One Nights."4
MOHAMMED ALLAL SINACEUR, director of
Unesco's Philosophy Division and professor of
the sociology of development at Hassan II Uni¬
versity, Casablanca (Morocco), was formerly a
research officer at the French Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique. He has written widely
on philosophical problems and on the history of
mathematics.
4. La formation de l'art islamique ("The Making of
Islamic Art") by Olcg Grabar. Editions Flammarion,
Paris. 1987.
r
Try 0- * I £* A4
Aerial view of the medieval city of Bozrah
(Syria) shows its maze of narrow streets,
massive citadel and the east-west road
which was once the main thoroughfare.
24
