The musical offering BY ALBERTO BASSO
Opera, one of the most characteristic forms of
baroque musical expression, originated in Italy
with Orfeo, L'incoronazione di Poppea and
other landmark works by Claudio Monteverdi.
The first significant French operas were written
by the Italian-born musician Jean-Baptiste
Lully, whose influence extended throughout
Europe. Above, "The Fall ofPhaethon ", a stage
design by Jean Bérain the Elder for Lully 's
musical drama Phaeton.
IN music, the term baroque has been
used to describe a certain concept of art,
a stylistic idiom, but also a method of
composition built on a specific component,
the basso continuo. Described in simple
terms, such compositions consist of a
melodic line and a continuous accompani¬
ment in a set form. This type of composition
is quite different from that of the preceding
period, when the emphasis was placed on
polyphony, that is, music in which there are
several parts of equal importance.
The starting point of the new epoch is
usually taken as the year 1600, when the
Italian melodramma (opera) came into
being, and its end is generally considered to
have come with the death of Johann Sebas
tian Bach in 1750. The history of music
underwent extraordinary changes in this
century and a half during which forms that
were to exist for hundreds of years were
"invented", and the structure of harmony
was established on foundations that lasted
into much later times.
As the Renaissance drew to a close, one
outstanding event dominated the musical
world, and later had a far-reaching effect on
the development of style in literature, in the
pictorial arts, in architecture and even in
social life. This was the rise of opera, the
logical evolution of the revival of the art of
theatre which was ushered in by the Italian
courts and was the outcome of the Renais¬
sance desire to recreate classical Antiquity
11

and actualize Hellenistic civilization. Opera
originated in Florence, but acquired various
characteristics of style and expression in
Rome, Venice and Naples. It was the most
effective vehicle of the new musical culture
in Italy, and rapidly won recognition in
other countries, where it almost always
retained its original character, except in
France where it developed independently
and was known as tragédie lyrique.
Claudio Monteverdi, Luigi Rossi and
Francesco Cavalli were the leading expo¬
nents of this new genre in the early seven¬
teenth century, while later Jean-Baptiste
Lully (the Florentine who was the father of
French opera) and Alessandro Scarlatti came
to the fore as creators of two different kinds
of musical theatre that persisted throughout
almost the whole of the eighteenth century.
The operatic style that prevailed was that
of Scarlatti, which was taken as a model even
by German masters such as Handel and
Hasse. Opera was originally a "serious"
genre, but later it assumed a comic form as
well, and became either a theatrical produc¬
tion in its own right or a kind of humorous
interlude performed between the acts of a
larger production (as in the case of the inter¬
mezzo, the undisputed master of which was
the Italian composer Giovanni Battista Per-
golesi). In other countries opera gave rise to
entertainments in which spoken dialogue
and singing were combined (the English
masque, the Spanish zarzuela, the French
opéra-comique, the German Singspiel),
which supplanted the traditional Italian pat¬
tern of recitative and aria.
This same pattern also dominated other
forms of vocal music, above all the oratorio,
the authentic expression of the devotional
spirit of the Counter-Reformation which
has all the characteristics of a spiritual opera
without scenery. At least, this is the case
with the most typical, vernacular form of
oratorio, such as the splendid works of
Stradella and Alessandro Scarlatti, for those
written in Latin (mainly associated with
Carissimi) were more ecclesiastical in
spirit.
Unlike oratorios, which usually relate
biblical events or the lives of the saints, Pas¬
sion music centres on the death of Christ and
often uses the words of the Gospels. The
finest examples are the Passions of Bach, but
other great settings were written by
Heinrich Schütz and later by Handel (who
was also a master of the oratorio) and by
Georg Philipp Telemann.
Opera in miniature, the chamber cantata is
a typical expression of Italian vocal music.
The thousands of examples of this genre sug¬
gest that its popularity exceeded even that of
the madrigal in the sixteenth century. One or
two recitatives and arias were enough to
create a cantata, and the only instrument
required, as a rule, was a harpsichord to
provide the accompaniment. From Car¬
issimi to Rossi, from Cesti to Stradella, from
Pasquini to Scarlatti and Handel, the cantata
remained in vogue throughout the baroque
period, even in French musical circles,
which constantly resisted the Italian style.
Indeed, the opposition between Italian style
and French taste was one of the most
persistent and pervasive features of the
baroque era.
As for sacred music intended for use in the
liturgy, masses and motets continued to be
composed, although at a rather sluggish rate.
The great masters of sacred music belonged
to the Roman and Venetian schools (Benev-
oli, Bernabei, Caldara, Gasparini, Legrenzi)
and then the Neapolitan school (Scarlatti,
Durante, Leo), later being drawn from the
Germanic countries, (Biber, Kerll and Fux)
and France (Charpentier, Lalande and Cou-
perin). In England, remarkable services and
anthems were written for the Anglican'
Church by composers who were also noted
for their secular music, such as Gibbons,
Tomkins, Lawes, Blow, and above all Pur-
cell, who inspired even Handel.
But it was in the Protestant Church music
Developed to a high degree of technicalperfec¬
tion, the harpsichord and the organ were, with
the violin, the favourite instruments ofbaroque
composers. In the work ofGirolamo Frescobaldi
in Italy andJohann Sebastian Bach in Germany,
organ music reached its peak, while in France
François Couperin "the Great" won fame as the
composer of music for the harpsichord. Eight¬
eenth-century engraving, left, shows the decora¬
tion of the organ in Weingarthen Abbey in
Swabia (Fed. Rep. of Germany) built by Gabler
in 1750. Below, "A Lady Playing a Spinet", an
engraving by Bonnart (c. 1685). An early
keyboard instrument of the harpsichordfamily,
the spinet was widely played in the 16th and
17th centuries, especially in England.
12

From Monteverdi to Bach
which sprang from the Lutheran Reforma¬
tion that the baroque period revealed a new
sensibility. The sacred cantata, more often
called a sacred concerto or simply a concerto
(as if to emphasize that it was the descendant
of the Italian concerto ecclesiastico, a com¬
bination of voices and instruments), came to
play an essential role in worship, and
inspired a constant creative effort from com¬
posers. The words were taken from the
Scriptures, often from the readings pre¬
scribed by the liturgical calendar for feast-
days, and the music took over that extraor¬
dinary vehicle of artistic and religious feel¬
ing, the chorale.
Schein, Scheidt and Schütz (the three great
Ss of the history of German music) laid the
foundations of an edifice that was to include
composers such as Buxtehude, Pachelbel,
Tunder, Weckmann, Böhm, Theile, and
above all Bach and Telemann (the latter
wrote almost 1,600 liturgical cantatas).
Bach, however, was the great exponent of
the religious cantata. (He is thought to have
written some 300, a third of which are lost.)
His works, which span the whole baroque
period, constitute an unrivalled repertory of
the vocal and instrumental techniques used
to express the emotions aroused by sacred
texts and religious festivals.
Some of the greatest works of instrumen¬
tal music, whether for a solo instrument or
an ensemble, are associated with the baroque
period. Pride of place went to keyboard
instruments (harpsichord, spinet, virginals,
clavichord and organ), with a repertoire that
was often interchangeable. The work of the
Italian school of organists reached its peak
with Girolamo Frescobaldi, whose organ
music and style influenced the whole of
Europe. One of his most distinguished
pupils, Johann Jakob Froberger, spread
throughout the Germanic countries a mes¬
sage that was heard above all by the masters
of the southern school, whose greatest figure
was Pachelbel. The northern school, on the
other hand, was more vigorous and pro-
Shown above are portraits of some of the great
composers who contributed to the flowering of
baroque music, which began with Monteverdi
in Italy at the beginning of the 17th century and
ended in the first half of the 18th century with
Bach. 1. Claudio Monteverdi (1567-1643), com¬
poser of operas, madrigals and sacred music,
whose work had a seminal influence on modem
music. 2. François Couperin (1668-1733), the
French master of the harpsichord, as depicted in
an anonymous portrait at the Palace of Ver¬
sailles. 3. Johann Sebastian Bach (1685-1750),
one of the greatest musical geniuses ofall time,
(engraving afterapainting by Gebel). 4. George
Frederick Handel (1685-1759), another great
German composer, who spent much ofhis life in
England (engraving after a painting by G.F.
Schmidt). 5. The Italian composer Alessandro
Scarlatti (1660-1725). His son Domenico, a
harpsichord virtuoso, livedfor manyyears at the
Spanish court, and taught Antonio Soler, the
leading Spanish baroque composer. 6. Henry
Purcell (1659-1695), the English composer who
in his short life wrote some of the finest lyrical
music of the age.
1 . Photo © Cournat © Rapho, Paris
2. Photo © Ciccione-Bulloz, Paris
3. Photo © Bulloz, Paris. Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
4. Photo © Bulloz, Paris. Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
5. Photo © Roger Viollet, Paris. Museo Cívico, Bologna
6. Photo © Edimedia, Paris. British Museum, London
duced more illustrious figures, notably Bux¬
tehude. It claimed as its progenitor a Dutch
master, Sweelinck.
Toccatas, fantasias, preludes, Capriccios,
ricercars and fugues proliferate in the key¬
board music of the time. Dance rhythms
were adapted into suites incorporating styl¬
istic, metrical and dynamic variation. The
Lutheran liturgy gave scope for the develop¬
ment of another genre, the choral prelude for
organ, which extended the range of that
instrument by providing it with a repertoire
of incomparable splendour, which will for¬
ever be associated with the name of Bach.
Among the illustrious names linked with
the harpsichord are those of Frescobaldi and
Michelangelo Rossi, and later Pasquini,
Alessandro Scarlatti and his son Domenico,
Couperin and Rameau, Bach and Handel.
But the harpsichord was also used to accom
pany instruments on which the melody was
played, especially the violin, the repertoire
for which culminates in the sonata and the
concerto, the two great ideal forms of the
baroque period, whether composed as
church music or as chamber music. Later,
the development of the concerto followed
two paths: that of the concerto grosso (in
which a group of solo instruments is heard in
contradistinction to the whole orchestra, the
tutti), and that of the concerto solo (in which
a single instrument accomplishes impressive
feats of virtuosity).
Arcangelo Corelli was the forerunner of
generations of violinists, but with him were
the greatest exponents of Italian eighteenth-
century instrumental music Vivaldi,
Albinoni, Geminiani, Locatelli, Tartini,
Torelli, Marcello. Hundreds of works for
solo instruments or groups are evidence of
an incomparable vitality which was felt in
every country in Europe, for their compos¬
ers bore the Italian style far beyond the bor¬
ders of Italy.
Meanwhile, new musical forms were
being developed. The symphony and over¬
ture vied with each other in a field teeming
with ideas, and compositions gradually
became increasingly complex and more
heavily orchestrated. The basso continuo
acquired a personality of its own, as several
themes were introduced into the fabric of the
music, which was composed in accordance
with dialectical principles. From then on the
rich, mannered baroque style began to give
way to the elegant and graceful style galant.
ALBERTO BASSO, Italian musicologist, was
president of the Italian Musicology Society from
1973 to 1979. He is the author of several books
including a six-volume history of music and a
biography of Johann Sebastian Bach. He is at
present editing an eight-volume Dizionario encic¬
lopédico universale della música e dei musicisti
("Universal Encyclopaedic Dictionary of Music
and Musicians").
13
