Vuk Stefanovic Karadzic
Profile of a great scholar
The bicentenary of the birth of the Serbian writer and
scholar Vuk Stefanovic Karadzic, who made an out¬
standing contribution to the culture of Yugoslavia, is
being celebrated as an occasion of international sig¬
nificance on 6 November 1987. To honour the memory
of this great figure, we publish below an account of his
life and achievements together with short extracts
from his works.
FATHER of Serbo-Croat literature,
great reformer of the Serbian lan¬
guage and spelling system, founder
of Serbian Romanticism, linguist, eth¬
nographer and historian, Karadzic played a
pioneering role in the cultural history of
Yugoslavia.
Born into a farming family at Trsic (Ser¬
bia) in 1787, he attended local schools but
was largely self-taught. In 1813 he took
refuge in Vienna and lived there, except for
a few short absences, until his death in
1864.
In Vienna he met a Slovene scholar,
Jernej Kopitar, who encouraged him and
introduced him to such leading European
writers and thinkers as Johann Wolfgang
von Goethe, Jacob Grimm, Leopold von
Ranke and Friedrich Engels. Karadzic's
first collection of epic poems, published in
1814, brought him to the attention of an
educated readership. In addition to his
many other activities, he devoted his life to
the collection and publication of works
from the Serbian oral literary tradition,
notably in "Serbian Folk Tales" (1821),
"Serbian Folk Sayings" (1836) and, above
all, the multi-volume "Serbian Epic Poems"
(1814-1866).
His efforts to record and preserve the
treasures of oral literature formed part of
his struggle to gain acceptance for the spo¬
ken language as the language of literary
expression, and to create an alphabet which
would be adapted to Serbian phonetics and
would obey his dictum: "Write as you
speak, read as it is written." Karadzic sim¬
plified the spelling system so that each
sound corresponded to a single letter,
finally devising an alphabet of thirty letters
that is one of the most scientific and logical
in the world today.
32

Preserving the oral heritage
His linguistic works include the first Ser¬
bian grammar which was reviewed by
Goethe and a "Serbian Lexicon" (1818), a
Serbo-Germanic-Latin dictionary which
did full justice to the rich vocabulary of
popular speech. The second edition (1852,
reprinted in 1934) remains a classic
reference work.
The translation of the New Testament
into the popular idiom that Karadzic com¬
pleted in 1847 laid the foundations of the
Serbo-Croat language, which was to
become the common tongue of the Serbs
and the Croats.
Karadzic was a revolutionary figure who
sought to bring about the political and spir¬
itual awakening of his people through
books. As well as his efforts to create a
national language and a new spelling sys¬
tem, he produced a body of historical and
ethnographic works, which, especially in his
"The Serbian Revolution" (1829) and
"Montenegro and the Montenegrins"
(1837), are dominated by his realistic vision
of social relationships and by his sense of
perspective.
During his lifetime Karadzic achieved a
European reputation. In 1823 he was the
guest of Jacob Grimm in Kassel and of
Goethe in Weimar; the same year he
received an honorary doctorate from the
University of Jena. In 1824 he became a
member of the Turin Society for Antiquities
and, in 1825, of the Göttingen Learned
Society. In 1842 he was awarded a gold
medal for his scholarship and literary
achievements by the Russian Academy of
Sciences. He became a corresponding
member of the Viennese Academy in 1848,
the Berlin Academy in 1850 and the St.
Petersburg Academy in 1851. He was
also a corresponding member of the Paris-
based African League for Combat Against
Slavery.
Karadzic owes his greatness not only to
the originality of his ideas and thé tenacity
with which he expressed them, but also to
the links he made between the traditions of
his people and international culture: as a
thinker he made a major contribution to the
spiritual unity of mankind.
Article and selection have been compiled from material
provided by Marija Biäof, author of Vuk Stefanovic"
Karadiié Bicentenary 1787-1987, a quadrilingual
(English, French, German and Russian) brochure pub¬
lished in Belgrade
Article and selection have been compiled from material
provided by Marija BiSof, author of Vuk Stefanovié
KaradzióBicentenary 1787-1987, a quadrilingual
(English, French, German and Russian) brochure pub¬
lished In Belgrade
Yugoslav postcard showing the thirty let¬
ters of the Serbian alphabet as devised by
Karadzió, in upper and lower case. The six
boxed letters are those which he added to
correspond to sounds In the spoken lan¬
guage which formerly had no graphic
equivalent. His signature appears below
the alphabet.
Write as you speak, read as it is written.
(Preface to the "Serbian Grammar", 1814)
As long as the spoken word of the people is
pure and unaltered, literary language
should not be distinct from the language of
the people. Why should it be different?
Don't we see people in our time discarding
the literary language of the past in order to
write in the language of the people as it is
today? ... Please God that we should be
able to write books in the way that the peo¬
ple speak ...
(Correspondence, 1845)
I am convinced that my efforts and my task
will be appreciated by all our writers and
authors who love the language of the people
and respect it as the most precious posses¬
sion of the people, for whom they wish hap¬
piness and progress. On the other hand, I
have not tried to please those who, while
speaking the Serbian language, heap abuse
on it and claim that it is worthless and no
more than a tainted language, the speech of
swineherds and horse-traders.
The greatest outcry will be raised against
the spelling system. But here too I hope that
all our writers will be on my side, all those
who are familiar with language and writing.
And they will see that this is the most appro¬
priate way to write the Serbian language.
(Preface to the "Serbian Lexicon'.', 1818)
A man with nothing else to do could easily
devote his whole life to bringing together all
our folksongs, our stories, our tales, our
riddles, our customs and our words. And
when he came to think he had finished the
task, he would see that he was only just
starting. ... These works of folk art must be
collected before they are altered or even
stifled by new, more "enlightened"
fashions.
Songs, riddles, folktales, these are a highly
accomplished form of popular literature, to
which there is nothing to add. They should
simply be collected and their purity should
be scrupulously respected. And when tran¬
scribing these tales, it is certainly advisable
to think of the construction of the words
(not, I repeat, according to one's own taste,
but following the genius of the Serbian lan¬
guage) so as to avoid any form of excess,
and to'succeed in such a way that cultivated
souls can read them and uneducated folk
can listen to them ...
(Preface to "Serbian Folk Tales", 1821)
Our folksongs can all be divided into epic
poems, sung to the accompaniment of the
guzla, and women's songs, sung by women
and girls but also by men, most often youths
singing in unison. More than the women's
songs, the epic poems are intended for a
public, hence the utmost importance of
their text.
(Preface to "Serbian Epic Poems", 1824)
Our Serbian folksongs do not come from
parchment manuscripts, they were col¬
lected from the warm lips of the people;
they are not old because they have never yet
been recorded in writing, but they will cer¬
tainly live to a ripe old age ...
Jacob Grimm
(Review of the third volume of "Serbian Epic
Poems", 1823)
Mother and daughter
Aie, aie, aie, mother, a monk is wakening
me,
He is wakening me, kissing my eyelids!
Must I kiss him, oh my mother?
Kiss, my daughter, do not be damned !
When your mother was the same age ,
Before dawn, she had embraced nine,
And your father, he was the tenth,
And she had woven three lengths ofcarpet!
(Traditional poem collected by Karadzic and
published in "The Red Duke" [erotic folk
poems], Prosveta publishers, Belgrade, 1979)
A 5 B r 4 "B E >K 3 H
a 6 b r a h e hî 3 h
m J K Jl Jb M H H) o n p
! J K ./I Jb M H H, o n p
1 C T
E
lt\ y 4> x u h ¥ in
ÎË c m Ji
c
ra
Z
>
v>
y $ x it q V UI.
>
33
