pluralistic approach to healing
Complementary medicine by Stephen Fulder
COMPLEMENTARY medicine, also
called natural, alternative, tradi¬
tional or unconventional medicine,
encompasses a variety of therapeutic sys¬
tems which are linked by the fact that they
are different from conventional medicine.
The central therapies are acupuncture, chi¬
ropractic, healing, herbalism, homeopathy,
hypnotherapy, therapeutic massage,
naturopathy and osteopathy. Other systems
may be developed in theory and practice
but are not so well known in Western coun¬
tries, such as anthroposophical1 or Ayur¬
vedic medicine.
In all these cases there is a diagnostic
procedure, a theory to account for the
origin, development and cure of sickness,
an established body of practical knowledge,
and a professional grouping of practi¬
tioners. The theory and practice may be far
removed from that of conventional medi¬
cine for example acupuncture is partly
based on concepts of circulating vital
energy, and of ying/yang. Nevertheless
these therapies can exist in partnership
with, rather than competition with, con¬
ventional medicine. Therefore we prefer
the term "complementary" rather than
"alternative", "natural" or "unconven¬
tional" medicine.
Despite their diversity, theories of com¬
plementary medicine are united by certain
common features. One important common
element is that they encourage and elicit
self-healing. Homeopathy uses minute
doses of plants that mimic the symptoms of
the disease, while herbalism utilizes large
doses of other plants to undermine the
symptoms. Yet both homeopathic and
herbal remedies are given specifically to
stimulate natural recuperative processes.
Symptoms do not have the same meaning
in complementary medicine as they do in
conventional medicine. They are not con¬
sidered as untoward signs that must be
1. Anthroposophy : philosophy based on the premise
that the human intellect has the capacity to contact
spiritual worlds. Editor.
attacked when they appear, but as guides to
underlying imbalances, vulnerabilities and
idiosyncrasies, and as monitors of progress
towards health. To take one example, a
traditional acupuncturist will examine, with
considerable sensitivity, the skin colour,
voice, tongue, eyes, pains and the flow
characteristics of blood within several
pulses. From these data he reads the inte¬
rior organ dysfunctions of the patient. As he
strives to correct these dysfunctions, he
watches how the signs and symptoms
change as a result of the treatment to make
sure he is on the right track.
The patient is treated as an individual.
There is little interest in statistical or popu¬
lation norms; instead the individual is his or
her own point of reference. A weak pulse
may, for example, be quite normal in one
constitutional type and a sign of sickness in
another. Health is defined as the optimal
function and longevity of the individual. In
addition, since the whole person, rather
than the disease, is the focus of treatment,
there is no practical or philosophical reason
to erect barriers such as that between mind
and body. Lifestyle, cast of mind, mood,
energy, posture or constitution are all as
relevant diagnostically as the physical signs.
Complementary medicine today is the
descendant of traditional and folk medi¬
cine: herbalism descends from shamanism
and folk remedies, chiropractic and
osteopathy from bone setting, homeopathy
from like-cures-like principles, naturopathy
from the Hippocratic tradition.
Curiously, scientific medicine traces its
origins to those same roots, via Galen of
Pergamum in the 2nd century AD.
However, it has diverged over the last 150
years towards a complete, perhaps exagger¬
ated expression of specificity principles.
That is, ill-health consists of a specific set of
symptoms, defined as a specific disease,
which is cured by the precise treatment for
that condition. This is in marked contrast to
the Hippocratism of complementary and
traditional medicine which regards ill-
health as a vulnerability derived from
imbalances within the individual. Complete
cure is only possible by restoring the equi¬
librium crasis with the help of self-
healing capacities the vix medicatrix
naturae.
The specificity approach achieved com¬
plete dominance during the last century,
after a bitter struggle. The traditionalists
called the new practitioners quacks, and
modern medicine replied by ridiculing the
traditionalists' arcane doctrines and
witches' brews. The outcome was sealed
with the help of new drugs extracted, iron¬
ically, from the plants of the herbalists. The
spectacular results of aspirin, digitalis,
quinine and opium left the traditionalists
with their principles but no patients. The
traditional systems were effectively out¬
lawed all over the modern world. A
resurgence of interest only began in the
1960s, mainly through the realization that
modern medicine bears a heavy cost in
resources and side effects. In addition it
became clear that many chronic conditions
that are related to lifestyle, such as back
pain or atherosclerosis, could yield to com¬
plementary medicine's gentler, more inte¬
grated, approach. .
CONTINUED ON PAGE 19
Moxa, or moxibusticn, is a traditional Chinese
therapy in which small cones of dried plant
material are burned on specific points of the
body (generally the same as those used in acu¬
puncture). The term "moxa" is derived from the
name of the wormwood plant most frequently
used, Artemisia moxa. Right, a Tibetan doctor
applies a variant of moxa treatment in which the
heat is transmitted to the patient's skin by a
needle. The circle ol card is used to collect the
ashes.
1fi


Over 3,000 years old, Ayurveda ("knowledge of
long life") is a Hindu medical system which
relies largely on plant medication. The ancient
Ayurvedic medical shastras (manuals) written or
engraved on palm leaves and pieces of bamboo
wood, above, have been handed down from gen¬
eration to generation. This form of traditional
medicine is widespread in India where there are
some 400,000 practitioners and over 200 Ayur¬
vedic hospitals.
j»«->-
". ..'.'.'.
-*&?>**
The removal of a ránula, a cystic tumour beneath
the tongue, is depicted in this illustration from a
Turkish surgical manuscript by Sharaf ed-DIn
(1465).
£äfWWfc
^
Left, two Nigerian women who are recognized in
their community as traditional healers. The
woman on the right specializes In problems rel¬
ated to childbirth.
18

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 16
Why do people go to complementary
practitioners? For ideological reasons?
Because of advertising? Or only as a result
of disappointments elsewhere? A survey
conducted in the Netherlands in 1980 found
that 40 per cent of the patients of comple¬
mentary practitioners sought them as a
result of prior inadequate or unsuccessful
treatment of the same ailment by doctors.
This was confirmed by a government-spon¬
sored study in Australia which showed that
necessity, not belief, brought people to
unorthodox clinics.
Furthermore, complementary medicine
does not fill gaps left by modern medicine.
Several studies have indicated the opposite,
that complementary medicine flourishes in
areas that are especially well served medi¬
cally. This supports the notion that it
provides another alternative in cases where
conventional medicine has failed. The
patients, too, tend to be slightly more edu¬
cated and slightly better off than the
national average.
If that is the case, the kind of health prob¬
lems that arrive at the door of the comple¬
mentary practitioner might be expected to
be the failures of conventional medicine, an
indication of the potential partnership
between the conventional and complemen¬
tary systems. The failure areas of con¬
ventional medicine are well known. They
are usually chronic conditions, often mus¬
culoskeletal problems connected to life¬
style, such as back pain and arthritis,
chronic pain such as migraine or neuralgia,
chronic infections such as bronchitis, ulceri-
tive colitis, urethritis, allergic conditions,
fatigue, insomnia and debility, cardiovascu¬
lar problems and stress-related disorders.
These conditions are generally managed
rather than cured, as in the administration
of cortisone for allergies and painkillers for
back pain.
Evaluative studies on complementary
medicine have shown that it is at least as
successful as conventional medicine in the
short-term treatment of conditions it com¬
monly treats. The few studies on the long-
term management of such conditions usu¬
ally put complementary medicine on top.
Many studies show, for example, that acu¬
puncture or hypnosis are as effective as
painkillers in pain relief and can be more
effective in the long term. A much-dis¬
cussed trial conducted in 1980 at the
Glasgow Royal Infirmary (U.K.) reported
that homeopathy is as successful as con¬
ventional drugs in the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis.
At the same time, polls of patients have
reported remarkable satisfaction with com¬
plementary medicine. The Netherlands,
Australian and other studies report that
more than 80 per cent of patients would
recommend complementary treatment to
others. Those who were not happy with
their complementary practitioner were
found to be uncured but unharmed, while
those dissatisfied with their doctor were
uncured but not necessarily unharmed.
An incidental boon has been gained from
research into complementary medicine:
new sources of ideas and principles have
emerged. Study of analgesia by acupunc¬
ture, for example, has brought a new under
standing of the mechanisms of pain control.
A number of new drug entities are being
introduced as a result of research into tradi¬
tional folk remedies. Indeed it has been
calculated that if traditional practitioners
are consulted, as opposed to random
screening, the rate of discovery of phar¬
macologically-active ingredients is
increased from much less than 1 per cent to
40 per cent.
The development of complementary
medicine poses questions to government
authorities and the entire medical establish¬
ment. How can traditional acupuncture be
incorporated into a medical insurance
scheme? How can laymen practise
alongside medical professionals? How can
the different medical specialities communi¬
cate with one another when their language,
concepts and practices are so widely dif¬
ferent? It is quite clear that if complemen¬
tary medicine is to be absorbed into the
mainstream of medical care some funda¬
mental reappraisals will be necessary. If it is
not to be so absorbed, complementary med¬
icine will simply continue to receive more
patients from the mainstream.
The major requirement is for education.
If trainee doctors could learn in medical
schools what complementary medicine is,
and what it can do, they would learn how to
co-operate with its practitioners, as in
China and indeed in the USSR where a
restricted form of acupuncture teaching is
available in medical schools. At the same
time practitioners of complementary medi¬
cine should be helped to improve their bio¬
medical knowledge, an area of acknowl¬
edged weakness today.
The wise employment of complementary
medicine would save much unnecessary use
of medical resources and hospital beds. The
preventive approach could be used to catch
conditions before expensive and dangerous
medical intervention was needed. If hyper¬
tension and arteriosclerosis were treated by
diet, herbs and techniques of relaxation,
coronary intensive care units and the heart
surgeons might be put out of business.
A more preventive attitude would be
required throughout the medical establish¬
ment. Medical care would shift away from
technology-intensive centres into the com¬
munity. Treatment would be more personal
as long-term therapeutic relationships
would be built up between patient and
therapist. Medical insurance would be
required to broaden its definitions of treat¬
ment and take a longer-term view. Even the
hospitals would change their character.
Besides providing last-resort care, which
will always be necessary, they could become
teaching centres. As well as teaching doc¬
tors, as they do now, there is no reason why
they could not teach patients too.
STEPHEN FULDER, of the United Kingdom, isa
biochemist and specialist in cellular ageing. A
former teacher at Chelsea College, London Uni¬
versity, he is the author of many articles and
books, including The Handbook of Complemen¬
tary Medicine (1985). A longer version of this
article has appeared in Unesco's international
quarterly Impact of Science on Society (No. 143,
1986).
Shavings from the Garcinia punctata tree,
above, are used in a traditional prescription for
diarrhoea among certain Zairean peoples which
possess a profound knowledge of the medicinal
plants of the tropical forest.
The Barbary fig (Opuntia licus-indica), above, is
a cactus which originated in tropical America
and now grows widely in the Mediterranean
Basin. Its fruit is edible and the plant can be
used medicinally. Photo is taken from a book on
the medicinal plants of the Aeolian Islands, pre¬
pared for publication in Italy later this year with
support from Unesco's Man and the Biosphere
(MAB) Programme.
19
