Plant therapy
in the fight
against cancer
by Xing Sishao
IN China, many practitioners of traditional
medicine are making a unique contribu¬
tion to the fight against cancer by combin¬
ing their clinical experience with the heritage
of ancient Chinese medicine. One of them is
Professor Duan Fengwu, Chief of the Tumour
Department of the Beijing Guang'anmen Hos¬
pital, which is affiliated to the China Academy
of Traditional Chinese Medicine.
Professor Duan has treated about 1 0,000
cancer sufferers since his hospital opened its
Tumour Department in 1962. In China, on
average only 29 per cent of patients with
stomach cancer survive for as long as five
years after treatment with Western medicine,
yet the figure stands at 55.23 per cent in the
cases that he has treated.
According to Professor Duan, treatment of
cancer with traditional Chinese medicines can
be traced back as far as the Yin Dynasty (1 2th
century BC). Ai, the current Chinese name for
cancers, appeared for the first time in two
medical works published in the Sung Dynasty
(960-1279), the Weiji Treasure Book and the
Ren House Directory of Medicine. The latter
includes this description: "Ai rises beneath the
skin and reaches deep in the flesh. When
dissected, it looks like the inside of a karst
grotto; small lumps, some blue, protrude like
outward-thrusting eyeballs and each has a tip
sticking out. Their poisonous roots are buried
deep in the body." As a description of malig¬
nant tumours it is very similar to that of modern
Western medicine.
According to Professor Duan, 200 kinds of
traditional Chinese drugs and medicinal herbs
can be used to treat cancer, about 80 of which
are the most commonly used. "We have stud¬
ied some of them in particular," he says, "and
most are effective in checking the growth of
tumours, alleviating clinical symptoms and
stimulating the immune reaction within the
human body, thus extending the life of the
patients.
"Traditional Chinese medicine holds that
though cancer afflicts only a certain part of the
body, it is a disease affecting the whole body.
In treating cancer, therefore, the condition of
the entire body should be taken into consid¬
eration and special attention should be paid to
internal factors when analysing the cause of
the disease. The relationship between
strengthening the patient's constitution and
dispelling the invading pathogenic factors
should be handled properly."
In his long career of treating cancer
patients, Professor Duan attaches great
importance to the harmony of yin and yang1 in
regulating xue (blood) and qi (vital energy). By
using traditional drugs and herbs, he seeks a
restoration of balance between yin and yang
in a patient. After his treatment, many patients
have recovered and a number of serious
cases have even lived on for more than ten
years.
Professor Duan says that ginseng, for
example, functions mainly as a tonic for the
vital energy of the body; it can stop prostration
and replenish the body fluid and it has been
effective in dealing with malfunction of body
organs due to deficiency of vital energy.
"However", he added, "ginseng is not
omnipotent. It must not be abused, otherwise
it harms rather than benefits the health. Two
kinds of extracts from ginseng have been
seen to activate the immune reaction in the
human body. They can enhance pha¬
gocytosis2 and stimulate the growth of anti¬
bodies. Some doctors think that these gin¬
seng extracts can directly destroy cancer cells
or reverse their development."
Professor Duan believes that traditional
Chinese medicine, radiotherapy and chemo¬
therapy all have advantages and disadvan-
Above, pharmacists weigh medicinal herbs at
Beijing's Tong Ren Tang drugstore, which has
specialized in traditional Chinese medicine for
over 300 years.
1. Yin and yang: the two fundamental principles or
forces in the universe, ever opposing and complement¬
ing each other an ancient philosophical concept used
in traditional Chinese medicine to refer to various antith¬
eses in anatomy, physiology, pathology, diagnosis and
treatment, e.g. feminine, interior, cold and hypofunction
being yin, while masculine, exterior, heat and hyper-
function are yang.
2. Phagocytosis: the process by which living cells (pha¬
gocytes) Ingest or engulf other cells, bacteria or viruses,
as a defensive reaction against infection. Editor.
tages in the fight against cancers.
Radiotherapy and chemotherapy have been
very effective in treating some malignant
tumours by killing the cancer cells or by stunt¬
ing their growth, but their biggest drawback is
the indiscrimination with which they destroy
cells. Some patients die of the complications
caused by such treatment instead of the can¬
cer itself. The advantage of traditional Chi¬
nese drugs and medicinal herbs, on the other
hand, is that they have few adverse side-
effects. They can strengthen the patients'
resistance and immunity and summon the
"vital energy" of the whole body to battle
against the disease.
As Professor Duan says: "We should sup¬
plement traditional Chinese medicine with
modern Western medicine. It seems to me
that a combination of these methods may
prove to be the best way to fight cancer. We
are all looking forward to the day when man¬
kind can conquer this fatal disease."
XING SISHAO, of China, is head of the tradi¬
tional Chinese medicine section and associate
senior editorofa Chinesejournal on health. He is
the author of several books, including "Famous
Contemporary Doctors".
20
