A fraction of the pharmaceutical products on the market
would be enough to satisfy human needs



Overdose
©
by Georges Peters
The vast range of pharmaceutical products on
sale in many developed and developing coun¬
tries is not medically justified and helps to
encourage an excessive demand for drugs which
drains the resources of health services.
APPROXIMATELY 90 per cent of
all drugs produced for human use
are manufactured and delivered in
ready-to-use form by the pharmaceutical
industries. Only in exceptional cases are
drugs concocted by pharmacists or healers.
The developing countries, inhabited by 80
per cent of the world's population, consume
from 15 to 20 per cent of the world's phar¬
maceutical output. Drug consumption is
tending to rise more rapidly in these coun¬
tries than in wealthy countries.
On the other hand, the developing world
produces only 10 per cent of all drugs con
sumed, and production is confined to a few
countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Egypt,
India, Mexico and Pakistan. The other
developing countries are obliged to buy all
their drugs from the rich countries and to
spend a substantial portion of their health
budget, or even of their national budget, on
such purchases. Even so, many of them are
still unable to satisfy the most pressing
needs of the majority of their population.
It is thus clear why developing countries
and international organizations should take
an interest in pharmaceutical industries.
These industries developed in the late
21

nineteenth century, usually as divisions of
chemical-manufacturing firms which were
dissatisfied with their position as suppliers
of cheap ingredients for medicines which
were then sold at high prices by the pharma¬
cists. In a bid for some of the profits, they
launched specialized pharmaceutical prod¬
ucts under protected brand names. The link
between the manufacture of pharmaceuti¬
cals and the chemical industry is so impor¬
tant economically that nearly all the drug-
manufacturing industries belong to
chemical-industrial complexes. Only these
chemical-pharmaceutical trusts manufac¬
ture drugs from non-medicinal raw mate¬
rials, and they alone are in a position to
develop new drugs.
Pharmaceutical innovation calls for clini¬
cal and biological research on which the big
manufacturers (which present themselves
as members of a pharmaceutical industry
based pn research) spend an average 9 per
cent of their turnover, approximately 4.5
per cent of the final resale price of their
products. This is less than half the amount
they spend on advertising. Most of the 120
companies which dominate 90 per cent of
the world pharmaceutical market and the 25
multinational corporations which produce
60 per cent of all pharmaceutical products,
belong to this industry. Their average
annual turnover amounts to $750 million.
The manufacture of pharmaceuticals
calls for substantial capital investment.
Because of the automation of manufactur¬
ing processes, the industry creates very few
jobs. Pharmaceutical companies differ from
other businesses primarily in that they man¬
ufacture a product which consumers do not
usually choose themselves but which is
recommended to them directly or indirectly
by a doctor. Moreover, the demand for and
sales of drugs far outstrip needs.
The world market of $200,000 million a
year corresponds to $50 per person per
annum spent on medicines. Less than a
quarter of this amount should suffice to
satisfy all medically justifiable needs. The
remainder is spent in an attempt to treat
symptoms or illnesses which will not res¬
pond to this form of treatment, or to
improve vigour and general health (some¬
thing that no drug will do), or to satisfy a
craving for certain drugs which has been
created by their use in the past. Overcon-
sumption of drugs is particularly wide¬
spread in the affluent countries, where per
capita spending can be as high as $160
per annum (as it is in Switzerland and
France).
All human beings have the same basic
needs with regard to curing or treating an
ailment, relieving a symptom or acquiring
protection against a disease. However, the
drug needs of populations in different
regions of the world can vary, depending on
the incidence of the prevailing diseases. In
developing countries, for example, more
than 30 per cent of deaths are due to infec¬
tious bacterial and viral diseases and to par¬
asitic diseases (which cause 4 per cent of
deaths in the wealthy countries) and could
be avoided by curative drugs. In the rich
countries, more than 60 per cent of deaths
are due to circulatory, respiratory and neu¬
rological diseases and to malignant tumours
(which cause fewer than 30 per cent of
deaths in the developing world): these
patients need symptomatic treatment and
can in some cases be maintained in a satis¬
factory condition by palliatives.
The number of drugs needed to satisfy all
human needs is very small. The Expert
Committees of the World Health Organiza¬
tion (WHO), which since 1977 have drawn
up and revised the Model List of Essential
Drugs, ' have had the task of selecting drugs
which are necessary and sufficient to treat
95 per cent of all diseases and of all human
symptoms susceptible to treatment by
drugs. The 1985 edition of the Model List
names 379 products containing 262 active
substances (in varying forms: tablets,
drops, capsules, etc.). If the aim were to
satisfy 99 per cent instead of 95 per cent of
all needs, the figure would probably rise to
350 substances in 500 commercial forms.
Yet the number of drugs on sale in the
highly developed countries nearly every¬
where exceeds 15,000, containing between
700 and 1,100 active substances.
The difference between the number of
drugs and the number of active substances is
so great because most of the former are
simply different forms or fresh combina-
Western doctors once prepared their own drugs
and then obtained them from apothecaries, the
ancestors of today's pharmacists. Above, detail
from a 16th-century painting shows an apothec¬
ary framed by the brothers St. Cosmas and St.
Damián, Christian doctors of Arab origin who
were martyred around 295 during the reign of the
Roman emperor Diocletian. The modern phar¬
maceutical industry began to develop early this
century, with the production of the first synthetic
drugs. Above right, preparation of vaccine
against poliomyelitis, the major cause of dis¬
ability in developing countries, at the Mérieux
Institute, a French pharmaceutical laboratory.
1. The Expert Committee has defined the word drug as
"any substance in a pharmaceutical product that is used
to modify or explore physiological systems or patholog¬
ical states for the benefit of the recipient".
22

Drugs in medicine
Different categories of drugs can be dis¬
tinguished according to the purpose for
which they are used:
Curative drugs, capable of completely curing
a disease after administration for a specified
time, are basically substances which are toxic
to invading organisms in the body. These are
the antibacterial, antiprotozoan and anti¬
parasitic drugs.
Palliative drugs normalize body functions
during the course of treatment. This category
includes hormone substitutes as well as anti¬
inflammatory, cardiovascular and psycho¬
tropic drugs.
Symptomatic drugs suppress a symptom
(which can be caused by different diseases).
They include the analgesics, antipyretics,
cough suppressors and drugs for diarrhoea.
Prophylactic drugs are in the main vaccines,
but some antibacterials can also be included
in this category.
Diagnostic drugs, such as those used in
radiology, are only used by the doctor.
Placebos. The placebo effect is the positive
therapeutic effect that some patients derive
from a medicament whose active properties
cannot be shown. Placebos constitute a large
proportion of all drugs bought or consumed.
Source: Georges Peters, in Santé, médicaments et
développement, Fondation Liberté Sans Frontières,
Paris, 1987.
tions clearly quite superfluous of the
same active ingredients. Between 250 and
1,500 pharmacologically active substances
(depending on the country) are equally
superfluous. These are substances of doubt¬
ful therapeutic value, "me-too" drugs,2 new
active agents which are more expensive and
hence more profitable, traditional drugs (of
national, colonial or folk origin) or medi¬
cines sold to treat non-existent diseases
invented by the advertising departments of
pharmaceutical manufacturers.
The only hope of satisfying the drug
needs of the people of the developing world
is to limit supplies to a restricted list of
essential drugs, which could be based on the
WHO Model List. This step would curb the
present ruinous outlay from the poor coun¬
tries and also avoid many errors made by
prescribers and consumers, as well as many
side effects, unforeseen incompatibilities
and cases of drug dependence.
In many developing countries with a free
market economy, the "national" list of
essential drugs is enforced only in the
"public sector", where drugs are bought by
2. "Me-too" drugs. Products similar to others already
on the market. Editor.
the State to be distributed free of charge or
sold to the public. On the other hand, most
of the medicines available on the European
or American markets are distributed in the
"private sector" of developing countries
where drug manufacturers can sell every¬
thing that has been registered by trie
authorities and that they can get doctors to
prescribe. Whereas the public sector is sup¬
posed to cater for the needs of the over¬
whelming majority, private medicine is usu¬
ally accessible only to the well-to-do
inhabitants of towns and cities, who repre¬
sent between 1 and 7 per cent of the popula¬
tion. As most drugs are imported and for¬
eign currency spending is limited, the
private sector prevents adequate supplies
from reaching the majority of the popula¬
tion. Furthermore, sick people who receive
medical treatment from the public sector
will tend to suspect that their government is
depriving them of "good" medicines! Full
benefit can therefore be derived from a
restrictive list of essential drugs only if such
a list applies to the private sector as well as
to the public sector.
In order to avoid many errors arising
from the plethora of trade names, and to
prevent the manufacturers of a brand of
drugs from making big profits out of it long
after it has ceased to be protected by patent,
it is also necessary to enforce the use of
International Nonproprietary Names
(INN), or the generic names of drugs, for
both prescription and selling purposes. All
that needs to be done is to stipulate that the
generic names of the active ingredients of
the drugs should be printed clearly and legi¬
bly on the package of each product, even if a
brand name is shown as well.
Many governments of developing coun¬
tries are endeavouring to set up national
pharmaceutical industries in order to
reduce their dependence on the developed
countries. Most of them realize, however,
that the establishment of a pharmaceutical
industry requires heavy capital investment,
that pharmaceutical plants yield returns
only after a relatively long period and that
ultimately they create very few jobs. None
of the developing countries which have
established pharmaceutical industries (with
the possible exception of Brazil and India)
has become truly independent in this field.
The establishment of a national formulation
and packaging industry merely changes the
type of dependence, so that a country
comes to depend on suppliers of chemical
23

BAN
BANNABLE
^\ DRUGS
The World Health Organization has drawn up
guidelines for the quality control of phar¬
maceutical products. In developed countries,
quality control is carried out by highly spe¬
cialized national laboratories. Developing coun¬
tries also need laboratory facilities, above, to
prevent poor-quality drugs from reaching them,
as a result of fraudulent practices, faulty man¬
ufacture, mislabelling, or exposure to high tem¬
perature and humidity.
raw materials, and hence on the chemico-
pharmaceutical industries. In the case of
pharmacologically active substances,
monopolies are often more restrictive than
for ready-to-use drugs.
In order to ensure that the population has
an adequate supply of strictly necessary
essential drugs, the developing countries
will be obliged, for years to come, to import
drugs or raw materials. If they are to avoid
crippling expenditure, these countries must
introduce a list of essential drugs and the
use of International Nonproprietary
Names. They will also have to equip them¬
selves with the means of controlling the
quality of imported drugs and endeavour to
buy them as cheaply as possible by, for
example, issuing international invitations to
tender. Finally, they must educate their
populations to use drugs more rationally,
and ensure that those who issue prescrip¬
tions only do so when they are fully
informed.
The pharmaceutical industries of the
industrialized countries would be well
advised, in the medium and long term, to
support programmes of action for the intro¬
duction and rational use of essential drugs.
Unfortunately, many of them set a priority
on short-term profits and defend the private
sector and protected brand names. These
industries currently make around 8 or 9 per
cent of their turnover in the developing
world. If the developing countries were to
become fully independent, the chemico-
pharmaceutical industrial complexes would
only lose part of this market because they
would continue to supply a proportion of
the raw materials.
The government of a poor country which
is unable to obtain essential drugs on
reasonable terms will have to seek other
solutions. One of these is recourse to tradi¬
tional drugs which call for no expenditure of
foreign currency. These drugs encompass a
vast range of products or plant extracts
whose therapeutic effects have not, as a
rule, been proved, whose composition var¬
ies from place to place and from year to
year, arid whose undesirable effects are still
unknown. Huge investments of capital and
labour are needed to enable a traditional
drug to become one that is medically useful.
If such a movement were to become
widespread, it could mean the end of phar¬
maceutical trading by industrialized coun¬
tries in the developing world. Unfor¬
tunately, it could also extinguish the hopes
of the populations of developing countries
of receiving the medical care and drugs they
really need.
A RATIONAL DRUG POLICY
*0* »W»TMf« tm>u**¡fS COM tac r
VOLUNTARY HEALTH ASSOCIATION OF INDIA
I
©
Poster produced by the Voluntary Health Asso¬
ciation of India
GEORGES PETERS, Swiss university teacher,
is director of the Institute of Pharmacology,
Lausanne University. He is a consultant with the
Swiss Development Agency and with the World
Health Organization. Among his manypublished
works on medicine in developing countries is
Racismes et races (1986; "Racism and races").
24
