Mountain
challenge
IN Hindu mythology, a mountain is the
centre of the universe and the axis of
the world. This mythical golden moun¬
tain, Mount Meru, is the abode of the gods
and the Himalayas are its foothills. It
extends down into the nether regions of the
Earth as far as ¡t reaches up into the heav¬
ens. On Mount Meru, say the Hindu scrip¬
tures, "there are rivers of sweet water run¬
ning, and beautiful golden houses in which
live the spiritual beings, the Deva".
From Fujiyama to Olympus to Sinai,
every high mountain has been looked upon
with awe and reverence by those who live
within its shadow. Indeed, so strong has
been this instinctive sense of the sacred
nature of mountains that even the plains¬
men of Mesopotamia felt the need to con¬
struct artificial mountains, the "ziggurats",
in an attempt to reach upwards to the
gods.
Perhaps this is because each one of us
has his own interior mountain to climb, to
enjoy and to revere. Even today, when men
have stood upon the summit of Mount Ever¬
est, the challenge and the reverence
remain. A mountain must be climbed,
revered and preserved, in the famous
mountaineering phrase, "because it's
there".
Strangely enough, for all our natural
Interest in mountains, there is no standard
geological definition of a mountain. The
most we seem able to say of them is that
mountains are landforms that rise promi¬
nently above their surroundings, generally
having steep slopes, a relatively confined
summit area and considerable local
relief.
View of the ziggurat at Ur (modern Tall
al-Muqayyar), Iraq. These pyramidal, step¬
ped temple towers were a characteristic
feature of the cities of ancient Mesopotamia
from about 2000 BC to 500 BC. They are
thought to have given rise to the story of the
Tower ofBabel.
I -*i _a_I ^~r~^-; V^-
Zi V ;" -4j^-^i
\ ~t -t _r-j-rj
m * ,_-. i I i i. 1 . I...
t- 	1 .±_z^TrZLrz.
27

A Nepalese village in the Himalayas Yet even if only areas above 1,000
metres in altitude are considered to be
mountainous, the mountain regions of the
world are vast in extent.
Some 10 per cent of the world's popula¬
tion actually live in mountainous areas and
approximately 40 per cent or more depend
on mountain resources, whether for miner¬
als, timber, agriculture, water, energy or
recreation.
Because man's impact on mountains is
mainly in rather than above the vegetation
belt, the mountain ecologlst tends to think
of mountains as areas, at all elevations,
where there is significant ecological dif¬
ferentiation in the vertical sense, and where
there are continuous interactions between
the ecological belts at different altitudes,
including, ¡n particular, interactions associ¬
ated with human activities, since man is the
most important factor for change in most
mountain ecosystems.
How great is man's impact on the moun¬
tain regions of the world? For centuries
highlanders have lived ¡n partnership and
equilibrium with nature, creating some of
the most harmonious landscapes in the
world. Today, however, the world ¡s shrink
ing, and from the Alps to the Andes the
pressures of population growth and move¬
ment and the demands of development are
placing this equilibrium in danger. Two
MAB research studies have shown how this
has come about.
For many centuries, human habitation in
the central Andes was concentrated mainly
in the altiplanos, or high plateaux, with set¬
tlements spanning the range from isolated
rural communities to large urban centres.
The adjacent downslope areas were more
sparsely settled, particularly the tropical
forest areas In the lowlands adjoining the
Andes. During this century, and especially
since the 1950s, there have been great
movements of population to the urban
areas in the mountains, to the lower altitude
areas and, above all, to the coastal towns
and cities.
Emigration from the highland areas
results in part from growing population
pressure on a limited resource base and in
part from a real or expected better quality of
life ¡n other areas. For a variety of social and
political reasons the patterns of land exploi¬
tation established in the altiplanos after the
Spanish conquest remained static and,
28

bacterial, viral, parasitic and microbial^
infections against which they have no*
natural immunity.
In the Alps, population movement has
been in two directions. The traditional
mountain populations are abandoning
some of the higher altitude areas, while
adjacent lower areas are becoming com¬
paratively crowded. But the main cau.se for
concern is the transformation of what was
formerly a relatively stable agricultural and
pastoral system, due to seasonal inflows of
people from outside the area on such a vast
scale that the carrying capacity of these
areas may well be exceeded.
These Inflows are made up of summer
and winter tourists and weekend visitors
from the densely populated neighbouring
regions. To these must be added owners
of second homes, who often become per¬
manent residents upon retirement. Many
traditional villages, Alpine pasturelands
and, indeed, whole valleys can no longer
meet the demands of this additional popu¬
lation for avalanche-safe building land,
water, roads, energy supplies, ski-lifts
and ski-runs.
Agriculture, too, is very much affected
not only in tourist areas but throughout the
Alpine region. New attitudes towards agri¬
cultural work and rural life are as important
as the Increasingly marginal profitability of
agricultural and pastoral use of steep and
isolated mountain lands in provoking the
abandonment of certain areas or the
appearance of such phenomena as under-
grazing. As fewer and fewer pathways for
the herds remain available, the old practice
of transhumance (the moving of livestock
from winter to summer pastures) is disap¬
pearing in the western Alps. One side effect
of this abandonment of grazing land is that
changes in the vegetation cover create sur¬
faces more conducive to avalanches.
The direct effects of the massive
increase in the number of skiers over the
past fifteen years must also be taken into
account. Aerial photographic surveys have
shown how much the impacting of snow by
thousands of ski descents every winter hin¬
ders the run-off of water in the spring. Vege¬
tation is destroyed by the cutting edges of
skis and it has been found that along the ski
runs the insect population ¡s decimated and
the number of earthworms per square
metre along some trails has been reduced
from 130 to ten.
These are but two examples of the prob¬
lems facing mountain regions throughout
the world as a result of population pressure,
social change and the needs of develop¬
ment. Even the mighty Himalayas are not
untouched. In Nepal, for example,
deforestation and erosion, coupled with an
influx of adventure-seeking tourist-
trekkers, are taking their toll.
To Edward Whymper (1840-1911), the
artist and mountaineer who was the first
man to climb the Matterhorn, an uncllmbed
mountain was "an affront to man's con¬
quest of nature". Today, man's spoliation of
the mountains he has revered for centuries
will, if left unchecked, become the ultimate
affront to nature.
Aboard the famous mountain train from
Cuzco to Machu Picchu, Peru
when faced with rapid population growth,
the capacity of the highland areas to sup¬
port ever-Increasing numbers was soon
stretched to the limit. The result was over¬
use of land, particularly over-grazing, a
decline in productivity and a consequent
increase in emigration, especially among
the younger and more dynamic people.
Migration on the scale experienced in the
Andes over the past two decades has
affected the environment through over-use
in some areas and under-use in others.
Today, for the first time, the down-slope
areas below the altiplanos are being mas¬
sively exploited. Unfortunately, lack of
sound agricultural practice is leading to
accelerated erosion of the soil which not
only affects the productivity of these areas
directly but also has a negative effect on
lowland areas.
Migration is putting serious pressure on
the housing and health services and other
amenities in the urban areas, especially ¡n
the coastal towns and cities to which the
population flow Is greatest. The health
problems are enormous since the altiplano
populations arriving in the humid low alti¬
tude areas are especially vulnerable to
29
