The Mediterranean,
an underwater museum
Between 50 and 100 new sites
located each year
by Anthony J. Parker
8
THE formative cultures of European
history, especially the far-reaching
"Roman Empire, grew up around the
Mediterranean Sea. They were thus in¬
volved with seafaring, fishing and seaborne
commerce from the earliest times. Even in
the seventh millennium BC, finds of obsi¬
dian and fish-bones in prehistoric settle¬
ments in Greece show that the sea was not
an insuperable barrier.
In the classical period, cities such as
Athens or Rome could not have survived
without a regular supply of food and raw
materials from overseas, brought by hun¬
dreds of sailing ships. An observer, gazing
out over the Mediterranean from a cliff or a
mountain top on a summer day some time in
the last two centuries before Christ or the
first two centuries of the Christian era,
would have seen the blue sea dotted with
sails.
The Mediterranean, though effectively
tideless, and enjoying good visibility and
calm weather for much of the summer, can
still hold dangers for sailing ships. There are
many low, sandy coasts which lack naviga¬
tion marks and natural havens; there are
also rocky, mountainous coasts where ships
can be held up by contrary winds, or over¬
whelmed by squalls. Mediterranean cur¬
rents, too, though they are scarcely noticed
by modern, powered ships, are strong
enough, if combined with other hazards, to
place a small sailing ship in danger.
The magnetic compass was unknown to
the classical world: ships navigated the
Mediterranean by looking out for land¬
marks such as mountains, or by watching
the stars at night. A sudden storm could
therefore endanger the ship, not just if it
were to be overwhelmed or made to leak,
but by blotting out the sky or the horizon so
that the ship sailed unawares into danger.
Small wonder, then, that there were
many shipwrecks in classical Antiquity. The
actual total number of ships lost is un¬
known it must run into scores or hundreds
of thousands but the dangers of sailing
(especially outside the best months of the
year) were well known, and are mentioned
by many writers, both Greek and Latin.
Today, almost 1,000 shipwrecks of the clas¬
sical and medieval periods have been disco¬
vered in the Mediterranean and the Black
Sea; nearly all of these have been found by
aqualung divers in the last forty years.
This body of information, which is con¬
tinuing to grow at the rate of between fifty
and a hundred new sites every year, offers
great opportunities to archaeologists and
historians to find out more about the com¬
merce and economy of the ancient world.
There are, of course, plenty of difficulties.
The shipwrecked cargoes which survive for
divers to discover do not, for the most part,
include perishable goods such as corn, tim¬
ber or cloth, which were certainly among
the most important items of trade; not all
wrecks are well preserved; some areas have
not been thoroughly searched; all too many
sites have been inadequately excavated, re¬
corded, studied or published; and many
divers are concerned only with collecting
souvenirs or even making a profit out of
selling their finds.
The special qualities of classical ship¬
wreck sites are double the overall view
and the detailed insight. Since almost no
statistics referring to seaborne trade survive
from Antiquity, the hundreds of lost ships,
even though they are individually very
varied, can supply a kind of statistic. No
master ever chose deliberately to wreck his
ship, destroy his cargo and risk his crew's
lives: shipwrecks are essentially a hapha¬
zard selection from the voyages which were
made, though we do not (and cannot) tell
whether the selection is really a meaningful
sample.
The areas where shipwrecks have been
found is one such statistic. The map on page
9 shows how they have been reported from
most parts of the Mediterranean, but that
the distribution is decidedly uneven. Many
coastal areas, and most of the deep sea,
have no wrecks at all; conversely, some
areas, such as the south of France, which
has one-fifth of all recorded sites, bulk dis¬
proportionately large because diving is
popular in this area, there is a State under¬
water archaeology service, and most of the
known sites have been published.
Another statistic which can be derived
from the shipwreck reports is the periods at
which voyages were most frequent. The
great majority of known Mediterranean
shipwrecks date from the Hellenistic and
early Roman Empire periods. Knowledge
HP
of prehistory, and even of the colonizing
and archaic centuries of Greek and Phoeni¬
cian navigation, remains surprisingly un¬
documented. On the other hand, the statis¬
tics clearly show the revival of Mediterra¬
nean commerce in the sixth century AD. In
the medieval period (after the Arab con¬
quest of the seventh century AD) there
were many changes in seaborne commerce,
and so it is not surprising that wrecks of
these centuries have rarely been reported.
In order to collect general statistics of this
kind, one has to take into account all man¬
ner of wrecks, both well-preserved, where
the ship's cargo and a good part of her hull
lie on the sea-bed much as they came to rest
on the day she sank, and mere scatters of
broken pottery, often ground into tiny
pieces by the waves and mingled with the
remains of other cargoes lost at the same
hazardous spot. Nor are all the published
reports of wrecks of equal value: in fact,
over a quarter of all recorded sites have
been published only in very summary
terms, such as "A Roman wreck two
kilometres out to sea...". Figures and dia¬
grams can reduce this very varied material
to order for the historian, but there can be
no doubt that it is well-preserved and fully-
excavated wrecks that with their grouping
of cargo, nautical equipment, personal pos-
CONTINUED PAGE 10

Surveying the site of a 4th-century-AD
Roman wreck in the Mediterranean
Ancient shipwrecks in the Mediterranean and the Black Sea
0° 1tf 20" 30" tc
I '-V->
^.-/ L>^
***~i îÏ -gfeti:.
A< y^ l^T ^
X p+!!* \ - ? - ^
~1- 4** L\ * TK, - Í \
%*' S * ^-l^ y ^u 7
JP o- . /*» I f^' ea Vf -40"
! *^ÏT ti .\>...^ kv l~&
/I"* Sitó- BSI "^
* r^« iL? *1^¿V"^
! ^^^ ¿/" -C' ' .AT* e^. ;-^vfe^/>,.-^'
ï i-- átï5 Í^*3
.£- ' zfc t -¿ . .;
®
>
NUMBER OF SHIPWRECKS
1
2-4
5-12
0 13-24
£ 25-66
^x
3 ^"""^ ''"""'"^L* » - 5Î
3
C ~^^^ # ^^\S-«>t
3 lrf
es i i
ti
© 1 '^2L ir
§
3
' ' 0" 	 10" 2D" 30" ¿ff

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 8
sessions and hull timbers offer real gains to
archaeology.
The people and objects on board a ship
make up a very special group in any society,
but we rarely have similar opportunities on
land to catch a glimpse of people and arte¬
facts frozen in the midst of their daily life.
This "time capsule" aspect of ancient ship¬
wrecks never fails to enthral divers, as
weed, encrustation and sand are delicately
stripped from the underlying deposits. Just
one example could be cited the Byzantine
wreck of Yassi Ada, excavated by George
Bass and Fred Van Doorninck, where the
captain, Georgios, had meals cooked in a
tiny stone-floored galley in the stern while
his quite small ship sailed on with her cargo
of anise-flavoured wine, slopping about in a
job lot of second-hand jars. One could
name many more details, and many other
wrecks, which together make up a vivid and
ever-growing tapestry of life in the ancient
world.
Gathering the threads of this tapestry,
however, involves more than merely diving
and collecting artefacts. Wreck-sites can
only be understood if they are meticulously
excavated, fully recorded on site, if the
finds are carefully catalogued and con¬
served, and most important of all if
enough time, effort and money are spent on
making a thorough study of every aspect of
the site. The Yassi Ada wreck is one of a
mere handful of excavated wrecks which
have been anything like properly studied
and published.
In the Mediterranean, as elsewhere,
wrecks are threatened with destruction
from commercial development and casual
looting. Portable artefacts such as amphor-
Datum 2
Î0
I
10
Approximate position
of looted concretion _
+ Datum 1
t « t i L r
Scale in metre»
+
Test pit
Amphoras salvaged m 1981
(approximate positions)
* « 3m x 2m »xcavation frame
Wood
as are hard to protect by legislation and
policing, and often the only way to save, a
site from destruction is to excavate it as
soon as possible.
There are some wrecks, however, which
are easier to protect, at least from casual
depredation, and they are also often spec¬
tacular sites on which to dive. These are the
remains of marble and building stone car¬
goes. At Rome the demand for fine stone
with which to construct or finish off build¬
ings had to be met by importing marble and
granite from Greece, Turkey, Egypt and
other distant parts of the Empire. Natural¬
ly, some stone-carrying ships failed to reach
their destination, and their cargoes lie lost
and abandoned along the sea-routes of the
Mediterranean. To swim under water
among the great blocks of stone is an aes¬
thetic and an evocative experience.
Let us hope that these sites can be left as
they are, with some protected status and
with a guardian boatman in charge, to serve
as exciting and instructive underwater
monuments which tourists (with aqualungs,
snorkels or even glass-bottomed buckets)
can view, just as (in another dimension)
they might visit the Colosseum or the Parth¬
enon on land.
ANTHONY J. PARKER, of the UK, is lecturer in
Roman archaeology at Bristol University. He is
the author of a forthcoming comprehensive re¬
view of pre-16th-century wrecks in the
Mediterranean.
Drawing at left is an example of site-map¬
ping as practiced by underwater
archaeologists. It shows the wreck of a
small Roman merchant ship which ran
aground on the beach of Randello, on the
south coast of Sicily, around AD 300, while
carrying a cargo of sardines preserved in
brine and stored in amphoras. Almost
1,700 years later, in 1982, the wreck was
excavated by a team of archaeologists
from British universities, with the help of
the man who found it, Dort. Giovanni
D'Andrea, and the assistance of the Sici¬
lian authorities. Analysis of fish-bones in
the amphoras revealed that the sardines
had "been processed in a permanent, pro¬
fessional fish-factory", writes Dr. Anthony
Parker. "The clay and shape of the
amphoras point to the Sado estuary of
Portugal as the place where this was done;
in the ruined Roman town of Troia, at the
mouth of the estuary, batteries of fish-
salting tanks can still be seen. The salt¬
pans of the Sado are traditionally re¬
nowned for the fine flavour of their salt,
and a century ago the fishermen of the
area were recorded as using boats and
nets for catching sardines in a way which
is extraordinarily like not only what we
know of Roman fishing in general but also
what can be inferred from the Randello
sardine bones."
