An art ofgilt andpathos BY JULIAN GALLEGO
Above, the monumental baroque façade known
as the Obradoiro, which was added to the
romanesque cathedral of Santiago de Compost-
ela (Spain) in the 18th century. Gothic and
plateresque (Spanish Renaissance) elements are
also found in the cathedral.
IT should be said at the outset that
religion played a fundamental role in the
development of Spanish Baroque. We
shall not go into the question of the meaning
of the term baroque, still less consider
whether, as the Spanish critic Eugenio d'Ors
has claimed, it is a cultural constant, recur¬
ring throughout the history of art in dif¬
ferent periods and forms, in alternation with
classicism.
In his book Principles of Art History, the
Swiss art historian Heinrich Wölfflin
broadly defined "classical" and "baroque" as
static and changing forms of art respectively.
In another influential book, Baroque, the
Art of the Counter-Reformation, by Werner
Weisbach, the Baroque is seen as a passio¬
nate reaction against Renaissance paganism.
Some specialists have recently suggested
that there is an intermediate style known as
Mannerism, which did not commit the
rhythmic and decorative excesses of the
Baroque but did reject the balance of the
Renaissance in an endeavour to achieve
heightened emotional effects (the most
renowned example of this style is perhaps
Michelangelo's LastJudgment, in the Sistine
Chapel, Rome). Some scholars consider that
Mannerism is the true art of the Counter-
Reformation, and the Spanish critic José
Camón Aznar has suggested that the term
"mannerist" should be replaced by "tren-
tine" (after the Council of Trent, which cod¬
ified the principles of the Counter-Reforma¬
tion).
The monastery of San Lorenzo del
Escorial, one of the outstanding monuments
of Spanish architecture, is an example of this
style. It was built near Madrid between 1563
and 1584 on the orders of Philip II. Its archi¬
tects were Juan Bautista de Toledo and Juan
de Herrera, the latter of whom gave his name
to the "herrcran style". Characterized by
austerity, clarity of line and volume, and an
attachment to regular, geometrical forms,
the style of the Escorial was to influence the
development of Spanish architecture
throughout most of the seventeenth century,
and remained a model until it was supplanted
in the eighteenth century by the highly orna¬
mental "churriguercsque" style, which took .
its name from that of a family of architects,
the Churrigueras.
Most ecclesiastical buildings in the Span¬
ish baroque style were built to rectilinear
plans until well into the eighteenth century,
and innovations were confined to ornamen¬
tation. Many churches were built to a plan
derived from that of II Gcsù in Rome, the
mother church of the Society ofJ esus, which
had been founded by the Spaniard Ignatius
Loyola. The plan of II Gcsù is cruciform,
and there is a dome above the crossing of the
transepts and the nave. On each side of the
14

nave there is a row of chapels. There are also
examples of vast oblong churches, whose
architectural sobriety contrasts with their
abundant, showy decoration, in wood and
plaster, sometimes stone and metal. Iron¬
work is rich and abundant, and the chapels
usually have wrought-iron gates. The deco¬
ration of the upper part of the church may
take the form of stalactite-like shapes and
other ornamental relief carvings of the type
described technically as "Grotesque". In
some cases these are vestiges of the mudejar
style of Muslim Spain (al-Andalus) which
lasted from the eighth century until the end
of the fifteenth century.
The lower part of the walls is often cov¬
ered with altarpieces in the form of a tri¬
umphal arch with richly decorated columns
and pediments. The largest altarpiece, in the
apse, is a monumental structure which
reaches to the vaults and is usually entirely
covered with gilt and polychrome painting.
In the church of San Esteban in Salamanca is
a massive altarpiece designed by José de
Churriguera (1668-1725). It has six huge
twisted "Solomonic" columns, modelled on
a column in Rome which was supposed to
have been part of Solomon's temple; this
form became famous when Bernini used it
for the baldacchino, or ornamental canopy,
over St. Peter's tomb (see photo page 5).
Supports of this kind (which sometimes sup¬
port nothing) bring dynamism to porches,
chapels and shrines, of which there are many
remarkable examples in Andalusia. They
display the influence of the new architecture
from Latin America, for while Spanish mod¬
els were dominant in Spain's American colo¬
nies, they were influenced by the taste and
craftsmanship of the indigenous peoples
(especially in Mexico and Peru) and gave rise
to a colonial Baroque whose luxuriant orna¬
mentation and colours in their turn influ¬
enced the Baroque of metropolitan Spain.
The great Spanish court architect was
Pedro de Ribera (c. 1683-1 742), whose work
showed a pronounced taste for the theatri¬
cal. As supports he used "estípites", highly
decorated pilasters of irregular shape, which
had been introduced into Madrid architect¬
ure by José Ximénez Donoso (1628-1690).
Thus, although the Bourbons succeeded the
House of Austria as rulers of Spain, the clas¬
sical baroque style of Versailles was not
adopted at the Spanish court until the royal
palace in the Alcazar (the style of which was
more or less herreran) was destroyed by fire
in 1734 and was replaced by the Palacio de
Oriente, the work of the Italian architects
Filippo Juvarra and Giovan Sacchetti, in
which there is less typically baroque orna¬
mentation. The outstanding example of this
transition to classicism is the architect Ven-
Right, the Baptism of Christ by El Greco (1541-
1614), the great Cretan artist who settled in
Toledo. Baroque sensibility is apparent in the
dramatic upward movement and bold elonga¬
tion ofnaturalforms characteristic ofEl Greco 's
late works.

tura Rodríguez (1717-1785), who
redesigned the Paseo del Prado, which made
Madrid one of the great European capi¬
tals.
In Andalusia, the vitality of the Baroque
left its mark on churches, monasteries and
convents, and palaces, in which fantasy and
elegance are combined in the use of multi¬
coloured materials such as brick, various
kinds of stone, glazed tiles, carved wood,
forged iron-work, shutters and stucco. Of
special interest are tall, decorated bell-tow¬
ers such as that at Ecija, and elegant bell-
gables, examples of which are found in
Seville and Cadiz. Inside the highly deco¬
rated churches there is often a window at a
certain height in the altarpiece, through
which can be seen a high chapel or niche
where a holy image is presented for worship.
Most of the external decoration was in por¬
ches and cornices; walls were left as
unadorned brick or stone, or were regularly
whitewashed to offer a striking contrast with
the deep blue of the sky.
In Spanish towns and cities a labyrinth of
medieval streets often leads to magnificent
church porches or to a plaza mayor, one of
the great squares which, throughout the
peninsula, are the focal point of civic life and
festivities. The churrigueresque great square
in Salamanca is a notable example. Some of
these squares are veritable museums of dif¬
ferent architectural periods and styles,
brought together and unified by baroque
urban planning. One example can be seen at
Santiago de Compostela, where the cathe¬
dral, which was given the monumental
The monastery ofSan Lorenzo delEscorial, built
near Madrid between 1563 and 1584 on the
orders ofPhilip II, provided a model for much
17th-century Spanish architecture. In the next
century the influence of its austere classicism
gave way to the highly ornate baroque churri¬
gueresque style. Below, the Patio of the Kings,
with the façade, a tower and the dome of the
monastery church.
baroque façade known as El Obradoiro by
Fernando Casas y Novoa in the eighteenth
century, is an extraordinary amalgam of
romanesque, Gothic, plateresque and classi¬
cal styles.
Through the combined effect of sculpture
and architecture, churches became sacred
theatres opening on to the splendid pro¬
cessions that took place outside. Wood carv¬
ing was the principal form of sculpture,
together with clothed polychrome statues
which were intended to create a lifelike
effect. The seventeenth-century school of
Valladolid, one of the masters of which was
Gregorio Fernández, produced sober, natu¬
ralistic works, full of intense emotion. The
people were thus helped to relive Christ's
Passion and death in the Holy Week pro¬
cessions. The Andalusian school was more
expansive and exuberant. Its polychromes
are brighter, and are combined with rich
materials. In Seville, Juan Martínez Mon¬
tañés (1568-1649) and Juan de Mesa (1583-
1627) were noted for the brilliant colours
and expressive gestures of their works, and
in Granada Alonso Cano (1601-1667),
Pedro de Mena (1628-1688) and José de
Mora (1642-1724) painted works of great
poignancy. The subjects most frequently
treated are scenes from the childhood and
Passion of Christ and the motherhood and
sorrow of the Virgin Mary.
The eighteenth century saw a trend
towards greater movement and elegance and
more brilliant colours, both in the decora¬
tion of wood (covered with gold leaf, which
was covered in its turn with oil-painted
embellishments), and in the clothing of stat¬
ues with embroidered garments. To
heighten the illusion that they were real and
to intensify the sense of drama, statues were
fitted out with eyes of crystal, artificial eye¬
lashes, and hair. Pedro Roldan (1624-1700)
and his daughter Luisa, "La Roldana" (1 656-
1704), introduced the new style to Seville,
carving widely-admired statues such as that
of the Virgin of Macarena. Smaller statues
The baroqueperiod in Spanishpainting came to
an end with Juan de Valdés Leal (1622-1690),
whose works are charged with tension and dra¬
ma. Above, Valdés Leal's The Wedding at
Canaan, now in the Louvre Museum, Paris.
were executed in terra-cotta, a technique
employed with great elegance by José
Risueño of Granada (1 665- 1 757). In Murcia,
Francisco Salzillo (1707-1781), an artist of
Neapolitan descent, was renowned both for
his Nativity figures and for groups of elegant
and expressive sculptures which could be
carried in the Easter procession.
The baroque period is the Golden Age of
Spanish painting. The Andalusian school,
which was naturalistic in the Italian style,
emerged at the beginning of the seventeenth
century with Pacheco and Herrera, and
filled the churches with huge canvasses. The
successors of El Greco (1541-1614) worked
in Toledo. They did not reach the ecstatic
mannerist heights of the Cretan master,
whose last works, in their depiction of ver¬
tiginous upward movement, verged on the
Baroque. Francisco de Zurbarán (1598-
1664), from Extremadura, painted pictures
for altars and cloisters that were imposing in
their archaic sobriety, their tactile and
almost architectural effects, and their pious
gravity.
Italian influence can be seen in the painters
of the Valencian school, who were in con¬
stant contact by sea with Naples. Outstand¬
ing among them are Francisco Ribalta (1551-
1628) and especially José de Ribera, known
as "el Españólelo" (1591-1652), who,
though he went to live in Naples and died
there, influenced painters all over Spain by
the powerful realism and beautiful colours
that were the hallmark of his work. He sent
his striking paintings of saints and martyrs
back to Spain. His example was followed in
the next generation by a pupil of Pacheco,
Diego Velazquez (1599-1660), who became
16

painter to King Philip IV. In paintings such
as "The Maids of Honour" and "The Spin¬
ners", he displayed a technical skill and a
conception of atmosphere and light that
were completely new and difficult to match,
although his successors Mazo, Carreño,
Rizi and Claudio Coello are worthy repre¬
sentatives of the School of Madrid which he
founded. The artist who most nearly
approached him was his friend the sculptor
Alonso Cano, who was also an excellent
painter and architect. Both these baroque
painters shunned exaggerated attitudes and
dynamic movement in favour of serene, clas¬
sical perfection, although there is no lack of
energy in the play of light and the boldness
of the brushwork.
Two Andalusian artists of genius brought
to an end the great period of Spanish baroque
painting: Bartolomé Esteban Murillo (1617-
1682) in Seville, and Juan de Valdés Leal
(1622-1690) in Córdoba. These men were
near-contemporaries but differed totally in
their approach. Murillo had a natural grace
that had a wide appeal. He wanted to make
the sacred relevant to his own day; and he
had exceptional technical powers, although
his works convey an impression of sim¬
plicity. This was the antithesis of the ten¬
sions, gesticulations, and exaggerated move¬
ments of Valdés Leal, which could,
however, lead to outstanding results in such
paintings as The Chariot of Elias, in the
monastery of the Carmelitas Calzados at
Córdoba, a work in which he approaches the
Romanticism of Delacroix.
JULIAN GALLEGO, Spanish historian and art
critic, is a professor at the Complutense University
of Madrid. He is an elected member of the San
Fernando Academy ofFine Arts, Madrid, a corres¬
ponding member of the Hispanic Society ofAmer¬
ica, New York, and a member ofthe International
Association ofArt Critics. His many publications
include Visión y símbolos en la pintura española
del siglo de oro ("Vision and Symbols in Spanish
Painting of the Golden Age"), Diego Velazquez,
and studies on Francisco de Goya and on the
history of art.
The last phase ofSpanish baroque architecture,
known as churrigueresque, is characterized by
the use ofspiralling forms and ornamentation of
a lavishness only surpassed in Latin America.
The huge altarpiece by José de Churriguera in
the Dominican church of San Esteban, Sala¬
manca (above), is typical of this ornamental
style.
Baroque polychrome sculptures of scenes from
Christ's Passion and Crucifixion are found in
many Spanish churches. During Holy Week
processions they are carried through the streets.
Left, a group ofPassion sculpturesfrom Zamora,
a city northwest ofMadrid.
17
