Sculpture, theatre of the sublime
BY FRANÇOIS SOUCHAL
The genius of Bernini, the supreme artist of
baroque Catholicism and the man who made St.
Peter's basilica the prestigious centre of the
papacy in Rome, was expressed with thegreatest
intensity in his work as a sculptor. Above left,
The Ecstasy of St. Theresa (1644-1652) in the
Cornaro chapel in the church of Santa Maria
della Vittoria, Rome, a dramaticportrayalofthe
mystic rapture of a 16th-century Spanish nun.
Bernini sought above all to express movement in
sculpture, often with a dynamism which infused
religious fervour even into works on mytholo¬
gical themes such as Apollo and Daphne (1622-
1625) in the museum of the Villa Borghese,
Rome (above right).
PROJECTING matter into space,
delimiting its presence there, the
sculptor's art is both defiant and sym¬
bolic. Drawing its vitality from a constant
state of tension with the architecture that
provides both its frame and its support, it has
to assert its identity within its environment,
and derives from this necessity a measure of
its dynamism and its dignity. Essentially,
primordially, an act of artistic creation,
sculpture also bears a message: its image of a
divinity, a sovereign or simply of a man is
never entirely gratuitous.
At the close of the sixteenth century, the
sculptor's unremitting struggle with nature
had led him into an impasse. Michelangelo,
assailed by doubts, left his statues
unfinished. Mannerism turned in on itself,
caught up in convolutions of its own mak¬
ing, a serpent swallowing its own tail. In this
atmosphere of introspection, the only possi¬
ble outcome was escape or asphyxia. West
ern art, as it had so often in the past, rose to
the challenge. Gathering new strength in the
process, it would give consummate expres¬
sion to the civilization that emerged from the
great conflicts of the sixteenth century.
Although this civilization was restless and
precariously balanced, it lasted for two hun¬
dred years.
It would be absurd, spurious even, to
attempt to list in order of importance the
different modes of artistic expression that
characterized this baroque civilization.
However, its great master was unquestiona¬
bly the sculptor Gian Lorenzo Bernini
(1598-1680), an artist who was perhaps
unsurpassed in the skill with which he
instilled living movement and the force of
illusion into his works. The personality of
Bernini is so overwhelming, so fascinating,
that it is tempting to see him as the person¬
ification of the magic spell that Baroque was
to cast over all Europe for generations.
20

However, it should not be forgotten that
Bernini himself was plagued by contradic¬
tions; he was an ardent, passionate man, but
one who took Antiquity as his yardstick and
never ceased to be haunted by the great
vision of classical harmony. Nor is it possi¬
ble to overlook the forces of opposition
which were inspired by rivals such as the
Italian Alessandro Algardi and the Fleming
François Duquesnoy, and which, through a
concern for simplification have been identi¬
fied with an "anti-Baroque" and con¬
sequently "classical" movement. But sim¬
plification can often lead to a degree of
misapprehension, if not to outright error. It
is not false to say that one of the riches of
sculpture in this period lies in the dialectical
tension between Baroque and classicism. It
is equally true that Baroque was a complex
art whose very complexities undeniably add
to its riches. And perhaps it is an example of
an art form that contained deep within itself,
embedded in an awareness of its own limita¬
tions, the reasons for its eventual decline and
demise, firstly because it is an art that
depends on immediacy, on capturing move¬
ment at the crucial moment, and secondly
because it is a theatrical, self-contemplating
art, and is thus sometimes charged with
almost unbearable emotion the emotion of
pathos rather than tenderness.
Let us look first at Bernini's famous sculp¬
ture The Ecstasy of St. Theresa, which
provoked such sardonic laughter on the part
of the French scholar Charles de Brosses
(1 709-1 777). In this work in a side-chapel of
the Roman church of Sta. Maria della Vit-
toria, Bernini has arrested the flight of the
golden arrow in the split second before it
pierces the heart of the saint and mystic,
capturing, in the same split second, the
expression of ecstasy that illuminates her
features. Meanwhile, at the crucial moment
in this celebration of Christian spirituality,
the members of the Cornaro family, to
whom the chapel belonged and who are por¬
trayed on each side of the composition in
niches that bear a remarkable resemblance to
boxes in an opera-house, gossip away in sub¬
lime indifference to the beatific vision that is
taking place before their eyes.
In its force of contrast, ambiguity, illu¬
sion, illusionism even, this is undoubtedly a
masterpiece of baroque sculpture, simul¬
taneously expressing intense religious fer¬
vour and the worldliness of a society that
lived as if it were on stage and believed that
theatre was more real than life itself. In this
work of art in which stage effects figure
prominently, light falls mysteriously from a
hidden source, softened by coloured filters,
and lends its own glory to the wonderful
group that occupies space with such
assurance and such power (of fascination
rather than persuasion) that the question of
domination by or subjection to its architec¬
tural framework does not arise.
Nor should it be forgotten that Bernini
was also outstanding at the staging of funeral
scenes and spectacular ceremonies. His
sculpture was designed to entrance the spec¬
tator. Even when he takes a subject from
classical mythology, as in the Apollo and
Daphne at the Villa Borghese in Rome, the
transformation (in this case of the nymph's
nubile body into a laurel tree) is designed to
provoke stupefaction, a shudder of amaze¬
ment. This is why the baroque sculptor
found equal fulfilment in depicting Christian
miracles and Ovidian metamorphoses: both
reflected the same appetite for the mar¬
vellous.
The taste for the supernatural was
expressed with particular gusto in the Ger¬
manic world, the home of Bernini's most
faithful disciples and a place where Nature
and reality had already in the past been sub¬
jected to violent distortions in the name of
art. In the church at Rohr, the painter Cos-
mas Damián Asam and his brother, the
sculptor Egid Quirin Asam, boldly staged (a
theatrical term, again!) one of the Christian
mysteries, The Assumption of the Virgin. In
this work executed in plain and polychrome
stucco, the Mother of Christ is suspended in
midair, in defiance of the laws of gravity.
The gestures and facial expressions of the
Apostles gathered around the open tomb
reveal a variety of reactions to this new chal¬
lenge to reason. They are actors in a tragedy,
playing their roles with passionate convic
tion. And we feel, as we do before the works
of Bernini, how these great baroque sculp¬
tures reflect an authentic sincerity and inten¬
sity of faith, a piety that proceeds not from
introspection but rather from a warm and
outgoing desire to communicate, from an
impulse towards charity, from confidence in
God's infinite goodness and in divine grace
(here is the language of mysticism again!).
Baroque sculpture did not, however, limit
itself to the depiction of superbly performed
great moments of sacred theatre. True, it is a
product of religious fervour, and is the last
sacred art worthy of the name in the Chris¬
tian West. But baroque society was also the
reflection of a system of government of a
monarchical system that was more or less
absolute according to the traditions and pat¬
tern of development of each State. And
baroque sculpture, if it served the Church,
The Ganges, a detail of Bernini's Four Rivers
Fountain (1647-1670) which adorns the centre
of the Piazza Navona in Rome. Bernini, Borro-
mini (the architect of the Piazza Navona) and
Guarini were the great trio of Italian baroque
architects.
21

: &m
© Baroque at Versailles
The 17th century in France is often seen as the
age of classicism. The French painters of the
period, including the greatest of them, Nicolas
Poussin, seem to have been largely untouched by
baroque vehemence. Even the Palace of Versail¬
les, the masterpiece of the reign of Louis XTV
designed by Jules Hardouin-Mansart, Louis Le
Vau andAndré Le Nôtre, appears at first to be a
classical work by virtue of its plan, with its
buildings and gardens reflecting a concern for
geometrical balance far removed from baroque
sinuosity. Nevertheless, Charles Le Brun, who
was commissioned to decorate the palace by
Louis XTV in 1674, enriched it with many baro¬
que scenic elements. Above, The Chariot of the
Sun fry Jean-Baptiste Tuby. This gilded bronze
sculpture in the Bassin d'Apollon, in thegardens
of the palace, was executed from a plan by Le
Brun.
also served this monarchical and aristocratic
society, providing a necessary setting for the
ceremonial and liturgy of kings and princes.
On the façades of palaces, on the walls of
reception rooms, lining the paths that led
through parks and gardens, forming the cen¬
trepiece of ponds and fountains, baroque
sculpture proclaimed the virtues of a politi¬
cal system that would only begin to crumble
much later, under critical assault from the
philosophers of the Enlightenment.
Baroque sculpture adapted itself equally
well to each of the two prevailing codes of
expression: Biblical Christian iconography,
and mythology as it had been formed by
writers such as the Italian Cesare Ripa (1560-
1645) into a more or less coherent symbolic
system. With the exception (by no means
absolute, however) of portraiture, allegory
is sovereign and ever-present in baroque
sculpture. Mythological figures are enrolled
as actors to give some kind of demonstra¬
tion. Sometimes, too, allegory is given form
and movement without the support of
mythology.
The French tend to reject the epithet
"baroque" as a description of the great sculp¬
tures that adorn the park of Versailles. But
what could be more profoundly baroque
than this universe of marble and lead, repre¬
sentation of a veritable political cosmogony?
It is true that the performers in this particular
drama are somewhat less exuberant than
their Italian or German counterparts.
Restraint is a feature of French theatre. And
more intellectual concerns are evident in this
remarkable commission dating from 1674,
the product of the imagination of the painter
Charles Le Brun and of the talent of the
sculptor François Girardon and his disciples
and rivals. The completed work depicts an
astonishing tetralogical system: the four sea¬
sons, the four humours, the four times of the
day, the four forms of poetry, and so on.
This is an eminently baroque attempt to
sum up the world of knowledge and knowl¬
edge of the world. The mode is secular, but
the ambition is equal to that of the great
religious compositions. Here once again is
the ambiguity of baroque sculpture herald
of the irrational and the pathetic, yet a
staunch defender of comprehension and
rhetorical unification, despite its excesses
and emotional turbulence and thanks to its
transcendent spirit and its pursuit of the eter¬
nal. Baroque sculpture is the most deter¬
mined attempt to give expression to the pas¬
sion that moves men and lifts them to the
sublime.
FRANÇOIS SOUCHAL, French art historian
and museum curator, has been professor of the
history of art at the university of Lille since 1969.
He is a member of his country's Historic Monu¬
ments Commission and the author ofmany articles
on baroque sculpture and architects. Among his
published works are three volumes in English enti¬
tled French Sculptors of the 1 7th and 1 8th Centur¬
ies (Faber & Faber, 1977-1987).
