The earthly
Paradise
by Christopher Columbus
In the time of the Genoese navigator
Christopher Columbus (1450 or 1451-
1506), the existence of an earthly
Paradise was unquestioned. The origin of
this myth is found in the Bible, where it is
written (in Genesis, II. 8): "And the Lord
Godplanted a garden eastward in Eden;
and there he put the man whom he had
formed." For Columbus the questfor the
earthly Paradise was an obsession which
lasted throughout his search for a western
sea route to China and India. His dream
was sustained by the luxuriant plant and
animal life, the mildness of the climate
and the abundant waters of the New
World. When, during his third voyage in
1498, he discovered the mouth of the
Orinoco on the coast ofSouth America,
he thought that he hadfinally located the
earthly Paradise, which he imagined to be
at the source of this vast effluence of
fresh water.
HOLY Scripture testifies that Our Lord made the earthly Paradise in which
he placed the Tree of Life. From it there flowed four main rivers: the
Ganges in India, the Tigris and the Euphrates in Asia, which cut through a
mountain range and form Mesopotamia and flow into Persia, and the Nile, which
rises in Ethiopia and flows into the sea at Alexandria.
I do not find and have never found any Greek or Latin writings which definitely
state the worldly situation of the earthly Paradise, nor have I seen any world map
which establishes its position except by deduction. Some place it at the source of
the Nile in Ethiopia. But many people have travelled in these lands and found
nothing in the climate or altitude to confirm this theory, or to prove that the
waters of the Flood which covered, etc. ... reached there. Some heathens tried to
show by argument that it was in the Fortunate Islands (which are the Canaries);
and St. Isidore, Bede, Strabo, the Master of Scholastic History,* St. Ambrose
and Scotus and all learned theologians agree that the earthly Paradise is in the
East, etc.
I have already told what I have learnt about this hemisphere and its shape, and I
believe that, if I pass below the Equator, on reaching these higher regions I shall
find a much cooler climate and a greater difference in the stars and waters. Not
that I believe it possible to sail to the extreme summit or that it is covered by water,
or that it is even possible to go there. For I believe that the earthly Paradise lies
here, which no one can enter except by God's leave. I believe that this land which
your Highnesses have commanded me to discover is very great, and that there are
many other lands in the south of which there have never been reports. I do not
hold that the earthly Paradise has the form of a rugged mountain, as it is shown in
pictures, but that it lies at the summit of what I have described as the stalk of a
pear, and that by gradually approaching it one begins, while still at a great
Detail from The Earth orThe Earthly Paradise,
painting on copper by the Flemish artist Jan
Brueghel, known as "Velvet Brueghel",
(1568-1625).
8

distance, to climb towards it. As I have said, I do not believe that anyone can
ascend to the top. I do believe, however, that, distant though it is, these waters
may flow from there to this place which I have reached, and form this lake. All this
provides great evidence of the earthly Paradise, because the situation agrees with
the beliefs of those holy and wise theologians and all the signs strongly associated
with this idea. For I have never read or heard of such a quantity of fresh water
flowing so close to the salt and flowing into it, and the very temperate climate
provides a further confirmation. If this river does not flow out of the earthly
Paradise, the marvel is still greater. For I do not believe that there is so great and
deep a river anywhere in the world.
The potency
"Letter to the Catholic Kings on the third voyage to the
Indies (1498)." The Four Voyages of Christopher
Columbus, edited and translated by J.M. Cohen, Pen¬
guin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth, U.K., 1969.
* Petrus Comestor, author of Historia scolastica (trans¬
lator's note).
T '	 ' >i -i^'JWfflBtWIIIIPMHW^^
