-
cu
O
ptí
D
tí
<
oí
H
z
tí
V
The art ofpersuasion
BY CHRISTIAN NORBERG-SCHULZ
DURING the eighteenth century,
the landscape of Catholic Central
Europe became saturated with
religious monuments: roadside crucifixes,
statues of the "bridge saint" John Nepomuk,
calvaries (mostly in combination with a via
crucis), pilgrimage churches, and a multitude
of new monasteries. The architecture of the
epoch was thus closely related to the
environment, which it sought to transform
into a "sacred landscape" which everywhere
should remind man of the "true faith".
In accordance with this aim, the works of
art and architecture in question have an exu¬
berant and persuasive character. The man¬
ifest religious ecstasy of the figures is echoed
in the flame-like towers of the churches, in
the interior of which heaven becomes visible
in the illusionary paintings of the vaults.
Even the palaces of the aristocracy have a
similar expression. Being rulers "by God's
grace", princes also had to present the basic
axioms of faith.
In general, we may say that baroque art
and architecture is a product of the Counter-
Reformation, the basis of which was the
esprit de système of the seventeenth century,
that is, the belief that the world may be
understood as a system deducible from a few
immutable a priori dogmas. According to
counter-reformatory policy, these dogmas
ought to be presented as vividly as possibly.
At the Council of Trent it was decided that
"The Bishops shall carefully teach this: that,
by means of the Stories of the Mysteries of
our Redemption, portrayed by paintings or
other representations, the people are
instructed and confirmed in the habit of
remembering, and continually revolving in
mind the articles of faith".
Persuasion thus became the basic means of
achieving the participation needed by the
system. The most famous example of this
approach can be found in the "Spiritual
Exercises" of St. Ignatius Loyola, which
aimed at an imitation of Christ by means of
imagination and empathy. And the Jesuits in
fact made an essential contribution to the
diffusion of baroque art.
Imagination as a means implies that the
world is transformed into a "theatre" and
that the church is intended as a teatrum sac¬
rum where the articles of faith are enacted.
Hence the expressive and illusionary charac¬
ter of baroque art. Following the principles
laid down at the Council of Trent, baroque
art and architecture were born in Rome, the
centre of the Catholic Church. In architect¬
ure we may distinguish between two cur¬
rents: the truly theatrical one, developed by
Bernini, where architecture serves as a splen¬
did but conventionally ordered background
to the "stories" told by illusionary painting
and sculpture, and the "architectural" one,
invented by Borromini, where space itself is
set into motion and becomes a means of
emotional expression. Borromini's more
original treatment of architecture as such
was further developed by Guarini, who in
numerous projects for Theatine churches
defined space as a system of interdependent
cells which seem to be subject to a movement
of pulsation. In fact, Guarini considered the
pulsating, undulating movement a basic
property of nature.
As a manifestation of the Counter-Refor¬
mation, Central European Baroque has a
double face. Firstly, it aims at persuading the
people, and from the very beginning it there¬
fore assimilated local traditions and beliefs to
become part of the world of daily life. It also
had to express the power of those who were
the guardians of faith, that is, the bishop and
the prince, who in Central Europe were
.42

Left, interior and vault of the Niklaskirche (the
church of St. Nicholas) in the Little Quarter,
Prague, Czechoslovakia. Begun in 1703 by the
architect Christoph Dientzenhofer and com¬
pleted by his son Kilian Ignaz, it has been de¬
scribed as "one ofEurope's most beautiful chur¬
ches".
Below, façade of the Karlskirche (St. Charles'
church) in Vienna (Austria) built between 1715
and 1737 by the architectJohann Bernhard Fis¬
cher von Erlach. Austriaplayed a leading role in
theflowering and diffusion ofCentralEuropean
Baroque.
often one and the same person. Therefore,
the Central European Baroque is popular as
well as grandiose, and aims at communicat¬
ing with "everybody".
The architecture of the Counter-Refor¬
mation was introduced into Central Europe
by the Jesuits before the end of the sixteenth
century. It was only after the Thirty Years
War (1618-1648), however, that building
activity gained full momentum, and the main
works of Central European Baroque stem
from the eighteenth century. Travelling Ital¬
ian architects and craftsmen played an
important role at the outset, and the names
of Lurago, Caratti, Carlone, Martinelli,
Zucalli, Alliprandi, Broggio and Santini
have found their place in architectural his¬
tory. Soon, however, local architects took
over, such as the Vorarlberg masters, who
aimed at a synthesis of local and Italian traits.
This aim was supported by the counter-
reformatory movement, which wanted a
locally rooted, generally understandable art.
Thus, quite early, we find the introduction
of medieval motifs and structures in the
basically classical language of the Baroque,
such as the wall-pillar, which is a late-
Gothic kind of buttress placed inside the
church.
Austria played a primary role in the
development of Central European Baroque,
due to the leading political position of the
country after the defeat of the Turks near
Vienna in 1683. Both of the main Italian
currents were present; the Berninesque one
found its spokesman in Johann Bernhard
Fischer von Erlach (1656-1723), who is
known as the creator of the grandiose
Karlskirche in Vienna (1715-1737), where a
synthesis of the eras of Solomon, Augustus,
Christ and the Austrian emperor is
expressed by means of historical quotations.
This is a truly "theatrical" architecture, with
a rich symbolic content. The Borrominian
current was introduced by Fischer's rival,
Johann Lucas von Hildebrandt (1668-1 745),
who in several churches made use of
Guarini's method of grouping spaces. His
main work, however, is the charming and
picturesque Belvedere palace in Vienna
(1714-1722), built for Prince Eugene of
Savoy, the defeater of the Turks.
A more popular baroque architecture,
mainly centering its attention on religious

Photo © C. Norberg-Schulz, Oslo
buildings, was developed in Bohemia by
Christoph and Kilian Ignaz Dientzenhofer.
Christoph (1655-1722) migrated to Prague
from Bavaria in 1686, and in his new country
achieved a highly ingenious synthesis of
Guarini's spatial organisms and the Central
European wall-pillar system. Owing to the
skeletal character of the latter, Christoph's
churches may be characterized as "open"
compositions which in a particularly fas¬
cinating way express the dynamism and
infinite quality of baroque art. Christoph's
son Kilian Ignaz (1689-1751) further
developed the ideas of his father, and in
numerous works realized an ars com¬
binatoria of interdependent spatial cells,
thus bringing the intentions of Borromini
and Guarini to their logical conclusion. One
example of the art of the Dientzenhofers is
the great church of St. Nicholas in the Little
Quarter in Prague, initiated by Christoph in
1703 and completed by Kilian (1737-
1753).
A third member of the Dientzenhofer
family, Christoph's brother Johann (1673-
1726), brought the principles of the Bohe¬
mian Baroque to Franconia, where we find
one of the most accomplished works of the
period, the monastic church of Banz (1710-
1719). Johann Dientzenhofer also inspired a
follower, who is generally considered the
most important architect of the Central
European Baroque: Johann Balthasar Neu¬
mann (1687-1753). The work of Neumann,
who was equally active in ecclesiastical, sec¬
ular and military architecture, is excep
tionally rich and varied. His great churches
of Vierzehnheiligen ( 1 742ff. ) and Neresheim
(1747ff.) combine the "open" spatial groups
of the Guarini-Dientzenhofer tradition with
a central, dominant rotunda, indicating that
around 1750 baroque dynamism started to
give way to a more static, classical con¬
ception of space.
The same holds true of the works of two
other important late baroque masters,
Johann Michael Fischer (1691-1766) and
Dominikus Zimmermann (1685-1766). In
Zimmermann's pilgrimage church at Wies
(1744-1754), the Central European Baroque
is consummated in a Gesamtkunstwerk
("total art work") of rare beauty, which
achieves an exuberant expression of rejoicing
and fulfilment.
After the powerful manifestation of faith
of the Central European Baroque,
Enlightenment took over, and a new epoch
in European history began, aiming at analy¬
tic understanding rather than synthetic
truth.
Today, however, a keen interest in the
Baroque is again being felt. Its "open" and
dynamic forms have a basic affinity to mod¬
ern art, and its emphasis on expression and
"happening" rather than ideal order, is cer¬
tainly related to some aspects of contempo¬
rary life. Although its aims and social back¬
ground were different, we may therefore
learn much from the Baroque, and the works
of the Borromini school in particular have
had a liberating effect on many present-day
architects.
Above, the interior of Dominikus Zimmer¬
mann's pilgrimage church (1744-1754) at Wies
in Bavaria (Fed. Rep. of Germany), a triumph
of Central European Baroque. High altar in the
form ofthe "tree oflife", right, wasproduced by
Bartholomäus Steinle for the church of Stams
monastery (Austria).
CHRISTIAN NORBERG-SCHULZ, Norwe¬
gian architect and art critic, is dean of the Oslo
School ofArchitecture, Norway. He has lectured at
major universities in Europe, the UnitedStates and
Japan, and is a member ofacademic associations in
several countries. Among his works published in
English are Late Baroque and Rococo
Architecture (Faber & Faber, London, 1980),
Meaning in Western Architecture (Rizzoli Inter¬
national Publications, New York, 1980), and
Architecture: Meaning and Place (New York,
1987).
E
O
44
