A cultural explanation
for Japan's economic
performance
Confucius and capitalism
by Michio Morishima
^^^ 1. Max Weber. Gesammelte Autsätze zur Rehgionso-
ziologie ("Collected Writings on Religious Sociology".
34 1920)
WHY did "modern capitalism" not
emerge in other times and other
places than modern western
Europe? The German sociologist Max
Weber (1864-1920) believed that modern
capitalism was not automatically produced
by the development of science and tech¬
nology, and that behind its emergence lay
also the emergence of rational, anti-tradi¬
tional ways of thinking among human
agents. Weber asked why there had been
such an enormous historical difference in
this respect between the Orient and the
Occident. To answer this question he
made a magnificent comparative study
covering Europe, the Middle East, India
and China, and concluded that there were
religious factors in the modern West which
favoured the rise of capitalism, while such
factors were absent in other civilizations.
'Sublimated empiricism'
Weber considered that Confucianism,
ike Protestantism, is a highly rational reli¬
gion, but that there is an important differ¬
ence between them. "As against the ac¬
commodation to the world found in
Confucianism we find in Puritanism [or
Protestantism] the task of reorganizing the
world in a rational manner."1 Puritanism
alone fostered modern natural science and
promoted the spirit of capitalism. In China,
not only were natural science and tech¬
nology absent, but also natural law and
formal logic. China, therefore, failed to
achieve a shift from empirical to rational
techniques. "Everything remained at the
level of sublimated empiricism."1
Weber's comparative study of world reli
gions may be regarded, as he himself
perceived, as a massive integrated at¬
tempt to clarify the cultural background,
spiritual backbone and materialistic conse¬
quences of Western civilization. From a
different point of view, however, it may be
seen as part of the overall task of estab¬
lishing the proposition that the economic
performances of various peoples or na¬
tions are unstable and influenced by the
slightest change in their ethos. Only that
part concerning Christianity was complet¬
ed by Weber himself, who left unfinished
the parts relating to other religions such as
Confucianism, Hinduism, and Buddhism.
The instability (or knife-edge) thesis is
based on the observation that Catholics
and Protestants, who share the same Bible
but interpret it differently, are significantly
different in their modes of worldly beha¬
viour. Weber sees the essential disagree¬
ment between the two as lying in the fact
that Protestantism removes the barrier be¬
tween layman and clergy by discarding the
division of Christian ethical precepts into
praecepta and consilia, while Catholicism
sticks to this dualism. For all Protestant
denominations "the only way of living ac¬
ceptable to God was not to outbid worldly
morality by monastic asceticism, but solely
through the fulfilment of the obligations
imposed upon the individual by his position
in the world. That was his calling "'
Rationalism and austerity
The Protestant interpretation of the Bible
thus produces the concept of a job as a
"calling", a task set by God, by which
secular life (and hence economic activity)

.
vYQ -senvi-
Photos Louis Frédéric © Rapho, Paris
is connected with the will of God. A job
becomes a duty, and this kind of outlook on
work is, at least at some stage of history,
necessary for the establishment of the cap¬
italist régime and its take-off for economic
growth. The Protestant Reformation was a
breakthrough by which asceticism, hitherto
confined to the monasteries, was released
into the outside secular world. People be¬
gan to act ascetically and rationally. The
rational utilization of capital was carried out
and the rational capitalistic organization of
labour was implemented. Protestantism
thus contributed to (or is congruent with)
the establishment of an efficient economic
system.
No such instability argument concerning
China, India and Japan is found in Weber's
works. He only concludes that neither Con¬
fucianism, Hinduism nor Buddhism is suit¬
able for promoting the spirit of capitalism;
each contains some significant factors
which militate against the emergence of
capitatism. He comes nearest to the knife-
edge proposition when he says: "The Chi¬
nese in all probability would be quite capa¬
ble, probably as much as if not more capa¬
ble than the Japanese, of assimilating
capitalism, which has technologically and
economically been fully developed in the
modern culture area."1 In my book Why
has Japan 'Succeeded'?, however, I have
carried out further investigation into the
subject and developed, for the sake of
comparison between China and Japan, an
argument which is parallel to the one which
Weber made with respect to Catholicism
and Protestantism.
In my opinion, between China and Japan
there is prima facie no significant differ-
CONTINUED PAGE 36
The Meiji Restoration in 1868 and the sub¬
sequent abolition of feudalism brought Japan
into the modern age through a rapid pro¬
gramme of industrialization and development.
Within a few decades Japan could compete
with the Western powers in economic and
military terms. The three 19th-century Japa¬
nese prints above give some idea of the extent
of the change: left, view ofa street in Edo (now
Tokyo) in the early ¡800s, by the great master
of the woodblock print, Ulagawa Hiroshige
(1797-1858), depicts a town untouched by
modern change. The two prints on this page,
"The Train from Takanawa to Tokyo" (c.
1875) and "The Azumabashi Bridge" (1887),
are both by Hiroshige HI (a pupil of Hi¬
roshige) and show the inroads being made by
industrialization and Westernization on the
traditional Japanese scene. The art of the Japa¬
nese print reached perfection in the 18th and
19th centuries in the work of such great artists
as Kitagawa Utamaro, Katsushika Hokusai
(creator of the famous "Thirty-six Views of
Mount Fuji"), and Hiroshige himself. Japa¬
nese prints became very popular in 19th-centu¬
ry Europe and exercised great influence on the
Impressionists and other painters.
One possible explanation for Japanese eco¬
nomic success may lie in the specific Japanese
interpretation of Confucian principles. Left,
an 18th-century ivory netsuke, a richly carved
small toggle used to attach objects to the sash
of a kimono. It depicts General Kuan-yü, a
Chinese hero (2nd and 3rd centuries AD)
considered by the Japanese to embody such
Confucian virtues as courage and loyalty. The
netsuke art form flourished in Japan during
the Edo period (1603-1867).

t!Ä
IL I
36
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 35
ence in ideological layout. They are primar¬
ily Confucianist countries. Buddhism came
to Japan not directly from India but always
through China, and Shinto which is gener¬
ally thought of as a religion truly indigenous
to Japan, was, even in its ancient primitive
form, deeply Influenced by Chinese
Taoism. Indeed it has been suggested that
Shinto might even be nothing other than a
Japanese version of Taoism. In spite of
this, Japan succeeded in easily assimilat¬
ing modern capitalism, while China contin¬
ued to be exploited by imperialists from the
West and Japan. This paradoxical situa¬
tion can be resolved only by viewing it in
the light of instability theory.
Company loyalty, a
Confucian virtue
It is noticeable that whereas the Chinese
interpretation of Confucius' doctrines is in¬
dividualistic and humanistic, the Japanese
version is nationalistic and militaristic. This
contrast arguably has existed ever since
Confucianism first came to Japan in about
the sixth century. This is not surprising
because the Japanese have suffered at all
times from a sense of inferiority vis-à-vis
the powerful Chinese empire, leading them
to be, throughout their history, closely
banded together and aggressive.2 After
two centuries of isolation which lasted until
1859, Japan came under pressure from
the West. In this crisis the intelligentsia,
who had been educated in the Japanese-
Confucian manner, succeeded in unifying
the country and finally established a new,
powerful modern government. A national¬
ist-capitalist economy was eventually es¬
tablished, based on a seniority system,
lifetime employment, the loyalty of employ¬
ees to their company, and the share-hold¬
ing system, which fully suits the ethos of
Japanese Confucianism.2
For the establishment of modern West¬
ern-style capitalism, there are two precon¬
ditions: the nation-State and the civil soci¬
ety. For the capitalist mode of economic
behaviour to prevail, an administrative or¬
ganization must be established, which se¬
cures the continuance of the régime. There
must be a strong government which en¬
forces rational law in order to enable each
member of society to calculate the conse¬
quences of his activity objectively and
quantitatively. The government must have
professional bureaucrats, administrative,
judicial and military.3 It is very much due to
the nationalistic Japanese form of Confu¬
cianism that Japan, which had been
marked by many class and regional divi¬
sions, was easily unified into a nation in a
relatively short period of about twenty
years, although there were obviously other
favourable factors, such as insularity, Ja¬
pan's awareness that the Philippines had
fallen into the hands of Spain and that
China was under constant attack from
Western countries. Whatever the reasons,
by 1890 Japan already had a powerful
modern government with officials recruited
from among ex-samurai and new universi¬
ty graduates.
It was, however, very difficult for Japan
to fulfil the other precondition for capital¬
ism, the establishment of a civil society. In
contrast to Christianity, according to which
everyone is equal in the sight of God,
Confucianism promotes a collectivist ethic
and the ethics of functional role expecta¬
tion,4 both of which maintain and strength¬
en the hierarchical character of the society.
Therefore, the elements of a civil society
were not well developed in Meiji Japan,
and it is evident that this strong nation with
its weak civil society was not suited for
competitive capitalism of the Western type.
It created a different type of production
system,4 though this can be, and is, in¬
cluded in the broad category of capitalism.
In this economy, the "invisible hand" is
more visible, since the government always
takes the initiative and plays the role of
helmsman of the economy. Efficiency has
been established by collaboration rather
than competition, and the idea of class
antagonism has not been widespread
among trade unionists.
The rise of 'Confucian
capitalism' in the East
We may say that by virtue of the emer¬
gence of Japan, capitalism ceased to be
monochromatic. Moreover, as the capital-
2. Michio Morishima, op. cit., 1982
3. Max Weber, Wirtschaftsgeschichte. Abriss der uni¬
versalen Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte. 1927
(General Economic History, tr. F.H. Knight)
4. J. Hirschmeier and T. Yui, The Development of
Japanese Business 1600-1973. 1975
5. J.A. Schumpefer, Capitalism. Socialism and Democ¬
racy. 1943

Company loyalty, one of the pillars ofJapan's
social consensus, does not prevent employees
from defending their interests, sometimes vig¬
orously, in negotiations with their employers.
The sense of "belonging" to a company is
reinforced by the widespread ringi system, in
which written proposals submitted from below
are examined by senior executives who take the
final decisions. Left, trade union and manage¬
ment representatives of a large Japanese
photographic materials company at the nego¬
tiating table.
The integration of employees into a company
is encouraged by working relationships based
on confidence and on the conception of the
company as a "big family". Communal holi¬
days and outings are organized such as the
picnic in the park at cherry-blossom time,
right. Each year in early April, the Japanese
press and television give daily coverage to the
northward advance of the "blossom from".
ism of the West, which may be called
Protestant capitalism, declines because of
its very achievements, its very success, as
the US economist and sociologist Joseph
Schumpeter (1883-1950) has pointed out,5
so the rise of Confucian capitalism in the
East becomes more apparent. The attain¬
ment of an economic optimum via individu¬
alistic economic competition, which is said
to be the most important raison d'être of
the free enterprise system, is neither the
main purpose nor the prime function of the
Japanese economy. In this context, collab¬
oration between workers for the benefit of
the firm is a more important subject for
analysis than competition among workers
vis-à-vis the firm. In Japanese society,
competition prevails, not so much among
adults, but mainly among children, who are
selected and allocated to various -firms
according to the diplomas they have re¬
ceived in the educational rat race. Once
they have been allocated to a firm, it is very
difficult for them to move, especially from a
small firm to a big one.
In addition, within Japanese society
there is a wide gulf, in wages, fringe ben¬
efits, productivity, risks and profits, be¬
tween big business and the small busi¬
ness-subcontractor sector. Compared with
Western firms Japanese big business op¬
erates in a very bureaucratic way, in ac¬
cordance with the ringi system ("proposal
submission from below and deliberation at
the top") instead of Western planning and
decision-making by top management.
Moreover, newly industrialized countries
such as the Republic of Korea, Taiwan,
Hong Kong and Singapore are all dom
inated by Confucianism. For the analysis of
these new capitalist societies, a new eco¬
nomic model emphasizing collaboration,
group consciousness and nationalism
should be formulated.
These countries have developed by
penetrating foreign markets, and home de¬
mand is not very important for their eco¬
nomic growth. Even for Japan, which has a
fairly large domestic market, domestic de¬
mand is not the main motive force behind
development. The failure of a civil society
to develop is thus not a serious handicap to
economic growth in these countries. It was
possible for them to achieve economic
expansion despite poor home demand and
to embark on a forced march of rapid
growth to catch up with the West.
MICHIO MORISHIMA, Japanese economist,
has been Sir John Hicks Professor of Econom¬
ics at the London School of Economics since
1984. The ideas presented in this article are
discussed in greater detail in his book Why has
Japan 'Succeeded'? Western Technology and
the Japanese Ethos, Cambridge University
Press, UK, 1982.
Although Japan has a substantial domestic
market, its industrial growth has been primar¬
ily sustained by exports. Right, cars for export
ready to be loaded aboard ship. 37
