Achallenge
for the developing world
by Albert Sasson
BIOTECHNOLOGIES have much to
offer developing countries. Their
application to agriculture, horticul¬
ture and forestry can contribute largely
both to the improvement of cultivated
plants and to the protection of species
threatened with disappearance. But careful
consideration must be given to the choice of
the most appropriate techniques and their
transfer and adaptation to specific condi¬
tions.
Such processes as plant cell and tissue
cultures and genetic engineering are tools,
not solutions to social problems. For exam¬
ple, the replacement of traditional crop
varieties by new ones may cause unemploy¬
ment if such new varieties require less work.
There is also a tendency for research in
biotechnology to respond primarily to the
needs of international markets rather than
the domestic needs of developing countries.
Furthermore, since it is the big landowners
who possess the financial and management
resources enabling them to profit from tech¬
nological innovations, it is likely that they
rather than the small farmers will gain
from the application of biotechnology to
agriculture.
fn a Kuala Lumpur laboratory, above,
Malaysian biotechnicians tend test-tube
cultures as part of a short-term project to
produce elite oil-palms.
There is a strong possibility that the poor
countries in general will not only reap few
direct benefits from the biotechnological
revolution, but that their economies will be
indirectly hit by the development of new
products (such as artificial sweeteners)
which will compete with their traditional
export commodities. There is a danger that
the technology gap between the rich and
poor countries will grow even wider.
Searching questions must therefore be
asked about the nature of the "Bio¬
technological Revolution" and its long-
term economic, social and geopolitical
effects; strategies must be devised to ensure
that its benefits are equitably shared both
between countries and between different
social groups within a given country.
The "Biotechnological Revolution" is
irreversible, if only because of the commer¬
cial successes that have already been
achieved and the size of the investments
which have been made in the different fields
of biotechnology. It has been estimated that
the sales of products derived from the
application of biotechnologies to food and
agriculture alone may reach between
$50,000 million and $100,000 million by the
year 2000.
Whereas the "Green Revolution" was
largely carried out by the public sector,
which made possible the free exchange of
new plant strains developed notably in
international agronomic research centres
sponsored by the FAO, the impetus behind
the "Biotechnological Revolution" in agri¬
culture is coming largely from the private
sector, although much basic research is
being carried out in universities and in
state-supported agricultural and forestry
facilities.
The privatization of the results of
research in biotechnology means that these
results do not form part of the universally
available body of scientific and technical
knowledge that belongs to the common
heritage of mankind. In addition, the public
sector research institutions and the organ¬
isms which subsidize them are tending to
29

J The Green Revolution and the "Biorevolution"
Characteristics Green revolution
L
Biorevolution
Crops affected Wheat, rice, maize Potentially all crops, including vegeta¬
bles, fruits, agro-export crops (e.g., oil
palms, cacao), and speciality crops
(e.g., spices, scents)
Other products affected None Animal products, pharmaceuticals,
processed foods, energy
Areas affected
~1
Crops displaced
Some locations in some less develo¬
ped countries (i.e., if accompanied by
irrigation, high-quality land, transport
availability, etc.)
All areas, including marginal lands
characterized by drought, salinity, alu¬
minium toxicity, etc.
Technology development and
dissemination
Largely public or quasi-public sector Largely private sector (multinational cor¬
porations and start-up firms).
Proprietary consideration Patents and plant variety protection
generally not relevant
Processes and products patentable and
protectable
Capital costs of research Low High
Research skills required Conventional plant breeding and paral¬
lel agricultural sciences
Molecular and cell biology expertise plus
conventional plant-breeding skills
None (except the germplasm resour¬
ces represented in traditional varie¬
ties)
Potentially any
Source: Ceres, FAO / Büttel et alr
take out patents and thus contribute to the
privatization of the results of research.
The growing tendency to grant patents to
plant breeders as a means of protecting the
creation of new strains is causing wide¬
spread concern in developing countries
where these measures are seen as obstacles
to their efforts to increase their agricultural
output.
The adoption of legislation to protect the
rights of plant breeders by patent (that is,
granting to plant geneticists and the bodies
which subsidize their research exclusive
production and marketing rights over these
varieties) has encouraged multinational
corporations and several major national
chemical and pharmaceutical groups to buy
seed marketing companies and to take
majority participations in firms engaged in
varietal selection and plant genetics
research. In Europe and North America,
the leading multinational petrochemical
and pharmaceutical firms have acquired a
dominant position in this field.
One reason for this trend is to be found in
the complementary roles played by seeds,
fertilizer, pesticides and animal medicines
in boosting agricultural output. It is thus
possible for one firm to influence the entire
production chain.
The market for selected seeds is worth
$12,000 million a year, including $2,000
million for hybrid maize and sorghum
seeds, and $1,000 million for hybrid oats,
soya and cotton seeds. The grip of the multi
national corporations and of other major
industrial groups on the seed companies is
likely to encourage monopolies and sharply
reduce the public sector role in plant
selection.
Measures taken by the technologically
advanced countries to protect the results of
increasingly expensive research into plant
genetics and to ensure that such research is
profitable include the payment of royalties,
notably by the developing countries, for
seed varieties selected in the industrialized
countries. The latter countries are also
tending to use their collections of seeds and
plants (germplasm) for commercial pur¬
poses; the private sector is playing an
increasing role in the collection, preserva¬
tion and use of germplasm.
Many developing countries do not pos¬
sess the financial and technical resources to
establish seed collections or to preserve
such collections in satisfactory conditions.
They have no alternative but to buy new
strains selected from varieties which have
been cultivated or which grow wild in their
own regions. Such varieties may have been
domesticated, cultivated and improved by
many generations of farmers in the develop¬
ing countries before being crossed with
other varieties, protected by patent, and
then sold in their countries of origin as "new
and different". This paradoxical situation
calls in question the validity of the patent
system, for to grant ownership rights and
royalties to those who have recently
improved the genetic heritage of a plant
variety is to disregard the efforts of all those
who have previously transformed the vari¬
ety and derived no profit from it.
"The North may be 'grain-rich' but the
South is 'gene-rich':" the genetic resources
of most cultivated plants are found in the
developing countries, notably in the trop¬
ics, but the selection and improvement
operations relating to these plants mainly
take place in the industrialized countries. In
1982, according to the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), the developing countries were
contributing an estimated $500 million a
year to the United States wheat harvest.
This contribution resulted from the use of
plant genetic resources which originate in
the developing countries and are indispen¬
sable to the improvement of cultivated
plants and variety selection in the United
States and in the other industrialized
countries.
In view of the economic importance of
their plant genetic resources, the develop¬
ing countries intend to protect these
resources for example by preventing the
export of plant reproducing material. They
also feel that the purchase price of varieties
of seeds selected and improved from their
own phytogenetic stock is excessive and
that it is unjust to be thus obliged to buy
back indirectly a part of their phytogenetic
heritage.
The risk of a diminution of genetic diver-
30

sity, combined with the question of restric¬
tive practices in the distribution of material
needed for the improvement of cultivated
plants, has led to a search for an interna¬
tional agreement on the conservation of
plant genetic resources, considered as part
of the heritage of humanity, and on their
equitable use, instead of allowing such use
to be regulated solely by national jurisdic¬
tions. If the industrialized countries wish to
have access to the plant genetic resources of
the developing countries and wish to use the
hardy local strains which are found there,
the developing countries wish to benefit
from services provided by gene banks in the
industrialized countries and to claim their
national sovereignty over plants grown in
their countries.
The problems of the conservation of and
free access to plant genetic resources have
thus assumed a geopolitical dimension in
the context of the debate on the exploita¬
tion of the Earth's resources for the benefit
of all humanity. In November 1981 a resolu¬
tion presented by Mexico to the 21st Con¬
ference of FAO invited the Director-Gen¬
eral to prepare a draft international
Convention on the conservation of plant
genetic resources necessary to increase agri¬
cultural production, on the removal of
obstacles to the free distribution of plant
material and on the improvement of inter¬
national co-operation in this field.
In November 1983, a draft international
Convention was accordingly submitted for
examination to the FAO Conference at its
22nd Session. Among its provisions was one
which prohibited the imposition of any
restriction on the availability or exchange of
plant genetic resources for agriculture and
food production.
The 156 countries represented at the
22nd Session recognized that "plant
resources were part of the common heritage
of mankind and should thus be accessible
without restriction". Such resources include
wild species or those close to cultivated vari¬
eties, which should be catalogued and pro¬
tected, for they are threatened with disap¬
pearance, as well as the most recent
cultivated varieties and strains which make
it possible to produce seeds of more produc¬
tive hybrid varieties.
In November 1985, at the 23rd Session of
the FAO Conference, the industrialized
countries opposed the creation of an inter¬
national mechanism to ensure the free
exchange of plant genetic resources and to
abolish payment for varieties selected in the
industrialized countries and royalties to
acquire them. It is thus to be expected that
genetic information needed for the
improvement of cultivated plants may
become a commercial commodity subject to
competition between seed companies,
between countries, and between seed com¬
panies and countries.
However, it is to be hoped that a compro¬
mise will be found between the legitimate
desire to reward human ingenuity by grant-
Completing the brick dome of a digestion
tank for biogas production in China. With
over 7 million biogas digesters, China
leads the world in this field of energy pro¬
duction.
ing patents to selectors in the industrialized
countries and the need for developing coun¬
tries to obtain selected varieties at a price
compatible with their limited means and the
imperatives of their agricultural develop¬
ment. It would also be ethically justifiable
to take into account, in the sale to develop¬
ing countries of seed varieties selected from
their own cultivated plants, the work of the
generations of farmers who have contrib¬
uted to the improvement of these plants.
In the meantime, much can be done to
harness biotechnologies to agriculture, hor¬
ticulture and forestry in the developing
world.
First of all, in each developing country
steps should be taken to establish priorities
and economic objectives which derive max¬
imum benefit from the available resources.
Those biotechnological processes which are
most relevant to the country's social and
economic needs should be identified and
inventories of local resources should be
drawn up.
Secondly, developing countries should
avoid entering into competition, at least ini-
31

* *&.̂
N
"i :
tially, with the industrialized countries in
such advanced fields as gene transfer and
genetic engineering. They should profit
from simpler techniques of plant tissue cul¬
ture, meristem culture (see page 6) and
plant organ culture for the rapid vegetative
propagation of the most useful strains and
for the isolation of virus-free strains. They
should adopt and practise at the appropri¬
ate scale low-cost, proven biotechnologies
which are easy to transfer and to adapt to
local conditions.
Thirdly, biotechnologies should not be
considered as the only means of improving
species of cultivated plants. They should be
seen as complementary to hybridization
methods and efficient agricultural prac¬
tices. The success of biotechnologies in the
developing countries will depend to a large
extent on their being closely associated with
classical methods of crossing and improving
plants, with agricultural training pro¬
grammes, the establishment of remunera¬
tive farm prices and the existence of a good
marketing network for agro-food products.
Fourthly, the choice of appropriate bio¬
technologies does not mean that we should
resign ourselves to accepting an interna¬
tional division of biotechnologies: high tech
for the technologically advanced countries,
outworn technologies for the developing
countries. A range of biotechnologies, of
varying degrees of sophistication and com
plexity, should exist in each specific situa¬
tion. Every national scientific and tech¬
nological community should take into
account international developments in bio¬
technology when considering local needs,
and be able to use the most advanced
techniques or adapt them to development
projects.
Whatever options for the development of
biotechnologies are chosen, education and
training are bound to play an essential role.
Standing as they do at the crossroads of
several disciplines of the life sciences
(genetics, biochemistry, physiology and
microbiology), and of engineering (fermen¬
tation technology, automization of produc¬
tion techniques, chemical and industrial
microbiology), biotechnologies call for
interdisciplinary training programmes and
an integrated approach.
There is a chronic lack of specialists and
biotechnology technicians in the developing
countries. According to one survey, in 1983
there were 23,000 researchers in this field in
the USA, 12,000 in the USSR, 8,000 in
Japan, 3,400 in the rest of Asia, 1,900 in
Latin America and 400 in Africa.
International and regional co-operation
undoubtedly has a major role to play in
encouraging the transfer of biotechnologies
and the fulfilment of their promise in the
developing world, as well as helping to solve
the ethical problems involved. It should be
From test-tube to forest
Biotechnology opens new possibilities for
forest management in developing coun¬
tries. In vitro tissue culture methods,
above, make possible the rapid production
of genetically uniform elite specimens
which must then be tested in field condi¬
tions in the outdoor laboratory the
forest. Lines of eucalyptus in the Congo,
right, stretch as far as the eye can see.
They were grown from clones of carefully
selected hybrids.
32

possible for countries within a given region
to carry out joint research projects into mat¬
ters of common concern and to obtain
results which can be applied in several coun¬
tries. Efforts must be made to encourage
co-operation between developing and
industrialized countries, including private
sector institutions in these countries. Exam¬
ples of such co-operation already exist.
They include the production of vaccines
against foot and mouth disease in Botswana
with the co-operation of Rhône-Mérieux in
France; biogas production from wastes
through co-operation between India, China
and several developing countries; and the
cloning of the oil palm and the creation of
new oil palm plantations in Ivory Coast,
Malaysia and Indonesia in co-operation
with the French Office of Scientific and
Technical Research Overseas (ORSTOM)
and the French Research Institute for Oils
and Oil-Producing Substances (IRHO).
The role of international intergovern¬
mental organizations is important in help¬
ing to provide governments with con¬
sultative services with a view to the
formulation of national policies and
programmes in biotechnology; to encour¬
age joint research projects and other joint
activities between developing and in¬
dustrialized countries; to encourage
researchers and technicians from all coun¬
tries to take part in these activities, and to
strengthen national research and training
capacities.
Ever since its early days, Unesco has laid
great stress in its scientific programmes on
international co-operation in research and
training in the life sciences, and at an early
stage drew attention to the importance of
research into micro-organisms and em¬
barked on a programme in applied micro¬
biology. In 1962 Unesco sponsored the
creation of the International Cell Research
Organization (ICRO), and in 1972 joined
with ICRO and the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) in
launching a world programme to safeguard
the genetic heritage of microbial resources
and to make this heritage accessible to
developing countries. Then, in 1975,
Unesco began to create the world network
of Microbiological Resources Centres
(MIRCEN) whose activities are described
in the article on page 27.
Following the adoption of Unesco's sec¬
ond Medium-Term Plan (1984-1989),
activities relating to training, research and
international co-operation in applied
microbiology were strengthened and fur¬
ther extended into the field of bio¬
technologies. Today, in close collaboration
with FAO, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization (UNIDO), the
World Health Organization (WHO) and
other specialized institutions of the United
Nations system and with international non¬
governmental organizations, Unesco con¬
tinues this work as part of the broader effort
to enable the developing countries to con¬
tribute to and benefit from advances in sci¬
entific knowledge.
ALBERT SASSON, Moroccan microbiologist, is
a doctor of natural sciences of the University of
Paris. From 1954 to 1973 he was engaged in
research at the Rabat (Morocco) Faculty of Sci¬
ences into algology, the microflora of arid lands,
and free and symbiotic nitrogen-fixing micro¬
organisms. A member of the Unesco secretariat
since 1974, Dr. Sasson is the author of several
books and studies on biology, microbiology and
biotechnologies and their applications to de¬
velopment, notably Biotechnologies: challenges
and promises (Unesco, 1984), which has so far
been published in English, French, Spanish, Ita¬
lian, Chinese and Russian and will soon be
appearing in Bulgarian, Portuguese and Roma¬
nian. In preparing this issue, the Editors have
made extensive use of Dr. Sasson 's book Quel¬
les biotechnologies pour les pays en dévelop¬
pement ? (Unesco and Biofutur publishers, Par¬
is, 1986), from which the above article has been
adapted. Dr. Sasson's latest book is Nourrir de-
main les hommes, ("Feeding mankind tomor¬
row") published by Unesco, 1986.
33
