Long nose,
white skin and
'honey mouth'
by Mungo Park
In 1795, a young Scots surgeon named
Mungo Park was commissioned by the
African Association ofLondon to explore
the true course of the Niger. As he
advanced into the interior ofAfrica he
discovered a continent comprising many
busy, sovereign States engaged in trade.
In his account of his travels, a unique
description of the west African slave trade
and an outstanding ethnographic
document, Mungo Pdrk brings back to
life the vanished world of the upper
Gambia river. Uncompromisingly written,
free from exoticism, his book presents a
series of encounters made by a traveller of
outstanding human qualities.
Portraitofthe Scottish explorer Mungo Park (1 771-
1805). In 1798 he pub/isriedTravels in the Interior
Districts of Africa Performed Under the Direction
and Patronage of the African Association in the Years
1 795, 1 796, and 1 797 by Mungo Park, Surgeon.
WHEN we came to the entrance of the court in which the king resides,
both my guide and interpreter, according to custom, took off their
sandals; and the former pronounced the king's name aloud, repeating it
till he was answered from within. We found the monarch sitting upon a mat, and
two attendants with him. I repeated what I had before told him concerning the
object of my journey, and my reasons for passing through his country. He
seemed, however, but half satisfied. The notion of travelling for curiosity was
quite new to him. He thought it impossible, he said, that any man in his senses
would undertake so dangerous a journey, merely to look at the country and its
inhabitants; however, when I offered to show him the contents of my portman¬
teau, and everything belonging to me, he was convinced; and it was evident that
his suspicion had arisen from a belief that every white man must of necessity be a
trader. When I had delivered my presents, he seemed well pleased, and was
particularly delighted with the umbrella, which he repeatedly furled and unfurled,
to the great admiration of himself and his two attendants , who could not for some
time comprehend the use of this wonderful machine. After this I was about to take
my leave, when the king, desiring me to stop awhile, began a long preamble in
favour of the whites, extolling their immense wealth and good dispositions. He
next proceeded to an eulogium on my blue coat, of which the yellow buttons
seemed particularly to catch his fancy; and he concluded by entreating me to
present him with it; assuring me, for my consolation under the loss of it, that he
would wear it on all public occasions, and inform every one who saw it of my great
liberality towards him. The request of an African prince, in his own dominions,
particularly when made to a stranger, comes little short of a command. It is only a
way of obtaining by gentle means what he can, if he pleases, take by force; and, as
it was against my interest to offend him by a refusal, I very quietly took off my
coat, the only good one in my possession, and laid it at his feet.
In return for my compliance, he presented me with great plenty of provisions,
and desired to see me again in the morning. I accordingly attended, and found him
sitting upon his bed. He told me he was sick, and wished to have a little blood
taken from him; but I had no sooner tied up his arm, and displayed the lancet,
than his courage failed, and he begged me to postpone the operation till the
afternoon, as he felt himself, he said, much better than he had been, and thanked
me kindly for my readiness to serve him. He then observed that his women were
very desirous to see me, and requested that I would favour them with a visit. ...
They were ten or twelve in number, most of them young and handsome, and
wearing on their heads ornaments of gold, and beads of amber.
They rallied me with a good deal of gaiety on different subjects, particularly
upon the whiteness of my skin , and the prominency of my nose. They insisted that
both were artificial. The first, they said, was produced when I was an infant, by
dipping me in milk; and they insisted that my nose had been pinched every day till
it had acquired its present unsightly and unnatural conformation. On my part,
without disputing my own deformity, I paid them many compliments on African
beauty. I praised the glossy jet of their skins, and the lovely depression of their
noses; but they said that flattery, or (as they emphatically termed it) "honey
mouth", was not esteemed in Bondou. In return, however, for my company or my
compliments (to which, by the way, they seemed not so insensible as they affected
to be) , they presented me with a jar of honey and some fish , which were sent to my
lodging, and I was desired to come again to the king a little before sunset.
I carried with me some beads and writing paper, it being usual to present some

Continued from page 18
small offering on taking leave, in return for which the king gave me five drachms
of gold, observing that it was but a trifle, and given out of pure friendship, but
would be of use to me in travelling for the purchase of provision. He seconded this
act of kindness by one still greater, politely telling me, that though it was custom¬
ary to examine the baggage of every traveller passing through his country, yet, in
the present instance, he would dispense with that ceremony; adding, I was at
liberty to depart when I pleased.
The art of
CD
CD
£
Travels into the Interior of Africa. Eland Books,
London, 1983.
CD
3
rwty^wnwBitpiwHi BMHffMWWWBWPPI
