Paper money
The Chinese invented paper money at the end of the eighth or beginning of
the ninth century AD. Its original name was "flying money" because it was
so light and could blow out of one's hand. The first paper money was,
strictly speaking, a draft rather than real money. A merchant could deposit
his cash in the capital, receiving a paper certificate which he could then
exchange for cash in the provinces. This private merchant enterprise was
quickly taken over by the government in 812. The technique was then used
for the forwarding of local taxes and revenues to the capital. Paper
"exchange certificates" were also in use. These were issued by government
officials in the capital and were redeemable elsewhere in commodities such
as salt and tea.
Real paper money, used as a medium of exchange and backed by
deposited cash, apparently came into being early in the tenth century, in
the southern province of Sichuan, as a private enterprise. Early in the
eleventh century the government authorized sixteen private businesses or
"banks" to issue notes of exchange; but in 1023 the government usurped
this private enterprise and set up its own official agency to issue bank notes
of various denominations which were backed by cash deposits. The money
issued by this bank had printed on it a notice to the effect that it was good
for only three years, and gave the dates. By 1 107, notes were being printed
with multiple blocks in no less than six colours.
The issuing of paper money by the government took on enormous
proportions. By 1126, seventy million strings (each string being equal to
one thousand pieces of "cash") had been officially issued. Vast amounts of
this paper money were not backed by any deposits, and a horrifying
inflation occurred.
Another problem which soon arose was counterfeiting. Since anyone
can print on pieces of paper, the authority must make the processes of
manufacture of its paper money so intricate that they cannot be exactly
reproduced. Complex manufacturing secrets were thus adopted quite
early, and included multiple colourings, immensely complex designs, and a
mixture of fibres in the paper; The basic material for the paper of paper
money was the bark of mulberry trees, and silk was sometimes incorpor¬
ated. One could hand in soiled or worn-out notes for new ones, but had to
pay the small cost of the printing of the replacement.
When the Mongols came to power in China, they issued a quaint form of
paper money called "silk notes". The deposits behind this currency were
not precious metals but bundles of silk yarn. By 1294, Chinese silk notes
were being used as money as far afield as Persia. In 1965, two specimens of
"silk notes" were found by archaeologists.
Paper money under the later Ming Dynasty was not so effective. The
Ming issued in 1375 a new note called the "Precious Note of Great Ming".
It was issued in one denomination only throughout the 200 years in which
it was the legal tender. This was naturally very inconvenient for all
commercial purposes, although copper coins were permitted to circulate,
and these must have provided the small change necessary in everyday life.
Through inflation, the Precious Note gradually lost its value and was
replaced by silver.
This diagram showing knowledge of the
magnetic declination is taken from an
early 10th-century geomantic treatise. It
is entitled The Directions andEmanations
ofthe Floating Needle, that is, the
compass needle floating in a pool of water
or mercury.
28
