The first contour transport canal
The world's first contour transport canal, the Magic Canal (Lingqu), was
constructed in China in the third century BC. This was indeed a most
impressive pioneering achievement. It was constructed by the engineer Shi
Lu on the orders of the Emperor Qin Shih Huangdi. The impetus for this
innovative type of canal was to assist in supplying the emperor's armies
sent south in 2 1 9 BC to conquer the people of Yue. We are told by the great
historian Sima Qian that:
"[the emperor] sent the Commanders (Zhao) Tuo and Tu Zhu to lead
forces of fighting-men on boats with deck-castles to the south to conquer
the countries of the hundred tribes of Yue. He also ordered the Superinten¬
dent (Shi) Lu to cut a canal so that supplies of grain could be sent forward
far into the region of Yue."
The Magic Canal is just over 32 kilometres long. Its chief interest is thus
not its length, which is unexceptional. The construction of the Magic
Canal, Jinking as it did two rivers flowing in opposite directions, made
possible the continuous inland navigation of barge transport for a distance
of 2,000 kilometres in a direct line, from the 40th to the 22nd parallel. One
could thus sail inland from the latitude of Beijing in the north as far as
Canton and the sea to what is today Hong Kong. The Magic Canal was
the final link in the chain.
The problem that had to be overcome was that the River Xiang with its
source at Mount Haiyang, flowed northwards, while the nearby River Li
flowed southwards. If only one could get a boat from one to the other!
for the Xiang led eventually to the Chang Jiang and the Li joined a tributary
of the West River and led to Canton. Near the little village of Xing'an, the
Xiang and the Li, in a landscape of limestone hills, are only 5 kilometres
apart. Simply joining them was not sufficient. Another solution had to be
found.
There was a saddle in the hills at this point along which a canal could be
dug. The rivers themselves were unruly and a lateral transport canal had to
be dug alongside the Xiang river for 2.4 kilometres at a more even gradient
than the river itself had. At the other end, some 22 kilometres of the Li river
had to be canalized in order to regulate it and make navigation possible.
Only with the two rivers "tamed" at either end like this could a 5-kilometre
canal then be dug to join them. A mound shaped like a snout was
constructed in the middle of the swiftly running Xiang to divide its flow,
and lead off much of the rushing water. It was backed up by two spillways,
and further spillways were made lower down. Several bridges at Xing'an
were constructed to cross the canal, which was 1 metre deep and 4.5 metres
wide. The system of division of the waters and spillways resulted in only
about three-tenths of the water from the Xiang entering the connecting
canal, so that it was not overwhelmed.
By being built along the contours of the saddle in the hills, the canal was
nearly level. Eighteen flash-lock gates were there by the ninth century at
the latest, reducing the number of towers needed for barges by the tenth or
eleventh century. The Magic Canal came to be considered a sacred
waterway, with a dragon as its governing spirit. A modern railway bridge
goes right over the old Magic Canal, which is still used.
This type of articulated junk used for
transporting freight was specially
designed to negotiate the many sharp
bends and shallows of the Grand Canal,
an immense waterway some
1,800 km long which was completed in
the 14th century. The prow and the stern
of the long, narrow boat can be separated
and sailed independently. The mast can
be lowered to enable the junk to pass
beneath low bridges. Below, the Grand
Canal today, at Wuxi.
32 _

