Science, technology
andhuman welfare
Rosalyn S. Yalow
IN a list of discussion topics for this
Conference, it is stated that "Ours is a
century dominated by science and
technology". None of us could disagree
with this statement. Nevertheless we should
also agree that the achievements of science
should not be denigrated by an overempha¬
sis on new problems which these achieve¬
ments may, in some cases, have introduced.
Unfortunately, the problems that persist are
those resulting from the unwise use of the
gifts of science and technology by govern¬
ments and those in positions of authority
and power.
Apart from the threat of war, the risks to
our collective health and wellbeing have
fallen strikingly during the twentieth centu¬
ry. The First World War claimed almost 9
million lives and the Second World War
more than 50 million. The fact that there has
been no war between the major powers
since 1945 may well be attributed to the
existence of nuclear weapons. We continue
to be reminded about the 110,000 who died
in the Second World War as a result of the
Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings, but we
do not hear about the comparable number
who died in the attack on Okinawa, or the
80,000 who died and the million who were
made homeless in one night by the fire-
bombing of Tokyo, or the comparable loss¬
es during the destruction of Dresden.
In spite of the heavy radiation doses suf¬
fered by the survivors of the Hiroshima and
Nagasaki bombings, it is not generally real¬
ized that the increase in cancer mortality up
to 1 982 was less than 7 per cent of the cancer
mortality expected had there been no irradi¬
ation. High technology was not required to
build the gas chambers that destroyed mil¬
lions of Jews. However scientific insights
and technology did make possible the rapid
development of radar which helped the
United Kingdom to survive the Battle of
Britain and was a crucial factor in the Allied
victory in the Second World War.
What of the role played by science and
technology in our daily lives? At the begin¬
ning of this century life expectancy in the
developed Western countries was about
forty-five years; today our lifespan exceeds
the biblical prescription of three score years
and ten. We are constantly being frightened
by the so-called cancer epidemic, supposed¬
ly due to environmental pollution. What are
the facts? Statistics from the United States,
which are probably similar to those from
Western Europe, show that of the 440,000
persons who died of cancer in 1983, 380,000
or almost 90 per cent were about fifty-five
years of age. At the turn of the century,
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre at
Trombay, near Bombay. The Centre's
Apsara reactor, built in ¡9Í6, was the
first in Asia.
when most people did not live until the age
of fifty-five, cancer was obviously less com¬
mon. If we examine the age-adjusted cancer
death rates since 1930 in the United States,
we find that the incidence of cancer of the
stomach has fallen more than fivefold, can-

Widespreadpublic concern about the safety of
nuclear energy was aroused by the 1979 acci¬
dent at a nuclear plant at Three Mile Island,
Pennsylvania (USA), and increased by the
Chernobyl (USSR) reactor accident in April
1986 (left). The proponents of nuclear energy
seek toput such events in perspective bypoint¬
ing to other, less publicized types ofpollution
that may be more dangerous.
Industrial society has polluted the oceans as
well as vast areas of the planet's land surface.
Below, marine pollution being studied in a
laboratory at INSERM (National Institute for
Health and Medical Research), Paris.
cer of the liver threefold, and cancer of the
uterus fourfold. Unfortunately there is a
cancer epidemic but the cause is smoking.
The incidence of lung cancer in both men
and women has risen more than tenfold in
the United States over the past fifty years
and now accounts for almost one-third of all
cancer deaths.
That environmental factors, presumably
related to diet, are important in cancer is
indicated by the fact that although deaths
due to stomach cancer have fallen strikingly
in the United States, a similar fall has not
occurred in Japan. On the other hand,
breast cancer is four times less common in
Japan than in the United States. However,
the cancer death rates among second-gener¬
ation Japanese immigrants to the United
States approach those of the population
among which they live, showing a striking
decrease in stomach cancer and equally
striking increases in breast and colon cancer.
According to a study on the causes of cancer
and estimated avoidable risks in the United
States, about one-third of cancers are due to
tobacco, more than one-third to diet, less
than 10 per cent to reproductive and sexual
behaviour, and only 2 per cent to pollution
and less than 1 per cent each to food addi¬
tives and industrial products. In view of
these figures, the idea of a cancer epidemic
attributable to the changes in our envi¬
ronment as a consequence of science and
technology is a myth.
Let us consider the fear of "toxigenic
bacteria". Although it is possible to alter
bacteria by genetic engineering, is there rea¬
son to believe that these altered bacteria
would be more toxic than the multiplicity of
bacteria that Nature has providedpartic¬
ularly in view of the ability of bacteria to
mutate continuously so as to produce new
antibiotic-resistant strains? Recently our
greatest concern has not been bacterial dis¬
ease but rather those diseases caused by
infection with retroviruses.
The world is now confronted with a ma¬
jor health problem, Acquired Immunodef
iciency Syndrome (AIDS), that affects peo¬
ple in the most productive portion of their
lives and increasingly is being transmitted to
children by infected mothers. In the present
state of knowledge, medicine can offer nei¬
ther a vaccine nor a curative therapy. There
are no really firm estimates of the total
number of people already infected with the
virus, nor of the fraction of those infected
who will go on to develop the lethal disease
itself.
The problems associated with AIDS
appear to differ in Western countries and in
Africa. In the Western nations AIDS is
transmitted primarily by homosexuals and
drug addicts, and an educational campaign
appears to be slowing the rate of transmis¬
sion among the homosexual population.
However, in Africa, where it is now esti¬
mated that 5 million people may be infected,
the spread of AIDS is associated with hete¬
rosexual practices and infection through
commonly used syringes for blood trans¬
fusions. We have barely begun to appreciate
the social and economic costs of this terrible
disease whose rapid spread has been a con¬
sequence of major changes in lifestyle. This
complex new disease is not a by-product of
science and technology. Let us hope that
science will find a way to prevent the spread
of this modern plague.
Concern about the possibility of nuclear
accidents has had a major impact on deci¬
sions to open new nuclear power plants in
the United States. It is of particular interest
that in our host country, France, nuclear
power accounts for 70 per cent of electricity
generated. Equivalent figures are 67 per cent
for Belgium, 39 per cent for Sweden, 30 per
cent for the Federal Republic of Germany,
25 per cent for Japan and only 17 per cent
for the United States.
Over the past forty years a sixfold in¬
crease in the Gross National Product of the
United States has been associated with a
sixfold increase in electricity consumption.
The use of nuclear power in place of oil for
the generation of electricity has resulted in
the reduction of oil consumption by utilities
to one-third of the 1 973 level, in spite of a 30
per cent increase in demand for electricity.
There is general agreement that until the
next century the increased demand for elec¬
tricity must be satisfied by coal or nuclear
power.
There was widespread public concern
about the accident in 1979 at the Three Mile
Island nuclear plant in Pennsylvania, al¬
though it resulted in no morbidity or mor¬
tality. Fear of radiation was further acceler¬
ated as a consequence of the Chernobyl
reactor accident in April 1986, in which
there were thirty-one immediate deaths.
To put this number in perspective let us
not forget the 4,000 who died in London in
December 1952 as a result of dense air
pollution associated with the burning of
fossil fuels, or the 350 dead, 500 injured and

In the United States smoking causes one-third
of the cases of cancer. Right, a lifelong addic¬
tion to tobacco often begins as a gesture of
adulthood.
"There is general agreement that until the next
century, increased demandfor electricity must
be satisfied by coal or nuclearpower... The use
of coal for electricity production results in an
average of 300 accident-related deaths each
year in the United States. " Below, miners in a
Belgian coal mine.
O
I
thousands made homeless by a Mexico City
gas-storage tank explosion in 1984. The use
of coal for electricity production results in
an average of 300 accident-related deaths
each year in the United States, as well as the
associated problems of acid rain and the
"greenhouse effect", i.e. the gradual warm¬
ing of the Earth due to the burning of fossil
fuels.
What are the likely delayed radiation ef¬
fects attributable to Chernobyl? One
hundred thousand people were evacuated
and had cumulative radiation exposures of
about 5 remcomparable to the difference
in background radiation associated with liv¬
ing in Switzerland for fifty years rather than
in Paris, London or Rome.
The most highly exposed group included
about 25,000 people living between 3 and 15
kilometres from the reactor, who received
an average dose of about 50 rem. These
doses were comparable to the acute doses
received at Hiroshima and Nagasaki but
they were delivered at much lower dose
rates.
Studies of radiation leukemogenesis in
these 25,000 people during the next decade
should provide answers concerning dose-
rate effects in man. It has long been known
from animal studies that X-ray and gamma-
ray radiation is far less carcinogenic when
delivered at a lower dose rate.
In spite of the concerns of the general
public, the scientific community uniformly
agrees that for the foreseeable future the
nuclear fuel cycle remains the safest way to
generate the electricity required to maintain
our standard of living.
Science and technology have been har¬
nessed to improve the well-being of people
in the developing as well as in the developed
countries. Unfortunately there remain po¬
litical and social problems which are not
amenable to the laws and rationality of
science.
ROSALYN SUSSMAN YALOW, of the United
States, was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiolo¬
gy or Medicine in 1977 (with R. Guillemin and A.
Schally) for discoveries concerning peptide hor¬
mones. A specialist in nuclear medicine, she de¬
veloped the radio-immunoassay (RIA) techniques
which are used to identify and measure hypothala¬
mus hormones and which have led to great prog¬
ress in neuro-endo'crinology. She currently heads
the Solomon A. Berson Research Laboratory of
the Veterans Administration Medical Centre, and
the department of clinical sciences at the Monte-
fiore Hospital, Bronx, New York.
8
