The conservation
of ancient cities
BY MOUNIR BOUCHENAKI
12
AMONG the many opportunities
available throughout the world to
the traveller or tourist of today, one
of the most exciting is the possibility of
visiting the remains of ancient cities and of
lifting a corner of the veil that shrouds the
civilizations of the past in mystery. Yet we
are light years away from the era of roman¬
tic reverie among ancient ruins, from the
time when the German poet Schiller could
declaim:
Are we to find again that which was lost?
Come Greeks and Romans, come!
Lo, ancient Pompeii is restored,
The city of Hercules is built anew!
Since the end of the nineteenth century,
and above all during the twentieth, the de¬
velopment of the historical sciences and
archaeological research, aided and abetted
on occasions by chance, has led to decisive
progress in our knowledge of ancient sites.
Some sites, like those of Troy, in Asia Mi¬
nor, and Nineveh, in Mesopotamia, had, to
be sure, been brought to light at a time when
enthusiasm for vanished civilizations, far
from being widespread, was limited pri¬
marily to curiosity-seekers and a handful of
scholars.
In the contemporary world, however,
there is clear evidence of an upsurge of
interest in ancient ruins, in their safeguard
and protection. How else can we explain the
vast movement of international solidarity
that sprang up during the 1960s and was
behind the rescue of the famous temples of
Philae and Abu Simbel in Upper Egypt
from the waters of the Nile?
This feeling of solidarity enabled Unesco
to develop the concept of a common human
heritage and to establish a World Heritage
List on which a number of major archae¬
ological sites are inscribed. Sites such as
Aksum (Ethiopia), Chan Chan (Peru),
Hampi (India), Sigiriya (Sri Lanka), Teoti-
huacán (Mexico) and Timgad (Algeria) are
so prestigious that it hardly seems necessary
to explain why they have been inscribed on
the World Heritage List, or why the coun¬
tries in which they are situated have decided
to safeguard them. The one thing they have
in common is that they are archaeological
sites, that is to say that, apart from their
attendants, they are entirely uninhabited
and the only sound now heard in their
streets is the echo of visitors' footsteps.
They could be dubbed "dead cities", since at
some point in the history of each one of-

Teotihuacán (Mexico)
irff^r
The pre-Columbian holy city of
Teotihuacán is located in the
mountains 50 km north-east of
Mexico City. Founded between
the 1st and the 3rd century AD, the city
extended over 36 km2 at the height of its
development, and supported a population
of 200,000. The imposing ceremonial centre
marks a high point in the art of Mexican
classical civilizations, with its main build¬
ing, the Pyramid of the Sun (left), rising
over 75 m from a 350 m2 terrace; the Pyra¬
mid of the Moon, 42 m in height; and the
Temple of Quetzalcóatl, the plumed serpent
of the Aztecs. The city's 4,000 buildings of
volcanic rock, stuccoed with mud or lime
plaster, and its finely-sculpted palaces, were
laid out in a rectangular grid pattern based
on principles of cosmic harmony. A wide
avenue bisected the city and linked markets,
monuments and plazas. The main industry
was the production of obsidian, from which
cutting tools were made for barter. In the
6th century, Teotihuacán controlled a pow¬
erful State with extensive territory, but
around the year 650, for reasons still ob¬
scure, the city was burned down and sub¬
sequently abandoned. When, in the 14th
century, the Aztecs discovered the ruined
metropolis with its enormous pyramids,
they thought that it must have been con¬
structed by the gods, and accordingly gave
it the name Teotihuacán "Place of the
Gods". The site was inscribed on the World
Heritage List in 1987.
Aksum (Ethiopia)
Situated in the Tigre region of
northern Ethiopia, the city of
Aksum was the capital of a fa¬
mous kingdom of Antiquity to
ffih
which it gave its name and which is de¬
scribed in a 3rd-century-AD Greek text as
the "third kingdom of the world". The Ro¬
mans also knew of Aksum at that time. The
city lay on a trade route along which passed
such precious commodities as rhinoceros
horn, ivory, tortoiseshell and obsidian.
Many traces have survived of the past
splendour of Aksum, covering a vast area.
They include gigantic stelae, the highest of
which (right) stands 33 m high and is the
largest known obelisk ever carved and
erected, stone columns engraved with Ethi¬
opian legends, and royal tombs. Legend has
it that beneath one tumulus is the tomb of
the Queen of Sheba. In the western part of
the site are the ruins of 3 ancient castles
built sometime during the first millennium
of the Christian era, and an 18th-century
basilica that provides valuable testimony
about Ethiopian architecture of that time.
As part of the international campaign for
the preservation and presentation of the
cultural heritage of Ethiopia, restoration
work will soon be carried out at Aksum,
which was inscribed on the World Heritage
List in 1980.
them, for reasons that are in some cases not
clear, all activity ceased despite the fact that
their ruins bear eloquent witness to the
ingenuity and vitality of the people who
dwelt there. These cities, once important ,
centres of civilization, are now the domain
of archaeologists and curators who super¬
vise their preservation and their presenta¬
tion to the public.
A rapid survey of these ancient cities
reveals first of all the existence of great
urban civilizations each of which is typical
of the part of the world in which it is
located. Thus, the ancient colony of Tim-
gad, in Algeria, is a city whose structure
reflects the values of Roman civilization into
which has been incorporated the dynamic
force of the indigenous people.
This site, whose symmetrical layout is
still quoted as an example in architectural
and town-planning manuals, is a product of
a comprehensive theory of town-planning
moulded by Oriental and Hellenistic influ¬
ences. This theory precisely encapsulated
the idea that the Ancients had of what a city
should be. As the Greek geographer Pausa-
nias wrote in the second century AD: "How
could I grace with the name 'city' a place
which has no theatre, no agora, no assembly
rooms and no gymnasium?"
The plan and layout of the settlements at
Aksum, Chan Chan, Hampi, Sigiriya and
Teotihuacán have been preserved like
those at Timgad although they belong to
different culture areas and different histor¬
ical periods, and are located in different
parts of the world. They represent a valu¬
able asset for modern man, since contempo¬
rary societies appear to have become aware
of the values attached to archaeological re¬
mains, whose disappearance would be an
irreparable loss for all humanity.
àafeiâa*à*tf3* 13

14
At a given moment in the human story,
each of these ancient cities was the setting
for a specific way of life which bears witness
to the activities, resources, beliefs and orga¬
nization of mankind, in a word, to culture.
It is the duty of the international communi¬
ty to preserve and not to disfigure these
sites.
Although documentary sources for an¬
cient times are generally speaking rare, the
presence of substantial remains buried in the
.soil or visible in the landscape, such as the
giant stelae of Aksum or the temples of
Chan Chan as well as the ruins of the other
cities mentioned, makes it possible to com¬
pile data which deepen our understanding of
how people lived, worked and worshipped
in the past. This stock of knowledge must be
safeguarded, a task which is not always easy.
A country in which there are sites that
usually cover hundreds of hectares, or even,
as at Hampi and Teotihuacán, tens of square
kilometres, is faced with a number of prob¬
lems such as their maintenance and super¬
vision. The inscription of such sites on the
World Heritage List reduces the scale of the
dangers that they face, but it does not elim¬
inate them entirely.
Those responsible for the heritage are
fully aware that the conservation of sites is
often regarded as an activity quite distinct
from the realities of modern life, particular¬
ly by regional planning authorities. As a
result these great archaeological complexes
Timgad (Algeria)
Timgad is the modern name of
the Roman city of Thaugadi,
which was founded by the em¬
peror Trajan in AD 100 as a
defensive military camp north of the Aurès
mountains. Thaugadi grew rapidly. After
the Vandal invasion in the 5th century, it
was destroyed by the mountain people of
the Aurès, then enjoyed a period of revival
in the 6th century under Byzantine occupa¬
tion before being abandoned. Archaeolog¬
ical excavations carried out since 1880 have
revealed the ruins of a city laid out accord¬
ing to the finest and most rigorous princi¬
ples of Roman urban planning and contain¬
ing such characteristic Roman public
buildings as a forum, capitolium (temple of
Jupiter, Juno and Minerva), theatre, baths,
temples, markets and a public library. The
remains of churches show that Christianity
was introduced to Timgad in the 3rd centu¬
ry. The conservation and presentation of
the site raise a number of problems. The
original extent of the settlement must be
precisely determined, taking into account
those parts which have not been fully exca¬
vated. It has been decided to remove the
best mosaic floors from the houses to the
site museum in order to preserve them from
extremes of temperature. An annual music
and drama festival has been established at
Timgad by the local authorities, but certain
events which caused damage to the ancient
theatre have been halted. Timgad was in¬
scribed on the World Heritage List in 1982.
Below, general view showing the triumphal
arch; left, a votive stela.
£**
£<V.u¿4*¿it-¡Z
*géü£3fe^
3jri^
>

Petra (Jordan)
Half-carved, half-built in spec-
Br tacular pink sandstone cliffs
1 util south of the Dead Sea, this an-
ÜHiBl c¡cnt Arabian city was the cap¬
ital of the kingdom of the Nabataeans (4th
century BC-2nd century AD). Situated at
the meeting point of 2 caravan routes, it
became an important centre for trade in
Arabian incense, Indian spices, Chinese silk,
Egyptian gold, and Nubian ivory and
slaves. Between the 1st century BC and the
1st century AD, Petra reached the height of
prosperity and built its first monuments. It
became part of the Roman empire in AD
106, and enjoyed a further period of great¬
ness until the development of alternative
trade routes dealt a death-blow to its econo¬
my. Later, Christians inhabited the city and
crusaders built fortifications which can still
be seen today. Access to Petra is through a
narrow 2-km-long ravine. Temples, tombs
and palaces hewn from the sandstone form
a magnificent setting in which Oriental tra¬
ditions blend with the Graeco-Roman style.
Today adverse atmospheric conditions and
erosion are damaging the ruins. Specialists
have studied the reasons for the deteriora¬
tion of the stone, and a complete photo-
grammetric survey of the site has been car¬
ried out. The World Heritage Committee
has recently provided the Jordanian au¬
thorities with financial aid for the preserva¬
tion of Petra and the restoration of the
Palatial Tomb. Petra was inscribed on the
World Heritage List in 1985. Above, ed-
Deir ("the convent"), a rock-hewn monu¬
ment outside the city which may have been
a royal tomb (2nd-3rd centuries).
are exposed to the risk of destruction. The
development of infrastructures, the building
of tourist accommodation and the use of
monumental sites for the staging of public
spectacles without ensuring that the neces¬
sary precautions are taken, are all dangers
that it is difficult for a national conservation
official to fight against. Added to this is the
constant threat of theft by clandestine
treasure-hunters and unscrupulous pseudo-
researchers, especially in sites that extend
over a large area and are therefore difficult
to supervise.
The inclusion of a site on the World
Heritage List can sometimes carry weight
with decision-makers, since the need to re¬
spect the criteria that classification entails is
backed up by the moral force of the in¬
ternational community. However, there are
many examples throughout the world of
conservation officials and those responsible
for development (such as town-planners,
architects, and tourist authorities) working
closely together to preserve the archaeolog¬
ical heritage and to find solutions to the
complex problems created by the need to
protect ancient remains. The archaeological
site of Carthage is a case in point for, despite
the huge sums of money at stake in the
property market, it has been possible to
create an archaeological park and a building-
free zone and thus to safeguard structures
vital to the understanding of the devel¬
opment of ancient cities.
Another problem may arise within the
very services responsible for safeguarding
the heritage, when, with the legitimate ob¬
jective of advancing knowledge, they are
obliged to undertake a dig in an unexplored
section of an archaeological site. Remains
are obviously better protected if they are left
underground, but where a site has been
largely uncovered the stratigraphie sampling
method, essential for example for the confir¬
mation of a dating, will have the least harm¬
ful effect on conservation.
Another subject of debate among special¬
ists is how far it is permissible to go in
restoring or reconstructing ruined struc¬
tures in order to present them to the public.
The problems that arise with regard to sites
of such exceptional quality that they have
earned inclusion on the World Heritage List
are leading to a reappraisal of attitudes and
to new approaches. Ultimately, the best way
to implement a policy of safeguarding ar¬
chaeological sites is to ensure that people
know about them and visit them, and more
use should be made of the media for this
purpose, particularly as far as young people
are concerned.
We could well apply to archaeological
sites the remark André Malraux once made
about the past in general: "We do not really
know why we are attached to our past, yet
we know very well that we are and that
today all nations are attached to theirs.""
MOUNIR BOUCHENAKI ¿5 a staffmember of
Unesco's Cultural Heritage Division. A historian
and archaeologist who was formerly chief curator
in the Algerian Antiquities Service, he has worked
on a number of archaeological sites in the Medi¬
terranean basin. He is the author of Cités An¬
tiques d'Algérie (Algiers, 1978), Fouilles de la
nécropole occidentale de Tipasa (Algiers, 1976)
and other studies and articles on archaeological
themes. 15
