CHRISTOPHE



PLANTIN
The master-printer of Antwerp
BY FRANCINE DE NAVE
AaBbCcD
FRANCINE DE NAVE, Belgian historian and
palaeographer, is director of the Plantin-Moretus
Museum in Antwerp and of the Antwerp Print-
Room. She is the author ofmany books and articles
on the history ofAntwerp. A longer version of the
present text has appeared in Belgique, des Maisons
et des Hommes, published by Nouvelles Editions
Vokaer, Brussels.
CHRISTOPHE Plantin was born
some time around the year 1520 in
Saint-Avertin, near the French city
of Tours, and served his apprenticeship with
the bookbinder and bookseller Robert Macé
in Caen. In 1549, after a brief stay in Paris,
he moved to Antwerp, at that time the hub
of Western European trade, and set up a
bookbinding business.
Antwerp suited his purpose perfectly, as
it was ideally situated to provide the equip¬
ment and raw materials necessary to set up a
bindery. And since it was also a major
financial centre, the capital necessary to cre¬
ate a business was readily available. In addi¬
tion, it was a city which attracted wealthy
art-lovers of all kinds.
Plantin had been in Antwerp for only a
few years when, following a wound to his
arm, he abandoned bookbinding in favour
of printing. The publication in 1559 of a
description of the magnificent funeral cere¬
mony of the Holy Roman Emperor Charles
V, by his son Philip II of Spain, established
Plantin's reputation, and he quickly found
himself at the head of what would prove to
be the most important printing-house in
Western Europe during the second half of
the sixteenth century.
Between 1563 and 1567, Plantin printed
and published over 200 titles, ranging from
annotated pocket editions of the classics to
liturgical works, Hebrew Bibles, richly il¬
lustrated anatomical treatises and botanical
studies.
Now a man of substance, Plantin enjoyed
great celebrity and was surrounded by a
circle of influential friends and acquaint¬
ances, one of whom Gabriel de Cayas,
secretary" to Philip IIwas to play a decisive
role in the further development of his af¬
fairs. It was Plantin's ambition to produce
an authoritative edition of the Old and New
Testaments; de Cayas secured financial
backing for the project from the Spanish
king, who also sent to Antwerp, to serve as
its specialist editor, his chaplain the hu¬
manist Benedictus Arias Montanus.
The undertaking, which took five years to
complete (1568-1573), was an outstanding
success: a copiously annotated edition of the
Bible in four languages (Hebrew, Syriac,
Greek and Latin), running to eight massive
volumes in folio. This Biblia Regia or Biblia
Polyglotta, as it was known, not only con¬
stituted a personal triumph for Plantin; it
was also the most voluminous publication
ever produced in the Netherlands by a
single printer. Its appearance marked the
beginning of the most prosperous period of
Plantin's business.
Thanks to the success of the Polyglot
Bible, and through the influence of Arias
Montanus, Plantin, who had already ob¬
tained the office of prototypus regius (royal
printer) from the Spanish monarch, was
accorded a monopoly in the sale of missals
and breviaries in Spain and its colonies over¬
seas. The lands in question rapidly became
14

Frontispiece of Plantin's masterpiece, the 8-
volume Biblia Sacra or Polyglot Bible, published
in 4 languages (Latin, Greek, Hebrew and
Syriac).
Photo © Rare Books and Special Collections Division, Library of
Congress, Washington, D.C.
Antwerp's Plantin-Moretus Museum is estab¬
lished on the premises of Christophe Plantin's
printing office and residence. The 16th- and
17th-century printing works has been recon¬
structed in the museum (above).
his most important clients, and carried his
fortunes to their zenith.
No fewer than sixteen presses were at
work in Plantin's printing-house an enor¬
mous figure when it is remembered that the
biggest printer in France at the time, Es¬
tienne, was operating only four. The num¬
ber of his employees confirmed Plantin's
ascendancy: there were 54 staff living and
working on the premises in 1574; with the
addition of those who lived or worked at
home the total must have been in the region
of 150. Work went ahead at a feverish pace;
12- or 13-hour days were the norm. Each
press had to meet a daily target of 1,250
printed sheets, or 2,500 pages. But the type¬
setters, printers and proof readers were by
no means dissatisfied with their lot: they
were pieceworkers, and a high output com¬
manded excellent rates. Plantin's workers
were among the best-paid in Antwerp.
Quantity was not, however, the sole con¬
cern. Plantin insisted on the highest quality
as well. The paper mills of the southern
Netherlands at the time produced only me¬
diocre material, so he imported the finest
paper from Germany, and more especially
from France. The type used for printing his
publications had to be perfect as well, and
he called on the best typecutters of the age:
Claude Garamond, Robert Grandjean,
Guillaume Le Bé and Hendrick van de
Keere, besides playing an important person¬
al role in the development of typestyles in
Western Europe by importing the roman
and italic typefaces currently in use in
France.
Concerned also with the quality of the
The modern typeface known as Plantin,
based on a design used by the Antwerp master-
printer.
illustrations, Plantin preferred to print them
from engraved copper plates, which pro¬
duced finer lines and more delicate tones
than the wood blocks generally utilized. If
the latter gradually fell out of favour for
book illustrations, it was because of the
success enjoyed by Plantin's publications.
Plantin was equally attentive to the con¬
tent of his books. Despite his monopoly of
the sale of liturgical works, his presses were
not exclusively engaged in turning out mis¬
sals, breviaries, antiphonaries,1 diurnals,
books of hours and psalters. He applied
himself to publishing the most outstanding
literary works of the post-humanist age:
collections of the classics or of laws, princi¬
ples and maxims; school books; the first
edition of Variarum lectionum libri III by
the Flemish humanist Justus Lipsius and
Origines Antwerpianae by the physician
Goropius Becanus in 1569; and, in 1574, the
first dictionary of the Netherlandic lan¬
guage, the Dictiunarium Teutónico-Lati¬
num, compiled at his request by his proof
reader Cornelius Kiliaan.
Tragedy came to Antwerp in 1576,
against the troubled background of the wars
of religion in which the Low Countries
were embroiled for much of the second half
of the century. In what came to be known as
the "Spanish Fury", mutinous bands of
Spanish mercenaries sacked the city, mas¬
sacring hundreds of its citizens, plundering
and destroying everything in their path.
Plantin's printing-house was spared, but its
output was seriously affected. After the
"Fury", Antwerp joined in the rebellion
against Spanish absolutism. Trade with
Spain, on which the prosperity of Plantin's
enterprise had depended, fell into a decline.
In 1578, only six presses were functioning;
after 1583 there would never again be more
than ten.
Under such circumstances, Plantin had
little choice but to work with the Repub¬
lican rebels. He was appointed official print¬
er to the city of Antwerp, governed at the
time by a Calvinist magistrate, and later
became printer to the Duke of Anjou,
French ally of William of Orange, the char¬
ismatic leader of the rebellion. The printing-
house thus took on a new lease of life, and
works of considerable importance were
soon emerging once again from the presses.
Towards the end of 1582, Plantin had to
face another turn in his fortunes. Spanish
troops were threatening Antwerp, so he
considered opening a branch office further
north, to which, if necessary, his activities
might be evacuated. He left Antwerp for
Leiden, where his old friend Justus Lipsius,
who was associated with the recently estab¬
lished Calvinist University, had obtained
for him the franchise of the university press,
then he worked for a time in Cologne, but
by 1585 he had returned to Antwerp.
Four years remained to the master print¬
er. The publication of the Martyrologium
Romanum of Cardinal Baronius in 1589 was
Christophe Plantin's last major undertak¬
ing. When he died, that same year, he left
behind a vast enterprise, the printing-house
he had created, which would survive him for
another three hundred years.
1. Books of chant melody and text in the Roman Catho¬
lic Church. Editor.
dEeFfGgHhliJjKkLl
15
