The 'Hundred Entertainments'
China's 2,000-year-old tradition of acrobatics
THE art of Chinese acrobatics dates
back nearly 2,000 years, to the Han
dynasty. Combined with music and
dance, the "Hundred Entertainments", as it
was called, was a major form of amusement
for the ruling classes.
In a work known as the "Prose of the
Western Capital", the scientist and man of
letters Zhang Heng (AD 78-139) vividly
describes the acrobatic art of his time, from
rope dancing and hand standing to juggling,
pole climbing, and balancing on balls. A
stone painting (photo 1) dating from the
Han dynasty, which was found in the ances¬
tral temple of the Wu family in Shandong
Province, depicts a performance that com¬
bines acrobatics with folk dancing.
In the T'ang dynasty (618-907), a special¬
ized "Training Workshop" was established
at the imperial court to train acrobats, musi¬
cians and dancers and to organize shows
comprising up to a dozen types of acrobatic
acts. The T'ang poet Bai Juyi described
some of these, such as "Dual-Sword Danc¬
ing", "Seven-Ball Jumping", "Rope Walk¬
ing" and "Long-Pole Tricks".
During the Sung dynasty (960-1279),
acrobatics gradually went out of favour at
the imperial court, but gained ground as a
form of popular entertainment. "Memories
of the Eastern Capital", by the Southern
Sung writer Meng Yuanlao, records over
one hundred different acrobatic acts.
In the Yuan (1206-1368) and Ming (1368-
1644) dynasties, many acrobatic skills and
techniques were introduced into drama and
opera. The so-called "Lotus Drama" in¬
cluded wire-rope walking, rope dancing,
hand standing, turning somersaults on a
ladder, jar-balancing, lasso tricks and
jumping through fiery or sword-studded
hoops.
China's first national acrobatic group, the
Acrobatic Troupe of China, was created
soon after the founding of the People's Re¬
public in 1949. Inspired by this group, local
troupes were formed all over the country.
Household utensils such as the rice bowl
are among the "props" used by Chinese
acrobats. Balancing a "pagoda" of bowls on
the head has long been part of their reper¬
toire. A picture on a tile unearthed in a Han
tomb in Nan-yang, Honan Province, de¬
picts an acrobat standing on one hand with a
stack of bowls on his head. In the 1950s, a
famous acrobat named Xia Juhua created a
new act which involved balancing a pagoda
of bowls while standing on one hand, and
supporting another stack of bowls between
her feet, thus combining acrobatics and cal¬
listhenics. Her innovation inspired a wide
variety of other "Pagoda of Bowls" acts
(photo 2).
Spinning plates on bamboo poles is
another graceful art which goes back to the
T'ang dynasty and is still practised today
(photo 3). Rope walking and dancing also
have a long history. A huge mural in a Han
tomb in Yinan, Shandong Province, depicts
three girls jumping, dancing and standing
on their hands on a thin rope with four
sharp knives, points uppermost, on the
ground below. Today, in addition to rope
walking, wire walking is practised, either on
a tightly-strung, slack or sloping wire. The
tight-wire walkers specialize in somersaults,
the slack-wire walkers in juggling, clowning
and sword-fights, and sloping-wire perfor¬
mers slide or walk up and down a 10-metre-
long wire strung at an angle of 40°.
The game of diablo, long popular with
Chinese children, has been successfully
turned into a circus act. All kinds of varia¬
tions have been added to the game, which
basically involves whipping a spool (the
"devil") into the air and catching it again
using a cord. The "Two-person Diablo
Game", and "Swinging Around the Body",
as performed by two Chinese acrobats,
Wang Guiying and Wang Shuying, have
added a new dimension to the traditional
game.
The Lion Dance is a beautiful and typical
example of an art form, known as "Mask
Entertainment" in ancient times, in which
people imitate or are disguised as animals.
ë ^
"\ àI;* ><-.
v h¿ mak
1 rsrjî .jr^^^
^T-/& r<V|
1 J>fcl»i#"' -

by Huang Minghua
Bai Juyi, in a description of the Lion Dance
as performed in the T'ang dynasty, wrote
that the dancers wore carved wooden masks
on their heads with gilded eyes and silver-
plated teeth. In recent variations of the
Lion Dance, up to four lions balance on a
ball, sometimes combined with work on a
seesaw (photo 4).
As bicycles are a very common means of
transport in China, the skills of trick cyclists
can be readily understood and appreciated
by Chinese audiences. Although bicycle
acrobatics only began at the beginning of
this century, the technique developed
rapidly, with the emergence of many diffe¬
rent collective balancing (see back cover)
and other trick cycling and unicycling acts.
In the 1950s, the acrobat and trick cyclist Jin
Yeqin introduced his "Clown on a Bicycle",
which never fails to captivate audiences
with its humour and wit.
Juggling with the feet is another ancient
balancing skill which is still practised. Wu
Zimu, a Sung dynasty writer, describes
artistes juggling bottles, plates, urns and
clocks with their feet. Peng Shiwang of the
Ch'ing dynasty (1616-1911) recounts how
an acrobat used his feet to juggle an eight-
year-old child, a table, a wooden hammer
and a nine-runged ladder. One of the hun¬
dred paintings produced by a Beijing artist
to illustrate Ch'ing dynasty customs depicts
one acrobat juggling a ladder with his feet
while another balances on top (photo 5).
While people, ladders, stools and chairs
are still used by foot jugglers, new acts have
been invented using even more props:
known as "heavy-weight juggling" with a
table or an urn, or "light-weight juggling"
with tubes or wooden plates.
Chinese acrobats have adapted valuable
techniques from other art forms in order to
develop new shows, some of which incorpo¬
rate dance poses modelled on images from
Buddhist frescoes in the cave temples at
Tun-huang, Kansu Province. From sporting
events they have borrowed the pole climb¬
ing technique (photo 6); other shows have
been developed from work on thé exercise
rings and the horizontal bar; while spring¬
board jumping, introduced into China in
the 1930s, has evolved into a series of com¬
plicated and highly skilled acts, where a
leap from the springboard can take an
acrobat to the top of a six-high human
pyramid, turning a backward somersault on
the way.
HUANG MINGHUA, of China, is a member of
the Association of Chinese Acrobats and deputy
editor-in-chief of "Modern Acrobatics" maga-
