The private life of the vampire bat
by Marian Stamp Dawkins
Photo C.V.V. © Jacana, Paris
...and other
surprising examples
ofanimal behaviour
THERE is a tendency among many of
us to think that the human view of
the world is the only one. We be¬
come so wrapped up in our own concerns
that we may fail to notice that there is
another point of view. We may think that
the suburbs of our towns are divided up into
postal districts or sharply delineated by the
boundary between our property and our
neighbours'. But cats will divide up the
same area quite differently and small birds
such as great tits see it divided into territor¬
ies, to be fiercely defended against other
great tits, with little regard as to where
humans put their arbitrary lines of own¬
ership.
Blood-eating vampire bat of tropical Amer¬
ica (Desmodus rotundus, actual size 6-9 cm.)
The study of animal behaviour is,
perhaps more than any other branch of
biology, a window into other worlds, the
worlds of species that may be very different
from our own, and it has provided some
astonishing revelations into the private lives
of the animals concerned. Who would have
thought that vampire bats would be willing
to give each other food when they were in
Continued on page 33
31

1
y-
s
^
*
Study of vervet monkeys in Kenya's
Amboseli National Park showed that the
monkeys have different alarm calls for their
3 main predators, leopards, eagles and
snakes. Each type of call elicits a response
appropriate to the kind of predator with
which the call is associated. When the monk¬
eys hear a "leopard" call, they run for the
nearest trees; an "eagle" call causes them to
look up at the sky and head for dense scrub;
and a "snake" call has them standing on
their hindlegs peering into the long grass
around them.
©
4 Termite tower blocks
Termites build brilliantly designed "air-con¬
ditioned" nests which provide the climate
suited to their needs. The nests begin as
underground chambers and swell above
ground as the termite population grows,
eventually forming a mound up to 6 metres
high. The large population means that the
air has to be regularly purified. High humid¬
ity and temperature are also critical for
survival. The termites achieve climate con¬
trol by an elaborate system of air ducts
inside the mound through which body heat
and carbon dioxide are Filtered to the outside
walls and cool fresh air is channelled back to
the base.
2
©
32

Continued from page 31
need, and also remember which bat had
done them a good turn in the past? But,
unlikely though it sounds, G.S. Wilkinson
has shown that these bats seem to realize
which of their fellows are in danger of
starvation and then give them blood meals if
they are. There is a catch, however. A bat is
more likely to provide food for another one
if, in the past, the starving bat has given
food to it. An unhelpful bat is therefore less
likely to get help itself when the need arises.
Just as unexpected were the insights into
monkey society that Dorothy Cheney and
Robert Seyfarth found when they started
watching vervet monkeys in the Amboseli
National Park in Kenya. One of the first
things they noticed was that the monkeys
make different alarm calls depending on
what sort of predator they have seen . If one
monkey has seen a snake, it warns the
others by giving a call that makes them look
down onto the ground; if it has seen a
leopard, it gives a second sort of call that
makes the others run into trees; and if it
gives the "eagle alarm" call, the other
monkeys look expectantly up into the sky.
The monkeys clearly have the ability to
"tell" each other what is going on.
More recently, the same workers have
shown that vervet monkeys are also con
noisseurs of each others' family relation¬
ships. A monkey that has recently been in
an aggressive interaction with another one
is more likely to threaten the kin of that
second monkey than before. The monkey
apparently notices who are the close associ¬
ates of the individual that is bothering him
and then takes it out on them just because
they are members of the same family!
The parallels between a group of animals
"talking" to each other about things going
on in their environment and having a de¬
tailed knowledge of each others' family re¬
lationships may be a little too close for
comfort to those who like to see a very sharp
dividing line between our own species and
any other animal. But if there is one thing
that the study of animal behaviour teaches
us, it is that the dividing line, although it
may be there, is not nearly as sharp as we
might like to think it is.
One area in which we humans tend to
think that we stand quite apart from other
animals, for example, is that of choosing a
mate. In fact, in farming, dog-breeding and
all sorts of other situations, we assume that
the animals do not care who they get as a
mate just as long as it is the right species and
that we can direct them to whatever partner
we choose. Our desire for bigger and better
bodies or more milk rides roughshod over
any preference they might have. And yet
when we look at what animals do when left
to choose mates on their own, we find that
not only are they often extremely fussy, but
that their choices, particularly those of
females, are based on the most pragmatic
considerations of social status and material
wealth in their partners.
Female spotted flycatchers (small migra¬
tory birds) have a strong preference for
males that arrive on the breeding grounds
early in the spring and set up their territor
ies before trie other males arrive. These
early arrivals tend to be the older males so
the females are apparently choosing
mature, well-established males as their
partners. However, by cleverly manipulat¬
ing the numbers of nest-boxes available in a
given area at any one time, R. Alatalo and
his colleagues in Sweden were able to show
that it was not the male himself the females
were going for, but his territory. What the
females really wanted was a safe place to
nest and this, in their view, meant an area
full of tall trees with high nest sites well out
of harm's way. If such a territory was de¬
fended by an older male, a female would
choose him, but if the territory belonged to
a younger male, he would do just as well. It
A fox investigates radio tracking apparatus
used to study foxes.
\

was the resources and nature of the territory
that mattered, not the male himself.
Even more mercenary are the female
hanging flies studied by Randy Thornhill in
the United States. These females simply
will not mate at all unless presented with
food. The larger the gift of insect food, the
longer the male is allowed to copulate and
the more eggs he fertilizes. The transaction
is as basic and straightforward as that.
It is clear, even from these few examples,
that the lives of many animals are of great
complexity and in some ways seem to pro¬
vide echoes of what we find in human
beings. But are we right to draw such paral¬
lels and, even if we wanted to, which anim¬
als should we look to? Do we look to our
closest living relatives, the monkeys and
apes? If so, do we see ourselves as baboons
with their male dominance hierarchies and
harems where the male disciplines his
females by biting them on the back of the
neck?. Or should we look to chimpanzees
with their promiscuous, much more egalita¬
rian society based on political alliances be¬
tween brothers and close relatives? If we
really want to draw fruitful analogies,
perhaps we should look even further afield.
After all, ants are one of the few kinds of
animal to go in for organized warfare in the
way that humans do.
In view of the enormous range of ways in
which different animals run their lives,
there are perhaps only two conclusions we
can draw with any certainty when we com¬
pare animals to humans. The first is that the
human view of survival, the choice of mate,
the rearing of young and the complexities of
social relationships is not the only one. We
share this planet with millions of other spe¬
cies whose lives, if we just take the trouble
to look into them, are full and rich in their
own right. There are other pairs of eyes
besides human ones looking out onto our
world and knowledge of that fact should
surely affect the ways we treat other species
and respond to them. It is arrogance indeed
to see our own species as the only one of
importance and, although it may dent our
human pride a little, perhaps we do have to
acknowledge that the study of animal be¬
haviour shows up parallels and similarities
in areas we might have thought were
uniquely human.
The other conclusion is essentially hope¬
ful. Most biologists believe that all animals
evolved by the process of natural selection,
which, on the face of it, appears to be a
ruthlessly selfish struggle for survival. We
might expect, therefore, to see "Nature red
in tooth and claw", as the fittest struggle to
survive and those unsuited to their environ¬
ments lose out in the competition for life.
Instead, what do we find? We find co¬
operation and collaboration, caring and
feeding of others. We find parents looking
after young, we find animals warning each
other of danger, we find even those hated
animals, vampire bats, feeding each other
when one of their number is in danger of
starvation. From the essentially selfish
struggle to survive and reproduce has
evolved co-operation and mutual aid be¬
cause these, in the long run, give both par¬
ties an advantage.
For many animals, to belong to a group
that aids them or feeds them when they are
in need gives them a better chance in life
than leading a solitary existence, even
though group membership may be at the
price of sometimes giving aid and protec¬
tion to others in return. Co-operation can
pay off. It may be co-operation born of
self-interest, but it is co-operation never¬
theless. Surely our own species, troubled
with conflict and competition, can take
some comfort in that.
MARIAN STAMP DAWKINS, British ethologist,
is Fellow in Biological Sciences al Somerville
College, Oxford, where she teaches animal be¬
haviour. Her research, carried out at the Depart¬
ment ofZoology in Oxford, is on the use ofanimal
behaviour to promote animal welfare. She is the
author o/Animal Suffering: the Science of Anim¬
al Welfare, which examines ways in which animal
suffering can be assessed, and Unravelling Anim¬
al Behaviour, an account of current problems in
ethology.
