The Big Top ^
The modern circus, an international art by Anthony Hippisley Coxe

MORE than 16,000 books are
known to have been written about
the circus: that is the surprising
total of entries in Raymond Toole Stott's
monumental circus bibliography Circus and
Allied Arts. Historians say that the modern
circus was invented in 1768 by Philip Astley
at Halfpenny Hatch, near Westminster
Bridge, London, and it seems highly prob¬
able that it was Astley, a former cavalry
sergeant-major trained as a rough-rider,
who first found that by galloping in a circle,
while standing upright on his horse's back,
centrifugal force could help him keep his
balance. After all, most of the trick riders
who appeared in the middle of the eight¬
eenth century started as riding masters,
steeped in the traditions of the rectangular
manège.
But did Astley trace the first ring in Lon¬
don, and did this take place in 1768?
In his Memoirs, published in 1830, Harry
Angelo writes that "Corporal Astley as¬
tonished the common people of Wilton ...
when one day his horse galloped in a circle.
With Astley upon its back, standing upon
his head...." That event took place some
130 kilometres west-south-west of London;
and since he was still a corporal the date
must be circa 1761.
Of course one trick rider does not make a
circus, but the reason why other showmen,
such as jugglers, stilt walkers, acrobats and
rope dancers, all found the ring an ideal
place in which to perform, can be readily
appreciated. Unlike the actor, musician,
singer or dancer, the circus artiste does not
interpret; he demonstrates some aspect of
physical prowess. But that demonstration
of agility or balance or dexterity must be
believed. In the circus arena there are eyes
all round to see that nothing is faked.
Hippodramas, trick riders and clowns
Small wonder then that such a spectacle
was immediately appreciated all over the
world; except in the United Kingdom, its
birthplace. Here Astley and his rival
Charles Hughes thought that by adding a
stage to the side of the ring they could
double the attraction. But the Spectacle of
Actuality is killed if it becomes associated
with the Spectacle of Illusion. If you know
that a certain role is being played by an
actor, you must have lingering doubts about
the rope dancer's performance; is the rope
really much thicker than it looks? Might
there not be some unseen wires which help
him keep his balance?
This misalliance produced a hybrid form
of entertainment, equestrian drama. It did
not survive for long in continental Europe.
Nor did it find favour with the tenting circus
proprietors in the United Kingdom. They
wondered why on earth they should make
travel more difficult and expensive by cart¬
ing round a lot of unnecessary scenery,
costumes and "props".
Halfway between hippodramas such as
"The Battle of Waterloo" and the straight¬
forward trick riding in the ring, came scenes
on horseback performed with the greatest
success by Andrew Ducrow. He was the
first great international star of the circus.
Yet of the score or more roles which he
enacted on the back of his horse "Indian
Hunter", "Chinese Enchanter", "Tyrolean
Shepherd", "Jack Tar" and so on only one
is still seen today: "The Courier of St.
Petersburg", in which the countries through
which a courier would ride on his way to
Russia are represented by horses which pass
beneath him as he straddles two more. It is
easy to see why this survived while all others
failed. It requires much more riding skill
agility and sense of balance than acting
ability.
Perhaps one other riding act can be
traced back to Andrew Ducrow. Although
Billy Bell is usually given the credit for
inventing the bareback or Jockey act, in the
1870s, I believe that it can be traced back to
"Le Jockeis (sic) Anglais" performed by
Ducrow in the 1820s.
Be that as it may, the Jockey act was the
one at which the British excelled. Apart
from Bell, Wilkes Lloyd, Adolph Wells,
Hubert Cooke and John Frederick Clarke
all achieved international fame. Clarke was
the greatest of all Jockey riders. Nobody
took up the £1,000 challenge which he
Erecting the Big Top. The Cirque Grock,
Cannes (France), 1954

Below, poster featuring the English white-
faced clown Foottit (1864-1921), who intro¬
duced a number of innovations into the
clown's repertoire. When performing at the
Nouveau Cirque in Paris he created a
famous double act with a Cuban artiste,
Chocolat (Raphaël Padilla, 1868-1917),
which established the classic partnership be¬
tween the clown and his stooge, the auguste.
His innovations in make-up were also widely
imitated.
NOUVEflU GRAND CIRQUE
ARl S
E
0)
CO
5
<u
oí
CD
É
©
.F 9
CLOWN FOOTTIT
H.HOUCK1
Above, "Astley's Amphitheatre" in London
as depicted in an early 19th-century print by
Auguste Pugin and Thomas Rowlandson.
The Amphitheatre was built by the British
horseman and acrobat Philip Astley (1742-
1814), one of the great figures in the history
of the circus and reputedly the first man to
think of staging shows in a ring.
issued. He was born in 1869 into a circus
family whose founder is said to have been
the model Charles Dickens used for Sleary
in Hard Times.
Today, that circus is utterly forgotten. It
was not a large show. The three partners,
Powell, Foottit and Clarke, reckoned their
share was worth £500 each. In the middle of
the last century it would travel almost 4,000
kilometres in 32 weeks, visiting some 200
towns and taking £8,500-£9,000 in ticket
sales.
Yet that one little show was the cradle of
three of the most famous circus performers
the world has ever seen. John Frederick
Clarke was one. His cousin Ernest Clarke
was the first man to turn a triple somersault,
from bar to catcher, on the flying trapeze.
The third performer, Foottit, was destined
to become famous as a clown.
Clowns have always been an integral pan
of the circus. In a spectacle of physical
prowess which produces a mental reac¬
tion such as wonder, astonishment,
apprehension or admiration in the au¬
dience, a complementary note is needed a
mental concept which produces a physical
reaction in the audience that of laughter.
And like the Jockey riders, many British
clowns achieved more success in continen¬
tal Europe than in their native land. The
two outstanding examples are John Price
(whose splendid portrait by Renoir is now
in the Kröller-Müller collection in The
Netherlands) and Foottit, who with his
Black partner Chocolat became the toast of
Paris at the Nouveau Cirque and was im¬
mortalized by Toulouse-Lautrec.
The epitome of style
Meanwhile, in France and Germany
another aspect of riding had come to the
fore. This was La Haute Ecole, or The High
School of Equitation. I still find an écuyère
riding side-saddle, wearing a habit, top hat,
veil and a bunch of violets in her but¬
tonhole, the very epitome of style. And no
doubt this view was shared by most mem¬
bers of high society at the end of the last
century. The Jockey Club had its private
box at the circus in Paris; while in St. Peters¬
burg the stables were specially scented so
that the aristocratic patrons would not be
offended by the smell.
The circus was better appreciated by the
aristocracy in continental Europe than in
the United Kingdom where , in spite of royal
patronage, High School was rather despised
by the upper classes. They preferred fox¬
hunting. The interest in dressage is a very
recent phenomenon.
Another aspect of working with horses,
at which the French and Germans were
more adept than the British, was the Lib¬
erty act of riderless horses. Ernst Renz,
Eduard Wulff, Albert Carré and, above all,
the Schumanns had superb troupes of
beautifully matched horses, trained to
perfection.
Daring feats on tightrope and flying trapeze
So for 150 years the horse dominated the
circus scene. But although it never lost
pride of place, in the middle of the last
century another influence was making itself
felt. Jules Leotard's invention of the flying
trapeze and Blondin's feat of crossing
Niagara Falls on a tightrope focused the
attention of the public on the individual
performer, working without animals. The
aerialist and rope dancer were followed by
jugglers such as Paul Cinquevalli. Each of
these disciplines eventually threw up the
outstanding acts of all time, the Codonas on
the flying trapeze, Con Colleano on the low
wire, the Wallendas up aloft and Enrico
Rastelli as juggler. Their actual feats may
now have been surpassed, but not their
sense of style.
By the end of the last century, wild anim¬
als were introducing an exotic note to the
circus. Animal dealers such as Carl Hagen-
beck of Hamburg were responsible. He is
usually given credit for introducing the
"gentling" system of animal training, but I
believe the tradition is much older than
that, stretching back into prehistory. Wild
animals had been exhibited in the
menageries throughout the nineteenth cen¬
tury. The wagon cages lined the walls of the
tent surrounding the public. The great in¬
novation came when the wagon cage, open
bars all round with all shutters removed,
was dragged into the centre of the circus
ring. The next step was to build up the big
cage in the ring itself.
And this brings me to the latest influence
on the spectacle of the circus: the growing
importance of apparatus. This movement
started in nineteenth-century Russia, and I
believe that it was the amazing artistry of
their ordinary gymnasts on apparatus such

In the early days of the circus, displays of
equestrianism dominated the scene. Below,
the celebrated British trick rider Andrew
Ducrow (1793-1842) as "Jack Tar", in one of
his many scenes on horseback.
The Clown (1868), by the French painter
Auguste Renoir, is a portrait ofJohn Price, a
member of a family of noted English circus
artistes and one of the first "musical"
clowns. Star performers at the Cirque Loyal
in France, John and William Price are
thought to have created the act in which two
clowns play the violin while performing
acrobatics and contortions.
as the Roman Rings and horizontal bars
that forced the circus to find a more spec¬
tacular presentation. So instead of perform¬
ing on a beam, the outside edge of a giant
moving semaphore arm was introduced.
The high wire could no longer remain hori¬
zontal; it had to take on an oblique angle
before our eyes.
Dressing for the occasion
That phrase "before our eyes" reminds
me how important a role apparatus and
accessories perform in the circus. Pierre
Bost, in Le Cirque et le Music Hall (1931),
has pointed out that whereas in the variety
theatre the curtain rises to reveal the appar¬
atus already set up, in the circus the compo¬
nent parts are brought in piece by piece and
assembled before our eyes. One of the mo¬
ments of delight for the aficionado is to
watch an almost insignificant little man in a
dressing gown and clogs adjusting the align¬
ment, checking the level, testing the ten¬
sion, and, when satisfied, leaving the ring
only to throw off his dressing gown and
make a magnificent entry, arm upraised in
salutation, for all the world as if he was
appearing for the very first time.
After such evidence of authenticity,
would it not be absurd for the ring-boys to
cover the apparatus with artificial roses to
make it look like a pergola? Yet I have seen
perches supposedly disguised as palm trees,
and more than one aerial act has introduced
a phoney aeroplane, which apart from look¬
ing silly also distracts by its noise.
This is over-production, which can also
be seen in the costumes performers wear.
They should be designed to enhance the
act. Ever since Con Colleano made his
entrance in Mexican trousers, wire walkers
have copied him. They seem oblivious to
the fact that, once on the wire, he ripped
these trousers off as he turned a
somersault to appear in the knee breeches
of a bull-fighter, so that his magnificent
footwork could be properly appreciated.
Tights and leotards still show aerialists to
their best advantage, because there is no¬
thing to hinder one's appreciation of their
movements through the air, or of the fasci¬
nating foreshortened view of the human
form seen from an unfamiliar angle.
In a High School act it is the unity of horse
and rider that needs stressing. Therefore
the formal classical costume, or the uniform
of Le Cadre Noir, are ideal. Yet I have seen
riders dressed in the red, white and green
frills and flounces, ribbons and bows of
Hungarian peasants, which immediately
established a disunity between horse and
rider. Because I want to see performers
look their best, I do not like seeing dogs
dressed up in crinolines. It merely detracts
from their natural attributes.
I am sure that by now many readers will
think I have gone too far adopted a much
too purist approach. What, you may well
ask, of the rococo band wagons with their
sun-burst wheels, the "oompah" music of
the befrogged and shako-ed band, the
spangles, the elaborately ornate show
fronts with their parades ...? Is not all this
"circus"?
Of course it is. It is the picture-frame
which surrounds the painting, but it is not
the painting it holds. It is a splendid setting
for the spectacle, but it is not the spectacle
itself. What I have tried to do is to get down
to the fundamental principles on which the
circus is built; why it appeals to everyone all
over the world, regardless of age, income
group, rank or class the one truly inter¬
national entertainment where nations are
united.
ANTHONY HIPPISLEY COXE, of the United
Kingdom, has written many articles and books on
the circus, including A Seat at the Circus (Evans
Brothers, London, 1951, Archon Books, Ham-
den, USA, 1980). His extensive collection of
circus memorabilia is preserved in the Theatre
Museum, London.
