The wolf-
a man-made scapegoat by Daniel Dubois
IN the beginning man made a pact with
nature. All animals, not only domestic
but also those that were thought to be
dangerous, were held sacred, and to kill and
eat them was regarded as murder and
punishable. Save on rare occasions when
the whole tribe participated, the use of their
flesh was forbidden.
Thus it came about that small groups or
clans of men concluded quasi-religious
pacts with such animals as the bull , the hare ,
the lion, the snake, the eagle and the scor¬
pion. The wolf was one of these animals.
The clan that chose the wolf made him their
totem. He became their brother, their
name and emblem, their ancestor, the re¬
vered animal which it was forbidden to kill
or eat, the tribe's guide and protector who
never attacked its members. He was a full
member, as it were, and had to respect and
share in all the rights and duties of his
brother-men.
This fundamental pact or primitive taboo
was reflected in a mandatory rule "thou
shalt not kill". This pact applied to men as
well as to their brothers the wolves, and
it is still observed between the wolves
themselves.
Mythology has been described as a dilu¬
tion of totemism which occurred when man
abandoned his pact with nature and trans¬
ferred his trust to new gods. But in many
instances man gave his totem animal to his
gods for a companion, or even deified the
animal, as in Ancient Egypt, where the wolf
Because of its fearsome reputation the wolf
has more than once been wrongly accused of
crimes it did not commit. When the noto¬
rious "Beast of Gévaudan" terrorized part
of southern France in the 18th century,
claiming over 100 lives and wounding 30
people, an enormous wolf was thought to be
the culprit. Today much of the evidence
seems to suggest that the atrocities were
caused by human hands. Above, contem¬
porary depiction of the Beast of Gévaudan.
was worshipped at Lycopolis, the city of the
wolves, capital of the nome of Lycopolite,
the homeland of Plotinus, now called
Assiout. In ancient Greece, Apollo, the god
of day and light, was also a wolf-god. A
bronze wolf guarded his altar in the temple
of Delphi.
Mars-Ares, the Roman god of war, had a
wolf for his emblem, and sometimes
changed into a wolf by donning a wolfskin.
It was his seduction of the vestal virgin Rhea
Silvia that led to the creation of Rome. She
was punished by drowning and her children ,
Romulus and Remus, were in danger of
certain death in the marshy waters of the
Tiber when they were rescued by a she-wolf
near Mount Palatine. Later, Romulus kil¬
led his brother and built his city on the
mountain where the she-wolf had reared
them. From that day Rome adopted the
wolf as its totem and paraded its famous
standard, decorated with the wolf, through¬
out the Roman world.
Further north the Scandinavian wolf-god
Odin (Wotan to the Germans) reigned,
assisted by the wolves Gere and Freke, who
never left his side. There is no trace of fear
of the wolf in any of these legends at the
most a kind of respect. It could not have
been otherwise, since the wolf was man's
brother and often his protector.
Some Christian saints, especially her¬
mits, lived without fear amongst the anim¬
als of the forest. Examples of wolf-loving
saints abound, but we shall mention only a
few. Among the Slavs there was a tradition
that Saint Peter was the wolves' shepherd
and that on 17 January he assembled them
all and distributed food supplies to them for
the coming year. In eastern Europe, Saint
George, patron of wild beasts, was accom¬
panied by wolves who were called his
hounds and were his favourite companions.
The blind Saint Hervé had a faithful wolf to
guide him. Saint Francis of Assisi made a
friendship pact with the wolf of Gubbio.
The pact was respected, and thanks to it the
reformed wolf was fed by the people of
Gubbio for the rest of his life.
Then, suddenly, everything changed.
From being a god or companion of the gods,
a friend or familiar animal of the saints, the
wolf gradually became a despised and hated
beast, an evil animal earmarked for destruc¬
tion. He became the enemy and supreme
insult the Devil; the werewolf, Satan's
henchman, Hell's procurer. What is the
reason for this hatred, which still survives in
our subconscious, even though the wolf is
now only found in fairytales, comic strips,
advertisements, and films of the fantastic?
If we do not know exactly what hap¬
pened, we can at least try to understand the
reasons for this turnabout. It is strange that,
although prehistoric man accurately repre¬
sented many animals on the walls of his
22

*c
-*~<rcZ í 1/Vi
^"Wolf man" Werner Freund, a former keep¬
er at Stuttgart Zoo, has bred a pack of 20
wolves in a specially made enclosure at Mer-
zig, in the Saar forest, Fed. Rep. of Ger¬
many. He lives among the animals, playing,
eating and even sleeping with them.
The wolf has been persecuted unremittingly
for centuries and has all but disappeared
from many of its former haunts, at least in
Western Europe, where only a few isolated
specimens continue to lead a precarious ex¬
istence. Below, a European wolf cub.
cave-dwellings, he very rarely represented
the wolf. And yet we know that the wolf
existed at that period, since many wolves'
remains have been found in deposits of
bones. Pierced eyeteeth of wild boars and
wolves, probably used as pendants or com¬
ponents of necklaces, have also been found,
especially in children's tombs. To the
eyeteeth was attributed the power to pro¬
tect from disease and the evil eye, a power
later found in magic and popular medicine.
Clearly, therefore, our hunter-gatherer
ancestors were not afraid of the wolf.
The transition to livestock rearing and
agriculture brought man and wolf who
occupied the same territories and had simi¬
lar modes of behaviour into deadly con¬
frontation. The wolf fell victim to steppe
and forest clearances, and, driven into
smaller and smaller areas where prey be¬
came ever scarcer, he became dependent on
man for his survival. In the West he chiefly
attacked livestock, an abundant and easy
prey. Sometimes hunger or rabies forced
him to emerge from his lair and attack his
persecutor, man. Hence the hatred and
fear, sharpened further by wars, invasion
and famines.
Henceforth the two enemies waged an
unceasing war on each other in which man
spared no effort as a hunter, setting traps
and snares, and using poisons and all kinds
of weapon. At a very early date man de¬
cided to exterminate the wolf because of the
wolf's damaging effect on the economy. No
account was taken of the wolf's important
and necessary ecological role, nor of his role
in medicine, for many parts of the wolf have
been used in the materia medica.
In Western Europe, the Emperor Charle¬
magne institutionalized the extermination
of the wolf when he established the
Louveterie or wolf-hunt. He had his vassals
appoint two officers in each fief, whose duty
was to hunt down the wolf. The system was
repeatedly modified and finally abolished
by Louis XVI on 9 August 1787 as an eco¬
nomy measure.
Napoleon I re-established the Louveterie
and placed it under the supervision of a
Grand Veneur or Master of the Imperial
Hounds. Everywhere, the Lieutenants de
Louveterie were big landowners. Many of
them were members of the nobility and
played an important role in local politics. It
was not until 1971 that this legalized surviv¬
al of feudalism was finally abolished by an
act of parliament.
The wolf is now totally extinct in Ireland,
the United Kingdom, France, Belgium,
The Netherlands, Denmark, the Federal
Republic of Germany, the German Demo¬
cratic Republic, Switzerland, Austria and
Hungary. The species is virtually extinct in
Norway, Sweden and Finland and is en¬
dangered in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia,
Italy, Poland, Portugal and Spain. Today it
is only in the snow-bound wastes of Alaska,
Canada and the USSR that the wolf is at
home.
Has fear of the wolf or rather the wolf
psychosis disappeared? Whenever a
strange, ferocious animal is mentioned,
someone will bring up the wolf and his
misdeeds, his ferocity, cruelty and man-
eating proclivities. During the Middle Ages
this fear was nurtured by tales of fantasy
told around the fire on long winter nights,
and later in cheap news-sheets which seized
upon accidents and attacks by wild animals;
as well as by the civil and religious author¬
ities.
Nowadays the wolf seems to have lost his
power to frighten, and soon fear of the wolf
will be only a myth, perhaps less because
of his disappearance than because we have
acquired a better understanding of his
behaviour.
DANIEL DUBOIS, French ethnozoologist, is a
staff member of the laboratory of ethnobiology
and biogeography at the Natural History
Museum, Paris. He is co-author, with Daniel
Bernard, of L'homme et le loup (2nd edition,
1987) and has published articles in a number of
periodicals. He is currently working on a book
about people and trees.
23
