Everyday life and letters
in ancientRussia _
;.
I
PP
BY MIKHAIL J. BRAICHEVSKY
IN ancient Rus', birch bark played a similar role to that of
papyrus in ancient Egypt and wax tablets in Rome.
Although feudal deeds, which were meant to be pre¬
served indefinitely, were written on parchment, birch bark
was used for writing of a more everyday kind, such as
instructions about farm or household matters, acknowledg¬
ments of debt, memoranda, and private correspondence. In
1951, archaeologists working in the ancient Russian city of
Novgorod unearthed several score of these texts, the oldest
dating from the late eleventh century. The importance of this
remarkable find for the history of language and culture is
comparable to that of papyri for classical studies.
The writers and recipients of the birch bark missives were
people of various degrees of eminence and from different
sectors of society. They included boyars, patricians, ordinary
artisans, peasants and soldiers. Hundreds of such writings
have been found. Nearly all deal with everyday matters,
reflecting the humdrum side of life which in most historical
sources is overshadowed by events of national importance.
Such material is a mine of information about the extent of
literacy in Rus' and about the existence of a well-established
primary education system there. Schoolchildren even had
"exercise-books", as we know from the discovery of those
that once belonged to a little boy called Onfim, who lived in
Novgorod in the first half of the thirteenth century.
Thus it is not surprising that many inscriptions should have
been found on instruments used by the master craftsmen of
ancient Rus'. A jeweller's matrix unearthed in Kiev is in¬
scribed with the name of its owner, "Makosimov". Arabic
inscriptions on matrices discovered in the Podol district of
Kiev provide valuable evidence about the international com¬
position of the patrician class in Kiev. The inscription on an
amphora found in Kiev reads "Mstislavl's amphora", indicat¬
ing its owner. A fragment of another amphora is inscribed
with the word "good" probably part of a formula express¬
ing good wishes. Another inscription, which reads "May this
amphora be well filled!", is quite unambiguous.
Specialists are still arguing about the meaning of the inscrip¬
tion on the best-known amphora, which was discovered in a
Birch bark manuscripts discovered at the city
ofNovgorodsince 1951 haveprovided a host of
= fascinating details about life in medieval
g Russia. Above, fragment ofa letter datingfrom
g: the late 14th century. Signed drawing, below,
© was made in the early 13th century by a school-
I ' boy named Onfim. It shows Onfim astride a
S charger with an enemy dead at his feet.
26

,**PT
m
&UC*
:i ii.*
g».
Photo © Mistetsvo publishers, Kic
graveyard at Gnezdovsk near Smolensk. Some read it as
Goroukhshcha (mustard), others as Goroushna (gaseous mix¬
ture), while yet another school has suggested the curious
reading Goroukh psa (Goroukh wrote this). This find is
particularly interesting because it dates from the first half of
the tenth century, before Prince Vladimir's baptism. We
know that writing existed in Rus' long before 988 from
treaties concluded between Rus' and the Greeks, from the
"Life of Cyril the Philosopher", and from information re¬
corded by writers from the East. But on the amphora from
Gnezdovsk we have a "real-life" autograph written before the
time of Vladimir.
A tenth-century writer named Chernorizets Khrabr, who
wrote a treatise on the rise of Slav literacy, suggested that
writing developed in the following stages: "first, our ances¬
tors used 'marks' and 'cuts' when they wanted to transmit
information, then they used characters from the Greek
alphabet 'without adaptation', and finally Cyril invented a
specifically Slav alphabet."
An alphabet recently discovered on the wall of the chapel of
St. Mikhail, in the cathedral of St. Sophia in Kiev, shows the
first stage of the "adaptation" of the Greek alphabet to the
phonetic characteristics of Slav languages. In addition to the
Greek letters, it contains four characters indicating the Slav
sounds "B", "Zh", "Sh" and "Shch", for which symbols had
to be found.
In any society, the introduction and spread of literacy is
accompanied by revolutionary changes in all spheres of social
life. With the coming of literacy, information becomes auton¬
omous and acquires almost unlimited possibilities for trans¬
mission in space and time. It can be said that the extraordinary
development of culture in ancient Rus' before the Mongol
invasion was largely due to this circulation of information
within society.
If we consider culture as a system, we can see that it is really
a whole, and that the factors that determine its development
influence (albeit in different ways) all spheres of creative
activity, from science and agriculture to poetry, metallurgy,
clothing and architecture. The latter calls for special attention.
Two horsemen slaying a warrior are shown on
this low-relief carving (late 12th century).
Now in the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow, the
relieforiginally came from the cathedral ofSt.
Michael with the Golden Roof, Kiev. Built
between 1108 and 1113, the cathedral is re¬
nowned for its mosaics and frescoes, some of
which are thought to be the work of a great
Russian icon painter, Alimpi of Kiev.
tâMSà
Enamelled medallion dating from the early
13th century. Around the image of Christ are
the words "I am the light".
27

ía. íuok» . rttmorauy A\Jr nfitfrV\ri'h\jfoy ru,CöAHrnri nm>j)o -,
UKa
0 í m a*í ahía- o^r.b.rAaAArntt - ríAKírtf . HMurrFM ßHA,fi<i
Miniature from the "Chronicle of Radziwill",
a late 15th-century illustrated manuscript (see
also caption page 6). The scene, set in the
Christianized Russia of 1092, shows the people
of Polotsk barricaded inside their homes to
escape the "naves", orspirits ofthe dead, whose
appearance in Polotsk, according to the Chro¬
nicle, was a portent of great misfortune
throughout the country.
These anthropomorphic laundry beaters from
Kievan Russia are decorated with Sun and
Earth symbols. Each head has the form of the
Sun, the cross-pieces are shaped like outstretch¬
ed arms, and the base is a wide skirt carved
with Suns andzig-zag lines representing water.
What traces of the architecture of ancient Rus' have sur¬
vived and what have archaeologists learned from them?
The social structure of medieval society was such that there
were three broad categories of dwelling palaces, castles and
houses. Each was designed to provide for a certain standard of
living, a certain way of life, certain ideas about behaviour, and
about real needs and the means of meeting them. In a private
house, for instance, there was no need for a servants' refec¬
tory, but a refectory was necessary in a castle. Nor did a
private house require a throne room, which was an important
part of a palace.
It was long thought that most of the people of Kievan Rus'
lived in dug-outs with sides 3 or 4 metres long. Each dug-out
was spanned by a roof resting on the ground. Towns were
depicted as a strange mixture of magnificent temples, luxu¬
rious palaces and wretched hovels in the ground.
Researchers were not perturbed by the obvious discrepan¬
cy between this combination and the general cultural level at
that time. It did not occur to them that people who had
composed or at least who read the "Tale of Bygone Years"
(The Russian Primary Chronicle) and The Song of Igor's
Campaign could not possibly have lived in burrows, or that
women dressed in silk, velvet and brocade, and wearing
attached to their head-dresses the ornaments and pendants
that are displayed in Russian museums today could not have
crawled out of dug-outs on hands and knees.
It is true that in Rus', as in all feudal societies, the social
classes were divided by great inequalities of wealth. But at the
same time there was a limit beyond which society could not go
without sinking into degradation and decay. Archaeology has
produced convincing evidence in this field.
Stone palaces in Kievan Rus', for example, were few in
number, but we know that they existed in many large towns
in Kiev, Chernigov, Pereyaslavl, Bogolyubovo, near Vladi-
mir-on-Klyazma, and others.
Exhaustive studies have been carried out on the castles and
the many fortified urban centres that made Rus' so pictur¬
esque in the ninth and tenth centuries. Unfortunately, mis¬
understandings have occurred, because evidence has often
been misinterpreted. The tenth-century fortified centre of the
village of Gorodishche, near Shepetovka, is a good example of
such a misunderstanding. Excavations were carried out in the
village for several seasons, but the archaeologist, who was
28

giftig
Fragments of a finely crafted gold and silver
distaff (viewed from both sides), from 12th-
century Kiev. The wheel bears the inscription
"distaff charm", evoking magical practices.
searching for a specific "feudal manor", did not suspect that
the whole complex, consisting of dozens of dwellings, farm
buildings, tradesmen's premises and warehouses, was what he
was actually looking for.
But the type of building which has stimulated the greatest
controversy is the ordinary dwelling, about which the most
extraordinary ideas have been advanced. We now know that a
peasant's dwelling at that time was like the later Ukrainian
khata or the Great Russian izba. In the towns, most of the



buildings were log houses or frame buildings, modified and
adapted to the conditions of urban life. The frame buildings
were constructed according to the standard Fachwerk (half-
timber) technique which was widely used throughout
medieval Europe, from the Atlantic Ocean to the Caspian Sea.
Both these types of building had several floors, usually
three, it would seem, since buildings are generally shown in
ancient Russian miniatures with three floors (though some
have two or four). The "dug-outs" were simply part of the
lower floor that was set into the ground, for reasons of fire
prevention and general domestic purposes. The log houses
that have been found, especially in the Podol district of Kiev,
may have consisted of semi-basements surmounted by a
Fachwerk superstructure. Such structures have been found in
Zvenigorod, with grooves to strengthen the Fachwerk struc¬
ture at the level of the uppermost logs.
Much has been written about ancient Russian culture. An
enormous amount of fresh information has been obtained
from the latest discoveries made by archaeologists, but there is
still a long way to go before we fully understand this complex
phenomenon. One thing is certain that the culture of Rus' at
the time when it adopted Christianity was in no way inferior
to that of neighbouring peoples; and the introduction of
Christianity, which linked Rus' with a different cultural
tradition, merely encouraged the flowering of the lofty
humanism which was inherent in the culture of ancient Rus'.
MIKHAIL JULIANOVICH BRAICHEVSKY, Soviet specialist in the
history and archaeology of the Slav peoples of Russia, is a senior scientist with
the Institute of Archaeology of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. He
is the author of over 300 publications, including "When and How Kiev was
Born" and "The Roots of the Ancient Slav State". Many of his works have
been translated.
Symbolic charms and ornaments (below) seem
to have been popular in Kievan Russia. Bird-
shaped amulets (top row) may have been in¬
tended to bringgoodfortune in marriage. Cen¬
tre row, duck/horse trinkets incorporating so¬
lar symbolism. Ornamental spoons (bottom
row) were a token of abundance.
