The new convergence
ofscience and culture
llya Prigogine
SCIENCE is a cultural phenomenon.
In his remarkable writings on Chi¬
nese science and technology, the
British biochemist and historian of science
Joseph Needham asks why modern science
did not emerge from China.1 China was, in
fact, particularly well placed to become the
cradle of modern science and technology.
From China came such key inventions as
the compass, gunpowder and printing, to
name but a few, and Chinese algebra and
astronomy had made several promising
advances.
Many reasons have been put forward in
reply to Needham's question. Among those
most frequently proposed are the highly
bureaucratic organization of Chinese socie¬
ty and the absence of a sovereign, law-giving
God, a concept deeply entrenched in Eu¬
ropean thought at the end of the Middle
Ages. Whatever specific answer may be giv¬
en, it is clear that the problem raised is one
of culture in all its complexity. It is my firm
conviction that the notion of a god who is
the guarantor of the laws of nature and their
rationality played an essential role at the
time of the first stirrings of European
science.
What today we call classical science was
born in a culture dominated by the notion
of an alliance between man, situated at the
interface between the divine order and the
natural order, and a law-giving, apprehen¬
sible god, a sovereign architect conceived in
our own image.
The correspondence between the German
mathematician and philosopher Gottfried
Leibniz and the English philosopher Samuel
Clarke, acting as Isaac Newton's mouth¬
piece, is very revealing in this respect. The
correspondence followed a criticism made
by Leibniz in which he accused Newton of
having a very poor opinion of God, since,
according to Newton, his handiwork was
less perfect than that of a good clockmaker.
Newton had, in fact, spoken of the con¬
stant intervention of God, the creator of a
world whose activity he unceasingly nour¬
ished. In reply, Newton and Clarke accused
Leibniz of reducing God to the status of a
Deus otiosus, an idler king, who, after a once
and for all act of creation, retires from the
stage. In classical science, dominated by the
1 . J. Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, UK,
Cambridge University Press, 1954, Vol. Ill, pp. 150-168.

One of the most important research tools in
nuclear physics is the particle accelerator, a
device which produces beams of fast-moving
electrically charged atomic or subatomic par¬
ticles. Photos above show the behaviour of a
beam ofoxygen particles emergingfrom a colli¬
sion with a lead target during an experiment at
CERN (the European Organization for Nuc¬
lear Research) in Geneva where the highest-
ever beam energies in laboratory conditions
have been achieved. The data revealed by such
experiments may help us to know more about
the origin of the Universe.
notion of the possibility of an omniscient
power indifferent to the passage of time,
Leibniz' view prevailed. The present deter¬
mined the future, just as it could serve to
reconstruct the past.
The almost inconceivable nature of this
idea of dynamic reversibility should, per¬
haps, be stressed. The question of time, of
what maintains, creates, disrupts the flow of
time, has always been one' of mankind's
central preoccupations. Many mystics have
denied the reality of this changing, uncertain
world and have postulated the ideal of at¬
tainment of a state of knowledge that would
make it possible to escape from the treadmill
of life. However, none of these speculative
postulations has gone so far as to affirm that
there is an equivalence between what is done
and what is undone, between a plant that
burgeons, flowers and dies and a plant that
comes back to life, grows younger and re¬
gresses to the original seed. Classical sci¬
ence, and in particular classical dynamism,
forcefully affirms this equivalence.
Einstein, perhaps, best represents this vo¬
cation of physics, this ideal of a body of
knowledge that strips our conception of the
world of those accretions which, for him,
were merely indicative of human subjectiv¬
ity. It has always been the ambition of
certain mystics to escape from the torments
of a changing, deceptive world. Einstein
made this ambition the very vocation of the
physicist and, in doing so, expressed it in
scientific terms. The mystics sought to live
this world as though it were an illusion;
Einstein, on the other hand, aimed to dem¬
onstrate that it was merely an illusion and
that reality consists of a transparent, intelli¬
gible Universe, purged of everything that
touches on the lives of men, of painful,
nostalgic memory of the past, of fear or
hope for the future.
Within the context of such a conception,
irreversibility, the notion of things happen¬
ing, is reduced to mere illusion, resulting
from the approximations that we introduce
in our description of the world.
Important as it may have been for the
progress of knowledge, the triumph of clas¬
sical science entailed a rift between the
world and man the importance of which
cannot be over-estimated. The external
world appeared to be an automaton, a
clockwork mechanism that had been regu¬
lated once and for all; it was in absolute
opposition to our inner world in which,
rightly or wrongly, we live in a time rhythm
which creates novelty, new events, and in
which we are conscious of having a freedom
of choice on which is based the notion of
rationality. Herein lie the roots of the di¬
chotomy that has coloured the whole of
Western thought since the emergence of
modern science. I cannot here enter into the
development that this problem deserves;
but students of the history of ideas will
already have noticed the irreducible dualism
it entails and which is manifest in works
such as those of Immanuel Kant and Henri
Bergson. This dualism results inevitably in a
precarious insertion of science into culture
which persists to this day.
My aim in this paper is to attempt to show
that we are slowly getting closer to a more
unitary vrew of things in which our descrip¬
tion of the Universe and our existential
experience are once more converging. We
are, perhaps, thus coming nearer to the
realization of Karl Popper's dream, which
he expressed in these words: "...the aim is a
picture of the world in which there is room
for biological phenomena, for human free¬
dom and human reason."
The twentieth-century contribution
It is not my intention to list here the
details of the immense contribution that has
been made during the twentieth century to
scientific and technological research. I
would, however, Tike to lay stress on the
revision of those ideas that have had a deci¬
sive impact on the relationship between sci¬
ence and culture. I shall start with the field
of classical dynamics, the discipline which
marked the emergence of Western science.
We are living through a revolution in
classical dynamics which began with Henri
Poincaré, continued with A.N. Kolmogo-
rov and has become one of the most active
fields of research in physics and mathemat¬
ics. Of what does this revolution consist? A
landmark observation made by the meteo¬
rologist Edward Lorenz pointed the way.
Lorenz noted that two time sequences of
temperature variation could diverge spec¬
tacularly, however superposable they were
at the starting period. This is the hallmark of
unstable dynamic systems. Thus it is pos¬
sible to predict the position of the Earth
over a period of five million years, because
the movement of the Earth is essentially (if
we ignore disturbances due to other planets)
10

an element of a dynamically stable system.
We can, however, only predict the evolution
of the Earth's temperature over relatively
short periods of time because here we are
concerned with an unstable dynamic sys¬
tem. This notion of instability turns out to
be basic to the understanding of the major
laws of physics.
The notions of instability, of chaos and of
amplification are today among the central
preoccupations of a growing number of
researchers in areas ranging from mathemat¬
ics to economics. The notorious "black
Monday" of 19 October 1987 (the day on
which share values crashed on the world's
money markets) may one day be remem¬
bered as a date in the history of science, not
in memory of the victims who saw the value
of their shares melt away, but because since
that day leading newspapers in the United
States have published articles on chaos dy¬
namics as a result of which such notions as
fluctuation, amplification and bifurcation
have come to the attention of the general
public, in much the same way as did, a few
years ago, the notions of the "Big Bang" and
"Black Holes".
Having said that, it should be noted that
to talk of fluctuation, amplification, sur¬
prise, is to evoke the negative aspect of
dynamic instability. There is, however, a
positive side; unstable systems subject to the
constraints of non-equilibrium are capable
of producing structures to which systems in
thermodynamic equilibrium can offer no
equivalent. What seems to me to be impor¬
tant in all this is that it reveals the limitations
of the classical, reductionist conception of
the Universe whose aim is to describe the
Universe in terms of groupings of stable
entities, established once and for all, wheth¬
er they be elementary particles, atoms or
molecules. We are now aware that there are
global phenomena which cannot be ana¬
lysed in this manner.
Rethinking the notion of complexity
The twentieth century will go down as
the century of surprises. It is true that quan¬
tum mechanics and relativity drew oh the
achievements of the nineteenth century. It
was such men as Ernst Mach and Ludwig
Boltzmann who, in turn of the century
Vienna, asked the questions which were to
give rise to these two prodigious theoretical
constructs. Yet as well as building on the
science of the nineteenth century, the twen¬
tieth century has witnessed discoveries that
constitute a fundamental break with the
past. Who would have predicted that time
would become a key element at the most
fundamental level of matter in the trans¬
formation of elementary particles as well as
at the cosmological level? Who would have
thought that determinism and reversibility,
which formed the bases of physical intelligi¬
bility in the classical sense, would be over¬
turned by new phenomena and new theo¬
ries? As William Golding put it,
determinism represents for us a form of
"cultural defeatism"; yet it is precisely on
this point that twentieth-century science is
diverging from classical science.
Today we can no longer identify certainty
and reason, or probability and ignorance.
For classical science, order was associated
with equilibrium and disorder with non-
equilibrium. It might now be said that this
relationship has been reversed. Non-equi¬
librium creates structures whose coherence
largely surpasses that of equilibrium struc¬
tures as described by classical science.
Movements such as those of a falling body
would have been described unhesitatingly
by classical science as simple, and phenom-
Photos © CERN, Geneva
ena occurring in the brain or within human
societies would have been considered
complex.
Today, however, we know that, even
where gravitational phenomena are con¬
cerned, when we pass on from study of the
movements of a system comprising two
bodies to examination of a system involving
three bodies, new patterns of behaviour
appear which have much in common with
that of systems that were traditionally con¬
sidered to be complex. As a result, the gap
between systems that used to be called sim¬
ple and those said to be complex has largely
disappeared. This new state of affairs means
that it is now possible to make transfers of
knowledge that would have been inconceiv¬
able only a few years ago, as witness such
areas as information theory and artificial
intelligence.
With the development of new means of
observation, ranging from radioactive iso¬
topes to artificial satellites, we have discov¬
ered that ecosystems are unstable; and this
has occurred at the very moment when
non-linear dynamics has supplied us with
the theoretical tools to understand the am¬
plification of fluctuations and the appear¬
ance of bifurcations that can occur within
such systems. Better understanding of the
instabilities of ecological systems and study
of the future prospects for our planet are
clearly priority matters. We have to go be¬
yond the conservation concept. We know,
for example, that some 10,000 years ago our
planet enjoyed optimal climatic conditions
and the Sahara and the Gobi, now both
deserts, supported flourishing civilizations.
There is nothing to exclude hopes of a
return to such a Utopian situation.
This new vision of Nature has also
changed our understanding of our position
within it. The consequences of progress
11

made in molecular biology were stated with
unprecedented clarity in Jacques Monod's
book Le Hasard et la Nécessité: "The old
alliance is broken; man knows at last that he
is alone in the uncaring immensity of the
Universe from which he emerged by
chance."
Thus classical science seemed to point the
way to disillusion, if not alienation. Howev¬
er, the conflict described by Monod be¬
tween the unchanging laws of an inanimate
world and the evolutionary phenomenon
described by biology is today largely resolv¬
ed. The image we have of the outside world
is converging with the image we have of our
own interior activity. The twentieth century
has brought us the hope of cultural unity, of
a non-reductionist, more global vision. The
sciences are not the reflection of a static
rationality to be resisted or submitted to;
they are furthering understanding in the
same way as are human activities taken as a
whole. They alone cannot tell us what is
man, what is Nature, what is society. They
are exploring a complex reality in which are
inextricably intertwined what we tend to
place in opposition under the headings of
what is and what ought to be.
Action plans for the 'silicon age'
The new picture that we have of the
Nature that surrounds us and of our posi¬
tion in it is beginning to have repercussions
in the field of culture. A new naturalism is
emerging and we are aware of a new sense of
solidarity between man and other living
creatures, indeed, with the entire biosphere.
Moreover, this transitional phase in science
coincides with a period in which mankind
itself is going through an age of transition.
The original contribution of the twentieth
century is that it has proposed some un¬
expected solutions to the contradictions in¬
herited from the nineteenth century.
r
Ttlj*1' :w*qnj . vif «m Jlîfl :&fMw
"¡A «aftrf«- *tefr **vn HIjikti .ti
\ - *¿P«tf* <»lS*Kf -\) «VlITH*«
Ï
g
Strangely enough, what is true for science
is also true with regard to the history of
mankind, for the great dramas of the two
world wars were above all due to ideological
hangovers from the past, and in particular
from the nineteenth century. It is no doubt
rather rash to make a judgement about a
century in which we are still immersed. It is
my hope, however, that historians of the
future will recognize, as we do, the signs of
the break with the past which were traced
out after the Second World War, a rupture
which seemed to herald a more naturalistic
vision, a new alliance between man and
Nature and greater respect for human
dignity.
The rapid phase of development on which
we are now embarked bears with it the
danger of the creation of a rift between
those with knowledge and those deprived of
it, and between those who are taking part in
and benefiting from the current scientific
and economic revolution and those who
have no share in it. The scandals of disease,
famine and the inequitable distribution of
wealth have been referred to on several
occasions during this Conference. Never¬
theless, science has made possible the emer¬
gence of a kind of society in which individu¬
al responsibility is greater than it has ever
These annotated drawings ofmechanisms using
screws and toothed wheels are by Leonardo da
Vinci (1452-1519). They feature in a manu¬
script known as Codex Madrid I, in which
Leonardo analysed the basic elements of
machines. The greatest experimental scientist
of his age, Leonardo understood principles
about machines andprocesses that were notput
to use until long after his death.
12

*.. *
> Jvx
ff*
&r^ ^**r
Fl
been, and has created a universal language
by means of which men can communicate.
The programme of action which emerges
from the analysis I have put forward corre¬
sponds with some of the points raised in
other papers presented. The importance of
knowledge, at all levels, has been stressed
(the fight against illiteracy, reform of ele¬
mentary education, restructuring of re¬
search systems in the developed countries to
make them more oriented towards the man/
Nature interface). This implies that support
should be given to programmes such as
Global Change2 and to the Japanese Gov¬
ernment's proposed Human Frontiers* pro¬
gramme, which could lead to the establish¬
ment of a worldwide network of scientific
collaboration. In the same spirit, it is vital to
press for pooling of the resources of the
oceans, of space and of information.
The new rationality that science is devel¬
oping is far from having the weight it should
have in the decision-making process if we
want to look beyond the short term. This is
why I recently proposed the creation of a
European Scientific Assembly which could
assist the Commission of the European Eco¬
nomic Community in the conduct of its
policies. Many other initiatives need to be
taken if the objectives mentioned here are to
be attained.
Science today has the potential to im¬
prove the overall situation of the world;
what is still needed is the political will to do
so. Here I must underline what Wassily
Leontief4 has said: we need a new Marshall
Plan for the developing countries. As Chan¬
cellor Willy Brandt has said, we must also
seek to reduce international tensions, for
example by encouraging the overtures made
by countries such as the USSR and the
People's Republic of China.
The science of today promotes a plural¬
istic outlook. We must henceforth combat
reductionist ideologies within the human
sciences, in economics and in culture in
general. This change in attitudes has already
manifested itself over recent decades in such
fields as music and literature. We rightly
deplore the danger of the destruction of our
cultural heritage by the mass media. On the
other hand, the media are making possible
an unprecedented level of cultural exchange.
One of the essential lessons that the twen¬
tieth century has taught us is that the strug¬
gle for the control of territory and raw
materials no longer plays its age-old role in
the history of human societies. It has often
been pointed out that, in what might be
called the "silicon age", the critical scarcity
is no longer the scarcity of raw materials.
I have always been struck by the syn¬
chronism that seems to mark human history
on the planetary scale. The great technical
advances of the New Stone Age, such as
pottery and agriculture, have always ap¬
peared at comparable periods of history in
various parts of the world. This synchro¬
nism, however, has been disrupted, with the
nineteenth century marking the high point
of this process of cultural disequilibrium. It
was the century of inequality, of savages and
civilized man, of colonizers and the colo¬
nized.
2. A programme proposed by the International Council
of Scientific Unions (ICSU).
3. The Human Frontiers programme is co-ordinated by
the Ministry of International Trade and Industry,
Tokyo. Its budget for 1988 totals 100 million Yen.
4. American economist. Nobel Prize for Economic
Science, 1973.
Conquête de l'espace (1960; "The Conquest of
Space"), a tapestry by the French painter and
designer Jean Lurqat (1892-1966), one of a
series often entitled Le chant du monde ("The
Song of the World").
In the twentieth century, an attempt has
been made to move away from this sit¬
uation, to seek behind all the conflicts a
more universal conception of human digni¬
ty that is less subject to the constraints of
history. In this respect too, the twentieth
century has marked an irreversible turning-
point in the history of mankind a turning-
point that heralds a new age, a bifurcation.
Will this be a new point of departure to¬
wards Karl Popper's dream of an open so¬
ciety? One of the fundamental lessons that
twentieth century science offers us is that
time is not fixed, determined; it is a process
of construction in which our future lies. It is
to be hoped that this Conference will make
a significant contribution to that process of
construction.
ILYA PRIGOGINE, of Belgium, was awarded
the 1977 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for his con¬
tributions to the thermodynamics of irreversible
systems, in particular the theory of dissipative
structures (dynamic structures undergoing a con¬
stant dissipation of energy and of matter). He is a
professor at the science faculty of the Free Uni¬
versity of Brussels, and since 1959 has been direc¬
tor of the Ernest Solvay International Physics and
Chemistry Institutes, also in Brussels. Since 1967
he has directed the Center for Statistical Mecha¬
nics and Thermodynamics (renamed the llya Pri-
gogine Center in 1977) at the University of Texas,
Austin (USA). His many publications in English
.include Order out of Chaos Man's New Dia¬
logue with Nature (1984).
13
