The gondola of Venice
Gondolas moored on a Venetian canal, sterns riding high out of the water
24

Floating symbol of a city
BY ARTHUR GILLETTE
Like the Yankee clipperships and
Arab dhows, the Venetian gon¬
dola is both a specific craft and
part of a myth.
Strangely, the boat that has come to
symbolize Venice, and that exists no¬
where else in the world, may well not be
Venetian in origin. There is a semantic
wrangle about the word itself. Some
etymologists think it is a corruption of
the Greek konkula ("hard little peel").
Others trace it to khontilas (Greek for
"short boat"). A further explanation
points to the similarity between the
shapes of the gondola and a Roman boat
of the fourth century AD with the
hypothetical name fundula.
The first hard evidence of the gondo¬
la's existence in Venice goes back
to 1094, when Doge (Duke) Vito Falier
issued a charter granting certain Lagoon
villagers the right to build a gondula.
Over the centuries, the craft has
evolved continually. Today's gondola is
the product of unceasing changes and
improvements made in response to the
socio-economic development of Venice
itself. Its history is a kind of maritime
application of Darwin's theory of evo¬
lution, a dialectical relationship between
a boat and its geographical and human
surroundings.
Venice grew into a city from a loose
federation of scattered villages. As its
population increased, a network of can¬
als was dug. The network spread and
became increasingly dense until it
formed the watery maze we know
today, which the twentieth-century
town planner and architect Le
Corbusier called "a perfect cardiac sys¬
tem". This very specific kind of urban
development, which could never de¬
pend to a very great extent on animal
transport, required a craft able to carry
more and more people over lengthening
distances through narrow, hard-to-
negotiate canals at ever-swifter speeds.
The gondola evolved in response to
those changing needs.
The gondola is renowned for its svelte
line, and the hull exudes the excitement
of a racer. Odd as it may seem in such a
feline craft, the boat is flat-bottomed
and has been since its inception, the
adjective "flat" being used by
Doge Falier in the eleventh-century
manuscript mentioned above. This
minimal draught was perfectly adapted
to the Venetians' amphibious existence,
first among the marshes of the Lagoon,
25

then along the city's canals. The canals
are shallow and the gondola flat-
bottomed to this day.
The first known blueprint of a gondo¬
la, drawn up in 1555 at the Arsenale
shipyard, shows that after at least
500 years' evolution, the boat already
had a diminutive beam. During the next
four centuries, it narrowed even further.
Now, the generally practised overall
length is 10.87 metres, for a beam
measuring a mere 1.42 metres, a ratio
of 7.7:1.
A narrowed beam coupled with the
need to ferry more passengers made it
impossible for the gondolier to stand, as
he previously had done, inside his craft.
As a consequence, a perch was built for
him in the shape of a poop deck flush
with the gunwhales as far astern as pos¬
sible. The rower's upright position gave
rise, in turn, to two further innovations
that are peculiar to gondola navigation.
The first is a long heavy sweep oar.
Fashioned from a single length of beech,
this oar is 4.2 metres in length and
weighs a daunting 4.3 kilos. These ex¬
ceptional characteristics require a strong
rower, but also give him extraordinary
leverage. They also call for considerable
dexterity.
The second improvement required by
the gondolier's standing position was a
sturdy, high and curiously shaped oar
lock. Called the foreóla ("fork"), and
looking like a gnarled little tree trunk, it
is hewn from a block of walnut. In
addition to being a striking piece of
sculpture, it serves as an ingenious
multipurpose fulcrum. Pivoting his oar
from one or other of the lip-like
indentations in the stern side of the fork,
the gondolier can choose between a fas¬
ter and a slower forward speed.
Displaced to the extreme stern of the
boat, the gondolier's 50 to 70 kilos
made it imperative to provide a counter¬
weight at the bows. So came into exist-
26

Races of gondolas and other typically Venetian
craft had become popular by the late
15th century. Both men and women competed,
as can be seen in the engraving (left) by the
Italian artist Giacomo Franco (1556-1620). The
Regata Storica(above), one of Venice's
traditional festivals, has taken place along the
Grand Canal in September for seven centuries.
It opens with a magnificent procession of
gondolas and other Venetian craft with persons
in historical costume on board.
The construction of gondolas is a dying
industry. One of the last Venetian gondola
yards, at San Trovaso, is being restored with
the aid of an International Committee for the
Defence of the Gondola which was set up with
Unesco backing.
ence il ferro ("the steel"), a heavy steel
blade from which protrude six horizon¬
tal "teeth". These are said to symbolize
the six historical quarters of Venice,
while the cornucopia-like metal plume
atop theferro is thought to represent the
shape of the Doge's ritual hat.
The above innovations seem to have
been more or less fully integrated into
the gondola by the end of the sixteenth
century. But the craft's gradually ex¬
tended length and increased weight en¬
hanced friction. To overcome this prob¬
lem, the stem and stern of the gondola
were progressively lifted out of the
water, to reduce wetted surface and con¬
sequent drag. Today, only the central
three-fifths of the hull are submerged,
leading a Venetian author to compare



the gondola to "a half moon posed on
the Lagoon".
The gondola continued to evolve into
the twentieth century, when the last two
characteristics that make the craft truly
unique were refined to perfection. To
grasp them, look at an empty gondola
moored between two piles. It is im¬
possible not to notice that the gondola is
unbalanced (it lists sharply to starboard)
and twisted (the hull is markedly
assymetrical). What purpose is served
by these bizarre features?
Already four centuries ago, but parti¬
cularly after the fall of the Venetian
Republic when many a noble house was
ruined, single gondoliers became popu¬
lar, more and more frequently replacing
the expensive pair of rowers used ear¬
lier. When he rows, the single gondolier
does not stand in the middle of the small
poop deck, but to port, so as to transmit
maximum propulsive force to the sweep
oar, pivoted around the foreóla fitted to
starboard. To compensate for the
weight of the gondolier standing off-
centre to port, the hull was made to lean
to starboard as early as the fifteenth
century. When empty, the boat lists to
starboard; the gondolier steps aboard
and takes up his position, and the craft
rights herself.
The intentional list did not, however,
solve all the problems caused by the use
of a single gondolier. His oar is ma¬
noeuvred off the starboard side only.
Without a corrective J-stroke, the gon¬
dola would always veer to port. But
such a J-stroke reduces speed. A most
improbable solution to this dilemma
was found toward the end of the last
century, by twisting the gondola's hull.
Today, the craft is markedly
assymetrical. At her point of maximum
beam, she is 24 centimetres wider to
27

Many gondolas have metal supports in the
shape of sea-horses (above) next to the passenger seat,
to which a rope is attached as a handhold.
port than to starboard. Compared with
a theoretically straight keel line, her
bows show a clear deviation to
starboard.
The gondola is unbalanced and
twisted, and it may be added in
passing-graceful to the point of beauty.
None of these features precludes pro¬
fitability, however. Quite the contrary,
the gondola is also extremely efficient.
One man can propel a gondola, loaded
and displacing up to 1,200 kilos, at a
sustained speed of nearly three knots.
No wonder that the Director of
Venice's Naval History Museum,
G. Rubin de Cervin, analysing speed
output yielded by energy input, judged
the gondola to be "the most profitable
craft afloat in the world".
Marvellous as she is as a technical feat,
the gondola would not have such unde¬
niable fascination were it not for the
men (and occasional women) who have
rowed her throughout the last ten
centuries.
According to a chronicler of 1493,
early gondoliers were often black slaves,
a contention borne out by a contempor¬
ary painting by Carpaccio. The de casa¬
da gondoliers (attached to the house¬
holds of wealthy families) had,
moreover, many other non-maritime
tasks, and were little different from
other menial servants.
As time passed, the gondoliers be¬
came a distinct group with its own char¬
acteristics. One of these is their profes¬
sional pride, the more openly displayed
since in numerical terms they were far
from a marginal category. At the end of
the fifteenth century there were
between 15,000 and 30,000 gondoliers
in Venice, and at certain periods in the
city's history they and their families
seem to have accounted for a quarter of
the population. Today their number has
shrunk to about 400.
Gondoliers also use a very special
language, an offshoot of the Venetian
dialect which itself is a unique mixture
of Italian, Spanish and Arabic. Many of
the terms designating the gondola's
dimensions and 280 different wooden
parts, as well as the tools and techniques
used in gondola building, have remained
unchanged for centuries while being
largely incomprehensible to people
(including boat builders) from other
parts of Italy. A gondolier of the 1980s
has little problem in understanding the
technical annotations appended to the
1555 blueprint mentioned above.
In Venice, the borderline between
celebration and work is not always
clear. Numerous civil and religious fes¬
tivals gave gondoliers the opportunity
to bridge the gap between these two
vital aspects of Venetian life.
The arrival of illustrious foreign dig¬
nitaries often led to veritable competi¬
tions among gondola designers for the
most elaborate decorations. In 1682, a
French ambassador, Monsieur Amelot,
made his entry into Venice on a baroque
craft described by a contemporary chro¬
nicler as follows: "The entire gondola is
covered with gilt carvings.... At the four
corners of the hull are four seated sta¬
tues representing the virtues of the
ambassador, each designated by its own
symbol. Vigilance [is symbolized] by a
lamp and rooster, Fidelity by a dog,
Discretion by a key across lips, and
Eloquence by Mercury's wand and a
hive of honey bees".
Particularly popular among the gon¬
doliers are the regattas that enable them
to show off their physical abilities and
technical skill amidst public rejoicing.
Truly mass events, the regattas of gon¬
dolas and other typically Venetian craft
were already popular at the end of
the 1400s. Dropped many years ago, the
annual Regatta was resumed in 1976,
which is only fair when one considers
that the word "regatta" is Venetian in
etymology. Now each year hundreds of
professionals and amateurs enthusiasti¬
cally participate in a gruelling 32-
kilometre water marathon.
The number of gondolas and gondo¬
liers has declined sharply in this cen¬
tury. The trade has so little appeal that
its transmission has been made no
longer hereditary. On the other hand,
there are some encouraging signs. The
games and above all the Regatta have
been resumed. A Unesco-backed Inter¬
national Committee for the Defence of



the Gondola has been set up and is
helping restore one of the last remaining
gondola yards at San Trovaso. On
balance, however, the gondola's fate
seems sealed. It now has only a decora¬
tive function as a tourist attraction.
Venetians themselves limit their use of
gondolas almost exclusively to cere¬
monial occasions such as weddings
and funerals. The gondola's central
purpose as Venice's main means of
passenger transport was pre-empted
just a century ago when motor vessels
were introduced.
ARTHUR GILLETTE is editor of Unesco's in¬
ternational quarterly Museum. The author of se¬
veral articles on sailing and shipping, he has
worked as a deck-hand on sail-powered fishing
boats in the Bahamas and in 1969 crossed the
Atlantic on a 7.6-metre cutter.
28

At the bows of a gondola, as a counterweight to the gondolier who stands near the stern,
is a heavy steel blade with six "teeth" which are said to symbolize the six historical quarters
of Venice. The metal plume above is thought to represent the Doge's ritual hat.
29
