The stirrup
For most of the time that man has been riding horses, he has had no
supports for his feet. Stirrups were unknown to most of the great armies of
ancient times the Persians and Medes, the Romans, the Assyrians, the
Egyptians, the Babylonians, the Greeks. The horsemen of Alexander the
Great made their way across the whole of Central Asia without being able
to rest their feet while in the saddle. When galloping or jumping, horsemen
had to hold the horse's mane tightly to avoid falling off. The Romans
devised a kind of hand-hold on the front of the saddle which gave them
something of a grip when the going got rough; but their legs just dangled
whenever they were not pressed tightly against the horse.
Mounting a horse without stirrups was not so easy either. Fierce
warriors took pride in their flying leaps, gripping the mane with the left
hand and swinging themselves up; and some bareback riders still do this
today. Cavalrymen of ancient times used their spears to help them up,
either by hoisting themselves aloft as in pole-vaulting, or by using a peg
sticking out of the spear as a footrest. Otherwise it was necessary to rely on
a groom for a leg-up.
By about the third century AD, the Chinese had remedied this situation.
With their advanced metallurgical expertise they began to produce cast
Collar harnest
Bronze stirrup dating from
the 6th or 7th century AD
18 _

Tang Dynasty (618-907
AD) porcelain horse,
harnessed for riding.
\
Bronze bit from a
horse's bridle,
China, 5th century BC
bronze or iron foot stirrups. No inventor of the stirrup is recorded and the



original idea probably came from the occasional use of a loop of rope or
leather to assist in mounting. Of course, such loops could not be used for
riding, because if one fell off, one would be dragged along and come to a
sticky end. Such loops may have been first used by the Chinese, the
Indians, or the nomads of Central Asia bordering on China. The essentials
of the stirrup may thus have originated in the steppes, the product of
ingenious men whose lives were lived on horseback. Apparently from the
third century, the Chinese were casting perfect metal stirrups. The earliest
surviving depiction of a stirrup is on a pottery figure of a cavalryman found
in a tomb in Changsha (Hunan) and dated to 302 AD.
The transmission of stirrups westward took place with the migrations of
a fierce tribe called the Ruan-Ruan, who came to be known as the Avars.
Their cavalry was devastatingly effective because they had the use of
cast-iron stirrups. About the middle of the sixth century, they were driven
westwards and moved across south Russia to settle between the Danube
and the Theiss. By 560, the Avars were a serious threat to the Byzantine
Empire, and the Byzantine cavalry was entirely reorganized in order to
counter them. The Emperor Maurice Tiberius prepared a military manual,
the Strategikon, in 580, specifying the cavalry techniques to be adopted. He
mentions the need to use iron stirrups the earliest mention in European
literature.
Stirrups then spread to the rest of Europe by means of the Vikings and
possibly the Lombards. One Avar-style child's stirrup has even been
excavated in London, brought by a Viking. But the use of stirrups in
Europe (other than by the Byzantines and the Vikings) was long delayed,
for reasons which are not entirely clear. Conventional armies of Europe do
not seem to have adopted them until the early Middle Ages. Perhaps the
lack of metallurgical expertise was a handicap, with stirrups having to be of
wrought rather than cast metal for a long time. Mass production of stirrups
was only possible with cast metal.

