PHOTOGRAPHY AND MEMORY
Aphotographer's viewpoint
AN INTERVIEW WITH WIM WENDERS
Wim Wenders: Hot Springs, Truth or Consequences, New Mexico
WIM



WENDERS
of the Federal Republic of Germany, is a
film-maker. In 1975 he set up his own com¬
pany, Road Movies. A number of his films
have won him an international reputation.
They include Alice in den Städten (1973;
Alice in the Cities), Im Lauf der Zeit (1976;
Kings of the Road), Der amerikanische
Freund (1977; The American Friend), Light¬
ning Over Water/Nick's Movie (1980), Par¬
is, Texas (1984) and DerHimmel über Berlin
(1987; Wings of Desire).
In preparation for the shooting of his film
Paris, Texas towards the end of 1983, Wim
Wenders travelled around the American
West armed with a medium-size hand
camera, a Makina-Plaubel 6 x 7. During this
journey through Texas, Arizona, New Mex¬
ico and California looking for locations, he
was struck by the seemingly infinite land¬
scapes bathed in light and colour that often
only retained a fleeting trace ofcivilization.
The series of colour pictures which he took
with this camera are both a tribute to the
semi-mythical emotive power of the land¬
scape and a reflection on memory. A selec¬
tion of these photographs was published in
1987 under the title Written in the West,
with an accompanying interview between
Wim Wenders and the French criticandfilm
directorAlain Bergala, extracts from which
we publish here.
Would you say that photography, more
than film, allows you to capture an image
of something that you are seeing for the
first time?
Yes. With photography, you can visit a
place only once. When you return to a place,
you seldom feel any desire to take photo¬
graphs. For me, the known or the familiar
virtually rules out photography, which is a
means of exploration, a journey. It's a bit
like a car or plane, which takes you some¬
where. A camera takes you somewhere.
Above all, it makes it possible to stop and
take things in properly.
Especially in the West, travelling by car,
the camera gave me a reason and an obliga¬
tion to stop. I don't take photographs out of
the window.
How did it happen, exactly stopping, de¬
ciding to take a photograph and choosing
the frame for the subject?
You arrive in a place, a village, for exam¬
ple, you stop, and you feel a sort of ex¬
citement, even before you have come across

PHOTOGRAPHY AND MEMORY
Wim Wenders: Portrait, Odessa, Texas
what you are going to photograph. You have
a feeling for the place: there is something in
the light, a special atmosphere. My photo¬
graphs are often linked to a certain surface
texture of landscape and houses. That par¬
ticular surface is something that you feel
before you have really found the place to
photograph. For example, I arrived in a little
town in New Mexico which is also called Las
Vegas, and there I took a photograph of an
empty shop, painted blue and red. I had a
presentiment, when I started strolling
around, that I would find this house. Arriv¬
ing in that deserted town, with that after¬
noon light and nobody in the streets, I knew
that I would stay there and that I would have
to find a hotel, because I would not be able to
leave again. The place could not be in the film
because it was too remote, but I went there
because I was interested in seeing another
Las Vegas.
In the West, there are a lot of billboards
and cinema façades that have already been
half eaten away by the elements and are in
the process of disappearing. There is a con¬
nection between photography and this dam
aged surface. In the cinema, too, I have often
chosen a site for shooting because I knew
that a particular house was going to be de¬
molished. For example, in The American
Friend, we filmed in front of a row of houses
because we had read in a newspaper that the
whole neighbourhood was going to be de¬
molished. In large cities like Houston, the
opposite is true: the surface was so new that
it all looked like a model.
So making an image means looking at
things before they disappear ...
In these photos there is the desire to look
at something and the desire to keep it. The
word is appropriate in French: re-garder.
The photographs taken by Walker Evans
during the Depression convey this exactly:
looking at and committing to memory some¬
thing that was going to disappear in three or
four years' time.
This is just the feeling that we have when
we look at photographs by Atget1 of
certain street corners and little shops in
Paris ...
I think this was his whole ethic: that he
saw himself as a "preserver". I always
appreciate this preservation side of photo¬
graphy.
It gives all these photographs an air of the
end of the world, especially the little towns,
street corners and shops ... As if you had
taken these photographs just after the
world had come to an end. We do not get
the same feeling from Paris, Texas, which
conveys a sense of beginning, among other
things. In this voyage of discovery, was
there a melancholy feeling connected with
the photography?
Melancholy is also connected with the
American West, and we can talk about that.
But in photography, more than in film, there
is an idea of the end of the world. I remember
what Nicholas Ray2 said to me one day
about some actors whom he was teaching.
1. Eugène Atget (1857-1927) photographed the
architecture of old Paris.
2. Nicholas Ray (pseudonym of Raymond Nicholas
Kienzle, 1911-1979), American film director, whose
works include Johnny Guitar (1954) and, with V/im
V/enders, Lightning Over Water/Nick's Movie (1980).

PHOTOGRAPHY AND MEMORY
WALKER
EVANS
(1903-1975)
Shoeshine Sign in a Southern Town, 1936. This
American photographer, with whom Wim Wen¬
ders has affinities, produced a powerful body of
work. His precisely detailed, frontal depictions of
reality have profoundly influenced contemporary
photography. He is known best for the reports
carried out in the 1930s for the Farm Security
Administration in the United States, in which he
recorded the poverty of rural victims of the De¬
pression. He was also a portraitist who recorded
scenes in the subway (1938) and on the Chicago
streets in the 1940s. In the 1950s, he produced a
series of industrial landscapes seen from trains.
He told them: "Even if you are asking for a
light for your cigarette, or if you simply say
hello, it is absolutely necessary that you do it
as if it were for the last time." I was impress¬
ed by this idea of doing something as if it
were for the last time, and for me this is
connected with photography. That is the
"end of the world" side of things. In fact, I
took this photograph because I knew that it
was the first and last time that I would see
this house. But, conversely, the very fact that
there is a photograph proves that the world
is continuing.
The idea of the deterioration of houses and
billboards, the "end of the world" aspect, is
connected with human beings and their
constructions. But what happens to trees,
landscapes and the natural world in your
photographs, in the light of your fondness
for capturing things that are crumbling
away?
There are very few photographs in which
there is no man-made object. In most of
them, there is always something which,
some day, will not be there any more, and
which is perhaps no longer there at this very
moment when we are talking about it. Or in
ten years or a hundred years from now.
The American West, to me, is the epitome
of the place where something disappears.
When I was a child, I knew the West through
films, westerns and novels, especially the
books of Karl May,3 and it was always my
impression that the West was this incredible
landscape in the process of being "won", in a
past that I located rather vaguely in the
nineteenth century. When I went there, hav¬
ing heard all about that conquest, I thought
that there would now be civilization. But not
at all. Civilization merely passed through,
especially with the advent of the motor car in
the 1920s and 1930s when the freeways, gas
stations and motels were built. But now,
when you get there, that whole culture of
roads, gasoline pumps, cars, neon signs and
motels is no longer necessary. To a great
extent it is not even used any more. People
no longer travel by car from New York to
3. Karl May (1842-1912), German author of travel and
adventure stories often set in the American West, includ¬
ing Winnetou (1893; Eng. trans. 1977).
Los Angeles. Americans tend to live more on
the coast, or in the Mid-West for farming,
but in the West they have passed through
and tried to do something, they have built
roads and so on, and they have even thought
of building towns sometimes, in the
middle of the desert you find a street called
375th Street but nothing has worked out,
and now only trucks pass through, and a few
cars. Civilization arrived, stayed a little
while, and is now once again disappearing.
Does your fondness for inscriptions, let¬
tering and billboards stem from the fact
that you very much liked the photographs
of Walker Evans?
The presence of written inscriptions in the
landscape is also a phenomenon characteris¬
tic of the West: Since people were not really
able to live there, it is my impression that
they started to write things so as to feel less
alone and to prove that they had conquered
this landscape. It's almost as if you had
arrived at the North Pole and found twenty
or so notices set up by those who had already
been there, to prove that they had reached it.

PHOTOGRAPHY AND MEMORY
Wim Wenders: Western World, near Four Corners, California
In the United States, this graphic tradition is
really remarkable and very advanced. It
shows a great deal of imagination and inven¬
tiveness and attention to detail in filling in
shadows and outlines of letters. The work on
the lettering of neon signs and advertise¬
ments is quite amazing, and in many cases it
is very attractive.
Americans always say: "A man must build
a house." And it's true, they build like mad:
what they build does not last very long, but
there are houses. But very often you also get
the impression that a man must first of all
paint a sign, and very often the sign is the
most valid part of the house. The house itself
is tumbledown, but the sign is a fine one. I
find these lasting inscriptions very poignant.
For example, I passed through an empty
place where there was nothing except a sign
saying: Western World Development. They
must have wanted to sell the land, but no¬
body came to buy it ...
These photographs seem to imply that you
favour a frontal, flat approach. Is this a
means whereby you turn the things
photographed into something sacred, set
apart from the flow of passing time and
trivial events?
That's true. Things do not know much
about time; I am the one who knows about
time, because, for one thing, I arrive and
depart again. So the head-on way of looking
at things, houses and landscapes is also the
approach from which I myself am the most
absent, and at the same time the most at one
with what is in front of me. In the West, the
horizon becomes a powerful presence, im¬
posing itself all the time, much more than in
the towns. Whatever you do, the horizon is
always there, cutting the photograph in two,
and all the objects are placed in relation to
the horizon, because the perspective draws
all lines towards the horizon. If the axis is not
frontal, if you adopt another angle, then the
object becomes detached from its horizon.
This is visually irritating, and it also deprives
the objects of something. Moreover, in the
American West, everything man-made is
highly theatrical. Once you are in an open
landscape, direct vision is, in a way, the only
possible approach, because any other mode
of looking, at an angle from the side, from
above or from below entails separating an
object from its surroundings. With frontal
vision, things keep their identity, but from
an angle they lose it, and the angle points to
the photographer.
These extracts from Alain Bergala's interview with
Wim Wenders have been taken from Written in
the West, with the kind permission of Schirmer
Mosel publishers, Munich. The interview first
appeared in the French magazine Cahiers du Cine¬
ma (Paris, 1987 ).
