Grandfather bear
by Viktor A. Shnirelman
'¥'
| ROM the innermost parts of the
Earth, from end to end, runs the
Myandash-pyrre, the wild rein¬
deer. His track is that of the sun; he runs
towards it. He is white, and his coat is more
silvery than the snow. He holds his black
head high, with his antlers back, and he flies
on invisible wings. His breath is that of the
untrammelled winds; they bear him along
on his flight ..."
In such poetic terms Lapp legends de¬
scribe the golden-antlered deer, which is a
protector and guide. Many of the peoples of
Northern Eurasia believed until recent
times that their good fortune depended on
the spirits that protected animals. The
Yakuts thought of a spirit as a fantastic wild
beast with the head of a dog, the hooves of a
cow, and long ears that hung down. Other
peoples believed that success in hunting
depended on the good will of the bear that
ruled over the reproduction of animals.
Others again thought that the world was
controlled by two does, from which both
wild and domesticated reindeer originated.
Another spirit of nature that people be¬
lieved in was the mammoth, which wan¬
dered about under the Earth, heaving it up
to produce hills and mounds.
Sometimes these spirits were thought to
be cosmic beings. Traces of this belief can
still be found among some of the Slav peo¬
ples; for instance, the Poles call the Polar
Star the "Elk Star", and in the north of the
Soviet Union the Great Bear was known as
the Elk until a short time ago.
All of this takes us back to the remote
past, when nature was peopled with super¬
natural beings on whose will the fate of
human beings depended. Hunters had to
pacify the spirits and observe certain pro¬
hibitions and prescriptions under the spirits'
watchful eyes. Preparations for the hunt
were surrounded by mystery. The hunters
were allowed to say little about it, and were
A bear in a sacrificial posture is shown in this
buckle from the Urals (4th-5th century AD).
In ancient times the hunters of Siberia and
North America treated the animals they
hunted with great consideration. Before
shooting an arrow at a bear, they addressed
it in friendly and persuasive tones as "old
man", "grandfather" or "lord", and later
when it was dead begged it not to take
revenge.
Hunting rituals
and animal worship
in early
Eurasian cultures
<
©
prohibited from referring to the game they
wanted to catch.
The quarry had to be treated with re¬
spect. Many of the peoples living in Siberia
and North America called the bear "old
man", "grandfather", "lord" or "sacred ani¬
mal". Before shooting a bear, they would
speak to it in a friendly fashion, to persuade
it not to resist. When the Ostyaks lured a
bear out of its lair, they would say, "Don't
be angry, grandfather! Come home with us
and be our guest." When they had killed the
bear they would beg it not to resent their
action and take revenge on the hunters.
They even tried to escape blame for having
killed it.
One Lapp legend tells how the reindeer
took pity on hungry men, and suggested
that they should kill him. Since then, people
had hunted reindeer, and had not wanted
for food. But the legend goes on to say that
the sacred reindeer had warned men to
spare the females and the leaders of the
herds in autumn; otherwise the hunting of
the wild deer would stop. By controlling
their hunting, the Lapps saved these anim¬
als from thoughtless extinction, in so doing
providing for their own future.
The ancient hunters also believed in cer¬
tain magical ways of ensuring the fertility of
wild animals. Many of the tribes of North¬
ern Eurasia and North America believed it
was forbidden to break the bones or the
skull of the principal animals they hunted.
They carried them into the depths of the
taiga, or hung them on trees, believing that
this would restore the creatures to life.
Others reconstituted the skeleton of a bear
they had killed and eaten and, after carrying
out certain rites, took it away into the taiga.
But even these precautions did not satisfy
the hunters' of old, and they called on the
shamans, who acted as intercessors with the
spirits. It was the shaman's duty to tell
people where and when they should hunt or

Openwork bronze plaque of intertwined
fantastic animals dates from the second half
of the first millennium AD. It was discovered
in the region of Perm in the Urals.
the Tuvinians sold their cattle, they pulled
out a few of the animals' hairs and burnt
them. In this way they tried to prevent their
good luck from leaving them along with the
animals.
The war-horse was a favourite figure in
Turko-Mongolian epics. It was more than a
horse; it had magical properties. It had
wings, and could fly through the air; its
flight was like that of a falling star. It bes¬
trode the clouds and outstripped the birds;
only magic could bring it to a halt. The
war-horse played its part in campaigns; it
was the protector, guide, counsellor, healer
and saviour of its master. Sometimes a mare
was the horseman's nurse, and in such cases
he was considered to be the foster-brother
of his horse. If a batyr lost his horse, he lost
his strength.
Certain features of the cult of the horse
(horses were born from sea-spray and, like
winged deer, could fly through the air) sug¬
gest that there was once a cult of sacred deer
among the ancient Indo-European peoples
which, when horse-breeding began, be¬
came a cult of the horse. Even today, the
motif of a deer's antlers can be seen in the
folk art of some parts of Europe. The Celts
Bronze cult object (5th-10th century AD)
from the Perm region is shaped in the form
of a man standing on an animal's back.
fish, and also to treat the sick and forecast
the weather.
Each shaman had an animal that was his
double; it protected him and was in close
contact with him. Many people thought that
the shaman was descended from this ani¬
mal, or had been nurtured by it. He often
identified himself with it. Bronze plaques
that have been found in the valley of the
River Kama and in the Perm region of the
USSR, made by metalworkers living in
those parts in the period between the sixth
and twelfth centuries AD, show the shaman
wearing a ritual garment made of animals'
skins and birds' feathers.
The shaman sometimes wore a "crown"
with a deer's antlers on it, and shoes that
were like a deer's hooves. Among the
Ostyaks, the shaman-bears had the muzzle
of a bear fastened to their brow. On the
wolf's festival day, the shamans of the
Chukchi wore a mask made from a wolf's
muzzle. It was thought that an animal's vital
force was in its muzzle, and that the shaman
became as powerful as the animal by wear¬
ing this sort of mask. When the shaman was
in a trance he behaved as if he were an
animal he growled like a bear, leapt like a
deer, and so on.
One Yakut legend tells of a shaman who
stole the magical hairs of the elk, a divinity
that protected wild animals. He strewed the
hairs on the tribal hunting ground, and they
turned into game. The Nganasan people
thought that the Earth Mother was a female
elk, and that they had been created from the
hairs of her coat.
Among Turkic-speaking nomads, belief
in the miraculous powers of animal hair is
linked with horses. In their epic tales the
batyr (a powerful lord, or warrior) often
gets out of a difficult situation by setting fire
to horse-hairs, which turn into horses.
When the horses' hair was clipped, in the
spring, the Buryats held a ceremony for the
burning of the hair of white horses, which
was unquestionably a fertility ritual. When
Costume of a shaman of the Mansi people of
Siberia (9th-15th century AD). Details such
as the antlers on the headdress evoke the
close relationship between the shaman and
the animal world.
<S
10
worshipped a deity which had a deer's
antlers, and Artemis, the Greek goddess of
the hunt, was shown surrounded by does. A
drawing of a winged creature with antlers
has been found in a Scythian burial-ground
in the Altai region of Siberia.
The transition from the worship of the
deer to that of the horse was a slow process,
and for a long time the horse was regarded
as the reincarnation of the deer. The Hit¬
tites and the Celts disguised horses as deer,
and according to ancient Vedic documents,
Aryan groups decorated the head of a sac¬
rificial horse with the golden antlers of a
deer. In the Pazyryk kurgans (burial
mounds) in the Altai, the remains of horses
have been found which have deer masks on
their skulls (see the Unesco Courier, De¬
cember 1976). The Scythians put special
frontlets on their horses' heads, making
them look like deer with winged antlers.
Among the Turko-Mongolian peoples,
too, deer were replaced by horses as cult
animals. We do not know exactly when and
where this took place. But in recent years
Soviet archaeologists working in the south¬
ern regions of the European part of the
USSR have discovered a whole stratum of
cultures dating from the fourth millennium
BC, when people hunted wild horses and
had begun to tame them. About the same
time, a cult of the horse grew up, evidence
of which can be seen in statuettes of horses
and ossuaries of horses' skulls and bones
found in ancient settlements and burial
grounds. In the same period, in the Euro¬
pean steppe, stone sceptres began to be
fashioned in the shape of horses' heads,
perhaps to symbolize the power of a chief.
VIKTOR ALEKSANDROVICH SHNIRELMAN
is a staff member of the Miklukho-Maklaya
Ethnography Institute of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, where he specializes in the history of
early societies. He is the author ofstudies on "The
Origins of Cattle-Raising" and "The Classifica¬
tion and Differentiation of Cultures".
