The mechanical clock
26 _

Model of Su Song's great astronomical
clock of 1092. The framework has been
left uncovered to reveal the mechanism.
The original clock tower was 10 m high,
with a power-driven armillary sphere at
the top for observing the stars. Inside the
tower, a celestial globe (B) turned in
synchronization with the sphere. The
central element was the escapement
(D, and detail below), which was turned
clockwise by water or mercury pouring
from the tank on the right.
V'%%
*<%$.
The Chinese did not invent the first clock of any kind, merely the first
mechanical one. Water clocks had existed since Babylonian times, and the
earliest Chinese got them indirectly from that earlier civilization of the
Middle East.
The world's first mechanical clock was built by the Chinese Tantric
Buddhist monk and mathematician Yixing (683-727). This was actually an
astronomical instrument which served as a clock, rather than simply a
clock. A contemporary text describes it:
"[It] was made in the image of the round heavens and on it were shown
the lunar mansions in their order, the equator and the degrees of the
heavenly circumference. Water, flowing into scoops, turned a wheel
automatically, rotating it one complete revolution in one day and night [24
hours]. Besides this, there were two rings fitted around the celestial sphere
outside, having the sun and moon threaded on them, and these were made
to move in circling orbit	 And they made a wooden casing the surface of
which represented the horizon, since the instrument was half sunk in it. It
permitted the exact determinations of the time of dawns and dusks, full and
new moons, tarrying and hurrying. Moreover, there were two wooden
jacks standing on the horizon surface, having one a bell and the other a
drum in front of it, the bell being struck automatically to indicate the
hours, and the drum being beaten automatically to indicate the quarters.
All these motions were brought about by machinery within the casing,
each depending on wheels and shafts, hooks, pins and interlocking rods,
stopping devices and locks checking mutually [i.e. the escapement]".
Yixing's clock was, like water clocks, subject to the vicissitudes of the
weather. In order to keep the water in them from freezing, torches
generally burnt beside them. Therefore, in the next great clock of which we
have accounts in China, mercury was substituted for water because of the
freezing problem. This clock was built by Zhang Sixun in 976 AD. Zhang
Sixun's clock was apparently much larger than Yixing's. It was certainly far
more complex. The dynastic history of the time describes it:
"... a tower of three storeys each over 3 metres in height, within which
was concealed all the machinery. It was round at the top to symbolize the
heavens and square at the bottom to symbolize the earth. Below there was
set up the lower wheel, lower shaft, and the framework base. There were
also horizontal wheels, vertical wheels fixed sideways, and slanting wheels;
bearings for fixing them in place; a central stopping device and a smaller
stopping device [i.e. the escapement] with a main transmission shaft. Seven
jacks rang bells on the left, struck a large bell on the right! and beat a drum
in the middle to indicate clearly the passing of the quarter-hours. Each day
and night [i.e. each 24 hours] the machinery made one complete revolution,
and the seven luminaries moved their positions around the ecliptic. Twelve
other wooden jacks were also made to come out at each of the double-
hours, one after the other, bearing tablets indicating the time..."
All of these efforts were preparatory for the greatest of all Chinese
medieval clocks, the "Cosmic Engine" of Su Song, built in the year 1092.
Su Song's clock was actually an astronomical clock tower more than
10 metres high, like the previous one of Zhang. But on top of Su Song's
tower was additionally a huge bronze power-driven astronomical instru¬
ment called an armillary sphere, with which one could observe the
positions of the stars. A celestial globe inside the tower turned in synchro¬
nization with this sphere above, so that the two could constantly be
compared. We are told that the observations made on the demonstrational
globe inside and by the observational sphere above "agreed like the two
halves of a tally".
On the front of the tower was a pagoda structure of five storeys, each
having a door through which mannikins and jacks appeared ringing bells
and gongs and holding tablets to indicate the hours and other special times
of the day and night. All of these time-indicators were operated by the
same giant clock machinery which simultaneously turned the sphere and
the globe.


Knowledge of the principles of Su Song's clock spreading to Europe led
to the development of mechanical clocks in the West two centuries later.
27
