A cybernetic machine
By the third century AD at the latest, the Chinese had a fully operational,
navigational "cybernetic machine", using the principles of feedback. It was
called the "south-pointing carriage", but had no connection with a magne¬
tic compass. It was a large carriage, 3.3 metres long, 3.3 metres deep, and
2.75 metres wide, surmounted by a jade statue of an "immortal" a sage
who had achieved immortality. The figure's arm was raised, pointing
ahead, and it always faced towards the south, no matter which way the
carriage turned. Even if the road were circular, the jade figure would rotate,
keeping the finger pointing in the same direction. How was this possible in
the third century AD? This machine may have been invented even earlier,
indeed, as much as 1,200 years earlier. An official history for 500 AD
describes how:
"The south-pointing carriage was first constructed by the Duke of Zhou
[beginning of the first millennium BC] as a means of conducting home¬
wards certain envoys who had arrived from a great distance beyond the
frontiers. The country was a boundless plain in which people ¡ost their
bearings as to east and west, so the Duke caused this vehicle to be made in
order that the ambassadors should be able to distinguish north and south."
If this information is correct, the invention would date from about
1030 BC. But Needham suspects that the word "carriage" was inserted in
this account by scribes, and that what is being described is a "south-
pointer", that is, a compass.
The next person credited with building a south-pointing carriage is the
astronomer and scientist Zhang Heng, about 120 AD, although this is also
regarded by Needham as doubtful. The only date which he is prepared to
accept with certainty is the middle of the third century AD, with the
famous engineer Ma Jun as the builder (and, thus, the inventor). The
drawing of a pointing figure of jade, taken from the Universal Encyclo¬
paedia of 1601, was copied from a print of 1341.
If the machine did not use a magnetic compass, how did it work? The
answer is that it had a train of differential gears, similar to those in a modern
automobile. Perhaps the function of a differential gear should be explained
as follows. When a wheeled vehicle is turning a corner the wheels on
opposite sides of the vehicle are clearly going to need to turn at different
rates since the near side is travelling a shorter distance than the far side.
With a hand-cart or horse-drawn carriage, this may not pose such prob¬
lems. But when a vehicle has power being applied to the axle to make the
wheels turn, how is it possible for one wheel to be permitted to speed up a
little, and the other slow down a little, on the same axle? This is made
possible only by an ingenious combination of gear wheels and flywheels:
the differential gear.
When Needham published his volume on mechanical engineering in
1965, he believed that the Chinese had invented the differential gear, and
that it had made its first appearance in this south-pointing carriage. If the
first south-pointing carriage were the one attributed to the Duke of Zhou
about 1000 BC, then the Chinese would indeed have been the inventors;
but we must stay on the side of caution, and assume that the first
south-pointing carriage was made in the second or third century AD. In
that case, we must credit the Greeks with inventing the differential gear, a
fact which became known only in 1975, when Professor Derek Price
published his book Gears from the Greeks. In this work Price wrote the
definitive account of a Greek differential gear dating from 80 BC, which
Price said "must surely rank as one of the greatest basic mechanical
inventions of all time". And although a transmission of this invention from
Greece and Rome to China was possible, it is equally possible that the
differential gear was independently re-invented in China for the south-
pointing carriage.
The precision needed in the construction of the south-pointing carriage
almost defies belief. For the outside road wheels alone, Needham points
out, J. Coales, in The Historical and Scientific Background ofAutomation,
"has calculated that a difference of only one per cent between the wheel
circumferences would lead to a change of direction of the pointing figure of
as much as 90 per cent in a distance only fifty times that between the two
	 14 _
Model reconstruction of a "south-
pointing carriage" based on a description
dating from the 3rd century AD. Owing
to a sophisticated gearing system, the
figure's arm always points southwards,
whatever the direction in which the
carriage is moving.

' **
wheels." This was because the carriage would veer more and more to one
side if one wheel were smaller (relative slip). So that for this south-pointing
carriage, the size of the road wheels had to be accurate to a margin of error
far less than one per cent, and a commensurate accuracy in size of gear
wheels would have been necessary. This points to engineering of such a
high order that we may well be justified in hesitating to apply the words
"ancient" and "primitive" to it!
The south-pointing device was basically a reversal of the use of the
differential gear in the modern automobile. Today, such gears are used to
apply power to turn the wheels and make the vehicle move. But with the
south-pointing carriage, which was pulled by animals, the power was
transmitted from the wheels, and applied towards the continual adjusting
of the position of the pointing figure. Thus it was the differential gear in the
machine which turned the figure so that it always pointed to the south. And
it did so just as the differential gear operates today, only in reverse.
Needham has called the south-pointing carriage "the first homeostatic
machine in human history, involving full negative feedback. Of course, the
driver had to be included in the loop. But as Coales has acutely pointed out,
an attractive carrot held by the pointing figure might have replaced the
human driver and closed the loop more automatically." Although
Needham has occasionally spoken of the south-pointing carriage as the



first actual cybernetic machine, he has qualified this by saying: "The
south-pointing carriage would have been the first cybernetic machine had
the actual steering corrected itself, as we could easily make it do today."
_ 15
