RETURN TO THE PAST
Pioneers ofSovietphotography
ARKADY SAMO1L0V1CH
SHAIKHET
Ilyich's Little Lamp, 1925. Installation of the first
electric light-bulb in a peasant cottage; Lenin (the
pseudonym of Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov) said:
"Communism is the power of the Soviets plus
electricity." In the 1930s, Shaikh« (1898-1959)
worked as a photo reporter on several newspapers
and periodicals such as USSR in Construction and
Arbeiter Illustrierte Zeitung. His images, showing
the world of work, blur the dividing-line between
journalism and art photography. This photo¬
graph, which became a classic, appeared with
other documentary photographs in the exhibition
that he presented in 1928, "Ten Years of Soviet
Photography".
-,
22

RETURN TO THE PAST
VIKTOR KARLOVICH
BULLA
Elena Stasova and Vladimir I. Lenin, Moscow,
1920. Bulla (1883-1944) was born into a family of
photographers, and he became one of the young
photojournalists who recorded the events of the
Revolution. He was the author of many famous
photographs of Lenin taken during the latter's
public addresses in the streets or during the Com¬
intern (Third Communist International) congres¬
ses. The Soviet State Archives contain more than
1 30,000 negatives of the photographs taken by the
Bulla brothers and their father and also some
thirty films.
^ MAX VLADIMIROVICH
* ALPERT
Construction Site of the Fergana Grand Canal,
1939. Between 1930 and 1950 an irrigation canal
was dug with picks and shovels in the Fergana
Valley, which extends into the territories of the
Uzbek, Kirgiz and Tadzhik Soviet Socialist Re¬
publics. In the photograph can be seen the musical
instruments which gave rhythm to this Herculean
task. Alpert (1 899-1 98 1) started work in 1 924, first
for the Rabochaya Gazeta and later for Pravda.
Some of his best-known photo reports include his
stage-by-stage accounts of the building of the
Turkestan-Siberia railway and the Fergana Canal.
He worked on the magazine USSR in Construc¬
tion, which attracted the cream of Soviet photo¬
graphic reporting. Alpert was one of the pioneers
of the picture story on a grand scale.
In 1 9 1 7, the October Revolution marked the
turning-point when Russia broke with its
past and staked everything on the future:
photography at that time became a means of
capturing events, working for the Revolu¬
tion and keeping a record. Photographers
such as Karl Bulla and Pyotr Otsup were
pioneers of photographic reporting, and the
chronicle that they began was brilliantly
continued in later years by photojournalists
such as Arkady Shaikhet and Max Alpert.
Meanwhile, portrait photographers such as
Mikhail Nappelbaum and Abram
Shterenberg were inventing their own new
styles.
With Aleksandr Rodchenko, in the 1920s,
photography was in the forefront of modern
art: "We are seeking a new aesthetic, we
must find it and we will find it (rest assured)
..." As the first great virtuoso of photomon
tage in Russia (see page 25), Rodchenko
brought new life to both journalism and
portraiture, through the boldness of his for¬
mal designs and his skill in framing the sub¬
ject. His influence was immense.
Seen through the eyes of these and many
other photographers who were as politically
committed as they were inspired, and who
were witnesses but also agents of the Revolu¬
tion, workers, peasants, leaders and even
large construction sites took on an aura of
universality and their story acquired the re¬
sonance of a prophecy. D
These photographs, with more than 300 others,
are reproduced in Pioneers ofSoviet Photography,
published by Thames and Hudson, London, 1983,
with a preface by François Mathey and an intro-/
ductory essay by Grigory Shudakov on Soviet
photographers from 1917 to 1940,
23

RETURN TO THE PAST
24

ALEKSANDR MIKHAILOVICH
RODCHENKO
RETURN TO THE PAST
Fire Escape, 1925. Rodchenko (1891-1956) started
out as a painter and graphic artist. After the Re¬
volution, he became a lecturer at the Higher Insti¬
tute of Art and Technique. With the poet Vladimir
Mayakovsky, his friend and intellectual colleague,
he produced posters and books, with the theatre
producer Vsevolod Meyerhold he created scenery
for the stage, and with the film-makers Lev
Kulechov and Boris Barnett he worked for the
cinema. In the 1930s, he became an outstanding
figure in the Oktiabr ("October") art group, a
leading movement in photography and film. He
launched the periodical USSR in Construction in
partnership with his wife, Varvara Stepanova,
with the encouragement of the writer Maksim
Gorky, and supplied it with photographic reports,
including one on the White Sea Canal, and, above
all, page layouts and cover designs. He was also a
leading theorist of the art of photography.
PHOTOMONTAGE
Manipulation of the photograph is as old as
photography itself. The origins of photo¬
montage techniques can be traced back to the
19th century. In the 1920s, however, the idea
was rediscovered by the Berlin Dadaists,
centred on George Grosz and John Heart-
field, and photomontage became extremely
popular. Whether used for Dadaist subver¬
sive art or surrealist fantasies, applied to
political propaganda or to enliven publicity
and commercial art, this medium which
altered normal perception made photogra¬
phy a part of all the avant-garde movements
of the inter-war years. In the USSR, photo¬
montage was a favoured means of expression
in revolutionary art. Above right, one of a
series of photomontages by Aleksandr Rod¬
chenko illustrating Pro eto (1923; "About
This"), a poem by Vladimir Mayakovsky
(1894-1930), a leading poet of the Russian
Revolution. The young woman is Lili Brik,
the poet's lover and elder sister of the French
writer Elsa Triolet. Rodchenko made a num¬
ber of photomontages with already existing
images before starting to practice photo¬
graphy himself.
25
