Last winter, Soviet clown Anatoli Martchevskigave this ringside interview
to the Unesco Courier while touring France with the Moscow Circus.



A juggler and acrobat as well as a clown, the talented Martchevski (born
1948) is a man ofmanyparts whose activities in the arts rangefrom directing
films to writing children's books.
The profession
of laughter
Have you wanted to be a clown ever since
you were a child?
Since even before I was a child !
Why were you attracted to being a clown?
It's one of the most human professions
there is. The clown is the personification of
laughter. But it's a kind of laughter which
doesn't belittle human dignity. A clown
doesn't lose his dignity when he makes the
audience laugh. People see him as their
equal or as someone they can identify with.
He has become the hero of a show.
When you say "audience", are you thinking
mainly of children?
Children are the most honest and genuine
audience. Through them, you can test the
quality of an act and work out exactly how
to make your entrance. Adults, on the
other hand, react in terms of their pre¬
conceived ideas about the world.
You don't have a red nose, you don't wear a
grotesque costume ... you have hardly any
make-up. How would you define the type of
clown you play?
In the Soviet Union it's known as the mod¬
ern clown, to distinguish it from classical
comic figures such as the auguste and the
white-faced clown. For us the clown is first
and foremost an artiste who comes into the
ring to express his own personality to the
public. He does not represent a fictional
character. Nor is he a traditional type. It's
his real self, an individual human being,
that emerges from behind his make-up.
Is the modern clown, as you see him, very
different from the auguste?
Yes, each has a particular psychology and
sense of humour. Auguste is the archetype
of the character for whom nothing goes
right: he is in thrall to the bossy, intellectual
and rather narrow-minded white-faced
clown. But I don't want to play auguste as in
the past, in the classical manner. I'll keep
his outward appearance, the "mask", as
well as his kindness and love of mischief,
but I'll add my own inventions. I should like
to create a blend of the classical and modern
art of clowning. My "rose" act can be per¬
formed as an auguste, for example. But that
would mean mixing up different types of
clown. If I play a modern clown, then it's
me, Martchevski, with no disguise, but if I
play auguste, then it's auguste acting and
not Martchevski.

Will you always be a clown?
Yes , because I want always to be a man . For
me there is no difference between the clown
and the man. I am the same person now,
talking to you, as I am in the ring.
How did you become a professional clown?
By chance. Big circuses didn't visit the little
Ukrainian town where I grew up. I was
eighteen when I first went to the circus, but
I became an amateur circus performer while
I was still at school. It was my passion. First
I worked as an acrobat and trick cyclist in a
small outfit known as the "Circus on Stage".
But at the same time I was preparing to go
to technical college to train as an engineer.
Then came the day when I had to fill in for a
clown who couldn't come on tour...
What happened?
I saw the eyes of the audience as they
laughed, I heard their laughter and their
applause. It was irresistible. It's like when
you know a funny story and you're longing
to tell it to somebody. You're already
laughing about it and you enjoy it just as
much as the person you tell it to. It's this
need to share, to make people laugh, to
make them react, to bring them some
warmth and a positive feeling, which drives
me on. So I decided to become a profession¬
al clown.
Is this encounter with the public always
crucial for you?
Yes. Of course, audience reactions can vary
from town to town, and from country to
country. The age range of the spectators is
different every night and that affects the
nature of the show. We're used to it, that's
how things are. With an audience that loves
the circus, the experience is very fruitful;
it's like two people communicating frankly
and openly. In one way or another, every
actor on stage, every person in real life,
always wants some form of contact. Well,
that's what I offer: knowing how to give,
being receptive to others. And that's how I
want to live.
In photo sequence, right, taken at a Paris
performance during the Moscow Circus's
tour of France in 1986-1987, clown Anatoli
Martchevski burlesques the act of weightlif-
ter Valentin Dikul, who had preceded him in
the ring. Dikul is a bearded colossus who
juggles weights of 50 to 500 kg as if they were
feathers. After finding other uses for the talc
which the weightlifter had rubbed on his
hands to give him a better grip, Martchevski
gravely tries to lift barbells whose weights
are balloons. In this parody sketch, Mart¬
chevski returns to one of the clown's tradi¬
tional sources of inspiration.
