FACE TO FACE
12

FACE TO FACE
Unvarnishedportraits BY ALFREDO CRUZ RAMIREZ
Romualdo García
ROMUALDO
GARCIA
Romualdo García was born in 1852 in Silao,
near Guanajuato, Mexico, where he was later
to set up as a photographer. Guanajuato was
a flourishing mining town in his day, with a
School of Applied Arts that was open to new
techniques such as that of photography.
Thanks to Romualdo Garcia's photo¬
graphic studio, the art of portraiture was
democratized. Ordinary people from all
walks of life labourers, clerks, farmers
came along in their best clothes on high days
and holidays, when there was something to
celebrate, or simply after church on Sun¬
days. The sitting at the photographer's
would be a once-in-a-lifetime experience for
most of them, a "bit of a treat? not the result
of having to "keep up with the Joneses" as
was the case in Europe. People had their
pictures taken just as they were, in their
awkwardness, happiness, pride or sen¬
timentality. Group portraits at entertain¬
ments, family album pictures extolling the
bonds of kinship, couples flaunting their
love or their complicity, pictures to remem¬
ber grandparents by, or souvenirs of the
"little angels", those children who died while
still babies. The photographs are reminiscent
13

FACE TO FACE
of the folk-art tradition, with their poses
often borrowed from religious imagery.
Romualdo García was awarded a bronze
medal for his portraits at the Paris Interna¬
tional Exhibition of 1889, and his work also
attracted attention at the 1900 Exhibition.
The Garcia studio was doing very well at that
time, but after the Mexican Revolution of
1910, it came up against financial difficulties
and was taken over by the founder's children
when he died in 1930. His work was redisco¬
vered as recently as 1978, when research was
first carried out on this rich collection of
images, an incomparable visual testimony to
his country's heritage.
The work of the Garcia studio is both a
unique record of daily life strongly rooted in
the 19th century, and a demonstration of
people's genuineness in front of the camera,
the frankness of a golden age that had
confidence in the magical new technology,
notwithstanding certain misgivings as to its
efficacity. D
The photographs reproduced here appeared in the
exhibition "Romualdo García, an early Mexican
portrait photographer", organized by the art
historian and museologist Alfredo Cruz Ramirez,
with the assistance of the "Paris-Audiovisuel"
Association, the Museum of Alhóndiga de Grana-
ditas in Guanajuato (Mexico) and Flor Garduño, a
Mexican photographer. The exhibition was first
shown in Paris, at the National Photography Cen¬
tre (Musée du Palais de Tokyo), from October
1987 to February 1988.
Romualdo García
14
