Why wildlife matters
Photo Norman Myers © WWF, Gland, Switzerland
"If all the beasts were gone, men would die
from great loneliness of spirit, for whatever
happens to the beasts also happens to the
man. All things are connected. Whatever
befalls the earth befalls the sons of the
earth." These words were written by an
Indian chief, Seathl, in a letter to the Presi¬
dent of the United States in 1855. Above, a
herd of African elephants. Poaching for iv¬
ory is a serious threat wherever elephants
are accessible, and in Africa elephant num¬
bers have declined considerably in recent
years.
IN this age of technology, of computers,
television, supersonic aircraft and nuc¬
lear power stations, why should wild
animals and plants matter to us any longer?
Surely they must now go into the ash-can of
history, along with bows and arrows, wood
fires and horse transport?
On the contrary, it is a matter of life and
death, in every sense of the phrase, that
animals and plants should continue to exist.
For every day of our lives, every man,
woman and child in the world depends on
them for vital parts of their welfare.
Animals and plants contribute to human
welfare in three main ways. They provide
much of the material basis of human life:
almost all our food, much of our clothing,
and in many parts of the world still most of
the material for building and of the fuel for
heating and lighting our dwellings. In addi¬
tion, they provide the knowledge that is
essential for maintaining this material basis,
and indeed for preventing a widespread
return to more primitive conditions. Not
least, they contribute significantly to our
enjoyment of our environment, both in our
daily recreation and in our wonderment at
both the beauty of the natural world and at
the mysteries of the universe.
It was recognition of the importance to
mankind of the genetic resources repre¬
sented by animal and plant species, both
18

Htter
Photo J. Esser © WWF, Gland, Switzerland
wild and domesticated, and alarm at their
widespread destruction, that eight years
ago led the International Union for Con¬
servation of Nature and Natural Resources
(IUCN) and the World Wildlife Fund
(WWF) to produce the World Conservation
Strategy (see the Unesco Courier, May
1980). This has three primary objectives:
(1) to maintain viable stocks of all animal
and plant species (it must be ail because we
still know so little about the value of the
great majority of species; it is only quite
recently, for instance, that the value in the
treatment of cancer of a little-known Mada¬
gascar plant, the periwinkle Catharanthus,
was discovered);
(2) to maintain large enough stocks of
species already known to be of value to
. man, so that they can be cropped, harvested
or otherwise enjoyed indefinitely; and
(3) to maintain pure air and water and
fertile soil.
, Though all three aims of the World Con¬
servation Strategy are plain common sense,
they are widely disregarded by both govern¬
ments and individuals, thanks to our pre¬
sent social and institutional arrangements.
How are we to overcome this widespread
neglect and manage the world's animals and
plants, both wild and domesticated, on a
sustainable basis, i.e. so that they continue
to be available for our benefit?
The two main threats to species, which
have led to the extinction of some and se¬
vere reductions in the numbers of many
others, are overexploitation and habitat
destruction.
Historically, overexploitation, both legal
and illegal, has been the more important. In
the last century, overhunting exterminated
the passenger pigeon in North America and
nearly exterminated the bison there too. In
the present century, systematic poaching
for their horns and ivory has almost exter¬
minated the black rhinoceros and severely
reduced elephant numbers in Africa.
Moreover, overhunting of the great
whales, especially in the southern oceans,
despite the efforts of the International
Whaling Commission (IWC) set up espe¬
cially to prevent this, has reduced almost all
stocks throughout the world to the level of
commercial extinction. Since their hunting
is now forbidden, the whaling industry has
in effect committed suicide. Marine fish
stocks throughout the world have also been
steadily overexploited so that many of them
are no longer available for human consump¬
tion. The world's last great reservoir of
plentiful fish stocks is now in the Antarctic
and sub-Antarctic. Will current efforts
through the Antarctic Treaty be too little
and too late to save these too?
But today widespread habitat destruction
The vicuña (Lama vicugna), a ruminant re¬
lated to the llama, lives in the high Andes. Its
exceptionally fine and warm wool was highly
prized in North America and Europe, and so
many vicuña were slaughtered that the spe¬
cies was threatened with extinction until
Peru took protective measures to save it in
the 1960s.
is by far the most serious threat to both
animal and plant species, especially in the
great rainforest belt of the developing
world. Here the burgeoning human popula¬
tion makes constantly increasing demands
for timber and cultivable land. "More peo¬
ple and less swamp", as an elderly Floridan
pithily explained the decrease of the cougar
in his district. Ten hectares of virgin tropical
forest are estimated to be disappearing
every minute. At this rate of clearance
hardly any of the surviving 2 to 3 billion
hectares will remain outside national parks
and other protected areas by the end of the
century, now only a dozen years away.
Pollution is an almost equally important
factor. Chemical wastes from both industry
and agriculture, as well as from the activi¬
ties of individuals such' as automobile
travel, are steadily impairing the quality of
19

The African northern white rhino (Cer-
atotherium simum cottoni) lives under threat
of extinction because of hunting for its horn.
By the early 1980s it was estimated that its
numbers had been reduced to fewer than 700
animals. The biggest population of northern
white rhinos today live in Zaire's 500,000-
hectare Garamba National Park, which in
1980 was included on Unesco's World Herit¬
age List as a natural property of outstanding
universal value.
The Arabian oryx (Oryx leucoryx) was once
common throughout the desert areas ofAra¬
bia, Syria and Mesopotamia. By 1972 it had
become extinct in the wild through intensive
hunting. Fortunately, before that happened,
a few had been captured and used to build
up breeding herds. In 1980 the oryx was
successfully reintroduced in Oman.
air, soil and water. The most dramatic effect
is that of acid rain , due to a "chemical soup"
still not fully understood, which is des¬
troying both forests and freshwater fish
stocks throughout the northern hemi¬
sphere.
To stop overexploitation, we must reg¬
ulate cropping and harvesting. This calls for
both licensing of individual hunters, some¬
times with specific bag limits, and quotas for
commercial harvesting. The problem is al¬
ways enforcement, as witness the universal
existence and increasing audacity of
poachers even in national parks, and the
dismal record of the whaling industry.
The accurate estimation of stock size is
another problem. The IWC has its own
scientific committee to do this for whales,
and IUCN has set up a Conservation Moni¬
toring Centre (CMC), to create an accurate
data-base for all species. The Centre is also
responsible for the Red Data Books, brain¬
child of Sir Peter Scott, which summarize
key information about endangered species.
So far the chief weapon against habitat
destruction has been the creation of nation¬
al parks, nature reserves, wildlife refuges or
other protected areas. But can enough land
be set aside in this way in the next ten or
twelve years to save the many thousands of
species that today face certain extinction
from rainforest loss alone? The number of
species so threatened may indeed be mil¬
lions, if the latest estimates of the world's
invertebrate species an incredible 30 mil¬
lion are correct.
The two bodies which bear the brunt of
the responsibility for saving species are
IUCN and WWF. They share a headquar¬
ters in Switzerland and are greatly helped
by the United Nations Environment Prog¬
ramme (UNEP), which strongly supports
and grant-aids IUCN. Birds are covered by
the International Council for Bird Preserva¬
tion (ICBP), headquartered in the United
Kingdom and currently grant-aided by
WWF.
IUCN operates through six commissions
of scientific experts: the Species Survival
Commission (SSC), the one mainly con¬
cerned with species conservation, works
through a network of more than 90 special¬
ist groups, to which nearly 2,000 zoologists
and botanists all over the world voluntarily
contribute their expertise. Among the most
active groups are those covering African
elephants and rhinos, antelopes, cats, pri¬
mates, crocodiles, marine turtles, dragon-
flies and orchids. The Trade Group is re¬
sponsible for IUCN's input into the impor¬
tant Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (CITES). The SSC
also has close links with ICBP, which has its
own series of working groups, such as those
for parrots, flamingos and bustards.
Two other relevant IUCN commissions
are those for Ecology (general habitat prob¬
lems, pollution) and National Parks and
Protected Areas. Unesco's Man and the
Biosphere Programme also plays a vital
part in preserving habitat for species, as do
such international conventions as the World
Heritage Convention, and the Ramsar Con¬
vention on Wetlands of International Im¬
portance.
Many non-governmental organizations
belong to IUCN, and some are active in the
species conservation field in their own
right, notably the Bombay Natural History
Society, the Fauna and Flora Preservation

Illicit trade
in threatened species
Society of London, the Frankfurt Zoologic¬
al Society of the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many and the New York Zoological
Society.
Unlike IUCN, WWF and ICBP operate
largely through national organizations or
sections, ICBP's network being consider¬
ably the more extensive world-wide. WWF
is primarily a fund-raising body, and in¬
creasingly tends to raise funds for its own
programmes and projects.
So where do we go from here? How can
this array of national and international
bodies help to achieve our aim, the con¬
servation and sustainable use (which in¬
cludes non-consumptive uses, such as bird-
watching and whale-watching) of animal
and plant species?
More, and usually a lot more, of what we
are already doing seems to be the answer.
First we must set aside and manage properly
adequate areas of habitat. This includes
ensuring that big development projects take
account of the need to conserve genetic
resources.
We must also ensure that all wild popula¬
tions that are harvested are not over-
harvested. This means both cracking down
on poaching everywhere, not just in pro¬
tected areas, and properly enforcing the
CITES trade regulations. Finally, and most
important of all, we must carry with us not
only the decision-makers, politicians and
administrators, but also villagers and
townsfolk all over the world. Without their
goodwill, and their realization of where
their own real long-term interests lie, every¬
thing will be lost.
RICHARD FITTER, British naturalist and au¬
thor, has been a member of the Species Survival
Commission of the International Union for Con¬
servation of Nature and Natural Resources
(IUCN) for 24 years and is currently chairman of
its Steering Committee. His 29th book was Wild¬
life for Man, a source-book on species conserva¬
tion for the World Conservation Strategy, and his
30th, a field guide to the north-west European
countryside in winter, will appear in September
1988.
The green turtle (Chelonia mydas), found in
tropical seas, is overexploited for its meat,
its eggs and its shell, used to make tourist
souvenirs. Turtle populations have been sev¬
erely reduced and in some regions have dis¬
appeared completely. Right, baby green
turtles.
