A 'silentgenocide'
Abdus Salam
OUR planet is inhabited by two
distinct types of human beings.
According to the United Na¬
tions Development Programme (UNDP)
count of 1983, one quarter of mankind,
some 1,100 million people, are "developed".
They inhabit two-fifths of the land area of
the Earth, while 3,600 million "developing"
humans Les Misérables live in the re¬
maining three-fifths. I shall call them the
rich and the poor respectively, although
some of those in the developing world are
not exactly poor in pure economic terms. It
is not just the level of poverty which dis¬
tinguishes one type from the other, it is also
a question of ambition and dynamism, and
the differing contribution made by each
type to "present day culture" and to science
and technology.
During 1983, the rich countries enjoyed a
total Gross National Product (GNP) of
$10.5 trillion, $9,500 per year and per cap¬
ita, or around $800 per month. For the same
year, the poor countries had a total GNP of
$2.6 trillion, an average of $60 per capita per
month. The part of the world I come
fromSouth Asiawhich consists of Af¬
ghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakis¬
tan and Sri Lanka and has a population of
1,000 million, had a GNP of $250 per cap¬
ita. This means on an average $20 a month
or 70 cents a day. These 70 cents are sup¬
posed to provide us with two daily meals,
clothing, shelter, health care and education,
if any.
The rich quarter of humanity "lead" the
"North-Centric" world of today through
their economic superiority and their mil¬
itary prowess. They include the two super¬
powers, the USA and the USSR, with pop¬
ulations of 235 and 272 million (and GNPs
of $3.3 trillion and $1.85 trillion, respec¬
tively). The "leaders" as a whole suffer from
two problems: a nuclear psychosis and un¬
employment. They seem to have conscious¬
ly chosen to keep 10 per cent of their active
population unemployed feeding and
clothing them at subsistence level.
The remaining three-quarters of human¬
ity includes some of the peoples who built
up the oldest civilizations of the planet the
Chinese, the Hindu, the Buddhist and the
Islamic. Their basic problems are lack of
food (some countries are wracked by recur-
"Unfortunately, there are fewpoints ofcontad
between the two types of human beings, the
rich and the poor. "
ring famines); of shelter; of clothing; of
health care; of education. Their situation is
aggravated by the problems of unemploy¬
ment; adverse terms of trade; chronic indeb¬
tedness (to the tune of $1 trillion); over¬
crowding; and lack of security.
I am not referring to the obviously shel¬
terless, the obviously needy. I have in mind,
rather, the uncomplaining hungry millions,
whoand I speak from experience sel¬
dom get two regular meals a day; the mil¬
lions who must often choose between buy
ing badly needed food or a Schoolbook for
their child. They live in a crushing poverty
of the kind that has not been known in
Europe and the United States since the time
of Dickens. I never cease to be amazed that,
despite this "silent genocide", the human
spirit does not break and that most of the
needy are still able to keep up a dignified
appearance.
Lack of security is today one of the most
unsettling aspects of life in the developing
world. The causes include: military dicta¬
torships (perhaps, as one dictator succeeds
another, the struggle for sheer survival ex¬
tinguishes the democratic spirit); the un¬
settled borders of nation States, which are
mainly a legacy of imperialism; religious
27

fanaticism, fanned by past events; greed for
territory; superpower rivalries and the in¬
sistent arms sales by the rich to the poor;
apartheid.
Unfortunately, there are few points of
contact between the two types of human
beings. Some of these are historical in nature,
a consequence of the Imperial past. Others
include a shared environment most of the
tropical forests which are the "lungs" of our
planet happen to be located within the
developing countries. The rich countries are
just beginning to appreciate the biological
importance of tropical forests for all human¬
ity and the need to share responsibility for
their upkeep. Another point of contact is
the need for raw materials, substitutes for
which cannot be easily found, such as oil
and gas, as well as food items such as ba¬
nanas.
Trade could have been an area for contact,
but it is not. All the developing countries
Engraving by the French
artist Georges Rouault
(1871-1958) is one ofa
series entitled Miserere,
executed between 1917
and 1927.
Theforests ofAmazonia
are one ofourplanet 's
"lungs", ofvital
importanceforall
humanity.
together account for no more than 20 per
cent of world trade. A recent study points
out that "the thirty-six countries the 'Real
South'with a per capita income of less
than $400 and half of the world's population
(including China, India and Pakistan) sur¬
prisingly account for no more than 3 per
cent of world trade".1
For all practical purposes, the "Real
Poor", like Frantz Fanon's2 oppressed
Blacks, make no mark on the present world.
Like all poor anywhere, they could dis¬
appear from the face of the Earth without
leaving any trace. What can be done about
their predicament?
There are two contrasting answers to this
question. Either to eliminate all the poor on
the lines of what the Irish satirist Jonathan
Swift suggested in his famous "modest pro¬
posal" to solve the problem of famine in
Ireland two centuries ago.3 Or if the con¬
science of the world will not accept a "final
solution" (and fortunately there are people
in the rich countries who would oppose
this), then the only other alternative is to try
to restore some measure of human dignity
to this assortment of peoples.
My thesis is that the situation of the
developing world can be improved in the
long term only through an assisted and
massive importation of modern science and
technology, the possession of which is the
basic difference between the North and the
South. Such a step may incidentally also
solve the unemployment problem of the
rich countries through the demand for
goods and services it would generate.
1. Gerald Segal, Guide to the World Today, (1987)
2. West Indian psychoanalyst and social philosopher
known for his writings on behalf of the national liber¬
ation of colonial peoples in such works as Black Skin,
White Masks (1967), and The Wretched of the Earth
(1965).
3. In his Modest Proposal for preventing the children of
the poor people from being a burthen to their Parents or
Country, and for making them beneficial to the Publick
(1729), Swift suggested that economic conditions might
be alleviated by using the children of poor parents as
food for the rich.
ABDUS SALAM, of Pakistan, was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Physics in 1979 (with S. Glashow
and S. Weinberg) for establishing an analogy be¬
tween electromagnetism and the interactions of
elementary particles. Founder and director of the
Unesco-supported International Centre for
Theoretical Physics, Trieste, and professor of
theoretical physics at the Imperial College of Sci¬
ence and Technology, London, he is the author of
a number of publications, including Ideals and
Realities: Selected Essays of Abdus Salam (1984),
and Supergravity in Diverse Dimensions (1987).
<
2
<
©
28
