The World Decade
for Cultural Development
Thrust (1959), oil on canvas by the American artist Adolph Gottlieb

Logo of
the World Decade
for Cultural Development
(see photo page 6)
BY FEDERICO MAYOR
Director-General of Unesco
THE experience of the last two decades has shown that
culture cannot be dissociated from development in
any society, whatever its level of economic growth or
its political and economic orientation.
Culture is an intrinsic part of the life and awareness
conscious and unconscious of individuals and communities.



It is a living fund of the creative activity, past and present,
which has shaped over the centuries the system of values,
traditions and tastes which defines the distinctive genius of a
people. Thus culture is bound to make an imprint on economic
activity and define the strengths and weaknesses of a society's
productive processes.
These conclusions emerge from the experience, both posi¬
tive and negative, of all countries. Whenever a country has set
itself the target of economic growth without reference to its
cultural environment, grave economic and cultural imbalances
have resulted and its creative potential has been seriously
weakened. Genuine development must be based on the best
possible use of the human resources and material wealth of the
community. Thus in the final analysis the priorities, motiva¬
tions and objectives of development must be found in culture.
But in the past this has been conspicuously ignored.
From now on culture should be regarded as a direct source
of inspiration for development, and in return, development
should assign to culture a central role as a social regulator.
This imperative applies not only to developing countries,
where economic extraversion and cultural alienation have
clearly and sometimes dramatically widened the gap between
the creative and productive processes. It is also increasingly
vital for the industrialized countries, where the headlong race
for growth in material wealth is detrimental to the spiritual,
ethical and aesthetic aspects of life, and creates much dishar¬
mony between man and the natural environment.
The same imperative applies to the relations between na¬
tions and between regions, at a time when the processes of
social change are rapidly becoming worldwide in scope a
phenomenon which is encouraging a growing exchange of
ideas, individuals and goods and is bringing people and nations
closer together, but which is also leading to a dangerous
uniformity of cultural values, and increasing the inequality of
opportunities for progress at world level. As a consequence,
human creative diversity may be impoverished and the
domination of those who define these values may increase.
A skilfully managed linkage between culture and develop¬
ment can make it possible to strengthen creative identities, to
inhibit standardization, and to encourage greater equality of
opportunity for self-expression for different cultures, thereby
promoting increasingly fruitful exchanges between them.
Such a linkage must be based on the rejection of any discrimi¬
nation, either between nations or between individuals, and on

the assertion of the universal humanist values of democracy,
justice and solidarity, without which no dialogue is possible. It
must be based on the encouragement of freedom of research,
invention and innovation which is the prime condition for any
cultural life.


Thus every effort must be made to allow creative diversity
to prevail over the dead hand of standardization, the basic
aspirations of mankind to prevail over the conflicts of interest
groups, and human solidarity to prevail through the free
self-expression of the individual.
As I remarked at the ceremony held to launch the World
Decade for Cultural Development on 21 January 1988, the
aim of the Decade is to promote awareness of the cultural
imperative and to foster a new state of mind that will lead to
the emergence of a variety of proposals devoted to "a diversity
which unites, a creativity which brings together, and a solidar¬
ity which liberates".
The four major objectives of the Decade constitute guide¬
lines rather than a rigid framework:
Acknowledgment ofthe cultural dimension ofdevelopment:
ways must be found in which production and creativity can be
linked, and economics can be rooted in culture.
Affirmation and enrichment of cultural identities: the en¬
couragement of all individual and collective talents and
initiatives.
Broadening participation in cultural life: mobilizing the
forces of freedom of expression and creativity in the individual
and the community, in the name of human rights, free will and
independence of mind.
Promotion of international cultural co-operation: seeking,
increasing and strengthening the means whereby a culture
freely draws sustenance from others and in turn nourishes
them, while respecting a nucleus of universally accepted
truths.
The Director-General of Unesco, Mr. Federico Mayor (right),
receives the logo of the World Decade for Cultural Development
(1988-1997) from its designer, Hans Erni, at a ceremony held
to launch the Decade on 21 January 1988. The artist describes his
design as "Five faces from the five continents of the Earth
symbolizing the manifold creativity of social and cultural life.
Expressing the joy of living, they are seen against the sunlight whose
rays reflect the many and varied aspects of Unesco's work."
Mahaweli Community Radio
(MCR), Sri Lanka's first regional
radio station, was set up with
Unesco assistance and funding from
DANIDA (Danish International
Development Agency). The service
is aimed at some one million farming
families who were moved
between 1977 and 1986 when dams
and irrigation canals were being
constructed along the course of the
Mahaweli River, in the northeast of
the island. The station broadcasts
reports from areas where the
farmers have been relocated and
programmes on local cultural
events. It also sponsors a street
theatre group and their musicians
(photos 1 and 2), who perform plays
based on the daily life of the villagers
and linked to development problems
such as the impact of
modernization, destruction of the
forests, or disputes in the
community. After the performance,
an MCR reporter interviews village
elders to record their reactions
(photo 3).
The improvement of living
conditions in urban settlements
with a low quality of life is one of the
priorities set forth in Unesco's Plan
of Action for the World Decade for
Cultural Development. Several
Unesco-supportcd projects in the
field are already under way,
including one to rehabilitate the
Barrio Río Salado (right), a riverside
settlement near La Romana in the
Dominican Republic.

