Daily life in the land
of the Pharaohs
BY CHRISTIANE DESROCHES-NOBLECOURT
EVEN the uninitiated traveller along the
banks of the Nile, studded as they
are with superb vestiges of
Pharaonic times, is immediately impressed
by the essential features of the luminous
civilization of ancient Egypt a profound
religious feeling that found expression in
immense temples and tombs, and an intense
and ardent love of life, endlessly recorded in
the painted or sculpted images that adorn the
inner walls of funerary monuments.
Study of these sources reveals that
Egyptian temples were never destined to
receive believers gathered to offer prayers to
an evocation of God. They were sanctuaries
designed primarily to maintain the cosmic
machinery through the meticulous atten¬
tions of the Pharaoh, who was the earthly
representative of divine power and purpose,
the supreme pontiff surrounded by a hierar¬
chy of priests. Ordinary people were denied
access to these sacred edifices. Imbued with
the divine, like "all that lives on land, in the
air, under the water" (the plant and mineral
worlds included), they recognized and wor¬
shipped their creator in all the manifesta¬
tions of Nature, without frequenting tem¬
ples. For them death was simply a threshold
which took them closer to god, and in their
funerary trappings they portrayed them¬
selves in the presence of the deities of the
underworld with which they would be in
direct contact until their complete incor¬
poration in eternity.
We should also take care not to misinter¬
pret what we see in the tombs. The captivat¬
ing scenes from daily life that adorn the walls
of burial chambers and some of the ritual
objects preserved in them should be seen in a
mystical light as symbolic images of the
"everyday" challenges and vicissitudes of
the journey through the Osirian underworld
from which the dead person would surely
emerge in triumph, winning access to
eternity.
These images are inspired by scenes from
everyday life on the banks of the Nile. A
funerary banquet incites the deceased to di¬
vine inebriation. A clump of papyrus reeds
recalls the primeval marshland in which he
must undergo gradual "gestation" as he
moves towards apotheosis. A depiction of
hunting the hippopotamus or trapping wild
ducks is meant to paralyse demons that may
block his path. Nets are set to catch the
mystic fish, the symbol of his destiny. Grain
is harvested and grapes are picked to make
offerings of bread and wine for Osiris. The
presence of a small calf symbolizes the sun's
renewal.
Through this lively and colourful panor¬
ama, designed for otherworldly purposes, it
^ Limestone head of a young girl in the Amarna
style. The short-lived Amarna period during the
reign of Akhenaten (New Kingdom, c. 1353-
1335 BC), who left Thebes to found a new capital
city near the present el-Amarna, left a legacy of
naturalistic statuary which broke with
traditional conventions of representation.

Wall painting from the tomb of the Vizier
Rekhmire (18th Dynasty), atThebes, shows the
deceased sailing in a papyrus skiff pulled by
haulers. The stretch of water, within a closed
garden, is surrounded by rows of sycamores and
date palms. Nature is widely represented in New
Kingdom art, whose practitioners enjoyed
greater liberty than their predecessors in choice
of subject, especially in the decoration of tombs.
is possible to grasp in broad outline the
context in which "the herd of god", as the
ancient Egyptians saw themselves, lived
their lives.
It is an almost entirely agrarian setting,
governed by what Julius Caesar (who
adopted it and imposed it on the Roman
world) termed "the greatest and most intelli¬
gent of calendars". This calendar was deter¬
mined by the inundation of the Nile, which
occurred every 365 V4 days to cover and fer¬
tilize the drought-parched lands of Egypt
(which had no other watercourse and vir¬
tually no rainfall).
The regularity of the annual flood had
determined since the earliest times the calen¬
dar of three four-month seasons, instilling in
the Egyptians, who were infinitely sensitive
to their environment, a profound and un-
shakeable faith in the principle of eternal
renewal.
Relations between men and women were
modelled on those which were deemed to
have governed the divine couples of "the
earliest times", and were characterized by
complete equality. Unlike women in many
of the societies of classical Antiquity, the
women of ancient Egypt enjoyed full legal
powers. Even a married woman could man¬
age her own fortune, share part of her hus¬
band's wealth and freely dispose of her own
property among her children. The married
woman was "Mistress of the House". She
advised her husband and contributed largely
to the prosperity of the household she man¬
aged. Cherished by her husband and re¬
spected by what she hoped would be a
numerous offspring, she was happy to feel
herself the pivot of the household and the
family circle. Parents accorded their atten¬
tion equitably to sons and daughters, not all
of whom (especially girls) seem to have re¬
ceived much formal schooling. Some girls
must, however, have undergone fairly
advanced instruction, since women were ad¬
mitted to certain posts in administration, in
commerce and even in the scientific profes¬
sions. The first woman doctor known to
history, Lady Pesechet, was in practice in
Memphis at the time of the pyramids, during
the third millennium BC.
Profoundly patriotic, the Egyptian was by
no means xenophobic. In early times prison¬
ers were taken during conflicts caused by the
need to defend the frontiers of "The Black
Land" (Kemi, as ancient Egypt was called),
but the Egyptians were fundamentally paci¬
fic people, for whom "war is a day of misfor¬
tune". Prisoners were humanely treated.
While they were often consigned to the sol¬
diers or officers who had captured them,
they could be set free and even permitted to
marry into the family of their captor. They
were free to worship their own gods.
As was still to some extent the case on the
banks of the Nile at the beginning of this

century, marriage was sanctioned neither by
a religious ceremony nor by an administra¬
tive act. An agreement made before a witness
by a man and a woman wishing to start a
family was a commitment of great moral
significance. On occasion, a deed might be
drawn up to specify the personal property of
each partner. The purpose of this was pri¬
marily to preserve the rights of the wife in
the event of divorce, which could be re¬
quested by either of the parties. Since di¬
vorce entailed forfeiture by the husband of
the wife's contribution (or of whatever he
had acknowledged to be her contribution) to
their joint fortune, it could prove a costly, if
not ruinous, process for him! All these conL
ditions, with the help of an admixture of
common sense, helped to maintain the sta¬
bility of marriage. *
The simplest dwellings always comprised
an enclosed courtyard leading to a commun¬
al living-room. Outbuildings were situated
behind the house. A staircase led from the
courtyard to a terrace, which was particular¬
ly appreciated as a place where the family
could spend the hot summer nights and en¬
joy a breath of cool air.
Remains of the residences of very wealthy
Egyptians have revealed a logical ground
plan that remained unchanged for thousands
of years. Like all other buildings except reli¬
gious monuments, which were constructed
in stone, a noble and durable material, such
dwellings were built in unbaked brick, made
of Nile mud mixed with straw and ash. Large
country mansions in vast estates comprised
The sarcophagus of a royal lady named Kawit,
in the precincts of the mortuary temple of
Mentuhotpe (c. 2061-2010 BC), Deir el-Bahri, is
decorated with reliefs evoking the daily life of
the deceased princess and perpetuating it in the
next world. Below right, the princess is seated
on a high backed chair, mirror in hand, while an
attendant arranges the curls of her wig. She is
holding to her lips a cup of milk poured out for
her by a steward. Below, the cow which gave the
milk, with a calf still attached to its leg.
_ tai
: z- '«- '
* .i * . *
three parts, corresponding to the require¬
ments of everyday life. A large entrance-hall
led to a central chamber whose high ceiling
was supported by one or by four columns.
Small windows high in the walls were fitted
with bars. Here were held the receptions and
festivities which the ancient Egyptians so
enjoyed. Side rooms served as stores, offices
or lodgings for secretaries or housekeepers.
A staircase led to a loggia running the length
of the entrance-hall.
The third part of the house was reserved
for family life, and included a central, more
intimate, communal living room, rooms
where the children worked and played dur¬
ing the cold days of winter and bedrooms.
An entire wing reserved for ablutions (inc¬
luding showers), anointings and personal
toilet and hygiene, was equipped with a sys¬
tem of drains.
These country estates, which functioned
as small, closed economics, were completed
by outbuildings housing kitchens, grain
silos, a bakery, butchery, brewery, and va¬
rious workshops, including one for weaving,
which was the major household activity of
women in all classes of society. Other
domestic activities, notably cooking (except
for making bread) were usually carried out
by the men. Asses were kept in the stables,
and so were horses, which were introduced
into Egypt during the New Kingdom and
were mainly used to pull the light chariots
that also originated in the Near East.
A garden planted with sycamores, weep¬
ing willows, tamarisks and palms, patch-
worked with flowerbeds and further deco¬
rated with trellised vines and a refreshing
pool of water, was the dream of every
Egyptian. In the towns, where space was
limited, gardens were smaller, surrounding
buildings of several storeys containing the
areas that occupied a single storey in the
country. The weavers' workshop was lo¬
cated in the cellar, which doubtless also pro¬
vided cold storage for foodstuffs and drink.
^ "o'ViV ^ -h" ^-Kn^Ksbii^: g I LI
28

Q
©
! ^&3TJ* üin!|í?te!i !fe^lo¡#
afir?