This basin of ytte ware, with a pale green
glaze, is one of the oldest surviving pieces
of porcelain (3rd century AD).



Porcelain
Ordinary pottery is made from clay baked in a kiln at temperatures ranging
from 500°C to 1150°C, and is called earthenware. Porcelain is something
quite different: it consists of a body of fused clay covered by a glaze, a
glassy substance, and is fired at a high temperature about 1280°C. The
secret of making porcelain lies in the use of a pure clay, kaolin or China
clay, which when fired at a sufficiently high temperature changes its
physical composition, a process known as vitrification, and becomes
translucent and totally impervious to water. The reason why China was
able to "invent" porcelain at a very early age compared to the rest of the
world was that the Chinese potters both found the clay and were able to
produce the high temperature necessary to fuse it.
It now seems that archaeological finds push back the date of true
porcelain to the first century AD. By the third century AD, in any case,
true porcelain was undeniably in use.
By the Song Dynasty (960-1279), porcelain had reached a very high
degree of artistry. Porcelain manufacture by this time was a highly
organized trade employing hundreds of thousands of people. There were
teams of men who specialized in washing the clay, others who concerned
themselves only with glazes, others who maintained the kilns, and so on.
One kiln of this period which has been excavated could accommodate
25,000 pieces of porcelain at a single firing. It was built on the slope of a
hill, the gentle incline of about 15° reducing the speed of the flames
through the kiln. The sophistication of the kilns was most impressive.
Some were fired by burning wood, while others were down-draught
burners of charcoal. Control of the firing process was of the utmost
precision. In the Ming Dynasty (1369-1644), when the famous blue and
white ware was largely produced, the best lustrous quality of the cobalt
blue pigment could only be obtained at certain specific temperatures, and
in a reducing (de-oxidizing) flame.
The secrets of porcelain manufacture were jealously guarded, and
visitors from Europe such as Marco Polo could but gape and wonder.
Porcelain objects were still a very great rarity in Europe by the fifteenth
century. They were gifts for kings and potentates. Not until 1520 did the
first sample of kaolin clay reach Europe, brought by the Portuguese.
Europeans then thought that if only they could find deposits of this white
clay, they would be able to make porcelain. But kaolin clay alone is far
from sufficient for the making of porcelain.
The countless experiments carried on with various earths and solid
substances in furnaces eventually had a most unpredictable result. Scien¬
tists and craftsmen began to notice that upon cooling down again, molten
minerals could crystallize. Until this began to be observed, Western
scientists had been convinced that crystals could only be formed from
liquids. About the middle of the eighteenth century in Europe, the idea
began to gain ground that perhaps the Earth's rocks could have been
formed from the cooling of molten masses of lava. In 1785 the geologist
James Hutton presented his revolutionary new theory of the Earth based
on this idea. And so, one of the great scientific advances in the Western
world took place as a direct consequence of the attempts by Europeans to
find the secret of porcelain manufacture.
White porcelain goblet with thick,
finely-crackled glaze. Tang Dynasty
(618-907 AD).
22 _
