The book situation in India
BY LOKENATH BHATTACHARYA
INDIA, which publishes about 20,000 titles annually, is
the eighth largest book producing country in the world.
With a healthy climate for authorship, democratic pol¬
icies and institutions, increasingly well-equipped printing
plants, availability of locally produced paper, editorial ex¬
pertise, a functioning network of distribution and a growing
community of readers, the country also has the largest
publishing infrastructure in the developing world.
According to a survey of the Indian book industry carried
out by the National Council of Applied Economic Research,
there are some 3,000 active publishers in India, including
about 100 large firms bringing out a minimum of 50 titles per
year. Educational publishing occupies the most prominent
place. Although the great bulk of publishing is in private
hands, about 450 agencies in the public sector are also active
in this field. In fact, the central government has emerged as
India's largest single publishing agency, and now accounts
for about 20 per cent of the country's book production.
The problems of authorship and publishing in India
should be seen against a background of enormous linguistic
and ethnic diversity. Fifteen major languages are recognized
by the Constitution as national languages. They are, al¬
phabetically, Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada,
Kashmiri, Malayalam, Marathi, Oriya, Punjabi, Sanskrit,
Sindhi, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu. All these are independent
languages, not dialects or variations of another language, and
most of them have quite extensive literatures of their own.
Each is spoken by millions of people.
In addition to the major languages and a few others such as
Dogri, Konkani, Maithili, Manipuri, Nepali and Rajasthani
which, though not as important, are still spoken by large
numbers of people, there are nearly 400 tribal mother
tongues in India, most of them with no written literature at
all. The problem of scripts, too, is almost as complex. The
eleven major script systems, used in addition to the Perso-
Arabic and Roman, are Nagari, Bengali, Assamese, Manipu¬
ri, Oriya, Telugu, Kannada, Tamil, Malayalam, Gujarati and
Gurumukhi.
Then there is the oral tradition, the majestic presence of
the spoken word, which even today is far from being
superseded. "Talking" books, as opposed to written ones,
are still a familiar sight. Wandering minstrels board a train or
gather in village fairs, and keep an audience spellbound with
what they recount or chant. Even to this day, busy market¬
places in cities like Calcutta undergo a magical transforma¬
tion in the evening when groups of people assemble to listen
to an episode of the Ramayana or the Mahabharata.
The following figures give some idea of literary activities
in the major Indian languages, as well as works written in
English by Indian authors. In one recent year, India pro¬
duced a total of 21,265 titles 77 in Assamese, 1,302 in
Bengali, 10,438 in English, 972 in Gujarati, 2,633 in Hindi,
306 in Kannada, 595 in Malayalam, 1,514 in Marathi, 322 in
Oriya, 597 in Punjabi, 177 in Sanskrit, 910 in Tamil, 817 in
Telugu, 352 in Urdu and 253 in other languages. Around 33
per cent of the tptal were literary works (except in the case of
22

LOKENATH BHATTACHARYA, Bengali poet and essayist, is a former
Director of the National Book Trust of India. He is the author of a Unesco
publication, Books and Reading in India, and of The Prose Poems of
Lokenath Bhattacharya (1972) and The Drum of the Guru (1979).



English, in which creative writing is negligible in India).
There is also the fact that less than 7 per cent of India's total
population know an Indian language other than their own
mother tongue although, since major language speakers are
not solely confined to specific areas or towns, all the States
and Union territories are multi-lingual.
Hindi, because of the numbers of people who speak it, has
been declared the official language of the country and every
effort is being made to promote its development and use at
the national level. The yearly output of publishing in Hindi
is second only to that in English.
Proficiency in English, instead of hindering the growth
and richness of expression in all the major Indian languages,
has significantly contributed to it. Today, India ranks as the
world's third largest producer of books in English, after the
United States of America and the United Kingdom.
The principal factors governing publishing activities in a
country are its literacy rate, the size and nature of its
educated population and since textbooks and other allied
supplementary reading material are the mainstay of the book
trade, especially in a developing country its educational
policies and programmes. While literacy and reading habits
are nowhere synonymous, literacy remains the first pre¬
requisite for the growth of a reading programme.
The last Indian census taken in 1981 shows the country's
literacy rate to be about 37 per cent, registering an increase of
nearly 7 per cent over the previous figures of 1971. This
4 Browsers at a New Delhi bookstall
Typesetting by hand at the Kerala Times in the
industrial town of Ernakulam in the State of
Kerala, southwest India. According to the latest
(1987) edition of Unesco's Statistical Yearbook,
there were 1,334 daily newspapers in India in
1984, with an estimated total circulation of
almost 15 million.
23

Engrossed in a book, a traveller waits for his
train on Howrah station, Calcutta.
increase does not mean that there has been an appreciable fall
in the number of illiterates in the country. On the contrary,
due to a considerable expansion of population figures during
the decade, India's illiterate population has increased by as
many as 48 million.
This partly explains an apparent paradox. Despite the fact
that India is one of the leading book producing countries, its
per capita publishing figures remain far below the world
average. Similarly, the consumption of books per person per
year is as little as 32 pages in India, as against an average of
2,000 pages in the industrially advanced countries. As re¬
gards print-runs, the Indian average still lags far behind the
international average books in Indian languages rarely ex¬
ceed a print-run of 1,000 copies, while those in English do
rather better with print-runs of between 1,000 and 2,000
copies.
This notwithstanding, the progress achieved in recent
years, especially since Independence, gives grounds for opti¬
mism about the future of printing and publishing in India.
Today, India's printing industry is on the threshold of a
revolution as an increasing number of printers are switching
from hand composition to mechanical or photographic type¬
setting with high-grade equipment. However, the over¬
whelming majority of printing presses operative in India are
still letterpress, the rest being sheet-fed offset litho machines,
mostly single colour. While much of this equipment is
imported, India has now started to manufacture a wide
variety of presses, offset as well as letterpress.
Considering that Gutenberg's epoch-making invention,
introduced to India in 1557 by a Jesuit missionary, took only
a little over a hundred years to reach the country in an age
when communications were much slower than today, it
seems likely that new technologies will take a fraction of that
time to spread not only through the big towns, but to the
rural areas. Already, desktop publishing is making inroads,
with the introduction of personal computers and laser
printers.
Moreover, publishing has been introduced as a course of
study in several Indian universities, and there are in-service
training facilities for editorial and production personnel.
Various professional institutions, in the public as well as the
private sectors, offer annual awards and other material bene¬
fits to encourage good writing and excellence in printing.
Book fairs and exhibitions are now held all over the country,
and increasing numbers of books are being translated from
one Indian language to another.
Magazines pour from the press at a modern
printing plant at Faridabad, 40 km south of
Delhi. According to Unesco's Statistical Year¬
book, India consumed 388,000 tonnes of news¬
print, printing and writing paper in 1984, more
than twice as much as in 1970.
24
