Who are
the Australians?
An Australian historian looks at his country's
development in the 200 years since European settlement
BY GEOFFREY BOLTON
I
AUSTRALIA has always seemed a bit of
a paradox in the eyes of the rest of
the world. Medieval navigators
talked of a Great South Land of gold and
monsters. Jonathan Swift situated his im¬
aginary land of Lilliput off Australia's south¬
west coast. After European settlement began
in 1788, reports still spoke of a land where
the trees shed their bark but not their leaves,
and where Christmas was celebrated in a
heatwave. It was the home of the pouched
kangaroo, and the furry platypus which laid
eggs, and the swagman with corks around
the brim of his hat to discourage the ever-
present flies. A rich country to be sure,
productive of minerals and wool, brave sol¬
diers and impressive sporting personalities,
but in the last resort, perhaps, not a nation to
be taken quite seriously. Overseas critics,
particularly English critics, too often look
for traces of colonial immaturity. Austra¬
lians, they say, are nice enough people but
they lack culture and sophistication. They
are, in a word, provincial.
Australians are also more aware than most
peoples of the shaping influence of the en¬
vironment. The Aborigines, who inhabited
Australia for at least 40,000 years before the
coming of white domination, adapted skil¬
fully to their surroundings. They lacked
cereals, and remained a hunting and gather¬
ing society which did not disrupt the ecolo¬
gical balance. By 1788 there were perhaps
750,000 of them, one for every ten square
kilometres of the continent. Captain James
Cook, navigating the east coast before claim¬
ing the land for Britain, thought them "far
more happier than we Europeans ... The
Earth and sea of their own accord furnishes
them with all things necessary for life". But
the white newcomers were not prepared
to learn from Aboriginal culture, and the
Aborigines succumbed to disease and dis¬
possession.
Various strategic and commercial motives
have been suggested for the British settle¬
ment of Australia. It was a unique ex¬
periment. Australia must be the only signifi¬
cant nation in the world to have been found¬
ed as a prison. Between 1 788 and 1 868 about
160,000 convicts, largely male, were sen¬
tenced by British courts to transportation to
Australia. English writers commented on the
"thief colony" with amused fascination.
"They don't thieve all day long, do they?"
the essayist Charles Lamb asked a friend
who was visiting Sydney in 1817. "It is im¬
possible that vice should not become more
intense in such society," shuddered the
Reverend Sydney Smith.
The first generation of Australians saw it
differently. Some compared New South
Wales with ancient Rome, which according
to the standard histories of the day was
founded by a band of outlaws under
Romulus and Remus. Others proclaimed the
superiority of the Australian colonies over
the United States of America. The first Pres¬
byterian minister, John Dunmore Lang,
wrote: "as a penal settlement the history of
New South Wales is unquestionably much
more interesting to the general reader than
that of any other colonies of the Empire.
That colony has been the scene of an experi¬
ment in the capabilities of man." Australia
was a test of the capacity of human material
to respond to improved environment and
economic opportunity.
*ts

High rise apartment
blocks overlook
the beach at a popular
holiday resort
in Queensland.
*H
By the 1 830s, Australia was becoming one
of the world's major wool producers.
In 1851 the discovery of gold in New South
Wales and Victoria brought half a million
immigrants within a few years, so that ex-
convicts became an ageing minority among
the newcomers and the native-born. There
were important regional differences in the
pattern of settlement. New South Wales was
always regarded as retaining the rough-and-
ready politics of its Georgian origins.
Victoria, where the gold rushes had the
greatest impact, was seen as dominated by
Scots investors and respectable but radical
Chartists. * Both had a substantial Irish-
Catholic element, perhaps 25 per cent of the
population, whose Catholicism and strong
sense of national identity ensured that
Australia could never grow into a second
England.
The largely working-class Irish-Austra¬
lians would always push for a separate
Australian identity. Western Australia, on
the other hand, always stressed its links with
London because its inhabitants thought
themselves ignored and disregarded by
Melbourne and Sydney. South Australia,
never a convict colony, was by far the most
Protestant region. Though often a pioneer in
social reform (it was the first colony to give
the vote to all adults), it was sometimes given
" Chartists. Supporters of a British working-class move¬
ment for parliamentary reform which took its name from
the People's Charter, a bill drafted and published in 1 838.
Editor

to bouts of restrictive morality. Queensland
was the frontier where Australian character¬
istics might be seen at their most exagger¬
ated. Tasmania, left behind in the race for
economic growth, consoled itself with rural
clannishness.
In each of these colonies the capital city
soon grew to contain between one-third and
one-half of the whole population. But there
was no Australian metropolis. The rivalry
between Sydney and Melbourne was too
intense. This meant that when the colonies
eventually federated in 1901 none of the ex¬
isting cities could be given priority as capital.
After much argument it was necessary to
create an artificial seat of government be¬
tween Sydney and Melbourne, at Canberra.
Meanwhile, no single Australian city came to
dominate Australian culture as London or
Paris dominated theirs. In the circumstances
it is remarkable that a unified Australian
culture came into being as early as the 1 880s,
the decade in which for the first time a
majority of the adult inhabitants were
Australian-born.
Melbourne gave the new culture its art,
Sydney its literature. In Melbourne a group
of young painters known as the "Heidelberg
School" used the techniques of the French
Impressionists to paint Australian land¬
scapes in colours and tones which could be
accepted as capturing the authentic look of
the country for the first time. For half a
century their vision of the comparatively
lush vegetation outside Melbourne and
Sydney would become the stereotyped
image of the Australian bush.
In Sydney the catalyst was a weekly jour¬
nal founded in 1880, the Bulletin. National¬
ist and radical in its early years, the Bulletin
encouraged writers to find their subject-
matter in the Australian bush. The cities
might be imitations of Manchester or
Chicago, but the outback was distinctively
Australian. Most of the writers in fact lived
within a few kilometres of Sydney Harbour,
but they soon won an enthusiastic read¬
ership across the length and breadth of
Australia. They wrote of the vast sheep sta¬
tions, of the drovers taking cattle on the hoof
hundreds of miles to market, of shearers and
miners and the travelling workers who were
forming Australia's most significant trade
unions.
In their writings the outlines developed of
the "typical" Australian man. He was practi¬
cal, resourceful, good at improvisation but
no perfectionist; humorous in adversity,
mistrustful of authority, disrespectful to¬
wards wealth and property, uncomfortable
with women, and staunchly loyal to his
mates, though apt to conceal his feelings
under a cynical and laconic wit. To the
Aboriginal poet Paddy Roe of Broome,
Western Australia, is the author
of 3 books which preserve the legends
of his people.
young Bulletin journalist Charles Bean, "in
the pastoral industry and at the diggings, the
ideal of the Australian is still made; or rather
the standards of pluck, hardiness, unaffec-
tedness, loyalty, truthfulness, hospitality on
which the rest of Australia consciously
founds its ideal".
Here too was a paradox. Even in the early
years of the twentieth century, the majority
of Australians were already city-dwellers in
an increasingly mechanized environment.
The Bulletin's authors wrote of a way of life
which was receding into nostalgia even as
they wrote. But, as the historian Rüssel
Ward argues, the typical Australian was
never the same as the average Australian. If
Australians saw themselves as a nation of
bushmen they were entitled to their national
myth, just as modern urban Americans may
identify with the frontier virtues of the Old
West. But the Australian national myth re¬
ceived powerful reinforcement during the
1914-1918 war. Australia sent a high propor¬
tion of its younger men to fight in the British
Empire's cause. Of these, one in six was
killed and about two-thirds became casual¬
ties. But it was the landing at Gallipoli
(Turkey) on 25 April 1915 which crystal-

Sand, sky and silhouettes
near Derby
in Western Australia
lized many of the concepts of Australian
nationalism.
The Gallipoli campaign was part of an
ill-starred plan to knock Turkey out of the
war. Allied troops, including a large propor¬
tion of Australians and New Zealanders (the
Anzac corps) managed to establish them¬
selves on the beach at Gallipoli but failed to
dislodge the Turks from the heights behind.
There the two armies slogged it out for eight
months until in December 1915 the invaders
withdrew. Gallipoli established the reputa¬
tion of the Anzacs as heroic fighters. The
defeat could be blamed on the incompetence
of British planning, whereas the heroism was
proof that the recently federated Common¬
wealth of Australia was capable of taking its
place among the nations of the world by the
usual rituals of bloodshed.
The Bulletin writer Bean covered the cam¬
paign and later became Australia's official
war historian. He argued persuasively that
the special qualities of the Australian soldier
were those of the bushman: the same re¬
sourcefulness, stoicism, wry humour and
loyalty to his mates. So the image of the
typical Australian won acceptance at home
and overseas. Despite the continuing sprawl
of Sydney, Melbourne and the lesser cities,
the Australian virtues were those of the wide
outback.
Australians on the whole were happy with
this self-image, but English visitors some¬
times worried about whether it concealed a
lack of depth. D.H. Lawrence spent
three months in Australia in 1922, com¬
plaining at one moment that Australians
were "healthy, and to my thinking almost
imbecile", but also noting that "nobody felt
better than anybody else, or higher; only
better-off".
In 1 935 the expatriate professor of English

at the University of Melbourne, G.H.
Cowling, stirred up controversy by claiming
that Australia could never hope to produce
an adequate literature. "There are no ancient
churches, castles, ruins the memorials of
generations departed ... From a literary
point of view Australia lacks the richness of
age and tradition." He was indignantly re¬
futed by Australian patriots, but the fact
remained that for most of the first half of the
twentieth century a steady procession of
Australian writers Henry Handel
Richardson, Martin Boyd, for a while
Patrick White went to live in Europe. They
were willing to pay the price of exile for
intellectual stimulus.
The 1939-1945 war brought profound
changes. When Japan entered the war and
Singapore fell, Australians realized that they
could no longer count on British protection.
In the future they must increasingly seek
trade and alliance with foreign powers; first
the United States then, when the war was
over, the nations of East and South-east
Asia, including before long Japan as a major
trading partner. The war also convinced
most Australians that their country was
underpopulated. No longer proud of origins
which were 97 per cent British, the
Australians after 1945 opened their country
to an unprecedented inflow of migration. In
thirty years the population doubled, passing
15 million by 1980. Until 1970 nearly all the
newcomers were of European origin:
Italians were most numerous, but Greeks,
Yugoslavs, Germans, Dutch, and eastern
Europeans were also well represented.
The "White Australia" policy was quietly
discarded during these years, and from the
1960s a modest amount of Asian immigra¬
tion occurred, growing after 1975 because of
an influx of Vietnamese refugees. Migrant
demand created prosperity for many
Australian industries, as did overseas de¬
mand for Australian wool and minerals.
Urbanization grew; by the 1970s Sydney
and Melbourne were supporting popula¬
tions of nearly three million, with Adelaide,
Brisbane and Perth each having nearly
one million. Air travel and television swept
Australia from its isolation. Times of such
rapid change presented a challenge to con¬
ventional images of what it meant to be
Australian.
Under Sir Robert Menzies (prime minister
1949-1966) belief in the British connection
was still officially fostered, although
American culture and American foreign
policy were gaining in influence. Between
1965 and 1971 Australia sent troops to help
the Americans in Vietnam. But in the late
1960s the forces of protest and change found
a voice, and in 1972 a Labor government
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10
	 8 	


CONTINUED FROM PAGE 8
came to office under Gough Whitlam, stan¬
dard-bearer of a new concept of Australian
nationalism.
Nationalism under Whitlam was multi¬
cultural. Instead of stressing the continuities
with British institutions, Australia would
identify itself with the cultural traditions of
all its numerous migrant groups. At the same
time care would be taken to preserve the
architectural and cultural heritage of the
pioneering past. The Australia Council was
founded to steer government funding to the
creative arts. Whitlam's government lasted
only three years. Trying to push through too
many reforms at once, it ran into a world
economic crisis and was controversially dis¬
missed by the governor-general in Novem¬
ber 1975. At the elections the conservative
parties were swept back into power. But
during the Whitlam years the agenda was set
for future debate about Australian national¬
ism and Australian national self-concept.
Meanwhile, sport was always a means of
vindicating Australian prowess. In earlier
years Australian cricket teams had success¬
fully competed with England for the legen¬
dary Ashes.** During the 1950s Australia
beat the United States and the rest of the
world at tennis. And in 1983 Australia de¬
clared a national day of rejoicing when for
the first time in over a century the Americans
lost the international yachting trophy, the
America's Cup, to an Australian competitor
financed by the immigrant millionaire Alan
Bond. The 16 million Australians liked to
see an element of David-and-Goliath when
their athletes won victories over rivals from
countries with much larger populations.
Sport for the Australians has often been a
'"' Ashes. Symbol of victory in cricket match series
between national teams of England and Australia. The
term was first used after Australia defeated England in
London in 1882 and an English newspaper lamented that
English cricket was dead and that its body would be
cremated and the ashes sent to Australia. Editor.
benign and realistic way of fostering national
pride without lapsing into militarism.
Outsiders observing the Australian enthu¬
siasm for sport have sometimes concluded
that Australians are a race of mindless
hedonists without cultural interests. They
concede that Australia has produced an im¬
pressive number of creative individuals
writers such as Christina Stead and Patrick
White, artists such as Sidney Nolan and
Arthur Boyd, interpreters of classical music
such as Charles Mackerras, Joan Sutherland
and Barry Tuckwell but claim that
Australia itself is still a cultural desert. Such a
picture is long out of date. The major
Australian cities have more to offer in the
way of music and the visual arts than many
European centres of the same size.
There is no dominant metropolis in which
all cultural activity is concentrated. When
Australia's population was smaller this led to
diffusion of effort, but in recent years strong
With an estimated
500,000 registered
players, cricket is
Australia's most
popular summer game.
International matches,
right, sometimes
attract crowds
of 80,000.
10

local traditions in the creative arts have be¬
gun to emerge. Australian theatre is perhaps
less vigorous than it was fifteen or twenty
years ago, but in compensation there has
been an impressive record of film produc¬
tion. Australia has a long association with
cinema and may even have produced the
world's first feature-length film around the
turn of the century, but the industry was
largely eclipsed by Hollywood in the 1920s
and it required imaginative government sup¬
port during the late 1960s and early 1970s to
launch a revival. The results have gained
international recognition. (See article
page 35).
Australians in quest of a national identity
have recently developed a consuming curios¬
ity about their background. Family history
has become a hobby straining the resources
of public libraries. Museums and heritage
parks are big business, encouraged in almost
every small town because of their tourist
potential.. Television series based on
Australian history enjoy a wide audience.
Colonial furniture and antiques are prized
by those who can afford them. The colonial
idiom is fashionable architecture. Australian
historians stress the need to write "history
from below"; the history of everyday life
including the underprivileged, history with
which today's Australians can identify, in¬
cluding Aborigines and immigrants.
But here controversy reigns. Is there a
mainstream Anglo-Australian culture with
which immigrants and Aborigines should be
expected to identify? Or is Australia's cultu¬
ral identity still in a state of flux? Should
encouragement be given to a multicultural
pluralism in which Aborigines and immig¬
rants of Asian and European origin are en¬
couraged to affirm their ancestral traditions?
Official policy in recent years has favoured
multiculturalism, but this has given rise to a
backlash from critics who fear that such a
trend will be socially divisive. They claim
that the affirmation of ancestral traditions
may mean the retention of ancestral griev¬
ances, leading to ethnic strife and even to a
form of apartheid. This is an especially acute
issue with Aborigines, many of whom in
recent years have rejected the idea of assi¬
milation within mainstream society and are
claiming the recognition of their separate
identity based on their unacknowledged
land rights.
It is impossible that Australia should re¬
main the "new Britannia" envisaged by its
founders 200 years ago, or even the old
Australia of outback tradition. Starting with
the Aborigines, the Australian people have
become a mixture of British, Irish,
European, and Asian origins living in an
environment different from any other.
Experiments in breeding fine-wool Spanish
Merino sheep began in the late 18th century
and laid the foundations of Australia's future
economic development. Above, giant Merino
statue at Goulburn, New South Wales.
Schoolchildren visiting the Melbourne Zoo
measure their height in relation to a wooden
kangaroo.
'
Within the last 200 years, and especially in
the last fifty, they have begun to create a new
culture with enormous potential for com¬
bining European background with aware¬
ness of Asian neighbours. It is impossible
that a people exposed to such a range of
experience could remain the rough-and-
ready stereotype of popular myth. Perhaps
the last word should go to David Martin,
himself a Hungarian migrant turned
Australian, who has written: "Foreigners
easily too easily assume that Australia is
a crude habitat. They do not understand
that, on the contrary, it is a subtle one, home
of a subtle people."
GEOFFREY BOLTON, one of Australia's lead¬
ing historians, has been Professor of History at
Murdoch University, Perth, since 1973 and was
Director of the Australian Studies Centre in Lon¬
don from 1982 to 1985. He is the author of a
number of books on Australian history including
Spoils and Spoilers: Australians make their En¬
vironment, 1788-1980 (1985) and was the General
Editor of the Oxford History of Australia.
11
