Os
a*
First impressions
Arabic early printed texts
BY CAMILLE ABOUSSOUAN
Above, early 17th-century punches for making
Arabic type, designed by Lebanese craftsmen at
the Maronite College of Rome. They were
brought to France in 1614 by the French diplo¬
mat and ambassador to Rome, François Savary
de Brèves, who intended to set up an "Oriental
Languages Printing House", and are today pre¬
served in the Imprimerie Nationale, Paris.
CAMILLE ABOUSSOUAN, Lebanese writer and diplomat, was formerly
his country's permanent delegate to Unesco and vice-chairman of Unesco's
Executive Board. A bibliophile specializing in works ofthe 16th, 17th and 18th
centuries, he is the author ofmany studies on the history of Lebanon and the
Near East. This article is an abridged version ofan essay which appeared in Le
livre et le Liban jusqu'à 1900, a work published under Mr. Aboussouan's
direction to accompany an exhibition, held at Unesco's Paris HQ in 1982, on
the history of the book in Lebanon.
ARABIC characters made their first appearance in a
printed book in 1486, when a Dominican monk
named Martin Roth printed at Erhard Reuwich's
workshop in Mainz the famous account of the "Voyage and
Pilgrimage Overseas to the Holy Sepulchre of the Holy City
of Jerusalem, written and recorded in Latin by Bernhard von
Breydenbach". In this original work, the narrative is in¬
terwoven with novel descriptions of scenes from urban life.
Erhard Reuwich is thought to have drawn and engraved the
plates in this book, which contains the first example of a
complete Arabic alphabet in a printed work, together with a
Latin transliteration, a map of Jerusalem and a charming
engraving showing Lebanese, dubbed Syrians, in a vineyard,
and wearing magnificent turbans.
This, however, was only the reproduction of an Arabic
alphabet. It was not until the reconquest of Granada several
years later that the need for a printed Arabic text arose in
Europe. In 1492, the last Muslim kingdom of Andalusia fell
to the Spanish Catholic sovereigns Ferdinand and Isabella,
25

1.
Left, title page of the polyglot Psalter, in Latin,
Hebrew, Greek, Arabic and Chaldean (a form of
Syriac), published by the Genoese Oriental
scholar, Agostino Giustiniani, in 1516. Below,
this flowered "aleph" (the first letter in the
Arabic alphabet) from the Psalter is one of the
first ornamental letters in Arabic printing.
, l »_. r .. rt ï -! \>' a -«
The Arabic alphabet from "The art of learning
the rudiments of the Arabic language" (1505), a
textbook by the Spanish scholar Pedro de Alca¬
lá. Each Arabic character is transcribed into the
Latin alphabet, which is printed in a Gothic
typeface.
The printing works of the University of St.
Joseph has been Beirut's biggest since it was
established in the 19th century. Below, as de¬
picted in an old engraving.
"Of*"
Medal struck by the Paris Mint to commemo¬
rate an exhibition on the history of the book in
Lebanon, held at Unesco's Paris HQ in 1982.
The medal depicts the monastery of St.
Anthony at Qazhayya, in Lebanon, where the
first printing establishment in the Arab world
was founded around 1610. Photo © Paris Mint'
3
©
26

Ct(loeronloecaratcre0rnotib:c6DcUo j c
laraearaoígap.laaqualcotodao fe puede J l^-^
rnplirci5m'¿iolctraelatínaoocaftdlan9e.6 manera pliega
lücoinuiialSíiramanoíJtncccfTida^ oelaefabcnii conoce»
c ily
who had by their marriage united the two powerful king¬
doms of Aragon and Castile. Anxious to bring the Andalu-
sians back to Christianity, the Spanish rulers ordered mis¬
sionaries to evangelize the country again. It soon became
apparent that this goal could not be attained without using
the Arabic language. In 1505, Archbishop Fernando de
Talavera, the first prelate appointed to the new diocese, had
two Arabic textbooks printed for use by missionaries who
could not speak that language. The title of the first was: Arte
para ligeramente saber la lengua araviga ("The art of learn¬
ing the rudiments of the Arabic language"); that of the
second: Vocabulista aravigo en letra castellana ("Arab glos¬
sary in Castilian characters"). Their author, the scholar
Pedro de Alcalá, a native of the prestigious university city of
Alcalá de Henares near Madrid, wrote them in Latin script.
The typeface is Gothic.
The first twenty-one pages of the Arte are given over to
grammar, and the next twenty-seven consist of Catholic
prayers in Arabic, instructions for confession in Spanish and
in Arabic, the ordinary of the mass, and instructions for
votive masses, all in Arabic. By way of introduction to the
vocabulary, a short three-page note explains the author's
method of transcription: the vocabulary is in alphabetical
order, but under each letter three separate categories contain
first verbs, then nouns and lastly adverbs, conjunctions and
prepositions. The verbs are given in three forms: present,
perfect and imperative; nouns are given in both the singular
and the plural.
This work, which is a curiosity in the history of both
linguistics and typography, is also the first and perhaps the
most practical of all attempts to transcribe Arabic into Latin
characters. The alphabet on the twentieth page is in north
African script, and the language taught in both of Pedro de
Alcalá's works is the vernacular, which the Spanish mis¬
sionaries needed to communicate with the converted Moors.
In a few places, the author indicates differences between this
and the written language.
As in Breydenbach's book, the Arabic alphabet is thus
reproduced, together with its Latin pronunciation, but it is
transcribed from the Maghrebian calligraphy also found in
Agostino Giustiniani's magnificent Psalterium Hebraeum,
Graecum, Arabicum, et Chaldaicum, the first polyglot Psal¬
ter, which was published in 1516 at Genoa (then a major
printing and paper manufacturing centre) in five languages:
Hebrew, Greek, Arabic, Chaldean (Syriac) and Latin.
Agostino Giustiniahi (1479-1536) belonged to the Ge¬
noese branch of the Giustiniani, one of the great families of
northern Italy. A Dominican who became the bishop of
Nebbio in Corsica, he was a learned student of Oriental
languages and a friend of great humanists such as Pico della
Mirándola, Erasmus and Sir Thomas More.
Giustiniani was the author of an audacious project to
publish a polyglot edition of the Bible in Hebrew, Greek,
Arabic, Syriac and Latin, which would make known all
existing versions of the Bible and enable them to be com¬
pared, while also serving as an instrument for studying these
languages. He began with the Psalter, and when this was not
a commercial success, the project was abandoned. Even so, it
was a remarkable achievement for the time.
The preparation of this masterly work was an arduous
task, as Giustiniani noted in his dedication to Pope Leo X,
who had written the preface: "Our work has been long ...".
This can easily be imagined. At that time no matrices or fonts
of Arabic type existed; the alphabets in the books of Brey-
denbach and Pedro de Alcalá were printed from woodcuts,
and there were few Hebrew typefaces. Moreover, the work
had to be revised by several proof-readers with knowledge of
at least three non-European languages.
It seems that Giustiniani had already ordered and tran¬
scribed the texts to be published as early as 1506. It is more
than likely that the design and casting of the characters had
been done long before the publication of the Psalter, which
thus pushes back even further the creation of the first printed
text in movable Arabic type.
The Arabic text alone occupies a forty-one-line column
containing an average of 160 words per page for 246 pages.
The two examples of initial letters in Arabic which appear in
the book are very beautiful a flowered "aleph" in a frame
and a "tah" similarly adorned. These are certainly the first
ornamental letters in Arabic printing.
In 1529, Master Geofroy Tory, a French typographer,
engraver and author from Bourges, published his fine treatise
on typography, the Champfleury (see page 11), in which he
attacked the use of the Gothic typeface, and included an
Arabic alphabet with a key to its pronunciation. Meanwhile,
the German, Latin and Spanish editions of Breydenbach, and
its French translation by Nicolas le Huen, regularly repro¬
duced the Arabic alphabet of the 1486 edition, as did Sébas¬
tien Mamerot's work entitled "The journeys overseas of the
noble Godefroy de Bouillon who was King of Jerusalem. Of
the good King Saint Louis and of several virtuous princes",
which was published in the late fifteenth century.
In 1538, the French humanist Guillaume Postel, who had
accompanied the embassy sent by King François I to Con¬
stantinople, and who styled himself "The Cosmopolitan", or
"Citizen of the World" as we should say nowadays, publish¬
ed his "Arabic Grammar" in Paris, the first of its kind to be
printed.
27
