Dreamtime
stories
The living testimony of Aboriginal art
BY VERONICA TIPPETT
THE Aboriginal art of Australia
belongs to the world's oldest
living art tradition, unbroken
for thousands of years. It continues to
survive and develop because it has been
retained and treasured in the memories
of successive generations of Aboriginal
people who have invested it with re¬
markable breadth, depth, symbolism,
vigour and intensity.
Despite the fact that the past
200 years of European settlement have
seen the erosion of much of the tradi¬
tional fabric of Aboriginal life and the
cultural attenuation of many groups of
people, a large and rich body of
Aboriginal artistic heritage has sur¬
vived. In many communities the arts are
still an integral part of social and reli¬
gious life but have also acquired a new
and urgent emphasis that of reinforc¬
ing Aboriginal identity- and asserting
traditional values in the face of an en¬
croaching wider community.
" In many ways the extraordinary rich¬
ness and variety of Aboriginal culture,
even in Australia, has been a well kept
secret. But while there is still emphasis
on secrecy to preserve the sacred nature
of much Aboriginal culture, there is also
an increasing openness and willingness
to share aspects of it. For example, it is
still not widely known that Australia is
the world's largest repository of
Palaeolithic rock art sites, many of
which predate the well-known rock art
galleries of Europe and Africa.
Throughout Australia there are
thousands of sites housing superb en¬
gravings and paintings. In northern
Australia in particular there are vast gal¬
leries which record a pageant of mytho¬
logical and historical events from Anti¬
quity until recent times. As individual
works of art they are astonishing and as
a continuous record of the development
of a unique artistic tradition they are
unsurpassed.
Most traditional Aboriginal art can be
regarded as religious art, in which land¬
scape and myth predominated. As such,
it represented and amplified themes
concerning the sacred myths and tot-
emic beliefs connected with the Dream¬
time, that sacred time in Aboriginal cul¬
ture which represents the beginning of
creation. According to Aboriginal be¬
lief, all life as it is known today
human, animal, bird, fish is a part of
one unchanging and interconnected sys¬
tem, one vast network of relationships,
which can be traced back to the Great
Spirit ancestors of the Dreamtime. The
Dreamtime refers not only to an ancient
era of creation it continues as the
Dreaming in the spiritual lives of
Aboriginal people today.
Often Aboriginal art was, and is, also
a statement concerning land a reflec¬
tion of the Aboriginal relationship to
particular stretches of land to which
individuals or groups were linked
through mythological associations or
specific connections with spirit beings.
Art, as the essence of the mythical and
ritual force, pervaded the life of
-*£
Aboriginal society, uniting it and giving
it meaning.
Music, song, dance and the associated
visual arts were all inextricably connec¬
ted. There were no "professional"
artists as such in Aboriginal society.
Everyone participated in the arts,
although those with exceptional skills
were recognized and encouraged.
Aboriginal Australia was (and still is)
made up of small, select groups with
different languages and distinct territor¬
ies. This gave birth to different art styles
and traditions. Western Desert art, for
example, with its curves, lines and con¬
centric circles, has a unique and very
distinctive style. Papunya, an
Aboriginal community settlement
about 300 kilometres west of Alice
Springs, is the present home of several
tribal groups whose original home terri¬
tories lie in central Australia. There, the
Walbiri-Pintubi people create magnifi¬
cent ground designs from plants, feath-
erdown, ochre and clay. These patterns
represent the land as well as events of the
12

Left, Aboriginal painter Lindsay
Roughsey at work on a bark
painting entitled Moon Legend
Story on Mornington Island off
the northern coast of Australia.
creation era. The meanings of the sym¬
bols in the ground paintings vary
according to the site revealed, the reli¬
gious inferences and the degree of in¬
formation the artists have been allowed
to convey. The paintings also tell stories
through symbols and signs which con¬
tinue to be part of traditional Aboriginal
communication.
Papunya is also the birthplace and
home of a dramatic and profound new
art form which has caught the imagina¬
tion and interest of people throughout
Australia and overseas. It involves the
transference of the decorative ground
sculptures and sand paintings onto
board and canvas with the use of com¬
mercial paints. This innovation in West¬
ern Desert art began in 1970 with the
encouragement of a teacher at the set¬
tlement. Now the Desert painters pro¬
duce an exciting and vivid array of
paintings in which traditional themes
are considerably elaborated and colour
contrasts are used which were not possi¬
ble using traditional techniques. But the
distinctive Desert style remains; the
symbols and stories retain their links
with a 'tradition that stretches back to
the Dreamtime. Neither does this new
form displace the old the ground
paintings are as important as ever in
their original ritual context.
In the north of the Northern Terri¬
tory, other, just as distinctive, art styles
are to be found. The rock and bark
paintings of western Arnhem Land are
an outstanding example. The Aboriginal
people in this large tropical region have
retained close links with their long past
and with the land they have inhabited
for many thousands of years. Much of
the rock art that abounds in this area
reflects that antiquity and underscores



Aboriginal links with earliest times.
Some of the oldest paintings are said to
have been produced by spirit beings
called Mimi. They are vivid, lively, open
line drawings, usually in red ochre, of
men and women in action running,
fighting and hunting.
Despite European intrusions, reli-
Bark painting of a Mimi or
rock-spirit
13

gious and ceremonial life and artistic
activity have continued to exist and de¬
velop in this part of the country. Many
bark paintings being produced today by
Arnhem Land artists reflect a remark¬
able continuity of subject and style with
the ancient cave paintings. One feature
of rock art that appears in contemporary
paintings is the X-ray drawing style that
illustrates the internal organs and skelet¬
al structure of the creatures represented.
These paintings, which generally por¬
tray animals, birds, reptiles and fish
seldom human beings are intended to
reveal the whole being, not simply its
external manifestation. Yet this adher¬
ence to traditional technique and style is
no mere copyist tradition, but an art that
is vibrant, relevant, imaginative and
contemporary.
The art of bark painting has
flourished over the last two decades to
become the most widespread form of
Aboriginal artistic expression through¬
out northern Australia. Designs are
painted in earth ochres on the smooth
inner surface of sheets of bark from
stringybark eucalyptus trees. The bark
is stripped from the trees during the wet
season and cured over a fire. The edges
are then trimmed, and the bark is flat¬
tened with stones or weights. Colours
come from a range of earth-based pig¬
ments including ochres, pipeclay and
manganese, as well as charcoal, giving
the artists a palette of white, brown,
yellow, red and black. No blue or green
paint is used, but the addition of seeds,
feathers and leaves makes possible a
wide choice of patterns and colours.
All Aboriginal art traditionally rested
on the need for explanation, and today
when an artist sells his work, he usually
provides a brief "story" for each piece.
Generally this is the simplest explana¬
tion of the design, such as might be
given to an uninitiated child. The deeper
levels of meaning, the references to
sacred symbols and other details re¬
served for tribal elders who have
attained ritual maturity, are never pas¬
sed on at the sale of the painting.
In many families of eastern Arnhem
Land today, unlike in earlier times, the
women often paint on bark. Their de¬
signs represent aspects of life related to
their traditional role of food gatherer.
As the story of the Papunya artists
	 14 	
shows, non-traditional art forms such as
acrylic paintings, batik, silkscreen print¬
ing, leatherwork and pottery are also
being adopted and developed by
Aboriginal artists and have no less valid¬
ity or legitimacy as cultural expressions.
Such innovative responses to a changing
world include the beautiful batiks of the
women of Utopia whose works in¬
corporate motifs and designs derived
from traditional stories and their desert
environment.
The Tiwi people of Melville and
Bathurst Islands about 100 kilometres



north of Darwin have also successfully
blended the old and the new to produce
a dynamic and creative art industry. The
Tiwi people have lived on these two is¬
lands for more than 20,000 years, ex¬
pressing their culture in art and craftwork
that is now sought worldwide.
Tiwi art is traditionally strongly ab¬
stract and symbolic, comprising circles,
curved lines and dots. These designs are
Bark drawing from the Alligator River region,
Northern Territory. Depiction of internal as well as
external organs of man and emu is characteristic
of Aboriginal art from this region.

applied to a number of artefacts, the
most dramatic being the spectacular
pukamani or grave posts which are
unique to the Tiwi. In 1969 an art
teacher at the mission school on
Bathurst Island began an Aboriginal
silkscreen workshop. This led to the
founding of two ventures, Bima Wear
and Tiwi Designs. Bima Wear recently
fashioned the Pope's vestments for his
visit to Australia. Today all seventeen
people who work at Bima Wear are
Aboriginal women. Most of the gar¬
ments designed, printed and sewn by
them are for females. Tiwi Designs, on
the other hand, employs only men.
Women have worked there in the past,
but traditional cultural influences make
it difficult for men and women to work
together. Tiwi designs, which have
strong visual appeal and have become
very popular, are now applied to a wide
range of items from tablecloths,
placemats, T-shirts and wall hangings to
lengths of fabric for fashions and fur¬
nishings. Although this enterprise is
recognized by the Aboriginal artists as a
"new way", they point out that it is
based on a traditional understanding of
their natural environment and a fami¬
liarity with ritual knowledge and its tra¬
ditional forms of expression.
Today, all major art institutions in
Australia and many regional galleries
are building collections of Aboriginal
art. And through public exhibitions,
media reviews, films and publications,
the work of senior Aboriginal artists is
being increasingly seen as one of the
most important and vibrant facets of
Australian cultural life.
VERONICA TIPPETT is the Aboriginal Prog¬
rams Officer in Australia's Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade and is herself an Aboriginal. She
has held a number of senior positions in the
Australian national public service and has been
particularly concerned with equal employment
opportunity and training programmes.
A
r?
\
This depiction of a fish was
incised on a cave wall in Arnhem
Land, in Australia's Northern
Territory, some 5,000 years ago.
An aboriginal healer has
portrayed a gaggle of man-like
geese in this bark painting
from the swamp country near
Elcho Island, Arnhem Land.
