Petroleum and natural gas
It is probably a conservative estimate to say that the Chinese were burning
natural gas for fuel and light by the fourth century BC. The deep boreholes
drilled for brine also yielded natural gas from time to time. These methane
gas deposits tended to occur under the brine, but many boreholes, includ¬
ing those intended for brine, yielded only natural gas and were known to
the Chinese as "fire wells". These boreholes were being drilled systemati¬
cally for brine by at least the first century BC, so that deep supplies of
natural gas were tapped from that date by boreholes going down over
1 00 metres. And the systematic search for natural gas itself by deep drilling
is recorded in the second century AD.
Chang Qu in 347 recorded in his book Records of the Country South of
Mount Hua:
"At the place where the river from Bupu joins the Huojing River, there
are fire wells; at night the glow is reflected all over the sky. The inhabitants
wanted to have fire, and used to ignite the gas outlets with brands from
household hearths; after a short time there would be a noise like the
rumbling of thunder and the flames would shoot out so brilliantly as to
light up the country for several dozen li around. Moreover they use
bamboo tubes to 'contain the light', conserving it so that it can be made to
travel from one place to another, as much as a day's journey away from the
well without its being extinguished. When it has burnt no ash is left, and it
blazes brilliantly."
Bamboo pipelines did indeed carry both brine and natural gas for many
kilometres, sometimes passing under roads and sometimes going overhead
on trestles.
The ignition and use of the natural gas for light and fuel posed problems
which were successfully overcome by the ancient Chinese. Old texts
describe in some detail the complicated arrangements which were even¬
tually adopted to control the burning of natural gas. The gas from the "fire
wells" was fed first into a large wooden chamber about 3 metres below
ground level over the mouth of the borehole. It was basically a cone-shaped
barrel into which an underground pipe also conveyed air. The chamber
therefore acted as a great carburettor, feeding into banks of pipes which led
to other smaller conical chambers which rested on the surface of the earth.
These too took in air, with a variety of entry pipes which could be opened
or closed, so that a fine-tuning of the "engine" was possible by a con¬
tinuous manipulation of the fuel/air mixture. If the pressure of the mixture
were to flag, dangerous flash-backs and explosions could occur, so the
main chamber would be opened up further. But fires could result if the
mixture were too rich, so surplus gas was allowed to escape through what
was called a "sky thrusting pipe" exhaust system.
Flames less than 50 cm high were used for other purposes, such as
providing lights in certain Sichuan towns. The gas was also available for
heating in these towns, though details of how it was employed are lacking.
It seems doubtful that proper gas stoves existed, and it is more likely that
the heating applications were generally for cooking and boiling uses.
Other portable heat sources included petroleum products, which often
went under the name of "stone lacquer" because they looked like lacquer
but seeped from the stones.
The domestic uses of petroleum products seem to have been confined to
modest applications such as oil lamps and oil-fired torches, but they were
used on a large scale for breaking up rocks by fire. Since burning oil could
burn in water, boulders in harbours were sometimes broken apart by
having burning oil poured over them.
Well-head and derricks photographed
over 40 years ago in Sichuan Province.
In foreground, the traditional
bamboo pipes which led the natural
gas to nearby towns.
_ 25
