The natural legacy
BY RALPH SLATYER
Australia is the only country, to
occupy a whole continent.
Mainland Australia together
with the island State of Tasmania occu¬
pies some 7.7 million square kilometres,
making the country the sixth largest in
the world, after the Soviet Union,
Canada, the People's Republic of
China, the United States of America and
Brazil, and very similar in size to the
forty-eight contiguous States of the
United States. Australia also has one of
the longest coastlines of any country.
The Australian continent once
formed part of the super-continent
Gondwanaland. Although separation of
individual continents from this south¬
ern land mass commenced about
130 million years ago, the Australian
continent and the islands of the region
separated more recently. Bass Strait and
the Tasman Sea appeared 80 million
years ago, resulting in the separation of
Tasmania, New Zealand and Lord
Howe Island.
After separation of Australia from
Antarctica some 20 million years later,
the Australian tectonic plate drifted
north and is thought to have reached a
location close to its present position
16

about 15 million years ago. At that time
it came into contact with the Sunda
Island arc system, forming the present
New Guinea land mass. Further north¬
erly movement of the Australian plate
resulted in a disjunction which saw
permanent separation of the Australian
and New Guinea regions. Much of the
topographic and geographic character
of these regions was laid down during
this period.
The continent has experienced major
changes in climate both during the
period of rapid continental drift and
while it has been near its present loca¬
tion. At the same time it has been re¬
latively free of the major tectonic dis¬
turbances which have led to extensive
mountain building in most other con¬
tinents. In the process, it has developed
the distinctive land surface and unique
flora and fauna which characterize its
present environment.
The uniqueness of Australian flora
and fauna is due in part to their isolation
from the biota of other land masses.
This genetic isolation has resulted in
divergence among some plant and anim¬
al families and genera, leading to a con¬
siderable diversity of species. The rich
and varied marsupial fauna and the array
of flowering plants in families such as
the Proteaceae, and in some genera in
other families, such as Eucalyptus and
Acacia, are some examples of this
diversity.
Given these unique flora and fauna
and the presence of striking land forms,
Australia is endowed with a magnificent
natural heritage which is now being rec¬
ognized by the inclusion of some of the
most outstanding sites on Unesco's
World Heritage List.
Already, Australia has seven prop¬
erties inscribed on the ListKakadu
National Park, the Great Barrier Reef,
Willandra Lakes Region, Western
Tasmania Wilderness National Parks,
the Lord Howe Island Group, Austra¬
lian East Coast temperate and sub¬
tropical Rainforest Parks and Uluru
National Park.
In view of Australia's large size, it is
often a surprise to realize that its human
population is only 16 million. A major
reason for this is that most of Australia
lies between 15° to 35°, the zone where
most of the world's great deserts are
The imposing red sandstone formation known
as the Olgas (left), in Uluru National Park,
Northern Territory, is a sacred site to
the central Australian Aborigines. Inset, tangle
of exposed roots at Baroalba Springs, Kakadu
National Park, near Darwin. Both Parks are
inscribed on Unesco's World Heritage List
of cultural and natural properties
of outstanding universal value.
found. More than 80 per cent of the
continent lies in arid or semi-arid clima¬
tic zones. Indeed, Australia is by far the
driest continent, regardless of whether
the comparison is in terms of precipita¬
tion or, more particularly, surface water
resources. Irrigated agriculture is li¬
mited in extent and rainfed agriculture is
largely restricted to the eastern, south¬
eastern and south-western parts of the
continent.
The limitations imposed by the
physical environment need to be recog¬
nized if sustained and stable land use is
to be achieved.
This posed relatively 'few problems
for the Aboriginal people whose culture
is ecologically sympathetic: In their cul¬
ture, people constitute an integral and
interdependent part of the ecosystems
they occupy, responding to the charac¬
teristics and fluctuations of the environ¬
ment in a way that maintains the land
and its flora and fauna in ecological
balance.
By comparison, European occupancy
of the continent, the cultivation of the
land and the modification of the flora
and fauna have had a dramatic impact on
that balance. Although Australia has ex¬
perienced only 200 years of European
occupation, and although the human
population has been low, land degrada¬
tion has already emerged as the greatest
environmental problem in Australia.
Land degradation has proceeded
quickly not just because of the low and
variable precipitation which charac¬
terizes much of the continent. It has
been compounded by the old and deep¬
ly weathered land forms, and under¬
lying geology, which have produced
shallow soils with poor structure and
intrinsically low fertility. It is not sur¬
prising that such soils have become de¬
graded when exposed to an erosive cli¬
mate. Land degradation has also been
compounded by the deliberate and
accidental introduction, since European
settlement, of a number of plant and
animal species, and micro-organisms,
which have become weeds, pests and
diseases.
European settlement opened up
ecosystems to the entry of exotic species
which were often able to compete suc¬
cessfully with native species for avail¬
able ecological niches. For example, the
feral rabbit became established relative¬
ly easily, owing to the lack of mamma¬
lian predators in the Australian biota, to
17

changes in the habitat, and to early ex¬
tinction of species which occupied simi¬
lar ecological niches.
With the wisdom of hindsight and
with more enlightened management,
many of these problems could have been
avoided or minimized. However, given
the lack of knowledge about the man¬
agement of such soils in such climates,
when agricultural and pastoral activities
first began in Australia in the late eight¬
eenth century, it was inevitable that the
impact would be severe.
Fortunately, there now appears to be
a rapidly growing awareness of the mag¬
nitude of the problem and of the need to
modify land use practices to minimize
further degradation and, hopefully, to
reve'rse the downward trend.
In this regard, Australia is well placed
in having a number of internationally
respected research institutions devoted
to various aspects of land use. Until
fairly recently the research emphasis in
these institutions was focused on the
development of the rural industries. In¬
deed, because of the need to develop
new crops, technologies and farming
practices, agriculture could not have be¬
come a major industry in Australia
without a strong science base.
Scientists working in these research
institutions, mainly in universities and
Federal and State departments and au¬
thorities, have skills ranging broadly
across the biological and physical sci¬
ences. As awareness of the importance
of maintaining long-term productivity
grows, these skills have a key role to
play in research and development re¬
lated to land degradation.
Many of the environmental problems
in Australia have their parallels in other
parts of the world, particularly in coun¬
tries which occupy similar latitudinal
zones. Many of these are developing
countries which lack the expertise and
resources necessary to ensure good en¬
vironmental management and minimize
land degradation. As a result Australia
and Australians have been active in
many bilateral and international pro¬
grammes which are focused on the
environment.
RALPH SLATYER is Director of the Research
School of Biological Sciences at the Australian
National University in Canberra. He has been
closely involved injseveral international environ¬
mental programmes, notably Unesco's Man and
the Biosphere programme of which he was Chair¬
man from 1977 to 1981. Professor Slatyer was
Australia's Ambassador to Unesco from 1978
to 1981 and was Chairman of the World Heritage
Committee from 1981 to 1983.
