The World Heritage List
Photo © Rinnie Tang, Paris



288 properties as at 31 December 1987
(211 cultural sites, 68 natural sites and 9 mixed sites)
Algeria
Al Qal'a of Beni Hammad. Tassili n'Ajjer. M'Zab
Valley. Djemila. Tipasa. Timgad.
Argentina
Los Glaciares. Iguazu National Park.
Argentina and Brazil
Jesuit Missions of the Guaranis: San Ignacio
Mini, Santa Ana, Nuestra Señora de Loreto and
Santa Maria la Mayor (Argentina); ruins of Sào
Miguel das Missöes (Brazil).
Australia
Kakadu National Park. Great Barrier Reef. Wil-
landra Lakes Region. Western Tasmania Wilder¬
ness National Parks. Lord Howe Island group.
Australian East Coast Temperate and Sub-Trop¬
ical Rainforest Parks. Uluru National Park.
Bangladesh
Historic mosque city of Bagerhat. Ruins of the
Buddhist Vihara, Paharpur.
Benin
Royal Palaces of Abomey.
Bolivia
City of Potosí.
Brazil
Historic town of Ouro Preto. Historic centre of
the town of Olinda. Historic centre of Salvador
de Bahia. Sanctuary of Bom Jesus do Congonhas.
Iguazu National Park. Brasilia.
Bulgaria
Boyana Church. Madara Rider. Thracian tomb of
Kazanlak. Rock-hewn churches of Ivanovo. An¬
cient city of Nesebar. Rila Monastery. Srebarna
Nature Reserve. Pirin National Park. Thracian
tomb of Sveshtari.
Cameroon
Dja Faunal Reserve.
Canada
L'Anse aux Meadows National Historic Park.
Nahanni National Park. Dinosaur Provincial
Park. Anthony Island. Head-Smashed-In Bison
Jump Complex. Wood Buffalo National Park.
Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks."" Quebec (His¬
toric area). Gros Morne National Park.
Canada and United States of America
Kluane National Park/Wrangell-St. Elias Nation¬
al Park and Preserve.
China
Mount Taishan. The Great Wall. Imperial Palace
of the Ming and Qing Dynasties. Mogao Caves.
Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor. Peking
, Man site at Zhoukoudian.
Colombia
Port, fortresses and group of monuments, Carta¬
gena.
*The Burgess Shale site, which was previously
inscribed on the World Heritage List, is part of
the Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks.
Costa Rica
Talamanca Range-La Amistad Reserves.
Côte d'Ivoire
Tai National Park. Comoé National Park.
Cuba
Old Havana and its fortifications.
Cyprus
Paphos. Painted churches in the Troodos re¬
gion.
Democratic Yemen
Old walled city of Shibam.
Ecuador
Galapagos Islands. Quito (Old City). Sangay
National Park.
Egypt
Memphis and its Necropolis: Pyramid fields from
Giza to Dahshur. Ancient Thebes with its Necro¬
polis. Nubian monuments from Abu Simbel to
Philae. Islamic Cairo. Abu Mena.
Ethiopia
Simen National Park. Rock-hewn churches, Lali-
bela. Fasil Ghebbi, Gondar Region. Lower valley
of the Awash. Tiya. Aksum. Lower valley of the
Omo.
France
Mont-Saint-Michel and its Bay. Chartres Cathe¬
dral. Palace and Park of Versailles. Vézelay,
Church and Hill. Decorated grottoes of the Ve-
zère Valley. Palace and Park of Fontainebleau.
Château and Estate of Chambord. Amiens Cathe¬
dral. Roman Theatre and Triumphal Arch,
Orange. Roman and Romanesque monuments,
Aries. Cistercian Abbey of Fontenay. Royal Salt¬
works of Arc-et-Senans. Place Stanislas, Place de
la Carrière and Place d'Alliance, Nancy. Church
of Saint-Savin sur Gartempe. Cape Girolatta,
Cape Porto and Scandola Nature Reserve, Corsi¬
ca. Pont du Gard (Roman aqueduct).
Germany (Federal Republic of)
Aachen Cathedral. Speyer Cathedral. Würzburg
Residence with Court Gardens and Residence
Square. Pilgrimage Church of Wies. Castles of
Augustusburg and Falkenlust, Brühl. St. Mary's
Cathedral and St. Michael's Church, Hildesheim.
Monuments of Trier. Hanseatic city of Lübeck.
Ghana
Forts and castles, Volta, Greater Accra, Central
and Western Regions. Ashante traditional build¬
ings.
Greece
Temple of Apollo Epicurius at Bassae. Archae¬
ological site of Delphi. Acropolis, Athens.
Guatemala
Tikal National Park. Antigua Guatemala. Ar¬
chaeological Park and ruins of Quirigua.
Guinea and Côte d'Ivoire
Mount Nimba Strict Nature Reserve. 37

Haiti
National Historie Park Citadel, Sans Souci, Ra¬
miers.
Holy See
Vatican City.
Honduras
Maya site of Copan. Rio Plátano Biosphere Re¬
serve.
Hungary
Budapest, banks of. the Danube with district of
Buda Castle. Hollokö.
India
Ajanta Caves. Ellora Caves. Agra Fort. Taj Ma¬
hal. Sun Temple, Konarak. Group of monuments
at Mahabalipuram. Kaziranga National Park. Ma¬
nas Wildlife Sanctuary. Keoladeo National Park.
Churches and convents of Goa. Khajuraho group
of monuments. Group of monuments at Hampi.
Fatehpur Sikri. Group of monuments at Pattada-
kal. Elephanta Caves. Brihadisvara Temple,
Thanjavur. Sundarbans National Park.
Iraq
Hatra.
Islamic Republic of Iran
Tchogha Zanbil. Persepolis. Meidan Emam, Es-
fahan.
Italy
Rock drawings, Valcamonica. Historic centre of
Rome. Church and Dominican Convent of Santa
Maria delle Grazie with The Last Supper by
Leonardo da Vinci. Historic centre of Florence.
Venice and its lagoon. Piazza del Duorao, Pisa.
Jordan
Old city of Jerusalem and its walls. Petra. Quseir
Amra.
Lebanon
Anjar. Baalbek. Byblos. Tyr.
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Archaeological site of Leptis Magna. Archaeolog¬
ical site of Sabratha. Archaeological site of Cy-
rene. Rock-art sites of Tadrart Acacus. Old town
of Ghadamès.
Malawi
Lake Malawi National Park.
Malta
Hal Saflieni Hypogeum. City of Valetta. Ggantija
Temples.
Mexico
Sian Ka'an. Pre-Hispanic city and National Park
of Palenque. Historic centre of Mexico City and
Xochimilco. Pre-Hispanic city of Teotihuacán.
Historic centre of Oaxaca and archaeological site
of Monte Alban. Historic centre of Puebla.
Morocco
Medina of Fez. Medina of Marrakesh. Ksar of
A'it-Ben-Haddou.
Nepal
Sagarmatha National Park. Kathmandu Valley.
Royal Chitwan National Park.
New Zealand
Westland and Mount Cook National Park.
Fiordland National Park.
Norway
Urnes Stave Church. Bryggen. Roros. Rock
drawings of Alta.
Oman
Bahia Fort.
Pakistan
Archaeological ruins at Moenjodaro. Taxila.
"3 O Buddhist ruins of Takht-i-Bahi and neighbouring
city remains at Sahr-i-Bahlol. Historical monu¬
ments of Thatta. Fort and Shalamar Gardens,
Lahore.
Panama
Fortifications on the Caribbean side of Portobe-
lo-San Lorenzo. Darien National Park.
Peru
City of Cuzco. Historic sanctuary of Machu
Picchu. Archaeological site of Chavin. Huascaran
National Park. Chan Chan archaeological zone.
Manu National Park.
Poland
Historic centre of Cracow. Wieliczka Salt Mine.
Auschwitz Concentration Camp. Bialowieza Na¬
tional Park. Historic centre of Warsaw.
Portugal
Central zone of the town of Angra do Heroísmo,
Azores. Monastery of the Hieronymites and
Tower of Belem, Lisbon. Monastery of Batalha.
Convent of Christ, Tomar. Historic centre of
Evora.
Senegal
Island of Gorée. Niokolo-Koba National. Park.
Djoudj National Bird Sanctuary.
Seychelles
Aldabra Atoll. Vallée de Mai Nature Reserve.
Spain
Mosque of Cordoba. Alhambra and Generalife,
Granada. Burgos Cathedral. Monastery and site
of the Escurial, Madrid. Parque Güell, Palacio
Güell and Casa Mila, Barcelona. Altamira Cave.
Old town of Segovia and its aqueduct. Churches
of the Kingdom of the Asturias. Santiago de
Compostela (Old town). Old town of Avila with
its extra-muros churches. Mudejar architecture of
Teruel. Historic city of Toledo. Garajonay Na¬
tional Park. Old town of Cáceres. Cathedral,
Alcazar and Archivo de Indias, Seville.
Sri Lanka
Sacred city of Anuradhapura. Ancient city of
Polonnaruwa. Ancient city of Sigiriya.
Switzerland
Convent of St. Gall. Benedictine Convent of St.
John, Müstair. Old city of Berne.
Syrian Arab Republic
Ancient city of Damascus. Ancient city of Bosra.
Site of Palmyra. Ancient city of Aleppo.
Tunisia
Medina of Tunis. Site of Carthage. Amphitheatre
of El Djem. Ichkeul National Park. Punic town of
Kerkuane and its Necropolis.
Turkey
Historic areas of Istanbul. Göreme National Park
and rock sites of Cappadocia. Great Mosque and
Hospital of Divrigi. Hattusha. Nemrut Dag.
United Kingdom
Giant's Causeway and causeway coast. Durham
Castle and Cathedral. Ironbridge Gorge. Studley
Royal Park including ruins of Fountains Abbey.
Stonehenge, Avebury and associated sites. Castles
and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd.
St. Kilda. Blenheim Palace. City of Bath. Ha¬
drian's Wall. Palace of Westminster, Westminster
Abbey and St. Margaret's Church.
United Republic of Tanzania
Ngorongoro Conservation Area. Ruins of Kilwa
Kisiwani and ruins of Songo Mnara. Serengeti
National Park. Selous Game Reserve. Kilimanja¬
ro National Park.
United States of America
Mesa Verde. Yellowstone. Grand Canyon Na¬
tional Park. Everglades National Park. Indepen¬
dence Hall. Redwood National Park. Mammoth
Cave National Park. Olympic National Park.
Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site. Great
Smoky Mountains National Park. La Fortaleza
and San Juan Historic Site, Puerto Rico. Statue of
Liberty. Yosemite National Park. Chaco Culture
National Historical Park. Monticello and Uni¬
versity of Virginia, Charlottesville. Hawaii Vol¬
canoes National Park.
Yemen Arab Republic
Old city of Sana'a.
Yugoslavia
Old city of Dubrovnik. Stari Ras and Sopocani.
Historical complex of Split with the Palace of
Diocletian. Plitvice Lakes National Park. Ohrid
Region and its Lake. Kotor and its Gulf. Durmi-
tor National Park. Studenica Monastery. Skocjan
Caves.
Zaire
Virunga National Park. Garamba National Park.
Kahuzi-Biega National Park. Salonga National
Park.
Zimbabwe
Mana Pools National Park, Sapi and Chewore
Safari Areas. Great Zimbabwe National Monu¬
ment. Khami Ruins National Monument.
States Parties to the World
Heritage Convention
The following States, in addition to
those mentioned in the List above, are
also Parties to the Convention Concern¬
ing the Protection of the World Cultural
and Natural Heritage: Afghanistan,
Antigua and Barbuda, Burkina, Burun¬
di, Cape Verde, the Central African Re¬
public, Chile, the Congo, Denmark, the
Dominican Republic, Finland, Gabon,
the Gambia, Guyana, Jamaica, Lao Peo¬
ple's Democratic Republic, Luxem-'
bourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Monaco, Mozambique, Nic¬
aragua, Niger, Nigeria, Paraguay, the
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Christopher
and Nevis, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan,
Sweden, Thailand, Uganda, Viet Nam
and Zambia.
The emblem of the World Heritage Convention
symbolizes the interdependence of cultural
and natural properties: the central square
is a form created by man and the
circle represents nature, the two
being intimately linked. The emblem
is round like the world, but at the
same time it is a symbol of
protection
