BYRON
the rebel
BY MARK STOREY
THE English poet George Gordon,
Lord Byron (1788-1824) said that he
had been "born for opposition". In
spite of his tendency to dramatize himself, to
strike an attitude, he could be remarkably
clear-sighted about himself, and this phrase
sums up the central aspect of his life and his
work. He rebels against the norms of society
and of the literary culture of his age: his
targets, he says, are "cant political, cant
poetical, and cant moral", and he refuses to
separate them in any cosy fashion.
For Byron, politics, morality and poetry
are inextricably intertwined; by extension,
there is a crucial connection between what he
writes and how he lives. His recognition of
this makes him that much more effective and
compelling as a rebel. When he died at Mis-
solonghi in 1824, before he had seen any
action in the Greek War of Independence for
which he had gone to fight, he quickly came
to be viewed as a martyr for the cause, a
central figure around whom the freedom
fighters and their European allies could
rally, and eventually throw off the Ottoman
yoke. It was an appropriate conclusion to a
relatively brief life, in which the poet
repeatedly insisted on the superiority of
actions to words. "Born for opposition", he
died for it too.
Byron's life was tumultuous, and he has
become the figure for a certain type of
Romantic writer. But we need to see how the
living and the writing go together. If Byron
saw himself as in some way cursed from the
beginning, he could find physical justifica¬
tion for this belief in the deformed foot with
which he was born, and psychological justi¬
fication in a miserable childhood spent with
his Calvinist mother in Aberdeen.
When he inherited his uncle's estate at
Newstead Abbey, near Nottingham, in
1798, he began to believe that, as a member
of the Regency aristocracy, he could be
"well avenged" for the cruelties of his birth.
He would assert himself against the odds. He
Painting by Adeline Oppenheim, presented at
the Paris Salon of 1902, depicts an episodefrom
Byron's poem The Corsair, first published in
1814. Medora swoons as she learns from the
shipmates of the pirate Conrad, her lover, that
he has fallen into the hands of the Pasha Seyd.
30

became obsessed with physical fitness, and
was to brag, when he swam the Hellespont
in 1 8 1 0, that it was the one great achievement
of his life. Freed from the shackles of pover¬
ty, he launched on an amorous career that
seemed, at every stage, to flout convention.
He formed attachments as though they were
challenges, taking on, with increasing risk,
the women of high society who seemed only
too ready to respond to the challenge.
For Byron, the price of his wholesale sex¬
ual rebellion was to be exile: he left England
for Italy in April 1816, never to return. But
he soon discovered that the amorous delights
of Venice provided ample compensation. It
was not until he became the official compan¬
ion (cavalière servente) of Countess Teresa
Guccioli that he appeared ready to settle
down; and even then he broke all the rules,
wrecking the Countess' marriage in the
single-minded pursuit of his passion.
It would be wrong to see all this activity as
mere self-indulgence. Byron's emotional
And, like a wither'd lily, on the land
His slender frame and pallid aspect lay,
As fair a thing as e'er was formed of clay.
A scene from Byron's "Epic Satire" Don Juan
is depicted in thispainting by the English artist
Ford Madox Brown (1821-1893). After being
shipwrecked on the way from Cadiz to
Leghorn, Don Juan is cast away on a Greek
island where he is found, apparently lifeless, by
the beautiful Haidée and her attendant.
31

restlessness reflected two things: his com¬
mitment to personal freedom, and his belief
that things did not, could not, remain static.
In 1810 he went on the Grand Tour of
Europe, in the course of which he began the
poem that was to bring him fame two years
later, Childe Harolde's Pilgrimage. It is very
much an autobiographical poem, with the
hero's restless depravity and self-imposed
exile a mirror of Byron's own psychology.
But it is also an astute and angry response to
the state of Europe at the beginning of the
nineteenth century.
Byron could not share in the generally
held English reaction against all the original
ideals of the French Revolution. For him,
Napoleon was still a hero; the episode of the
Elgin Marbles (still reverberating today) was
for him an indication of England's perfidy.
He recognized the importance of the Greek
ideal as represented by the ruined, classical
past, and by the stirrings towards Greek
Independence that were to find their fulfil¬
ment twelve years later. In writing ostens¬
ibly about himself, Byron was in fact pro¬
ducing a highly political and provocative
poem, championing the cause of freedom
throughout Europe.
Typically, his maiden speech in the House
of Lords in 1812 was against the tyranny of a
government that wanted the death penalty
for frame breaking,1 against what he saw as
the "palpable injustice" of the bill. But he
soon saw that his rebelliousness would not
suit him for Parliament: he did not belong in
that system, either. His fight against political
hypocrisy, however, was to bring him into
active involvement with the attempts of the
secret revolutionary society of the Carbo¬
nari to free Italy from the Austrians in the
1820s, and then, of course, the final act
much more than a gesture on behalf of the
Greeks.
All this time, he was writing poetry of an
extraordinary range and diversity. Even the
works that won him popular acclaim, the
so-called Turkish Tales, did not exactly fit
comfortably into a literary tradition. Byron
was focusing all his attention and energies on
characters with whom he could sympathize,
mysterious adventurers with guilty secrets,
set apart from society, and driven by some
all-consuming fury that elevates them into
potentially tragic heroes. These lonely
figures can be compared to the rebellious
Prometheus, about whom Byron writes on
several occasions. The image of the rebel god
who brought fire to mankind, and was
1. In the early 19th century, great distress was caused in
parts of England by the introduction of new textile
machinery ("frames") which led to the dismissal of many
handicraftsmen as well as the impoverishment, owing to
increased competition, of others who did not actually lose
their employment. In response to the destruction of
frames by organized bands, the government introduced
severe repressive legislation. Byron's speech in the House
of Lords was a notable feature of opposition to this
legislation. Editor
punished for it, is an apt reflection of the
rebel poet.
With a few exceptions, Byron had little
use for his contemporaries. His first satire,
English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, was an
attack on most living authors. The Vision of
Judgment was a brilliant and scurrilous
attack on the poet laureate Robert Southey,
who had written a poem of the same name
celebrating the imagined arrival of King
George III in Heaven. This combination of
poetical and political anger was to inform
Byron's largest, most ambitious work, Don
Juan, in which he attacks the literary giants
of his own day, the decline of moral integ¬
rity, and the glorification of war on which
the concept of Empire depends. It is all the
more remarkable for being comic. Rebel¬
lious in everything, Byron's final act of liter¬
ary rebellion is to produce an intensely
humane poem that is a radical critique of his
society, in a form that challenges the very
premises of other writers of his time. By his
determined opposition to cant, hypocrisy
and humbug, Byron ensured that his name
would survive, along with his work, as a
byword for truth and liberty.
MARK STOREY is Reader in English literature
at the University of Birmingham, England. He has
written and edited several books, including The
Letters ofJohn Clare (Oxford University Press,
1985), and Byron and the Eye ofAppetite (Macmil-
lan, 1986). His Poetry and Ireland since 1800 will
be published later this year.
In 1823, Byron decided to join the Greeks in
their rebellion against Ottoman rule, a struggle
which ended in the establishment of an inde¬
pendent kingdom of Greece. The poet did not
live to see the end of the War ofIndependence.
After a brief illness he died in the Greek town
of Missolonghi on 25 April 1824. Missolonghi
later heroically withstood a long siege (below)
before falling to the forces ofIbrahim Pasha in
April 1826.
32
