The Nobel Laureate Conference reached
the following sixteen conclusions:
1. All forms of life must be considered as
mankind's essential heritage. Destroying the
ecological balance is therefore a crime
against the future.
2. The human species is one, and each indi¬
vidual who belongs to this species has equal
rights to freedom, equality, and brother¬
hood.
3. Mankind's wealth also stems from its
diversity. This diversity must be protected
in all its aspects cultural, biological, philo¬
sophical, spiritual. To this end, the virtues
of tolerance, listening to others, and refus¬
ing- ultimate truths must be unendingly
reiterated.
4. The most important problems mankind is
faced with today are both universal and
interdependent.
5. Science is a form of power, and access to
science must be equitably shared among
individuals and peoples.
6. The gap that in many countries separates
the intellectual community from the politi¬
cal establishment must be bridged. It is a
matter of each acknowledging the role the
other plays.
7. Education must become the absolute pri¬
ority in all budgets and must help enhance
all aspects of human creativity.
8. Science and technology must be made
available to developing countries in partic¬
ular, to help them gain control over their
own future and define the knowledge they
deem necessary to their development.
9. Assuming television and new media are
an essential means of education for the fu¬
ture, education must contribute to the de¬
velopment of critical attitudes towards what
the media broadcast.
10. Education, food, and preventive health
care are essential tools for population pol¬
icies and the reduction of infant mortality.
In particular, the generalized use of existing
vaccines and the development of new vac¬
cines must be the common task of both
scientists and politicians.
11. Research into the prevention and treat¬
ment of AIDS must be pooled and encour¬
aged, rather than slowed down and overly
partitioned, in particular with the co-oper¬
ation of the pharmaceutical industry. Once
developed, the corresponding vaccine will
have to be endorsed by governments.
12. Molecular biology which has, through
its recent developments, given rise to new
hopes in the field of medical science and
helped determine the genetic dimension of
some diseases, must be encouraged in order
to help foresee and perhaps cure these dis¬
eases.
13. Disarmament will give economic and
social development significant impetus, be¬
cause of the limited resources of our planet,
presently drained by the arms industry.
14. We urge that an international conference
be held to deal with all aspects of Third
World debt, which hinders economic and
political development.
15. Governments must make unambiguous
and binding commitments to respect human
rights, as well as the treaties they have
ratified.
16. The Nobel Laureate Conference will
meet again in two years to consider these
problems. In the intervening time, whenev¬
er crises are perceived as requiring urgent
action, on-site visits will be made by a
number of Nobel laureates (can you imagine
five Nobel Prize winners in Bhopal or in
Chernobyl?) as they will to all places where
human rights are threatened.
34
