A time-spun art BY EDOUARD GLISSANT
MORHOR
a writer, artist and photographer of French
origin, divides his time between the Antilles,
France and Greece. In 1987, he held an ex¬
hibition at the Museum of Modern Art in
Mexico City entitled Testigo mudo ("Mute
Witness"), which consisted of portraits of
artists and intellectuals, for the most part
Mexican. Two albums of his work will be
published next year, one of large-format
portraits and the other a collective work on
the theme of "The new Gulliver's travels",
on which Morhor has collaborated with a
number of painters.
Just as the waters of a river change as they
flow to the sea, so Morhor's art ripens and
matures, in dogged quest of its own defini¬
tion. It is an art which might be likened to a
journey of initiation, throughout which the
voyager seeks to attain the node, the focal
point wherein all human care is subsumed.
At first Morhor used to place those he
photographed against a stark background, a
recessed doorway or an abandoned room, as
though to warn them against those distrac¬
tions of existence that tend to distance us
from our own verities. Gradually he came
closer to those whoone cannot call them
models are best described as his interlocu¬
tors, his conversation companions, even,
perhaps, his confidants. It took him a long
time to abbreviate this short, yet infinite,
distance. It is as though, from then on, on the
evidence of the face alone, divorced from its
setting, he focused on that invisible break-
line that announces the time, the need to
depart, to grow old, and yet to endure.
The portrait thus evoked is not a death
mask; rather it is the shade of a doppel-
ganger. Not one of those whom Morhor
thus encountered is reduced simply to an
effigy that marked his route, an unyielding
milestone. There is a response at the other
end of this voyage. Morhor incites com¬
munication, the complicity of continuity.
He hears the echo and questions and con¬
sults it. We can but admire and understand
him as he constructs this precious, fragile
"brushwood rampart", so redolent of the
future. D
Morhor: The French painter André Masson (1896-1987)
15
