The changing face of the
life sciences
~l
by François Gros
IN comparison with its antecedents, con¬
temporary biology presents a dramati¬
cally altered image to the world. Not
only is it in the process of revolutionizing
medicine, agriculture and the environmen¬
tal sciences, it is also calling in question,
through the epic adventure of modern gene¬
tics, the very nature of the species homo
sapiens. We are far from the poetic reveries
of Jean-Jacques Rousseau's botanizing
"Solitary Walker", or the attempts of
nineteenth-century comparatists to deter¬
mine the laws of evolution. Biology has
been transmuted into an exact, computer¬
ized, strangely disturbing science which has
spawned marketable technologies that are
profoundly modifying the industrial scene
and the balance between the industrialized
and the developing countries.
The decisive turning point was reached in
1973, the year which saw the birth of the
new and revolutionary discipline of genetic
engineering, which derived directly from
molecular biology. For the first time, the
general public became truly aware that the
life sciences existed and were capable of
exciting a degree of passionate concern riv¬
alling that aroused by nuclear physics.
Political and industrial decision-makers
were quick to recognize the birth of a mod¬
ern technology and to perceive the impor¬
tant practical consequences it could be ex¬
pected to have on the overall economic
equilibrium of the planet. From being pri¬
marily a "contemplative" science, biology
has become an active, manipulative
science, and even at times, unfortunately, a
target for speculators.
At this point I would like to give a few
examples of some of the most significant
achievements of contemporary biology.
Mapping the human genome
In addition to making it possible to con¬
trol at will the biosynthesizing capabilities
of unicellular organisms, genetic engineer¬
ing techniques have led to the development
of marker devices known as "genetic prob¬
es". It is now possible to envisage the use of
these probes to draw up an accurate map of
the human genetic make-up. Using recom-
binant-DNA technology1 (see the Unesco
Courier, March 1987), scientists have suc¬
ceeded in cloning2 fragments, varying in
size, of chromosomes taken from human or
animal cells within the cells of micro¬
organisms.
The micro-organisms propagate and am¬
plify these chromosome fragments which
can then be sorted and purified. Once they
are available in sufficient quantity to be
analysed, they can be subjected to two
further operations. The first of these,
known as physical mapping (or restriction-
enzyme mapping) consists of identifying the
fragments by studying the manner in which
they are cleaved by a battery of restriction
enzymes.3 The second, known as sequenc¬
ing, consists of determining their chemical
sequence, that is, the order in which their
constituent elements are linked together.
Before the advent of genetic engineering
the existence of genes could only be infer¬
red from the consequences of mutations of
which they are the site. Evidence for her¬
editary traits was found by studying change
in an eye pigment, in the morphology of a
limb, the behaviour of an animal, or in
susceptibility to a given disease. Once
tracked down, as it were, its site in the
chromosome was usually deduced from stu¬
dies of crossing based on the frequency of
liaison or segregation of characteristics dur¬
ing the recombination of parental chromo¬
somes. Finally, it was possible, under
favourable conditions, to reveal certain al¬
terations in chromosomes (splitting, trans¬
position, amplification) by observation us¬
ing optical or electronic microscopes.
Genetic engineering has made it possible
to "materialize" the gene. Representing
little more than a millionth part of man's
physical inheritance, the gene can hence¬
forth be isolated as a molecule; it has be¬
come, technically speaking, "workable".
Not only can it be analysed, it can also be
manipulated and, thanks to restriction en¬
zymes, be subjected to micro-surgery. In
short it can treated like any other molecule.
All this has had many consequences for
our fundamental understanding of life. It
has led, for example, to the discovery of the
genetic mechanisms responsible for the di¬
versity of antibodies, to precise study of
individual genetic polymorphism, and to
the discovery of cancer-bearing genes, or
"oncogenes". For the time being, however,
let us take a look at some of the medical
consequences, in particular the study of
hereditary diseases.
Locating defective genes
Every year in France, thousands of chil¬
dren are born suffering from serious here¬
ditary diseases. These afflictions, which
account for 50 per cent of infant mortality,
include muscular dystrophy, mental dis¬
orders, intolerances due to metabolic error,
mucoviscidosis (cystic fibrosis), blood dis¬
orders, X-chromosome fragility, serious
immuno-deficiency (an affected child may
have to be enclosed in a sterile "bubble").
But this is only the tip of the iceberg. In fact,
as the fund of genetic knowledge increases,
doctors and biologists are becoming aware
that, from birth, our genes bear within them
a number of risk factors and susceptibilities,
even when they are not subject to the se¬
rious mutations that are responsible for the
monogenic4 diseases. The French geneticist
Jean Dausset's discovery of genes whose
properties control compatibility or reaction
to organ or tissue grafts between individuals
has shown that certain mutations within
these genes increase considerably, some¬
times by a factor of over one thousand, the
predisposition to such serious illnesses as
ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatic fever and
auto-immune disease.
The ability to establish the chemical
sequences or physical organization of genes
opens up wide prospects for pre-natal or
pre-clinical diagnosis. Such early detection
was already possible by examination of the
karyotype or of enzymes, but these tests
were not very reliable and, above all, could
not be carried out until a relatively late
stage of foetal development. Diagnosis us¬
ing genetic probes, on the other hand, can
be made from the eleventh week. A dozen
or more serious illnesses can thus be de¬
tected and the nature of the mutation pin¬
pointed.
Moreover, this new field of genetics may
open the way to a grandiose project that has
aroused as much public interest in the Un¬
ited States of America as the problem of
AIDS. The proposed project involves
establishing the sequence of the 3,500 mil¬
lion chemical elements that make up the

>.!'>:
f.V.-: ^H
HH ^
A biological research laboratory
:m
^T^h

complete genetic code enclosed within
man's forty-six chromosomes. The hope
would be that we would thus be in a position
to locate the very large number of muta¬
tions responsible for hereditary diseases
whose primary causes are as yet unknown.
Out of nearly 3,000 hereditary diseases that
have been described in the medical liter¬
ature, it has so far been possible to link no
more than a few dozen with any certainty to
a corresponding genetic mutation. Of the
100,000 to 150,000 human genes, barely
1,500 have been "located" and for only 500
of these has the chemical sequence been
established.
It is not our purpose here to enter into the
discussion as to whether there is sufficient
justification for such a project, which would
cost nearly 1,000 million dollars and occupy
hundreds of research wqrkers for from ten
to fifteen years. Yet the fact that it has been
proposed shows the extent to which the
recombinant-DNA technique has revolu¬
tionized genetics. Moreover, we have not as
yet mentioned its therapeutic possibilities.
"The ability to establish the chemical se¬
quences or physical organization of genes
opens up wide prospects for pre-natal or
pre-clinical diagnosis." Below, a genetic re¬
search worker makes a montage of human
karyotypes.
T
k 1 $j£3
It has been known for some five years now
that a foreign gene will function normally
when inserted into a somatic cell, such as
the lymph cell of human bone marrow.
Hence the idea of grafting "normal" genes
to compensate for defective genes by im¬
planting into a patient some of his own bone
marrow cells in which the "normal" gene
has already been inserted. Specialists be¬
lieve that it will soon be possible to envisage
the use of these "prosthetic genes", in par¬
ticular to save the lives of children suffering
from immuno-deficiency.
Oncogenes
Molecular biology and genetic engineer¬
ing have opened up a new approach to
human biology and medicine as they relate
to cancer. With the discovery only some
twelve years ago of a special category of
genes, the so-called "oncogenes", we are
now for the first time in a position to explain
the genetic origin of cancers and their
occurrence linked to mutations and viral
attack.
The main families of carcinogenic viruses
were described at the beginning of this cen-
The dystrophies are inherited diseases char¬
acterized by progressive weakening and
atrophy of different groups of muscle tissue.
(1) Diagram of an normal X-chromosome.
Arrow indicates the position of the abnormal
gene responsible for Duchenne's dystro¬
phy a muscular degenerative disease
named after the 19th-century French neuro¬
logist who first described it. (2) Photograph
of a normal X-chromosome. (3) Photograph
of an X-chromosome from a patient suffer¬
ing from Duchenne's dystrophy associated
with other diseases. Arrow indicates the
position of the defective gene. (4) Photo¬
graph of the two X-chromosomes from the
patient's mother, one normal (black arrow)
and the other abnormal (white arrow).
tury. The first was identified in 1914, at the
Rockefeller Institute of New York, by the
American biologist Peyton Rous. Rous
drew attention to a virus which, in a few
weeks, produced sarcomas in chickens.
Since then over thirty carcinogenic viruses
have been isolated. Over the last ten years,
the conviction has grown that many human
cancers are linked to oncogenic viruses. The
most well known are Hepatitis B virus,
frequently associated with primitive cancer
of the liver in the tropical zones, the Epstein
Barr virus, which is one of the elements
responsible for cancers of the jaw in Africa
and Asia (in Europe it causes the benign
condition of infectious mononucleosis), and
the papillomavirus, responsible for cervical
cancers. Mention should also be made of
the RNA or retroviruses, which include the
HTLV1 and HTLV2 viruses associated with
leukemia, as well as the unhappily cele¬
brated viruses responsible for AIDS,
known under the labels of LAV, HTLV3 or
HIV, which provoke certain cancers such as
the Kaposi sarcoma.
It had been recognized that the carci¬
nogenic effect of these viruses was linked to
the presence of a particular gene which was
an integral part of the hereditary make-up.
However, much surprise was caused by the
discovery in 1976 that all animal cells (inc¬
luding human cells) contained in their chro¬
mosomes, even when these were perfectly
healthy, genes very similar to those pre¬
viously detected only in viruses. Among the
100,000 or so human genes, only about
thirty oncogenic genes have so far been
detected. This amazing discovery has pro¬
vided some explanations of phenomena of
great importance to the understanding of
the mechanisms of tumour formation:
1 . There is an obvious explanation for the
existence in carcinogenic viruses of
determinants6 specific to cancer genes: the
viruses have "stolen" them from cells they
previously infested. The mechanisms of the
exchange between a cell's hereditary deter-
z
©

+*
- * .-
- "
* . / Vf
» y/
££ A
vi
--
- I
s '
minants and those of a virus are, in fact,
well known.
2. Most of the agents responsible for the
occurrence of cancers (viruses, chemical
agents, mutations) have this effect by acti¬
vating or disturbing the normal functioning
of certain cellular oncogenes.
3. It has been established that, as a gener¬
al rule, at least two oncogenes whose effects
are complementary must be activated by
exogenous influences for a cell to develop a
malign condition. This "co-operative"
action, which can be experimentally repro¬
duced by manipulating cell cultures in vitro,
clearly demonstrates the multifactorial na¬
ture of cancers.
4. Since the disturbance of cellular
oncogenes can result in the appearance of
extremely varied cancers, that is to say of
manifestations of uncontrolled cell growth,
it is reasonable to suppose that, in their
normal state, oncogenes play a central,
permanent role in the control of the process
of cell division and recognition.
In fact, it has been shown these determi¬
nants are nothing other than the "genes of
communication" between cells. Some of
them code for the exogenous chemical sig¬
nals, the "growth factor" signals involved in
this process, others for receptors of these
signals located on the cell membrane, and
others, finally, for the substances that carry
the signal to the chromosomes, once it has
reached the receptors, so as to trigger off
the cell division. These substances are
generally phosphorylation7 enzymes, or
proteins closely related to DNA and cap¬
able of performing regulatory functions.
It would seem, therefore, that a general
A
Strand of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), the
material which carries in coded form the
hereditary instructions responsible for the
behaviour of cells and the plants, animals or
microbes of which they are part.
molecular explanation of the development
of cancer has been elucidated. Knowledge
of the precise phenomena triggered by the
activation of oncogenes should make it
possible to elaborate new inhibiting pro¬
ducts that will block the transformation to
cancerous growth and, perhaps, open the
way to new therapeutic methods.
) The neurosciences
I should like to conclude with a look at
the equally fascinating field of neuro¬
biology. No one would deny that, within the
highly organized framework of a human
being, two "master elements" account for
most of our characteristics our genes and
our neurons. Furthermore, the nature of
the dialogue between our genes and our
neurons is a central problem of biology.
I shall not spend too much time on the
formidable arsenal of equipment that has
enabled us to overcome obstacles to the
study of the human brain: gas encephalog¬
raphy, arteriography and, above all, tomog¬
raphic densitometry, nuclear magnetic re¬
sonance imagery and positron cameras (see
the Unesco Courier, August 1987). Mention
should also be made of the enormous prog¬
ress made in microscopic observation of
neurons.
-.
Yet here again, two fundamental bran¬
ches of modern molecular biology im¬
munology with monoclonal antibodies and,
above all, genetic engineering have un¬
doubtedly been responsible for speeding up
study of the neuron. Today, most of the
proteins and important neuropeptides have
been cloned. The genetic probes thus
obtained have enabled us not only to ana¬
lyse the biosynthetic activities of single
neurons with extraordinary precision, but
also to determine the molecular structure of
adjustors8 and, better still, of receptors and
ion pathways.
Without going so far as to suggest that the
brain secretes thought in the way that the
liver secretes bile, it must be admitted that
discoveries concerning the detailed bioche¬
mistry of neurons is having important reper¬
cussions on pharmacotherapy. It is,
however, too early yet to say whether the
enthusiasm of the reductionists in this re¬
gard is exaggerated or not. The psycho-
physiologists think that current notions
concerning the molecular biology of the
neuron will go the same way as the now
demoded micro-electrophysiology10 vogue.
Be this as it may, the new field of molecular
neurobiology is now open and has already
gathered a rich harvest of information.
We should, however, never forget the
pluridisciplinary character of the neuro¬
sciences. Without recourse to neuro¬
anatomy, neurophysiology and neurohisto¬
logy, as well, of course, to the study of
neuropathological behaviour and diseases,
it would be illusory to hope to understand
the memory and the major cognitive
functions.

The study of the genetics of behaviour is
also in full ferment. It is true that it throws
light only on simple stereotypes, such as the
song of the cricket, the reproduction of the
aplysia, a marine mollusc, or the short-term
learning cycle of the drosophila fly and its
memorization. It is also true that we are
only at the very beginning of the study of
neurogenetic diseases. We can, however,
sense the prospect of a modern neurogene¬
tic discipline emerging which is as worrying
in its ethical implications as it is full of hope
for the medical science of tomorrow.
This exposé of mine has left unexplained
many aspects of a biological science "in the
making", as well as of a "ready made"
biology. I have not explored the vast do¬
main of biotechnological applications; nor
have I dealt with the new patterns of phar-
maco-medicine, a glimpse of which we have
been given with the creation, by the techni¬
ques of genetic engineering, of molecules
endowed with new therapeutic properties.
I have not touched upon the enormous
field of microbic genetics, nor on the
molecular revolution that plant biology,
long left on the sidelines of contemporary
scientific advance, is currently undergoing.
Thanks to genetic engineering the elabora¬
tion of a physical plant gene map can now be
envisaged. Micropropagation techniques,11
the use of artificial seeding and plant or
microbial transgenation12 could well re¬
volutionize agricultural technology. There
is a distinct probability that the next millen¬
nium will witness great achievements in
plant genetics, the repercussions of which,
whether good or bad, will certainly be con¬
siderable for agriculture.
For reasons which can easily be im-
Autoradiogram of a section from the brain
of a rat, on which the location of cholecysto-
kinin (a neurohormone) can be detected
with the aid of radioactive tracers.
Brainstem neurons photographed with the
aid of an electron microscope
agined, any self-respecting science, and not
only biology (which is only one among
many sciences), evolves to the rhythm of a
kind of "self-induced" acceleration. But in a
certain manner biology touches us more
closely than the others. As Immanuel Kant
wrote concerning biology: "I see in it a
disposition of feeling that is very favourable
to morality and which, at least, prepares us
for it." And did not Louis Pasteur see in
biology a kind of panacea, generator of
blessings and of peace, intrinsically en¬
dowed, as Kant noted, with moralizing vir¬
tue? Can such judgements still be upheld?
Are they not, as the French doctor and
biologist François Jacob pondered, just a
little old-fashioned and outmoded? Is it
possible to maintain such a vision of the life
sciences despite certain obvious deviations,
past, present and to come, of the concepts
and techniques that have emerged from
them, such as the excesses of Nazi resear¬
chers and doctors, the threat of the imposi¬
tion of a "copyright" on human genes, and
the menace that will loom over the natural
resources of the developing world when
micropropagation and genetic engineering
have standardized everything?
Yet biology, like all the other sciences,
will continue to progress, to surprise, to
question. It will continue to bring solutions
and replies to our hopes and our ques¬
tionings. To be more vigilant, more con¬
scious of the limitations and dangers of
science, should not prevent us from moving
forward. Who could seriously consider
turning back the clock of knowledge? Who
could be so mad as to outlaw the search for
knowledge? We must be more knowledge¬
able about the results of science, and at the
same time be wiser and more humane.
We are about to embark on a great
adventure of the mind. Let us hope that it
will also be an adventure of reason and of
the heart.
1. Recombinant DNA: The hybrid DNA produced by
joining together in vitro pieces of DNA from different
organisms.
2. Cloning: Asexual reproduction of genetically iden¬
tical cells or organisms from a common ancestor.
3. Restriction enzymes: a group of proteins produced by
living cells which act as natural catalysts by means of
which a gene can be excised from a fragment of DNA
and grafted on to the DNA of another organism.
4. Monogenic: Relating to or controlled by a single gene.
5. Karyotype: The sum of the specific characteristics of
the chromosomes of a cell.
6. Determinant: One of the chemical groupings that
together determine the specific reactivity of an antigen
or antibody.
7. Phosphorylation: Conversion by enzymes of carbohy¬
drates into their phosphoric compounds.
8. Adjustor: A unit of the nervous system which controls
or adjusts stimuli received by a receptor neuron before
passing it on for action by a motor neuron.
9. Psychophysiology: A branch of psychology that deals
with the effects of physiological processes on mental life.
10. Electrophysioiogy: The branch of physiology con¬
cerned with the electric phenomena associated with
living bodies and involved in their functional activity.
11. Micropropagation: Multiple reproduction of plants
by in vitro culture of plant tissue.
12. Transgenation: Gene mutation.
FRANÇOIS GROS, French biologist, is professor
of cellular biochemistry at the Collège de France
and head of the biochemistry unit in the Pasteur
Institute's department of molecular biology,
where his main field ofresearch is the functioning
and regulatory mechanisms of genes. His many
publications include Les secrets du gène (1986).
This text was presented at a conference held at
Unesco Headquarters in October 1987.
8
