The art of the impossible
A repertoire constantly renewed
by courageous, versatile artists
by Lucien-René Dauven
UNLIKE the circus itself, which can
only establish itself in a new country
by diversifying to adapt to a new
public, the arts of the sawdust ring have
developed in approximately the same way
all over the world, owing to the proverbial
mobility of the "travellers" and the deter¬
mination of all artistes to outshine their
rivals. Since the beginning of the nineteenth
century, there has been a steady stream of
exchanges from one circus to another. A
Franconi Circus number much applauded in
Paris would be seen the following season in
London, Copenhagen or St. Petersburg.
Jules Leotard of Toulouse, who invented
the flying trapeze at the Cirque Olympique
in Paris, and who was unknown before he
made his Paris debut, had already worked
all over Europe when he decided to go to
New York. This was the crowning glory for
a young man who had been improbably
lionized during the Second Empire and
who, impervious to ridicule, styled himself
the "Antinous of the Trapeze".
The animal trainers who came on the
scene around 1830, and the daredevils who
appeared later, are not the only outside
artistes to have been accepted by the circus.
Other examples include the trick cyclists,
adopted by the circus in the heyday of the
velocipede. But experience has shown that
although such artistes can contribute to the
success of a show, they are not indispens¬
able: the essential features of a circus are
still those which made its name when it
began to establish itself as an entertainment
in its own right: horses and acrobats.
In the last century, the circus was called
the "temple of the horse" by its most lyrical
chroniclers, and was primarily a celebration
of women trick riders and side-saddle
equestriennes elevated to the rank of prin¬
cesses. Lovers of horsemanship knew when
to applaud at the right moment. The horse
has vanished from everyday life, and con¬
noisseurs have become rare, but equestrian
acts, ranging from voltige and other forms
of trick riding, to High School and
"Liberty" horse displays, have lost none of
their prestige. They are eagerly awaited,
appreciated, applauded and often cheered.
Just as it is possible to love painting without
©
-^ Walking the high wire, Lagny (France),
1960
ever using a brush, it is possible to admire a
trainer without knowing that chambrière is
the name given to the long whip that he
throws on the ground as he enters the ring,
in order to show the audience that he does
not need it in order to win obedience from
his "pupils".
Equestrian spectaculars
The history of the equestrian arts of the
circus has been punctuated by major turn¬
ing points (such as the introduction of High
School riding around 1820) which can be
dated to within a year or two, depending on
the historian describing them. Although cir¬
cus horsemanship developed rapidly in the
second half of the nineteenth century, it had
Poster announcing the first appearance of
Jules Leotard (1838-1870), the inventor of
the flying trapeze, at the Cirque Napoléon,
Paris, in 1859. At first Leotard worked with
a layer of mattresses below him, the equiva¬
lent of today's safety net.
CIRQUE NAPOLEON
ra_- I ***t«*l *"» Hlk»-J«.. .ihiir.
. MliKft M i-it*rn /OP
DEBUT . Gywuii^Bt TmImsiib LEOTARD fils
MERVEILLES
CYMNASTIQUES
h :. COURSE AUX TUPES* ww h tau Ma ira
LES 2 VIRTUOSES
LE TOURBILLON
l'IYIIIIUII IUIIMM
FANTAISIES CHINOISES
*«l 1K1I l' KIKIM 14 KM
L* PASSE DjUJPËfÎt CERCLE
II, a. n *ii4» <» <
i% riJim m t i »»(tu i -.
il «INvtt-l
©
begun long before in Astley's
Amphitheatre (see article page 4), with bur¬
lesque scenes acted out on horseback, early
versions of comedy acts, and above all with
the dressage interludes which gave the vol¬
tige riders time to get their breath between
two exercises. The first trained performing
horses were not required to do very much,
but as soon as they were gathered in the
ring, they became the distant and unwitting
forerunners of the splendid equestrian spec¬
taculars that are still the pride of the big
circuses.
Carousels, with as many as sixty horses in
the ring, are no longer fashionable, and
nowadays acts with a group of twelve, or
sometimes twenty-four, Liberty horses,
faultlessly performing complicated man¬
oeuvres, have come close to perfection. The
time-honoured traditional repertoire con¬
tinues to be enriched by new routines
smoothly linked under the invisible gui¬
dance of the trainer, who gives orders by
gestures and movements so discreet that
they go unnoticed by most of the audience.
Some recent inventions such as the cloud of
white mist from which the Lipizzaner horses
of the Swiss trainer Frédy Knie gradually
emerge, and the circling of the ring by a
rearing stallion, a finale of rare beauty in¬
vented by the late Alexis Gruss, Senior, are
on the way to becoming classics.
Daredevils on horseback
In the circus, High School has a spectacu¬
lar side unsought in the riding school. Using
training methods that are criticized by mas¬
ters of academic equestrianism, outstan¬
dingly talented écuyers, starting with Fran¬
çois Baucher and his pupil James Fillis,
adapted their art to the restricted area of the
ring and invented new airs such as the pas
espagnol, the galop en arrière and many
others which are still popular today. Circus
horsemanship is different from formal
equitation. It is more showy, but it also
shuns facility, and today boasts high-class
artistes, men and women, who are elegant
riders of splendid horses trained with rigor¬
ous precision. Unfortunately, there are too
many others who turn High School in the
ring into a shameless parody.
Voltige acts are military in origin, but
voltige as practised by circus tumblers on
horseback soon became quite different
from that taught in the barracks. The tradi¬
tional vaults and jumps of voltige were com-
11

Alexis Gruss, Junior, and his brother Pat¬
rick, French horsemen and acrobats, leap to
land astride a horse in their "double Jockey"
act, during a performance at the trad¬
itional-style Gruss Circus in Paris. In this
form of voltige act the rider combines
acrobatics with feats of balance on a bare¬
back horse, circling the ring in an anti¬
clockwise direction.
bined with acrobatic feats, and the two
disciplines were already merging when, to¬
wards the middle of the nineteenth century,
two novelties from the United States spread
through Europe: voltige à la Richard, which
was performed bareback without saddle or
bridle, and so-called "Epsom Jockey"
work, a mixture of all known types of vol¬
tige in which the rider leaps off the horse
and vaults on again, landing in a standing or
sitting position. Pride of place, however,
still went to exploits performed actually on
horseback.
Acts became more varied when they were
performed by two or three riders working
together, and when troupes of six to eight
people formed amazing human pyramids
straddling four or five horses trotting neck
and neck. But the store of new tricks was
running out. Although we do not know for
sure where, when and by whom the first
backward somersault from horse to horse
was performed, this exploit was undeniably
more than fifty years old in 1930 when it was
performed by the Franco-Chinese horse¬
man Chotachen Courtault in the ring of the
Cirque Medrano in Paris. It was hailed as a
novelty ... for a time.
There may be fewer trick riders in the
circus than in the past, but the best of them
stand comparison with their predecessors.
There are reasons to doubt whether any
new acts will be devised. In recent years,
novelty has lain primarily in a welcome
return to tradition. Alexis Gruss, Junior,
for one, has vividly revived such long-
forgotten numbers as the "Courier of St.
Petersburg", in which the rider, standing
astride two horses, allows twelve horses to
pass between his legs, snatching up their
long reins ás they pass. This number was
created by Andrew Ducrow in 1826 (see
article page 4) , and had not been performed
for some thirty years.
Leapers and tightrope walkers
Although equestrian acts delighted the
elegant audiences who brought the circus
into fashion, directors soon realized that the
general public, who provided most of the
takings, was less interested in these acts
than in acrobats, leapers and tightrope
walkers, The tumblers of yesteryear,, now
known as artistes "of strength and agility",
soon came to the fore. Many of them be¬
came famous, including Leotard, the clown
Auriol (who could turn a somersault and
land with his feet in his slippers), Blondin,
the tightrope walker, and Risley, who gave
his name to an act in which one or more
performers, lying on their backs, juggle the
smaller members of the company with their
feet (see photo bottom left, centre colour
page).
They all had their imitators, intent on
doing better than their models. Such rivalry
did not exist in the days when professionals
preferred to avoid one another and met
only by chance when they were on the road,
and it accounts for the remarkable develop¬
ment of the art of acrobatics as practised by
the finest circus performers. But this prog¬
ress would probably have been less remark¬
able arid less swift had it not been for the
training that has always been compulsory
for circus folk.
Circus training calls for will-power, pa¬
tience and courage (which the animal train¬
er Gilbert Houcke used to describe as the
three essential qualities of the good crafts¬
man), and for the future acrobat it entails a
long, hard apprenticeship. Before specializ¬
ing at all, he or she must achieve complete
mastery of acrobatic jumps and balancing
acts on the ground. It takes several years'
practice to be able to perform a standing
somersault correctly, or to maintain a hand¬
stand for two minutes. But once an artiste
possesses these skills, the sky's the limit,
and he or she can aspire to excel not just in a
single discipline, but in several, or even in
all. This versatility accounts for the con¬
tinual renewal of acrobatics, which is more
noticeable today than it was in the last
century.
Acrobats who spend years learning an
'impossible' trick
"In acrobatics, the last word is never
spoken, and the nee plus ultra never
attained," wrote Georges Strehly, profes¬
sor of philosophy at the Sorbonne and
historian of acrobats, in 1903. His implicit
tribute to the artistes of the last century is
just as valid today. Since modern acrobats
cannot perform any more extraordinary
movements than those invented by their
predecessors, they combine their tricks with
others borrowed from different disciplines.
Nowadays, jugglers perform not only on
the ground, but standing on their heads on a
tightrope or upright on a galloping horse.
Tumblers use stilts and are thrown into the
air from a springboard; contortionists vary
their dislocationary movements with hand-

The most critical moment of a breathtaking
act. Perched on a monocycle balanced on a
globe, the young Chinese juggler Fu Xiuyu
performs a feat which won her the City of
Monaco Prize at the 12th Monte Carlo Cir¬
cus Festival in 1987.
to-hand interactions between partners, and
some acts amaze even the most jaded
audience.
Perched on a tall monocycle and pedall¬
ing with one leg in order to keep her balance
on the top of a large wooden globe, which
would begin to roll at the slightest false
movement, the young Chinese acrobat Fu
Xiuyu places four bowls along her free leg,
and then flips them all into the air. The
bowls fly in different directions and then,
stacking neatly into one another, land in a
fifth bowl that she has previously placed on
her head. These are joined shortly after
wards by a teapot and lid, flung into the air
in the same way. The feat seems almost
impossible. But some day will another
artiste make it even more complex by
adding an extra difficulty? It is tempting to
answer: "Why not?". In the circus, as in the
sports stadium, records exist to be broken.
And they always are broken.
The list of recent inventions that bear
witness to the incredible virtuosity and in¬
ventive abilities of acrobats would be a long
one. They dream of performing an impossi¬
ble trick. It will perhaps take them years to
do it, but they will succeed, and sometimes
they will even be outdone by a colleague
who has stooped to faking. Some very im¬
pressive numbers that win the loudest ap¬
plause are of questionable value, because
they consist of tricks that the performer
cannot attempt unless he has first hooked to
his belt the safety rope or "lunge" that will
save his life if he misses his catch. In some
cases, the lunge provides the acrobat with
aid, more or less visible, which deprives the
supposed star turn of any interest.
Fortunately, there are many other num¬
bers which deserve wholehearted enthu¬
siasm, even if they are less impressive and
their merits are apparent only to those
members of the audience who know the real
thing when they see it. Fearlessness is part
of the game, but no one goes to the circus
hoping to see a fellow human mutilated in
the ring. Safety precautions which do not
diminish the quality of acrobatics are thus
to be commended. However, if numbers
involving deception cannot be excluded, at
least let us hope that they are few, and save
our respect (and applause) for acrobats who
are wedded to their art and whose motto
might be: "I am less flashy, but I don't
cheat."
'A happy dream'
Is the art of acrobatics declining or
developing? No acrobat will answer that
question.
The growing complexity of the acts, the
use of new apparatus and the replacement
of one technique by another have depleted
the ranks of those working in the less spec¬
tacular disciplines, which are closest to pure
acrobatics, and which require only muscu¬
lar strength and a keen eye.
But the circus is first and foremost a
spectacle. No voltige rider catapulted up¬
wards by two people clasping each other's
hands has ever reached the fourth level, i.e.
landed on the shoulders of the third man in
a three-man column . But if the same voltige
rider is propelled by a seesaw, which gives a
powerful artificial thrust, he can somersault
and reach the fifth or even the sixth level.
Which of these tricks has the greater merit?
It is difficult to judge, because it is undeni¬
able that the second has a bigger impact
than the first. The trend may be regretted,
but it should not come as a surprise.
One thing is certain, however: if the
achievements of the past cannot be com¬
pared to those of the present, the latter are no
less valid than the former. Acts that were
considered impossible at the beginning of the
century, such as head-to-head balancing
without a protective pad, have been per¬
formed, and no longer surprise anyone; En¬
rico Rastelli surpassed jugglers who, accord¬
ing to Strehly, would never be rivalled; and
the forward somersault on a tightrope, the
virtually exclusive master stroke of Con Col-
leano in the 1930s, features in the repertoire
of all good specialists. One of them, Luis
Muñoz, performs it in the "lay-out" or fully
extended position, and no longer "balled-
up", with his arms hugging his knees to his
chest, like all his predecessors.
Riders, animal trainers and acrobats: in
the ring, all remain eternally young, and
thanks to them the circus is still, as Heming¬
way wrote, the only show that gives the
audience the feeling that they are living in a
happy dream.
What better reason could there be for
loving the circus?
LUCIEN-RENE DAUVEN, French journalist,
writer and contributor to the revised edition of
Henry Thétard's La merveilleuse histoire du cir¬
que, has been the editor since 1959 of Le cirque
dans l'univers, the quarterlyjournal of the Paris-
based Club du Cirque, ofjxhich he is president.
The Editors wish to express theirgratitude to Mr.
Dauven for his assistance in the preparation of
this issue.
