At the frontiers of science
and technology
BY ROBYN WILLIAMS
Australian scientific brilliance
has been kept secret for far too
long. Although they consti¬
tute barely 0.3 per cent of the world's
population, Australians produce 2 per
cent of the world's scientific papers each
year. The standard of this work is of the
highest order and it is perplexing that
this should be so little known, both in
Australia and elsewhere. As Dr. Mike
Kenward, editor of New Scientist maga¬
zine, said at the ANZAAS (Australian
and New Zealand Association for the
Advancement of Science) Centenary
Congress in 1988, "both your wine and
your scientific achievements are very
well kept secrets!"
Among the pioneers of scientific re¬
search in Australia, Lawrence Hargrave
(1850-1915) was an aeronautical inven¬
tor who used kites to develop lighter-
than-air flying machines. The first large-
scale refrigerators were produced in
Australia, enabling ships to carry
Australian meat to Europe. Lord Florey
(1898-1968) was one of the triumvirate
responsible for making penicillin into a
usable drug and won a Nobel Prize for
his efforts.
Many of these achievements,
however, remained either well con¬
cealed in ivory towers or firmly linked
with establishments overseas. Then, af¬
ter the Second World War, Australian
science experienced an upheaval. One
important contribution to this was
made by a number of young British
scientists who had been engaged in radar
research and who came and settled in
Australia. They turned the skills they
had developed for plucking signals from
the sky to astronomy. An explosion in
astronomical research followed.
Today Australia has some of the best
telescopes on Earth: the optical tele¬
scope at the Anglo-Australian
Observatory in Coonabarabran, re¬
sponsible for finding what is perhaps the
most distant object in the universe,
10,000 million light years away; and the
huge radio dish telescope at Parkes,
The Anglo-Australian Observatory at Siding Spring
Mountain, near Coonabarabran, New South Wales, houses
one of the world's largest optical telescopes.
'
*«y
m d
^*^=rr~
"
*ai£r~,mtm¿

which carried to the world the famous
signals of American astronaut Neil
Armstrong making his first steps on the
Moon, and has since discovered several
important organic molecules in outer
space. In September 1988 the gigantic
Australia Telescope was inaugurated in
northern New South Wales. With its
several dishes on wide railtracks, it is
moveable and yet precise to a fraction of
a millimetre.
There is also a long tradition of
medical research in Australia. The col¬
ossus in this field was Sir Macfarlane
Burnet, who shared the 1960 Nobel
Prize for Physiology or Medicine with
Sir Peter Medawar of Britain for their
discoveries in immunology. Sir
Macfarlane was for many years director
of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute in
Melbourne, where today scientists fight
cancer and carry out research into tro¬
pical diseases, especially malaria.
Next door almost, in the "square
mile" of medical institutes around the
University of Melbourne, is the Florey
Institute where scientists are seeking
remedies for high blood pressure and
trying to determine the interplay of hor¬
mones. One hormone, relaxin, has been
isolated and even produced by bacteria
using genetic engineering techniques.
This hormone is made naturally by the
body before childbirth, softening the
skeletal parts of the pelvis to allow the
baby's head through. Lack of relaxin is a
cause of cerebral palsy, so medical pro¬
vision of the hormone could be of spec¬
tacular importance.
Another idea which may have enor¬
mous significance is due to Professor
Ted Ringwood, a geologist at the
Australian National University, who
has developed a synthetic rock or glass
called Synroc which can be used for the
safe disposal of nuclear waste. Synroc
has been extensively tested and shown
to restrict the passage of radiation. It
now remains to be established that this
property will last for hundreds of years.
Australia also excels in geological re¬
search, especially in the study of deserti-
AUSTRALIA'S NOBEL LAUREATES
IN SCIENCE
Three Australian scientists have been awarded
the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine.
Left to right:
Howard Walter Florey (Lord Florey; 1898-1968),
pathologist. Joint winner, 1945 (with
Sir Alexander Fleming and Ernst Boris Chain);
Sir Macfarlane Burnet (1899-1985), physician
and virologist. Joint winner, 1960
(with Sir Peter Medawar);
SirJohn Carew Eccles (b. 1903), neurophysiologist.
Joint winner, 1963 (with Alan Hodgkin
and Andrew Huxley).
fication and the protection of arid
zones. Dry land farming methods are
linked to this kind of expertise, which
many Australians have taken to Asia
and Africa.
About 30 per cent of Australia lies in
the tropics and, accordingly, great ex¬
pertise is being acquired in the develop¬
ment of tropical farming methods, new
breeds of stock and varieties of grain,
and new ways of fighting pests. Perhaps
the most pleasing aspect of this, centred
on James Cook University in northern
Queensland, has been the exchange of
ideas with other countries in south-east
Asia and the South Pacific.
Perhaps the most spectacular dis¬
coveries in Australian science have been
in connection with the Australian past.
In biology and palaeontology there have
been extraordinary finds, including fos¬
sils entombed in rock at Riversleigh in
northern Queensland which were so ex¬
tensive that the air force had to be asked
to help carry them out. The picture of
early Australia they reveal is one of
gigantic monsters, of special lines of
adaptation, of animals such as marsupial
lions and wolves.
Among the recent achievements of
Australian technology is a bionic ear
developed by Dr. Graham Clarke of
Melbourne and now worn by several
children who can hear as a result. The
. *>^-' ^
28

Australian pacemaker (the idea was in¬
vented in Australia) commands 40 per
cent of the world market. The CSIRO
(Commonwealth Scientific and Indust¬
rial Research Organization) landing
system, the brainchild of Dr. Paul Wild,
is in use in airports around the globe.
The Repco self-twist spinning machine
revolutionized the textile industry after
its invention in the 1970s. Sir Alan
Walsh invented the atom absorption
spectrometer which analyses substances
at lightning speed.
As for the future, a space port is plan¬
ned for northern Queensland, conve¬
niently placed near the equator for
launches. Many Asian space projects are
likely to use this facility. The world's
largest stellar interferometer (to study
stars), being built at the University of
Sydney, has been described as one of the
most significant developments in astro¬
nomy in the past forty years. Remote
sensing systems are being used for agri¬
culture, forest protection and mining.
The techniques for in vitro fertilization
and embryo freezing developed in Mel¬
bourne are now being exported to the
United States and elsewhere. The com¬
puterized switching system for mass
communication currently being per¬



fected at the University of Western
Australia may soon be adopted as the
preferred option in a number of
countries.
But many Australians believe that
their greatest scientific contributions to
the rest of the world are more simple
though nonetheless profound. These
contributions are sometimes described
as "alternative technology", perhaps be¬
cause they seem less flashy and space-
age, perhaps because they adapt tradi¬
tional technologies. One example is a
scheme which uses sand to filter out
microscopic bugs to yield clean water.
Just that! Yet how many villages in how
many nations depend for their existence
on the flow of good sweet water? Such a
process may not make the headlines but
it is the kind of science Australians are
getting better at.
ROBYN WILLIAMS is Australia's leading sci¬
ence broadcaster. He has been executive producer
of the Science Unit of the Australian Broadcasting
Corporation since 1972, is Chairman of the
Australian Museum Trust, and a member of the
Commission for the Future.
Refining plant on Gove Peninsula in the Northern Territory produces alumina from bauxite ore.
