Overarmament and
underdevelopment
Willy Brandt
DEVELOPMENT and peace are in¬
terdependent questions of such
vital international importance
that, especially if the ecological aspect is also
taken into account, the destiny of our planet
and that of humanity hinges on adequate
solutions being found for them.
In scientific analyses and in political prac¬
tice these interdependences often go unrec¬
ognized. Although the close relationship
between peace and development is immedi¬
ately obvious in the countries of the South,
it is also true that disasters in the South have
an immediate impact on the countries of the
North.
The reports submitted by the Brandt
Commission (.1977), the Palme Commission
(1980), and the Brundtland Commission
(1987)1 were firmly based on the concept of
common responsibility for the future of our
planet and also attached importance to the
concept of interdependence though with
varying emphasis.
The notions of "common interests",
"common security", and "common future"
demand that uncompromising confronta¬
tions should be ended throughout the world
and give way to harmonious coexistence.
None of the major problems prevailing
between industrialized nations and devel¬
oping countries can be effectively solved by
means of confrontation. Reasonable solu¬
tions can only be based on dialogue and
co-operation.
However, this will not be possible with¬
out a new understanding of mutual depend¬
encies. There are many positive sides to this
interdependence: all countries would bene¬
fit from a strengthening of the world econo¬
my involving a reduction of national debts
and an improvement of the climate for
growth and investment.
All of them would also benefit from a
more careful use of non-renewable raw ma¬
terials and greater respect for environmental
1. The Brandt Commission on International Devel¬
opment Issues and the Palme Commission on Dis¬
armament and Security Issues were founded, respec¬
tively, on the initiative of Willy Brandt (Chancellor of
the Federal Republic of Germany, 1969-1974) and of
Olof Palme, formerly Prime Minister "of Sweden. Dis¬
tinguished figures from a number of countries served on
these Independent Commissions set up to study major
international problems. The World Commission on En¬
vironment and Development, chaired by Mrs. Gro Har¬
lem Brundtland, Prime Minister of Norway, was com¬
missioned by the General Assembly of the United
Nations in 1983. Editor
29

resources; and all of them would benefit
from stabilization of the world population.
Objectively speaking, all countries be
they North or South, East or West, indus¬
trialized or developinghave an obvious
interest in more security and less defence
spending. And they are equally interested in
an improved capacity to tackle global
problems.
Children are still dying every minute be¬
cause they do not have enough food or
water, or because they lack basic medical
care. Over 500 million people throughout
the world still suffer from hunger. In these
circumstances, it is not much consolation to
be told by experts that at international level
food production has continued to increase.
On the contrary, it is all the more scanda¬
lous that such a vast number of people are
condemned to starve in a world that seems
obviously capable of providing enough food
for all. And who would deny today that
hunger and poverty could be more effective¬
ly overcome in large parts of the world if
some of the funds wasted on overarmament
could instead be used for productive and
humanitarian ends?
We possess relatively reliable estimates on
worldwide arms expenditure. In future
agreements on arms reductions, serious ef¬
forts should be made to use at least part of
the funds thus saved for economically, so¬
cially, ecologically and thus politically
useful purposes.
We are also aware of the external debt
burden that many developing countries are
suffering from. An increasing portion of
their export earnings has to be spent on
servicing foreign debts. For a number of
years now, the flow of funds from the South
to the North has been greater than in the
opposite direction.
Excessive arms spending has not made
peace any less precarious, and the desperate
position in which many developing coun¬
tries find themselves is certainly not an
adequate basis for future-oriented economic
and ecological decisions.
According to the findings of the World
Commission on Environment and Devel¬
opment (WCED) and of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), human¬
ity is now able to bring about radical
changes on the planet Earth, which may
either take a destructive or a constructive
course.
The crisis observed in large parts of the
developing world is due to both worldwide
structural changes and to internal and ex¬
ternal mismanagement. The United Nations
Conference on Disarmament and Devel¬
opment held in 1987 also came to the con¬
clusion that disarmament, development and
security are interdependent.
Up to now there have been no sufficiently
high level talks on the interrelationship be¬
tween overarmament and underdevelop¬
ment. Instead, intergovernmental North-
South negotiations in a "multilateral"
framework have all but petered out. But
1. Half the world's population lacks easy access
to an adequate supply ofpure fresh water. To
develop a scientific basis for the rational man¬
agement of water resources, Unesco's General
Conference in 1974 launched a long-term In¬
ternational Hydrological Programme (IHP).
2. A research team from the University of
Ghana gathers information on local diets in a
village near Legon. Their survey is being car¬
riedout in association with the UnitedNations
University as part of an effort to understand
the factors responsible for hunger and mal¬
nutrition and to improve food and nutrition
policies. 3. In the Kathmandu valley, Nepal, a
Nepalese specialist attached to the United Na¬
tions University charts information for use in
natural hazards mapping.
where bilateralism predominates, the dis¬
advantages of the weaker party are
accentuated.
All those who see other peoples as neigh¬
bours for whom they feel responsible must
put pressure on their governments to initiate
a process of systematic and future-oriented
negotiations. More specifically, I would like
to ask for your support in passing on a
message to all those who are currently in
government. The message is that they
should finally recognize that an objective
interrelationship exists between peace,
development and the protection of the
environment, and that they should act
accordingly.
This interdependence long unrecog¬
nized no longer be underrated.
There must be a growing realization that all
countries are linked by their common in¬
terest in survival and that solutions to our
problems will only be achieved by adopting
a far-sighted and global approach. Our
"mutual obligation" requires the adop¬
tion quickly as possibleof a new ethic
of human survival.
WILLY BRANDT, chancellor of the Federal Re¬
public of Germany from 1969 to 1974, inaugu¬
rated a policy known as Ostpolitik, which sought
to improve relations with the socialist republics of
eastern Europe, in particular the German Demo¬
cratic Republic. He was awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize in 1971. Former President of the Socialist
International and Member of the European Par¬
liament, he is the author of several books on
political issues, including People and Politics: The
Years 1960-1975 (1978), Frauen Heute (1978;
"Women Today"), and Links und Frei (1982;
"Left and Free").
