Pharaonic art
and the modern
imagination
BY RICHARD A. FAZZINI
/ " ;#
V'vV
-
c
THE sense of identity underlying
Egypt's nationalist movement was
enhanced by the archaeological re¬
discovery of ancient Egypt, a fact reflected in
such works as Cairo's partially pharaoniciz-
ing sculpture The Awakening of Egypt by
Mahmoud Mokhtar (1891-1934), and in the
use of ancient Egyptian history in the early
allegorical novels of the modern writer Najib
Mahfüz.
These uses of elements of ancient
Egyptian history and art might have seemed
familiar to the Pharaohs of the early New
Kingdom (sixteenth century BC) who ex¬
pelled the Hyksos the so-called "shepherd
kings from the East" and reunited the
country. Viewing themselves as heirs to the
kings of the early Middle Kingdom (late
twenty-first to early twentieth century BC)
when Egypt was reunited after the collapse
of the Old Kingdom, they established close
religious and archaizing artistic links be¬
tween themselves and their early Middle
Kingdom "ancestors". In fact, ancient
Egyptian civilization, while sufficiently evo¬
lutionary to permit incredible artistic
change, was also sufficiently resistant to
change to ensure amazing artistic continuity,
and encompassed concepts that could allow
the past to be a viable model for the present.
This also helps to explain how Egyptian
art of the fourth century BCand later, which
included the native Twenty-ninth and Thir¬
tieth Dynasties (399-343 BC), was a blend of
the traditional and the innovative. Among
the features of that era's art was a greater
fullness in figurai style, a greater penchant
for animal figures, a plethora of figures of
gods and of religious symbols, and more
complex forms and decoration in general. It
was this later Egyptian art especially that
spread throughout the Hellenistic and
Roman world, via the diffusion of Egyptian
cults. In Italy and Rome in particular, ob¬
jects imported from Egypt were sup¬
plemented by new Egyptianizing works
made to serve cults that also partook of
non-Egyptian elements, to reflect imperial
glory, or simply to decorate houses and
gardens.
With the fall of Rome and the rise of
Christianity and Islam, ancient Egypt en¬
tered the realm of the unknown, mysterious
and fabulous. It remained there even when
Egypt's rediscovery was begun in the Re¬
naissance, because the rediscovcrcrs were
concerned, for example, with ideas of links
between Christian doctrine and the wisdom
or magic of ancient Egypt. Further, the Re¬
naissance's main sources for the study of
ancient Egypt were the Egyptian and
Egyptianizing objects from Italy and Rome.
The former were hardly representative of
ancient Egypt in general, and the latter
varied greatly in the degree of adherence to
Egyptian norms.
Poster advertising a record album by a modern
pop music group is a fantastic and theatrical mix 33
of popular images of ancient Egypt. oassra

34
One especially important discovery was
the Roman Period Mensa Isiaca, so called
because it resembles the top of a table (mensa
in Italian) and because its iconography re¬
lates it to the cult of Isis. Made of bronze and
silver, it is decorated with images of
Egyptian deities and symbols, as well as
hieroglyphs which are imperfectly under¬
stood. Like sculptures similar to the second
century AD Egypto-classical figure of the
Emperor Hadrian's favourite, Antinous,
found at Tivoli in 1740, the Mensa Isiaca
became a source for Egyptianizing elements
in the art of the Renaissance. In part because
they went on being presented as fine sources
for such endeavours, they and other
Egyptian and Roman Egyptianizing works
continued to play a role in Egyptian studies
and Egyptianizing art in the Western world,
despite increased interest in, and firsthand
knowledge of, Egypt in the seventeenth and,
especially, in the eighteenth centuries.
Nevertheless, in the eighteenth century
several non-scientific developments also led
to greater interest in ancient Egypt, and also
increased its influence on Western arts.
These developments included the growing
importance of Freemasonry, the concept of
the Sublime (the ability of art and
architecture to induce emotional reactions
such as amazement and dread) and emerging
Neoclassicism's concern for grandeur, sim¬
plicity and massiveness.
Such concepts informed the reconstruc¬
tions of Egyptian temples by the French
painter and designer Louis François Cassas,
published in 1799, and the schemes for vast
Egyptianizing monuments by architects
such as Etienne-Louis Boullée (1728-1799),
also of France. Equally significant, but in a
very different vein, are the drawings of extra¬
vagantly Egyptianizing rooms and fireplaces
Above, the Grande Pyramide, an engraving by the French artist Louis-François
Cassas (1756-1827). The entire'composition is a Romantic fantasy combining an
Old Kingdom pyramid with a temple of much later date, and an approach lined
with very un-Egyptian sphinxes. In the background is an equally un-Egyptian
mountain landscape. Above right, a glass and steel pyramid has been erected above
the main entrance and reception area of the Louvre Museum, Paris, as part of a
modernization programme. The structure, designed by the American architect
I.M. Pei, was completed in 1988.
by the Italian printmaker and architect
Giambattista Piranesi, published in 1769.
Based to no small extent on late Egyptian
and Roman Egyptianizing art, they consti¬
tute a major attempt to create an
Egyptianizing style instead of using indi¬
vidual motifs. Indeed, Piranesi was among
the first to appreciate Egyptian art for its
decorative beauty as opposed to its majesty
or mystery. Europe was thus already in¬
volved with ancient Egypt when the
Napoleonic Expedition to Egypt of 1798-
1801 ushered in the first and largest of what
would be many Egyptian revivals, between
which interest in Egypt has never really
vanished.
The Napoleonic Expedition also initiated
Egypt's archaeological rediscovery, which
led to scholars' growing ability to recon¬
struct Egypt's history and civilization more
accurately, and to understand and appreciate
the art of all its ages. It also made possible
more accurate Egyptianizing in literature,
art, architecture, stage sets and the like.
Nevertheless, this did not happen all at once,
as evidenced, for example, by the figure in
the 1808 Egyptianizing fountain in the rue
de Sèvres, Paris, that is based on the statue of
Antinous discovered in 1740. If newly dis¬
covered, older Egyptian models appeared
alongside long-familiar later ones, they did

Below left, a 2nd-century-AD Roman statue of
Antinous, favourite of the Emperor Hadrian.
Antinous, deified by the Emperor after
drowning in the Nile, is depicted as the Egyptian
god Osiris. This type of statue served as the
model for the fountain constructed in 1808 in
the rue de Sèvres, Paris (below).
not supplant them: it is the business of scho¬
lars, not artists, to attempt to recreate ancient
civilizations totally and accurately.
In the twentieth century a number of fac¬
tors, not all new, fostered a greater know¬
ledge and appreciation of ancient Egypt and
its art: archaeological discoveries (especially
Tutankhamun's tomb); exhibitions of
Egyptian art, some of which, . like the
Tutankhamun finds, have inspired Egyptian
revivals in various areas; increased tourism
to Egypt; more mass education; and an en¬
hanced Western respect for non-Western
art. As in the nineteenth century, Egyptian
art continues to influence serious architects,
artists and designers in manners other than
slavish imitation.
However, other aspects of ancient Egypt's
culture, real or imagined, continue to fascin¬
ate and influence the West. In fact, even
before the great age of commercial motion
pictures, plays, operas (especially Aida), his¬
torical novels, and fantasy and horror novels
(Egyptian themes start in the nineteenth cen¬
tury, well before the "curse" of Tutankha¬
mun's tomb was world news) gave some
version of the culture to the public. Adver¬
tising and packaging for a variety of pro¬
ducts, particularly cigarettes and beauty pro¬
ducts, also have had their influence.
Both symptom and cause of interest in
ancient Egypt, Hollywood and its allies
have, from the beginning, used spectacles
based on Egyptian themes to attract a wider
audience, once again with varying degrees of
historical or artistic accuracy. Other impor¬
tant influences on popular conceptions or
misconceptions of ancient Egypt and its art
are television, American comic books (not
always aimed solely at children), and their
more sophisticated French counterparts. A
number of the latter dealing with Egypt
combine impressively accurate drawings of
modern Egypt and its ancient monuments
with equally impressive Egyptianizing
fantasies.
The mass media, heirs not only to early
Hollywood but also to the works of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, per¬
petuate old and new myths about ancient
Egypt such as its descent from Atlantis, the
influence of beings from outer space, and
"pyramid power".
An impressive recent example of
Egyptianizing in popular media are the post¬
er and cover for the record album Power-
slave by the group Iron Maiden. Its design
would have been impossible without the
temples of Abu Simbel, widely publicized by
Unesco's campaign to save the monuments
of Nubia. The image, however, is not really
Abu Simbel, but rather a theatrical
Egyptianizing fantasy evocative of many
popular associations of Egypt in the modern
mind.
One thing seems certain: ancient Egypt
and its art may come to be better understood
and appreciated, but the land of the
Pharaohs, of which the ancient Greek histo¬
rian Herodotus said "more monuments
which beggar description are to be found
here than anywhere else in the world", will
continue to be a source of many wonders and
fantasies only somewhat reflective of ancient
reality.
RICHARD A. FAZZINI, of the United States of
America, is curator of Egyptian, Classical, and
Ancient Middle Eastern Art at The Brooklyn
Museum. An Egyptologist specializing in ancient
Egyptian art, he is also an archaeologist and directs
The Brooklyn Museum's excavations in the temple
precinct of the goddess Mut at South Karnak.
