THE DESKTOP REVOLUTION
BY HOWARD BRABYN
One of the many possibilities offered by do-it-yourself electronic publishing systems using personal computers may be to
help developing countries meet their needs for textbooks and other printed materials.
IN 1473, explaining the somewhat slipshod appearance
of his latest publication, a printer of Parma in northern
Italy declared that because rivals were about to bring
out the same text, he had had to rush it through the printing
process "faster than you can cook asparagus".
This colourful hyperbole bears eloquent witness to the
astonishingly rapid spread of publishing in the second half of
the fifteenth century. Barely twenty-five years after Jo¬
hannes Gutenberg had originated his new method of print¬
ing (using movable metal type, a press and an oil-based
printing ink), printing had spread to nearly all the major
trading centres of Europe. In the first half of the fifteenth
century the number of manuscript books in Europe could be
counted in tens of thousands; by the year 1500, more than 9
million books had been printed.
The history of printing and publishing, like that of all
human progress, is a record of the interplay between techno¬
logical innovation and social change. Whilst each of these
two streams of human activity promotes the other, with each
in turn playing the leading role, the really crucial leaps ahead
have always been made when the two converge to become an
irresistible tide. Thus, whilst it was made technically possible
by Gutenberg's discoveries, the development of printing in
Europe, "The German Art" as it was at first called, was
equally a response to the spread of literacy and to the social
climate of the Early Renaissance.
The early printers were men of many talents. Not only did
they design and cast their own typefaces, they also fulfilled
the functions of publisher, editor, printer and bookseller.
Only bookbinding and the manufacture of paper were left to
others. William Caxton, for example, the first English print¬
er, was an accomplished linguist and himself translated from
the French the first book to be published in English, The
Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye (1475), which he printed
on the press he had established in Bruges.
One of the great early printer-publishers was the Venetian
Aldus Manutius (1449-1515). In 1490, Aldus began produc¬
ing the first printed editions of many of the Greek and Latin
classics. Later he pioneered the production of cheap pocket
editions, with what for those days were large print runs of
1,000 copies to keep down the cost, and commissioned the
first italic typeface (see page 12). In 1502, he published
Dante's La Divina Commedia on which his famous imprint,
the anchor and dolphin, appeared for the first time.
As the demand for books and publications of every sort
grew, the days of the great printer-publishers were num¬
bered. The only way the book-hungry market could be
supplied was by specialization and the division of labour. As
a consequence the world of publishing gradually took on a
new form, which has lasted until modern times, with the
functions of author, publisher, printer, bookbinder and
bookseller becoming separated.
Significantly, however, the name of Aldus Manutius has
become associated with the current revolution in the pub¬
lishing world, for Paul Brainerd, the man who in 1985 coined
the phrase "desktop publishing", is president of the Aldus
Corporation, the firm that produced one of the first pro¬
grams capable of composing and formatting text merged
16

with graphics on a computer for subsequent output to the
new generation of printing and typesetting machines.
What exactly is desktop publishing? Basically it is the
application of personal computers to the entire range of the
publishing process, from the typing in of the author's origi¬
nal copy to the final printing of the publication. It is a means
of producing documents, complete with graphics, ranging
from one-page information or advertising leaflets, through
brochures and price lists, to newsletters, magazines and even
books, on equipment which can comfortably be housed on a
reasonably large desk.
. The basic equipment, or "hardware", required consists of
a computer, complete with a visual display unit (screen), a
keyboard and a movement sensing device known as a mouse,
an optical scanner and a laser printer. The programs, or
"software", needed to operate the equipment consist of a
"page description language" which translates the image on
the computer screen into a set of digital instructions that the
laser printer can follow, and a composition program to drive
the entire system.
The advent of desktop publishing was as sudden as its
social and economic implications were profound. As recent¬
ly as 1970, the text sent by a publisher to a professional
printer would be set in "hot metal" by methods not funda¬
mentally different from those used by Gutenberg and Cax-
ton some 500 years earlier. By 1985, typesetting to profes¬
sional standards could be achieved in the office and in the
home.
Five key technical advances made this possible:
the development of a new generation of very powerful
personal computers;
the development of page description languages to drive
laser printers and phototypesetters;
the development of small, comparatively cheap laser
printers with a printing resolution (300 dots per inch) capa¬
ble of producing output of "publishable" quality;
the development of composition languages to drive the
whole desktop system which can easily be operated by users
with very little knowledge of computers, typesetting or
graphics;
the development of scanning devices which can "read"
photographs, drawings and previously typed or printed texts
and feed them into a computer where they can be modified as
required and incorporated into the document to be pro¬
duced.



Coupled with the development of new manufacturing
methods which have brought the price of this equipment
tumbling down (it is now possible to buy a complete desktop
publishing system for US $10,000 or less, and prices are still
falling), these technical advances constitute a revolution of
worldwide scope and importance.
Anyone who uses such equipment is, like Aldus Manutius
and the early printer-publishers, in a position to control the
entire publishing process, from initial selection of what is to
be printed, through input of text and graphics, to final
output of the printed page. Only rather rudimentary meth¬
ods of bookbinding are available to the desktop publisher,
however, and, as in the days of Aldus Manutius, quality
bookbinding is likely, for the time being, to remain a
separate domain.
Desktop publishing has swept away most of the barriers
that for centuries have stood between those who want to
publish and their potential readers. Composition programs
and page description languages have replaced the craft skills
of the printing process and handed back the choice of what is
to be published to the author.
A good desktop publishing package will offer a wide
choice of typeface styles and sizes, number of columns per
page, justified or unjustified text, automatic hyphenation of
words at the end of lines, insertion of graphics and automatic
flow of text around them, as well as automatic page number¬
ing and spelling checking.
There is nothing now to prevent the author of a specialist
or minority interest book that no publisher will handle
*&:&.'&/&.&!&&<&<£>:
4a
Left to right: inventively designed devices or
marks of 4 early European printers. William
Caxton (1422-1491): the printer's initials and
trade-mark; Robert Estienne (d. 1559): the
philosopher under the tree of knowledge;
Christophe Plantin (1514-1589): compass on
book; Aldus Manutius (1449-1515): anchor and
dolphin.

These pages from Man Belongs to the Earth, a
new report on Unesco's Man and the Biosphere
(MAB) Programme, were prepared for the press
using the techniques of desktop publishing. The
.175-page report, published in English, was
written and compiled by Howard Brabyn and
Malcolm Hadley.
The basic equipment of a desktop publishing
system: computer, visual display unit, key¬
board, movement sensing device ("mouse"), and
printer. ,
SATELLITE
SENSING
I d* *«tW
bird's-eye view
SATEUITE SCMSJMG AfRUi. PHOTOGRAPH V - THE CAKOPV RAFT
Ai _C
because it might not be profitable, or of a potential literary
masterpiece whose merit is not immediately recognized,
from publishing it himself.
Clearly, because of the problems of storing and handling
the huge quantities of paper involved, the ordinary member
of the public will not be in a position to print more than a
few hundred copies of a brochure, a newsletter, or even a
short book. Nor will he or she have the organization to
distribute a daily newspaper or to handle sales of a book that
turns out to be a best-seller. For the time being at least this
will still be the domain of the major newspaper proprietors
and the publishers with their well organized bookselling
outlets.
Nor should it be forgotten that, despite the impressive
functions that desktop publishing software has to offer, the
layout and appearance of the printed page will depend upon
the skill and taste of the operator. Many of the basic rules of
good page design can be quickly learned, but these need to be
complemented by flair and practical experience.
The wider social, political and economic implications of
desktop publishing are equally profound. Censorship,
whether by governments or by powerful interest groups,
will be much more difficult if not impossible to impose.
Minority groups will find it easier to make their voices beard
and, with the development of electronic transmission, fron¬
tiers will no longer be effective barriers to information.
For the developing world the possibilities would appear to
be enormous:
It will no longer be necessary to fund the huge capital
investment involved in setting up a traditional printing
works and distribution network (a complete desktop pub¬
lishing package can be bought for as little as a quarter of the
cost of a single professional typesetting machine).
A three-month training course in desktop publishing will
replace the long and costly apprenticeship of the traditional
print craftsmen.
Costly distribution of books, newspapers, etc., over large
areas, often with an inadequate or non-existent road and rail
infrastructure, will be replaced by electronic transmission of
the material to be published, in print-ready form for local
printing.
The cost of school textbooks will plummet as will the cost
of revising and up-dating them. No wasteful stocks of
unused books will be built up since it will be much easier to
match local print runs to local demand.



Each area will be able, where necessary, to modify text¬
books to meet specific local needs.
The advantages are not limited to the developing world.
The desktop publishing revolution may well lead to the
creation of tbe first personalized, electronic newspapers
which would be transmitted directly to the home or office
for printing on a laser printer. Subscribers with home or
office computers and printers could indicate those subjects
that interest them most and these would be included in the
personalized newspapers that would be transmitted to them
at any time they cared to specify.
Charles Geschke, who with John Warnock pioneered one
of the earliest and most widely used page description lan¬
guages, recently declared: "One of my fantasies is to wake up
in the morning and have my automated clippings service
deliver me a sheaf of papers on my printer at home with
exactly the kind of articles that I would be interested in."
Such fantasies may well soon become reality. Thanks to
the desktop publishing revolution, news of what is happen¬
ing anywhere in the world will soon be instantly available.
Perhaps more important still, we will all one day have direct
access to the accumulated sum of human knowledge and
culture very much "faster than you can cook asparagus".»
HOWARD BRABYN, of the United Kingdom, is a Paris-based writer and
journalist with a special interest in the popularization of science. He was
formerly editor of the English edition of the Unesco Courier.
18
