"It isproposed that a statement be made at the
Conference suggesting that Unesco may or
should be involved in implementing
programmes ofeducation 'for the masses '
regarding science (how does itproceed?) and
scientific knowledge (about thefunctioning of
the human body, physical laws ofNature,
energyproduction by nuclear reactions,
ecology, the Universe, etc.). "
Roger Guillemin
| Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, 1977
"The United Nations have been promoting the
joint concepts ofDisarmament and
Development. There are serious financial
constraints on the implementation of
development programmes that are designated
to improve thepace ofeconomic development.
Disarmament, however, on a plausible scale,
mutually executed, could create a significant
I developmentfund that would not impose new
financial burdens on potential donors. *
Lawrence R. Klein
Nobel Prize for Economic Science, 1980



In search ofpeace,
prosperity
andjustice
"Some ofthe subjects you will be considering
arefor us in South Africa not just ofacademic
interest. They refer to issues that without
exaggeration can be regarded as ones oflife and
death, for to live as someone whose basic
human rights are violatedwithout
I compunction is often a fate worse than death. "
Desmond Tutu
Nobel Peace Prize, 1984
(Extract from a message sent to the Conference)
"Technology has increased economic and
political interdependence throughout the
world, with the result that the security ofone
nation increasingly depends on the security of
others. Therefore the security ofany one nation
needs to be thought ofin terms ofcommon
security. "
Maurice H. F. Wilkins
Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, 1962
"The destiny ofhumanity is more than ever
dependent on the courage and creative
capacity ofman, on the development ofscience,
andon technologicalprogress. Allof these can
make life more human, contribute to the work
ofmankind, protect the health ofmen and
I women, andsafeguard the environment. "
Lech Walesa
Nobel Peace Prize, 1983
I (Extract from a message sent to the Conference)
"What is calledfor is a secondMarshallPlan
designed to accelerate andsustain year after
year the economicgrowth ofthepoor, less-
developed countries. ThefirstMarshall Plan
(thefortieth anniversary ofwhich has recently
been celebrated) was spectacularly successful in
rebuilding Europe after the devastation ofthe
Second World War. This time it will be
necessary to movealongayet unexploredpath
into an entirely new territory a much more
challenging anddifficult task. "
Wassily Leontief
Nobel Prize for Economic Science, 1973
21
