The rubber man by Alfred Mikhaïl
THE Egyptian acrobat and contortion¬
ist Sabir Hamid Rammah is one of
the stars of his country's National
Circus. His virtuosity has earned him an
international reputation. He is known as
the "rubber man" because his movements
are so graceful, supple and precise that his
body seems boneless.
He does not belong to one of the old
circus families, some of which were already
travelling from town to town and village to
village in the Arab countries before the
seventeenth century. Accompanied by their
menageries, they put on shows foi mawalid
festivals (anniversaries of the birth of the
Prophet or of a Muslim holy man).
Rammah comes from a bedouin family
which settled at Giza. Most of the family
were tailors. From early childhood he was
noted for his agility and dexterity. At the
age of thirteen, he left his family to work as
an acrobat in Alexandria, a cosmopolitan
city which welcomed visiting foreign perfor¬
mers. A meeting with one of them, a Ger¬
man acrobat, led Rammah to polish his own
act. Then, in 1950, he accompanied a trio of
German acrobatic dancers when they went
home.
On returning to Egypt two years later,
Rammah had developed a new style in
The Egyptian contortionist Sabir Hamid
Rammah
which he filled out his act with clowning. He
worked in casinos and in schools which
organized festivals and other spectacles, as
well as in various private circuses.
In 1964 the Egyptian National Circus
gave its first performances, which were
34
highly popular. "A competitive spirit drove
us all to excel," Rammah explains, "and we
did our utmost to surpass ourselves. In our
troupe we had first-rate performers such as
the trapeze artiste Dakhli Amin. He would
leap from the flying trapeze with a sack over
his head, perform three backward somer¬
saults and catch his partner's hands in mid¬
air. Other notable acts were that of the
juggler, Farouk Rachid , and the Ben Abbas
tightrope walkers."
Thanks to a policy of exchange visits with
circuses in other countries, Rammah has
worked with a number of circuses. In 1974
he won a international acrobatics competi¬
tion in Tokyo.
Today Rammah works with the Egyptian
National Circus in one of their permanent
Big Tops, at Giza, on the banks of the Nile.
Among the show's many attractions apart
from acrobatics, are trained animals (as
many as fourteen big cats at a time), trapeze
artists and jugglers.
Rammah's passion for his art is so strong
that he would like to die in the ring in the
middle of his act. Thus he would have given
his entire life to the circus, to his very last
breath.
ALFRED MIKHAIL, of Egypt, heads the
documentary films section of the Egyptian televi¬
sion service. His own work for television includes
films on the Suez Canal (1975), shadow plays
(1983), and Verdi's opera Aida (1987).
