A topsy turvy world by Manuel Pereira
"Might not the word 'circus' come from
Circe, the sorceress in Homer's OdysseyV
Above, "Circe changing Odysseus' com¬
rades into swine", by the Amsterdam-born
engraver and print-dealer Jaspar de Isaac
(died Paris, 1654).
w
rHAT is the etymological origin of
the word circus? Common sense
suggests that it comes from "cir¬
cular", an allusion to the traditional shape
of the circus ring from the Roman Coliseum
to the Big Top of today. I would suggest
another explanation. Might not the word
circus come from Circe, the sorceress in
Homer's Odyssey who changed Odysseus'
comrades into swine? The Latin word cir¬
censes, describing the circus games, makes
this hypothesis even more tempting, for
what were the sorceress's tricks but circus
acts before their time?
More prosaically, Pliny tells us that when
the Romans first caught a giraffe in Africa
they thought it was a cross between a camel
and a leopard because it had a spotted coat.
They supposed it to be an animal capable of
fighting the gladiators in the arena, and
there the harmless creature was killed,
amid applause.
The stories of Circe and of the giraffe
have one point in common zoological
confusion. Men are turned into pigs, gir¬
affes are thought to be wild beasts. In both
cases the natural order of things is inversed
to produce an exciting spectacle. This de¬
sire to turn things upside down is the ess¬
ence of the circus. What is an acrobat but a
man who imitates a bird? What is a clown
but an unreal being whose absurdity can
make us laugh or cry? The behaviour of a
tamed lion is as human as that of the
gladiators in Vespasian's day was bestial.
The bearded lady, the spider woman, the
35

Fools and jesters were often depicted by
15th- and 16th-century European artists.
Above, detail of a jester and his bauble
drawn by the German artist Hans Holbein
the Younger in the margin of a 1515 copy of
In Praise of Folly, by the Dutch Humanist
Erasmus.
frog man, Siamese twins, the sword-swal-
lower all the biological freaks, whether
real or fake, that occur in the history of the
circus can be traced back to Homer's Circe
and Pliny's giraffe.
The circus is the world back to front.
. Whatever is unusual, eccentric or disturb¬
ing, whatever is, so to speak, a challenge to
us, has always found an ideal refuge there.
Moreover, this is not a purely European
phenomenon; circuses are found all over
the world. The museum of freaks that the
Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés disco¬
vered in Tenochtitlán was Moctezuma's pri¬
vate circus; and Marco Polo tells us with
amazement how in another part of the
world the Great Khan had a huge lion
trained to kneel at the foot of the throne
when there was a festival at the palace.
In every court, in every land, from China
to Spain and from the time of the Mongol
emperor Kubla Khan to that of the Spanish
king Alfonso X (The Wise), there have
always been astrologers and necromancers,
clowns and acrobats, performing animals,
jugglers and minstrels. Every court has
been a kind of circus ; one need only think of
the extraordinary garments people wore at
masked balls, the attire of the lansquenets
(German mercenaries) or the Burgundians
with their huge puff sleeves and cockscomb
hats. The historians Johan Huizinga and
Jules Michelet both give detailed descrip¬
tions of fashionable gatherings where the
guests could watch puppets fly through the
air and devices that made a sound like roll¬
ing thunder, dwarfs riding bears and huge
Moors riding elephants, the statue of a
woman with wine flowing from her breasts
and that of a boy urinating rose-water, and a
pie containing twenty-eight musicians.
Leonardo da Vinci constructed a mechan¬
ical lion to amuse the guests at a banquet
at the château of Clos-Lucé, where he was
lodged by François I.
Tragedy and comedy are often mingled in
the circus. The death of Aeschylus, for in¬
stance, is a circus turn in itself. An eagle
caught a tortoise and flew up into the sky,
then dropped it to break its shell, where¬
upon it fell on the sleeping poet's head. A
comic accident, even though it cost the life
of the great Greek tragedian. The tortoise
transformed into a projectile might have
been one of Circe's tricks, but it is also like
an Eleatic aphorism or a Chaplinesque gag.
The blood-stained bullring is the only
survival of the Roman circus, for bullfight¬
ing is basically a circus game which goes
back to the mythical Minotaur of Crete.
The bullfighter is to the gladiator what the
bull is to the lion. That is why there are so
many bulls, tumblers and harlequins in
Picasso's paintings; they are all part of the
same obsession. And the bullfighter's cos-
"Bullfighting is basically a circus game
which goes back to the mythical Minotaur of
Crete ... That is why there are so many bulls,
tumblers and harlequins in Picasso's paint¬
ings; they are all part of the same obses¬
sion." Below, The Picador, a wash drawing
by Picasso.
©
36

-*
Grimacing masks by the Belgian artist
James Ensor (1860-1949), in an oil painting
entitled Intrigues.
tume is reminiscent of the clown's get-up
and his flour-white face.
Fortunately, the only reminders of the
bonfires that blazed at the time of the In¬
quisition are the straight]' acket and the cowl
worn by the condemned. And there is a
curious resemblance between these gar¬
ments and the attire of the figures of Pul-
chinello painted two centuries later by
Giandomenico Tiepolo. The conical cap is
the same as the dunce's cap once worn by
restless and rebellious children. Even today
clowns often enter the ring wearing this
unjustly derided headgear. Just as the
alchemist's cap became the Phrygian bon¬
net of the French Republic, so the conical
cap of the heretic became the cap of the
clown. Once more tragedy is inextricably
linked with comedy.
But in any case the grotesque is always a
-dominant feature of the circus, whose entire
imagery is contained in grimacing cathedral
gargoyles and in twelfth-century illumin¬
ated bestiaries, perpetuated in the works of
Gaudi and Borges respectively. The circus
is Gothic, Romantic, Baroque and sur¬
realist. It is certainly not classical, for its
spirit is too mischievous for serenity. It is
predominantly Faustian to the extent that it
seems to have become a favourite theme of
German literature.
Nietzsche, in Thus Spake Zarathustra,
chose the acrobat walking the tightrope as a
symbol of domination. The superman is a
tightrope walker: "He is a lightning flash;
he is a madman", as Nietzsche puts it. This
is a variation of the exploit of Icarus, or of
Goethe's Faust the flight to the imposs¬
ible. The theme recurs in Rilke; the fifth of
his Duino Elegies is a tribute to trapeze
artistes who catch each other in mid-air.
This circus tradition in German literature
can be traced from Thomas Mann's Mario
and the Magician to Günther Grass's Tin
Drum, and includes Heinrich Boll's The
Clown.
In the Middle Ages, the very idea of the
circus seemed destined to disappear. Para¬
doxically, however, the Angel of the Ex¬
traordinary survived extermination. The
liturgical drama of the Church and the secu¬
lar ritual of the courts were, ultimately, a
kind of circus. And between these two cere¬
monies was the irrepressible street festival,
the carnival, that was to be seen every¬
where. There was much circus in trie
medieval carnival, as can be seen in Pieter
Brueghel the Elder's Fight Between Carni¬
val and Lent. Hiëronymus Bosch and
Albrecht Dürer also painted pictures of car¬
nivals and circuses inspired by the fifteenth-
century humanist Sebastian Brant's allegor¬
ical poem The Ship of Fools. And these
same fools, with their caps and bells and
their asses' ears, waving their baubles and
banners, are figures from the medieval
French satirical plays known as Sotties, half¬
way between buffoons and clowns. Eras¬
mus was probably thinking of them when he
wrote In Praise ofFolly. Bosch takes up the
same theme in The Conjurer who plies his
trade at a fair, and in The Cure of Folly,
which depicts a surgeon wearing a funnel
for a hat, and a nun with a book on her
head. Pure circus.
In the seventeenth century the Flemish
painter David Teniers the Younger often
painted pictures of festivals in which the
villagers chose a mock king, with a card¬
board crown; this was a satire on authority.
From then on the country fête became a
common theme in painting, from Rubens'
Kermesses, to Watteau's fêtes galantes,
which contain echoes of pantomime,
Goya's Burial of the Sardine, in which the
painter mocks obscurantism, and James
Ensor's brightly coloured masks.
In a period when laughter was suspect
and weeping was thought to be in good
taste, the god of laughter lurked in disguise
on religious feast-days such as Christmas
and Epiphany, turning up in medieval mir¬
acle and mystery plays, in festivals and
when folly was tolerated, at the carnival,
which later crossed the ocean to America, ,
where the Day of the Kings was celebrated.
The drum-playing and the Yoruba dances
which the Negro slaves took to the New
World were other manifestations of the
spirit of the circus, which is the impulse
towards the Dionysian paganism that Savo¬
narola attacked at the height of the Renaiss¬
ance with his "burning of the vanities".
Tournaments also had something of the
circus in them. Equestrian pageants which
might be described as a sport with erotic
overtones, they were the last survivals of
the horse-races and gladiatorial combats of
37

Antiquity. The spirit of the circus can also
be glimpsed in medieval miniatures, in the
fairy-like damsels with their hoods and wide
veils, who wander among round tents
adorned with coloured pennants, forerun¬
ners of the Big Top. Perhaps the best-
known example of this spirit is to be found
in the famous unicorn tapestries in the
Cluny Museum, in Paris, one of which de¬
picts a lady, surrounded by birds, rabbits,
monkeys, dogs and lions, coming out of a
multicoloured tent. She is wearing a feath¬
ered turban which makes her look like a
sultan's wife, or a snake-charmer worthy of
The Thousand and One Nights.
The Cluny tapestries, like flying carpets,
transport us to the imaginary circuses, float¬
ing animals and fantastic Gypsy caravans of
Marc Chagall's paintings. It would be in¬
teresting to study the development of the
tent from the studded medieval pavilion of
the Battle of Roncevalles to the Big Top in
Ingmar Bergman's film Sawdust and Tinsel.
I suspect that Gypsies played a substantial
part in if. Even today, in the streets of
Madrid, the Gypsies shake their tam¬
bourines around a bear dancing on a barrel,
and fortune-tellers read the hands of
passers-by in the Paris Flea Market. Any
Gypsy has the circus in his blood because he
is an outsider and because both his clothing
and his way of life are exaggerated, out of
the ordinary.
Exaggeration is the key word. Arcimbol-
do, with his heads made up of plants, Rabe¬
lais with his erotic humour, his eschatolo-
gical jubilation and his insatiable greed,
Brueghel and Bosch with their diabolical
fantasms all these were faithful to the spir¬
it of the circus in the best possible way,
unconsciously. And isn't it appropriate that
a misshapen dwarf, Henri de Toulouse-
Lautrec, should have produced a series of
circus paintings? His self-portrait is a true
caricature of a clown, with its exaggerated
mouth, pathetic spectacles, squashed bow¬
ler hat, and nose like an aubergine from an
Arcimboldo head. Everything in the work
of Toulouse-Lautrec, the aristocrat who
lived with outsiders, recalls the circus,
whose secret mysteries are revealed only to
artists and children.
The circus has obvious links with the
cinema, and vice versa. As early as the
eighteenth century, the magic lantern was
an attraction at French fairs. In its early
days, the cinema drew inspiration mainly
from the scenic and dramatic wealth of the
circus, the cabaret and the music-hall. The
ambiguity of the circus may be its weakness
or its strength: neither an art nor a sport,
neither Athens nor Sparta, for ever vacillat¬
ing in the no-man's-land between aesthetic
fervour and muscular skill.
In the declining days of their empire, the
Romans asked their emperors for "bread
and circuses". Today, civilized societies set¬
tle for "bread and cinemas" or, worse still,
for "bread and television". The fantasms of
the circus live on in video-clips and even in
advertisements. They startle us in the
streets with punk hair-styles and clothes, or
when rock concerts resound through a
space several times the size of the Coliseum ,
amid coloured lights, clouds of smoke and
shrieks. Not only are the singers disguised
as clowns, marquises or Martians some
call themselves "Prince" or "Queen", a re¬
minder that the clown Coquinet, the jester
of Burgundy, was once appointed minister
by his prince. Long before that, Caligula
had proclaimed his horse a consul. History
is full of tightrope walkers.
There are craters in the moon which,
from afar, look like open-air circus rings.
Perhaps, one day in the not too distant
future, an intergalactic troupe will appear in
one of them. Perhaps indescribable won¬
ders will then be seen, as in the films of
Steven Spielberg, who is in many ways close
to the circus. Holography and laser beams,
computer science, optical fibres and quan¬
tum mechanics will perhaps make it possi¬
ble to change Pliny's giraffe into Aeschy-
lus's tortoise. Perhaps such a fantastic trick
will give free rein to the concentrated
liberty of the circus.
MANUEL PEREIRA is a Cuban novelist and
journalist whose novels El comandante veneno
and El ruso have been translated into several
languages. His reports on Nicaragua have been
published under the title Cró-Nicas. He is cur¬
rently a member of Cuba's Permanent Delega¬
tion to Unesco.
