The labyrinth ofknowledge
Baruch S. Blumberg
I should like to discuss two strangely
interrelated subjects. The first deals
with an aspect of the scientific process
that tells us that it is difficult or impossible
to obtain perfect knowledge about a subject.
The second is concerned with problems of
medical care which require a strong measure
of personal responsibility.
In one construction of the scientific proc¬
ess, hypotheses are formulated from obser¬
vations, or from theory, and laboratory or
observational experiments are designed to
test the hypotheses. After the conclusion of
each experiment, a decision is made as to
whether the hypothesis is supported or re¬
jected. The data collected to test the first
hypothesis can then be used to generate new
hypotheses which, in turn, generate more
answers, but also more questions. The more
we know, the more we know about what we
don't know. If perfect knowledge means
that we know everything possible about a
subject, then the scientific process, as I have
described it, does not achieve that goal.
When a problem is solved it raises another
problem, the solution of which in turn cre¬
ates new problems. The story of Daedalus, a
hero of Ancient Greek mythology, is an
interesting metaphor for this process.
Daedalus was an architect, a sculptor, an
engineer, an artisan and a problem solver.
But each time he solved a problem, other
problems were generated. While serving at
the court of King Minos of Crete, he solved
the problem of Queen Pasiphae's love for a
great white bull. He designed and built a
model, a life-size hollow cow. When the
Queen was placed inside, she became im¬
pregnated. However, this solution to her
problem raised another one, namely, the
issue of this union, the dreaded man-mon¬
ster, the Minotaur.
Daedalus solved this problem by design¬
ing and constructing the Labyrinth, a maze
in which the Minotaur was secured. This in
turn created another problem: Athenian
youths and maidens had to be offered to the
Minotaur each year, which caused Daedalus
much grief since he himself was an Athe¬
nian. To resolve this situation he helped
Theseus and Ariadne (daughter of the King
and Queen and therefore half sister to the
monster) to kill the Minotaur and escape
from the great maze. But this led to Daeda¬
lus' imprisonment in the Labyrinth along
with his son Icarus. The solution to this
problem the escape of Daedalus and Ica¬
rus, using wings that Daedalus had designed
and made of feathers and wax led to the
death of Icarus. Daedalus, however, flew on
to other adventures and to the solution and
creation of new problems.
Poster commemorating the 40th anniversary of
the World Health Organization (WHO),
1948-1988. It was designed by Peter Davies
and offered to WHO by the International
Green Cross.
o* santé pour tous - tous pour la santé
£ V»M*i<5MÏKUH»fSKmirTOHUK!A Suffi
Labyrinth in mosaic (4th century AD) at the
basilica of Ech-Cheliff, Algeria
Thus the product of scientific creativity
and problem solving often seems to be a
new problem, even though the overall result
may be satisfactory. It is valuable to keep
this possibility in mind as we use science to
solve new social problems arising from ad¬
vances in technology, such as improvements
in health care.
The World Health Organization has set
itself the goal of achieving "Health for all by
the year 2000". Measures to achieve this will
include those taken by governments and
civic organizations, and those which are the
responsibility of the individual. The former
are particularly important in developing
countries. Primary among them are ensur¬
ing the purity of food and water, appropri¬
ate management of the disposal of human
wastes, control of disease carrying insects,
and mass vaccination programmes. In the
developed countries, because of the general¬
ly high standard of living, good housing and
sophisticated infrastructure, many of these
problems have been solved. If these achieve¬
ments can be extended to countries where
life expectancy is shorter, dramatic im¬
provements can be predicted.
Both in the developed and the developing
countries, the individual's participation in
the process of health care is essential.
Changes in everyday behaviour are essential
requirements ' for a healthy community.
Cigarette smoking, excessive use of alcohol,
diets which lead to obesity and a high level
of cholesterol, and lack of regular exercise,
are responsible for a major part of the dis¬
ease load. Accidents, often caused by auto¬
mobile drivers under the influence of alco¬
hol, and violent behaviour, homicide and
suicide, are major contributors to premature
death. Obviously, society plays a large part
in helping to alter behaviour along lines
acceptable to it, but ultimately it is the
14

' - i. " ' ,
P*$míim¡ » vtmñ
individual who must give up destructive
habits.
There is evidence that society responds to
useful information produced by research
and can bring about changes in people's
lifestyle. In the United States, and to a lesser
extent in other countries, the number of
smokers has decreased dramatically in the
past decade, and this is reflected, in part, in
the plateauing and decrease in the curve of
lung cancer incidence in male's. During the
past few years there has been a dramatic
decrease in cardiovascular disease in many
population groups in the USA and else¬
where. These results are partly due to im¬
provements in medical and hospital care,
but they can be largely attributed to health¬
ier diets and the popularity of vigorous
physical activity approaching near mania
in some communities.
Another dramatic behaviour change, al¬
most certainly due to the application of data
derived from research, has occurred in one
of the high-risk groups for the current tragic
epidemic of AIDS. In one of the areas where
AIDS is most prevalent, the virus which
causes the disease has now infected about 60
per cent of the population, and many of
these individuals will die. But among those
who are uninfected, the incidence of new
infection has decreased to about 1 per cent
per year. This also appears to be a conse¬
quence of changes in behaviour which de¬
crease the probability of infection.
It is encouraging to note that society
often responds in an intelligent and reason¬
able manner when provided with the neces¬
sary information in an acceptable form. As
more is learned, largely through research, it
is likely that there will be an even greater
improvement in public health, and people
can enjoy a longer period of disease-free life.
BARUCH SAMUEL BLUMBERG, of the Un¬
ited States, shared the 1976 Nobel Prize for Phy¬
siology or Medicine with D.C. Gajdusek for dis¬
coveries concerning new mechanisms for the ori¬
gin and spread of infectious diseases. His research
on population genetics led to the discovery of the
"Australia antigen" and its role in hepatitis. Since
1977 he has been professor of medicine and
anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania.
He has been George Eastman Visiting Professor at
the University of Oxford (1983-84) and a Visiting
Professor with the Indian Academy of Sciences,
Bangalore (1986). His many publications include
papers for scientific journals and a book, Australia
Antigen and the Biology of Hepatitis B (1977).
Icare, a paper cut-out by the French painter
Henri Matisse (1869-1954)
15
