FROM MOVABLE TYPE TO THE MICROCHIP



LANDMARKS IN PRINTING
BY WERNER MERKLI
WERNER MERKLI, of Switzerland, is editor of the German-language
edition of the Unesco Courier. A specialist in printing technology, he was for
many years a director ofa leading Swiss publishing andprinting company, and
served as president ofthe Association ofSwiss Printing Industriesfrom 1976 to
1981. He was for 25 years president of the friends of the Swiss Gutenberg
Museum, Berne. Among his published works are "Vademécum. An introduc¬
tion to the graphic arts", published by Hallwag, Berne (2nd ed. 1967).
FOR more than 400 years after Johannes Gutenberg's
invention of a process of printing from movable
metal type in the fifteenth century, all type was cast
in a hand mould, the text was composed by hand, and
printing was carried out on hand presses. It was not until
the nineteenth century that typesetting and printing pro¬
cesses were mechanized. Since the mid-twentieth century,
electronics and the microcomputer have revolutionized
text composition, reproduction of illustrations and print¬
ing techniques.
Papermaking
1 . The earliest picture of papermaking
in Europe is this woodcut made byjost
Amann for Hans Sach's "Book of
Trades", printed in Frankfurt in 1568.
Although almost all steps in
papermaking are now highly
mechanized, the basic process remains
unchanged. Plant fibres are separated
and wetted to produce pulp, which is
filtered on a screen, leaving a sheet
from which the water is pressed out.
The dry sheet is further compressed
and treated, depending on the use for
which it is intended.
2. Detail from a late 15th-century
woodcut from Nuremberg shows
Ulman Stromer's paper mill, the
first in Germany.
3. Side view and plan of
Nicolas-Louis Robert's
papermaking machine, 1798
The art of papermaking (1) was invented by the Chinese as
long ago as the second century BC (see article page 32), and
travelled westward when Chinese papermakers, taken prison¬
er by the Arabs near Samarkand in AD 751, were forced to
disclose their manufacturing secrets. In 1150 the art reached
Spain, and by the time of Gutenberg, paper mills had been
established in several European cities (2). Gutenberg thus had
at his disposal a perfect printing material that was much
cheaper than the parchment on which manuscripts were
produced in the monasteries.
Papermaking was not mechanized until around 1800, when
the first papermaking machine was invented by a Frenchman,
Nicolas-Louis Robert, in the Didot paper mills near Paris. It
used a moving belt, and paper was made one sheet at a time (3).
In 1805 the English engineer Joseph Bramah devised a paper-
moulding machine which used a rotating cylinder. This de¬
velopment later led to the production of continuous reels or
"webs" of paper (4). The manufacture of paper is now almost
entirely automated and quality control can be carried out by
computer.
4. Machine for producing reels of paper, c. 1 820

The art of printing
Letterpress
impression
cylinder
«y.
Letterpress is the oldest method ofprinting, and theonly
process which can use type directly. Printing is done from cast
metal type or from blocks on which the image or printing areas
are raised (in relief) above the non-printing areas. Ink rollers
touch only the top surface of the raised areas, and the inked
image is transferred directly to the paper. Above, operating
principles of a type of letterpress machine with a flat bed and an
impression cylinder.
Monastic libraries contain printed sheets dating from the
ninth and tenth centuries which were produced from relief
engraving on wooden blocks (5). Between 1041 and 1048, the
Chinese smith Bi Sheng used a technique of printing texts on
paper with movable characters made of earthenware, and
printing was also carried out with characters cast in copper in
a Korean printing works in 1403. Between 1436 and 1444,



Johannes Gensfleisch zum Gutenberg, of Mainz, Germany
(6), developed the type mould or matrix and originated a
method of printing from movable metal type that was used
without important change until the twentieth century.
Gutenberg cut a punch in hard metal for every letter, accent
and punctuation mark and struck it into a softer metal to make
the mould for casting identical pieces of type. The type was
made from an alloy of lead, antimony and tin. The finished
characters were kept in compartmentalized typecases (7) from
which the text was assembled. For printing, Gutenberg built a
wooden worm-screw hand press (8), similar to a wine press.
His printing ink consisted of a mixture of pinewood soot and
linseed oil, which was spread on the printing surface with
leather pads. To ensure better absorption of the ink, the paper
was dampened before printing.
It is not surprising that the first book Gutenberg chose to
print was the Bible, for at that time it was the work most in
demand. His "forty-two-line Bible" (see back cover), so
named because of the number of lines in each column, was
printed in Mainz between 1452 and 1455, in an edition of 200
copies. The coloured initial letters to chapters and the decora¬
tions were added afterwards by hand, because so far as the
design of the type (9) and the layout was concerned Guten¬
berg followed closely the model set by fine book manuscripts
in the monasteries.
The art of printing spread rapidly all over Europe. Many
efforts were made to improve the efficiency of the wooden
press, and Wilhelm Haas, a typefounder of Basel, Switzer¬
land, followed the basic design of the wooden press when in
1787 he developed the first all-metal hand press, which pro¬
duced a better quality impression.
6. The oldest known portrait of
Gutenberg. Copper engraving
from Vrais portraits et vies des
hommes illustres, Paris, 1584.
5. A modern woodblock-engraver
A
DIaar.mi3D aaacinaa
§1 1UL IUI JU DDDI iodo
SI iai iai IE3 anac lana
m im IDI JU DDEJt man
m IUI im 1U tiaac laajB
mtac IUI JU uaatia:*:u
ddqquuu EiDnaana 1
naaonHi aauauuuu 1
m inn nnn nrnaa
Ol IBU UUU JUaa
gl D BDO
.jlju;;
aale
BIIDD g DBBOB
- R G
V 1
7. Illustration of typecases from
Diderot's Encyclopédie
8. Gutenberg's press reconstituted
at Leipzig in the 1 9th century. The
press has a fixed, level lower
surface, the "bed", and a movable,
level upper surface, the "platen".
The composed type, after being
locked into a metal frame to make
the printing block or "forme", was
inked, covered with a sheet of
paper, and pressed between the two
surfaces.
9. Examples of letters Q /* % X r> r>
cut by Gutenberg
to to to to c c
te ta £ bi Ir tt
t C t f f f
10. Diagram of Koenig's press
(1 8 1 1), in which the platen is
replaced by an "impression
cylinder"

The idea that a rolling cylinder might be used in printing to
overcome excessive manual strain was put forward in the early
seventeenth century, but it was not until 1811 that the first
steam-driven cylinder printing machine was patented by the
German compositor and inventor Friedrich Koenig (10).
Further progress was achieved in 1818 with the double rotary
press designed by Koenig and his associate Andreas Bauer, in
which paper printed on one side under one of the cylinders
passed to the other cylinder to be printed on the other side.
In 1844 Richard Hoe in the USA patented the first rotary
press in which the type was carried on a metal cylinder instead
of a flat plate. In 1866 the proprietor of the London Times,
John Walter, had the first rotary press fed by a continuous roll
of paper constructed according to the American model in¬
vented by Jeptha Wilkinson (11), making it possible to print
14,000 copies of the newspaper per hour.
Revolving at a rate of 35,000 revolutions
per hour, modern rotaries can print 500 m
ofpaper per minute.
Above, preparing to print a
newspaper on a rotary press.
impression
cylinder paper doctor
blade
12. A copperplate
engraver at work
Gravureprinting, like letterpress printing, is based on a height
differential between the ¡mage and non-image areas. In this
process the image areas are recessed (intaglio) below the level of
the non-printing areas. The surface of the printing plate is
broken up into small cells holding different ink volumes, which
constitute the image. The plate is flooded with ink and the
surplus removed by a "doctor blade", leaving ink only in the
recessed cells.
THE PRIZE
Gravure
This technique developed from the art of copperplate en¬
graving, in which the design is cut with a gouge, or chemically
etched, into a polished copper plate (12). The earliest known
etching was made by the Basel goldsmith, painter and graphic
artist, Urs Graf, in the fifteenth century. Printing from the
engraved plates was done by hand. Later an engraved cylinder
was used instead of a flat plate, and reels of the material to be
printed were fed between it and the pressing cylinder. This
idea proved attractive to printers of cloth in the eighteenth
century, and in 1783 a multi-colour gravure press for making
cotton prints was constructed in England by a copperplate
printer, Thomas Bell. In 1860 Auguste Godchaux, a Paris
publisher, obtained a patent for a gravure rotary press which
would print on each side of the sheet.
A key invention in modern gravure printing was a photo¬
graphic etching process using carbon tissue, developed by the
Czech painter and graphic artist, Karl Klic, or Klietsch, in
1878. Since then, millions of illustrated publications have been
produced by gravure printing (13).
In 1908, two Germans with experience in cotton printing,
Ernst Rolffs and Eduard Mertens, developed a flexible steel
"doctor blade" to wipe excess ink from the printing plate.
Later, the process of etching the printing cylinder was greatly
improved by the introduction of automated, electronic
engraving.
13. Early example of a children's
magazine illustration printed by
gravure

Lithography and offset
The lithographic technique was discovered by chance in
1 796, when the Munich dramatist Aloys Senefelder, searching
for a economical method of printing his own work, tried
writing on a finely-ground stone surface and discovered the
water-repellent properties of his greasy, oil-based ink.
Initially, the images to be reproduced were hand-drawn on
a litho stone (14) and printed on a manual press (15). The
impression was taken by pressing the paper against the inked
stone with a scraper. Thanks to the mechanization of this
technique with Georg Sigl's flat-bed litho press, introduced in
Berlin in 1851, single and multi-colour lithographic printing
(16) became very important, especially for printing packaging
material.
As early as 1805 Senefelder had tried to find an alternative
to the heavy litho stone, but it was not until 1904 that Ira W.
Rubel and Caspar Hermann of New Jersey, USA, devised a
thin metal plate to carry the image to be printed. After this had
been inked, and the surplus ink repelled with moisture, the
image was transferred to a rubber-coated cylinder and then to
the paper (17). This form of indirect printing is known as
offset. The fact that the printing plate, the rubber blanket and
paper all ran on cylinders enabled higher printing speeds to be
achieved from the start.
In the early offset litho presses, the need for dampening
often caused serious problems and the impressions obtained
were dull and blurred. After the Second World War, technical
improvements combined with better inks and more thickly-
coated paper, resulted in sharper impressions and higher ink
saturation.
Today, large electronically-controlled offset rotary presses,
with several printing units in sequence, can print both sides of
the paper, in sheets or as a continuous web, at the rate of
30,000 impressions per hour (18).
impression^
Cylinder/ paper
1 7. Offset lithography. Basically the offset printing
press consists of 3 revolving cylinders. The first
cylinder carries the printing plate, the second carries a
rubber blanket, and the third (the impression cylinder)
presses the paper against the offset blanket. Other
rollers feed the paper through the press.
dampening
rollers
paper
inking
system dampening
, ^ system
kwater
In lithography, the printing and
non-printing areas are on the same
plane of the surface of a thin metal
plate, and the definition between
them is maintained chemically.
The printing parts of the surface
repel water when moistened but
absorb the ink with which they are
coated, whereas the non-printing
parts absorb the water and repel
the ink.
15. Wooden lithographic hand
press from the time of Senefelder
16. Colour illustration by the
Finnish lithographer Emilie
Topelius was reproduced in a
children's book, Sagor, published in
1847
. ¡ » i: i V
impression
cylinder
plate
cylinder
blanket
cylinder
printed
mage
1 8. An offset rotary press

Revolutions in typesetting
In the nineteenth century attempts were made to mechanize
text composition, which was still carried out line by line with
individual metal characters assembled in a composing stick
(19), following a process that had not changed greatly since
Gutenberg's time. The first patent for a typesetting machine
was taken out in 1822 by William Church of Boston; others
soon followed (20).



But the real breakthrough in the mechanical setting and
casting of type was achieved in 1884 by the German-born
watchmaker Ottmar Mergenthaler in Cincinnati, USA, when
he invented the Linotype machine, which could set 6,000
characters per hour as compared with 1,400 by hand. In the
Linotype system (21), the brass matrices in which the charac¬
ters are engraved in negative form are released from the
storage magazine by typing on a keyboard, assembled into a
line and moved into the casting mechanism. After casting, the
entire lead line or "slug" is ejected and the matrices carried
back to their position in the storage magazine where they
remain on call for another line.
In 1897, also in the USA, the English engineer Tolbert
Lanston separated the operations of setting and casting the
type in his Monotype machine. In the Monotype system (22),
again by typing on a keyboard, a paper tape on the setting-
machine was punched with a different combination of per¬
forations for each character. This punched tape mechanically
controlled the typecasting mechanism, which cast each char¬
acter individually. Because of the high quality of the type
produced by the Monotype system, it came to occupy a
predominant position in book printing.
Developments in photographic techniques led to many
attempts to replace metal type by photographing the images
of the characters (23). A successful early application of photo-
typesetting was the Lumitype system developed by two
Frenchmen, René Higonnet and Louis Moyroud, in the
1940s. Production speeds exceeded 28,000 characters per hour
on later models. In the Monophoto, introduced in England in
1950 as a development of the Monotype system, the charac¬
ters could also be enlarged and reduced in size when projected
onto film.
In 1955 sensational developments in electronics sounded
the deathknell of Gutenberg's lead type. Instead of being
controlled by perforated tapes, typesetting machines could
now be driven by a computer programmed to expose the
characters onto film, permitting an output of 30,000 to
100,000 characters per hour. A considerable acceleration in
output up to 600,000 characters per hour was achieved in
the 1960s with the development of faster computers and the
use of a cathode ray tube (CRT).
Another significant development at this time was the intro¬
duction of the Optical Character Recognition (OCR) reading
machine, which scans typewritten or printed text at the rate of
300,000 characters per hour to produce input to a computer-
driven typesetter.
Considerable improvements in text input speeds were
achieved with the introduction of integrated circuits and
microprocessors into computer systems, as well as by the
introduction of a visual display unit on which the selected
characters appear as they are typed. The text can be read and
corrected on the screen (24), before being stored in the
computer's memory. However, there is a limit to the typeset¬
ting speed of machines using CRT technology, as each charac¬
ter has to be picked out individually from the image matrix.
8
Another approach was adopted in 1 965 by Dr. Rudolf Hell,
of Kiel, Federal Republic of Germany. In his Digiset system, a
scanning device analyses each character electronically and
breaks it down into tiny squares, which are stored in the
computer's magnetic memory in digital form. When inputting
text, these squares are recombined on film, again using a
cathode ray tube, into characters of the required size and
typeface. With a initial production speed of over 1 million
characters per hour, this was another important breakthrough
in typesetting.
In 1976, the laser beam began to be used to replace the CRT
beam for digital recording of the characters (25). The intense
light beam from photons projects a sharper, clearer typeface.
Digital storage of text opens up revolutionary possibilities for
its high-speed transmission throughout the world, via satellite
or fibre-optic cable.
19. The composing stick holds
pieces of type. The compositor sets
the type upside down.
20. Hattersley's typesetting
machine, London, c.1870
21. Diagram of
Linotype machine
22. Early monotype
keyboard (left) and
caster (right)

The printed image
Throughout the Middle Ages, beautiful copperplate engra¬
vings, etchings, woodcuts (26) and lithographic prints were
produced by draughtsmen and painters by carving or drawing
on printing blocks of wood or stone, or by engraving on metal
plates. Discoveries regarding light and the theory of colour,
together with the invention of photography in the nineteenth
century, brought the potential of photographic processes to
the printing industry (27).
Although solid lines can be printed directly using the
letterpress and offset processes, the intermediate tones in
photographs cannot. In 1881, the Munich copperplate en¬
graver Georg Meisenbach succeeded, by photographing an
image through a screen of crossed lines, in breaking down the
image into tiny dots. In the resulting positive, the closely-
spaced dots combine to form the darker tones of the original
image, and the less dense dots yield the light tones. The
screened image can then be recorded on to a printing plate in a
process known as halftone etching. Screening is often carried
out by electronic scanning today (28).
For the reproduction of tonal images in colour, however,
three plates must be made one each to print red, blue and
yellow ink. Usually, a black plate is also made, because black
ink adds sharpness to the printed copy. The first step is to
separate the colours photographically in the original image.
The colour separations are made by taking four separate
photographs through different filters which block out all
colours except the desired colour, and also through a halftone
screen to produce the dot pattern required for printing. In
colour printing, some of the different coloured dots fall close



together and some are superimposed. The eye mixes the
colours of the dots on the printed page into all the tones of the
original. For example, what the eye sees as green is really an
area of tiny blue and yellow dots. Experiments carried out in
the USA between 1946 and 1950 led to the development of a
process for making colour separations by electronic scanning,
and by the late 1970s, following developments in electronics
technology, the impulses from the scanner beam were digi¬
tized. The tiny dots which produce the tonal values of the
reproduction are then reconstituted by laser beam, either on
film or directly onto the printing plate.
iVrnj&iua copoitdlj
nue DOOM
3lo.(WTfoncjncil-
Unue pmticnha
23. Diagram showing
operating principles of
a phototypesetting
machine
24. Composing text
on screen
26. In the early days of
European printing,
identical woodcuts
were sometimes used to
illustrate different
people.
27. Photo from William
Henry Fox Talbot's
Pencil of Nature (1844-
46), the first known
book illustrated
entirely with
photographs
28. Electronic scanners
(right) can be used to
process images for
printing. The image is
fitted onto a revolving
drum and reproduced
by the scanner as a
pattern of tiny dots.
Far right, halftone dots
enlarged
The electronic future
Developments in the printing industry during the coming
decades will be primarily determined by advances in electro¬
nics. Desktop publishing technology (see article page 16)
emerged in the 1980s for the processing of both text and
image. Using electronic pencils and brushes, computer
graphics can be created directly on the screen and integrated
into the stored text. Furthermore, magnetic discs are being
developed which can store over 1,000 million typographical
signs (500,000 typewritten pages) and integrated databases
will improve access to information.
Metal typesetting and letterpress printing processes have
virtually disappeared within a short period. Thanks to the
simplification of platemaking, however, the offset and photo¬
gravure processes have survived. Electrostatic printing,
whereby an electrostatically-charged plate transmits a dry
powder or liquid ink toner to plain paper, and inkjet printing,
in which computer-controlled jets are used to spray hundreds
of thousands of electrostatically-charged drops of colour per
second onto the paper to produce text and images, are just two
of the techniques which are leading to contactless printing,
instead of printing from an inked plate.
