Sinan and Palladio
The parallel development of two master-builders
by Selda Besnier-Kiligoglu
Thanks to the skilful positioning of a great
many openings, the interior of the Selimiye
Mosque, built by the Turkish architect
Sinan at Edirne (Turkey), is bathed in a
strong light which intensifies the impression
of spatial unity created by the vast dome.
THE theoretical treatise of the Italian
architect Andrea Palladio (1508-
1580), / quattro libri dell'architettura
(1570; The Four Books of Architecture,
1716), is considered to be a crucial land¬
mark in the history of art and architecture.
But what is the significance of the work of
Mimar Sinan (1489-1588), the greatest
Ottoman architect of the same century?
Was he simply a builder, with no original
architectural theory to his credit?
Granted, unlike his Italian contempor¬
ary, Sinan did not leave any treatise setting
out the principles of a new theory of
architecture. But it is unthinkable that such
a master of design, who established rules of
town-planning and devised a general hyd¬
raulic system for the water supply of the
capital of the Ottoman Empire, was work¬
ing without any theoretical or critical
rationale or scientific method when he built
112 mosques and 42 masjids, 79 madrasahs
(Islamic schools), 53 hammams (public
baths), 42 turbehs (funerary monuments)
and 31 caravanserais.
On the contrary, an analysis of Sinan's
architectural works yields ample proof of
the fact that he devised a conceptual metho¬
dology similar to that defined by Palladio,
which he developed and applied throughout
his career: a process of questioning
accepted practices, which Is conventionally
known as Mannerism.*
These two architects, Sinan in the East
and Palladio in the West, produced very
different types of work: the former de¬
signed primarily religious buildings, while
the latter built a series of villas in the Véne¬
to region of Italy. But the basic similarity
between them is the parallel development
in their architectural methods: gradually
'Art style that arose in Italy around 1520 and spread
throughout Europe, characterized by a break with the
formal equilibrium of the Renaissance, the creation of
deliberate tension and a tendency to artifice which was
to lead into the baroque style of the 17th century. Editor.
33

The Villa Cornaro (c. 1560-1565), built by
the Italian architect Andrea Palladio at
Piombino Dese, near Vicenza. The columns
and pediment of the portico recall the monu¬
ments of Antiquity.
parting company with their sources, build¬
ing up a precise figurative lexicon and,
above all, searching for typologies and for¬
mal variants.
Thus the various planometric combina¬
tions in their respective output can be re¬
duced to a single spatial pattern, square in
shape: the "nine spaces" of Palladio's villas,
and the "spatial unity created by a dome" of
Sinan's mosques. The adoption of such a
formula, which would undergo many
changes as one architectural accomplish¬
ment followed another, attests in both cases
to the application of a rigorous and critical
conceptual method.
The art historian Rudolf Wittkower de¬
monstrates in Architectural Principles in the
Age of Humanism that all Palladian villas
have a regular rectangular outline, the
"nine spaces", modified by two symmetrical
wings, which determine the principles of
spatial distribution.
The conceptual ideal of Sinan, on the
other hand, whose key pattern was one of
"spatial unity" on a very large scale, was
achieved by means of a dome. The Turkish
architect worked on a great many small
sites, and the technical skills that he thereby '
acquired were subsequently put to use on
the great imperial construction projects.
Like Palladio, Sinan followed a method
based on Mannerist experimentation.
The many mosques that Sinan has left us
add up to a very extensive architectural
typology, in which the stability of the dome
is secured by means of various systems of
construction. We shall refer to only three
essential examples: the Shehzade Mosque
(1543-1548) and the Süleymaniye Mosque
(1550-1557) in Istanbul (the former Con¬
stantinople and ancient Byzantium) and the
Selimiye Mosque (1569-1575) at Edirne
(formerly Adrianople).
In the Shehzade Mosque, Sinan's first
masterpiece, the great dome of the prayer
chamber rests on four piers. Four half
domes surround this central structure, re¬
laying the thrust to the side walls. The
square layout is completed by four subsidi¬
ary domes placed at the corners of the build¬
ing. In contrast to Byzantine buildings, the
central dome is supported not by barrel
vaults but by the half domes. This technical
arrangement, which appears regularly in a
variety of combinations in Sinan's work,
helps to lighten the outline of very massive
buildings. The slender colonnades decorat¬
ing the lateral façades and the main portico
serve a similar purpose.
In the Süleymaniye Mosque, also de¬
signed on a square plan, the central dome
again rests on four piers, but here com¬
pensation is made for the outward thrust by
two half domes in the longitudinal axis and
two aisles supported by four columns in the
transversal axis. These side aisles are cap¬
ped by small domes of various sizes which
are alternated to eliminate monotony.
This type of layout, with a central dome
flanked by two half domes, has often, un¬
fortunately, misled art historians, whose
analyses have not taken account of the
Mannerist aspect of Sinan's style. This
failure to recognize the continuous develop¬
ment of a syntactical conceptual methodol¬
ogy leads them to see the Süleymaniye Mos¬
que as a copy of the sixth-century Byzantine
basilica of Hagia Sophia, Istanbul.
It is obvious on entering these buildings
that a planimetric likeness is not the same as
a volumetric similarity. In Sinan's work, the
planimetric pattern is always linked to a
hierarchy of architectural elements in the
total composition. In Hagia Sophia, the
observer very easily grasps the importance
of the side aisles, whereas the Süleymaniye
Mosque gives the impression of a unified
space, emphasized by excellent lighting
from the 128 bays set at regular intervals
around the walls. There is another basic
distinction: the minarets on either side of
the portico leading into the courtyard have
two balconies, whereas the two taller
minarets attached to the main body of the
mosque have three balconies each. This
hierarchical arrangement of architectural
elements is the secret of the ingenious
adaptation of the building to the steeply
sloping site. The domes, half domes and
minarets, all varying in size, combine to
create a harmonious pyramid-shaped
silhouette which embellishes the city
skyline.
The Selimiye Mosque, Sinan's master-
work, marks the apogee of his search for
"spatial unity created by a dome". The
central dome rests on eight fluted piers on
an octagonal plan. Its originality lies in the
fact that these piers are half embedded in
the walls which enclose the central space, so
that the arcades appear to rise directly from
the piers. This composition produces a cen¬
tral area of great visual complexity, and
recalls the determining influence of the
early Sassanid dome, supported by squinch
arches. Moreover, thanks to the skilful
positioning of a great many openings, the
interior is incomparably well lit.
By placing minarets at the four corners of
the prayer chamber, Sinan uses them as
buttresses to compensate for the lateral
thrust, and creates an exterior that is as rich
in architectural detail as the interior which
we have described. In elevation, the hier¬
archy of structural elements is dominated
by the mighty dome. The elevation precise¬
ly reflects the plan, with the result that there
are no external colonnades.
Palladio assimilated the characteristic
styles of the architectural history of his own
culture: he used the pilasters and rusticated
ornamentation of the early Renaissance
Florentine style in the Palazzo Thiene, the
high classical style in the Villa Rotonda, and
baroque decoration in the Palazzo Porto
Breganze. Sinan, likewise, referred to de¬
corative models which belonged to the
cultural heritage of his region: arched win¬
dows of Byzantine origin in the central
domes, to transfer downward the dynamic
thrust essential to the support of such struc¬
tures; ogee arch openings, showing Persian
influence, in the walls of the main structure
in order to emphasize the vertical com¬
position.
But these two master builders never, at
any time, plagiarized the models of their
cultural heritage. Their genius lies in having
assimilated the constructive and ideological
rationale underlying that heritage in order
to found a Mannerist conceptual metho¬
dology of their own.
SELDA BESNIER-KILIÇOGLU, Turkish
architect and engineer, has studied the history of
architecture and restoration techniques of ancient
monuments both in Turkey and in France, where
she has given courses on the Anatolian civiliza¬
tions. Her published work is primarily concerned
with the history of Turkish architecture.
34
