A new ethicaloutlook
by Federico Mayor Zaragoza
Director-General of Unesco
/ £*\ CIENCE without conscience
* ^^ spells the ruin of the soul". Much
K-J water has flowed under the
bridges of history and science since François
Rabelais wrote those premonitory words in
the.early sixteenth century. The author of
Pantagruel can scarcely have imagined the
extremes to which the moral contradiction
that he so shrewdly pinpointed has been
taken in our own century. In Rabelais' time,
the dawn had hardly broken on what was to
become in the ensuing centuries the dazzling
sun of modern experimental science. And
nobody except perhaps Leonardo da Vin¬
ci, with his prophetic vision could then
have suspected the extent to which the world
would be conquered by science and technol¬
ogy and the promise of a radiant future
which they hold out, still less the dangers
that might loom for mankind as the result of
so exhilarating an enterprise.
The result is plain for us to see. Never
before, until now, has the tension between
science and the human conscience, between
technology and ethics, reached a point where
it has become a threat to the world as a
whole. Molecular genetics and nuclear ener¬
gy, to cite only two outstanding examples,
can, depending on how they are used, gener¬
ate great benefits or wreak great havoc. It all
depends on the use to which scientific know¬
ledge is put and on whether it is applied
correctly or incorrectly. For instance, so-
called "industrial civilization", which has in
so many respects been beneficial to man¬
kind, can, when economic criteria alone pre¬
vail, adversely affect that precious entity
known as the environment, which people
were scarcely conscious of only a few de¬
cades ago.
This is the other side the one we are
reluctant to contemplate of the gleaming
coin of progress. We are so dazzled that we
do not perceive the threats hanging over our
heads, warning us of the pressing need for a
radically new and universal ethical outlook
on the future of present-day science. We
have to bear in mind the negative aspects, the
dark underside of science which appears
when its applications are at variance with
profound and far-reaching cultural re¬
quirements, when basic human needs in
keeping with the principles of equity are
disregarded, or when science is not regulated
as it should be by the interests of society.
Although science and technology can contri¬
bute to wisdom, it would be very dangerous
if they were to try to supplant it. Bertrand
Russell made that point perfectly clear when
he wrote that thanks to science and tech¬
nology, mankind is united in evil but not yet
united for good; that people have learnt the
technique of mutual destruction, but not the
more desirable technique of worldwide co¬
operation. Russell believed that wisdom be¬
comes increasingly necessary with every
advance in knowledge and technology, and
that although our age has surpassed all others
in knowledge, it has not enjoyed a correla¬
tive increase in wisdom; and he called for a
"new moral outlook".
Without such a new moral outlook, the
wholesale slaughter that threatens us could
become inevitable. Whence the need for a
scientific revolution which can take place
when knowledge acts as a counterweight to
power instead of being subordinated to it.
Today, knowledge is increasingly becoming
a prop for power, and science is unduly
subservient to force whereas it should
work exclusively in the service of reason.
The revolution lies in making wise use of
knowledge. Thus it is necessary to establish a
scientific order which will produce the
wherewithal, in the form of nutrition,
health, culture, for the survival in dignity of
all mankind. Such a new scientific order will
undoubtedly entail making far-reaching
changes in the course taken by technology,
and steering the applications of science in a
new direction, far removed from the nuclear
landscape and the rampant consumption of
the present day.
Ensuring that science goes hand in hand
with conscience, and technology with ethics,
is our responsibility if we are not to see that
"ruin of the soul", which would now be
tantamount to the annihilation of humanity.
We all bear that responsibility, since we are
all in the same boat. But a special responsibil¬
ity is borne by intellectuals and by the think¬
ers and scientists on whose work the flower¬
ing of theoretical and practical knowledge
depends. By virtue of the very nature of their
work, scientists and intellectuals should be
open to what is universal this is the very
essence of science capable of reflecting on
the grave problems of the modern world
with the necessary knowledge and breadth
of vision and in a spirit of equity, without
being influenced by political expediency or
cultural particularities, however legitimate.
They are sentinels, capable of thinking
ahead, of predicting what will happen and of
sounding the alarm.
It is not easy to determine how scientists
can exert their influence to change the direc¬
tion in which powerful interests steer and
indeed manipulate their work and the re¬
wards derived from it. However, it is their
responsibility to speak out about the dangers
stemming from the wrongful use of scientific
knowledge, a misuse which fails to measure
its social, economic and cultural conse¬
quences in other words, its human impact.
Indeed, it is their responsibility to highlight
those dangers.
Ever since it was founded, Unesco has
endeavoured to be a sounding-board for
serene and rigorous thinking by the world
scientific and intellectual community and an
instrument of peace and development. It is
therefore bound to give a warm welcome to
any venture that will contribute to a better
knowledge of the benefits and risks, the
positive aspects as well as the dangers, to
which mankind as a whole is likely to be
exposed as a result of technological and in¬
dustrial growth. This is why Unesco took
such a keen interest in the deliberations and
conclusions of the Conference of Nobel
Prize winners held at the Elysée Palace in
Paris from 18 to 21 January 1988, at the
invitation of Mr. François Mitterrand, Presi¬
dent of the French Republic, and Mr. Elie
Wiesel, the writer, who was awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize in 1986. Seventy-four
leading scientists, intellectuals and political
figures who had been recipients of the presti¬
gious Nobel Prize, discussed the threats and
promises facing mankind as it approaches
the threshold of the new millennium. This
issue of the Unesco Courier is devoted to the
ideas and analyses they put forward, and
presents the declarations made by eight of
the participants. Its publication is a con¬
tribution to Unesco's task of paving the way
for that new ethical outlook without which
peace and genuine human progress are not
possible, and never will be.
