César
VALLEJO
A revolutionary voice in modern poetry
BY LEYLA BARTET
IT is no exaggeration to say that contem¬
porary Spanish-American poetry
would not be what it is today without
César Vallejo. Yet his work, which marked a
radical break with traditional forms and sub¬
ject-matter, took shape in a society whose
reaction to it was one of indifference, if not
perplexity and hostility.
Vallejo was born in 1892 in the village of
Santiago de Chuco, in the Andes of northern
Peru, and his poetry was deeply marked by
his ties with that cultural background.
Forty-six years later already half a century
ago he died in Paris one rainy afternoon in
April 1938, as he had unwittingly prophesied
in one of his poems, when he wrote: "I shall
die in Paris on a rainy day/a day I can already
remember".
There are two main periods in Vallejo's
work, both marked by the environment in
which he lived. The first of these, which he
spent in Peru, saw the beginning of what was
to become a constant factor a rejection of
intellectual coteries and stereotypes, of the
uncritical adoption of literary models, and of
identification with any particular school.
With his first two collections of poems, Los
heraldos negros (1918; "The Black Heralds")
and Trilce (1922), Vallejo began to use a
language which broke away from Romantic¬
ism and the mannerisms of Modernism,
from the Decadent Movement, and from the
dream-inspired symbolism that were typical
of Peruvian poetry of the time. The distinc¬
tive aesthetic quality of Los heraldos negros
upset the critics, while Trilce, whose very
title is a mystery and may be a combination
of "triste" (sad) and "dulce" (sweet),
violated all the prevailing literary canons. At
the time, Luis Alberto Sánchez, a leading
Peruvian intellectual, wrote: "César Vallejo
has come out with an incomprehensible and
The Peruvian poet
César Vallejo
photographed at Versailles in 1929
extremely strange book . . . and my astonish¬
ment increases with every page".
There can be no doubt that this was writ¬
ing of a kind that the Latin American conti¬
nent had never seen before. In it ¡ntimist
cameos fuse with social preoccupations, and
contradictory ideas and emotions are cou¬
pled (faith and scepticism, hatred and love,
life and death):
All my bones are alien to me;
perhaps I stole them!
I somehow came to take something
that was meant for someone else;
and I think that had I not been born,
some other poor soul would be drinking
this coffee!
I am not much of a thief ... what will
become of me?
[Los heraldos negros]
Later, the Martiniquais poet Aimé Césaire
rightly noted that Trilce had dynamited the
language in its bid to achieve expression,
defined the problems of modernity, and
settled scores with the existing Modernist
aesthetic.
Vallejo was very quick to grasp the need
for social commitment, which he saw in
terms not so much of political militancy or
the adoption of a hard and fast partisan
political stance as of making a choice at a
given historical moment. In his student days
in the city of Trujillo in northern Peru, he
became involved with a group of intellec¬
tuals who were connected with what was
later to become the APRA Party (Alianza
Popular Revolucionaria Americana). In¬
deed, as a result of being unjustly accused of
involvement in a local uprising, he had to go
into a long period of hiding, following which
he was arrested and imprisoned for four
months.
34

Pen and ink drawing of
Vallejo made by Pablo
Picasso in 1938, shortly
after Vallejo 's death
Photos © SPADEM 1988, Paris
Manuscript, dated21
November 1937, ofapoem
from Vallejo 's volume
entitledVotmas humanos
<
©
"^.«rf-Jk.
V
¥r. *ta L *~.
U h* M *t~t
&~ '%» MkA,A A«»../«/- Amy.* »
"*" /~*X* _¿n >; AAA Wix*
/ .
In 1923 he moved to France, and lived in
Paris until his death fifteen years later. While
he was there, he took a keen interest in the
problems of his time. He was passionately
enthusiastic about the Russian Revolution
and in 1932 published Rusia en 1931 ("Rus¬
sia in 1931"), a short book describing what
he had learned from a visit to that country.
He was greatly distressed by the Spanish
Civil War in 1936. He was particularly con¬
cerned with the role of the intellectual in
modern society and was scathing in his cri¬
ticism of the European avant-garde. In El art
y la revolución ("Art and Revolution"), he
wrote: "Literary schools come and go. Such
is the fate of any form of anxiety which,
instead of becoming an austere creative
laboratory, merely turns into an empty
formula".
Vallejo later became involved with anti¬
fascist groups and in 1937 went to war-torn
Spain to attend a congress of intellectuals in
support of the Republic.
During his time in Europe, he wrote many
prose works and analytical essays, but it was
only after his death that the poetry he wrote
during this period came to be known, with
the publication in 1939 of Poemas humanos
("Human Poems") and España, aparta de mí
este cáliz ("Spain, take away this cup from
me"). These books reveal significant changes
in Vallejo's style. Although some of the
features present in Trilce are still to be found,
there is a growing preoccupation with rhyth¬
mic patterns and with the overall structure of
the poems, so that the reader never feels that
the writing is disjointed. Vallejo was now
making more systematic use of such devices
as enumeration and anaphora, or repetition.
Neither pebble, nor oven nor white dog
Defenceless Malaga, where my death was
born
While taking a stroll
And where it died ofpassion without being
born....
Malaga, following in your footsteps, with
no way out.
[España, aparta de mí este cáliz]
Vallejo was a poet of universal and
prophetic significance. This explains both
why his work continues to be so relevant and
why his poetic diction is so surprisingly
modern. It also accounts both for the failure
of his contemporaries to understand him,
and for the heart-rending emotion he felt as a
creative artist. This was undoubtedly the
price he had to pay for being one of the
greatest poets who has ever written in
Spanish.
LEYLA BARTET, Peruvian journalist and
sociologist, studied linguistics at the University of
Paris. She has published a number of articles on
ideology and communications, and has co-
authored books on advertising and the press.
35
