San Francisco de Lima
by Christina Barbin
A jewel ofLatin American baroque art
WHEN the arts of Latin America
are discussed outside the con¬
tinent, the first thing that springs
to mind, for both specialists and the general
public, is the exceptional pre-Columbian
legacy. Colonial art, both sacred and pro¬
fane, was long considered a provincial out¬
growth of the manneristic and baroque art
of the Old World, and attitudes towards it
have been very slow in changing. Yet this
period produced important works in
architecture, sculpture, painting and gold
and silver work, of which the Convent of
San Francisco de Lima is one of the most
outstanding examples.
In 1535, the Emperor Charles V ordered
the conquistador Francisco Pizarro to ear¬
mark two sites in the urban plan of Lima
then under preparation, to be used by the
Franciscans to erect their church and con¬
vent. Situated right in the centre of Lima on
the banks of the River Rimac, these lots
(with later additions) formed the largest
area ever to have been occupied by a con¬
vent in the New World: one eighth of the
area of the colonial city which had 14,000
inhabitants at the beginning of the seven¬
teenth century. On 4 February 1656, an
earthquake destroyed a major part of the
church and convent. The Portuguese
architect Constantino de Vasconcellos,
who lived in Lima, was entrusted with the
task of rebuilding the complex, generally
known as the Convent of San Francisco,
which now comprises the churches of San
Francisco, La Soledad and El Milagro, with
their cloisters, patios and outbuildings.
The problem facing Vasconcellos was
how to erect a monumental church able to
withstand earthquakes. His solution was
twofold. On the one hand, he built a barrel
vault resting on solid pillars, a technique
which allowed for the construction of tall
and resistant structures. On the other hand,
the building materials he used were wood
and a mixture that the conquistadors had
borrowed from the Indians: quincha, a con¬
glomerate of rushes, mud and plaster. Both
light and relatively elastic, quincha is consi¬
dered to be an earthquake-resistant mater¬
ial, and was later to be used for a whole
series of buildings along the coast of Peru,
for which San Francisco was the model.
Thanks to these building methods, the com¬
plex has survived the earthquakes of three
centuries.
While the profuse ornamentation of the
Convent of San Francisco is clearly inspired
by European art, in the Spanish mudejar,
manneristic and baroque styles, the mate¬
rials are an original response to local con¬
ditions. With the exception of the "altar-
piece-portal" and the lateral portal, both of
stone, the whole church, including the
towers, some 35 metres in height, are made
of quincha. This makes the whole complex
look like a giant clay sculpture.
The most talented artists of the day
goldsmiths, silversmiths, sculptors, painters
and wood carvers contributed to the
ornamentation. A factory was even set up
to produce painted and glazed tiles (azule¬
jos) to decorate the outbuildings. San Fran¬
cisco thus became a sort of college of arts
and crafts. After the death of Vasconcellos,
his disciple, Manuel de Escobar, from
Lima, completed the work in 1672. It is to
him we owe the beautiful lateral portal.
As in the case of most baroque churches
in Spanish America and in contrast to Euro¬
pean and Brazilian Baroque, the architectu¬
ral groundplan of San Francisco is very
simple: three 7-span aisles, a transept and a
presbytery. Decorative exuberance spills
over the facades, altarpieces, domes and
towers. Wealth of form makes up for mod¬
esty of materials: the church is literally co¬
vered in relief decoration.
The two bossed towers flank a stone
"altarpiece-portal". It dates from 1664 and
is the work of Vasconcellos. Damián
Bayon, a Argentine historian, describes it
as "stone chiaroscuro proliferation", a
lavish but harmonious mass of sculp¬
tures, niches, frontispieces, windows and
pilasters.
These "altarpiece-portals", typical of
Latin American churches, date back to six¬
teenth-century Spain. The altarpiece is
brought forward to the church portal, bring¬
ing religion to the street. This was consi¬
dered essential by the conquistadors, who
saw Christianity as a great unifying bond
between populations of different origins.
San Francisco was the church attended by
the Viceroy of Peru and his Court, and for
this reason it received many donations and
legacies, generated by the rich Peruvian
gold and silver mines. The convent thus
accumulated a vast treasure, part of which
disappeared in the nineteenth century dur¬
ing the wars of independence. Nevertheless
it can boast today some outstanding works
of art.
Besides the fifteen canvases of the Apos¬
tolado (one of only three in the world)
painted by the Spanish artist Francisco de
Zurbarán and his workshop, there are
thirty-nine canvases in the main cloister,
painted between 1670 and 1672 by four local
artists (Francisco Escobar, Fernando de
Noriega, Andrés de Liébana and Diego de
Aguilera), representing the life of the
founder of the Order; a triptych by Angeli-
no Medoro and a St. Bonaventura by thé
same artist; eleven seventeenth-century
Flemish canvases of the school of Rubens; a
Coronation ofthe Virgin by Juan Solórzano,
Saint Bartholomew, from the atelier of Fran- ^
cisco de Zurbarán (1598-1664). The canvas
forms part of a series of fifteen in the Con¬
vent of San Francisco de Lima. Restoration
work on these paintings was carried out in
1987 as part of a vast endeavour to save the
convent undertaken by the Government of
Peru with the aid of Unesco, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and other organizations.
a native of Cuzco, and many other paintings
of the same school. An exceptional ensem¬
ble of Sevillian azulejos adorns the main
cloister, not to mention all the carvings,
furniture, and delicately wrought silver and
gold ware. The library deserves special
mention. It contains numerous manuscripts
and more than 25,000 printed volumes, in¬
cluding fifteenth-century incunabula and
many sixteenth-century first editions.
Earthquakes (especially that of 1974),
the ravages of time, constant humidity, but
also human negligence, have gravely dam¬
aged the convent. In 1941, the Government
of Peru declared it a national monument
and began urgent restoration work. Since
1978, Unesco, in collaboration with the Un¬
ited Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), has contributed some 300,000
dollars towards technical assistance, train¬
ing of restoration experts and equipment.
Some of the consolidation work to be
carried out is particularly urgent, but Peru is
experiencing a difficult economic situation
and cannot meet all the costs involved. To
raise the 3 million dollars that are needed, it
is essential that the international commun¬
ity rally to the country's aid, as the Direc¬
tor-General of Unesco explained in his
appeal launched from Lima on 2 April 1987.
It is to be hoped that the response will be
generous, as it has been in favour of other
major universal works of art which bear
witness to past cultures, such as the Borobu-
dur monument or the Nubian temples. The
loss of what was the most beautiful orna¬
ment of the "city of the kings", today a
living testimony to the history of South
America, would be irreparable.
CHRISTINA BARBIN, ofArgentina, has worked
for several years as an editor in Unesco's Office of
Public Information. She has published a number
of articles on cultural themes in the information
bulletins ofdifferent countries, and is the author of
a monograph (1986) on the Colombian painter
Omar Rayo.
16

The complex known as the Convent of San
Francisco consists of three churches, with
their cloisters, patios and outbuildings.
Above, façade and main portal of the church
of San Francisco.
The Portuguese architect Constantino de
Vasconcellos, who was commissioned to re¬
build the Convent of San Francisco in the
mid- 17th century after an earthquake had
largely destroyed it, searched for a light and
flexible form of construction that would
withstand earth tremors. He hit on the idea
of using as building materials wood and
quincha, a conglomerate of rushes, mud and
plaster traditionally used by the Indians,
instead of stone or brick. This unusual and
economical technique met with great suc¬
cess, and is being revived today in the res¬
toration of certain parts of the convent
buildings.
The interior of the convent is profusely de¬
corated. Below, detail of the magnificent
panelled ceiling of the main cloister, which
has been seriously damaged by the ravages
of time, humidity and insects.
17
