A sense of the sacred
BY OLEG GRABAR 


The values enshrined
in holy places
A large number of the cultural
properties on the World
Heritage List are religious
monuments. They range in size
from a small medieval wooden
church in Norway to a sacred
city in Sri Lanka; some are
located in the heart of historic
city centres, others in remote
rural areas. Are such
monuments bound by a thread
of common values which
transcends their diversity? Can
the significance of still-used
religious buildings only be
fully grasped by those who
worship in them? How should
the temples and sacred edifices
of long-dead religions be
interpreted? In the following
article a noted American
scholar examines these and
other complex issues raised by
religious monuments and their
conservation.
CERTAIN values attached to reli¬
gious monuments are peculiar to
them and to them alone. Three of
these values, which may be called spiritual,
aesthetic and cultural, are of particular im¬
portance, because each one affects the ways
in which religious monuments can be ex¬
plained and interpreted to those who wish
to see or understand them.
To talk about spiritual values in relation
to religious monuments is not as tautolo-
gous as it may seem. To begin with, it is not
always easy to understand the functional or
transcendental aspects of monuments be¬
longing to religions which have disap¬
peared, such as those of the ancient Near
East or of classical Antiquity. In order to
sense the sacred remoteness of an ancient
Egyptian temple, the subtly rational pro¬
portions or the siting in nature of a Greek
sanctuary, there is need for a knowledge of
the ceremonies, liturgies, ideas and beliefs
which made such monuments possible, but
which no longer play a role in human life
today.
Nor are spiritual values interchangeable.
To interpret a Muslim holy place in terms of
Buddhist spirituality is obviously intellec¬
tually improper and ethically wrong. Very
different spiritual approaches are, for exam¬
ple, required to understand such different
sites as Delphi and the Jesuit missions in
South America.
What is at issue here could be called the
spiritual integrity of a religious monument,
and its expression through the information
provided about it. The need for such in¬
formation is obvious in the case of monu¬
ments of abandoned religions, but it is even
more acute in the case of living religions,
especially when the monument is also a
living one. How should Christian or Mus¬
lim spirituality be presented in buildings
which have become museums, like Hagia
Sophia in Istanbul, which was built as an
imperial church and then turned into a
mosque of considerable ideological signif¬
icance? How should the spiritual values of
Chartres be presented without trivializing
religious practice into a kind of show? Or
should we say that religious buildings are
spiritually restricted to those who belong to
the faith concerned? These questions raise
fundamental issues about the ethics of spiri¬
tual property which, to my knowledge, have
not been discussed.
We seem to be on safer ground when we
turn to aesthetic values, since agreement can
easily be reached about the visual qualities
of a monument. To an overwhelming de¬
gree, the artistic heritage of mankind has
been inspired by the piety and beliefs held
by men and women since time immemorial.
At various times great artists have been
asked or have volunteered to build, deco¬
rate, or otherwise create religious monu¬
ments. And there is a degree of consensus
about the definitions of aesthetic quality, at
least for times somewhat removed from our
own. In part, these definitions derive from
the constantly evolving taste and judgment
of living societies, but aesthetic definitions
are not only the fickle judgments of various
periods. Much in them comes directly from
knowledge and understanding of the time
and place in which the monument was cre¬
ated. It is always assumed that those who
created the monument invested in the best
available competence to produce something
whose high quality would be recognized
by the people of that time, if not by
posterity.
Difficulties begin to appear when one
seeks to understand similarities and differ¬
ences between masterpieces of religious art.
For instance, nearly all religions have raised
at one time or another the question of
whether art and belief can coexist. Answers
have varied, and Christianity or Buddhism
have provided at different times contradic¬
tory responses to an issue which is central to
any religion with a transcendental divine,
while Islam or Judaism have remained, on .
the whole, set on a single and more or less
consistent course.
Such variations have obviously created
very different emphases and approaches to
visual creativity. Nearly all religions have
both congregational requirements and ways
of expressing private piety. These have led
to very different solutions, the huge congre¬
gational mosques of Islam at one extreme;
CONTINUED ON PAGE 31
27

fifrn
Mosque City of Bagerhat
(Bangladesh)
This city, originally known as
Khalifatabad, was founded in
the 15th century by General
Ulugh Khan Jahan in the
southern part of the world's biggest delta,
near the coastline of the Bay of Bengal. A
devout man, the general constructed brick
mosques, palaces, public buildings, bridges
and mausoleums, as well as paved roads
communicating with other cities. Large res¬
ervoirs of fresh water, indispensable in this
region of brackish water, catered for the
needs of the population. Architecturally,
the spectacular ruins of Bagerhat are a
unique blend of the imperial style of Delhi
and the local style of Muslim Bengal. The
mosques are sober and austere. A typical
example is the Shait Gumbad mosque
(right), which is renowned for its 77 domes
and its immense prayer hall divided into 7
naves. The site, inscribed on the World Her¬
itage List in 1985, is threatened by the mon¬
soon, encroaching vegetation, and the ex¬
treme salinity of the soil and the
atmosphere which is corroding the monu¬
ments and weakening their foundations. In
1985 Unesco launched a campaign to safe¬
guard Bagerhat and Paharpur, another
World Heritage site in Bangladesh. The first
priorities are to reinforce the weakest sec¬
tions of the buildings, to set up a drainage
system to stop rainwater from seeping into
them, and to combat vandalism.
The Convent of St.
(Switzerland)
Gall
In the valley of the Steinach river, where
the Irish monk Gallus had his hermit's
retreat in the 7th century, abbot Otmar
established a Benedictine community in
Whi
747 and founded a monastery and a school. In the 9th
and 10th centuries, St. Gall became one of the most
important centres of culture in the West. Its schools of
chant and illumination, and above all its scriptorium
or copying room in which scribes produced illumi¬
nated manuscripts of outstanding beauty, were famed
throughout Western Christendom. The abbey was at
the height of its glory in the 9th century under abbot
Gozbert, when it was rebuilt according to a new
design which was a remarkable illustration of Car-
olingian architectural ideas. Today the only surviving
vestiges of the splendour of the Carolingian monaste¬
ry are the foundations and a number of architectural
elements discovered during probes made in the 1960s.
Rebuilt between the 16th and the 18th centuries,
the monastery incorporates a fine baroque cathedral
(above) and library. A major landmark in the history of
Western intellectual and religious life, the Convent of
St. Gall was inscribed on the World Heritage List in
1983.
Jesuit Missions of the Guaranis (Argentina, Brazil)
ffihi
As part of their efforts to con¬
vert the Guarani Indians to
Christianity, Spanish Jesuit
missionaries in 17th- and 18th-
century Latin America created villages
known as reducciones in which the Indians
could be concentrated and given a religious
education. Five of these Jesuit Missions, Sao
Miguel das Missöes in Brazil, and San Igna¬
cio Mini, Santa Ana, Nuestra Señora de
Loreto and Santa Maria la Mayor in Argen¬
tina, were jointly inscribed on the World
Heritage List in 1983 and 1984. They were
all built in accordance with the same ba¬
roque masterplan, with church, Jesuit fa¬
thers' residence, school, Indians' houses and
cemetery all grouped around a large square.
For several years Argentina and Brazil have
been engaged on study and restoration
work in some of the Missions. In Argentina,
exploration, site-mapping and clearing
have been carried out at Santa Ana; tourist
facilities have been improved at San Ignacio
Mini, which is better preserved than the
other Missions; and undergrowth has been
cleared at Nuestra Señora de Loreto. In
Brazil, consolidation, site-mapping and
cleaning are under way at Sao Miguel.
Unesco will soon be launching a major
international campaign to safeguard the
Jesuit Missions. Consultants are already
advising on steps to consolidate the build¬
ings. Unesco has also, among other mea¬
sures, financed meetings to plan future ac¬
tion programmes, carried out site
inventories, published a booklet on The Je¬
suit Missions of the Guaranis and co-pro¬
duced a documentary film. Right, church of
Sâo Miguel d^s Missöes (Brazil), and detail
of façade, San Ignacio Mini (Argentina).
28

Photo Unesco Photo F.F. Ortiz/Unesco

30
Cistercian Abbey of
Fontenay (France)
iÜfhi
Situated in northern Burgundy,
Fontenay was founded in 1119
by Bernard of Clairvaux, one of
the most forceful personalities
of his time. As a young man, St. Bernard
entered the Cistercian order, newly found¬
ed by a reformer who wished to restore
rigour and austerity to Western monasti-
cism. Painting, ornate sculpture and all
forms of embellishment liable to cause dis¬
traction were prohibited from the walls of
Cistercian monasteries, and consequently
tjie Cistercian edifices of Europe are ad¬
mired by those who look for clarity, logic
and plainness in architecture. The church at
Fontenay was built between 1139 and 1147.
Its transept is towerless. Apart from the
cloisters (left) and the chapter house, which
were built at the same time as the church,
the warming room, the refectory, and the
long, magnificently vaulted parlour have
also survived, along with the dormitory,
whose timberwork was restored in the 15th
century and has not needed repairs since
then. The forge (c. 1 180) is one of the oldest
industrial buildings in Europe. Abandoned
in the 18th century, then sold, the abbey
had not been too seriously damaged by its
owners when all activity came to an end
there in 1902. Four years later, a new owner
embarked on the restoration of the abbey.
He successfully achieved his goal and today
the onerous task of upkeep is being scrupu¬
lously carried out by his heirs with the aid
of the French State. The abbey was inscrib¬
ed on the World Heritage List in 1981.
ffifbi
The Great Mosque and
Hospital of Divrigi (Turkey)
This highly original architectu¬
ral ensemble in the mountain¬
ous region of eastern Anatolia
was founded in 1228-1229 by
emir Ahmet Shah of the Turkish Menguce-
kid dynasty. Both the mosque and the ad¬
joining marestan (a hospital for the insane)
were built by the same architect, Khurram-
shad of Ahlat. The single prayer room in
the great mosque has 5 naves and stone
vaulting which displays astonishing tech¬
nical skill and mastery of space. Above the
prayer room are 2 cupolas of unequal size,
one above the ablutions basin, and the main
cupola which rises above the mihrab (the
decorated niche indicating the direction of
Mecca) and is itself surmounted by the
mosque's most accomplished piece of archi¬
tecture, a ribbed hexagonal spire supported
on pendentives. The walls of Divrigi are
pierced by 3 monumental gates (left) sump¬
tuously decorated with floral and geometric
motifs recalling contemporary Armenian
or Georgian designs. The mosque and hos¬
pital were inscribed on the World Heritage
List in 1985.

mm
Studenica Monastery
(Yugoslavia)
tffh
Founded in 1183 by the Serbian
prince Stefan Nemanja and de¬
veloped by his sons, the monas¬
tery of Studenica became the
necropolis of the Nemanjic dynasty and
remained a focal point of Serbian history
for centuries. Within the walls of the mon¬
astery more sanctuaries were built in addi¬
tion to the original church, and decorated
by medieval Christian artists with beautiful
marble sculptures and graceful frescoes
such as that of the Birth of the Virgin
(above) from the famous "King's Church"
of St. Anne and St. Joachim, completed in
1314. The wall paintings (1208-1209) in the
Church of the Virgin display new ways of
depicting human expression and space and
are a landmark in the history of Byzantine
and Western art. The works of the late
13th-century Italian painters Cimabue,
Duccio and Giotto spring from this new
awareness. The monastery, inscribed on the
World Heritage List in 1986, is well-
conserved. However, the authorities are
concerned by plans to construct a dam
in the vicinity and divert the Studenica
River. In autumn 1988 Unesco experts will
visit the site to study the likely effects of
this project.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 27
individual and private icons, reliquaries, or
altars at the other.
Other examples can easily be provided of
different, even antagonistic, purposes and
assumptions underlying aesthetic creativity.
Should one, for instance, tend to emphasize
the similarities, the constants, of spaces cre¬
ated for large numbers or of the need for
official or esoteric signs and symbols? Or
should one, on the contrary, argue that since
aesthetic enjoyment is a personal matter, its
expression can only be defined around indi¬
vidual monuments and not on a universal
level? Are there a religious art and aesthetic
of faith and piety? Or are there only large
numbers of religious monuments, each of
which provides one or more aesthetic solu¬
tions to discrete and specific needs?
These brief considerations of spiritual and
aesthetic values lead automatically to my
third category, that of cultural values. What
I mean by this are such features as enhance
and strengthen the awareness an individual
or a group has of the past, both in an ethnic
or biological sense and in a geographical or
regional sense.
It is assumed that a knowledge of one's
roots is an asset in the definition of one's
identity, and certainly religious beliefs ex¬
pressed through writing, through traditions,
and through monuments are part of every
person's heritage. But, in addition, the va¬
garies of history have given to many ethnic
or national groups the guardianship of the
monuments of other pasts and other reli¬
gions than their own. The issue here is how
to interpret other religions within one's own
consciousness and within one's own heri¬
tage, or else how to have access to one's
religious monuments located in other and at
times inimical lands.
This is a relatively recent issue, for in the
past new religions or new States did not
hesitate either to destroy the remains of
older faiths or to adapt them to their own
purposes. The ancient Egyptian temple at
Luxor was in the past transformed into a
church, as was the Pantheon in Rome, and
Hagia Sophia became a mosque, while the
first mosque at Delhi was built on top of a
Hindu temple whose destroyed elements
were reused in the mosque. In many ways
the truth of any one religion implies the
falsehood of other faiths, and the tragic
human consequences of this state of affairs
throughout the ages are well known.
It is probably best to assume that, in our
time of complex relationships both to the
past and to land, each person will maintain
some sort of equilibrium between his or her
own religious culture, the religious cultures
of the land in which he or she lives, and a
universal acceptance of diversity. Only then
will it be possible to see religious monu¬
ments as national heirlooms, as the property
at one level of all men and women and at
another as expressions of piety for restricted
groups only.
A common thread binds spiritual, aes¬
thetic and cultural values when they are
applied to religious monuments. It is the
thread of integrity. There is the integrity of
the monument, which conservators, cura¬
tors and academics of all sorts are ready to
preserve, but must above all try to explain at
different levels, from the highest and most
esoteric scholarship to the very important
level of primary education. There is also the
integrity of the pious believer, who must
not feel that fame and recognition may have
robbed his or her shrine of some particle of
grace but who realizes that this holy place
can also be a work of art. Finally there is the
integrity of the citizen of a country who
feels pride in its monuments. Through the
magic of artistic creativity, it is possible to
partake of the power of a religious monu¬
ment, without sharing in its holiness or even
liking its aesthetic values.
The questions raised in this essay can only
be answered if we are ready to furnish the
considerable educational effort which
would make religious monuments accessible
and meaningful to all. Such an education
must go further than the mere provision of
information. It requires a protean sensitivity
which combines humility towards all be¬
liefs, pride in the age-old accomplishments
of artists and artisans, and emotional or
aesthetic satisfaction in their works.
OLEG GRABAR, of the United States, is a
distinguished art historian who has been since
1980 Aga Khan Professor of Islamic Art and
Architecture at Harvard University, where he
was Chairman of the Department of Fine Arts
between 1977 and 1982. He was a member of the
Steering Committee of the Aga Khan Award for
Architecture between 1978 and 1987. He has been
a member of the American Academy ofArts and
Sciences since 1978 and was recently elected to the
British Academy. He is the author of numerous
articles and books on Islamic art and architecture
including, most recently, Islamic Art Until 1250,
Pelican, London, 1987 (written in collaboration
with the late R. Ettinghausen). 31
