A New World
. . . and a new era in world history
by Arturo Uslar Pietri
In 1992 the fifth centenary of an event that hadan enormous influence on the history of the modern world will be commemorated,
notably in the Spanish- andPortuguese-speaking countries: the arrivalofChristopher Columbus and his Spanish crew, on 12 October
1492, in a land which would later be named "America". On that day afar-reaching process of cultural cross-fertilization was set in
motion, which, although marked by the violence of conquest and colonization, was to create a new reality , justly called the "New
World", that would radically transform the wholeplanet. The Unesco Courier will be devoting more space to this theme in later issues;
meanwhile we publish an evocation of that new world by the Venezuelan writer Arturo Uslar Pietri.
I
N less than five years'
break on 12 October 1992. The Earth
r::: r\
time, day will lj
will come into view as the Sun progres
sively casts its light on a succession of re¬
gions, climates and peoples until the planet
has come full circle. This is what, symboli¬
cally, has happened in the course of five
centuries since that day when, with the first
light, a new age dawned in the life of man.
It all began with the most auspicious of
voyages: three sailing ships, with their
eighty-eight crew members and a man of
vision who, without knowing it, was trailing
the destiny of the world behind him. Their
initial reaction was one of mild surprise, but
the Europeans soon came to realize that
new lands and new peoples had been dis¬
covered. They did not know the extent of
what they had found, and even today it is an
effort for us to grasp the full significance
and magnitude of the event. Some consider¬
able time was to elapse before they per¬
ceived that they were dealing with a new
continent that had never been known in
Europe before. Christopher Columbus, the
"admiral of the ocean sea", thought that he
had found the western route to the Indies;
he was searching for Asia and was carrying
letters for Préster John, the legendary ruler
of the East.
When we speak of the discovery of the
Americas, we think of the first fleeting im¬
pression which it conjured up in the minds
of the Europeans. What actually hap¬
pened and this came to be realized as one
surprise followed another was that a new
age had begun. The things that Europeans
saw or thought they saw, the things they
sought and found , the things that were com¬
ing to an end or were only just beginning, all
represented a new age for mankind as a
whole.
^ In the great enterprise which led to the
European arrival in the Americas or the
Indies, as the land was known at first the
leading roles were played by the Catholic
rulers of Spain, Ferdinand II and Isabella I,
and the Genoese navigator Christopher Col¬
umbus. In 1492 they reached an agreement
(the Capitulation of Santa Fé) whereby Col¬
umbus's proposals were accepted and it was
agreed to fund his voyage. Portrait of Ferdi¬
nand and Isabella, left, is today preserved in
the Augustinian Convent of Madrigal de las
Altas Torres, the queen's birthplace. Col¬
umbus's portrait, above, can be seen in the
Museum of the Americas, Madrid.
*J

The news of the discovery spread like a
revelation: it stimulated people's imagina¬
tions and gave the humanists grounds for
rediscovering the remote myths of classical
Antiquity. No document had more influ¬
ence on the turn taken by the European
mind than the letter written by Columbus
recording the birth of a new era. The im¬
measurable magnitude of the discovery was
unfurled step by step from the Antilles,
with their mythological name, it ranged
over the Costa Firme (or mainland), the
Darién isthmus, the marvel of the Pacific
seaboard, the conquest of Mexico and Peru,
the search for El Dorada, the circumnaviga¬
tion of the globe, and the control of the two
immense seas surrounding the new and pro¬
digious land.
It took a long time to learn what the
Europeans had found, if indeed we have
ever really succeeded in learning: it may
have been the Earthly Paradise, the long-
lost Golden Age of Greek mythology; or it
may have been the Amazons they were
looking for on the world's largest river and
on the vast sun-lit coast which they called
California.
What they above all discovered was the
boundless possibilities of the imagination.
There emerged from the writings of Col¬
umbus, Amerigo Vespucci and Pedro Már¬
tir de Anglería not only the promise of an
inexhaustible source of novelty but an irres¬
istible invitation to engage in intellectual
creation. In the end, it was to prove possible
to find everything that people had ever
dreamt of: from the Garden of Eden to the
headless men; from the lost tribes of Israel
to the imaginary city of Manoa, resplendent
with gold and precious stones; from halluci¬
nogenic plants to the Fount of Eternal
Youth.
|f>^
A«** **>V> 0 0 f 0 c o oooooltóo^^
When Europeans discovered the New
World, their ideas on geography changed
dramatically and "a comprehensive view of
the planet was obtained for the first time".
The cosmography of the 2nd century-AD
Greek astronomer, mathematician and
geographer Ptolemy collapsed, and the
centre of the world was shifted from the
Mediterranean to the Atlantic. Above, 8th-
century map of the world, from a manu¬
script preserved in a library at Albi
(France), follows the ingenuous Ptolemaic
conception of the Earth. Right, more realis¬
tic 16th-century map of South America from
a portolan (medieval navigational chart) by
the Spanish cartographer Juan Martinez.
^mmE*Jm*XJmWESi&
-4 On 12 October 1492, Christopher Columbus
and his companions disembarked onto
American soil for the first time, at the island
of Guanahani (today San Salvador, the
Bahamas). This highly imaginative por¬
trayal of the scene was executed by the Flem¬
ish engraver Théodore de Bry (1528-1598).
10

The Old World meets the New
That day marked the start of a new muta¬
tion of the Western world. The great culture
which had slowly evolved and spread from
the Mediterranean to the Baltic and was
steeped in the fertile mix composed of the
Greek, Latin and Judeo-Christian heri¬
tages, took a giant stride to the far shore of
the mare tenebrosum, in order to embark on
a new stage in its immense creative
movement. The Iberians in South America
and the Anglo-Saxons in the North,
together with the Spaniards, Englishmen,
Frenchmen, Dutchmen and Danes who
converged on the open space of the Carib¬
bean and turned it into a strange mare nos¬
trum, all brought with them an image of
Europe that was to change its appearance
and significance. In the North, the narrowly
circumscribed transplantation of the Puri¬
tan colonies was to predominate, whereas
in the South there was an unrestricted and
mutually rewarding coming-together of
different heritages and cultures.
The very same line that had divided the
Old World into two spheres of Christianity,
with differing conceptions of man and his
destiny, was carried over to the other
hemisphere, complete with the differences
and conflicts emerging from European his¬
tory between the Protestant North and the
Catholic South, between a pragmatic con¬
ception of life dedicated to work, thrift and
peace-loving virtues and another concep¬
tion, dazzled by the call of heroism, the
tragic and adventurous sense of life, and
contempt for passive servility. In the North,
they went patiently about their work, sow¬
ing the seeds from which Montreal, Ottawa,
New York, Chicago and Los Angeles would
one day spring. In the South, cities, king¬
doms, universities, palaces and convents
were to be created in an open-minded atti¬
tude to the mixing of cultures, from which a
new form of community was to emerge.
What came into being was not so much a
new Spain or a new Portugal as a new
dimension of the historical estate in a new
setting and with different protagonists. At
the beginning of the eighteenth century, the
New World was that which had been
formed in Ibero-America, with which
Europe was not very familiar and which it
did not readily understand. It was a new
society situated not only on one shore of the
common sea, but on both shores. It was a
community that was to transform the com¬
mon heritage and to have an influence on its
component parts on either side of the
Atlantic. The day the King of Portugal set
up his court in Rio de Janeiro, it became
quite clear that such a community existed,
that it did not have a privileged focal point,
and that it was consistent with a new age.
Had it been possible to carry out the plan
put forward by the Count of Aranda,1 or
some such similar plan, the traumatic rift of
independence would not have occurred and
the powerful affirmation of the Ibero-
American community would not have been
retarded for more than a century.
The community was created by a growing
pattern of exchanges and mutual influence
between its two component parts, ranging
from mental attitudes and legal systems to
customs, diet, the economy, society and the
concept of identity.
The Earth becomes one
Had the voyage merely involved the dis¬
covery of new lands and peoples, it would
not have had such enormous consequences.
Many irrevocable changes took place at
that "watershed" date, which was also the
starting-point for many other changes that
are still taking place today. The time when
mankind lived separate existences came to
an end and a comprehensive view of the
planet was obtained for the first time. The
cosmography of Ptolemy collapsed; the
mare tenebrosum became a highway; the
centre of the world was shifted from the
Mediterranean to the Atlantic; the entire
globe was covered by sea routes; and the
Earth became one. It has frequently been
said that this represented the beginning of a
new era in world history, but it is necessary
to go further, for with the active merging of
four continents and the major oceans, his¬
tory itself took on a universal dimension.
Photo © Artephot, Paris. Biblioteca Nacional, Madrid

People came from every imaginable
place, attracted by the promise of the im¬
mense discovery. The historian Gonzalo
Fernández de Oviedo, who saw them
arrive, had this to say: "Here, none of the
languages spoken in all those parts of the
world where there are Christians are mis¬
sing, whether it be Italy, Germany, Scot¬
land or England, or whether they be
Frenchmen, Hungarians, Poles, Greeks,
Portuguese or all the other peoples of
Asia, Africa and Europe."
Not only were the great European pow¬
ers stirred into action in order to exploit the
new opportunities, but trade also started
with the Chinese ports across the Pacific, in
the bid to extend the dialogue between
civilizations. Africa, isolated as it was and
with no means of taking action on its own,
suffered harshly from the discovery. In the
space of one century, millions of Africans,
bringing their cultural background with
them, were to be transported and unjustly
put to work performing the basic tasks re¬
quired to create a new reality.
It was at this time, in fact, that the New
World began to steer a new course, not only
in the narrow sense used by the humanists
of the period, but also in two other real and
creative senses that were complementary to
one another. There was certainly a New
World of the Americas which took shape in
a centuries-long development involving the
taking-over of the land, the existence side
by side of peoples and cultures, the mixing
of races and mental attitudes, and the
adaptation to new places and new partners
in dialogue.
From that moment onwards, neither
Europeans, nor Indians nor Africans could
go on being the same as they had been. A
far-reaching process of cross-fertilization,
especially of a cultural nature, was set in
motion. The end product was not and
could not be European, neither could it
be Indian or African. To varying degrees,
the three cultures were combined with one
another and blended to create a different
pattern which, although still not fully recog¬
nized or precisely defined today, was re¬
flected in all the forms assumed by people's
lifestyles, attitudes and relationships.
Whenever a world is created there is
something of a cataclysm, whether it be the
"Big Bang" of modern astrophysics or the
global revolutions of our time. There was a
great deal that was cataclysmic about the
creation of the New World, what with the
bloody struggles, the violence, the heart¬
breaking rifts, the unaccustomed circum¬
stances in which people were transplanted
and had to adapt, the ordeals of living and
dying, and the examples of cruelty and mag¬
nanimity. Yet they all contributed to a de¬
velopment lasting less than a century in
which people of differing and alien origins
came to create a new human scheme of
things against the huge and varied back-
cloth of a new continent.
When Cortés, with blood-curdling con¬
viction, tore down the representations of
the Aztec deities from their altars and put
the cross and the image of the Virgin Mary
in their place, he engaged in an act of the
most physical and spiritual violence. His
attitude, which we are now reluctant to
D'VrRARTOLOMr: DÉLAS CA$Î
CO
a.
o
a.
<
©
i
o
Ô
tn
>
<
o
M
EL'
t
o
c
a. ÊÊÈLwm mmm
'-''V'
V'jw - -
2
<
©
Bartolomé de las Casas, the "Defender of the
Indians", as depicted in a painting preserved
in the Columbus Library, Seville. The great
Spanish historian and polemicist was the
first to force a major expansionist power, as
Spain was in his day, to reflect on the wis¬
dom of its conquest and subjugation of
peoples, in the name of a universal vision of
humanity.
The Amazon forest, Venezuela. The gran-
diose and mysterious landscape of the New
World formed a powerful stimulus to the
European mind and imagination, fuelling
the spirit that impelled so many explorers to
go in search of the Amazons, El Dorado or
the Fount of Eternal Youth.
understand, was one that was to spell out
the singular nature of the process by which
the New World came to be formed. The
discoverers did not come to live side-by-
side with the Indians or to superimpose
their own system: they came to lay found¬
ations, to replant and to create. The priest
and contemporary historian Lucas Fernán¬
dez de Piedrahita spoke with terrible can¬
dour of the unwavering intention to "stamp
out the idolatry that has been deeply rooted
in the barbarous practices of the natives for
so many centuries".
The creation of the New World was in¬
deed cataclysmic and a new human scheme
of things was to emerge from it. In less than
a century, the Spanish, the Indians and the
Africans all became brothers in Christ and
the spiritual descendants of Abraham,
Moses and the Fathers of the Church. This
was to form the main basis for the striking
cultural unity which spiritual communion
was to impart to this new incarnation born
of old and separate cultures. The New
World, with all its specific features and
nuances, became Christian and part of
Western culture, which would define its
identity and destiny for ever more. Thus
was formed the life-enhancing clay from
which "the Inca" Garcilaso de la Vega,
I
M
t
'à
.) 9
¡'S
re¡
i
V,
khk
íVSf*¿>;
?**,"?

s *¿
1 "Ä*J
Vi«
'/'
I
Simón Bolívar, Benito Juárez and Rubén
Darío were to spring.
Far-reaching transformations
The daté of 12 October 1492 marked not
only the beginning of a New World in the
Americas, but also that of the most far-
reaching change ever experienced by the
rest of the planet in its entire history. The
historians of science, thought, economics
and society have all stressed the immensity
of these new developments. The avalanche
of precious metals from the Americas, for
example, was behind the rise of capitalism
and present-day monetary systems, in that
the thousands of tons of gold and silver
shipped back went beyond the confines of
medieval-style banking transactions and
created a transnational financial market.
Population growth in Europe, which was
instrumental in bringing about major urban
concentrations, national consolidation and
the subsequent development of the indust¬
rial revolution, had its roots not only in
worldwide market expansion but also in the
fact that the famines which had decimated
the Europeans for centuries had finally
come to an end. The role played in this
development by some of the non-human
factors arising out of their discovery of the
Americas, such as maize and potatoes, was
decisive. Eating habits and social practices
alike were transformed by the introduction
of tobacco, cocoa, rubber, quinine and Bra¬
zilwood. The red macaw and the plumed
Indian featuring in the multi-coloured de¬
cors of the baroque painters are a spectacu¬
lar manifestation of this definitive presence.
The novel concept of the Americas and
all that it implied was to change the science
and thinking of the West. In their view of
the planet and the cosmos, people had to
abandon Ptolemy's ingenuous cosmological
mechanism in favour of the heliocentric
conception of the planetary system, with all
its far-reaching consequences. The new cli¬
mates, the new skies, the reality of the
Antipodes, the inexhaustible variety of
plant and animal life never seen before,
were all to give rise to doubts and debate
and to lead to further questions, such as
whether those animals had not been known
in Noah's Ark and, if they had, how they
had come to disappear from the Old World.
The advances made in science in the
nineteenth century have their roots in the
Americas. The book by Acosta,2 Alexan¬
der von Humboldt's travels, and the arrival
of the Beagle the boat on which Charles
Darwin made his celebrated voyage off
the coast of South America and the Galapa¬
gos, were all key background material for
Darwin's formulation of the doctrine on the
origin of species.
'Utopia is American'
The ideas of independence and revolu¬
tion that have dominated the history of the
modern world have their origin in the ex¬
perience of the Americas. Utopia is Amer¬
ican. Columbus's letter and the publications
of the first chroniclers of the discovery were
to come as a shock to European thought.
The devastating impact of that scarcely
understood revelation can be seen in the
essays of Michel de Montaigne.
Thomas More's famous book Utopia
(1516) is plainly the ideological conse¬
quence of this first view of the American
world. More, the Chancellor-saint, looked
with disgust on the England of his time.
Poverty, injustice, war, hatred and power
struggles had only served to spread misfor¬
tune everywhere. His main character,
Raphael Hythloday, confirmed what Col¬
umbus and Vespucci had already announ¬
ced, namely that there was another world
For centuries, Spanish galleons (below, 16th-
century engraving) would ship back the gold
and silver of the New World to Europe. This
avalanche of precious metals had a decisive
influence on mercantile expansion and the
development of capitalism, on which the
modern industrial economy is founded.
**/?
*V'^'.fi
m
V,
m
H if". >
i .. - 1 ' 7ï .
_	
13

where people lived in peace, plenty, justice
and honesty. The conclusion was inevit¬
able: the Europeans had in many ways de¬
parted from the true path and had been
condemned to live in an abominable form
of society.
In this connection, some years ago Paul
Hazard, the historian of ideas, spoke au¬
thoritatively of the crisis of European con¬
sciousness, which is nothing but the harrow¬
ing and painful reflection on their own
situation inspired in Renaissance thinkers
by the vision of the "noble savage". This
fundamental contradiction between what
exists and what is possible was to feed the
revolutionary thinking which culminated in
the Enlightenment with Jean-Jacques
Rousseau and the Encyclopaedists and with
the great and bloody baptismal rite of the
French Revolution. In this sense, Robes¬
pierre, Marx, Lenin and Mao can be said to
have followed earlier thinking on the dis¬
covery of the Americas.
There has been an overwhelming tenden¬
cy to look upon the history of political ideas
from the European standpoint. Yet it was
on American soil that the idea of independ¬
ence was raised for the first time and that
reference was first made in a fundamental
historical document [Declaration of inde¬
pendence, 1776] to the self-evident truths:
"... that all men are created equal , that they
are endowed by their Creator with certain
unalienable Rights, that among these are
Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness".
It was likewise on American soil, in the
Preamble to the world's first written Con¬
stitution that of the United States of
America that there first appeared a figure
whose unwonted presence was asserted by a
phrase that was subsequently to echo as far
as the furthest corners of the Earth: "We
the people ... ".
There is nothing that exists today by way
of civilization, politics or thought that is not
a consequence, in some way or another, of
the great event which had Columbus's
voyage as its point of departure, whether it
concerns the arts or the sciences, ideologies
or customs, or the concept of the universe
and the concept of mankind itself.
If the discovery is confined to only one of
its aspects, or if it is simplified into only one
of the infinite number of facets which it has
continually displayed over half a millen¬
nium, then it is condemned not to be under¬
stood. If it is reduced to the elementary idea
of a discovery and conquest, then it will be
mutilated and deformed until it becomes
unrecognizable. There can be no denying
that there was a discovery in a fleeting and
piecemeal fashion, and that there was also a
conquest, with all its terrifying inhuman
or perhaps only too human consequences.
But this was only part, albeit a necessary
and inevitable part, of an immense process
that has no parallel in history.
Matters of conscience
There was a bloody stage of conquest,
and that word alone conjures up frightful
images in the memories of peoples, espe¬
cially among the weakest. However, while
it was unfortunately not the first time, nor
the last, that one nation has imposed itself
by force on others, it was, outstandingly,
the one exemplary occasion in history when
a conquering power stopped in its tracks to
give thought to the legitimacy and justice of
what it was doing.
The debate that took place in Valladolid
in 1550 and the royal edicts stemming
therefrom3 represented the first occasion
on which a major power called a halt to its
expansion in order to resolve the issues of
justice and conscience entailed by that fact.
It was on that occasion that a proclamation
was made for the first time from the highest
level of the State, to the effect that "all
peoples are nations" (Bartolomé de las
Casas) , that all nations have rights that have
to be respected, and that they form an
international community. What was no less
important was the fact that because they
were men, those remote and unknown Indi¬
ans had the same rights as the conquista¬
dors. Is there any human being on Earth
It was on the soil of the New World that the
first modern democratic Constitution was
drafted, that of the United States of Amer¬
ica. Its effects were wide-ranging and pro¬
found. Right, contemporary engraving of
the monument to Christopher Columbus at
the Chicago Exposition of 1892.
today who would be prepared to disavow
and reject this heritage?
Mankind as a whole should be convened
to commemorate with proper dignity the
fifth centenary of that symbolic date and all
its implications, without exception and
without confining it to only one of its
aspects.
By the time 12 October 1992 comes, the
enlightened words verging on blasphemy
which the cleric and historian Las Casas
wrote to the Emperor Charles V may not
sound so much like hyperbole: "The best
thing since the creation of the world, other
than the incarnation and death of Him who
created it, is the discovery of the Indies,
which is why they are called the New
World."
1. At the end of the eighteenth century, this reform-
minded Spanish governor proposed that three vassal but
self-governing kingdoms Mexico, Peru and Tierra
Firme be created in Spanish America, with only Cuba,
Puerto Rico and some points of the mainland continuing
to be colonies.
2. Historia natural y moral de las Indias (1590; Natural
and Moral History of the Indies, 1604), the earliest
survey of the New World and its relation to the Old, by
the Spanish theologian, missionary and historian José de
Acosta.
3. In 1550 the Emperor Charles V convoked a meeting of
theologians, the Council of Valladolid, to discuss the
questions raised by the anti-colonial writings of Las
Casas. One of the most positive outcomes of the debate
was a revised version of the "Laws of the Indies". This
legislation, extremely liberal for its day and intended to
protect the American Indians from colonial excesses,
was not always enforced in practice. Editor.
ARTURO USLAR PIETRI, Venezuelan writer
and politician, taught Latin-American literature at
Columbia University, United States, before serv¬
ing as his country's ambassador to Unesco and as
a member ofthe Organization's Executive Board.
His wide range of published works includes the
historical novels El camino de el dorado (1947)
and Oficio de difuntos (1974); the short story
collections Red (1936) and Pasos y pasajeros
(1965); and essays among which are La otra
América (1974), Fantasmas de dos mundos
(1979) and Giotto y compañía (1987).
A In 1500, eight years after Columbus landed
in the Bahamas, a major breakthrough g
occurred in the exploration of the South £
American continent. The Portuguese navi- »
gator Pedro Alvares Cabrai reached the |
coast of what is today Brazil. Left, Portu- ©
guese azulejos (painted and glazed tiles) 1
show Cabrai rowing ashore. £
