The freedom of the ring
by Annie Fratellini
"If an art is to survive, it needs a school."
Above, a young trapeze artiste trains at the
National Circus School founded in Paris by
Annie Fratellini and Pierre Etaix.
FRATELLINIit's our real name-
means "little brothers" in Italian.
Gustave, born in 1842 in Carrara,
was the first member of the family to join
the circus, just as one might join a religion.
He had four sons: Louis (1868-1909), Paul
(1877-1940), François (1879-1951) and
Albert (1886-1961). When the eldest died,
the remaining three formed a trio that be¬
came famous "the Fratellini Brothers".
My father Victor, son of Paul, was an
acrobat. He taught me acrobatics, the con¬
certina and the saxophone. He gave me a
new musical instrument an accordion, a
vibraphone, a violin, a piano for each
birthday. I learned to play them all. I made
my first appearance in the ring at the Cirque
Medrano in Paris , at the age of twelve. I had
to balance on a rolling blue globe, trundling
it forwards while I played the saxophone.
But by the time I was twenty, I wanted to
forget about the circus. It was a family my
family that I rejected wholesale. I left the
circus and went into jazz, singing, music
hall, drama and films. Why? Mainly be¬
cause it had not lived up to my expectations.
The circus of my childhood wasn't the circus
as my parents had known it.
The memories that I cherished were
those of Grandfather Paul the auguste
with the top hat and the monocle. But I had
to learn all the circus disciplines without
sharing in its magic and mystery. It was
wartime. The circuses were silent. I had to
break free, and for fifteen years I turned my
back on the circus.
What gave me the idea of setting up a
circus school? Originally it must have been
Paul, my grandfather, who gave me this
desire to widen my horizons. He had a
remarkable collection of books, and was
interested in the theatre, music, painting
all the arts. With him I listened to Beeth¬
oven, Wagner, Puccini and Verdi. He
talked to me about life at the Cirque Medra¬
no, where the three Fratellini brothers
worked from 1909 to 1925. In 1920 they
gave the first performance of Jean Coc-
teau's sketch Le buufsur le toit, with music
by Darius Milhaud. Musicians such as
Milhaud, Jean Wiener, Henri Sauguet,
Georges Auric and Erik Satie; writers
Cocteau, Raymond Radiguet, and Colette;
painters, such as Georges Rouault, Fer¬
nand Léger, Pablo Picasso and many
more all used to come to the Cirque Med-
27

Photos © Berthe Judet, Paris
rano, and would gather in the Fratellinis'
dressing-room after the show.
My life took a new direction in 1968 when
I met Pierre Etaix, a terrific fan of clowns
and of the Fratellinis. He persuaded me to
return to the ring. Fernand Léger used to
say, "A ring means freedom: it has neither
beginning nor end". Pierre Etaix was the
white-faced clown. I was the auguste. Three
years later, we went on our first tour with
the Pinder Circus.
I abandoned everything in order to re¬
turn to my origins. My daughter Valérie
(born in 1960, the child of a previous mar¬
riage to the film-maker Pierre Granier-De-
ferre), who had kept away from the circus,
decided to become a trapeze artiste. Where
could she train? There were no more cir¬
cuses in Paris. Medrano was dead, and the
Cirque d'Hiver was being used for other
types of show.
If an art is to survive, it needs a school.
Where there were schools, the circus was
alive and well. This was an observable fact.
Encouraged by the then Minister of Cul¬
ture, Jacques Duhamel, we first of all
founded the National Circus School Asso¬
ciation in 1971 . Then, in 1974, we were able
to establish the school in a Paris youth
centre.
It was an instant success. I had expected
about twenty young people: 600 turned up.
We had to organize classes. I was deter¬
mined that the teachers should be artistes
themselves, the best in their field, real pro¬
fessionals who also wanted to teach. I
wanted the school to be wide open and
generous in its approach , without any initial
weeding-out of applicants. Selection would
occur naturally. My aim was to instil in all
the young beginners the same high stan¬
dards and the same respect for work well
done.
In 1977, we pitched our circus tent on a
piece of land adjoining the La Villette park
in Paris. Circus arts have to be learned in a
clearly defined space, a particular place.
Since we received very little in the way of
subsidies, we had to fight to prove that the
craft of the circus was necessary. In that
year our school became the first technical
education establishment to award a Profes¬
sional Circus Diploma (circus tent equip¬
ment assembler), and the circus became
officially part of French education in 1985.
The school provides two types of
teaching: artistic and technical. On the
technical side, pupils learn how a tent can¬
vas is put together, how king poles, quarter-
"Make-up isn't a disguise; it helps to bring
out your personality." Above, Annie
Fratellini, one of the few female clowns,
prepares for her renowned auguste act.
poles and all the rest of the equipment are
manufactured. Next they learn to read a
tent plan, lay out a tent and build it up.
They also study joinery, metal work, elec¬
tricity and sound systems. After three years
they take an examination.
In the artistic disciplines, dancing and
acrobatics are compulsory. After three
months, pupils choose from among the fol¬
lowing options: fixed trapeze, flying
trapeze, tightwire, juggling, basic music,
equestrian voltige, clowning and trampo¬
line. Having passed through the school, the
pupils can then take their first steps in pub¬
lic, learn to set up an act, choose a musical
accompaniment and a costume, regulate
their lighting and participate in the prepara¬
tion of the show.
It was for these pupils that we created the
Fratellini Circus, which is attached to the
school. An exhibition on the clowns in my
family travels with it on tour. Thus, at the
end of the road, I offer my pupils my
memories, linking the past with the future.
If an art is to continue, its roots must be well
planted. At the end of this training the
pupils can embark on the artiste's life equip¬
ped with all the qualities of a true profes¬
sional, or they can choose something else.
The intake is international: we have
pupils from other countries besides France.
Annie Fratellini's "auguste shoes", which
once belonged to her grandfather, Paul
(1877-1940), one of the famous trio of
"Fratellini Brothers" who made their name
at the Cirque Medrano in Paris.
A circus whose artistes are all from the same
country is not a real circus; diversity is
essential, in nationality as well as in perfor¬
mance. And during the school holidays we
go on tour with the pupils. Since 1975 our
Big Top has visited 200 towns, we have
toured in England, Belgium, Italy and the
United States, and have welcomed 1.5
million spectators.
At present, 360 young people are attend¬
ing the school; 200 children from the age of
eight upwards come to learn on Wednes¬
days and Saturdays. It takes at least three
years at the Circus School to learn acroba¬
tics, which is the foundation for all other
disciplines. Learning on the job is indispen¬
sable, and those who stay are those who
have what it takes to practise the art of the
circus at a high level. Out of 300 pupils
between the ages of eight and twenty, 5 per
cent succeed.
Thus we have trained a new generation of
artistes who can be seen in a number of
establishments. Circuses with schools, such
as the Big Apple Circus in the United States
and the Cirque du Soleil in Canada, have
grown up in the light of our experience.
For twelve years, our circus has been
battling against difficulties. For the circus is
nothing if not fragile. To those who do not
like it, the effort that it requires may seem
futile. We "build up" put up the circus
tent we work, and we go on our way. And
we say to ourselves, "So much labour for so
little reward". But our reward is the plea¬
sure we give to the audience. We relive the
legend of the "travellers", the strolling play¬
ers of the olden days: we set our own scene
in which to present a world of dreams and
magic. The circus entails, above all, hard
work, and a team; team-work. It is a craft,
and must be exercised with sensitivity. I am
gratified that so many young people are
attracted to it.
The circus is regarded by most people in
show business, whether in the theatre,
dance or the cinema, as a school second to
none. It is, after all, at the heart of all forms
of show business, and this explains its influ¬
ence and its continued existence. I wanted a
school, a ring: "A circus for the future."
ANNIE FRATELLINI, ofFrance, is a member of
a famous circus family. From early training as an
acrobat she has gone on to be a singer, musician,
and actress. She has appeared in films by Louis
Malle, René Clair, Pierre Granier-Deferre,
Federico Fellini and Pierre Etaix. Since 1974 she
has run the National Circus School in Paris,
which she founded with Pierre Etaix.
28
