A revolution in seeing' BY ANNE HOY
DAVID
HOCKNEY
is a British artist whose varied creative out¬
put encompasses paintings, prints, drawings
and stage designs as well as photographic
collages and other "cameraworks". Many of
his works are set in his own everyday world
and are filled with recurring themes, such as
Californian swimming pools and portraits of
his friends and members of his family. His
photographic collages have been published
as David Hockney Cameraworks (London,
1984). In David Hockney: A Retrospective
(1988), the volume which catalogues the ex¬
hibition of the same name which is currently
being shown at the Los Angeles County
Museum of Art, his photocollages form the
subject of a study by Anne Hoy from which
this article is taken.
This abridged version of a text by Anne Hoy is
reprinted by permission of the publishers, The
Los Angeles County Museum of Art, L.A., and
Harry N. Abrams, Inc., N.Y., from the book
David Hockney: A Retrospective organized by
L.A.C.M.A., 1988. Published in the United King¬
dom and the British Commonwealth by Thames
& Hudson, Ltd., London, 1988. Published in the
Federal Republic of Germany by Dumont Buch¬
verlag, Cologne, 1988. © 1988 Museum Asso¬
ciates, L.A.C.M.A.
Up to February 1982 David Hockney
scorned the camera as nothing more than a
recording device. Photographs did not hold
his attention. "You'd never look at a photo
for more than thirty seconds," he said, "un¬
less there were a thousand faces and you
were looking for your mother."
Though he took "holiday snaps" begin¬
ning in 1963 and made photographs as pre¬
liminary studies for his paintings from 1968
on, he considered the camera inferior to life
drawing as a means of rendering "weight and
volume". In his paintings, especially through
1972, he exploited the photograph's intensi¬
fication of effects of light and the flat, daz¬
zling colour of commercial processing but
found photography false to perception and
to the actual experience of time and space.
"Photography is all right," he commen¬
ted, "if you don't mind looking at the world
from the point of view of a paralysed
Cyclops for a split second."
But when a visiting curator left some
packages of Polaroid film in Hockney's
newly decorated house in the Hollywood
Hills, he decided to try to represent its three
spatial areas. What began on 26 February
1982, with a thirty-print composite, grew
into over-life-size, full-length Polaroid por¬
traits of his friends, then into vast photocol¬
lages of famous American scenery and com¬
plex portrait narratives made from 35 mm
prints, and climaxed five years later in a
panoramic Western landscape composed of
more than 600 prints. Between March and
May 1982 Hockney made more than' 140
Polaroid collages. Then, from September
1982 to August 1986, he produced 231
photocollages with Pentax 110 single-lens
reflex and 35 mm Nikon cameras. He has
made no large-scale photocollages since.
In their sheer number and monumental
elaboration Hockney's photocollages are a
major body of work within his career. Of a
piece with his paintings, drawings and
prints, his camera art is sunny in spirit,
personal, even diaristic, in subject matter,
and experimental and spontaneous in
technique.
In his photocollages, as in his other work,
Hockney explores lines and edges; he called
his first exhibition of photocollages Draw¬
ing with the Camera. He also employs
photography as a reproductive tool, like
etching, lithography, or most recently the
office photocopier, but exploits its special
features.
His photocollages are accessible in con¬
tent and means. Indeed Hockney welcomes
the recent imitations of them in American
magazine advertisements and French tourist
promotions. To him these replicas forecast
the "revolution in seeing" he hopes his
camera art will foster.
The revolution Hockney seeks is through
Modernism. In this regard his photocollages
define issues latent in his previous work and
give them unique, spectacular resolution.
"In a way Modernist art hasn't triumphed
yet!" Hockney remarks. "Because we're still
stuck with the Renaissance picture which
is the photograph and we believe it's the
most vivid representation of reality."
Conventional painting and photography,
which ratify one-point perspective, create,
not greater realism, but greater distance be¬
tween spectator and subject, he believes.
And with ordinary photographs the viewer
lacks the compensation of handwork offered
even by perspectival painting, the verisimili¬
tude gained, Hockney says, as "the hand
moving through time reflects the eye moving
through time (and life moving through
time)".
To circumvent these limitations, Hockney
turned to Modernist collaging of many
photographs. As early as 1970 he had taken
photographs sequentially and pasted them
down edge to edge as a means of recording
more information in architectural studies
but without the distortion of a wide-angle
lens. He called these works "joiners".
Eventually he realized "that if you put six
pictures together, you look at them six times.
This is more what it's like to look at some¬
one." He notes that the gaze moves perpe¬
tually, that visual experience is a composite
of shifting views focused by interest and
inflected by concept and memory. Sensa¬
tions of depth and movement are intrinsic to
eyesight, he observes, upholding the defini¬
tion of perception known since Impression-
26

NEW PERSPECTIVES
David Hockney:
The Brooklyn Bridge Nov. 28th 1982, photocollage, 1982
The ßrfkfy* BrlJff-
A/tv 17* /ffl
27

NEW PERSPECTIVES
David Hockney:
The Crossword Puzzle Minneapolisfan. 1983, photocollage, 1983
7/i ä* Cro SS WW* fu2 2/e /Y)/** /<*/>* //J J&*i S? ¥S .
ism and seen in Cubism. While a single
photograph can encapsulate only a frozen
moment Hockney calls such pictures
"one-eyed" a collage of them suggests the
composite experience of observation over
time.
His photocollages add "Cubist effects to
photography", Hockney says, and the
effects range from witty art-historical refer
ences to ambitious extensions of Synthetic
Cubist drawing, perspective and collage.
"It's our movement that tells us we're
alive," Hockney says. This conviction has
sharpened his use of diverse perspective
means throughout his career, for they sup¬
port or counteract the inherent stasis of the
picture and thus sharpen our awareness of its
illusionism. D
28
