From the Nubian campaign to the Library ofAlexandria
Unesco and the ancient
Egyptian heritage
BY GAMAL MOKHTAR
THE Campaign to Save the Monuments
of Nubia was the most spectacular
demonstration of Unesco's concern
for the legacy of ancient Egypt, and its suc¬
cess was the most striking example of inter¬
national understanding and world solidarity
in the field of cultural co-operation and the
preservation of the heritage.
When the Egyptian Government began to
study a project for building a High Dam to
the south of the city of Aswan in order to
develop and modernize the country's eco¬
nomy and decided to execute the project
in 1954, it became apparent that Egypt and
the Sudan had a major cultural problem on
their hands: dozens of temples and
archaeological sites and areas in Nubia were
in danger of being submerged by the waters
of the vast artificial lake that would be
formed behind the High Dam. The lake,
which would be 25 kilometres wide in some
areas, would extend over 300 kilometres up
the Nile Valley in Egyptian Nubia and some
200 kilometres into Sudanese Nubia.
Two examples indicate the scale of the
problem. The first concerns the two temples
of Abu Simbel, 270 kilometres south of
Aswan. The base of the larger temple stood
124 metres and that of the smaller temple
122 metres above sea level. The temples lay
upstream of the old Aswan Dam, which had
been constructed around the turn of the
century, but as the water level of the reser¬
voir created by this dam never exceeded
121 metres, no part of the two temples was
ever submerged by its waters. After the con¬
struction of the High Dam, however, the
water level would rise to 1 82 metres, exceed
ing the highest level reached by the waters of
the old Aswan Dam by 62 metres and sub¬
merging the two temples completely.
The second example is that of the temples
which stood on the island of Philae,
1 04 metres above sea level to the south of the
old Aswan Dam and to the north of the High
Dam. The Philae temples were submerged
almost totally by the waters of the old
Aswan Dam most days of the year.
However, after the construction of the High
Dam (whose waters would not directly
affect these temples, as they were located
downstream) the water level of the old reser¬
voir would drop and fluctuate daily
between 102 and 110 metres in the process
of generating electricity. In other words, the
water would only partially inundate the tem¬
ple walls, but the fluctuating water level
36
The project to dismantle the two rock temples of
Abu Simbel and to re-erect them ata new site
with the same orientation as before, but 64 m
higher and 180 m further inland, was one of the
most spectacular achievements of the
Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia
launched by Unesco in 1960. Artist's conception
of the salvage operation (right) shows the Great
Temple with its seated colossi and the Small
Temple beyond it, both protected from the
waters of the Nile by a cofferdam (foreground).
The rock has been excavated above and behind
the Great Temple to enable dismantling of the
temple rooms. Far right, the temples re-erected
at the new site, out of reach of the water. Two
great concrete domes with overlying rock
recreate the original appearance of the
surrounding area. Work was completed in 1968.

* ^i
'A
làia.'J
Éwl L'M-^ilJ
would pose a more serious threat to the
stonework of the temples than their total and
permanent submersion.
The High Dam project thus confronted
the two governments with a major responsi¬
bility to the land of Nubia, which had had
strong links with Egypt throughout its his¬
tory, especially during the Pharaonic period.
It had therefore been the scene of major
architectural activity, particularly the con¬
struction of temples, fortifications and cas¬
tles for the protection of trade routes and the
maintenance of peace. Cities, cemeteries and
tombs were built in various periods, and
innumerable quantities of rock stelae, carv¬
ings and inscriptions had survived, not to
mention all the records of the past that still
lay buried.
The Egyptian Government therefore
approached Unesco on 6 April 1959, re¬
questing its active material, technical and
scientific assistance in the design and execu¬
tion of projects to save the monuments of
Nubia. Such a step was warranted by the
scale and costliness of the task and also by
the fact that the monuments were part of the
universal human heritage and hence a matter
of concern to the world as a whole.
Moreover, it was felt that Unesco had a
major responsibility for preserving and safe¬
guarding the world heritage and was the only
international organization capable of raising
the financial support and rallying the special¬
ists and technicians that were needed from all
over the world. A few months later, the
Sudanese Government submitted a similar
request to Unesco.
Unesco responded to these requests by
launching two major appeals. A first general
appeal was made by the Director-General of
Unesco on 8 March 1960 and a second, con¬
cerned more specifically with the need to
rescue the temples of Philae, was made
on 6 November 1968. In both appeals, the
Director-General called on governments,
public and private bodies and all potential
sources of aid to provide financial, technical
and scientific assistance for the purpose of
saving the monuments of Nubia.
The Campaign to Save the Monuments of
Nubia began with the following archaeolo¬
gical activities:
1 . Comprehensive recording of the monu¬
ments of Nubia: this was meticulously car¬
ried out by the Documentation and Study
Centre for the History of the Art and Civi¬
lization of Ancient Egypt in Cairo, which
had been established in 1955 as a result of a
contract between Unesco and the Govern¬
ment of Egypt providing for co-operation in
documenting Egyptian monuments with
their inscriptions and carvings. The Centre
was set up and financed by Egypt, with
Unesco providing the experts and
equipment.
2. An archaeological survey of Nubia to
make an inventory of all the archaeological
areas and sites that would be inundated and
to identify areas that had not yet been ex¬
cavated. Over seventy archaeological mis¬
sions from twenty-five countries then car¬
ried out excavations in those areas of
Egyptian and Sudanese Nubia that were to
be submerged.
The rescue of the temples which stood on the
island of Philae was the final stage in the
Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia
threatened by the waters of the Aswan High
Dam. The temples, dedicated to the cult of Isis,
are shown still almost intact in the 1 9th-century
engraving above left. They became endangered
in the early years of this century, when the first
Aswan Dam was built downstream from them.
After 1934, when the dam was raised, the island
and its temples were submerged for much of the
year. Photo taken in 1972 (above centre) shows
the Temple of Isis and the Graeco-Roman
"Kiosk" of Trajan partly under water. In 1960,
the construction of the High Dam threatened to
submerge the temples permanently, and a
decision was made to dismantle them and move
them to the neighbouring island of Algikia,
which was landscaped to resemble Philae. Work
began in 1972 and was completed in 1979.
Above, the monuments reconstituted on their
3. Rescue work on over twenty temples in
Egyptian and Sudanese Nubia, including:
The two temples of Abu Simbel, which
had been hewn in the rock. Many proposals
were submitted and extensive field studies
were carried out. In the end it was decided to
dismantle the two temples and rebuild them
inside soaring artificial domes erected at the
same site, but on ground 60 metres above the
original location. The temples were inaugu¬
rated at their new location in 1967.
The temples of Philae. Several proposals
were submitted for this rescue operation and
the project finally selected was carried out by
.Egyptian and Italian companies. It involved
dismantling the temples and reassembling
them on the neighbouring island of Agilkia
after preparing and levelling the terrain. The
completion of the project and the successful
conclusion of the campaign to save the
Nubian heritage were marked with great
celebrations in 1980.
In addition, over twenty temples, many
chapels, rock stelae and carvings also had to
be dismantled, transported and reassembled
on higher ground, safely above the waters of
the new reservoir, Lake Nasser. This rescue
work was carried out by the Egyptian De¬
partment of Antiquities, with the exception
of the Temple of Kalabsha, which was res¬
cued by the Federal Republic of Germany,

The Great
Sphinx
threatened
^ With its human head and the body of a
recumbent lion carved out of the rock
beneath the Great Pyramids at Giza,
the colossal great Sphinx is a portrait
statue of the Pharaoh Khephren
(c. 2520-2494 BC), whose tomb it
guards. Today the Sphinx is
threatened both by erosion due to the



climate and by the rising level of
extremely saline ground-water. In
February 1988, a block of stone
weighing almost 300 kg fell from the
right shoulder of the monument and
broke. The Egyptian Minister of
Culture has appealed to Unesco for
help in saving the Sphinx, which with
the rest of the Giza site is inscribed on
the World Heritage List of cultural
; properties of outstanding universal
value. The Director-General of
Unesco, who has recently visited the
site and noted the extent of the
damage, has expressed Unesco's
readiness to co-operate in the
restoration of the Sphinx.
*
38
and a section of the Temple of Amada, which
was rescued by France. The latter was moved
on rails to safe ground near its original site.
The antiquities of a region that had impor¬
tant ties with Pharaonic Egypt were thus
saved for posterity. For thousands of years
they had stood as a magnificent symbol of
human achievement in an isolated, barren
and inhospitable land, and they now provide
a unique example of what modern science
and technology can do to save the heritage of
our forebears.
Saving the monuments of Nubia was a
major landmark in the history of Unesco, for
it involved the Organization in the most
ambitious cultural and scientific operation
ever attempted in human history. The un¬
qualified success of the campaign was the
result of intensive co-operation among all
the parties concerned over a period of almost
twenty years. Victory was achieved through
the firm determination of the Governments
of Egypt and Sudan to save their cultural
heritage, the generosity of Unesco's Member
States, and the enthusiasm and skill of all
those who took part in the rescue operation
itself, particularly the archaeologists,
architects, engineers and experts who joined
forces under Unesco's aegis.
Unesco has contributed to the presenta¬
tion and enhancement of Egypt's ancient
heritage in other fields, including:
the improvement of museum services, par¬
ticularly the Egyptian Museum of Pharaonic
Antiquities in Cairo;
the conservation and restoration of ancient
Egyptian and Islamic archaeological sites
such as the Pyramids of Giza, Luxor and
several Islamic sites in Cairo;
the inclusion of a number of Egyptian
antiquities on the World Heritage List;
assistance in the publication of the Coptic
manuscripts of Nag' Hammadi, known as
"The Gnostic Codices";
the launching in 1982 of an International
Campaign for the Establishment of the
Nubia Museum in Aswan and the National
Museum of Egyptian Civilization in Cairo
and provision or all the financial, technical
and informational assistance needed to
achieve the goals of the campaign. The pur¬
pose of the National Museum is to present
the civilizations of Egypt from pre-nistory
to the present day . The exhibits of the Nubia
Museum will cover the geological, geog¬
raphic, ecological, ethnographic and artistic
features of Nubia and every aspect of its
history and archaeology. The Museum will
also contain a research centre to study all
matters related to Nubia and its ties with
Africa, for it was a major passage-way for the
transmission of cultural influences between
the Mediterranean and Africa.
Support for the project to revive the
ancient Library of Alexandria, a store of
learning that served the scientists and philo¬
sophers of the Greek world at a time when
Alexandria was a world centre of culture and
science. Unesco has called for contributions
to cover the building costs and for donations
of basic equipment, and has offered help in
planning this long-term project, which will
be completed at the end of the century. '
1 . The Library of Alexandria project will be the subject of
an article in the November 1988 issue of the Unesco
Courier. Editor.
GAMAL MOKHTAR, Egyptian archaeologist, is
a former Director of his country's Service ofAnti¬
quities. The author of many publications on the
history of ancient Egypt, he was the editor of
Ancient Civilizations of Africa (1981), Volume II
of Unesco's General History of Africa. The Editors
of the Unesco Courier would like to thank
Dr. Mokhtar for his help in the preparation of this
issue.
