The Little Top
by Jorge Enrique Adoum
Latin America is justly famous for the
quality of its big circuses, but it is the
poignant world of the small-time circus
rather than glamorous Big Top spec¬
taculars that inspired this evocation by
the Ecuadorian novelist and poet Jorge
Enrique Adoum.
THE Argentine poet Raul González
Tuñón penned the following descrip¬
tion of the character whose name
figures in the title of his book Los poemas de
Juancito Caminador: "He was a pitiful
negro, who worked in a circus. All circuses
are poor, but this one was poorer than the
poor. He had planned a 'magic act', in
which he placed a skull on a table, with a
lettuce leaf beneath its one remaining jaw¬
bone. Behind it, where the audience could
not see, there was a rabbit eating the leaf,
v and this gave the impression that the skull
was doing so. When the rabbit died, he lost
his job. I don't know whether he just didn't
think of buying another rabbit, or whether
he couldn't afford to buy one."
The universal symbol of the circus the
tent means poverty to the Latin Amer¬
ican. Whenever the tent is mended or
patched, ten new gaps appear, and when it
rains the audience have to use their umbrel¬
las. These gaps would be a godsend for the
bare-foot children who cannot afford to pay
the entrance money, were it not for the
local police who, either because the mana¬
ger or owner of the circus has greased their
palms or because they are always ready to
do anything that stops the poor from doing
what they want, prevent them from enter¬
ing what for them is paradise.
The Ecuadorian writer Raúl Vallejo once
wrote a story called "The World's Most
Patched-up Circus Tent" and a similar tent
appears again and again in "The Triple
Jump", a collection of texts by his compat¬
riot Iván Egiiez. But the image of poverty
evoked by the circus tent is best captured by
the Chilean poet Alfonso Alcalde: "The
lion's coat was so worn that some friends
had patched it up with bits of socks and old
shirt-sleeves. There were patches of every
colour yellow, with purple or green
stripes, or red circles. When the lion was
pleased, it wagged its tail, which was tied up
with string."
That is when there is a lion. For exotic
animals, the main attraction of a circus, are
very expensive. They have to be imported
from Africa or bought in European mar¬
kets; transport has to be paid for; a suitable
environment must be created for them; they
cost a fortune to feed. (When one of these
Pablo Picasso, circus-lover and a frequent
spectator at the Cirque Medrano in Paris,
painted many canvases on circus themes,
especially during his "Rose Period". His Girl
on a Ball (1905), left, is today preserved in
the State Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts,
Moscow.
14

"real" circuses came to town, the street
urchins, who had somehow found out in
advance, used to catch stray dogs and sell
them as food for the wild animals.) And so
these little circuses, which try their luck on
the outskirts of big cities, dwarfed by Ferris
wheels and merry-go-rounds, are proud
when they can show off an elephant or a
bear in much the same wretched state as
Alfonso Alcalde's lion, animals which the
big circuses sell off because they can no
longer stand on their feet.
The village circuses are even poorer and
virtually sedentary, although they may
travel short distances in a truck where the
performers sleep beside their belongings
so much for the nostalgic image of a caravan
of covered wagons where "Gypsies" live
(for we always regarded the circuspeople as
Gypsies, perhaps because of the fortune¬
tellers) with their children who never know
for sure which country they were born in.
Such village circuses are happy if they can
produce a wild cat of some kind. The tamer,
a kind of poor man's Tarzan in a makeshift
uniform, usually has his eye on an eques¬
trienne in a rival circus that has horses,
while also setting his cap at the mulatto
trapeze artiste, who is nearly always the
owner's daughter-in-law or concubine. He
is remarkable for his stature rather than his
skill; he makes a great noise when cracking
his whip in order to conceal his failure to
overcome the animals' obstinate refusal to
obey him.
The other animals the circus keeps are
small, tame monkeys, inevitably dressed up
as babies, which squeal as they jump, clam¬
ber up high and turn somersaults, and "per¬
forming dogs" dressed up as clowns, Gyp¬
sies or ballerinas, depending on their sex.
The dogs' main activity is walking around
with a hat in their jaws, collecting money
from the audience, who are seated on
planks placed on trestles. The money they
collect is a kind of gratuity over and above
the entrance fee or the price of a bag of
candied peanuts made by the women in the
troupe. (Sometimes a bigger dog, dressed
in a tawny-coloured skin, serves as a tiger.)
And in at least one village in the Andes
there are hens with skirts or cloaks and even
neckties, whose act consists of running
madly round the sawdust-covered ring.
The performers, who are usually mem¬
bers of one family (to avoid splitting up the
takings) are much the same as in any circus.
There is the female contortionist and the
bearded lady, the sword-swallower, the
knife-thrower who more often than not
misses the target, and the magician who
pulls many a scarf and bunch of flowers out
of his painted cardboard hat, but never a
rabbit which would be enough for the
family dinner ... or could have kept Juan-
cito Caminador in his job. The tightrope
walkers and acrobats are particularly
courageous since they know that the
trapeze is a dubious piece of apparatus
patched up with odd bits of wire, that the
tightrope was bought second-hand at the
frontier, and that there is no safety net to
protect them from a sudden return to earth .
Some new additions to the repertoire
indicate concessions to modernity: "Super¬
man and the Seven Dwarfs", "Franken¬
stein's Coffin", and "The King of the Jun¬
gle" (who stands in for the tamer when the
latter is dismissed by the owner or his son
for making advances to the trapeze artiste),
the hunchback who swivels round on his
Two Colombian aerialists, members of the
Los albarracines troupe, performing at the
Cirque d'Hiver, Paris
hump, and the dwarf who dances on his
head. Until recently fakirs were another
attraction . An exotic figure if ever there was
one, the fakir was locked up with a snake in
a glass-topped chest, where he fasted for
thirty days. Some members of the audience
thought that this was an inordinate length of
time and yelled, "Some people will do any¬
thing rather than work !", obliging the
police commissioner to certify personally
that it was not a hoax.
The band, recruited from local musi¬
cians, enlivens the show with tunes of ineff¬
able gloom. It's the same band that strikes
up in the square late on Sunday afternoons
after playing at the Sunday morning foot¬
ball match in the same square (sometimes
there is only one team and the players wear
ordinary clothes) and at bullfights where
there are no spangled costumes and no
matadors, and the bull careers round the
square, knocking over the Indians and mes¬
tizos who have been drunk since the night
before. A band which, wherever it plays,
pours out the melancholy of villages hud¬
dled in the hollows of the cordillera and
covered with a veil of dust that protects
them from the drizzle. The grocer plays the
cornet, the chemist the trombone, the
muleteer the flute, the lawyer's clerk the
saxophone, and the barber the clarinet. The
butcher's boy beats the drum, consoling
himself for his humble destiny with the
knowledge that the death-defying leap
would be impossible, or at least not so
exciting, were it not for the roll of his drum.
In the poorest circuses of all, the problem is
solved by the cassette-player, a marvellous
substitute for the gramophone, with its re¬
cords that used to get broken after every
performance.
Here, as everywhere, the clown is the
person who most fully expresses the way
things are in communities that are victims of
the system. He also expresses his own situa¬
tion as a victim of the circus, for he does not
belong to the family which owns it. They
exploit him, for as well as clowning he has to
drum up business, collect the entrance
money, put away the props and sweep up
after the show. Here more than anywhere,
the clown is what the American writer
Henry Miller called "fate's pawn".
Although some people prefer to see him as
the village idiot, the shoe-shine boy in the
market, or a stammering beggar, rather
than, like them, the victims of others or
of fate.
In big, well-equipped international cir¬
cuses, the clown's attire has to "look" torn,
his hat and shoes must "suggest" a tramp's
outfit. But in our sort of circus, both in
everyday life and on the night when there is
a show, the clown (in remote villages an
artisan or peasant, in the city an itinerant
who goes from circus to circus), has his
elbows and knees showing through holes in
his shabby old clothes whose patches are
not part of the costume , but marks of pover¬
ty. Slapped in the face, kicked about, spat
at, the poor wretch is a compendium of the
mistakes and stupidities of humanity. He
walks like a blind man, bumps into walls,
can't grasp explanations, doesn't hear what
people say to him. He is a blockhead made
fun of and exploited by another blockhead,
because it takes two to represent society
and the system. The other blockhead blows
him up and then deflates him, plays tricks
on him, fills his hat with water, and pulls
away his chair so that he sits down with a
bump. And the children laugh. After all,
why shouldn't they laugh at the misfortunes
of this hapless wretch if it helps them get
even with a life in which there is little to
laugh about? And even the adults laugh
because some of them see their own like¬
ness in the clown. For everyone knows that
the other chap, the rascal, the bully, the
villain, never makes people laugh.
Such are the images of gloom and poverty
evoked by the kind of circus that does not
come to town headed by a parade of acro¬
bats riding exotic animals, while the big
band plays. During the interval it's imposs¬
ible to buy a photo of a pretty girl walking
on a ball bigger than she is (for one thing the
girl who performs this act isn't pretty; for
another, balls are so expensive that she has
to use an empty barrel smelling of liquor).
There is no printed programme. Sometimes
there are no tickets; you just hand over your
money at the entrance and walk in. But the
main thing is that such circuses bring poor
people a fleeting moment of happiness on a
Sunday afternoon. For next morning, when
the farce of the system starts all over again
they too will have to contend with cuffs,
kicks and shabby treatment, and perform
their own leaps into the void and their own
balancing acts as they move forward along
an unsteady and endless tightrope.
JORGE ENRIQUE ADOUM, Ecuadorian writer,
has published several volumes ofpoetry, includ¬
ing an anthology, No son todos los que están:
Poemas (1949-1979), a novel, Entre Marx y una
mujer desnuda, and two plays, La subida a los
infiernos and El sol bajo las patas de los caballos
(published in English as The Sun Trampled be¬
neath the Horses' Hooves).
