Tomorrow's medicine
Jean Dausset
THE concept of science, which re¬
lates to knowledge, is often con¬
fused in the public mind with the
concept of technology, which concerns the
utilization of knowledge.
Man, himself derived from matter, is be¬
ginning to "know" and understand his envi¬
ronment and the great forces which control
it, and to apprehend the mechanisms of life.
Knowledge is the glory of man. Knowledge
frees man, while ignorance restricts and
constrains him. The progress of science as a
fundamental cognitive acquisition cannot
and must not be halted.
Technology is the tool which enables
knowledge to be used. This is how, down
the centuries, man has slowly but gradually
acquired a certain mastery over his envi¬
ronment, while at the same time developing
his psychic and spiritual capacities.
Then, suddenly, in a few decades in¬
deed, during our generationwe have wit¬
nessed and, in the case of some of you,
actively participated in, man's acquisition of
tremendous powers. Through atomic fis¬
sion he has acquired an almost inexhaustible
source of energy. Computer science has
increased almost to infinity his powers of
calculation, analysis, indeed of prediction
and even decision. Thanks to the application
of molecular biology to genetics, he is ac¬
quiring control over life itself.
We thus have the remarkable privilege of
living at a unique moment in the history of
our species, certainly the most exciting, but
also the most dangerous, period in the hu¬
man adventure. This means that our gener¬
ation bears a heavy responsibility to which
we cannot remain indifferent and from
which we must not try to escape.
The possession of this knowledge and this
power imposes new duties on man. He must
cease to be the plaything of chance and to
submit passively to his fate, for he is now
capable of guiding his destiny towards a
well-thought-out future in other words,
of assuming control of his own destiny. We
"Through atomic fission, man has acquired an
almost inexhaustible source of energy. " Below,
nuclear reactor at Millstone, Connecticut,
United States.
have no right to be either optimistic or
pessimistic. We owe it to ourselves to be
clear-sighted.
In the first place, we must not try to hide
from ourselves the fact that we have already
inflicted serious damage on the biosphere,
nor the fact that the very survival .of our
species on this planet with its limited re¬
sources is seriously threatened.
Fortunately, this situation is not irrevers¬
ible, since it is largely due to the time-lag
between the rapidity of material changes, as
discoveries are made at increasing speed,
and the inertia of mental attitudes whose
slow rate of evolution is counted in gener¬
ations. This significant time-lag is causing
the current malaise or crisis which, we
hope, is only a crisis of growth. An enor¬
mous effort of adaptation is thus urgently
necessary.
Up to now, thanks to his intelligence,
ingenuity, tenacity and dynamism, man has
been able to adapt to every situation, how¬
ever critical or extreme. Why should this
not be so again?
Scientists and all thinking people must
mobilize to promote this adaptation by the
16

Vv'
As a result of unwise uses of the great power
conferred on mankind by science and tech¬
nology, the environment has been despoiled
and the survival of the human species has been
jeopardized.
h
b\
- \>
nh>
*
{>.
\
¿N
* .* ,. «i
ifc-
ztl
-
W m*.
r.
-t$
¿
-Xí jSW1*
T
l«*l
ii ¡s*w«
¿*X
-I
v.
wrts
KIV3 W ÜB
"' «¡P vf&«
i -
^$'kHäfi?
'W "4,
1 '. . ' V» '
'
n
Sí
>,» r.v
' ;
; xfr >\kx¡
''-'' *i'-- >. ,.
&¡}.r\; k
aë*
1 ¿A ^'^^^

most rapid and effective means. Indeed that
is why we are here today.
As a biologist, I am proud of the enor¬
mous benefits that modern medicine has
brought to millions of people, but I cannot
hide from myself the fact that the improve¬
ment in health has resulted in an almost
insupportable growth in the world's pop¬
ulation, with its accompaniment of poverty
and suffering.
Nevertheless, medicine must unremit¬
tingly continue its work. Let us not forget
that at least 1,000 million people are still
affected by parasitic diseases: 200 million by
malaria, leading to between 8 and 10 million
deaths per year; 200 million by bilharzia; 10
million in South America by Chagas' disease
(American Tripanosomiasis); not counting
the blind, the crippled and the outcasts who
are victims of other forms of parasitosis.
In this already serious context which
must not be disregarded a previously un¬
known (or little known?) disease appeared
only a few years ago: AIDS, which now
affects both industrialized and developing
countries, particularly those in Africa.
The figures speak for themselves. The
World Health Organization (WHO) esti¬
mates the total number of AIDS cases at
between 100,000 and 150,000, possibly un¬
derestimating the countless number of vic¬
tims in Africa, most of whom are not rec¬
orded or even treated. The number of cases
is doubling every year. Five to ten million
people throughout the world will probably
be infected by the virus by 1991.
AIDS is, therefore, a major challenge to
mankind. Since the time of Pasteur we have
become accustomed to the virtual disap¬
pearance, at least in the industrialized coun¬
tries, of the danger of fatal infectious dis¬
eases, but now a new killer disease is
spreading. Charles Nicolle1 warned us that
"Perhaps this is the noblest accomplishment ofour
century: as we abolish distance, men everywhere
recognize one another as brothers. For, let us
confess, on a moral level our society is merely
groping forprogress. Ourpriorities seem without
real focus. We are more preoccupied with prob¬
lems of space than with any ethical quest, or any
quest for an ethic. Concrete matters interest us
more than humanity's heart and soul. Man walks
on the Moon, but remains distant from his fellow
man. He explores the depths ofthe sea, the limits of
the Universe, but his next-door neighbour re¬
mains a stranger. We live to become very old, but
old age has become a burden and a curse. "
Elie Wiesel
Extract from an address given at the opening plenary session of the
Nobel Laureate Conference, Elysée Palace, Paris
1. French bacteriologist, Nobel Prize for Physiology or
Medicine, 1928
new diseases would appear through the nat¬
ural play of the agents of infection, causing
ravages before their hosts became adapted
through selection of the most resistant
individuals.
The challenge of AIDS concerns psychol¬
ogists, sociologists and politicians, as well as
medical doctors and research scientists.
The challenge to doctors is all the greater
since they are practically helpless at present
and the deaths of their patients are the more
distressing because most of them are young
people in the prime of life, fully aware of
their condition and prospects. Their lives
are broken, and the distress of their families
is total. In most cases these patients are
looked after by doctors and nurses with
exemplary dedication and compassion.
Although an agent of infection has never
before been identified, isolated, studied and
analysed so rapidly, the challenge to re¬
searchers and biologists is extremely severe.
The AIDS virus or viruses have proved to be
particularly formidable adversaries because
they penetrate and destroy the very cells
whose role is to defend the organism. Any
immunity protection is thus annihilated and
the patient becomes a prey to many other
infections which he or she is no longer
capable of resisting.
Image from a computer game produced in
France for use in AIDS education. The first of
its kind, the game is intendedfor young people
between the ages of15 and25, and teaches basic
facts about the disease and its transmission.
Apparatus for biological and haematological
examinations is used in AIDS screening and
treatment.
18

^ Faces offamine. Father and son at an Interna¬
tional Red Cross feeding centre for refugees in
Ethiopia.
The stakes are therefore very high. Scien¬
tists have been mobilized on a world-wide
scale. This mobilization should, and must,
lead as quickly as possible to means of
curing and preventing the disease.
The challenge to psychologists and so¬
ciologists is no less serious. It stems from
our thorough understanding of the method
of contamination by sexual channels or
through the blood. The number of infected
but apparently healthy persons is growing
rapidly, and in the social categories most
affected, such as drug addicts and homosex¬
uals, it has reached the alarming rates of 20
to 40 per cent. It is primarily among the
high-risk groups that action must be taken
to try to check the spread of the disease.
Efforts must be made to convince those
already infected, the sero-positive, of their
enormous responsibility to society, for the
spread or restriction of the epidemic de¬
pends solely upon their sexual behaviour.
It must also be pointed out that the atti¬
tudes of psychologists and sociologists nec¬
essarily varies considerably with cultures,
customs, ideas and taboos. Thus, these atti¬
tudes differ greatly in Africa and in Western
societies. Likewise, such apparently simple
means of protection as condoms are readily
available to some people and practically
inaccessible to others. Here injustice in the
face of disease reaches its peak.
But perhaps the greatest challenge is that
facing politicians, because in this situation
the individual interests of the sick and the
sero-positive do not always coincide with
the interests of society. Sometimes these
interests are even opposed hence the enor¬
mous difficulty in setting up effective bar¬
riers to the spread of the virus. Jurists and
politicians are thus faced with a challenge of
exceptional dimensions. It remains to be
seen whether their response to it will be
adequate.
Of course, society has a duty to protect
its citizens, but this must be done with due
respect for the freedom and dignity of the
individual. Should authoritarian measures
which alienate certain individual freedoms
be taken if the interest of the community
calls for them? Such measures have been
proposed and even applied in certain coun¬
tries. All of them are discriminatory. They
consist of compulsory notification, system¬
atic screening, jsolation or segregation of
AIDS cases and even of those infected with
the virus, their exclusion from certain types
of employment, sanitary restrictions, and
sanctions.
But it seems that wisdom is prevailing and
that, with a few exceptions, governments
have concluded that authoritarian measures
would probably be ineffective and would in
any case be largely unacceptable.
Naturally, once an anti-AIDS vaccine has
been proved effective, vaccination can be
made compulsory, as in the case of some
other vaccines.
What should be done? In the present state
of our knowledge, the fight must be con¬
fined to the most intimate domain of indi¬
vidual behaviour, that of sexual life. Only
clear, calm, credible, objective and complete
information, free from excessive prudery
and sensationalism, is likely to have any
effect. This information must combat
myths, alarmist rumours and falsehoods. It
must demonstrate the seriousness and- fre¬
quency of the risk, causing fear but not
panic which could lead to irrational, unjust
and even violent attitudes. The role and
responsibility of the media in the field of
information and communication are of fun¬
damental importance.
AIDS is a social phenomenon which caus¬
es the pendulum to swing backward. For
centuries the sexual behaviour of our fore¬
bears was conditioned by fear of syphilis
and pregnancy. The contraceptive pill has
liberated our children's morals. AIDS may
restrict them again, demonstrating the ex¬
tent to which morality and physiology are
linked.
19

We hope that the authorities who take
measures against this scourge of modern
times will do so in a spirit of scientific
precision and tolerance.
The second subject about which I should
like to speak, as a biologist, is the major
impact which new developments in the
study of genetics are bound to have on
tomorrow's world.
In this field man has acquired the fab¬
ulous capacity to decipher and modify the
genetic programme which governs the con¬
struction of living beings. I wonder whether
it is generally realized that all forms of life
on Earth are programmed and coded by an
extraordinarily limited number of chemical
structures, the four nucleotides adenine,
thymine, cytosine and guanine, which are
the four letters A, T, C, Gof the al¬
phabet of life. It is only the order of se¬
quence of these four letters that causes a
rosebush or a maize plant to differ from a
bacterium, an elephant or a human being.
Man's genetic programme comprises
3,000 million of these four characters, form¬
ing an enormous molecule curled up in the
thousands of millions of cells in our bodies.
If it were given the means, molecular biol¬
ogy would now be capable of reading this
enormous text which would fill 1,000 vol¬
umes of 1,000 pages each and whose compo¬
nent words are the genes which code the
constituent elements of the organism.
Highly sensitive chemical tools now en¬
able us to identify indicators throughout the
length of this long filament, which can be
compared to milestones and between which
we can locate the genes of many diseases.
Thus it has become possible to know
whether or not an individual is a carrier of a
defective gene or whether a child is certain
to be born handicapped, in which case ap¬
propriate measures can be taken. The same
procedure can be applied to more complex
diseases such as cardiovascular ailments,
high blood pressure, diabetes and even
cancer.
The medicine of the twenty-first century
will be predictive medicine. It will be pos¬
sible, to a much greater extent than at pre¬
sent, to predict and therefore prevent rather
than cure. The dream of a long life with all
one's faculties intact to the end is, perhaps,
no longer unattainable.
But the geneticist's power is often feared
by the public. Geneticists are admired when
they succeed in modifying a plant or animal
species in order to obtain a better yield, but
people also fear that one day the same meth¬
ods will be applied to man. Biologists have
long been regarded as benefactors, but
they now risk being seen as sorcerer's
apprentices.
Rather like physicists in the years 1945 to
1950, geneticists are faced with a very seri¬
ous moral dilemma. Should they continue
their research regardless of the conse¬
quences, or should they set limits to it, and
create a sanctuary that must not be violated?
"/ wonder whether it is generally realized that
all forms of life on Earth are programmed and
coded by an extraordinarily limited number of
chemical structures, the four nucleotides ade¬
nine, thymine, cytosine andguanine A, T, C,
G of the alphabet oflife. It is only the order of
sequence of these four letters that causes a
rosebush or a maize plant to differ from a
bacterium, an elephant or a human being."
Above, diagram ofthe "double helix" structure
of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), the genetic
material of all living things.
Personally, I believe that there is no limit to
the acquisition of knowledge, evenper¬
haps especially knowledge about the hu¬
man genetic inheritance, but I am absolutely
convinced that all attempts to modify this
inheritance must be strictly forbidden.
Here a distinction must be made. To
insert a normal gene into a patient in order
to correct his or her disorder is highly
desirable provided the gene is inserted into a
cell which does not participate in the repro¬
ductive process. On the other hand, to in¬
sert a gene into a germinal cell or into a very
young embryo is a criminal act because the
result could be transmitted to posterity and
the human genetic inheritance would be
modified.
It is easy to imagine what such practices
could lead to if they served a totalitarian
ideology. As the late Peter Medawar2 once
said, false eugenics of that kind would
"smell horribly like a gas chamber".
Man's genetic inheritance is a treasure
that belongs to all humanity and it must not
be traded or modified. Any interference
with it could disturb its admirable harmony.
We are collectively responsible for this jewel
of evolution, the human species, for the
wonderful potential we bear within us and
which too often is still allowed to lie fallow,
for the marvellous capital contained in the
brain of everyman. Responsiblewhat a
beautiful word, instantly conjuring up lu¬
cidity, moral force capable of decisions, and
the willpower to execute them.
I am honoured to be the current chairman
of the French branch of the Universal
Movement for Scientific Responsibility.
The purpose of this movement is to make
people aware of the responsibility of science
with regard to the future of mankind, of
ensuring that our children's lives will not
only be preserved but enriched in peace,
thanks to the mutual tolerance of our phys¬
ical and cultural differences.
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry was not a
member of the Universal Movement for Sci¬
entific Responsibility, but the entire spirit of
the movement is expressed in his story Le
petit prince, by the fox who said to the Little
Prince: "There is one truth that men have
forgotten. But you you must never forget
it. You become responsible for ever for what
you have tamed."
2. British biologist. Nobel Prize for Physiology or Med¬
icine, 1960
JEAN DAUSSET, of France, was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1980
(with B. Benacerraf and G. D. Snell) for investiga¬
tions into genetic control of the response of the
immunological system to foreign substances,
which led to major progress in skin graft and organ
transplant techniques. Since 1974 he has served as
a World Health Organization expert on immuno¬
logy. The range of medical literature on which he
has collaborated includes Leucocyte Typing (1984)
and studies on the human leucocyte antigen, HLA
1982 and HLA 1985.
20
