The revival of the world's first
universal library
.
.
m K¿yy.
^
j Ef'OiEI
...
Hellenistic mosaic by Sofitos II
represents an allegory of the city of Alexandria
The Greek mathematician Eratosthenes (284-
192 BC), who calculated the circumference of
the Earth, was also the father of geography. His
geographical system, reconstituted in 1 803 on
this map by the French geographer Pascal
François Joseph Gosselin, was of fundamental
importance to the development of
mathematical geography. Eratosthenes, called
to Alexandria by King Ptolemy II, became
director of the great Library there.
Alexander the Great is said to
have been welcomed in Egypt
as a liberator. He showed great
respect for the people's customs and
beliefs, and as a professed defender of
religion, won the support of the priests.
He openly consulted the Egyptian ora¬
cles, particularly that of Amon, to
which he journeyed with great cere¬
mony. Moreover, he very quickly
understood the central role which
Egypt could play in the expansion of
world trade, and he lost no time in
lending his support to it.
One of the most far-reaching deci¬
sions that Alexander made in this con¬
nection was to found the city of
Alexandria. Legend has it that he
chose the location himself a small
- - -. --* .^
O
T i <2 ' r.
V
ln>-' äs
c
T * « i
t'Mdt S\r"r
1. i B V r
h«*UhuUr
TTTT *T

Bibliotheca Alexandrina
BY LOTFALLAH SOLIMAN
Mediterranean port whose site had
attracted him, as the shelter of the
offshore island of Pharos formed two
natural harbours, ideal as a Greek naval
base. Legend also relates that Alexander
personally traced out the boundaries of
the new city, construction of which
began in 332 BC to the design of the
Rhodian architect Dinocrates.
Thanks to its favourable geographical
situation and its shrewdly designed
port, Alexandria became one of the
most renowned commercial and mari¬
time crossroads of Antiquity. Until it
was conquered by the Arabs in 641 AD,
the city played a major role in Egypt's
history.
When Alexandria was first built its
population included, in addition to the
0 c f
l N
.RAPHiQVK n Kh vrosrin m
^"- PFJ OmwiUMm, vim t m
SK""^rtl/
indigenous Egyptians, the Macedonian
guard, a colony of Greek immigrants
and a Jewish minority. The city grew
rapidly, and during the rule of King
Ptolemy I Soter* it welcomed many
scholars and artists, who enjoyed royal
protection and patronage. The king
closely followed the spirit of the policies
instituted by Alexander. Respectful of
the local civic and political institutions,
creeds and religions, he created a climate
of tolerance and security in Egypt that
was exceptionally favourable to cul¬
tural development. Thanks to him,
Alexandria began to approach its
founder's dream of an ideal capital city,
an illustrious centre of intellectual and
artistic influence.
Ptolemy 1 ordered the construction of
:	:	 ,	
the famous Pharos lighthouse, one of
the seven wonders of the ancient world,
and during his reign plans were laid for
the most celebrated public library of
Antiquity, the Library of Alexandria.
His son, Ptolemy II Philadelphus
(308-246 BC), brought the library pro¬
ject to fruition. At the same time, he
made Alexandria the world's leading
commercial centre. Greeks, Romans,
Ethiopians and Jews came to this cos¬
mopolitan city to conduct their business
among copyists, clerks, librarians, inter¬
preters, ambassadors, court officials and
public administrators. A patron of the
arts and of literature, Ptolemy II sur¬
rounded himself with eminent scholars
and poets, including Callimachus
(died 240 BC), whose name would
come to be associated with the expan¬
sion of the great Library.
The first known library is thought to
have been built at Memphis, where visi¬
tors were welcomed by the words
"Medicines for the Soul". However,-
when Ptolemy I decided to create a lib¬
rary in Alexandria, he chose to model it
on that of Aristotle in Athens. He may
have even acquired the books from
Aristotle's library, one of the richest
collections of Antiquity.
Right from the start attempts were
made to obtain copies of all the works of
Greek literature for the Alexandrian
Library. This objective was soon
achieved, however, and copies of all
works of good quality in other lan¬
guages were sought. Finally, complete
universality became the goal, and the
Library tried to obtain copies of all .
existing manuscripts.
Acquiring these copies became one of
" Ptolemy Soter ("the Saviour"), Macedonian general of
Alexander the Great, became ruler of Egypt (323-
285 BC) on Alexander's death. Editor.

.:,V^yW%
the main tasks of the librarians, who
arranged for all known works to be sent
on loan from Athens in return for a
deposit, and to be borrowed long
enough to make one, or sometimes
several copies. Manuscripts found on
ships moored in the harbour were also
temporarily "confiscated" and copied.
Thanks to this gigantic effort to col¬
lect and conserve writings from all over
the world, the Library of Alexandria
became the first truly universal library
in history and attracted the most emi¬
nent philosophers, scholars and re¬
searchers of their day. The exact number
of papyrus scrolls which made up the
collection is not known. Estimates vary
between 400,000 and 700,000, as one
scroll could contain several works, just
as a single work could cover several
scrolls.
The Library did not confine itself to
collecting manuscripts written in their
original languages; it also embarked on a
massive translation programme. For ex¬
ample, seventy-two Jewish scholars
were given the task of translating the
Old Testament into Greek, and transla¬
tions of Babylonian and Buddhist
manuscripts were commissioned.
It was also the first library in history
to establish a set of rules for the classi
fication and inventory of its collection.
The monumental catalogue was com¬
piled by Callimachus, who perfected a
method of retrieving each work,
together with a synopsis or even a critic¬
al appraisal. These listings, known as the
"Pinakes", from the Greek word for
"tablets", have unfortunately been lost.
Records of them from the ancient world
are sufficiently abundant, however, to
give an idea of the enormity of the task.
The Library of Alexandria formed
part of a larger complex, the Mouseion
("Museum", or temple of the Muses), a
research institute which opened its
doors to the arts and the sciences, with
10

Among the scholars attracted by the intellectual
climate ofAlexandria was Euclid, who founded a
celebrated school of mathematics there in the
3rd century BC. In this engraving by the French
artist Jean François Pierre Peyron (1744-1814),
Euclid is shown giving a geometry lesson.
an astronomical observatory, a zoo¬
logical and botanical garden, and.
meeting rooms.
Thus some of the greatest scholars
and creative artists lived in or visited
Alexandria, delving into the Library's
priceless treasures to help them in their
work and their discoveries. An intellec¬
tual and cultural movement grew up
around them, embracing all fields of
knowledge and creativity.
Among these men were Herophilus
(c. 340-300 BC), who established the
rules of anatomy and physiology;
Euclid (330-280 BC), the inventor of
geometry; Eratosthenes (284-192 BC),
who calculated the circumference of the
Earth; Aristarchus (215-143 BC) and
Dionysius Thrax (1 70-90 BC), who sys¬
tematized the grammar of classical
Greek; Hero (fl. 62 AD), who wrote
several books on geometry and mecha¬
nics and invented the dioptre, a sur¬
veying instrument; and Claudius
Ptolemaeus (90-168 AD), founder of
cartography and developer of astro¬
nomy. Thus the Library played a vital
role in the development of Graeco-
Roman culture.
Nothing remains today of this monu¬
ment to human genius. It is thought that
the main part of the collection was des¬
troyed in a fire which ravaged the port
when Julius Caesar took Alexandria
in 48 BC. Mark Antony made amends
for the damage to a certain extent when
he gave Cleopatra the rich collection of
the library at Pergamum (Asia Minor).
This library, carefully built up by
Eumenes II, the king of Pergamum, is
thought to have possessed some
200,000 works written, for the first
time, on parchment.
The astronomer and geographer Claudius
Ptolemaeus (90-168 AD) is shown in the
observatory at Alexandria in this engraving by
the 19th-century French artist Charles Laplante.
Other catastrophes were to follow, as
if to emphasize the great fragility of
works of the mind. The Library and the
Museum of Alexandria may have been
destroyed in the civil war which tore
Egypt apart in the third century AD.
But Alexander's dream was not in
vain. The Government of Egypt and the
University of Alexandria, in collabora¬
tion with Unesco and the United
Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), have initiated a project to
revive the famous Library. It is intended
to endow the new Library with modern
facilities which should enable it, at the
dawn of the third millennium, again to
fulfil its ancient role. But this time it
will be linked by computer with ar¬
chives and documentation centres all
over the world. While recapturing the
spirit of the original, the new Library
of Alexandria will, at last, be
indestructible.
LOTFALLAH SOLIMAN, Egyptian writer and
journalist, is currently preparing a study on the
history of Palestine.
11
