Schools for artistes
by Monica J. Renevey
Rapt spectators at the Grand Cirque, Palais
des Sports, Paris, 1957
THE Swiss sociologist Jean Ziegler
claims that the circus is "the last
surviving trace of an ancient, ex¬
istential and esoteric form of knowledge".
There are only two ways of perpetuating
this knowledge and the unique, ancestral
art of the circus: transmitting it from gen¬
eration to generation within the family, or
teaching it in a circus school.
Great circus dynasties such as the Knie,
the Gruss, the Togni, the Althoff and a few
other families have practised the first
method. But, as we shall see, a Gruss and a
Fratellini also founded the first circus
schools in France. Conversely, it is quite
common in countries such as the USSR and
Poland to find third- or even fourth-genera¬
tion circus artistes who are learning their
skills at the State circus school, but who also
benefit incalculably from the experience of
their fathers, of members of an older gener¬
ation. In the past, too, a boy would some¬
times be lured away by the glamour of the
sawdust ring and "oompah" music and,
leaving his family and his village, would be
lucky enough to find a "master" who would
agree to teach him all the tricks of the trade.
Let us pay a brief visit to some of the
circus schools that exist today in different
parts of the world. First stop will be the
famous Moscow Circus School, followed by
its counterparts in Poland, Hungary, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
and Cuba. Next we will head for France,
which boasts three big circus schools, and
then look at a few isolated but interesting
cases, such as the Big Apple Circus in New
York, Canada's Cirque du Soleil, and the
acrobatic troupes of China.
In 1919, Lenin signed a decree on the
"nationalization of theatres and circuses" in
the Soviet Union. At that time there were
very few Russian artistes, and their Western
counterparts, who were far more numer¬
ous, became the first instructors of the new
generation of Soviet circus performers. The
Moscow School was inaugurated in 1927 as
the "School for Circus Arts", and its first
pupils graduated in 1930. One of them,
Mikhail Nikolaievich Rumiantsev (1901-
1983), later became world famous as the
clown Karandash (literally "pencil", in
Russian). The Soviet Union is undeniably
the hardest place in which to learn to be a
clown, because of the very high standards
required in the examinations. A Soviet
clown must be not only a perfect mime
but also a rope dancer, a walker on the
slack wire, a good juggler and an excellent
acrobat.
In addition to the famous Moscow
School, the USSR has two more official
circus schools organized along the same
lines. One is at Kiev, in the Ukraine, and
the other is at Tbilisi, in Georgia. About a
hundred teachers (sixty of them full time)
instruct 300 pupils. The age of admission
ranges from fifteen to twenty, and the
course lasts four years. Every year, three
selective examinations (medical including
general bearing and presence, physical apti¬
tudes and musical ability) weed out all but
seventy-five pupils.
In the first year, eclectic forms of
teaching and practical work enable the
teachers to assess their pupils' general abili¬
ties and, above all, their individual gifts.
Pupils are encouraged to go on only if they
are capable of reaching a very high level.
Specialization takes place in the second
year, and the third year is spent refining and
polishing. The fourth and final year belongs
to the chosen few who are considered to be
worthy representatives of the Soviet circus.
24

Those who are not chosen will play "small
parts", as long as they pass the two final
examinations, one in their own discipline
and another in philosophy, for in the USSR
a circus artiste is something more than a
muscular, spangled figure capable of land¬
ing accurately to within the nearest mil¬
limetre on his partner's feet, or of making
animals perform without seeming to give
them any orders. The circus artiste is always
part of a vast and carefully planned pro¬
gramme inspired by a long-term philosophy
of the performing arts.
In the last few years, all the circus profes¬
sionals who meet annually at the Monte
Carlo Festival have been saying that "the
wind is blowing from the East". The new
trend in the circus, which combines har¬
mony of gesture, beauty of performance
and strength of feeling, has sprung from
Soviet circus philosophy.
The director of the Leningrad Circus,
Valentin Kuznetsov, like other Soviet cir¬
cus school authorities, feels that "technical
skill alone is a thing of the past. The overrid¬
ing aim is now to communicate an emotion
to the audience. In the Soviet Union today,
a circus performance is planned as if it were
a piece of drama, with a prologue, action,
and epilogue. The almost theatrical
sequence of the acts is of paramount im¬
portance, but the progression must be sus¬
tained by a heightening of emotion. This is
where the entrée clown, typical of the
USSR, comes in. The whole programme
hinges on him; he is the hub of all the
action ..."
The art of clowning has also changed; the
clown now tries to get people to smile rather
than laugh. Considerable subtlety is re¬
quired, and in addition to his physical pro¬
wess the artiste must be able to understand
the psychology of different types of au¬
dience, know all about the joys and sorrows
of everyday life and possess great emotional
versatility.
Nearly all the other socialist countries of
Eastern Europe have circus schools, but the
standard achieved by their graduates is in
most cases lower than that of their Soviet
counterparts. The main reason for this is the
lack of support for circus arts and artistes on
the part of many local authorities.
In Poland, the winter quarters of circuses
and of the school are in Julinek, 30
kilometres from Warsaw, on a former great
estate in the beautiful forest of Kampinov-
ski. Only pupils who have passed their
secondary school leaving certificate and are
under the age of twenty-one are allowed to
enrol for the two-year courses held at the
school, which was founded in 1967. In the
first year, a wide range of disciplines are
taught, including anatomy and biomecha¬
nics. Preparation for individual acts takes
place in the second year, which also in¬
cludes paid training periods with Polish cir¬
cuses. In order to get the most out of
Balanced on a knife edge. A spectacular feat
based on the strength of the jaw, as per¬
formed in Paris by the Circo Americano, a
big Italian circus.
Poland's artistic potential, some directors
are trying to extend the courses and make
them more intensive, and, above all, to
lower the age of admission to sixteen.
Cuba and the Democratic People's Re¬
public of Korea have each founded a circus
school on the Soviet model. In Cuba, which
has four circuses, there is a four-year
course, and pupils often finish their training
in Moscow, while the national circus and
school founded in Pyongyang in 1952 pro¬
vides four years of basic training after which
the pupils begin to polish their acts. One
typical Korean acrobatic number uses the
seesaw (a piece of apparatus that can be
seen in parks all over the country); recently
Western audiences have had the opportun¬
ity to admire a young acrobat in a tight-
fitting kimono turn backward somersaults
after being launched in this way.
Back in Europe, the Budapest Circus
School follows the Moscow pattern, except
that its organization is patriarchal (many
families today have been in the circus for
four or even five generations). All the
teachers are former artistes or gymnasts.
Like its counterparts for drama and dance,
the Hungarian Circus School accepts pupils
at eleven years of age and offers an eight-
year course. The first half of the course is
spent studying basic disciplines and general
culture, up to the level of the school leaving
certificate. The second half provides profes¬
sional training, with three years devoted
primarily to acrobatics, followed by spe¬
cialization. The School may modify an act
to suit the aptitudes of a pupil or even to
take account of market demand. It is open
to Westerners and has already awarded
diplomas to French and Swiss pupils.
The Gruss Circus School, founded in
Paris in 1972 by Alexis Gruss Junior and the
25

In the Soviet Union, circus artistes are as
popular as film stars and sporting heroes,
and there is strong competition for admis¬
sion to circus schools. Above, a young
Muscovite tries his hand at clowning, made
up as Oleg Popov, the internationally known
Soviet clown.
One time-honoured way of becoming a cir¬
cus performer is to belong to one of the great
circus dynasties. Below, Achille Zavatta, a
famous auguste, leaves the ring with his son
Franck.
actress Silvia Monfort, was also "patriar¬
chal". It was housed in a former theatre
whose high-ceilinged rooms were particu¬
larly suitable for practising trapeze acts.
The pupils studied basic subjects for one
year and then prepared their act for two
years before performing in their own old-
style Circus. With their small tent pitched in
the heart of Paris and the school right next
to it, the Gruss family were pioneers in
revolutionizing circus arts in the West.
Also in Paris, Annie Fratellini and Pierre
Etaix founded the National Circus School,
open to all young people between the ages
of sixteen and twenty-five (see article page
27). There are even beginners' classes for
six-year-olds. Basic disciplines are taught in
the first year, and then technical problems
(erecting and dismantling apparatus, light¬
ing) are tackled, and training periods are
arranged in a travelling circus. After three
years, the pupils can think of preparing a
professional number.
Since 1986, France has also possessed the
first professional circus school in the West
organized on Eastern European lines, the
High School (of the National Centre) of
Circus Arts, at Châlons-sur-Marne. Pupils
from France and other countries are re¬
cruited from the age of sixteen on by com¬
petitive examination. The course consists of
two two-year stages. The first is designed to
encourage the expression of individual and
group potential and to guide the pupils
towards a suitable line of specialization.
Specialized work begins in the third year,
and in the fourth year acts are worked out
and polished. A circus performer's diploma
is awarded at the end of the course. The
basic disciplines taught for three years in¬
clude acrobatics, dance and music; the cir¬
cus techniques include trapeze-work and
trick riding; and the general subjects taught
range from anatomy and physiology to
show business management and labour
legislation. There were 370 entrants for the
first examination: twenty-five passed, and
nineteen of these continued into their
second year. The school is directed by Guy
Caron, a Canadian who is a former pupil of
the Budapest School.
Each of North America's few circus
schools flourishes in the shadow of a circus.
In 1983 Guy Caron set up a private circus
school in Canada, which works closely with
the Cirque du Soleil, of which he is also
artistic director. Here, too, in keeping with
modern trends, great importance is
attached to choreography. In the United
States, the giant Ringling Circus has a
"Clown College" where the art of comedy is
taught. American clowns, with their custard
pies and monstrous tooth extractions, are in
a class apart.
New York's Big Apple Circus and its
school, the New York School for Circus
Arts, Inc., are ten years old. The School,
run by Frenchman Dominique Jando,
offers a course for children between the
ages of nine and thirteen, organized jointly
with the Manhattan Harbor School, which
provides two hours a day of circus training
and options for more advanced instruction.
When the Big Apple Circus acquires its new
building, it plans to organize courses for
thirteen- to sixteen-year-olds and to create
a professional training school.
In China, there are no Big Tops. Circuses
are usually stationary and have troupes of
acrobats which are the equivalent of circus
schools. Foremost among these is the
Acrobatic Troupe of China, which was
formed in 1950 as the Zhonghua Troupe,
and has inspired a number of other groups
including the Troupes of Shanghai, Chong¬
qing, Shenyang, Wuhan and the Troupe of
the Guangzhou Soldiers.
China today has some 130 professional
State troupes, with over 11,000 artistes.
Conjuring and voice imitations are two
highly popular specialities. Anyone who
works in show business can join the Asso¬
ciation of Chinese Acrobats, which was
founded in 1981. Its woman president is a
former acrobat, Xia Juhua, who is also a
Deputy to the People's Congress. It is not
surprising that China should produce circus
acts of high calibre, since quality is con¬
nected with the respect accorded to artistry,
and circus artistes in China and the Soviet
Union enjoy high social status.
MONICA J. RENEVEY, of Switzerland, is an
animal trainer turned reporter, writer and publi¬
cist. She is the chiefauthor and editorofa French
encyclopedia on the circus, entitled Le grand
livre du cirque (Bibliothèque des Arts, Geneva,
1977). Among her many publications and articles
on the circus are II circo e il suo mondo (Laterza,
Rome, 1985) and J'aime le cirque (Walt Disney
Productions, Paris, 1986).
