of modern science
BY JOSEPH NEEDHAM
THE extraordinary inventiveness, and
insight into nature, of ancient and
medieval China raises two fun¬
damental questions. First, why should the
Chinese have been so far in advance of
other civilizations ; and second, why aren't
they now centuries ahead of the rest of the
world? We think it was a matter of the
very different social and economic sys¬
tems in China and the West. Modern sci¬
ence arose only in Europe in the seven¬
teenth century when the best method of
discovery was itself discovered; but the
discoveries and inventions made then and
thereafter depended in so many cases on
centuries of previous Chinese progress in
science, technology and medicine.
The English philosopher Francis Bacon
(1561-1626) selected three inventions,
paper and printing, gunpowder, and the
magnetic compass, which had done more,
he thought, than any religious conviction,
or any astrological influence, or any con¬
queror's achievements, to transform com¬
pletely the modern world and mark it off
from Antiquity and the Middle Ages. He
regarded the origins of these inventions as
"obscure and inglorious" and he died
without ever knowing that all of them
were Chinese. We have done our best to
put this record straight.
Chauvinistic Westerners, of course, al¬
ways try to minimize the indebtedness of
Europe to China in Antiquity and the
Left, a model reconstructed after a Tang
Dynasty (7th century) original, of a "/»-
counter" or device for measuring
distance. The counter was constructed in
such a way that, as it moved along the
road, one of the 2 drummers would beat
the drum at each li, an ancient Chinese
distance unit corresponding to half a
kilometre.
Middle Ages, but often the circumstantial
evidence is compelling. For example the
first blast furnaces for cast iron, now
known to be Scandinavian of the late
eighth century AD, are of closely similar
form to those of the previous century in
China; while as late as the seventeenth
century all the magnetic compasses of sur¬
veyors and astronomers pointed south,
not north, just as the compasses of China
had always done. In many cases, however,
we cannot as yet detect the capillary chan¬
nels through which knowledge was con¬
veyed from East to West. Nevertheless we
have always adopted the very reasonable
assumption that the longer the time elaps¬
ing between the appearance of a discovery
or invention in one part of the world, and
its appearance later on in some other part
of the world far away, the less likely is it
that the new thing was independently in¬
vented or discovered.
But all these things being agreed, a for¬
midable question then presents itself. If
the Chinese were so advanced in Antiqui¬
ty and the Middle Ages, how was it that
the Scientific Revolution, the coming of
modern science into the world, happened
only in Europe?
The fact is that in the seventeenth cen¬
tury we have to face a package deal; the
Scientific Revolution was accompanied
both by the Protestant Reformation and
by the rise of capitalism, the ascendancy of
the entrepreneurial bourgeoisie. Distinc¬
tively modern science, which then de¬
veloped, was a mathematization of
hypotheses about nature, combined with
relentless experimentation. The sciences
of all the ancient and medieval worlds had
had an indelibly ethnic stamp, but now
nature was addressed for the first time in a
universal and international language, the
precise and quantitative idiom of mathe-

This tower for measuring the shadow
cast by the Sun at the winter and summer
solstices was considered by Chinese
astronomers in ancient times to be the
centre of the world. A gnomon (sundial
arm), almost 13 m high, stood upright in
the central niche and its shadow was
measured along the 40-metre-long
horizontal stone scale (foreground). In
its present form the structure is a Ming
Dynasty (1368-1644) renovation of a
building erected around 1276 AD.
*V<* '-'
matics, a tongue which every man and
woman, irrespective of colour, creed or
race, can use and master if given the proper
training. And to the technique of experi¬
ment the same applies. It was like the
merchant's universal standard of value.
How one looks at the primary causative
factor in all this depends on one's own
background. If one is a theologian one
probably thinks that the liberation of the
Reformation was responsible; if one is an
old-fashioned scientist, one naturally
thinks that the scientific movement occur¬
red first and powered all the others; and if
one is a Marxist, one certainly thinks that
the economic and social changes bear the
main responsibility.
One factor which must have great rele¬
vance here is the undeniable circumstance
that the feudalism of Europe and China
were fundamentally different. European
feudalism was military-aristocratic: the
peasantry were governed by the knights in
their manors, and they in turn were sub¬
ject to the barons in their castles, while the
king in his palace ruled over all. In time of
war he needed the help of the lower ranks
in the feudal hierarchy who were bound to
rally to him with stated numbers of men-
at-arms. How different was the feudalism
of China, long very justifiably described
as bureaucratic. From the time of the first
emperor, Qin Shih Huangdi, onwards
(third century BC), the old hereditary
feudal houses were gradually attacked and
destroyed, while the king or emperor (as
he soon became) governed by the aid of an
enormous bureaucracy, a civil service un
imaginable in extent and degree of orga¬
nization to the petty kingdoms of Europe.
Modern research is showing that the
bureaucratic organization of China in its
earlier stages strongly helped science to
grow; only in its later ones did it forcibly
inhibit further growth, and in particular
prevented a breakthrough which has
occurred in Europe. For example, no
other country in the world at the begin¬
ning of the eighth century AD could have
set up a meridian arc survey stretching
from south to north some 4,000 kilo¬
metres. Nor could it have mounted an
expedition at that time to go and observe
the stars of the southern hemisphere to
within 20° of the south celestial pole. Nor
indeed would it have wanted to.
It may well be that a similar pattern will
appear in the future when the history of
science, technology and medicine, for all
the great classical literary cultures, such as
India or Sri Lanka, comes to be written
and gathered in. Europe has entered into
their inheritance, producing an ecumenic¬
al universal science and technology valid
for every man and woman on the face of
the Earth. One can only hope that the
shortcomings of the distinctively Euro¬
pean traditions in other matters will not
debauch the non-European civilizations.
For example, the sciences of China and of
Islam never dreamed of divorcing science
from ethics, but when at the Scientific
Revolution the final cause of Aristotle was
done away with, and ethics chased out of
science, things became very different, and
more menacing. This was good in so far as
it clarified and discriminated between the
great forms of human experience, but very
bad and dangerous when it opened the
way for evil men to use the great discover¬
ies of modern science and divert them to
activities disastrous for humanity. Science
needs to be lived alongside religion, philo¬
sophy, history and aesthetic experience;
alone it can lead to great harm. All we can
do today is to hope and pray that the
unbelievably dangerous powers of atomic
weapons, which have been put into the
hands of human beings by the develop¬
ment of modern science, will remain
under control by responsible men, and
that maniacs will not release powers that
could extinguish not only mankind, but all
life on Earth.
JOSEPH NEEDHAM, British historian of Chi¬
nese science and technology, is director of the
Needham Research Institute in Cambridge,
England. For more than 40 years he has been
engaged on a monumental, multi-volume history
of Science and Civilisation in China (Cambridge
University Press), of which he is the director and
principal contributor.
8 _
