Efficient horse harnesses
A Han Dynasty rubbing
(c. 1st century BC) showing the use of
the trace harness, with its breast strap, to
pull a carriage whose passengers are
protected from the elements by a
precursor of the umbrella.
From earliest times until the eighth century AD in the West (and, as we
shall see, much earlier in China), the only means of harnessing horses was
by the "throat-and-girth harness". It was an absurd method since the strap
across the throat meant that the horse was choked as soon as he exerted
himself. As long as man was restricted to the use of this pathetic harness,
horsepower was all but useless for transport by cart. Even individual riders
could half-strangle their mounts at a gallop.
Those who read about ancient Rome are often struck by the importance
attached to the shipping of grain from Egypt. Without Egyptian grain,
Rome must starve. But why? What was wrong with grain grown in Italy,
_ 17

one asks? Why was Rome dependent on ships from Egypt in order to be
able to eat? The answer is simply that there was no horse harness capable of
making it possible for Italian grain to be transported to Rome.
In about the fourth century BC the Chinese made a great breakthrough.
A lacquered box of the period bears a painting which shows a yoke across
the horse's chest, from which traces connect it to the chariot shafts. Soon,
the hard yoke across the breast was also abandoned and replaced by the
more satisfactory breast strap, commonly called the "trace harness". There
is no longer a strap across the horse's throat; the weight of the load is borne
by the horse's chest and collar bones.
Experiments have been carried out to establish the relative efficiency of
the different types of harness. Two horses harnessed in the throat-and-
girth fashion can pull a load of half a ton. But a single horse in a collar
harness (described below) can easily pull a ton and a half. With a trace
harness the efficiency is only slightly less.
Needham suggests two factors which may have led the Chinese to invent
the trace harness. There was the motivation of the Chinese, Mongols and
Huns living on the edge of the Gobi Desert where they were always getting
stuck in the sand, from which horses using the throat-and-girth harness
could not extricate them. Secondly, there was the use of human hauliers.
Man's own experience of hauling, for example, boats upstream, meant that
he was quickly aware of the inadequacy of a rope round the neck.
The most efficient harness is the collar harness (see drawing this page).
The earliest evidence for the collar harness in China may be seen in a
rubbing from an ancient brick. It dates from some time between the fourth
and first centuries BC. Therefore, we must consider the collar harness as
having been invented in China by the first century BC at the latest. This is a
full thousand years before its appearance in Europe a century after the trace
harness.
After some time, it was found by the Chinese that the collar could be
used in another and simpler way: traces could be attached from the sides of
the collar directly to the vehicle. It is this form of the collar harness which is
used today all round the world.

