The compassionate eye BY YVES BONNEFOY
FACE TO FACE
Martine Franck: The American photographer Paul Strand (1890-1976)
in his garden at Orgeval, near Paris, 1974
MARTINE
FRANCK
a Belgian photographer, is a member of the
Vu picture agency set üp by the French
photographer Pierre de Fenoyl in 1970-
1971 , and one of the founder members of the
Viva agency in Paris. She has also been a
member of the Magnum Photo Agency since
1980. Her work has featured in both group
exhibitions and one-woman shows and
selections have been published as Le temps
de vieillir (1980) and Le théâtre du soleil
(1982). To mark her most recent exhibition
(13 April to 29 May 1988 at the Maison de la
Culture, Amiens, France), a portfolio of 18
photographs has been published with an
accompanying text by Yves Bonnefoy.
When I reflect on Martine Franck's work,
there comes to mind her portrait of an old
man in a home for the aged, seated on the
edge of a bed, the wall behind him plastered
with erotic photographs. Every oppor¬
tunity was there for Martine Franck to in¬
dulge in that kind of cruelty that is some¬
times passed off as a desire to seek truth.
Instinctively, however, in those for ever
frozen features, those eyes lost in a blank
reverie, she saw and showed us that there yet
remained a trace of that force that spurred
mankind to build the world, to establish
values, to bring together and give form to
scattered but lasting elements, things in
abeyance, in short, to create the absolute.
In this particular instance, as in many
others, Martine Franck had the insight to
rediscover in a human being with no obvious
qualities something of the dignity that is
apparent to the highest degree in the ravaged
face of Nerval or in Baudelaire's troubled
look. Such is the magic that photography can
work through the agency of a compassionate
being; and through this alchemy, the infinite
background of dreams, the idea that one has
of oneself, disappears, but something of the
absolute appears.
This is the message of the best of those
pilgrims who roam the world, Leica in hand.
"See," they say, "even in that moment when
you are illusion, irrelevance, futility, even in
the instant when you are nothing, when you
are nothingness itself, you are, and, in being,
you are everything, you are the all."
Compassion is above all a capacity for
self-effacement, for forgetting self in the en¬
counter with others. Of all the contempor¬
ary forms of expression, photography alone
demands compassion and humility as a sine
qua non. It demands the kind of humility
possessed by the great medieval craftsmen
who, in the period that followed the archaic
stylizations of their predecessors and before
the advent of humanistic refinements, knew
so surely how to carve out of a block of
wood faces of the madonna, in majesty or in
sorrow yet with the features of the most
ordinary of women, that were imbued with
the reality of the churchyard tree or the
flowers in blue clay vases placed before the
statues. In its innermost strivings, very mod-
8

FACE TO FACE
Martine Franck: Examining a painting by Paul Delvaux
at an exhibition of Belgian art held in Paris, 1974
em art is at one with the best of this religious
period.
In my mind's eye I see again Martine
Franck one summer's afternoon in the de¬
serted outskirts of a small town in Provence,
in the south of France. In the intense heat she
emerges abruptly, camera in hand, out of the
bright curtain of light. What is she doing?
Does she really expect, in this setting so
familiar to her, to chance upon the unex¬
pected or some scene of furtive stealth? Is
she, I wonder, not there rather just to learn
the art of being nothing, of dissolving herself
into the nothingness between earth and sky,
training herself thus to comply with the
demands of her art, of which clearly she has
the highest and most noble vision?
When we look at certain photographs, we
often ask ourselves: "How did the photo¬
grapher manage to get so close undetected?
With what silent tread did he stalk the fabu¬
lous bird as it alighted for just an instant?"
Others may wonder: "Does this not make
the photographer feel divorced from life, out
of the world? What loneliness, what sadness,
this constant watchfulness must bring."
The fact is that these soundless steps must
first be made within oneself, for it is there, in
that inner space, that those intuitive events,
those extra-sensory perceptions occur that
are the summum of an art that is prima facie
devoted to the externality of things. It is in
the intercourse of self with self that no sound
must be made that might frighten away a
vision or glimpse of a vision. When we suc¬
ceed in doing this, as we stand with bated
breath, far from being outside the world the
uplifted soul hears the beating of the deep
heart's pulse, the joyful shouts of children at
play beneath a line of washing, the wind
turning sheets into sails, and the chirruping
of cicadas.
Martine Franck walked in silence that
summer's day, already in this frame of mind.
Had she photographed a peasant woman in a
black straw hat, or a child with hand at
forehead, warding off the menace of a
threatening world, she would simply, direct¬
ly, as light goes to light, have picked out
from the woman's shadowy figure, from the
child's rebellious forelock, that look which
embodies the One behind the multiple.
Of all Martine Franck's photographs, I
like particularly that of Paul Strand. That
deep metaphysical solidarity which links her
with all her subjects is here made more com¬
plex by the fact that the model is himself a
photographer, taken unawares at his work,
absorbed in his own silent tread. This gives a
touch of humour to the ordinary photo¬
graphic experience, adding to it another de¬
gree of reflection which is superbly captured
in the very image from which it sprang.
Paul Strand is in a garden in which the play
of light on foliage conjures up memories of
Claude Monet, his garden at Giverny, Im¬
pressionist painting, and an entirely different
relationship between art and light. He is
holding an ancient, barely portable camera
which he is aiming at we know not what
target, since it is out of the field of vision of
Martine Franck's photograph. One has the
feeling that, more than anything else, he is
wondering where the devil he can put this
cumbrous black box down for a moment.
How long has he been so carefully, even
anxiously carrying it around? For forty
years maybe judging by his lined forehead;

FACE TO FACE
Martine Franck: Mlle Manago in her apartment at Forcalquier, France, 1979
long enough at any rate to be aware of the
dangers of what he is doing and to be con¬
scious of his responsibilities. Burdened with
this camera, which evokes the origins of
photography, this great photographer seems
to be asking : "Have I any right to be here?
Am I not planting a time bomb which may
destroy the world, despite the element of the
eternal in the light among the foliage?"
And it is true that photography is danger¬
ous. Some photographers exercise their art
with care; it is the others, purveyors of news
or fancies, with their reckless hastiness com¬
pounded of a truly sacrilegious indifference,
who incite us to look only at the outermost
exterior, the least significant superficialities.
If nineteenth-century photography de¬
nounced illusion (bringing the subject into
disrepute even in the eyes of painters, and
edging them out-of-doors, at Giverny as
elsewhere), in the twentieth century it has
gone to excess in the rejection of values and
the flouting of good sense; it is, it would
seem, concerned with nothing but the sub¬
stance and the celebration of death.
Yet, even now, photography is still one of
those rare fields in which can flower in the
persons of a few such as these two, commun¬
ing in this garden something, perhaps a
great deal, of that enlightenment of the
whole being of which the great traditions,
and in particular Buddhism, tell us. Martine
Franck was right to spice with a generous
sprinkling of light humour (a mark of con¬
fidence) her meeting amid the trees and flow¬
ers with her elder colleague, who views,
perhaps, with some dismay, the seemingly
countless horde of unseeing photographers
invading the whole world, putting it to sack.
Nothing is ever really lost of an art or a
skill, when the best that there is in us can still
find expression in it, if only fleetingly . Has it
not, and have we not too, at least the right to
dream? Great revolutions of the spirit are
indeed born of a countenance at peace, of a
simple smile. So why should we not continue
to carry with us along every highway and
byway of life that strange box, daily growing
smaller and smaller yet more than ever man¬
ifestly destined for decisive action, focusing
it on that which we love (for ever waiting
there, close but invisible). Is the West, in¬
deed the world, destined to perish in a flood
of photographs? Who can tell? Perhaps
salvation will be found at the edge of doom
in the simple, epiphanic message that a few
among them have to offer.
Yves Bonnefoy
French writer,
Professor at the Collège de France
The above text is an abridged version of a study entitled
Martine Franck, which has appeared in Portraits, Photo¬
graphies de Martine Franck (Trois Cailloux publishers,
Maison de la Culture d'Amiens, Amiens, 1988).
10

FACE TO FACE
a
Martine Franck: In Paris, 1980, the Hungarian photographer André Kertész (1894-1985),
with a portrait of his wife (Elizabeth and Me) which he took in 1931.
BILL
BRANDT
(1904-1983)
Portrait of the British writer Robert Graves ( 1 895-
1985), taken in 1 94 1 . After working with Man Ray
in Paris in 1929 and frequenting the Surrealists,
this British photographer went back to England
and concentrated mainly on photojournalism. He
put together a series of images of life among the
different social strata at the time, ranging from
working people in industrial towns to the middle
and upper classes in their homes and clubs. During
the air raids on London in the early 1940s he
worked for the Home Office, making a photo¬
graphic record of city-dwellers in their improvised
shelters. From 1945-1965 he photographed wri¬
ters and artists in their working environment for
Lilliput magazine. These powerful and shrewd
portraits are greatly admired by Martine Franck.
He was also an innovator in studies of the female
nude, using distorted perspectives and unconven¬
tional lighting.
i
m M
a
H
v
mm- ' mÁ
11
