'As American as apple pie'
by A.H. Saxon The art of the circus spectacular
LIKE its European ancestor, the circus
in the United States began with ex¬
hibitions of trick horsemanship, to
which clowns, acrobats and tightrope per¬
formers were quickly added. Its founder
was the British equestrian John Bill
Ricketts, who had previously performed in
English circuses and who, in the 1790s,
established permanent circus buildings of
his own in Philadelphia and New York City.
Ricketts and his small troupe also toured
cities in the USA and Canada, often erect¬
ing temporary wooden arenas along their
route.
Meanwhile, in a parallel development,
other showmen had begun taking around
the country small collections of exotic anim¬
als brought to these shores by enterprising
ships' captains. There were no public zoos
in the United States at this time. Conse¬
quently, it was through such exhibitions
that most Americans had their first view of
lions, camels, elephants and other non-
native animals. The menagerie owners,
whose "caravans" quickly grew to impress¬
ive sizes, established permanent buildings
in such cities as New York, where they
exhibited their animals during the winter
months. When the weather was warm, they
continued to tour, and they soon hit upon
the idea of exhibiting under canvas tents,
thereby eliminating the need to erect
boarded enclosures or lease existing build¬
ings wherever they went. Beginning in the
1820s, this innovation was adopted by
American circuses.
'Big Tops' that could scat 10,000
With these portable tents that could easi¬
ly bè erected or taken down in a few hours,
they were free to roam wherever they liked,
even to the smallest towns in the hinter¬
lands, where they often gave single perfor¬
mances, then moved on in time to exhibit in
the next town on the following day. From
the introduction of the tent dates the true
beginning of the American touring circus,
which later in the nineteenth century ex¬
panded into "tented cities" of astounding
dimensions consisting of "big tops" cap¬
able of seating 10,000 or more spectators;
separate tents for menageries, sideshows
and other attractions; dressing tents and
Roll up! Roll up! Before the show, a young
performer encourages the public to come
and see the "crocodile-woman". Lagny
(France), 1959.
dining-room or "cook tents" for artistes and
employees; not to mention additional tents
for stabling the hundreds of draft horses
that pulled the circus wagons, for black¬
smiths and veterinary surgeons, and for va¬
rious other purposes.
By the mid-nineteenth century, too, a
number of circuses had linked up with
menageries, whose animals were no longer
simply exhibited in cages, but were now
featured in the increasingly elaborate street
parade that advertised the arrival of the
circus in a town, in processions and races
(between camels, elephants, and even
ostriches ridden by monkeys) inside the
circus tent itself, and in separate numbers of
their own. Among these last was the sensa¬
tional act by the celebrated American lion
trainer Isaac Van Amburgh, who first en¬
tered a cage with his "big cats" in the 1830s
and shortly thereafter, as the first American
circus performer to gain an international
reputation, appeared with them in various
European cities.
There is no such thing as "pure" circus,
and since the early days of Philip Astley in
London and Antonio Franconi in Paris, the
circus has traditionally been a mixture of
diverse entertainments: of tumbling and
rope walking which date from Antiquity, of
trick horsemanship performed in open
fields by eighteenth-century riding masters,
of clowns whose roots are traceable at least
to the Commedia dell'Arte, of pantomimes
and even theatrical spectacles, in which '
animals often took part, performed on huge
scenic stages in permanent circus buildings
and theatres.
'The Greatest Show on Earth'
In the United States, another accretion
occurred in the late nineteenth century,
drawn from the hippodromes of Henri Nar¬
cisse Franconi and Phineas T. Barnum in
New York City (built in 1853 and 1874,
respectively). These establishments were
huge arenas sometimes open to the air,
sometimes roofed with canvas or glass
that had been popular for some years in
Europe and were a conscious attempt to
recreate the ancient Roman "circus" and its
"games". This was not the circus as we
know it today, but rather the great oval
course over which races, à la Ben Hur, were
run. In the United States, such arenas fea¬
tured races between Roman chariots, be¬
tween male and female jockeys on indi¬
vidual horses, representations of stag hunts
with real stags and full packs of hounds in
pursuit, besides steeplechases, foot races
and related attractions. The oval hippo¬
drome track and the kinds of entertainment
peculiar to it were also adopted by the
American circus but not before another
important development had taken place.
.As in Europe, American circuses were
originally one-ring affairs, an arrangement
that remained the norm until the 1870s. At
the beginning of that decade the great
showman P.T. Barnum, then in his sixties,
entered the field and, within a few brief
years, created what he proudly termed
"The Greatest Show on Earth". The size of
his main tent or Big Top was so large that
many spectators had difficulty seeing, stood
up in their seats and crowded to the ring¬
side, and consequently interfered with the
view of others. At the beginning of his
second season in 1872, therefore, Barnum
and his partner William C. Coup decided to
add a second ring, in which acts were per¬
formed simultaneously with those in the
first in effect making their enterprise into
a "double circus". At the same time they
added to their establishment an oval hip¬
podrome track, encompassing the two rings
and running around the arena immediately
in front of the spectators' seats; and races,
spectacular processions and triumphal
drives in a carriage by the famous showman
himself became standard features on this
vast expanse. The arrangement proved so
popular that nearly every circus in the coun¬
try soon added a second ring.
The three-ring circus
To go one better than these competitors
and further increase the size of their tent, in
1881 Barnum and his new partner James A.
Bailey added a third ring, thereby complet¬
ing the evolution of what is perhaps the
most distinctive characteristic of the Amer¬
ican circus: the "three-ring" format. In fact,
even this term gives but a faint idea of the
multiplicity of entertainment such a show
presents, since besides the three rings and
hippodrome track, Barnum added two
large platforms or "stages" between the
rings for acts requiring a firm surface, such
as trick cycling or roller-skating, while
above the arena high-wire artistes and as
many as three trapeze troupes might per¬
form at the same time! When Barnum took
his huge show to London during the winter
of 1889-1890, British spectators, still accus¬
tomed to the traditional one-ring circus,
hardly knew what to make of it. It was
bewildering, overwhelming, apt to give
spectators "fits of indigestion", critics
wrote. Yet nearly all agreed it was a mag¬
nificent spectacle.
Since the days of Barnum, at least, "spec¬
tacle" has remained another distinctive fea¬
ture of American circuses. On the great
hippodrome track itself, elaborate proces¬
sions, featuring horses, elephants and all
31

the human artistes, are given to this day;
while traditionally, at another point in the
programme, all of these forces, gorgeously
costumed, participate in a mammoth panto¬
mime or "spec", as it is termed, whose
theme may be based on some nursery tale or
historic event, and whose action occupies
all three rings in addition to the track.
In Barnum's day there was sometimes
even a raised stage over 100 metres
wide at one side of the arena, on which
grandiose pantomimes like Nero, or The
Destruction of Rome were performed. This
particular production, which was given in
1889 and 1890, employed a cast of over
1,000 actors and dancers, a full orchestra
and choir of 100 voices, and nearly all the
animals belonging to the establishment, be¬
sides scenery depicting the interior of
Sir Edwin Landseer painted the portrait,
above, of the American lion tamer Isaac A.
Van Amburgh (1801-1865) with his big cats
while they were performing in the United
Kingdom in the late 1830s. Note the compa¬
ratively small, rectangular cagel The cir¬
cular "big cage" used by circuses today only
began to appear at the end of the 19th
century.
An early poster for the Ringling Brothers
Circus, one of the great itinerant American
circuses of the early 20th century. The cir¬
cus, under the name of Ringling Bros, and
Barnum & Bailey, is still performing today.
Below, Barnum & Bailey Circus poster
(1887) for an act by a dwarf elephant, "Tom
Thumb", named after one of Barnum &
Bailey's most famous attractions, the midget
"General Tom Thumb" (real name Charles
Sherwood Stratton). Phineas T. Barnum
(1810-1891) and his partner James A. Bailey
(1847-1906) are depicted at left.
»«
V
WORLD'S
GREATEST
&HOW&
Tm
Invincible
monar.cn
or Tm amusement World.
AMERICAS
LARGEST. (jRMIDEbT. MOM PROW.«
AMUSEMENT INSTITUTION.
CE <ft
= c
3.<3
II"
ma
D
II
< r
©a
o x>
CLCÛ
'-OsiGirUtfAMousiOniy Diminutive.Dwarf Clown Elephant'Tom Thumb''
J&Eä TOSAVE WHOM J U M BO SO NOBLY SACRIFICED HIS OWN LIFEi^S*»* ^SSSäwt
32

Nero's palace, the Circus Maximus, and
Rome itself, which spectacularly "burned"
at the end, of course, amidst a glorious
apotheosis celebrating the DAWN OF
CHRISTIANITY!
Bigness sheer size for the sake of size
has traditionally been another goal of
American circuses, the expressions "one-
horse show" and "one-elephant circus"
generally being terms of derision. In Bar-
num's day again, which is sometimes refer¬
red to as the "golden age" of the American
circus, as many as forty trained elephants
might participate in the programme, while
the menagerie tent itself often rivalled or
actually outshone the finest zoos in the
country. "Freaks" human prodigies like
the celebrated midget Tom Thumb (dis¬
covered by Barnum) and Chang and Eng,
the famous Siamese Twins abounded in
the sideshow or "museum" department,
which also displayed a profusion of auto¬
mata, illusions and curious inventions.
Three special trains for a single show
To Americans, especially those living in
rural areas, the day the circus came to town
was a major event. For here, crammed into
the space of a few brief hours, was enter¬
tainment enough to last a year, beginning
with a spectacular street parade that fea¬
tured blaring bands and beautifully carved
"tableau" wagons; gorgeously costumed
riders atop richly caparisoned mounts; up to
forty horses pulling a single, colossal band
wagon; elephants ambling along with pic
turesque howdahs on their backs; while
other animals lions and tigers, monkeys,
giraffes, even serpents behind plate-glass
windows were drawn along in their own
special wagons; and at the very end (in case
of explosion!) another American invention,
the steam organ or calliope, whose raucous,
ear-splitting notes could be heard
kilometres away.
To transport these immense shows to all
the cities throughout the United States and
Canada, Barnum and his contemporaries
soon abandoned horse-drawn wagons, fit¬
ted out their own special railway trains, and
devised new methods for quickly loading
and unloading them. Indeed, so marvel¬
lously efficient did this operation become
that it was not unusual for a circus like
Barnum's to unload early in the morning,
Above, a restored "Elephant Wagon" be¬
longing to the AI G. Barnes Circus parked
on a lot at Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.
Top, a once-familiar scene reconstituted in
1985: the circus train arrives in an American
town.
Balancing and juggling act performed by the
young American artiste Anthony Gatto
33

set up its tents and give its street parade and
as many as three complete performances,
reload in late evening and travel overnight
hundreds of kilometres to another town, to
begin all over again the following day.
The circus artistes and labourers (whose
one day off was Sunday) slept aboard the
trains, and the logistics and careful advance
planning required by such an unrelenting
schedule may easily be imagined. No less
than three separate trains were needed to
carry all the employees, animals, tents and
paraphernalia belonging to Barnum's
establishment. Garishly decorated "adver¬
tising cars", attached to regular trains and
carrying press agents, billposters and so on,
preceded the show by several weeks in
order to publicize its coming. Other special
agents also travelled in advance to arrange
for the rental of the circus lot, the delivery
of food and fodder for the circus employees
and animals, and anything else that might
be required. When Barnum's partner and
successor James A. Bailey toured the
United Kingdom and continental Europe at
the end of the nineteenth century, again
using special trains modified to the speci¬
fications of the circus, military officers from
all the countries through which the show
passed were sent to observe these precise
operations and were later said to have put
what they learned to good use during the
First World War.
A college for clowns
In the present century the American cir¬
cus, while retaining many of these tradi¬
tions, has continued to be influenced by
contemporary developments. With the one
notable exception of Ringling Bros, and
Barnum & Bailey the lineal descendant of
Barnum's show nearly all circuses now
move by motor transport. The circus parade
has been entirely abandoned, although
many of its handsome chariots and ornately
carved wagons have been lovingly restored
and may still be admired at the Circus
World Museum in Baraboo, Wisconsin.
The Big Top and three-ring format continue
to flourish; but here again the Ringling
show, the largest in the country, proves to
be an exception. At the end of its 1956
season this renowned circus gave up playing
under canvas and ever since has performed
in the modern, enclosed sports arenas that
are now found in virtually every North
American city. Besides saving considerably
on expenses, this arrangement permits the
circus to exhibit for up to eleven months
each year (in fact there are two Ringling
shows, the "Red" and the "Blue" units),
while spectators are more comfortably
accommodated than they formerly were.
Of the dozens of other circuses that criss¬
cross North America each season, un
doubtedly the most interesting and elegant
is the Big Apple Circus, a show that exhibits
in a single ring, employs a tent that seats
only around 1,600 people, and deliberately
attempts to emulate "European" tradi¬
tions. With its headquarters in New York
City, supported by subventions from both
the municipal and State governments, this
non-profit organization also runs a school
for training future circus artistes. For the
past few years, at its winter quarters in
Florida, the Ringling show has also run a
special "college" for clowns.
Unlike the situation found in several
European countries, circuses in the United
States the reputable circuses that give
their patrons a fair return for their money,
that is are generally in sound financial
condition. For despite the advent of the
movies, television, and a host of competing
entertainments in the twentieth century,
the circus, to use a popular expression,
remains "as American as apple pie".
A.H. SAXON, of the United States, is the author
ofover a hundred books, articles and reviews on
the theatre, circus and popular entertainment.
Among his publications, which have been trans¬
lated into several languages, is The Life and Art
of Andrew Ducrow and the Romantic Age of the
English Circus. He is currently working on P.T.
Barnum: The Legend and the Man, a biography
of the famous showman.

