A horse named Hans by James Serpell
If-
The search for
a 'talking animaP
Arecent study in the United States
revealed that three-quarters of all
books and stories written for chil¬
dren are either about animals or contain
animals as important central characters. In
the vast majority, animals are endowed
with essentially human thoughts and feel¬
ings and, more often than not, they are able
to talk.
Although obvious to anyone who has
ever browsed through the average child's
bookshelf, these findings are nevertheless
intriguing. After all, why should adults writ¬
ing for children evidently assume that their
readers will identify more readily with
animal characters than with human ones?
And what is the point of encouraging chil¬
dren to imagine that animals can talk when
every child will eventually discover that
they cannot? At least not in the sense that
humans talk. The more one thinks about it,
the more curious it seems.
While this notion of animals and people
talking to each other is doubtless peculiar, it
is far from being a recent or a Western
invention. It is older and more widespread
than literature itself. The creation myths of
indigenous peoples throughout the world
hark back to a time beyond memory a
time such as the "dreamtime" of the Austra¬
lian aborigines when gods, animals and
people lived together and communicated as
equals in a common language. Even the
biblical account of creation implies a state
of harmonious coexistence between Adam
and Eve and the non-human denizens of the
Garden of Eden. And Noah, we are told,
was able to communicate sufficiently well
with doves and ravens that he could send
them out on search missions.
14

^ "The notion of animals and people talking to
each other ... is older and more widespread
than literature itself. ... Noah ... was able to
communicate sufficiently well with doves
and ravens that he could send them out on
search missions." Left, Noah's Ark depicted
in a woodcut executed in 1564 by the Swiss
painter and engraver Jost Amman.
Long reputed for their intelligence, playful-
ness and friendliness to man, dolphins are
mentioned in the works of Aesop, Herodotus
and other early writers, often as a child's
mount or the rescuer of someone lost at sea.
For centuries many sailors regarded the pre¬
sence of dolphins leaping around their ship
as a sign that their voyage would be smooth
and happy. Right: "Cupid astride dol¬
phins", detail from a 2nd-century-BC
mosaic on the Greek island of Delos.
Indeed, as late as the Middle Ages in
Europe, the ability to communicate with
animals was regarded as a sure sign of bud¬
ding sainthood. According to legends,
many of the early Christian saints possessed
a special rapport with the birds and beasts.
The nature mystic, St. Francis of Assisi, for
example, preached sermons to rapt audi¬
ences of birds, and was able to tame wolves,
sing duets with nightingales, and still the
chattering of swallows or the croaking of
frogs. In this modern age of scientific objec¬
tivity, such stories seem quaint and fanciful.
Yet, ironically, the concept of people talk¬
ing to animals and vice versa continues to
flourish as never before.
The recent revival of interest in such phe¬
nomena began with a horse called Clever
Hans. Hans belonged to a retired school¬
teacher, Wilhelm von Osten, around the
turn of the century in Germany. Convinced
that his horse was exceptionally intelligent,
von Osten decided to teach it to solve sim¬
ple mathematical problems using the same
techniques he had used to teach children.
Hans far exceeded his expectations and
proved to be exceptionally gifted. When
asked to solve a simple problem, for exam¬
ple six subtracted from eleven, the horse
would give the correct answer by tapping
five times on the ground with his right fore¬
leg. Only rarely did he make serious errors.
Once the news of von Osten's clever
horse reached the rest of Europe, Hans
became a notable sensation. Visitors
poured in to see the horse perform, and
most of them went away convinced that
Hans was an equine genius. Even those who
suspected trickery, including many eminent
scientists, were baffled to discover that the
horse could still answer people's questions
correctly when his trainer was out of sight.
His fame spread, and Clever Hans rapidly
became a household name.
Sadly, it was not to last. Two professors
with the names of Stumpf and Pfungst were
determined to prove that Hans was a fraud.
They designed a series of experiments, in
the first of which two people agreed on a
problem they would ask the horse. One of
them would whisper the problem in the
horse's ear, and then retire from view be¬
hind a screen. In this test, where both ex¬
perimenters knew the right answer, Hans
usually solved the problem correctly. In the
second test, however, one experimenter
thought up a problem without telling the
other, and he then whispered it to the horse
and retired as before. In this situation,
Hans was apparently unable to give the
correct answer.
Further investigations revealed that Hans
was, indeed, very clever, but not in the way
that people had thought. Hans's skill lay in
his ability to detect the minute and subtle
variations in people's posture and facial
expression whenever he solved a problem
correctly. To get the right answer, all Hans
needed to do was to continue tapping on the
ground until he received the appropriate
signal to stop from his mystified audience.
Everyone, including the disillusioned von
Osten, had been fooled because they were
unaware that they had been transmitting
any signals to the horse (in humans, non¬
verbal messages of this kind are transmitted
unconsciously). They had drastically under¬
estimated the animal's powers of percep¬
tion and, as a result, had fallen into the trap
15

of assuming that Hans actually understood
the problems he was solving.
In reality, Clever Hans was not particu¬
larly exceptional. Talking animals, or at
least animals with amazing powers of
understanding, had been known about for
centuries. Clever Hans was, however, the
first such animal to be subjected to detailed
scientific scrutiny, and his eventual "expo¬
sure" cast a shadow of scepticism over all
subsequent phenomena of this kind.
It took the scientific world many decades
to recover from this ignominious piece of
self-deception and, when news of talking
animals resurfaced again in the early 1960s,
it involved not horses, but dolphins. It had
long been recognized that marine mam¬
mals, such as dolphins, were intelligent and
highly trainable creatures which could be
taught to perform astonishing tricks for
public entertainment. But in 1961, a book
entitled Man and Dolphin was published
containing far more exciting observations.
The author, John C. Lilly, was a neuro¬
logist who had been conducting experi¬
ments on the brains of live dolphins, focus¬
ing particularly on their vocal behaviour.
Despite early setbacks (many of his ex¬
perimental animals died under anaesthe
tic), Lilly succeeded in training dolphins to
vocalize on command, and he noticed that
some of his animals spontaneously pro¬
duced passable imitations of human speech.
This finding, coupled with the fact that
dolphins possess exceptionally large and
complex brains, inspired Lilly to make the
optimistic prediction that "within the next
décade or two" humans would establish
two-way communication with another
species, probably a marine mammal.
Lilly's book attracted considerable media
attention and stimulated a number of futur¬
istic novels and films. More surprisingly,
perhaps, his arguments were so convincing
that research on human-dolphin com¬
munication began to attract considerable
government funding. Alas, despite these
efforts, Lilly's talking dolphin never mater¬
ialized. Within a decade it was apparent
that the spectre of Clever Hans had simply
reappeared in an unfamiliar disguise, and
the entire programme of research was dis¬
continued.
Evidently undaunted, the scientific com¬
munity once again shifted its attention, this
time to focus on anthropoid apes. As our
nearest living relatives, apes have long been
the objects of special fascination, and the
idea of teaching them to speak was far from
new. The earliest experiments in this direc¬
tion, conducted by various people between
1896 and the 1940s, were, however, largely
unsuccessful. In 1947, for example, a young
American psychologist and his wife
adopted a month-old infant chimpanzee
called Vicki, and brought her up as their
"daughter". Vicki was reared as a child for
six years until her death, and subjected to
an intensive programme of language
training. Despite this, she learned only four
words papa, mama, cup and up which
she whispered rather than spoke. It was
concluded that apes were incapable of ac¬
quiring human language, if only because
they lack the necessary vocal apparatus to
pronounce words effectively.
In spite of these early negative results,
talking apes hit the headlines again in the
1970s when Allen and Beatrice Gardner at
the University of Nevada began teaching a
young chimpanzee called Washoe Amer¬
ican Sign Language (a system of hand sig¬
nals devised for the deaf). After four years
of intensive training, the Gardners claimed
that Washoe had acquired a vocabulary of
132 different signs which she could combine
together into apparently meaningful "sen¬
tences". Owing to the particularly close
relationship which existed between Washoe
and her trainers, however, it was difficult to
rule out the so-called "Clever Hans effect".
In other words, the Gardners may have
unwittingly provided Washoe with non-ver¬
bal cues when she gave the correct or ex¬
pected hand signals. Even when Washoe
signalled some spontaneous request, such
as "give me drink", it was not clear that she
understood the meanings of her signals in a
symbolic or abstract sense, as a person
would. It was possible that she had simply
learned to associate a gesture or a series of
gestures with a particular desired result.
These objections to the results of
"Project Washoe" and other more recent
sign-language studies have led to the inven¬
tion of increasingly elaborate and sophisti¬
cated techniques for exploring the linguistic
ability of apes. Artificial languages using
coloured plastic chips as "word analogues",
and computer keyboards made up of dis¬
tinctive geometric symbols have been de¬
vised to eliminate human interference and
the Clever Hans effect. Chimpanzees have
even been trained to communicate with
each other using such artificial languages.
Studies of this kind have revealed that
chimpanzees can be trained to understand,
in abstract, the meanings of the symbols
they use. In other words, they can acquire
"Chimpanzees can acquire ... the use of
arbitrary symbols to represent objects,
states or events. As yet, however, research
has provided little evidence that they are
able to organize these symbols according to
recognizable rules of grammar or syntax. In
short, their conversational abilities are
strictly limited." Left, a chimpanzee learn¬
ing the hand signal for "tickle" at the Insti¬
tute for Primate Studies in Norman, Okla¬
homa (USA).

the rudiments of semantics, or the use of
arbitrary symbols to represent objects,
states or events. As yet, however, this re¬
search has provided little evidence that
chimpanzees are able to organize these
symbols according to recognizable rules of
grammar or syntax. In short, their conver¬
sational abilities are strictly limited.
Perhaps because apes lack the ability to
pronounce human words, scientists are now
exploring the linguistic capacities of other
more "talkative" species. Most people
assumed that talking birds, such as parrots,
merely mimic sounds at random and are
incapable of using speech in appropriate
contexts hence the phrase: to learn some¬
thing "parrot fashion", meaning to imitate
things without understanding them.
After several years of careful instruction,
however, researchers at one university in
the United States have succeeded in train¬
ing Alex, an African grey parrot, to learn
verbal labels for more than twenty different
objects, such as paper, rock, cork or water.
He also knows five different colours, four
different shapes, and various commands,
such as "want", "come here", and "you
tickle me".
More to the point, Alex is able to com¬
bine these words intelligently to identify,
request or refuse more than fifty different
items, even some which were not included
in his original training. Alex is a long way
from being able to hold a conversation with
his trainers, and many scientists argue that
he is just another example of associative
learning and the Clever Hans effect. Yet his
"For the time being, talking animals anim¬
als capable of holding conversations with
people or with each other must remain the
subject of myths and children's literature.
... But one need only observe a shepherd and
his dog, or a skilled rider and his horse, to
realize the extraordinary level of shared
communication which exists." Above, "con¬
versation" between a man and his horse in
Romania.
achievements already rival those of the
signing chimpanzees, and Alex is only a
parrot.
For the time being, talking animals
animals capable of holding conversations
with people or with each other must re¬
main the subject of myths and children's
literature. All our efforts to educate our
non-human relations have failed to produce
a single individual that is capable of acquir¬
ing language. This does not, of course,
mean that people and animals are unable to
communicate. One need only observe a
shepherd and his dog, or a skilled rider and
his horse, to realize the extraordinary level
of shared communication which exists. But
there is a fundamental difference between
this, and the kind of communication that
goes on all the time between people.
Language, with its abstract symbols and
grammatical rules, is apparently unique to
human beings. We alone acquire it with
ease and apparent spontaneity; so much so
that when a person does not acquire lan¬
guage during normal development we are
immediately concerned that something is
seriously wrong. We need language in order
to cope with the complex social and mate¬
rial world in which we live. It is apparent,
however, that animals do not need it. They
manage their lives efficiently and effectively
without.
But, if all this is true, why have people
devoted so much time, effort and resources
to the idea of talking to animals? What
would we actually gain from the exercise? It
would certainly be interesting (and doubt¬
less ethically disturbing) to know what
animals really think and feel. Or to be able
to ask them direct questions concerning
their lives. But we have never, in fact, come"
close to achieving this sort of dialogue.
Perhaps our true motive is a simple desire to
make contact; to be united once again with
our own animal origins.
Human language and self-awareness
effectively isolate us from the rest of the
animal world. As Adam and Eve dis¬
covered, the price of self-knowledge was
eviction from the Garden of Eden. Yet in
myths, fairy-tales and children's literature,
and in our more recent interactions with
clever horses, signing chimpanzees and
talking parrots, we seem to cherish the per¬
sistent, if forlorn, hope that this isolation is
only temporary.
JAMES SERPELL is a senior research associate
in animal behaviour at the University of Cam¬
bridge (UK). He has written numerous articles on
animal behaviour and relationships between peo¬
ple and animals and is the author ofa recent book,
In the Company of Animals: A Study of Human-
Animal Relationships.
17
