INTERVIEW
An exclusive interview with
the President of the French Republic
François Mitterrand
Before the institutional upheavals of 1789, France (along
with the rest ofEurope and North America) experienced
an immense ferment of ideas, an intellectual, ethical, ju¬
ridical and aesthetic revolution which paved the way for
political change. Was this not a moment when secular cul¬
ture came to play a crucially important role as the driving
force ofhistory? Would it not be correct to say that culture
plays a role which is just as important, ifnot more so, than
economics as a source ofdynamism (or inertia) in the evo¬
lution of humanity?
1 ou are right to point out that the French Revolution
did not take place in a void. It was the prolongation, in po¬
litical terms, of profound changes in ways of thinking, feel¬
ing and acting.
Throughout the eighteenth century there was all over
Europe a vast ferment of men and ideasthink of the trav¬
els and debates of the philosophers, scholars and artists of
that timewhich slowly changed the way in which society
regarded itself.
The social and political order was no longer perceived
as an immutable effect of divine will but as a balance which
was both relative (the discovery of the "new world", and
other voyages had revealed the existence of other societies
organized differently) and perfectible (as the victory of the
American rebels had shown).
For many people there emerged a new line of demarca¬
tion between the religiousa matter of personal conviction,
the field of freedom of conscienceand the secular, of which
government was to be an emanation.
This emergence of a secular culture to which you refer
was not in itself hostile to religionone of the great figures
of the Revolution was the Abbé Grégoire, a priest faithful
to his religion and his ministry, and a republicanbut the
affirmation of man's rights and responsibilities on earth.
The evolution of the sciences played a part in this
process. The progress of observation and experimentation
made the worldfrom the secrets of nature to human
relationsincreasingly accessible to understanding, to ration¬
al analysis. Was this not the moment to think of rebuilding
in a different way, with more reason, more justice and more
liberty?
The German philosopher Fichte, who regarded the
Revolution sympathetically, saw in it a proof of the superi¬
ority of man over the beaver, which always rebuilds in an
identical fashion, or over the bee, which invariably arranges
the cells of its hive in the same way.
The new ideas which were spreading at that time,
transmitted in the salons, gazettes, and cafés, thus had a
decisive influence. They not only provided the weapons of
criticism but, in a society blocked by hereditary privilege
and absolutism, in a sense legitimized the transition to
action.
Not that there was a ready-made theory of revolution
waiting to be applied when the moment came. A great deal
of improvisation went on under the pressure of events.
But people did have a kind of compass of which the
Rights of Man were the armature.
However, during the same period, other movements
were defeated, although the aspirations of the revolution¬
aries of Geneva, Batavia or Brabant, of the Italian Jacobins
and the Hungarian patriots, the republicans of Mainz, the
Irish rebels or the Polish resistance were not much differ¬
ent from those of the French.
For history is not made by ideas alone. There must be
a conjunction of economic, social and political conditions
favourable to change. And there must always be the
determinationindividual and collectiveof men.
In the last analysis, they alone are the driving force of
history.

i^^JW'N' *<% Vt-^-l"- .- -id "?*¥1
Bi ExsSSEüäea
^H

<
...Neither self-renunciation nor self-absorption
There is a growing tendency to "localize" or "nationalize" which respect the identity of everyone, co-operate without
culture in the sense that people speak, for example, of arrogance or excessive humility in the priority areas of edu-
French, German, Chinese or Egyptian culture. Is there not cation, science, and culture, the keys to a freely chosen
a twofold danger here of encouraging compartmentaliza- destiny.
tion between cultures and of centring each culture on it- It is in this sense that France is working, with others,
self, of inciting it to turn towards the past rather than the for a Europe with a living culture, for the strengthening of
future? Ofcourse there are many cultural homelands, each links within the French-speaking community, and for recog-
linked to a specific language and history and each bearing nition of the cultural dimension of development aid.
a specific combination ofcreative resources. Some are more On a vaster scale, this is Unesco's raison d'être and the
dynamic and aggressive than others and they must all have ambition of the decade of cultural development launched
the opportunity to express themselvesfully andfreely. What in 1988. For today even more than in 1945, the following
can be done to protect them in such a way that they are three objectives are indissociable: we must educate, seek and
not stifled? create together.
I Finally I would say that I do not believe in the
would not be inclined to agree with you that there is a past/present dilemma, but rather in the force of societies
general tendency for culture to be increasingly confined which know how to use their past to project themselves into
within local or national frontiers. the future.
First of all because the entire history of humanity is one, The project to rebuild, under Unesco auspices, a vast
often violent, sometimes peaceful, of growing contact be- new library at Alexandria is one example of what I have
tween human cultures. in mind; to create modern conditions for access to
In our age, the media build many bridges, multiply in- knowledge on that Mediterranean shore is simultaneously
fluences tenfold and make time contract. to renew links with a prestigious past and to prepare the
The question is whether this will lead to an enrichment future.
of our different cultures and a more fertile dialogue between
them. Or to new dissensions, new inequalities, between those Is there an area where all these cultural homelands are in
who will master the world media and the rest, between those contact, an area of universal values? Could one go so far
who will have access to the perpetually changing field of as to say that before the Enlightenment such an area was
knowledge and the rest. without intellectual landmarks, that it was latent in great
This is a paradox of modern times; we know that the works ofart and literature produced in many countries
wealth of the world lies in the diversity of its cultures, in but that after 1789 it foundphilosophical expression in the
the variety of sensibilities and forms of expertise; we pos- concept ofa universal man, cut loose from all ethnic, con-
sess fantastic means for improving mutual understanding and fessional and social moorings?
communication. But if we are not careful, these instruments T
of co-operation will become instruments of domination. And 1 am tempted to reply with an anecdote. In 1827, Goethe
under the economic or political impulsion of the most ag- was delighted to discover in a Chinese novel themes close
gressive cultures, a pernicious uniformization may come to to those he had used in his epic Hermann und Dorothea. He
prevail. noted enthusiastically that there are placesin this case
So what is the answer? Neither self-renunciation nor self- bookswhere humanity can overcome its divisions. And
absorption. as a consequence he defined a programme in the form of
Next, we must be thoroughly convinced of the impor- a concept, Weltlitteratur [world literature], capable of tran-
tance of what is at stake: there will be no lasting economic scending historic frontiers and cultural particularisms. That
development, no social progress, no solid democracy, no was his answer to your question about a possible area of
world peace without the flowering of cultures which are universal values,
sure of themselves and capable of mutual enrichment. The revolutionaries of 1789 felt no doubt on this score:
Lastly, we must search for forms of cultural solidarity their message was addressed to the whole planet, the rights

...educate, seek and create together
of man and the citizen were proclaimed as universal. This In other words, it is not so easy to define the philosophi-
was said with a force that still rings in our ears, and the es- cal area you describe. The recognition of new forms of
sential thing was, for the first time, to say it in this way. determinismeconomic, social and psychologicalhas al-
We know that in practice things turned out somewhat ways raised the question of what is universal in man.
differently. That liberty, armed for war, ended by assum- But, more specifically, is it possible to act if all values
ing in Europe the form and customs of conquest, as Jaurès are relative (to a place, a time, a given culture) and thereby
said. That equality for women, blacks, and the poor, was cancel each other out? If racism is only one idea among
something less than true equality. others, and apartheid is the problem of South Africans alone?
But if the French Revolution was not always faithful Can one do anything but postulate a minimum of univer-
to its principles, it was an ideal in whose name people would sal values in order to pass any kind of judgement outside
fight in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, in a con- one's own immediate sphere and provide a basis for human
text in which national and social questions came to assume solidarity?
greater and greater importance. Many peoples of Europe and Liberty, equality and fraternity are values which have
Latin America, Asia and Africa, would make it their watch- stood up well to the wear and tear of time and have become
word against the domineering pretensions of the West. sufficiently well acclimatized in all latitudes that people have
And when in 1948, after a devastating world war, the continued to defend them. As nothing is ever definitively
need arose to reaffirm human rights, it was again the decla- achieved in this field, there is a long way to go from the
ration of 1789 which inspired the universal declaration set real to the ideal.
forth at the UN. Later the universal declaration was com- I will conclude with the wise definition given by Tzve-
pleted by the declaration of economic and social rights which tan Todorov in his latest work: "the universal is the horizon
had been called for in over a century of workers' struggles, of agreement between two particulars". This dialogue, he
This was not aimed at the universal man cut loose from his adds, is perhaps inaccessible but it is the only worthwhile
social moorings of whom you speak; on the contrary it was postulate,
concerned with people in specific situations, at work and
in society. What about the relationship between politics and culture?
To return to your question, I think a distinction should Is it possible to expect from politicians, above allfrom world
be made between acts which bear political fruit1789, the leaders, an aesthetic of community relations, of relations
Declaration of the Rights of Manand the complex course between man and nature, of essential forms of solidarity
which, especially in the history of ideas, leads to them. between all humanity? Can such an aesthetic draw inspi-
First of all, the radical change of outlook which made ration from the ideal whereby each person should act as
the Revolution possible was a slow gestation which origi- if the meaning of his or her action could be erected into
nated long before the eighteenth century, in the humanism a universal principle?
of the Renaissance, in the coming of the spirit of comparí- T
son which shook the authority of religious revelation, in 1 seem to remember that Kant formulated his categorical
Galilean physics which heralded the Encyclopaedists, in the imperative in similar terms in his Groundwork of the
Wars of Religion which gave rise to the right of tolerance, Metaphysic of Morals. He set forth three moral laws: act
in Montesquieu and La Bruyère who asserted the relativism as if the maxim of your action were to be erected into a
of beliefs and customs. universal law of nature, act in such a way that you always
Secondly, throughout the eighteenth century different treat humanity as an end and never as a means, act as if
sensibilities coexisted, some more universalist, others more your maxim was to serve as a universal law for all reasona-
relativist, than others, the echoes of which are found in ble beings.
modern critical debates on the idea of ethnocentrism, which To my mind it would be entirely beneficial if political
claims to erect into dominant universal values the specific leaders drew inspiration from these rules of conduct laid
contents of a culture, and on the limits of the right to be down by a philosopher who followed the events of 1789
different. very closely!

Fickle and libertarian, such is the essence of creation.
This only irritates those who fear liberty.
An aesthetic of relationships in the community? In today's world, no one will find salvation by going
It is not for statesmen to define what is beautiful. But against others. The increasing interdependence of economies
they are responsible for encouraging all that forges a link and cultures makes solidarity an obligation,
between people and strengthens the feeling of a common
destiny. Art also has a part to play since it makes use of Political institutions should encourage theflowering ofcul-
dreams, that essential commodity. tures and the circulation oftheirproducts in the freest pos-
Here a striking vista which makes the city more con- sible conditions. But isn't the creative artist always
genial to its users; there a new museum, revealing its treas- necessarily at odds with the politician, even when the lat-
ures to all; elsewhere a restored monument reminding the ter is full ofgood intentions towards the arts? Is it not true
nation of a moment in its history; somewhere else a modern that the artist needs to explore pathways that are anti-
public library, beautiful and useful. institutional?
To provide amenities, to adorn, to make a significant A
statementall this can be done together. IJLbsolutely. The freedom to create is to some extent the
So many cities throughout the world bear the stigma barometer of all liberties. A society which restricts this free-
of degrading forms of urbanization which display an ugly dorn usually attaches little importance to its members,
contempt for people. Other choices are possible which ex- Where people are free neither in their movements nor in
press a desire for a better community life for all and a rejec- their words, the force of creation is weakened even if cou-
tion of laissez-faire, of the haphazard effects of exclusively rageous works appear, condemned to a restricted diffusion,
private interests, of thoughtless conformity. In relation to art, the political authorities bear the
I would not claim that the link between man and na- responsibility you describe: they should create conditions
ture is the same for everyone, for the inhabitant of Buenos propitious for creation and circulation.
Aires and the villager of Casamance, for the Parisian and I would also add an educational dimension, a responsi-
the Baltic fisherman. Some grapple with earth or water day bility towards young people or publics which are relative-
after day, others enjoy them as a form of recreation. ly unfamiliar with creative works. For loving also comes
And yet the risks of exhaustion of certain natural through learning,
resources are of concern to us all; the irremediable destruc- And sometimes too there is an obligation to see that
tion of the atmosphere will spare no one; the community market forces do not reign entirely unchecked, to take, when
has to pay a price for rashly polluted seas. necessary, protective measures simply to defend the freedom
Human development has been based on mastery of na- to create against over-encroaching cultures. The example of
ture. If we forget what we owe to nature and despoil it, then the audiovisual media, at a time when the number of chan-
we may be heading for perdition. Those who work close neis and satellites is rapidly increasing, shows that it is im-
to nature know that an ill-treated piece of land does not yield possible to pay too much attention to this,
its wealth for long. The abuse of power begins with interference in content.
And the city-dweller knows that by creating a garden History has too many regrettable examples of attempts to
or a park among the stones, we do more than embellish the promote an official art exalting the "positive" virtues of a
city, we assert the continuity of a civilization, we indicate given régime,
that human genius is rooted in respect for certain balances. One important feature of the Enlightenment was the
I have cited these examples to show that politicians, and holding of a public debate on aesthetics. Many viewpoints
all citizens, must be more attentive to the essential solidari- were expressed and some of them make us smile todayas
ties between people and between people and their environ- when Diderot recommended historical portraits as a par-
ment, to preserve the vital balances not only for their own ticularly revolutionary art form since they drew the atten-
societies but for the future of the world. tion of the public to the great defenders of its rights.... But
Remember that when Unesco acted to save Borobudur, fortunately no narrowly utilitarian conception of art
Venice or Mont Saint-Michel, it did so because that heritage prevailed.
is part of the memory of all mankind, the common heritage. Fickle and libertarian, such is the essence of creation.
What was valid for the past is even more valid for the future. This only irritates those who fear liberty.

What cultural project do you personally dream of? What
wouldyou like to achieve with other world leaders between
now and the end of the millennium? Is it possible to im¬
agine a cultural programme on a world scale analagous
to Eureka?
M.Lust I really tell you about my dreams?
Very well. There is one project for my country which
I hold dear and that is the great library of France, the launch¬
ing of which I announced last summer, on the day of our
national festival.
The book and the written heritage are at the heart of
our civilization. During my first mandate, France greatly
developed and modernized its library network. But our Bib¬
liothèque Nationale is too cramped in its old buildings and
cannot, in spite of all efforts, adequately present its presti¬
gious heritage or receive all those who seek access to it, in
some cases after travelling from distant countries.
Whence the idea of building a great library on another
site, radically new in conception, covering a vast field of
knowledge, using the latest technologies of data transmis¬
sion, equally concerned with the audiovisual documents of
today's culture, and eventually forming partwith other
French and foreign librariesof a great network.
I intend to follow the project closely. The building must
be beautiful andwhy not?the site favourable to medita¬
tion, so that everything will combine to celebrate the pleas¬
ure of discovery and study, and encourage the acquisition
of knowledge.
Secondly, what would I like to achieve with other heads
of state between now and the end of the millennium? There
is so much to do if the world is to become less harsh to the
needy, less given to destruction, more respectful of univer¬
sal human rights....
One problem, however, seems to me of extreme and
even frightening importance for the survival of humanity:
the deterioration of the atmosphere.
Everyone must understand that this is not just another
form of pollution; it may spell the end of all life on the
planet. Here everyone must join in the search for a solution.
The United Nations is devoting an interesting research
programme to this problem. But the moment has come for
decision and action.
This is why, on 11 March last, at The Hague, twenty-
four countries signed an appeal urgently calling for the cre¬
ation of an international authority for the environment.
As always in such a case, dogmatisms and egoisms,
draped in a refusal to abandon any fragment of national
sovereignty to a collective authority, are slowing the move¬
ment down. But twenty-four countries, for a start, are de¬
termined to go ahead. Others will follow as they come to
realize what is really at stake.
I wish thereforelong before the end of the
millenniumto see human reason, that virtue so dear to the
hearts of the men of 1789, triumph over the destructive
ravages of laxity and laissez faire.
You mention Eureka, the programme of European tech¬
nological development which now has a sister programme
in the field of the audiovisual.
At the time we faced a choice. Should we wait for unani¬
mous agreement among our partners, or should a few of
us who were determined to act go ahead and leave the doors
wide open for all those who might wish to join us later?
We opted for the second course. Gradually the candidatures
have flowed in, and not only from Europe.
Cultural co-operation at planetary level, which owes
much to Unesco, can also proceed in this way: a project,
a programme, the united determination of some, others who
join in later.
