An idea
that changed
the world
The eagle
and the sphinx
The Egyptian campaign led by BotlUpUTte
Mzpoleon Bonaparte was meant to liber- Jfi Egypt
ate Egyptfrom her overlords and estab¬
lish a regime based on Enlightenment
precepts. However, as a result ofthe clash
of cultures and military failure things
turned out differently. All the same, the
ideas of 1789 took root in Egypt... but
in unexpected ways.
BY MAHMOUD HUSSEIN
I,N March 1798 the executive Directory of the
French Republic decided to despatch a military
expedition to Egypt under the command of
General Bonaparte.
In a paper presented in support of this plan,
French Foreign Minister Talleyrand wrote:
"Egypt was once a province of the Roman
Republic; she must now become a province of
the French Republic. The Roman conquest
marked the period of this beautiful country's
decadence; the French conquest will herald the
era of her prosperity. The Romans seized Egypt
from a line of kings renowned in the arts and
sciences; the French will rescue her from the
hands of the vilest tyrants who have ever existed."
The general in charge of the expedition was
therefore instructed both to "cut off the isthmus
of Suez and to take the necessary measures to en¬
sure for the French Republic full control of the
Red Sea" and "to improve the lot of the native
inhabitants of Egypt by all the means in his
power." 25

26
The army was accompanied by a Commission



des Sciences et des Arts, a group consisting of lead¬
ing figures in the sciences and the arts among
whom were such famous men as the mathemati¬
cian Gaspard Monge and the chemist Claude Ber-
thollet as well as a galaxy of talented engineers,
architects, biologists, chemists, writers, painters
and sketch-artists. Taken as a whole, the 165
members of the Commission constituted a verita¬
ble walking encyclopaedia, a modern administra¬
tion in embryo and a "centre of excellence" for
the promotion of intellectual and material
progress.
Make war on the Mamluks
Respect the Egyptians
"Here I am," wrote Monge, "transformed into
an argonaut, carrying the torch of Reason in a
land where for years its light has ceased to
shine...." Bonaparte and his band of scholars were
imbued with the notion that they were going to
Egypt, not only to establish a military base as a
bastion against the British, but also, and above
all, to implant the ideals of 1789, by freeing the
country from the medieval grip of the Mamluk
Beys, reviving agriculture and commerce, estab¬
lishing new industries, overcoming the scourge
of endemic diseases and imposing a modern le¬
gal system....
In a message to the soldiers under his com¬
mand, Bonaparte explained that the objective was
not to force the Egyptians into submission, but
rather to gain their support by defeating their op¬
pressors, the Mamluks. "You will find that the
customs here," he told them, "are different from
those in Europe; you must get used to them. The
peoples amongst whom we shall find ourselves
treat women differently than we do; but in ev¬
ery country the rapist is considered to be a mon¬
ster.... Pillage enriches only a few and brings
dishonour upon all of us..."
"The general officer commanding expressly
forbids all Frenchmen, whether soldiers or
civilians, to enter mosques or to gather at the en¬
trances to mosques.... It is of supreme importance
that each soldier pays for anything he acquires
in the city and that they [the Egyptians] be
neither cheated nor insulted. We must make
friends of them and make war only on the
Mamluks."
A missed rendezvous
The Mamluks were easily vanquished. But despite
this, the Egyptians on the whole did not frater¬
nize with the French. On the contrary, they rose
up in protest against the French presence, some¬
times even making common cause with their lo¬
cal oppressors. A combination of reasons explains
why this should have been so.
In the first place, despite its revolutionary
motives, the French army was an army of occu¬
pation which had suddenly burst in upon a so
cial and cultural arena totally alien to it. Further¬
more, this army belonged to a country of which
the collective Egyptian experience retained the
most bitter memory, that of the pitiless confron¬
tation between Christendom and Islamthe Cru¬
sades. With the exception of a minority of
intellectuals, who were attracted by the secular
French approach, the Egyptian people saw the
French expedition as a new Crusade.
Secondly, the watchwords of liberty, equali¬
ty and responsibility had too new, too disturb¬
ing a ring to minds dominated by the imperatives
of custom and of the community and too strong¬
ly imbued, over the centuries, with a spirit of sub¬
mission to Mamluk despotism. When Bonaparte
informed leading Egyptian personalities of the
creation of a Divan (Council), whose elected
members would administer the country's inter¬
nal affairs, their reply was that the people would
only obey the orders of the Mamluks. As for
equality, in a country where domestic slavery was
still widespread, the concept seemed as bizarre as
it was disquieting.
Finally, the measures taken by Bonaparte to
rationalize the legal code and to modernize the
administration, were seen by many as a provoca¬
tion. In Cairo, the inhabitants lived in family
groups or in close-knit trade guilds, in sectors
separated from one another by gates which were
only open during the day. When the order was
given to de-compartmentalize the city and to re¬
move these gates, a general feeling of uneasiness
and insecurity resulted. The new consolidated
regulations concerning property, inheritance and
Nlembers of Napoleon's
Egyptian expedition
produced a 5-volume
"Description of Egypt"
illustrated with over 3,000
drawings. The
"Description" covered
many facets of Egyptian
life, from arts and crafts
and household objects to
monuments, zoology and
botany. .

taxation by-passed the established patriarchal hi¬
erarchies and local customs. The limit was
reached when soldiers penetrated into the vari¬
ous sectors of the city and even into houses to
impose public health precautions against the
threat of plaguecleaning of streets and houses,
washing of clothing and destruction of the be¬
longings of people whose deaths were suspected
of being due to plague. This was seen as a viola¬
tion of the privacy of the home.
Too many changes, introduced too rapidly,
overturned centuries-old values. Popular discon¬
tent, exploited by the Ottomans and the Mam¬
luks and channelled by religious leaders, led to
a succession of riots, which were bloodily sup¬
pressed. The gulf widened between the deep heart
of Egypt and an army decimated by disease, its
fleet destroyed by the British, which was find¬
ing its position increasingly difficult to maintain
and whose only thought was to return home.
Three years after it had set out, the French
expedition ended in complete military failure.
The revolutionary backlash
Paradoxically, it was at this moment that revolu¬
tionary thought began to exercise a deep cultur¬
al, intellectual and political influence. Once the
occupier was no longer physically present, once
the brutalities of oppression were forgotten and
the daily affronts that French behaviour inflict¬
ed on believers and on local traditions were a
thing of the past, the revolutionary message be¬
gan to spread insidiously in the minds of men.
An illustrious witness of these events, the
chronicler Djabarti, relates that no sooner had the
French army left than the former Ottoman and
Mamluk overlords, anxious to re-establish their
weakened authority over the population, began
increasingly to resort to arbitrary measures and
acts of cruelty. The people then began to appreci¬
ate the difference between a modern administra¬
tion and despotic power and to regret the absence
of laws which, though they had jolted them out
of their accustomed ways, at least were universal
in their application. They recalled that Bonaparte
had had soldiers of his own army shot for steal¬
ing a chicken from a peasant, whereas the Mam¬
luks did not hesitate to pillage entire villages.
Some Egyptian intellectuals started to voice
the respect inspired in them by the French scho¬
lars accompanying the expedition and the admi¬
ration they had felt when hearing them explain
their discoveries and inventions and, perhaps even
more, listening as they spoke of life, society and
progress in terms which threw open to them
hitherto unsuspected intellectual perspectives.
What the Egyptians discerned in the words
JVluhammad Ali
(1769-1849), viceroy of
Egypt (1804-1849).
izz£s%J^
of the French was an appeal to overcome their
feelings of inferiority, to take charge of their own
affairs, to think not only of their duties but also
of their rights, to go beyond their present mis¬
fortunes and look to the possibility of change,
to a future which would be more than a cons¬
tant repetition of the past. This was a summons
to escape from a universe dominated by intangi¬
ble, revealed truths and to enter a world open to
question, to experience, to liberty, in which the
mind, guided by reason, could explore an unlimit¬
ed range of possibilities. The more enlightened
spirits of the age began to think that only by fol-
ln this work by Auguste
Raffet, Bonaparte is seen
presiding over the Divan
(Council) in Cairo.
27

Fighting the Mamluks,
detail from a painting by
the French painter
Théodore Géricault-
(1791-1824)



lowing this path could Egypt be awakened from
the sleep into which she had sunk for centuries
and be given the opportunity to modernize and
recover the prestige that had been hers in the
heroic age of Saladin.
Muhammad Ali,
enlightened despot
Two of these intellectuals, Djabarti and 'Attar,
reflected on how Egyptians could become recep¬
tive to this new way of thinking that had reached
them from the other side of the Mediterranean.
They came to the conclusion that the first thing
to be done was to reform the educational system.
This they thought could be achieved by creating
a new type of school in which a rational approach
based on experience would be taught, and by
sending Egyptian students to France where they
could imbibe the spirit of progress.
Their plans were to be realized thanks to an
unforeseen political occurrence, the seizure of
power by Muhammad Ali. An Albanian by birth
and head of one of the Ottoman brigades sent to
regain control of Egypt at the time when the
French army was preparing to leave, Muhammad
Ali was quick to grasp the radical novelty of the
ideas, the organization and the techniques that
the French expedition had displayed and the ad¬
vantages that could be drawn from them by a
governor anxious to redress a country rapidly fall¬
ing apart.
He began by consolidating his political
authority by allying himself with the country's
spiritual and intellectual leaders and then massacr¬
ing the leading Mamluk chiefs. With the reins of
28

power in his hands, he obtained the Ottoman sul¬
tan's recognition of his status as Governor of
Egypt and then launched into an enterprise com¬
parable in scope to that to be undertaken thirty
years later by the Meiji in Japanthe moderni¬
zation, enforced from the top, of a patriarchal
society.
He reorganized the central structures of the
state, established civil and military manufactur¬
ing plants, and set up an army. He took as models
the officers and scholars of the French expedition,
in all respects except onethe spirit of individu¬
al initiative. For it was not a question of strength¬
ening private as against state enterprise, but of
reinforcing the state against private feudal power.
The door was cautiously opened to Western
science and technology. Scholars and European
specialists were summoned to Egypt. Egyptian
students were sent to Europe. Schools were creat¬
ed in which learning by heart and recitation gave
way to experiment and reasoning.
Agriculture was reorganized and the adminis¬
trative system reunified. The centralized irriga¬
tion system, left in ruins by the Mamluks, was
reestablished. A transportation network was
formed to link the various regions of the coun¬
try to the capital and to the port of Alexandria.
A new police structure was established which
gave the people a sense of security they had not
known for centuries.
Thus, an orderly, enlightened dictatorship
replaced the previous corrupt, anarchic
despotism. The hand of the state became more
strongly felt in the daily life of the people, but,
on the other hand, horizons began to widen and
a sense of space, movement and change began to
permeate a hitherto stagnant existence. For those
called upon to work in the factories or to enlist
in the army, the whole pattern and setting of life
was revolutionized.
Under pressure from the state, the different
strata of society supplied the manpower neces¬
sary for the modernization programme. From the
ranks of the ulemas (the learned of Islam) came
the intellectuals who were to learn the lessons of
the West. From the artisans, and later even from
among the peasantry, came the workers who
were to man the state factories.
A great power in the making
Muhammad Ali did not stop there. If Egypt was
to become an industrial power, it was so that she
could also become an Arab military power. To
create an army modelled on that of Bonaparte
rather thanthat of the Mamluks, Muhammad Ali
took the bold step of introducing conscription.
The peasant communities would provide the rank
and file recruits; the officer corps would be
recruited from among the sons of heads of the
richer families.
Prompted by Muhammad Ali, the moral
shake-up produced by the French expedition was
bringing about a major social upheaval. Starting
from the pinnacle of power, the shock-wave of
the technological characteristics that had brought
about the modernization of the West was now
travelling downwards through the structure of a
traditional community.
In a quarter of a century, Egypt thus became
a great regional power whose armies were on the
advance both north and south and whose victo¬
ries were beginning to galvanize the Arab peo¬
ples. Her political and military élan was to be
disrupted when London and Paris joined forces
to prevent the emergence, around the figure of
Muhammad Ali, of a dynamic, conquering Arab
nation. From then on, Egypt, like the other coun¬
tries south of the Mediterranean, was condemned
to economic colonization.
Pathways to modernity
New pathways had to be taken if the concepts
of the Enlightenment were to suffuse the minds
of men. Intellectuals rather than the state became
the chosen vehicle and the shackles of despotism
were gradually thrown off. The spirit of progress
became associated with the spirit of liberty and
justice. The ideas of the Enlightenment fertilized
trends of thought in which change, reform and
the struggle against the arbitrary were to take on
increasing importance.
Tahtawi, who towards the end of the 1820s
had led the first Egyptian student mission to
France, opened the way to a new, rational con¬
sideration of a modern Egypt in which all should
be equal in the eyes of the law. From then on,
a liberal tradition emerged upon whose roll of
honour are inscribed such prestigious names as
Loutfi Al Sayyed and Taha Hussein, and in the
wake of which, in the aftermath of the First
World War, the national Wafd party was born.
Religious thought itself came into question.
To take up the challenge of the West, reformers
such as Afghani and Abduh called for a "Renais¬
sance", which, for them, meant a return to the
original sources of the Holy Message and the
selective integration of certain European social
contributions.
The great debate on the ways and means of
coming to grips with the modern world was
open. It has continued, on an ever-increasing
scale, right up to the present day.
29
