REDISCOVERING
'THE ISLANDS OF THE MOON'
BY ANDRE LIBIOULLE
BECAUSE of a paradox inherent in
the history of the islands on which
they live, the people of the Como¬
ros archipelago have only had access to
their age-old cultural heritage since 1979,
when the first public library containing
a collection of historical and contem¬
porary sources relating to their identity
was opened at Moroni, the capital.
This tropical archipelago of four
islandsNgazidja (Grande Comore),
Mwali (Mohéli), Nzwani (Anjouan) and
Mahoré (Mayotte)has cast a spell on
travellers ever since the first voyages of
Arabs and Persians to what they called
the "Islands of the Moon" (al-Kamar)
because of the moonlit radiance of their
rugged shores. Sixteenth-century Por¬
tuguese explorers opening up the Spice
Route first made the islands' existence
known to the West.
Navigators must have been attracted
to this volcanic archipelago at the north
ern end of the Mozambique Channel in
the Indian Ocean by its mild climate. But
they were surely also drawn by the
singularity of the population, a mixture
of Bantu, Arab and Persian peoples living
in closely-knit communities, whose
tempestuous history was marked by
rivalry between local chiefs and forays by
pirates. Epic folk tales chronicled the
myths and legends of a culture left
astonishingly intact between its two great
neighboursthe African mainland (Dar
es-Salaam is some 700 kilometres away),
and Madagascar, whose northern coast
lies 300 kilometres from the Comoros.
Why should the Comoros be isolat¬
ed? During the colonial period, from 1912
to 1946, when the islands were ad¬
ministered from Madagascar as a French
colony, they were considered of negligi¬
ble importance because they were so
small. This archipelago which neither
forms part of Madagascar nor of the
Creole-speaking world was overlooked
by researchers. The little that was known
about the Comoros was filtered through
Madagascar, as in the "Comoros room"
established half a century ago in the
Tananarive Museum.
The isolation of the Comoros was
further intensified by the dispersal of
ancient writings and legal, historical and
ethnographic documents into east Africa,
where the Swahili civilization (of which
the Comoros constituted a kind of ocean
outpost) had become an Anglo-Saxon
sphere of influence.
The Comorianslike the people in
the outside worldthus did not know
their own country. In order to discover
their cultural identity, they had to take
matters into their own hands, a task
which was all the more urgent since eco¬
nomic instability, dependence on foreign
aid and imports of essential commodities
had made their country vulnerable.
31

In October 1978 the Islamic Federal
Republic of the Comoros was consti¬
tuted, including all the islands except
Mayotte, which remained a French
dependency. A decree was issued the
following year creating a National Centre
of Documentation and Research on the
Comorians (CNDRS), whose facilities
include a library and a national museum
and archive as well as a research centre
on oral traditions.
The multidisciplinary work of the
CNDRS is concentrated on research on
the history and communities of the
archipelago. The Centre and its special¬
ized associations have succeeded in
motivating people to study traditions
which were erased during the colonial
period. These deeply rooted traditions
can be used fruitfully when they are
adapted to modern circumstances.
The guiding principle is that a link
should be created between the CNDRS
and village communities, where groups of
young peoplewho are the best catalysts
in that they are aware of tradition yet
sensitive to modern technology would
bring about an attitude change, not with
the idea of blind acceptance of the trans¬
fer of technology but rather of cultural
transformation based on a "revival" of
the past.
None of the pilot schemes of the
CNDRS, such as the establishment of
associations to safeguard historic or
archaeological sites, the restoration of
ancestral dwellings, the setting up of read¬
ing rooms and small ethnographic collec¬
tions, the reconstitution of forgotten
dances or traditional musical instruments,
are secondary to urgent social needs,
although they may seem to be so. They
are all intended to enrich the present by
looking to the cultural heritage of the
past.
In its early days the CNDRS received
aid from many quarters, including
Unesco and the Agency for Cultural and
Technical Co-operation; and a number of
European and African countries have
contributed either to the purchase of
video equipment or to the training of
technicians. The Centre is now seeking
In a school at Ikoni, near Moroni, the capital of the Comoros, children recite to the rhythm of
tambourines in preparation for the Maulid, the Islamic festival that marks the birthday of the
Prophet.
to improve its facilities to train Comori-
an experts to an international level, par¬
ticularly in the natural and environmental
sciences. Moreover it is essential that a
CNDRS unit should be set up on each
island in order to disseminate information
and identify new needs.
Two progressive educational institu¬
tions, the National Institute of Education
(INE) and the National School of Higher
Education (ENES), are working with the
Centre. The INE aims to establish the
historical and linguistic content of school-
books and promote appropriate teaching
methods, while the ENES wishes to
encourage students to produce original
work on oral traditions, epidemics, botany
or village communities.
Thus a cultural identity, a real inspir¬
ation to the future of the Comoros, is
consciously and progressively taking
shape.
ANDRE LIBIOULLE, a Paris-based Belgian
journalist and producer of radio programmes on
cultural topics, has worked in the Comoros on
behalf of the Agency for Cultural and Technical
Co-operation. He has recently contributed articles
to a Larousse chronicle of the 20th century.
32 	
