The Friedrichstrasse,
a link in the chain
of history
BY CHRISTIANE MENGIN
rrom the late 19th century
until the end of World
War I, the Friedrichstrasse
bustled with activity.
X OUR kilometres in length and lying athwart
the boundary between the two parts of the city,
the Friedrichstrasse sums up the history of Ber¬
lin better than any of its other thoroughfares. The
Friedrichstrasse is more representative than, for
example, the Unter den Linden, the wide
boulevard in the east where, during the eight¬
eenth century, Frederick the Great, thirsting for
prestige, erected a number of monumental build¬
ings, or than the Kurfürstendamm, the "Champs-
Elysees" of the western part of the city.
Sleepy suburbs
and unobtrusive houses
At the beginning of the eighteenth century,
Berlin was becoming more and more cramped
within the straitjacket of its ramparts and a new
district, Friedrichstadt, was constructed outside
the city walls. Baroque in style, this outgrowth
was traversed by three streets, the Wilhelmstrasse,
the Friedrichstrasse, which formed the central
axis, and the Lindenstrasse, leading southwards
to the Rondell circus, inspired by the Piazza del
Popólo in Rome. In the middle of the circus stood
a column commemorating the battle of Water¬
loo which marked the south-eastern limit ci the
extension of the city.
Until the late nineteenth century, Friedrich¬
stadt remained essentially a residential suburb
with its rows of identical, unpretentious, two-
storey, bourgeois houses. Here and there an ele¬
gant aristocratic property enlivened the aspect of
this sleepy suburb. Nothing disturbed the calm
of the Friedrichstrasse except the passage of
hearses on their way to the out-of- town cemetery
or the tramp of soldiers heading for the Rondell
parade ground or the Tempelhofer Feld training
ground to the south of the city. Barracks and sta¬
bles added the finishing touch to the somewhat
martial aspect of the Friedrichstrasse.
The arrival of a number of shopkeepers and
craftsmen during the first half of the nineteenth
century gave little indication of the frenetic 11
m p
- »-

Above, plan of Berlin in 1740 showing the
Friedrichstrasse, the main north-south axis through the new
suburb of the Friedrichstadt. Below left, photo taken in
1871 of the Belle-Alliance Platz, better known as the
Rondell, which gives on to the Friedrichstrasse. Below
right, the Rondell, renamed the Mehringplatz in 1945, as
it is today. The only vestige of the past is the peace column
in the centre, which was erected in 1843.
12
¿J^-^HmSzw
%M fe^£ ** v^^^ ZW yJ
JâlÉfliaaiaMaii»^ üjk^aflB ^a^T . .3

Krjp^MikmSSi
development that was to change the face of the
Friedrichstrasse following the proclamation of
William I of Prussia as Emperor of Germany in
1871. When this period of frenzied growth and
speculation began, the historic heart of Berlin and
the Unter den Linden were bursting at the seams.
Not a scrap of land was available for building,
so it was in the Friedrichstadt district that the de¬
velopment occurred that was to transform the
somewhat provincial chief city of Prussia into the
capital of the Reich.
The end of a golden age
A vast construction programme turned the once
peaceful Friedrichstrasse into a bustling main
thoroughfare with heavy traffic and lined with
serried ranks of fashionable shops, restaurants,
cafés, night-clubs, theatres and a wide variety
of hotels, business headquarters, banks, insurance
companies and government offices. The "street
of 107 cinemas" housed a host of studios and
workshops of the youthful German motion
picture industry, while newspapers and publishers
established themselves in the nearby Kochstrasse.
The golden age of the Friedrichstrasse lasted



until the fall of the German Empire in 1918. Its
long, narrow perspective, disappearing into the
distance between the contrasting façades of the
three- to five-storey buildings that had replaced
its original houses, has been immortalized in
hundreds of photographs and illustrations.
Passers-by, casual strollers, elegantly-dressed
women and office clerks jostled each other on the
narrow sidewalks beneath a profusion of multi¬
coloured signs. With its trams and old, horse-
drawn buses, the Friedrichstrasse hummed with
the feverish activity of an Empire launching
itself into a tardy but breakneck process of
industrialization.
After the First World War, Germany was
plunged by defeat into an economic slump that
did not spare the Friedrichstrasse. Nevertheless,
although building activity was considerably
slowed down, this centre of Berlin life inspired
several avant-garde architects to conceive some
of their most daring projects. In 1921, on the oc¬
casion of an architectural competition for an
office block at the S-Bahn underground station
in the Friedrichstrasse, Ludwig Mies van der
(checkpoint Charlie, a
border control point on the
Friedrichstrasse. Left, the
Kurfürstendamm, a lively
centre of Berlin life. Right,
the Alexanderplatz, in the
eastern part of the city
between Karl-Marx-Allee
and the Friedrichstrasse, is
part of a vast area which
has been reconstructed
since 1961.
CHRISTIANE MENGIN,
French art historian
specializing in modern
German architecture, is a
lecturer at the University of
Paris I. With a Franco-
German team, she is
preparing a study to he
published shortly on
Franco-German relations
between 1940 and 1950 and
their effects on urban
architecture and planning.
Rohe designed a triangular-shaped glass tower
which presaged the glass and steel buildings he
was to erect in the United States twenty years
later. Around 1930, the functionalist town-
planner Ludwig Hilberseimer suggested that
several blocks on either side of the Friedrich¬
strasse should be demolished and replaced by rec¬
tangular, eight-storey office blocks so as to make
more rational use of space in the business centre.
This visionary project was never realized, but it
was no accident that it was to have been sited in
this lively part of town.
Although its role as the capital's business and
shopping centre continued, artistic and literary
life became concentrated in the west of the city
around the Kurfürstendamm. However, a num¬
ber of the great names of the theatre remained
faithful to the Friedrichstrasse. Max Reinhardt,
in particular, continued to direct many produc¬
tions, at the theatre company which in 1954 be¬
came Bertolt Brecht's Berliner Ensemble and at
the Grosse Spielhaus, transformed in 1919 by the
architect Hans Poelzig into an expressionist
theatre.
A city in ruins
When Hitler came to power in 1933, the
Friedrichstadt district was largely taken over by
the Nazis. They occupied many old buildings in
which they installed the government offices of
the Third Reich. Albert Speer's monumental plan
for Berlin, whose fruition was prevented by the
war, did not include the Friedrichstrasse. Only
the planned redevelopment of Museum Island and
its extension westward would have modified its
appearance slightly. The proposed construction
on either bank of the Spree River of four new
museums would have involved, among other
things, the demolition of the Admiralpalast (to¬
day the Metropol), a popular theatre devoted to
operettas and musical comedies.
In May 1945, after the battle of Berlin, the
centre of the city was in ruins.
When Berlin was divided up between the Al¬
lies, the Red Army, the first on the scene, oc¬
cupied the eastern part of the city. The dividing
line followed the boundaries of the existing dis¬
tricts. Part of the old Friedrichstadt district, in¬
cluding three-quarters of the Friedrichstrasse, was 13

14
in the Soviet sector. The fourth quarter, to the
south, was allotted to the American sector.
In the hope of a reunification of the city, the
local authorities in the west delayed reconstruct¬
ing the area under their control so as to be able
to do so in collaboration with their counterparts
in the east. At that time, the southern end of the
Friedrichstrasse was a sea of mud from which
arose the sinister shells of a few buildings that had
escaped total destruction by bombing or in the
fighting.
In the east the authorities began to raze
ruined buildings. The winters of the latter years
of the war, when no heating was available, had
seriously damaged the stucco-work and external
ornamentation that had once been one of the
street's attractions. They were removed and the
façades were coated with a beige rendering which
rapidly weathered to a gloomy grey.
The erection of the Berlin Wall, in 1961, set
the seal on the division of the city into two parts.
The Friedrichstrasse took on a new symbolic sig¬
nificance since it was the site of two crossing-
points, the Friedrichstrasse underground station,
which had become a railway station, to the north,



and, to the south, the famous "Checkpoint
Charlie", a reinforced barrier set up in the mid¬
dle of the roadway and reserved for use by
foreigners.
From that time onwards, renovation of the
Friedrichstrasse began in both east and west.
Berlin's 750th anniversary
In the west, the renovation programme began
with the reconstruction of the Mehringplatz, the
former Rondell. The Wilhelmstrasse and the Lin-
denstrasse, which both led to it, were diverted
and it became a pedestrian precinct whose cir¬
cularity was emphasized by the construction, be¬
tween 1968 and 1975, of two rings of massive
buildings.
After 1980, however, this policy gave way to
an altogether different approach to urban reno¬
vation. An attempt was made to conserve build¬
ings that had survived and still bore witness to
the past glories of the Friedrichstrasse. The origi¬
nal street pattern was retained and an effort was
made to take into account the architecture of the
earlier buildings. The aim was to restore this ur¬
ban area, so roughly treated by history, while
keeping in mind the integrality of Berlin, evoked
in 1987 by the city's 750th anniversary.
In the east, too, the reconstruction of the
Friedrichstrasse went on apace. In the early 1980s,
several buildings were under construction, among
them a huge auditorium, the Friedrichstadtpalast,
an international Trade Centre and several modern
hotels, including the Metropol and the Unter den
Linden. Other buildings still in the planning
stageapartment blocks, restaurants, cafés and a
cinemawill all help to restore the former charm
of the Friedrichstrasse.
Skyscraper-studded skyline
in Shinjuku, one of Tokyo's
business districts. Inset,
entrance to Rikugien
Garden.
