THE MERMAID OF THE DNIESTER
BY OSYP PETRASH
IN 1772, Galicia, in the western
Ukraine, became a part of the
Austrian Habsburg monarchy.
The people of the new province
were severely oppressed and re¬
mained largely illiterate. Intellectual
life was impoverished by the fact
that no books were published in the
Ukrainian language; only a rich tra¬
dition of folk songs and legends
nourished the spiritual life of the
people.
At that time a number of Slav
peoples (Czechs, Serbs and Croats)
were undergoing a national and cul¬
tural revival. The first indications of
a similar revival also began to ap¬
pear in Galicia. In 1833, a clandes¬
tine circle was organized in Lvov, the
capital, with the objective of reviv¬
ing the national culture of the
Ukrainians of Galicia. Its founders
were three friends, Markiyan Shash-
kevych (1811-1843), Ivan Vahylevych
(1811-1866) and Yakiv Holovatsky (1814-1888). Instead of speaking
German or Polish, as was the rule when societies held meetings, they
used their native Ukrainian language, and discussed the culture and
destiny of their people.
The activities of the Shashkevych circle constituted not only a
literary phenomenon, but a social and democratic movement. Its
greatest achievement was the publication of an almanac entided Rusal-
ka Dnistrovaya ("The Mermaid of the Dniester"), which was the
first collection of Ukrainian literature to appear in the western
Ukraine.
Shashkevych prepared a collection of literary works and folk songs,
originally entitled Taria ("The Dawn") and submitted the manuscript
to the board of censors. As there was no censor of Ukrainian books
in Lvov, Toria was sent to Vienna, where Varfolomei Kopitar, the
censor of Greek and Slav books, made positive comments on the
manuscript but pointed out that it was "purely political" and sent
it back to Lvov. Under the new title of Rusalka Dnistrovaya, the
almanac was then sent to the Hungarian censor at Pest. He allowed
it to be published and 1,000 copies appeared in Buda in 1837. One
factor which had helped to make publication possible was
Holovatsky's friendship with the Serbian writer Georgi Petrovich and
other leading figures in the Slav revival.
What were the contents of this almanac that the Habsburg authori¬
ties found so disturbing? Its 150 pages open with an epigraph by
the Czech poet Jan Kollar: "Not sad eyes, but the hands of the wor¬
ker bring hope." These words were meant as an appeal to readers
not to give way to pessimism about the destiny of the people, but
to work towards its cultural and national awakening. The preface,
A copy of the Rusalka Dnistrovaya (The Mermaid of the Dniester") which
escaped the clutches of the censor. This was the first collection of
Ukrainian literature to appear in the western Ukraine.
by Shashkevych, is a manifesto call¬
ing for the revival of Ukrainian liter¬
ature in Galicia. It lists Ukrainian
publications which appeared in
Moscow, St. Petersburg and Kharkov.
Most of the almanac consists of
Ukrainian folk songs, as if confirm¬
ing Kollar's claim that "Folk songs
are the most solid foundation of edu¬
cation. An element of culture, the
support of national identity, they
protect and beautify language." A
chapter is devoted to original writ¬
ing by Shashkevych, Vahylevych and
Holovatsky. There follow translations
of Serbian folk songs, extracts from
"The Kraledvorski Manuscript" by
V. Hanka, an article by Shashkevych
on the importance of historical
monuments in spiritual life, exam¬
ples of the vernacular Ukrainian lan¬
guage, a short description of the
ancient manuscripts of Saint Basil's
monastery, Lvov, and a review of a
collection of marriage songs and folk customs.
The Lvov censor objected both to the contents of the almanac
and its use of popular speech and phonetic orthography. He decided
that its distribution should be prohibited. About 800 copies were con¬
fiscated and legal proceedings were brought against the publishers.
But Rusalka Dnistrovaya was not doomed to perish. Some 200 copies
were widely distributed with the help of friends of the circle in Buda.
Rusalka Dnistrovaya was intended by its authors to lay the foun¬
dations of a Ukrainian literature in tune with the ideological and
aesthetic principles proclaimed by Shashkevych in his work "The
Alphabet": "Written language is for every people its life, its way of
thinking, its other self; it should be born and grow among people...
it must not become like the bird of paradise which is said to be
without feet and is thus condemned to stay in the air for ever. Litera¬
ture is a vital need of the people."
The Rusalka was a powerful voice which spoke out about the
lives and national dignity of the Galician Ukrainians. Mainly con¬
sisting of works by Slav authors, it became a literary landmark in
the Slav world. It is significant that the ideas of the Serbian writer
and scholar Vuk Karadzic (1787-1864), a leading figure in the Slav
Renaissance, should have inspired Shashkevych's circle, and that the
lexical and orthographical principles set forth by Karadzic should have
been the basis of the phonetic spelling system used in the almanac.
"The Mermaid of the Dniester" thus has an important place in the
Slav Renaissance as a whole.
OSYP PETRASH, of the Ukrainian SSR, is the author of a number of studies on
the history of 19th-century Ukrainian literature.
23
