Highways
in the city
BY BRIGITTE OUVRY-VIAL
E
LOUSTON is a city in trompe l'oeil. It has
at least four downtown areas organized around
ultra-modern tower blocks, and then, as far as the
eye can see, covering nearly 650 square
kilometres, stretches a medley of districts rang¬
ing from the smart to the run-down.
These districts are linked by highways rather
than streets, for the streets of Houston are un¬
like those of many other cities. Even Milam Street
or Louisiana Street, in downtown Houston, are
not quite "streets". Houston is a city of
boulevards and avenues.
Inside the Loop
Each of these long arteries defines an area of the
city, with its own way of life and speciality. Mon¬
trose, with its galleries and museums, is the arts
district. Shepherd is for everyday activitieswith
"' i 1 r
¡f': .
: .i mi! I %
1 iL iimii'iMir.
i_ ,.£& §§&, j jttifcliiiifiM^im.-
^^^^i^S
1,1 1
Ë&.
Vaff^HI HÉÉaV, '

BRIGITTE OUVRY-VIAL,
French journalist and
writer, is a regular
contributor to the review
Autrement. She is the
author of Femmes made in
USA, a study of
contemporary women in the
USA (Autrement
publishers, Paris, 1984) and
a biography of Henri
Michaux.
its bagel vendors, its Garden Center, its barbecue
restaurant, drive-in banks and self-service stores
even though you may have to travel several
kilometres to get from one to the other. Kirby
and especially Riveroaks are fashionable residen¬
tial districts whose peaceful acres accommodate
the magnificent Victorian, neo-classical, coloni¬
al or ultra-modern villas of Texan oil tycoons,
financiers and politicians.
The difference between districts is so
pronounced that your address is a good indica-
1 he Houston skyline
transformed by a computer-
generated laser and
firework concert given by
the French composer Jean-
Michel Jarre in 1986
during the annual arts
festival.
tor of your social and professional status. Depend¬
ing on whether you live inside or outside the ring
road known as the Loop, it is possible to make
a rough guess as to how much you might be
worth.
Chevrolets and pickups cruise along freeways
leading into the city, where they become multi-
lane thoroughfares with flower-covered embank¬
ments, link roads or bypasses. Houston's streets
are a vast maze of diversions, interchanges and
junctions through which an endless flow of traffic
is channelled in and out of the city.
Vertical addresses
These enigmatic, paradoxical streets make it
difficult to know where you are. They are enig¬
matic because they do not provide any bearings.
In downtown Houston addresses are vertical.
You go from one skyscraper to another, from Al¬
lied Bank Plaza to the Milam Building or the
Republic Bank. You find your way around not
by looking for street names, but for skyscrapers.
The roads simply provide access to glass and steel
tower blocks whose great height symbolizes the
power of the companies whose headquarters they
are. The interest of a street is defined only by the
beauty of the building that soars above it. The
street has no existence of its own.
If you happen to get lost, you will look in
vain for someone to put you right. No one seems
to be around. Mystified, the new-comer wonders
where everyone can be. As a pedestrian you feel
vaguely out of place because you are alone. Apart
from a few patient souls waiting interminably for
a bus to take them out to the suburbs, the only
animation is that provided by passing traffic. And
sometimesduring the lull between the peak
periods at the beginning and end of office
hoursthere is not even any traffic. Tower block,
avenue, car park. Tower block, avenue, car park.
And so on. Even the department stores close at
lunch-time for lack of custom.
An air-conditioned city
The American myth of the highway has carried
all before it in Houston, a city shaped by and for
the automobile. Even the splendid monoliths
created by the architects of prosperity seem to
pay tribute to the concept of a city planned for
the automobile, a vertical city built in response
to the ups and downs of the cotton and oil in¬
dustries. Houston's latest jewel, the Transco
Tower, has been planned as a freeway sculpture,
to be seen from all sides.
For Houston's white-collar workers, under¬
ground galleries replace streets as they are known
in New York, San Francisco or in the cities of
Europe. Here, because of the torrid heat, people
travel from air-conditioned houses in air-
conditioned cars to air-conditioned offices which
they reach through air-conditioned corridors
beneath the skyscrapers. Street life does exist, as
in every other city, but it goes on in the shop¬
ping galleries located in these corridors, with their
boutiques, restaurants and news-stands.
In this city, which has no real centre, the
streets seem to be works of the imagination,
traced at random. While the controlled environ¬
ment underground has taken over the life of the
city, what remains of nature is left to the streets
outside. It is a science-fiction all-steel nature,
where the plaintive cries of a marsh bird sudden¬
ly pipe out from a roadside tree, one of the few to
have been spared by the flow of concrete.
36
INSET PREVIOUS PAGE
Allen Parkway and Allen
Center, in the heart of
downtown Houston.
Heneath the city's
downtown area is a tunnel
system with shops and
restaurants, providing air-
conditioned access to major
buildings.
