Fountain in the Plaza
Real, Barcelona



A THOUSAND YEARS
OF CATALAN HISTORY
BY FRANCESC VALLVERDU
TEN centuries ago, the Count of Barcelona severed the
ties of feudal loyalty that bound him to his liege lord,
the King of France. From then on, a territorial, social
and political entity centred on the ancestral house of Barcelo¬
na grew in strength and, from the thirteenth century onwards,
was known as Catalonia.
As a marchland and the outpost of Carolingian Europe in
Muslim Spain during the High Middle Ages, and the driving
force behind Catalan and Aragonese expansion between the
twelfth and fifteenth centuries, Catalonia has a historical con
tinuity of which even many Spaniards are unaware. Hence, the
commemoration of its "birth" a thousand years ago is more
than a strictly political event.
Catalonia is a small territory of some 32,000 square
kilometres which is situated in the north-eastern corner of the
Iberian peninsula and forms part of the kingdom of Spain.
However, historical Catalonia included part of southern France,
and even today some people think of Catalonia as encompass¬
ing the Catalan-speaking regions of Valencia, the Balearic Is¬
lands, Andorra, and the French Departement of Pyrenees
26 	

Orientales. But let us leave polemics aside. The region referred
to in this article is the autonomous community of the "Gener¬
alität de Catalunya", whose capital is Barcelona.
In geographical terms, present-day Catalonia is a triangular-
shaped region bounded in the north by the mountain chain
of the Pyrenees, in the east and south by the Mediterranean,
and in the west by the provinces of Aragon and Valencia, which
are irrigated by the River Ebro. There is a wide variety of cli¬
mate and relief. In the north are the Pyrenees, whose limestone
spurs extend southwards. The transversal north-eastern cor¬
dillera and the Mediterranean coastal ranges make a contrast
with the Ebro basin and the coastal plains. Although the cli¬
mate is predominantly Mediterranean, the high mountain areas
are Alpine in character.
From barely two million in 1900, Catalonia's population
has risen to six million today. The increase is primarily due
to immigration, which has compensated for the low birth rate
of the Catalan population.
Catalonia is one of Europe's most economically dynamic
regions. It occupies a pre-eminent position in the Spanish econ¬
omy, along with Madrid and the Basque region. The industrial
sector is particularly strong and is concentrated on textiles,
paper and the graphic arts, chemicals and metallurgy, and
tourism.
A dynasty that ruled for 5 centuries
Some 3,000 years ago the region was settled by Iberian tribes
with which the Phoenicians and Greeks established trade rela¬
tions, and in the third century BC it became part of the Ro¬
man province of Hispania. As elsewhere in Spain, Roman
civilization left an indelible mark on the language, culture and
law of Catalonia, which even inherited its agricultural and fish¬
ing techniques from Rome.
After the fall of the Roman Empire, Hispania was invaded
by Germanic tribes and later by the Moors. In the eighth cen¬
tury AD, Charlemagne set up a number of vassal earldoms in
the eastern Pyrenean region of France as marchlands facing Mus¬
lim Spain. When the Count of Barcelona became independent
of the French kings in the tenth century, he established a dy¬
nasty that would govern Catalonia for the next five centuries.
In the twelfth century, the Count of Barcelona became, through
marriage, the king of Aragon. From then onwards, the Catalan-
Aragonese confederation, also known as the Crown of Aragon,
expanded into the eastern part of the Iberian peninsula. It con¬
quered Valencia, the Balearic Islands and later Sardinia, Naples
and Sicily, and eventually reached Greece and North Africa.
This was a splendid period of Catalan culture. Among its artis¬
tic and intellectual highlights were its Romanesque (see page
29) and later Gothic, art and architecture and in literature the
work of the thirteenth-century philosopher and mystic Ramon
Llull and the fifteenth-century poet Ausiàs March.
Crisis and loss of independence
In the fifteenth century, Catalan society experienced a
demographic crisis owing to the great plague, and an econom¬
ic and political crisis when the dynasty of the House of Barce¬
lona came to an end. The Crown of Aragon passed to rulers
of Castilian origin. During the reign of the Catholic monarchs
Ferdinand and Isabella at the end of the fifteenth century, the
kingdoms of Aragon and Castile were united, although each
maintained its political autonomy. This de facto confederacy
lasted until the eighteenth century when Philip V, victor of
the War of the Spanish Succession and the first Bourbon king
of Spain, conquered the former territories of the Crown of Ara¬
gon and annexed them to the Court of Castile.
Mending fishing nets, Barcelona harbour
il iD'ÑJro»'' im
27

The philosopher,
mystic and poet
Ramon Llull (c.
1233-1316), one of the
founders of Catalan
literature. Often
referred to as the
"Visionary Doctor",
Llull devoted his life
to meditation and
missionary work. This
18th-century portrait,
an engraving by the
Italian artist
Domenico Rossetti, is
based on an earlier
painting by Jan-Frans
van Douven.
In 1714, Catalonia lost its political independence and self-
governing institutions, and the Catalan language was banned
from education and public administration. At the same time,
the region began to recover from the economic decline into
which it had fallen between the fifteenth and the seventeenth
centuries. The contrast between economic expansion, based on
advances in agriculture and industry, and a lack of political
decision-making powers was the fundamental reason for the
Catalonia's instability during the nineteenth century and one
of the decisive causes of the political crisis in Spain.
The recovery of autonomy
Although, with the proclamation of the Catalan Republic
in 1931, it seemed that the crisis in the Spanish state could be
resolved by democratic means, while respecting the autonomy
of Catalonia, that illusion was soon dashed by the terrible Civil
War which lasted from 1936 to 1939. After General Franco's
victory, Spain was subjected to a fascist-inspired dictatorship
which, for Catalonia and the Basque region, entailed the loss
of their national liberties and their governing institutions.
The situation began to change again with the restoration
of democracy in 1975. Two years later Catalonia recovered its
traditional self-governing institution, the Generalität, and since
1979 it has enjoyed self-governing status as an autonomous com¬
munity within the Kingdom of Spain.
Over a period of ten centuries, then, Catalonia has deve¬
loped into a viable national community and a strong-willed peo¬
ple which has asserted itself through the vicissitudes of its
history.
A cultural boom



Today Catalonia can celebrate the thousandth anniversary
of its political independence with serenity and optimism.
Although only twelve years have passed since 1977, it is worth
recalling that Catalonia has not enjoyed such a long period of
political autonomy and democracy for three centuries. The
Catalan language has recovered its status as an official language
alongside Castilian Spanish, it is taught in all educational es¬
tablishments and it is increasingly heard on radio and televi¬
sion. There is a boom in Catalan literature not only within the
region, where over 4,500 books a year in Catalan are published,
but elsewhere, owing to the translation into Spanish, English,
French and other languages of the works of our great medieval
and classical writers such as Ramon Llull, Bernât Metge, Au-
sias March, Joariot Martorell, as well as those of contemporary
authors like Josep Carner, Salvador Espriu, J.V. Foix, Mercè
Rodoreda and Joan Perucho.
Catalan art, which in this century has produced such world-
famous figures as the architect Gaudi, the musician Pau (Pab¬
lo) Casals, and the painters Joan Miró, Salvador Dalí and An-
toni Tapies, has brought extraordinary stature to our culture,
which will surely be appreciated by the visitors who will at¬
tend the Olympic Games in Barcelona in 1992.
Certainly there are problems which cast a shadow over
some aspects of this positive report, but perhaps their very ex¬
istence is a sign of the vitality of Catalonia and its ability to
take up the challenges of the next thousand years.
FRANCESC VALLVERDU, Catalan writer and educator, is the founder of
the Catalan Sociolinguistic Group and editor-in-chief of the review Treballs de
Sociolingütstica Catalana.
Car manufacturing plant, Barcelona
28 	
