MIHAI EMINESCU,
ROMANIA'S NATIONAL POET
M
"IHAI Eminescu
(1850-1889) is recogn¬
ized as the foremost
Romanian lyric poet. His
mastery of language has also
earned him a high place in
world literature.
Eminescu led a tormented
life. Born into the minor
aristocracy, he was educated at
the universities of Vienna
(1869-1872) and Berlin
(1872-1874) and tried his hand
at several jobs before joining
the editorial staff of the
newspaper Timpul ("Time").
In 1883 he suffered a mental
breakdown which, punctuated
by periods of lucidity, lasted
until his death.
Poet, dramatist, journalist,
a specialist in Romanian folk
poetry, Eminescu was a man
of wide intellectual interests.
He produced a vast body of work, but only published one
volume of verse in his lifetime, under the title of Poezii (1883;
"Poetry").
The poems he wrote in his youth, such as Inger si demon
("Angel and Devil") or Impärat si proletar ("Emperor and
Proletarian"), are marked by a Byronic and Faustian revolt
against the social and the cosmic order. Later, his reading of
the philosophy of Kant and Schopenhauer modified his vision
of the world. A short prose fantasy, Särmanul Dionis ("Den¬
nis the Pauper"), published in 1872, illustrates his determina¬
tion to transcend time and space in a quest for absolute liberty.
He gave a new and original slant to the Romantic theme of
the fallen angel.
His interest in folklore and comparative mythology was re¬
inforced by his knowledge of the work of the German Roman¬
tic poets, particularly the Heidelberg school (Achim von Arnim,
Clemens Brentano, Joseph von Görres). After 1874, love be¬
comes a dominant theme of his poetry, in which woman is por¬
trayed in harmony with Nature, bathed in moonlight and the
heavy perfume of lime blossom. His rhyme and verse forms,
as in Floare albasträ ("Blue Flower") and Povestea teiului ("The
Tale of the Lime Tree"), have a gentle, lyrical quality never
before attained in the Romanian language.
After 1877, a cold aura of gloom and death begins to per¬
vade his work. His love poetry becomes the expression of
unrelieved solitude and suffer¬
ing. Some poems, such as
Despartiré ("Separation"),
evoke emotional crisis, while
others, such as his sonnets, are
imbued with a heart-rending
and enchanting beauty.
In the third of five Scrisori
("Epistles") from his mature
work, the patriotic poet evokes
episodes from the glory of
the Romanian medieval past
and, alternating between
lyricism and satire, contrasts
them with the bitterness of the
degraded present.
Eminescu was a true
Romantic, creator of mytho¬
logical worlds in which the
tragedy of the human condi¬
tion is played out. Like the
great lyric poets Friedrich
Hölderlin and John Keats, he
used the classical myth of
Hyperion in his long ballad Luceafarul (1883; "The Evening
Star"), in which he suggests that genius is condemned to soli¬
tude in a society hostile to spiritual values. Written in four-line
stanzas with seven or eight syllables to the line and the rhythm
and style of a folk tale, it is a masterpiece of lyric poetry.
Hyperion, the evening star, who is in love with a mortal
princess and ready to renounce his immortal existence and
become human for her sake, engages in an epic astral journey
which leads him into the presence of God. Warned of the fick¬
leness of mortal love (the princess has fallen in love with a young
page), he understands the futility of the sacrifice which he was
about to make and does not return to the world of humanity:
But this time he does not fall
down to the depths of the sea
but says: "Does it matter to you,
clod of earth, if it's any man or me?
You live in a narrow world,
a plaything offortune.
But I live in my own universe,
immortal and immune. u
This article is based on
University of Bucharest.
a study by Zoe Dumitrescu Busulenga, a professor at the
11
