LITERARY DETECTION
AND LATIN AMERICAN WRITING
IN 1915, at the height of the Mexican
Revolution, the writer Mariano Azuela
published a serial in an obscure
newspaper in El Paso, across the US
frontier in Texas. At the time he was
writing for the paper, El Paso del Norte,
his stories reflected developments in the
Revolution. Some months later he col¬
lected the episodes of the serial and turned
them into a novel, which by 1925 was
recognized as a classic of twentieth-
century Latin American literature under
the title Los de abajo (The Underdogs).
The fate of The Underdogs
The novel went through several edi¬
tions, and by 1983 had sold more than a
million copies, but the text had been
repeatedly changed. Azuela had amend¬
ed and expanded the short original novel
in each of the successive editions pub¬
lished during his lifetime. Only after his
death in 1952 at the age of seventy-nine,
when he was already a famous writer, was
the "definitive" edition of the novel pre¬
pared. It was finally published in 1958.
BY FERNANDO AINSA
Azuela had begun by changing the
verbs in the 1920 edition from the present
to the past tense, altering adjectives, and
correcting punctuation, spelling and syn¬
tax. After Los de abajo became the estab¬
lished "novel of the Mexican revolution",
Azuela decided to rewrite it extensively.
In the 1938 edition he introduced a new
character, Valderrama, who brought a
humorous touch to the austere original
version. He modified his Manichean
representation of the revolutionary gener¬
al, Pancho Villa, and made important
ideological changes in the behaviour of
other characters, such as the cynical Luis
Cervantes. The novel which he had writ¬
ten in the sound and the fury of the Revo¬
lution became a more detached reflection
on Mexican history. Times had changed.
The revolution had become "institution¬
alized" and Mariano Azuela had become
an established author.
Meanwhile, the newspaper in which
Azuela's original text had been published
had disappeared without trace. Surpris¬
ingly, the paper was not registered, even
in the United States, and not a single copy
had been kept. Thus for over sixty years
only the second and third editions of Los
de abajo were known, while a semi-
mythical legend grew up around the lost
first version. Then, thanks to the per¬
severance of an American researcher,
Stanley R. Robe, an incomplete set of El
Paso del Norte was found in a private
collection in 1979.
Only then did most of the original
text of Los de abajo become available,
allowing the comparison and collation of
different editions and the publication of
a critical edition indicating important
changes in the text. Apart from the aca¬
demic interest of such an enterprise, crit¬
ics now had a great opportunity to make
a genealogical study of the text and a com¬
parison of the different versions from a
linguistic and semiotic point of view.
Literary critics and Azuela specialists
jumped at the chance.
The fate of the text of Los de abajo
closely resembles that of other works of
Latin American literature, where all trace
of manuscripts, drafts, or simple annota¬
tions indicating the author's creative
process has been lost. But it is also an
example of the confusion that can arise
when successive editions pick up mis¬
prints or spelling mistakes from a care-
Cover illustration from the critical edition of the Uruguayan writer Enrique Amorim's novel La carreta ("The Wagon"), recently published in the
Archives Collection. Analysis of the author's archives revealed over 1,500 differences between the first and sixth editions of the novel.
21'

lessly produced first edition, afterwards
reproduced without anyone checking the
originalsomething which is not always
feasible.
A revaluation of César Vallejo
One of the most striking examples of
this process is the work of the Peruvian
poet, César Vallejo, which has had a
chequered fate even though Vallejo is one
of the major figures of Latin American
literature. The two collections of poems
published during his lifetime, Los heral¬
dos negros (1918; "The Black Heralds")
and Trilce (1922), were quickly forgotten.
Reprints and anthologies published after
his premature death in 1938 were full of
inaccuracies. His publishers' use of arbi¬
trary chronologies and indiscriminately-
chosen titles, such as Poemas humanos
(1939; "Human Poems"), has led to his
work coming out in a distorted and frag¬
mentary form.
Moreover, as often happens to
writers whose estates give rise to bitter
dispute among their heirs, the excessive
zeal of Vallejo's widow resulted in most
of the poet's output remaining unpub¬
lished for thirty years. Only in 1968,
when Vallejo's fame was established
beyond doubt, did his widow agree to the
publication of this body of work. Once
again an arbitrary chronology and title
were usedPoemas en prosa ("Prose
Poems"). As if this were not enough,
other typescripts and manuscript origi¬
nals in her possession disappeared mys¬
teriously after her death in 1984. But the
saga of Vallejo's work did not end there.
Some years ago, the first edition of the
poems inspired by the Spanish Civil War,
España, aparta de mí este cáliz ("Spain,
take away this cup from me"), which was
thought to have been lost at the time of
the Republican defeat in 1939, was
discovered hidden in the monastery of
Montserrat in Catalonia.
The task of retracing the develop¬
ment of Vallejo's work from such incom¬
plete and unreliable elements was a great
challenge. The absence of drafts, notes,
manuscripts or first versions made it im¬
possible to undertake a complete genea¬
logical study of the kind which is possible
when writers bequeath their papers to a
national library. But a philological and
genealogical study of the "internal" fea¬
tures of Vallejo's work could be made
which goes beyond mere conjecture.
Proceeding from recurring themes and
the evolution in style, an international
team led by the critic Américo Ferrari has
The Cuban writer José Lezama Lima
(1912-1976). A critical edition of his novel
Paradiso has been published in the Archives
Collection.
succeeded in "deconstructing" existing
anthologies and "constructing" an ap¬
proximate chronology which throws
light on unpublished parts of the poet's
work and relates them to the whole, thus
necessitating a reassessment of the defini¬
tive texts.
'Paradise' regained
A similar case is that of the Cuban
writer José Lezama Lima. The first edi¬
tion of his voluminous novel Paradiso
("Paradise") was full of typographical er¬
rors which for many years were taken to
be deliberate mistakes made by the
author, since he had checked the proofs.
Seventy per cent of the errors which he
had inadvertently overlooked were at¬
tributed to his style, to indiscriminate use
of quotations and references and to the
full stops and commas which he scattered
in time with "the rhythm of his asthmatic
breathing", as he ironically remarked,
and not according to the prevailing rules
of grammar.
An attempt was made several years
later to correct the innumerable errors in
the 1966 Cuban edition in a second, Mex¬
ican, edition supervised by the writer Ju¬
lio Cortázar. But a new problem arose.
Not having the original manuscript from
which to check the text, the publishers
introduced new errors, changed Lezama
Lima's idiosyncratic style to the extent of
altering the meaning of some passages,
and corrected the author's spelling of per¬
sonal and place names. Lezama Lima him¬
self lost interest. Letters addressed to him
by his publisher remained unanswered
and he claimed that checking the proofs
of the text against the manuscript would
tire him.
Over twenty years went by before
the published texts could be compared
with the manuscripts deposited in the
José Martí National Library in Havana.
This painstaking task, carried out by
Lezama Lima's old friend, the poet Cin-
tio Vitier, made it possible to establish the
definitive text of Paradiso. There were
many surprises, and thanks to the result¬
ing critical edition, many judgements of
the novel are being revised.
The examples of Azuela, Vallejo and
Lezama Lima show how important it is
to apply an adequate methodology when
studying the "itinerary" of literary texts
in regions like Latin America and the
Caribbean, where insufficient importance
has hitherto been attached to the preser¬
vation, evaluation and study of manu¬
scripts and to the variations which can
exist between different editions of the
same work. Literary manuscripts have
not received the same attention as
historical documents, and there are few
countries whose national libraries have
a department specializing in the pre¬
servation and study of their writers'
"archives".
29 years from 1st edition
to 'definitive text'
An interesting example is provided
by the Literary Archives of Uruguay's
National Library, thanks to which it was
possible to prepare a critical edition of
Enrique Amorim's La carreta ("The Wag¬
on"). The problem here was quite differ¬
ent from that posed by César Vallejo's
work, in that Amorim's widow, Esther
Haedo, had donated all her husband's per¬
sonal papers, which included a lot of
material relating to his work. There were
enough manuscripts, drafts, plans, typed
copies corrected by hand, and published
texts (different editions of the novel) and
a large dossier on matters relating to La
carreta, such as correspondence and crit¬
ics' reactions. The task was to classify and
interpret all this material.
Its analysis brought other facts to
light. Amorim's novel, published in 1932,
was an amalgam of four short stories
which appeared between 1923 and 1927..
The first of them, Las Quintanderas, con¬
tained the "genetic seed" or nucleus of
the novel, so that all the statements by
the author, letters and controversies aris¬
ing from its publication, would be of fun¬
damental importance for a genealogical
textual criticism.
22

Despite the novel's success, and the
fact that the first two editions were sold
out immediately, Amorim was not satis¬
fied with the structure of La carreta, feel¬
ing that it was too dependent on the
original short stories. A couple of years
later, he changed the order of the chap¬
ters, made stylistic changes in order to
achieve greater unity, and published a
third, revised edition.
Although he was still dissatisfied with
La carreta, Amorim dashed off other nov¬
els and stories which he published at this
time. Obsessed by the "imperfect", "un¬
finished" character of this first novel, he
made further changes in the text of ev¬
ery edition. In 1942 he even added a new
chapter, which had been published as a
short story entitled Carreta solitaria a
year earlier. It was not until the sixth
edition of 1952 that the "definitive" text
of the novel was established. Like Bou¬
vard et Pécuchet, the structure of which
greatly preoccupied Gustave Flaubert,
Amorim's novel, put together from
"remnants" and worked upon during a
large part of his life, became its author's
favourite.
This creative process lasting twenty-
nine years has left over 1,500 differences
between the first and last editions of La
carreta. Their inventory is of interest be¬
cause the "deconstruction" of the novel,
from the definitive 1952 edition back to
the short story of 1923, has made it pos¬
sible to study the development of the
work.
The paradox of La carreta is that the
critical edition of a work that is imper¬
fect but laboriously prepared is more in¬
teresting than that of one which is
theoretically perfect but was written "at
one go". Amorim could have agreed with
the German thinker Walter Benjamin,
who said that "for a great writer, a
finished work is of less importance than
a fragment on which he has been work¬
ing all his life".
Cortázar's logbook
In the development of genealogical
textual criticism in Latin America, in
which an initiative like the Archives
Collection* plays an important role, the
The children's game of hopscotch (Spanish
Rayuelo) inspired the structure of Argentine
writer Julio Cortázar's eponymous novel as
well as providing its title. Sketches of the
game, two of which are reproduced here, are
scattered throughout El cuaderno de bitácora
de Rayuela, the notebook he kept while
writing the novel.
Argentine author Julio Cortázar has in¬
voluntarily provided excellent material
for researchers. When he began writing
his novel Rayuela (1963; Hopscotch) on 7
November 1958, he decided to keep a sort
of diary of the creative process which he
significantly called El cuaderno de bitácora
de Rayuela, or "the log book of Rayue¬
la", to which he committed at random
outlines of scenes, lists of characters, suc¬
cessive plans for the arrangement of the
work, diagrams and sketches, all of which
represented the development óf the nov¬
el he was to publish five years later.
The career of this log book did not
end with the publication of Rayuela in
1963. Exactly twenty years later, in 1983,
El cuaderno de bitácora de Rayuela was
published in Buenos Aires and in turn be¬
came an object of genealogical study.
Whether they deal with incomplete
or carefully preserved manuscripts, scat¬
tered literary archives or those deposited
in public or private collections, studies of
this kind are attracting more and more
interest in regions like Latin America and
the Caribbean, whose "voices of identi
ty" are raised in the cause of safeguard¬
ing our heritage, of which the written
word is one of the essential pillars.
* The five examples cited in this article are taken
from the first genealogical studies of texts and the
creative process in Latin American countries, made
possible by the creation of the Archives Collection
(see article page 18).
FERNANDO AINSA, Uruguayan writer, is a
Unesco staff member. He is the author of many es¬
says and novels including Los buscadores de la uto¬
pia ("The Quest for Utopia") and Identidad cultural
de Iberoamérica en su narrativa ("The Cultural Iden¬
tity of Spanish-speaking America in its Fiction").
He was director of the critical edition of Enrique
Amorim's novel La carreta which has appeared in
the Archives Collection.
IVJLAvv4X VU^Aa.
I «A. LlAVC*. Cv-M>
