An Orient of myth
and mystery
An alluring picture of the
Orient of the Arabian
Nights is presented in
Jacques Becker's version of
Ali Baba and the 40
Thieves (1960) starring
Fernandel and the Egyptian
dancer Samia Gamal.
BY ABBAS FAHDEL
X HE picture of the Arab in Western cinema is
often a product of fantasy and imagination,
reflecting the West's fascination with and fear of
the Arab Muslim East, that other world so near
and yet so far.
This colourful, mysterious and exaggerated
picture, this Orient made in Hollywood, Paris,
or Rome, would perhaps be less offensive if it was
not peopled by rascally and barbaric Arabs, recog¬
nizable by their shifty looks and dissolute man¬
ner. They are hot-tempered and always seem on
the point of whipping out a dagger. Lustful and
polygamous, they like to kidnap young Western
girls and sequestrate them in their harems.
In fact, Western cinema is no more than a
reflection of widespread prejudices, some of them
dating back to the Crusades, which were widely
held under colonial rule, when, after all, North
Africa was known as the Barbary Coast.
If some films such as Morocco, Casablanca, Un
de la Légion, and The Lost Patrol purport to be
set on Arab soil yet contrive not to show a sin¬
gle Arab, in others Arabs have walk-on parts and
provide a splash of local colour, along with the
minarets, palm trees and camels.
Even so, the range of roles played by male
Arab actors is wider than that available to Arab
women. A man can be a valet, a shoeshine boy,
a guide, a snake charmer, a looter or even an
official, whereas a woman is limited to the roles
of prostitute (in a tradition stretching from Pépé
le Moko in 1936 to Grand frère, which came out
seven years ago) or belly-dancer (La maison du
Maltais). 25

1 he "Moorish woman " is
often depicted in films as a
prostitute, top (Julien
Duvivier's Pépé le Moko,
1936), or as a dancer,
above (La maison du
Maltais, Henri Fescourt,
1927).
26
Scantily dressed, lascivious and voluptuous,
she provides entertainment for legionnaires and
adventurers slumming it in disreputable casbahs.
Occasionally she may display fidelity and hero¬
ism, like Yasmina, the dancer in Fleur de sable
who dies in the arms of a European intelligence
officer after helping him thwart a conspiracy.
Hitchcock's three minarets
Just as little respect is paid to the Arab landscape
as to the people who live in it. Reduced to a hand¬
ful of clichéspicturesque alleys, teeming mar¬
kets and palm groves surrounded by sand
dunesit is no more authentic than Arab charac¬
ters played by Western actors with brown-stained
faces. Lack of authenticity is not confined to films
made in the studio with painted scenery and plas¬
tic palm trees. In many films made on location
in Arab countries the natural beauty of the sur
roundings is heightened with artificial splendours
intended to add to the exotic effect. In The Man
Who Knew Too Much, Alfred Hitchcock shows
not just the famous single minaret of the Kou-
toubia Mosque, Marrakesh, but three of them!
In Pépé le Moko the Algiers Casbah becomes a
hideout for crooks and gangsters, while in
other productions Beirut, Cairo, Tangiers and
Casablanca are shown as capitals of vice, crime
and corruption.
Film-goers should not be surprised, therefore,
to hear Egyptians speaking a Tunisian dialect, or
to see Iraqis dressed like Moroccans. These incon¬
gruities exist because many films set in the Middle
East are actually made in the Maghreb. Some
directors make no distinction between the various
Arab peoples, and others mix up Arabs and Mus¬
lims, thus robbing their works of the little eth¬
nological interest they might otherwise have had.
The casual way in which Western film¬
makers appropriate Arab landscapes, characters
and stories and reshape them as they please in a
rubbishy celluloid Orient is evidence of a long¬
standing unscrupulousness.
The colonial film
After the end of World War I, the Arab rebel¬
lion against foreign domination became increas¬
ingly widespread. Its repercussions reached the
European countries, and the cinema, which could
not ignore such a burning question, also entered
the fray. Thus the colonial film was born and be¬
came popular in the 1920s and 1930s. This kind
of film glorifies the skills of the colonisers (Les
hommes nouveaux and Le bled were made for the
centenary of the French conquest of Algeria) and
what were known as "peacekeeping" operations
(Feu, Lesfils du soleil, Beau Geste, La voix du désert).
Its heroes are the legionnaires and soldiers of the
colonial armies, and the villains are the "recal¬
citrant" Arabs.
Not all the natives are shown as hostile and
treacherous. Sometimes, among the ranks of the
local officials, we come across "good" Arabs who
choose to join the colonial forces and fight against
their rebellious brothers (L'âme du bled, Capitaine
Ardant).

1 he police check up on
Algerian immigrants in
France during the Algerian
war in this scene from
Michel Drach's Elise ou la
vraie vie (1971).
On the other hand, Arab revolts, particular¬
ly the most dramatic one in Algeria, are handled
with a great deal of embarrassment. In the 1960s
and 1970s, a few films such as Elise ou la vraie vie,
Muriel, and Le petit soldat, depicted the Algerian
war summarily and indirectly, but only one
French film squarely faced up to the subject, the
American director James Blue's Les oliviers de la
justice, and that was an anachronism since it called
for reconciliation when the breaking point had
already been reached.
It was not until the 1970s that two French
film-makers, René Vautier and Yves Boisset, cou¬
rageously denounced the colonial war in Avoir
vingt ans dans les Aurès and R.A.S., stories of
young conscripts forced to take part in
"mopping-up" operations in Algeria. In 1989, the
director Gérard Mordillât dealt with a similar sub¬
ject in Cher frangin.
The French output is not very substantial in
comparison to the many American films on the
Viet Nam war. The only Western director to
show the war from the Algerian point of view was
the Italian Gillo Pontecorvo, whose courageous
The Battle ofAlgiers was long banned in France.
The Arab-Israeli
conflict
It seemed that the end of the colonial era and the
independence of the Arab countries might her¬
ald the opening of a new chapter of less conten¬
tious relations between East and West. But the
old demons were awakened by the Arab-Israeli
conflict. Some Western directors took sides in
their treatment of this conflict. In Otto
Preminger's Exodus, which retraces the creation
of Israel, all the Arabs are unpleasant characters,
except for one who wants to get along with the
Jewish colonists and is assassinated by his co¬
religionists.
Preminger's 1974 film Rosebud deals with the
Palestinian question from the terrorist angle.
Other American films such as Victory at Entebbe
and The Little Drummer Girl reflect a similar ap¬
proach, while the problems of occupation were
raised by the politically-minded film-maker
Costa-Gavras in Hanna K.
Scene from The Battle of
Algiers (1970), Gillo
Pontecorvo's courageous
film about the Algerian
war (1954-1962). 27

28
In other films, antagonism between East and
West takes the form of doomed romances be¬
tween Arabs and Westerners. From Fazil, the
story of a Frenchwoman who falls in love with
an Arab prince and eventually escapes from the
harem where she has been confined (and where
a muezzin calls the faithful to prayer by singing
"Oh my love"!), to Pierre et Djemila, a modern
version of the Romeo and Juliet story transposed
to a suburban low-rent housing estate (where
native-born French people and North African im¬
migrants live side by side without mixing), these
films usually end with the death of one of the
protagonists, if not both. Rare exceptions, such
as Baroud and Rex Ingram's The Arab, have hap¬
pier endings.
Certain films, inspired by actual events and
real people, rise above this allegedly insurmount¬
able antagonism and evoke the experience of a
few fervent lovers of the East who have gone in
search of the Arab Muslim world. Such produc¬
tions include L'appel du silence, which tells the
story of Charles de Foucauld, a French viscount
who became a desert hermit, and above all
Lawrence ofArabia, which had a worldwide suc¬
cess. But even in these films, the facts were often
sacrificed to the demands of a fictional treatment.
The East of a Thousand and One Nights
Another kind of film about the East is based on
stories and legends such as the celebrated Thou¬
sand and One Nights. These tales that paint the
splendour and refinement of the golden age of
Arab Muslim civilization in glowing colours pro¬
vide an inexhaustible treasury of wonderful
material which has been adapted for the cinema
with varying degrees of success.
The first screen adaptation of the adventures
of Aladdin appeared as early as 1899. In 1902, it
was the turn of Ali Baba, and in 1919 that of Sind-
bad the Sailor. They were followed by several
hundred more films from the West, including
four masterpieces: the two versions of The Thief
ofBaghdad (USA, 1924 and UK, 1940), Ali Baba
et les 40 voleurs (a comedy starring the French ac¬
tor Fernandel and the delightful Egyptian dancer
Samia Gamal), and the Italian director Pier Paolo
Pasolini's Ilfiore délie mille e una notte. Pasolini
was the only film-maker to show as much interest
in the fantastic and aesthetic aspects of the
tales as the profound wisdom contained in them.
These films often provide pleasant entertain¬
ment, but curiously enough their success has had
the deleterious effect of encouraging many
Western directors to depict an imaginary East
instead of the real thing. The problem is that
some of these "imaginative" films misleadingly
claim to give an accurate picture of Arab life. One
of them, Arthur Joffe's extraordinary Harem,
depicts a fantasy Orient which no Arab would
recognize.

m¿JM*'%
Recently the cinema has begun to examine
the problems of immigration. Some films about
immigrant communities facing an uphill struggle
to win acceptance popularize widespread clichés
such as that of the delinquent Arab. Others, such
as Yves Boisset's Dupont-La-Joie and Roger
Hanin's Train d'enfer are warm-hearted films
which nevertheless confine the immigrant in the
role of victim and scapegoat. Rainer Werner Fass-
binder's Angst essen Seele auf(Fear Eats the Soul)
and Michel Drach's Elise ou la vraie vie are two
of several exceptional films which offer a critique
of racism while at the same time presenting
complex and subtle portraits of attractive
characters.
The last few years have seen the emergence
of a new generation of immigrants' children who
find it easier than their parents to integrate.
Among them are a number of film-makers includ¬
ing Mehdi Charef, Rachid Bouchareb and Abdel-
karim Bahloul, who have already had some
success in presenting a more complex, subtle and
accurate picture of the Arab community.
David Lean directs Peter
O'Toole and Omar Sharif
(inset in close-up) during
the filming of Lawrence of
Arabia in 1962.
ABBAS FAHDEL,
of Iraq, is a journalist with
the Paris periodical Présence
du Cinéma Français. He has
directed several short films
and has contributed to a
number of books on cinema
and television, including Les
cinémas arabes (Paris, 1986)
and Les télévisions du monde
(Paris, 1988). 29
