Mock lion
from Senegal, a ligbthearted traditional
game with serious undertones
16

and real heroes
BY MAMADOU SECK
IN Africa collective celebrations have always
been held to strengthen community spirit and
group solidarity, as well as to break the
monotony of everyday life. Most of these popular
festivals have a significance which goes back to
very early times.
Some festivals, like Senegal's bao-naan, a ritual
dance calling for rain in drought-stricken times,
pay tribute to a divinity and appeal for his good
offices. Others celebrate the birth of a child, an
abundant harvest or some other happy event.
Festive occasions such as light-hearted wrestling
matches between champions from different
villages simply offer an opportunity for displays
of strength and agility. But all the festivals up¬
hold threatened values such as generosity, a sense
of honour and dignity, and courage in the face
of adversity, and although during them things
sometimes seem to take a violent turn, univer¬
sally accepted rules are always respected.
All these features are combined in the game
of the mock lion, known in Senegal as Simb. I
saw this game when I was young, and my
memory of it is still undimmed.
The whole district was in festive mood. A
dense and colourfully dressed crowd jostled
around the platform of honour on which the
notables had taken their places. The oldest people
had brought makeshift seats since they could not
stand up for long. Each spectator flourished on
his forearm a piece of cotton thread studded with
knots died red with cola. This thread, which was
sold by teenage volunteers, was the entrance
ticket to the show and afforded protection against
the lion's fury. Woe betide those who had no
piece of thread!
All around tom-toms were beating time while
women danced. The nearby streets pulsated with
activity. Vendors of water, soft drinks and coco¬
nuts pushed their way through the crowd. On
each side of the main street, lines of headscarves
and loincloths fluttered in the wind. Beneath
them were teenage girls wearing their finest
boubóus, and decked out with jewels sparkling in
the sun. No one was allowed to cross these lines
without paying a kind of forfeit, the lo-lambé.1
The smallest coin conferred the right to put one's
hand on the intimate parts of the women who
were taking the money. No one took offence.
That was how it had always been.
The Game of Simb (1989),
by the Senegalese artist Ousseynou Sarr. 17

Six o'clock in the evening. Suddenly there
was an indescribable commotion, punctuated
with wild applause. Preceded by an imposing
escort, the mock lion entered the arena. He was
unrecognizable as a man. He wore a wig with a
mane attached to it. His face was covered with
black soot, his eyes adorned with ochre powder.
Everything about him gave the impression of a
wild beast, of the king of the forest, symbol of
strength and courage. From time to time he
opened his mouth wide and slobbered a whitish
liquid. Then he began to roar, looking nastily at
the crowd. His legs were ringed with jangling
amulets and knickknacks. He was a fearful sight.
Feigning panic, a lion-tamer hurled himself
before the "lion", brandished a long piece of
cotton thread and loudly recited an incantatory
prayer: "Daar Ndé Gaînde Ndiaye. Daru mala
Yala la dar. Ku Yala dar nga daru."2 Seemingly
hypnotized by these words, the beast crouched
down and pretended to sleep. During this brief
moment of respite, the crowd applauded raptu¬
rously, not forgetting in their excitement to bran¬
dish their protective threads to extinguish the
man-animal's murderous intentions.
This was the moment when a group of bare-
chested youths rashly pulled the piece of cloth
which served as the mock lion's tail. Some threw
stones at him or chewed and snapped old bones.
In unison the spectators sang out the ritual war¬
ning cry: "Det! Way det! Gaînde bagne na Kuy
dam yax."3 Then the lion roared louder than
ever and set off in hot pursuit of those who had
provoked him. There was pandemonium as the
animal engaged in a flurry of biting and boubou-
ripping. He knocked one spectator down. The
tamer ran along behind, reciting prayers to get
the victims out of their predicament. What mad¬
ness! What a release!
Suddenly the mock lion changed direction
and advanced rapidly towards the platform of
honour, sowing panic among the tiny tots hiding
beneath their parents' clothes. He went up to a
special guest, who wondered for an instant whe¬
ther this could really be happening to him, and
discreetly pulled a handkerchief from his pocket
to wipe away a bead of sweat. Everyone was
shouting. The man-animal fixed his eyes on ano¬
ther guest, whose lips began to tremblethe poor
man had no cotton thread. An irresistible oppor¬
tunity! The "wild animal" leapt on the guilty
spectator like an eagle on its prey, pinned him
to the ground with a smart blow from a paw, and
then let fly with his fists. By the time the tamer
had managed to cool the lion's ardour by utte¬
ring incantatory prayers which were drowned in
the general hullaballoo, the poor victim was lying
on the ground, his face covered with blood. He
was taken away after someone had lent him a cot¬
ton thread. The festival went on at full tilt until
sunset.
That night everyone had something to talk
about. The mock lion was a hero. He had dis¬
played energy and perseverance in pursuing and
punishing those who had disobeyed the law of
the community. The teenagers who had shown
their mettle by provoking the wild beast and then
standing up to him were heroes too. Their appe¬
tites for excitement satisfied, people went to sleep
thinking of the children of the forest, past and
present, who had stood their ground before the
king of animals. In an afternoon of festivity, man
had rediscovered his pride.
1. A Wolof word meaning: "How much do you touch with?"
or more precisely: "How much do you give to have the right
to touch?"
2. "It is not I who tame you, but Allah. When He tames you,
you must obey." (Wolof)
3. From the Wolof: "No, no, the lion hates it when people
break a bone!".
18
. *
Oimb the mock lion,
Dakar.
MAMADOU SECK,
of Senegal, has been director
of the Unesco Press since
1984. He was founder-director
of the Senegalese publishing
house Nouvelles Editions
Africaines, which he headed
for ten years, and is the
author of a novel entitled
Cicatrices pour demain ("Scars
cor Tomorrow"; L'Harmattan
publishers, Paris, 1989).
