Tristan and Pavlova through
the looking glass
Co-operation,
not caricature, is
the new watchword
in relations
between American
and Soviet cinema.
30
* John Ford's The Lost Patrol
(1934).
X RISTAN, a male American dolphin, and
Pavlova, a female Soviet dolphin, are trained for
combat at military bases in their respective coun¬
tries. Then, one day, they meet under water and
fall in love...
This is the plot of a recent animated cartoon
series co-produced by a Soviet studio and an
American company. Only a few years ago, col¬
laboration between the United States and the
Soviet Union on a theme relating to military con¬
frontation would have been inconceivable. For
Americans, the Russian represented the threat of
communist subversion. The Soviet image of the
American was fuzzier. The West epitomized all
that was alien, but historically its image had
varied from that of the despised adversary to that
of the fascinating model.
In 1908, when Russian cinema was born, the
West already led the field. To conquer the
market, Russian companies had to woo the pub¬
lic with films which were as attractive as Ameri¬
can action films or French comedies of manners.
As early as 1912, in addition to historical dramas
and adaptations of great works of Russian litera¬
ture, many films were made about fashionable so¬
ciety, directly inspired by the Western films the
Russian public loved so much. With few excep¬
tions, such as Yakov Protazanov's Jenny the Ser¬
vant (1917), these stories reflected a taste for
melodrama and tragic endings.
The 1917 revolution and foreign intervention
brought an increasingly strong ideological colour¬
ing to the rivalry between Russian and Western
cinema. The Western countries were no longer
taken as models but as examples of a depravity
which had to be denounced. In Soviet cinema,
America, the symbol of capitalism, became the
rival and the enemy.
Lev Kuleshov's evocatively titled The Extraor¬
dinary Adventures ofMr West in the Land of the
Bolsheviks (1924) strikingly reflects the spirit of
the 1920s. A number of enduring stereotypes
BY MARILYNE FELLOUS
were created in this odd parody of an American
action film. The characters are one-dimensional
representations of the social class to which they
belong. West, the cowboy, is the archetypal
spoiled child. A rich land-owner consumed with
fear and hatred of the Bolsheviks, he sets off for
the Soviet Union with his assistant and
bodyguard, Dejddy. The latter, as a representa¬
tive of the working classes and thus a more at¬
tractive figure, soon finds his way around in a
world very different from his own. Meanwhile,
Jenny, the secretary, has plenty of time to get to
know and like the Soviet Union.
However, while they seemed to be denounc¬
ing the anti-Soviet campaigns which raged in the
United States, the authors of this kind of film did
not take the stereotypes they used too seriously.
In the 1930s, the class struggle and great pow¬
er rivalry intensified, but the trend for remakes
continued unabated. In his memoirs the Soviet
film-maker Mikhail Romm wrote this account of
the origins of his film The Thirteen:
"I was sent for by the Head of Cinematogra¬
phy, Boris Shumyatsky. The script-writer Iossif
Prut was summoned at the same time. Neither
of us knew what for.
" 'A comradehis name is immaterialhas
seen an American film in which a desert patrol
perishes in a combat after carrying out its mis¬
sion,' Shumyatsky said.* 'The film is imperialist
and hysterical, but this comrade has suggested
that something similar should be made about our
frontier guards. Will you try? You can write the
scenario together.'
" 'Can we see the film?'
" 'No, it's already been sent back. But that
doesn't matter. The important thing is that we
need a desert (we've got some terrific ones), front¬
ier guards and Basmachis, and that everyone dies
at the end. Almost everyone, but not everyone,
don't forget that, comrade Mikhail!'
In other words, in order to depict the struggle

Ldv Kuleskov's The
Extraordinary Adventures
ofMr West in the Land
of the Bolsheviks (1924)
used stereotyped characters
to parody American
comedy films of the 1920s.
against the ideological enemy within, Soviet
cinema fell back on ideas from the ideological
enemy outside its frontiers.
In 1953, in the middle of the Cold War,
Abram Room was commissioned to make a film
called Silver Dust, in which a corrupt American
scientist discovers a method of mass destruction.
He wants to experiment with it on Blacks, but
is prevented by "representatives of the people,
peace campaigners, one of whom is his eldest
son". Finally he sells his discovery at an exorbi¬
tant price to gangsters who murder him. His
younger son, a fascist, dies from the effects of the
terrible silver dust. All the ingredients are there:
corruption by money, the neo-nazi danger, and
the people's struggle for progress and peace.
Ideological struggles
First and foremost, this type of film was a denun¬
ciation of the ideological poison of nazism and
neo-nazism. In OffSeason (1968), which was pat¬
terned on an American spy thriller based on a
true story, a Soviet spy in "a Western country"
is ordered to neutralize a mad scientist who is
nostalgic about nazism. The spy is here the
saviour of humanity, a role which each country
simultaneously and in competition claims for
itself.
In the field of the "ideological struggle", the
films of the Brezhnev period satisfied two de¬
mands. They responded to anti-Soviet films
produced in the United States by using a similar
genre and themes, but above all they illustrated
official policy, which was to seek an agreement
to halt the arms race. Thus the films proclaim
the Soviet desire for peace and at the same time
the absurdity of war, even explaining the tensions
between the two great powers in terms of the
folly of certain individuals.
Sergei Mikaelian's Flight 222, in which a
Soviet dancer refuses to return home from a tour 31

in the United States, is an example of a duplicat¬
ed film. The American intelligence services put
pressure on his wife so that she stays too. This
is a response to the American film White Nights,
in which the dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov, an
emigré to the United States, plays himself.
A. Tumanishvili's Solitary Navigation is an exam¬
ple of an anti-war protest film in which a Soviet
ship manages to avoid a world catastrophe
planned by the commander of an American
atomic submarine who goes mad during the Viet
Nam war.
The rejection of the West appears in another
form, less official but just as durable, in the con¬
flict between Slavophiles and Westernizers. This
issue, which divided the Russian intelligentsia in
the nineteenth century, re-emerged with the re¬
ligious revival in the middle of the 1960s, of
which the flagship film was Andrei Tarkovski's
Andrei Rublev (1966). The epitome of triumphant
technology and the renunciation of spiritual
values, the West hurtles inexorably towards an
apocalypse from which Russia alone can save it.
Konstantin Lopushanski's Letters from a Dead
Man (1986) gives a detailed description of a
nuclear catastrophe which takes place outside the
Soviet Union.
'Eternal Russia'
The West is interesting to these film-makers
above all as a way of asking what lies beyond the
familiar world. Whether the subject is a visit to
another country (in Alov and Naoumov's The
Shore a writer visits a decadent Federal Republic
of Germany), or voluntary or involuntary
emigration (in Naoumov's The Choice two old
friends meet again, one of whom escaped during
the Second World War and now realizes that he
is a failure because he left his homeland; Tarkov¬
ski's Nostalgia, made in Italy in 1983, evokes its
author's exile)all these films show how hard it
is for Russians to live far from their native soil
and how they cannot adapt to a savage, hostile
world which they consider to be on the verge of
bankruptcy.
But this tendency to fall back on the values
of an "eternal Russia" is matched by another
which, by authorizing and even encouraging co-
productions with other countries, establishes the
West as a friendlier place, offering a welcome to
Russian émigrés who bear with them the values
of a past which their country is at last beginning
to rehabilitate.
Here too, an animated cartoon sets the tone.
A US-USSR co-production directed by Efim
Gambourg, its title is Stereotypes. Constructed in
the form of a parody of an American show, it
portrays bearded and threatening mujiks armed
with hammers and sickles and cynical cigar-
smoking businessmen, their feet on the table.
1 he Soviet director
Mikhail Romm's film
The Thirteen (1936), above,
is thought to have been
inspired by John Ford's
The Lost Patrol (1934), below.
»l1-
*^f' %,Z y j
a ;-$*
' V'i&*fl
*?hy. U v.V >.
., *t*
at .,;>'
«."*-
'^3»w.. . #sr ',; <r T
\;->
^ II >
32
