Farewell
to winter
BY HÉLÈNE YVERT-JALU
JL HE Russian carnival, Maslenitsa, whose origins
are lost in the mists of time, is still celebrated with
undiminished vigour. The celebrations include a
number of ancient customs, such as the eating of
blini (pancakes), tobogganing and sleigh rides. To
these have now been added a host of other
diversions, such as ski races, skating competitions
and dancing and singing to the accompaniment
of accordions and balalaikas, which make the
"Farewell to the Russian Winter", as it is
commonly called today, more of an entertain¬
ment than a rite. Even though " certain ancient
rites are from time to time resurrected, the deeper
meaning of such traditional practices is being
gradually lost.
The name Maslenitsa is derived from the
Russian word maslo, meaning "butter". During
the week preceding the six-week period of Lent
that leads up to Easter, the eating of meat was
forbidden by the Church and so people ate dairy
products, fish, eggs and blini maslenye, pancakes
to which melted butter was added to make them
more creamy.
The word Maslenitsa signifies both the
carnival itself and the grotesque doll-figure that
personifies it. In Moscow, by the eighteenth
century, the symbolic aspects of the carnival had
already been lost, but they survived in the
countryside and in some villages carnival was still
being celebrated in its traditional form at the
beginning of the twentieth century.
The festivities began with the welcome of the
Maslenitsa, a doll made of straw and rags, usually
in the likeness of a woman. It was dressed in a
The evergreen popularity
of the traditional
Russian carnival to
welcome the spring

JtSlini ready for the feast
tarewell to winter as the
Maslenitsa burns...
blouse and a sleeveless peasant's smock and a scarf
was knotted on its head. Sometimes it was
attached to a wheel at the top of a long pole,
sometimes the role of Maslenitsa was actually
played by a person. It was then paraded through
the village, accompanied, on foot or on sleighs,
by a noisy crowd of villagers who gave vent to
their joy with shouts and bursts of laughter and
by dancing and declaiming poems of welcome:
The worthy Maslenitsa, generous boyar,
Has come to descend our snowy slopes,
To feast on blini
And to abandon herself
To wholehearted enjoyment.
Then the Maslenitsa was placed on a mound
or other high point where it remained until the
end of the week.
It is sinful not to drink
to the Maslenitsa
The welcome ceremony triggered off a variety
of entertainments. These ranged from horse races,
pitched battles between unarmed men and attacks
by horsemen on the defenders of forts made of
snow, to swings and seesaws. Above all there was
tobogganing, which was very popular with the
young men and women since it gave them an
opportunity to get better acquainted with their
wives or husbands to be. Young married couples
would shoot down the slopes together in full view
of the whole village with the wife sitting on her
husband's knees. By popular demand, a couple
had to kiss before and after making a descent.
Sometimes a young couple would be buried
together for a brief moment in the snow.
The richer families would begin preparing
their blini on the Monday, the poorer ones on
the Thursday or Friday. The women would make
the batter in accordance with a given ritual. At
moonrise some would add snow to the mixture;
others, acting with the utmost secrecy, would set
to work at night at the river's edge when the stars
came out. In some districts, the first pancake to
be cooked was placed on the window-sill for the
souls of the departed. In other areas, it was given
to beggars so that they could commemorate the
dead. Pancakes, served very hot with sour cream,
herrings and caviare, were lavished on relatives,
friends and acquaintances. The laws of hospitality
required open house to be kept throughout the
carnival. People ate and drank their fill and more,
as if sating themselves so as to get through the
long period of Lenten abstinence. As the popular
saying went: "It is sinful not to drink to the
Maslenitsa."
It was also customary for a young wife's
mother to invite her new son-in-law to a meal
of blini liberally washed down, a custom which
gave rise to countless charming songs. The young
married couple would come bearing presents and
might stay for two or three days. Sometimes, to
welcome them, a Maslenitsa figure would be
attached to the roof gable.
On the Thursday or Friday, tobogganing
would give way to sleigh rides. Young couples,
and particularly newly-weds, would parade
around their village before setting off for neigh¬
bouring villages or even the nearest town, all
anxious to show themselves off in their finest
equipage and their richest attire. The horses'
manes would be decorated with ribbons and
paper flowers, the sleighs would be covered with
rugs and the curved wooden cross-piece that 35

\ v
-y * * "ai,
5
1881). The death of his heroine at the end of the
opera made possible the return of Yarilo/Sun to
shine again in the kingdom of Berendei and for
spring to come again.
For those who favour the theory of borrow¬
ings, which dates from the end of the last century,
the Maslenitsa derives from Greek-influenced
Roman rites that may have been transmitted to
the Slavs by minstrels from Byzantium.
Othersamong them most Russian
specialistsbelieve that, like other popular
festivals, the carnival is based on pre-Christian,
Slav agricultural cults and that the festivities were
intended to ensure good crops. The earth, which
is seen as female, is induced to become produc¬
tive by means of magical procedures, the most
important being the invocation of the dead and
the rites of preparation and of fecundation. Blini
are offered to the dead so that they will tend the
seeds and seedlings that have been placed in the
bowels of the earth, where the dead dwell. Erotic
activities were also seen as a method of making
the earth fertile. Drawing a parallel between
human fecundity and the fertility of the earth,
they attributed magical powers to sexuality;
hence the attention paid to young couples during
the festival. Hence also the wearing of masks
which facilitated licentious behaviour. Finally,
the fertilizing power of the ear of corn,
represented by the straw of which the doll-figure
was made, was transmitted to the earth when the
figure was buried or burned. The magical power
of the laughter that accompanied the "killing"
of the doll-figure was thought to help the earth
become fruitful.
For many historians of religions, however,
the significance of the Russian carnival goes
deeper than this merely agricultural explanation
might suggest. They believe that the Maslenitsa
is important because it belongs to that category
of festivals that proclaim the end of one period
and the beginning of anothera crucial moment'
in any traditional society. Marking the transition



from winter to spring and, in ancient Russia, the
beginning of the New Year, it is a festival of the
recreation of the universeagriculture being only
one aspect of the symbolism of periodic
regeneration.
The cult of the dead, a vestige of the
ceremonies that accompanied the transitional
period between two cycles, forms a link with this
myth of eternal renewal. Seen in this light, the
reversal of values, such as the parody of interment
and the general licentiousness, may represent the
primordial chaos which must be mastered to
make possible the cyclic recommencement of the
order of things. The confession of sins and
Pardon Sunday express the desire for a return to
the purity of this new beginning of primordial
time. Finally, creation is symbolized by that
essential element of the festival, the lighting of
fires.
1 he Winter Carnival
(1916), by the Russian
painter Boris Mikhailovich
Kustodiev (1880-1927).
-^W
