The republican
dream
In a famous speech delivered at An¬
gostura in 1819 at the opening of the
Congress of Venezuela, Simón Bolívar
set forth the principles which underlay
his political action and his loyal attach¬
ment to a republican régime based on
liberty and equality guaranteed by a
constitution. Extractsfrom this impor¬
tant text are given below.
34
X HE continuation of authority in a single in¬
dividual has frequently been the downfall of
democratic governments. Repeated elections are
essential in popular systems, because nothing is
more dangerous than allowing the same citizen
to remain in power over a long period of time.
The people become accustomed to obeying him,
and he becomes accustomed to commanding
them; this is how power is usurped and tyranny
takes root. The freedom of the Republic must be
jealously safeguarded, and our citizens should just¬
ly fear that the same magistrate who has governed
them for many years might come to rule them
for ever....
A healthy diet offreedom
Freedom, says Rousseau, is a most succulent dish,
but one that is difficult tb digest. Our frail fellow-
citizens will have to build up their strength long
before they are able to digest the life-giving
nutrient of freedom. Will they, with their limbs
stiffened from such long enchainment, their sight
enfeebled by the darkness of their dungeons, and
their spirit crushed by pernicious servitude, be
able to stride firmly toward the august temple of
freedom? Will they be able to gaze unblinkingly
into its splendid rays, and inhale the pure air
which surrounds it?...
Notwithstanding such painful reflections, I
am overwhelmed with joy at the great steps
which our republic has taken in embarking on
its noble course. Imbued with purpose, inspired
by love of justice, aspiring toward perfection, it
has, with the separation of Venezuela from the
Spanish nation, recovered its independence, its
freedom, its equality and its national sovereignty.
By constituting itself as a democratic republic, it
has proscribed the monarchy, distinctions, nobil¬
ity, exemptions, privileges; it has proclaimed hu¬
man rights and endorsed freedom to act, think,
speak and write. These eminently liberal meas¬
ures can never be praised enough for the purity
which inspired them. The first Congress of
Venezuela has inscribed in the annals of our legis¬
lation, in ineradicable letters, the majesty of the
1 he 35-year-old Simón
Bolivar is shown beside an
allegorical figure of
America in this painting
by Pedro José Figueroa.

people expressed in all its dignity, with the ratifi¬
cation of a social act such as which will ensure
the happiness of a nation....
The sovereign principle
of equality
Does not the Spirit ofLaws state that these should
be suited to the people making them, that only
by a pure coincidence may those of one nation
meet the requirements of another, that the laws
should be suited to the country's physical condi¬
tion, its climate, the quality of its soil, its situa¬
tion, its extent and its people's way of life; that
they should conform to the degree of freedom
that the Constitution can tolerate, to the religion
of the inhabitants, their interests, commerce, cus¬
toms and traditions? This is the code which we
should consult, and not that of Washington!...
Let us remember that our people are neither
European nor North American; they are a com¬
pound of African and American elements, rather
than an emanation of Europe, as even Spain it¬
self is no longer entirely European because of its
African blood, its institutions and character....
The citizens of Venezuela all enjoy, by virtue of
the Constitution, the interpreter of nature, per¬
fect political equality. Whereas equality may not
have been a guiding principle in Athens, France
and America, we ourselves should affirm it in
order to remedy the distinction which apparently
exists.
My opinion, legislators, is that the fundamen¬
tal principle of our system depends directly and
exclusively on equality being established and prac¬
tised in Venezuela.... Nature creates men unequal
in disposition, temperament, force and character.
The laws correct this difference because they
place the individual in society in such a way that
education, industry, the arts, services and virtues
may give him a fictitious equality, properly called
political and social. It is eminently felicitous in¬
spiration to have gathered all the classes in one
state, the diversity of which has grown with the
propagation of the species. By this step alone,
cruel discord has been torn up by its roots. How
many jealousies, rivalries and hatreds have been
thus avoided!
The lessons of history
We must have equality in order to reshape, so
to speak, the human species, with its political
opinions and public customs, into one single
whole. Then, fixing our gaze on the long road
that lies before us, we must devote our attention
to the dangers to be avoided. History should be
our guide on this journey....
And moving from antiquity to modern times
we find England and France the cynosure of all
the nations and providing eloquent lessons of ev¬
ery kind in the realm of government. The Revo¬
lution of these great peoples, like a radiant
meteor, flooded the world with such a profusion
An idea
that changed
the world
of political brilliance that every thinking creature
has been made aware of what man's rights and
duties are and what constitute the vices and vir¬
tues of governments. Everyone today can appreci¬
ate the intrinsic value of the speculative theories
of modern philosophers and legislators....
Legislators, it is fitting to recall what the elo¬
quent Volney says in his preface to The Ruins of
Palmyra: "To the nascent people of the Spanish
Indies, to the generous leaders who guide them
to freedom: may the errors and misfortunes of
the ancient world teach wisdom and happiness
to the new world." The lessons of experience,
therefore, should not be lost; the consequences
of Greece, Rome, France, England and America
should instruct us in the difficult science of creat¬
ing and conserving our nations with their own
just, legitimate and, above all, fitting laws. We
should never forget that the excellence of a
government does not lie in its theories, in its form
or in its mechanisms, but rather in its appropri¬
ateness to the nature and character of the nation
for which it is devised.
Jcene from Bolivar (1943),
an opera by Darius Milhaud
to a libretto by Jules
Supervielle. The décor of this
1950 Paris Opera production
was designed by Fernand
Léger.
35
