4,
1789
An idea
that changed
the world
China:
rethinking
the Revolution
BY ZHILIAN ZHANG
Reform or revolution? This was the
dilemma faced by Chinese élites in
the nineteenth century. The example of
the French Revolution was at the core
of their debates.
44
\juangxu, emperor of
China (1875-1908).
Influenced by the reformer
Kang Youwei, he wished to
modernize the country but
the Empress Dowager Cixi
(Tz'u-hsi) soon put a stop to
his plans.
IN China, the influence of the French Revolu¬
tion was not immediately felt, and it was only
a century later that the ideals of 1789 were ex¬
plicitly voiced.
There were geographical as well as sociolog¬
ical reasons for this time-lag. In the days of sail¬
ing ships, a despatch took at least eight months
to reach Peking from London. Lord Macartney,
head of the first official British mission to
China, left Portsmouth in September 1792, and
did not reach Peking until August 1793.
The imperial court where he was received had
already heard of the events in France, and
rumours of the upheaval caused by the Revolu¬
tion made anything new subject to suspicion. At
the height of its power and prosperity, China had
no need to think of change. The country had a
stable social structure, with no bourgeoisie, no
ideological contention, no political opposition.
If the peasants were unhappy, they were not yet
organized. In China, the time was not ripe for
reform, still less for revolution.
During the nineteenth century pressure for
social and political change began to mount.

Peasant unrest (from the White Lotus uprisings
in the 1790s, to the Taiping insurrection of
1850-1864), foreign aggression (from the First
Opium War with Britain of 1839-1842 to the
French expeditions of the 1880s), economic
decline and widespread corruption, continuous
population growthall these factors sapped the
foundations of the Middle Empire. The crisis be¬
came acute on the eve of the twentieth century
following defeat at the hands of Japan.
Such were the conditions in which Chinese
élites began to study the French Revolution in
the hope of finding solutions to their own
problems.
Monarchs who lose
the people's confidence
The first significant commentary inspired by the
French Revolution was written by the reformer
Wang Tao (1828-1897). In his Compendium on
France he wrote: "Does the calamitous violence
of republican government always lead to such ex¬
cesses? When the rebel parties, in their cruel fury,
do not shrink from committing regicide, where
are a country's laws? What has happened to the
rulers of nature? It is as if Heaven and Earth had
been reversed and the world was upside down...
In all of history surely there has been no rebel¬
lion worse than this. And yet, at the origin of
these calamities, we find the inability [of the
monarch] to conciliate the masses and win the
confidence of his subjects. Presuming upon their
high position, these monarchs fail to identify with
popular fortunes. And mounting resentment is
enough to bring about the demise of royalty...
Such being the case, can rulers do as they please
and behave irresponsibly?"
Wang Tao condemned the rebels but held the
king responsible for the calamity because he had
alienated himself from the people. This was a les¬
son that rulers should draw from the Revolution.
The stirrings of reform
The tide for radical change rose higher in the
1890s and a generation of reformers emerged,
with Kang Youwei (1858-1927) and Liang Qichao
1 easant rising in a
Chinese village (print
dating from around 1895)
45


(1873-1929) in the forefront. Kang won the con¬
fidence of the Emperor Guangxu (but not that
of the Empress Dowager), and dreamt of reform¬
ing the Empire "from the top". True to the clas¬
sical Chinese tradition of using the past to serve
current policies, he was nevertheless an innova¬
tor in that he used the history of a foreign coun¬
try to convince the emperor and the court.
In the preface to his Account of the French
Revolution, dedicated to Guangxu, Kang uncon¬
ditionally condemned the excesses of this "bloo¬
dy revolt": "There has never been anything more
disastrous than the atrocities of modern revolu¬
tion." His censure of Louis XVI was no less se-
46
vere: "Divine right is not granted permanently.
Only by virtuous means can you keep it; other¬
wise, it will be taken from you. Louis XVI's
promise to grant a constitution did not come
from his own initiative but was given under pres¬
sure. His hesitation and oscillation, his initial
recourse to arms and later disbandment of his
guards, and finally his appeal to foreign interven¬
tion and flight to Varennes, stirred up the indig¬
nation of the people to such an extent that he
was sent to the guillotine and scorned by the
world."
Kang felt that popular feelings should be
calmed rather than excited, because the populace,
once aroused to action, is like a rock rolling down
a steep hill; nothing can halt its course. "It may
have been possible for a single person to tyran¬
nize an ignorant mass. But once the people real¬
ize that the world is made for all and not just for
a few, they envy the rich and strive for power
and prestige."
Kang conceded that all modern constitutional
governments originated in the French Revolu¬
tion: "In spite of its aberrations and tyrannical
violence, it was aided by the trend of the times
and the spirit of the people. Like a huge storm
sweeping over and transforming the great earth,
it was indeed something frightening. As there has
not been anything as grandiose in the annals of
political change, it may also serve as an example."
According to Kang Youwei, the obvious les¬
son was that a reform programme should be
launched from above and a constitutional monar
chy be established before the rebellious people
took matters into their own hands and imposed
radical changes from below.
Kang's contemporary Liang Qichao was one
of the first writers to introduce the ideas of the
Enlightenment to the Chinese. In his Life of
Madame Roland, he called the Revolution "the
Mother of European Civilization"; but he repeat¬
edly cited the alleged final words of his heroine
on the scaffold: "Oh, Liberty, what crimes are
committed in thy name!" He rejected oppression
and revolution in the same breath. He was an ad¬
vocate of "destruction without bloodshed". He
warned the conservatives in high places that to
From left to right: Kang
Youwei; Madame Roland;
Liang Qichao
ZHILIAN ZHANG,
of China, is a professor of
history at Beijing
University. President of the
Association for the Study of
French History, a member
of the International
Commission on the History
of the French Revolution,
and editor-in-chief of a
general history of France,
his published works include
an essay entitled From the
Gauls to De Gaulle.
ignore the aspirations of the people would lead
to a new outbreak of the Terror. At the same
time, he made clear to the "pushers in low places"
that if they unleashed the passions of the masses,
the result would be a blood bath and anarchy,
as in France.
The reforms proposed by Kang and his fol¬
lowers, although mild, were not accepted by
those in power.^Six reformers were decapitated.
Kang was obliged to flee to Hong Kong, while
Liang sought refuge in Japan. The attempt at
change was nipped in the bud.
Bloodshed, the price of liberty
A reaction was bound to assert itself from the


revolutionary camp. Not only in China, but also
in Japan where many radicals took shelter fol¬
lowing the failure of the reforms. A torrent of
pamphlets and political papers imbued with the
ideas of 1789 appeared. In the first decade of the
twentieth century, the French Revolution be¬
came the model for the struggle against feudal op¬
pression.
A radical interpretation of the French Revo¬
lution emerged from the writings of the revolu¬
tionists. Rebutting the counter-revolutionary
ideas of Kang Youwei, they stressed the necessi¬
ty of propagating in China ideas of Enlighten¬
ment and revolution. They exalted the spirit of
sacrifice and recourse to violence. They appealed
to men and parties to unite. For the first time,
the names of Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau,

Turgot, Helvétius, Sieyès and Fourier were on
the lips of Confucian scholars. Journals published
commentaries on the Declaration of the Rights
of Man and of the Citizen. Several versions of
the Marseillaise were circulated.
Criticizing as ridiculous the notion of "des¬
truction without bloodshed", the revolutionists
upheld, on the contrary, that the success of the
revolution depended on violence and sacrifice.
Ready to give their lives, they vowed "to sacrifice
themselves for the rights of the people and to buy
liberty with bloodshed". Was that not how
despotism had been abolished and natural rights
restored in France? A staunch revolutionist from
Hunan exclaimed: "Have you not known the af¬
fairs in France, the homeland of the Social
Contract, the battlefield of freedom? All was ac¬
complished through violence. The Revolution of
1789 was indeed tragic and violent; those of 1830
and 1848 were no less so. The guillotined head
of the King was paraded through the streets of
Paris, while the throngs of people cried out Vive
la liberté! Thrice have they driven away
their king, fourteen times have they changed their
constitutionalways with much bloodshed. Yet
France has become a strong nation."
But how was the unity of the revolutionary
movement and its leaders to be preserved? The
Chinese revolutionists expressed great admiration
for the Jacobin Club which appeared to them as
a "driving force of the Revolution". But they no¬
ticed with regret that political and personal rival¬
ries between Girondins and Montagnards, then
between Dantonists and Robespierrists, finally
led to the downfall of democracy. A revolution¬
ary patriot, Liu Yazi, drew an analogy between
the disputes of leaders in the French Revolution
and the quarrels of leaders in the Taiping Heaven¬
ly Kingdom, as a warning to his comrades.
Thus the long debate on the virtues and
crimes of the French Revolution gradually rein¬
forced the conviction of those who believed that
China needed revolution, not piecemeal change.
A great 'social laboratory'
A new generation of revolutionary leaders came
to the forefront. Many of them discovered their
calling while listening to accounts of the storm¬
ing of the Bastille. In June 1920, a twenty-two-
year-old Chinese youth wrote these lines for a
classmate who was leaving to study in France:
On your return, you will
Hoist the Flag of Liberty
Sing the Song of Independence
Fight for the Rights of Women
And seek for Equality
In the great social laboratory.
The author's name was Zhou Enlai.
1 he Empress Dowager
Cixi (1835-1908) in 1903,
at centre ofphoto
47
