PORTRAIT
GABRIELA MISTRAL
POET AND HUMANIST
JL HE life of Gabriela Mistral, who was
born on 7 April 1889 in a village in north¬
ern Chile and died in New York in 1957,
was devoted to an intellectual and spiri¬
tual quest. From her early days in Chile's
Elqui valley to her European travels on
cultural and diplomatic assignments, the
story of her career reads almost like a
myth. The needy peasant girl becomes
the doyenne of Latin-American literature.
The humble rural schoolteacher is award¬
ed some of the world's highest honours,
including the Nobel Prize for Literature
in 1945.
Gabriela Mistral's poetry, from her
1922 collection Desolación ("Desolation")
to Lagar ("The Wine Press") of 1954, was
written in harsh, powerful and colloquial
language. Like her massive output of
prose, it is informed by a visionary,
prophetic sense of the destiny of Latin
America. But readers in Europe and
countries as culturally diverse as Israel,
China and Japan, also found a meaning
in the humanism and poetry of her work.
In many books, theses, poetic and
philosophical reflections, it is possible to
trace the influence of this Latin-American
writer from a country which, within a
mere half century, produced three writers
of world stature: Gabriela Mistral,
Vicente Huidobro and Pablo Neruda.
Why has Gabriela Mistral's work had
a universal impact? As in the case of all
true creative artists, attachment to her
own familiar world did not exclude a
strong feeling for other languages and cul¬
tures. She acknowledged her debt not
only to Saint Theresa and to the Spanish
poet Luis de Góngora y Argote but to
Dante, Rabindranath Tagore, and the
great Russian writers, and, Christian
though she was, to the great sages of
Buddhism.
Closely identified with her country
and with her people ("I am and will
remain," she said, "a daughter of my
land"), Gabriela Mistral described her
personal experience with a voice which
all humanity could recognize, drawing
from a tragic love affair a song of love and
tenderness which speaks to people every¬
where. In her sympathy for the down¬
trodden and her readiness to defend their
cause, poetry and humanism become one:
"We must give expression to the soul in
all its intensity, and boldly utter the mes¬
sage which springs from the heart before
it ceases to beat."
The above text has been adapted from an article by
Mr. Gastón Von Dem Bussche, professor at the
Metropolitan University of Chile. 49
