MAKERS OF
MODERN INDIA BY SARVEPALLI GOPAL
Mohandas K. Gandhi (1869-1948),
the architect of India's struggle for
independence through non-violent
disobedience to British rule.
MAHATMA Gandhi was the
foremost leader of the Indian
independence movement; and
one of his great qualities was to secure and
retain the devotion of persons of differ¬
ing temperaments but all of very great
distinction. Of these, three leading figures
were Jawaharlal Nehru, Sarvepalli Rad-
hakrishnan and Maulana Abul Kalam
Azad.
Educated in Britain, Nehru was drawn
to Gandhi because he felt that while
others talked Gandhi was primarily a
man of action who was making a dent on
British rule. Nehru accepted Gandhi's
method of non-violence, first as a useful
weapon against the British and then, af¬
ter the atom bombs of 1945, as a means
without an alternative. He saw the valid¬
ity of Marx's analysis of historical change
but did not believe that such change can
only be brought about by force. The class
war could not be denied but it could be
resolved by persuasion. In the freedom
movement, Nehru realized that, while
Gandhi had brought the peasants into the
political campaign, to retain their interest
and support the Indian National Con¬
gress should have an economic
programme. In this sense he is a pioneer
of modern, twentieth-century na¬
tionalism.
Once Gandhi had brought other class¬
es into the independence movement, it
became Nehru's task to hold the various
classes together by taking account of the
basic economic needs of the vast majori¬
ty of the Indian people. So Nehru
promised that, when freedom had been
won, the free government of India would
give priority to economic 'development
and the promotion of social justice. Even
before the departure of the British, Nehru
made the Indian people conscious of the
importance of planning.
Nehru's other great contribution to
the independence movement was that he
gave it an international perspective. He
saw that fascism, militarism and imperi
alism were partners and against them were
ranged popular and national movements
all over the world. So the independence
movement in India was part of a univer¬
sal struggle and its allies were the peoples
fighting for freedom and dignity in Eu¬
rope, Asia and Africa.
Nehru's policies as India's first prime
minister from 1947 till his death in 1964
continued to be influenced by these
ideals. An emphasis on civil liberties and
a search for a socialist pattern of society
inspired all his efforts within India, while
abroad he followed an active policy of
support for anti-colonialism and anti-
racism. He was particularly committed to
Africa which he regarded as India's neigh¬
bour. He supported the national move¬
ments in Kenya, Algeria, Ghana and
Nigeria and never compromised in his
resistance to apartheid. Above all he was
a supporter of the United Nations and its
agencies, sent Indian troops as part of
United Nations contingents to Gaza,
Suez and the Congo and worked to pro¬
mote total disarmament.
The contribution of Sarvepalli Rad-
hakrishnan to the independence move-
Jawaharlal Nehru (1889-1964), the first prime
minister of independent India
10

ment was of a different order.
Imperialism damaged the identity of the
Indian people by assuming that Western
civilization was superior. In reply Rad-
hakrishnan turned to the sources and, in
his writings on Indian philosophy,
showed that the thought of his people
was second to none in logic and rational¬
ity. This enabled them to hold up their
heads. But Radhakrishnan did more. He
argued that philosophy was related to life
and, while interpreting Indian thinkers at
their best, also called on Indians to dis¬
card what was outmoded and to rid them¬
selves of obscurantism and superstition.
Their long and rich tradition had been ar¬
rested and required innovation and fur¬
ther evolution. Truth should not be
allowed to be smothered by the dead past.
The speculative and scientific thought of
the West should be incorporated into the
Indian heritage.
Moreover, by expounding Indian
thought in terms which related to the
Western tradition, Radhakrishnan made
Indian culture a part of world civilization.
He, like Nehru, accepted a nationalism
which was a brick in the structure of
internationalism and his philosophical
efforts were intended to build under¬
standing between East and West. A mem¬
ber before the Second World War of the
International Committee for Intellec¬
tual Co-operation, he was active in
Unesco from its foundation in 1945. He
was a member of Unesco's Executive
Board, served as its chairman, was elect¬
ed president of the General Conference
in 1952, and was associated with the
opening of Unesco's Paris Headquarters
in the Place de Fontenoy in 1958. To him
Unesco was, as he described it, "the
priesthood of the spirit".
Radhakrishnan's main activity, after
India became free, was to help in the
reconciliation of mankind on the basis of
the common ground among all the
religions of the world. He believed that
a global community was emerging and
that humanity should be educated to
recognize its purpose and destiny. Ap¬
pointed by Nehru as India's ambassador
to the Soviet Union, Radhakrishnan
stood nearly thirty years ago for negoti¬
ations and peaceful settlements between
the two sides in the cold war. In 1952 he
came back to India and for the next
fifteen years in Delhi, first as Vice-
President for ten years and then for five
years as President, he gave the lead in
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1888-1975) was a
scholar and philosopher of international
repute, noted for his work on Hinduism.
improving the quality of life and promot¬
ing character. Even while holding these
high offices and carrying out his duty to
his own people, Radhakrishnan con¬
tinued to travel round the world, advocat¬
ing the emergence of a new civilization
based on the unity of mankind and
common truths of the spirit and animat¬
ed by a religion founded not on dogma
but on the deepening of the individual's
awareness and compassion for all fellow
beings.
If Radhakrishnan was by birth a Hin¬
du, Abul Kalam Azad was born in Mec¬
ca of pious Muslim parents; but they both
had a strong sense of religion based on
rationalism and the common values of all
humanity transcending creeds and
denominations. Fluent in Arabic and Per¬
sian and a scholar in Islamic studies, Azad
gave a broad and liberal interpretation of
the Qur'an. To him religion was a guide
to proper action and his scholarship led
him into public life. From 1912 his
primary objective was to draw the Mus¬
lims in India into the struggle for free¬
dom. A steadfast follower of Gandhi, he
was elected a number of times President
of the Indian National Congress and
suffered long terms of internment and im¬
prisonment. From 1920 political differ¬
ences between Hindu and Muslim
organizations increased; but the Congress
insisted that nationalism had no connec¬
tion with religion and the presence of
Maulana Azad in the ranks of the nation¬
alist leadership was the highest testimo¬
ny of this. Azad's pride in being an Indian
was strengthened by his commitment to
what he termed the Islamic spirit, and he
never accepted that a good Muslim could
not be a good Indian.
From 1947 till his death in 1958 he
served as India's first minister for educa¬
tion and was a key figure in the formula¬
tion of national policies in all fields. With
his belief that true religion brings all peo¬
ples together, Azad also took much in¬
terest in the promotion of international
understanding and was the president of
the General Conference of Unesco at its
session in Delhi in 1956.
SARVEPALLI GOPAL is Emeritus Professor of
Contemporary History at Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi, and a Fellow of St. Antony's
College, Oxford (UK). He was a member of the
Executive Board of Unesco from 1976 to 1980.
Among his many published works are Modern India
(1967) and a 3-volume biography of Jawaharlal
Nehru (1975-1984).
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad (1888-1958), the
architect of India's post-Independence
education policy.
**& ***
11
