THE WRITTEN WORD..
BY LEOPOLD SEDAR SENGHOR
THE fire which destroyed the
Library of Alexandria is often
cited as one of the natural catas¬
trophes which have afflicted humanity.
Many other fires have impoverished for
all time the memory of mankind. They
are mentioned less often, but we who
have suffered their effects at first hand
know that these irreparable losses have
been instrumental in permanently distort¬
ing the contribution of our peoples to
universal civilization.
Today our identity and our heritage
are faced with the threat of a form of des¬
truction which may be less spectacular
but is quite as pernicious and is taking
place more insidiously. So insidiously, in
fact, that the international cultural com¬
munity does not yet seem fully aware of
it and ready to take action. This form of
destruction, which is jeopardizing the
safeguard of the written heritage of the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, today
not only concerns the developing coun¬
tries; it has become a serious and urgent
global problem. The fragility of the
material on which manuscripts are writ¬
ten, the inadequacy of the resources allo¬
cated to national libraries, legal loopholes
and the lack of facilities for training
specialists, are all misfortunes which are
shared, albeit unequally, by all countries
and institutions.
It is to the credit of a non¬
governmental organization entitled "As¬
sociation Archives de la Littérature
Latino-Américaine, des Caraïbes et Afri¬
caine du XXe Siècle" (ALLCA, the La¬
tin American, Caribbean and African
20th-century Literary Archives Associa¬
tion), of which I was president for ten
years, that it has tried to make Unesco
member states aware of the need for con¬
certed action in this field, on a par with
the measures they have already taken to
save other aspects of the cultural heritage
of humanity such as monuments, mov¬
ing images and oral traditions. Initially
such measures should be taken by in¬
dividual countries, but they cannot be
limited to the national level.
To preserve the testimony of creative
thinkers and to render their manuscripts
accessible to international research is an act
of profound civic importance whereby we
affirm our identity and maintain the life
and continuity of our cultural heritage. The
cultural heritage is not a dusty monument,
a souvenir of the past restricted to a scho¬
larly élite, but the focus of a form of
"ancestor-worship" which vitalizes and
enriches later generations.
LEOPOLD SEDAR SENGHOR, Senegalese
statesman and writer, was president of the Repub¬
lic of Senegal from 1960 to 1981. The author of
many poems, essays and other literary works, he
has been a member of the Académie Française since
1983. As former president of the "Association Ar¬
chives de la Littérature Latino-Américaine, des
Caraïbes et Africaine du XXe Siècle" (ALLCA), he
has a special interest in the safeguard and study of
contemporary manuscripts.
