FROM THE WORLD'S ARCHIVES
The Vatican Library
THE Secret Archives of the Vatican (so
named because of the practice where¬
by the archives of sixteenth-century
European sovereigns were usually described
as "secret") are by virtue of their universal
nature, a documentary source of exception¬
al interest not only for religious and political
history but also for the social and cultural de¬
velopment of many nations. In 1880 they
were opened to the public, without distinc¬
tion of nationality or religious persuasion, by
Pope Leo XIII, and since then they have been
used by scholars from all over the world. Each
day some eighty researchers study in the Ar¬
chives, while some 120 more use the Vati¬
can Library.
The documents in the Vatican Archives
originate from the bishops, priests, monks
and laymen and women of local churches,
and from the nunciatures of the Holy See.
They contain ecclesiastical, historical, social,
cultural, economic and political information.
Also in the Vatican Archives are the records
S. ;-.U*n^v» (-.: ¡v-«»f "m y-.tjU.-a.jjr-.. .jjiyV» ii* rJW V^tp r~ -C^r.hj»
TV«4U, ^Jfei ,T ¿ffuwA**! 1»^1.WWI. ~Mtt»l. m'ffcw. »«.-paill^ -, pMWg. »pvl'wS
J"-"»" «S"» & 3*^99 "** i""f»^i- f"-tm» ft» j«f»tl *i.J»».^ ^ -mji.*««-. «lip Jill fa? TV.
f j-»j^-^»..^.^«-..^!»^; .s.^.X« r|«ft fix-,^.«SK-«.
«K ^"**fc t* -y*f...rW jl^ '~jj.i*' «iifmt» i~i ytf yvh^H pliii ift-m^f^n^rj AI. i »i~ TS~^wntr » «Srm ^~Ti
j»-ir-Tg»m^,,ipmfJB-lsUiBnt«ifL«. i-jt/r fS»^*- &»» «rip «í ÍJ««»V¡J»S. 7
of the major departments of the Roman curia
which are responsible for relations with the
churches of the six continents.
Josef Metzler
Prefect of the Secret Archives of the Vatican
Letter bearing the seal
of Bela IV, King of Hungary. It was sent in
1246 to Pope Innocent IV.
^<S
In February 1988, a fire in the Leningrad
Library of the Soviet Academy of Sciences
destroyed an estimated 400,000 volumes, and
a further 3.6 million books and documents
were damaged by fire and water. Unesco has
helped the library to collect microfilm
versions of many of the works that were
destroyed and has advised on drying and
restoration. Above, the cataloguing
department and (inset) the periodicals reserve
after the fire.
	 12 	
The Soviet Union,
a scattered heritage
RICH holdings of nineteenth- and
twentieth-century literary manuscripts
are preserved in the great libraries and
research institutes of the USSR Academy of
Sciences such as the Institute of Literature
(Pushkin House) in Leningrad and the Insti¬
tute of World Literature in Moscow. The Cen¬
tral State Archives of Literature and Art
specialize in preservation work.
But facilities for the preservation and use
of twentieth-century literary manuscripts
leave much to be desired. Holdings cannot
be efficiently consulted because they are not
computerized. And in most cases the basic
conditions for preservation do not exist.
Attempts to constitute the literary ar¬
chives of Soviet authors are confronted with
many obstacles. The manuscripts of great
writers who were victims of Stalinist oppres¬
sion were either destroyed or have been lost
without trace. As a result of emigration, es¬
pecially during the Civil War, the Soviet Un¬
ion lost many of its leading creative artists and
their manuscripts are today scattered all over
the world, notably in the United States.
A comprehensive history of twentieth-
century Russian literature is being prepared
under the auspices of the Gorki Institute of

The safeguard of manuscripts
in Africa
THE art of the manuscript has been prac¬
tised for several centuries in Ethiopia, in
the Maghreb, in Muslim Black Africa
and in southeastern Madagascar. But only
relatively recently, during the period of Eu¬
ropean colonization, did written records be¬
gin to be kept throughout the continent.
Today manuscript archives are found in all
African countries. Some Ethiopian gospel-
books and other illuminated manuscripts
written in Amharic and Geez (right) and cer¬
tain Arabic manuscripts from the Maghreb,
date as far back as the fourteenth century,
but most of the remainder are contemporary
or recent.
In spite of a growing awareness of the
incalculable value of these manuscripts, few
effective measures have been taken to
safeguard and preserve them. The situation
is in many ways disturbing because complete
and systematic inventories have not been es¬
tablished at the national level, because of the
slender resources of institutions in which
manuscripts and documentary sources are
kept, and because of lack of personnel
specializing in the analysis, treatment and
preservation of manuscripts.
!
-*-. ...
... *.« *>.-..,- -,- , fcj, ,
fcja^t.'» .-:- 1«M«
.t.V*> IH* ' »-»l.-*Vr*«l
*» fc>. li«»l i
J,
African manuscripts are housed in a var¬
iety of institutions ranging from libraries,
research centres, archives services and pub¬
lishing houses, to Ethiopian churches and
monasteries, and mosques and Koranic
schools in the Maghreb, Mauritania and
Senegal. Many documents are in private
hands. Writers and their families usually keep
the manuscripts of their published works. Not
only should the institutions where
manuscripts are preserved be provided with
adequate facilities; other holders of these cul¬
tural treasures should be identified.
18th-century prayer
book written in Geez,
a liturgical script of
the Ethiopian Coptic
Church from which
Amharic was derived.
Efforts should also be made to train
specialized staff. Schools of library science,
some of which have been functioning for
several years, should be upgraded and provid¬
ed with improved equipment. In too many
cases, courses on the restoration and preser¬
vation of documents provided by library
schools are excessively theoretical and the
practical aspects are neglected.
Ousmane Sane
Director of the School of Librarians, Archivists
and Documentalists, Cheikh Anta Diop
University, Dakar (Senegal)
World Literature. It will record the full diver¬
sity of Russian literature written in this cen¬
tury both in the USSR and elsewhere. Where
the manuscripts of works written outside the
USSR are concerned, the gaps are very seri¬
ous. If this project is to be brought to a suc¬
cessful conclusion, scholars engaged on it
must at least be able to consult copies of
manuscripts by these writers who produced
their work outside the Soviet Union and use
them as a basis for research and future criti¬
cal editions.
The ideal solution would be to provide
for the exchange of copies of manuscripts be¬
tween different institutions and different
countries. A comprehensive agreement on
this point is needed to provide for mutual as¬
sistance in the collection, preservation, study
and possible publication of literary
manuscripts. Such an agreement should con¬
cern the manuscripts of all authors in all
countries. The Central State Archives of Liter¬
ature and Art, the repository of the most im¬
portant collection in the Soviet Union, is ready
to work towards this goal.
Natalia Volkova and Irina Nikiforova
India: a new conservation policy
In contemporary India literary manuscripts
are usually destroyed after publication, and
authors rarely keep their manuscripts and
other material related to their work. (One
notable exception was the Bengali poet
Rabindranath Tagore, whose manuscripts are
preserved at Visva-Bharati University.)
Recently, however, India's National Academy
of Letters (Sahitya Akademi) has adopted an
acquisitions and conservation policy for
contemporary literary documents, and the
state has granted financial assistance to
libraries for the preservation of rare
manuscripts in their keeping. Below, reading
room of the National Library at Calcutta,
which has important manuscript collections.
