%J789
An idea
that changed
the world
Sieyès, Herder, Goethe
Universality
and national
identity
BY ALAIN FINKIELKRAUT
Herder and the German Romantics
contested the universalist concept ofthe
nation which France proposed to the
rest ofEurope in 1789 on the grounds
that each people had a unique "soul".
Goethe was the only thinker ofhis time
to go beyond this contradiction between
the universal and the specific when he
affirmed that all cultures can aspire to
universality.
%
is aHE nation," wrote the Abbé Sieyès,
group of associates living under a common sys¬
tem of laws and represented by a single legisla¬
ture."1 In making use of the term "associates"
he wiped out with a single stroke of the pen the
traditions of a thousand years and consigned
France's national history to the waste-paper
basket. The division of the people into "Three
Estates" was abolishedthere were no longer
nobles, priests, judges, commoners or peasants,
but only people enjoying the same rights and sub¬
ject to the same responsibilities. With a word
Sieyès pronounced the end of the hereditary sys¬
tem; anyone who claimed special legal status
merely on the basis of ancestry was thereby ex¬
cluded from the body of the nation.
Contradicting its own etymological roots, the
revolutionary nation (the word "nation" comes
from the Latin "nasci", meaning "to be born")
thus uprooted individuals, redefining them in
terms of their humanity rather than their birth.
It was.not a question of restoring a collective iden¬
tity to human beings without status or social
moorings; on the contrary, it was a matter of
releasing them from all specific restrictive bonds
and making a radical affirmation of their
tonomy.
Between 1795 and 1799
France was governed by the
Directory. Executive power
was in the hands of 5
Directors elected by a
"Council ofAncients".
Above, Emmanuel Joseph
Sieyès (1748-1836) wearing
his Director's uniform.
au-
30
The nation: a free
and voluntary association
Not only were they freed from the shackles of
their ancestry but also from the spiritual power
La Liberté (1793-1794) by
Nanine Vallain.
Brandishing the pike and
red bonnet of the sans¬
culottes in one hand and
holding the Declaration of
the Rights ofMan in the
other, she treads the chains
of slavery underfoot.

-
Er
mW
^^^^^^^^^1
m
là 4
H 1
1
- ^H
m
LÉ
'
m -
V N. f-fcl i CVi
¡J <4ç_
- . . -

Kjoethe (centre) surrounded
by German writers. From
left to right: Wieland,
Lessing, Klopstock, Herder
and Schiller.
which had until then ruled over them. Liberated
from God and from their sires, they were under
the tutelage neither of heaven nor heredity. Asso¬
ciates and not subjects, they were, as Sieyès put
it, represented by the same legislature. The source
and legitimacy of the power to which they sub¬
mitted lay in their decision to live together and
to create institutions that were common to all.
The exercise of that power, its limits and its
nature, were defined by z pact. In short, the
government was a property belonging to the
whole nation and of which princes were never
more than "ministers and trustees who held it
in usufruct". If a king misused the authority con¬
tractually delegated to him and treated it as pri¬
vate property, the nation, as Diderot had already
ALAIN FINKIELKRAUT,
French philosopher and
writer, is a professor at the
Ecole Polytechnique, Paris,
and director of Le Messager
européen magazine. An
English edition of his La
défaite de la pensée has
appeared under the title
The Undoing of Thought
(Claridge Press, 1989).
32
indicated in the Encyclopédie, was entitled to
release him from his oath as though he were "a
minor who had acted without full knowledge of
the facts".2 In other words, power no longer
originated from heaven but from below, from the
earth, the people, the union of wills that consti¬
tuted the collective nation.
The concept of the "nation", therefore, burst
upon the historical scene in opposition to both
the privileges of the nobility and royal absolu¬
tism. The social hierarchy was based on birth and
the monarchy on the divine right of kings. In
place of this view of society and this conception
of power, the French Revolution substituted the
image of a free and voluntary association.
Herein, for the conservatives, lay the origi¬
nal sin, the fatal presumption of the revolutiona¬
ries. In coming together with the aim of
establishing a constitution, they believed that
they were reaffirming the primordial pact from
which society had sprung. They took the social
contract as their authority to establish rule by
assembly. The defenders of traditional ways,
however, responded that there had never been
such a contract; a citizen, they maintained, did
not belong to his nation by virtue of the decrees
of his own sovereign will. This notion was no
more than a chimera.
Herder: universal values
vs. diversity
If the philosophers challenged the power of cus¬
tom, it was because they respected abstract, time¬
less principles. They did not hesitate "to ride
roughshod over prejudice, tradition, seniority,
popular consent, authority, in a word, all that
rules the minds of the masses",3 because, with
Plato, they placed the Good above all that exists.
To back up their assessment of the established
order they referred to an absolute standard, an
invariable, compelling notion of right. The
counter-revolutionaries, unwilling to follow them
to these heady heights, found their spokesman
in the German philosopher Herder.
Instead of testing facts against idealist stan¬
dards, Herder showed that these standards them¬
selves were nothing more than acts with a source
and a context. He replaced Goodness, Truth and
Beauty in their original local setting, removing
these eternal verities from their comfortable posi¬
tion in the heavens and bringing them down to
the tiny patch of earth on which they were born.
There are no absolutes, Herder declared; there
are only local values and fortuitously-formed
principles.
Throughout history, or at least from Plato
to Voltaire, human diversity has been weighed
and judged in the court of values; Herder placed
all universal values in the dock and had them tried
and condemned by human diversity.
It took the crushing defeat of the Prussian
army by Napoleon at the battle of Jena in 1806
and the napoleonic occupation to trigger the real
acceptance of these ideas. Germany, a piecemeal
agglomeration of petty principalities, regained its
sense of unity when faced with an all-conquering
France. Glorification of the collective identity
assuaged the mortification of military defeat and
the degrading subjection it entailed. The nation
compensated for the humiliation it was experien¬
cing by the rapturous discovery of its culture.
"Teutonomania" helped the German people to
forget their country's impotence. The universal
values proclaimed by France were challenged in
the name of a specific "Germanity" and poets and
jurists believed it to be their mission to attest to
this ancestral German spirit. The jurists vaunted
traditional solutions, customs, maxims and
sayings that formed the basis of Germanic law,
a collective work forged by the instinctive, un¬
voiced spirit of the nation. The poet's task was to
defend the national genius against the infiltration

of foreign ideas, to cleanse the German language
and to replace words of Latin origin with others
that were purely Germanic, to uncover the
buried treasury of popular songs and, by reviv¬
ing them, to recapture the fresh innocence and
perfection of a folklore which sang in unison of
the specific individuality of the people, untar¬
nished by contact with outside influences.
The philosophers of the Enlightenment de¬
fined themselves as "reason's peaceful law¬
makers".4 Advocates of truth and justice, they
propounded the equity of ideal law against
despotism and abuses. For the German Roman¬
tics everything was the reverse. Jurists and writers
took as their first target the notions of universal
reason and of ideal law. Their task was not to
fight against prejudice and ignorance; it was to
give expression to the irreducible particularity of
their culture, the unique soul of the people,
whose guardians they were.
Art, the bond of universality
On 31 January 1827, Goethe, then at the height
of his fame and in the evening of his life, was talk¬
ing to his faithful friend Johann Peter Eckermann
about a Chinese novel he was reading and which
struck him as quite remarkable. Whereas he had
expected the book to be overwhelmingly strange
and picturesque, he had found in it affinities with
his own verse epic Hermann und Dorothea and
with the novels of the English writer Samuel
Richardson. He was surprised not by the book's
exoticism, but by its lack of it. He was intrigued
by the fact that this text, a lone fragment from
a far-off, little-known land, was not a curiosity.
Through this unlikely contact between himself,
a patriarch of Europe, and this Chinese novel,
through the strange feeling of familiarity it
evoked in him, through this bond stretching
across a gulf of differences, he became aware of
the capacity of the mind to overstep social and
historical boundaries. Rooted in a particular soil,
anchored in an epoch, dated and placed, men
could still escape the fatality of their specific
situations. The divisions between them were not
irrevocable. There were placesi.e. books
where mankind could overcome its fragmenta¬
tion into a myriad of localized mental attitudes.
Dazzled by this realization, Goethe immedi¬
ately drew his conclusions from it. Since litera¬
ture was capable of vanquishing or transcending
differences of time, race, language and culture,
then literature should set to work to do so. This
opportunity became for him an ideal. This uto¬
pia, this somewhere beyond time and place, be¬
came his true vocation. Only those books which
went beyond questions merely of "when" and
"where" were of any value.
Goethe had learned from Herder that for
man, language, environment and history were not
secondary attributes or ornaments added to his
fundamental nature. He was very much aware
that no one can be freed by decree from the par
ticular circumstances of his or her birth. For him,
the ethnic group into which a person is born is
not a fortuitous aspect but a constituent element
of that person's existence. Yet Goethe, and this
is the essential point, refused to make a virtue of
necessity. That we were the issue of a particular
tradition and were formed by being part of a par¬
ticular nation was a fact to which, henceforth,
no one could be blind. In no way should this be
considered as a "value". It was a reality which
should be recognized but not worshipped. Breath¬
ing the same air as the other members of their
tribe, born, like everyone else, into a divided
world at a particular time in history, artists could
not claim right away to have achieved universal¬
ity. They instinctively shared the common way
of seeing and judging things and their personali¬
ties were, at first, in no way different from those
of the collective personality which was the source
both of their initial ideas and the words in which
they expressed them. Yet this was not a reason
to exaggerate their rootedness in a place or a lan¬
guage or to raise it to the level of an absolute.
Like Herder, Goethe recognized the con¬
straints on the mind that arose from its being
rooted in a particular community. Unlike Herd¬
er, however, he called upon art not to reinforce
this dependence but to transcend it. A writer's
works should go beyond the Volksgeist and not
be the expression of it. Human culture should un¬
der no circumstances be reduced to being the sum
of specific cultures. This is why Goethe called
upon poets, artists and thinkers to break out of
the national framework to which Herder and his
followers demanded that they should confine
themselves.
Towards a world culture
In his conversation with Eckermann, Goethe re¬
mained calmly confident, maintaining that time
was working towards the emergence of a world
literature. Nationalist fervour was declining as the
memory of the trauma of the napoleonic con¬
quest became blurred and as political romanticism
went into what seemed like an irreversible
decline. Furthermore, a world economic market
was coming into being which would put an end
to national isolationism. Henceforth, no segment
of humanity could live out its history under
wraps, sheltered from the entanglements of the
world economy. Once impermeable barriers
were becoming porous and it seemed that it
would not long be possible to exclude works of
the mind from the generalized commerce in
commodities.
History, as we know, was to give a more
capricious turn to events...
The oath on the Riitli
(1780), by the Swiss
Romantic painter Johann
Heinrich Fuseli (1741-1825),
portrays a legendary episode
in the liberation of
Switzerland.
1. Qu'est-ce que le Tiers-Etat?,
P.U.F. publishers, Paris, 1982.
2. Denis Diderot. Article on
"Autorité Politique" in'the
Encyclopédie.
3. Diderot. Article on
"Eclecticisme" in the
Encyclopédie.
4. Sebastien Roch Nicolas
Chamfort (1740M794), quoted in
Le sacre de l'écrivain by Paul
Bénichou. José Corti publishers,
Paris, 1973. 33
