Mob insurrections often turned
into popular festivals at key
moments in the French Revolution
which were later commemorated
by the state
T:
42
HE French Revolution ushered in an age
which proclaimed itself to be one of liberty,
equality and fraternity. This radical new
departure after centuries of monarchy did not
come about without incident. Between 1789 and
1794, the peopleabove all the people of Paris,
the centre of political powerconstantly took
to, the streets. Full of hope in the future, the
participants in this great upheaval turned it into
a popular festival which lasted for five years
almost without interruption.
The most striking symbol of this great surge
of revolutionary hope is to be found in the many
"trees of liberty" that were planted during these
years. In the countryside, a "maypole", whether
a tree or simply a post, was traditionally planted
on such occasions as weddings and harvest-time
as an emblem of fertility, joy and success. During
the Revolution, it became a symbol of the
destruction of feudalism, then the emblem of
liberty. A popular festival was inconceivable
without a tree of liberty. Each village planted its
own. Adorned with red, white and blue ribbons,
with cockades, flags, red bonnets or the text of
the Declaration of the Rights of Man, the tree
was the centrepiece of the gathering. Beneath its
branches liberty newly won was feted and rounds
were danced. It was held to be sacred. When it
was planted, a solemn ceremony was held which
often ended with farandoles and singing.
Let's dance the Carmagnole!
Long live the cannon's roar!
The songs which had long been used to
accompany popular dances had a special place in
the revolutionary landscape. More than 2,000 of
them have been listed for this period alone. In
a society in which half the adult male population
was illiterate, songs were a powerful vehicle of
revolutionary debate. The streets resounded to
patriotic, civic or satirical lyrics. Wars between
songspatriotic songs versus royalist songs
sometimes broke out. Street singers were
ubiquitous and attracted crowds which joined in
songs that usually featured old and well-known
tunes to which new words had been set.
People sang everywhere and on every possible
La Carmagnole. Anonymous print (1792).

a *
Liberty, Equality, Festivity!r
BY LAURENCE COUDART
43

1 he National Guard
accompany the people
on their triumphant return
to Paris from Versailles,
6 October 1789.
Anonymous etching.
1 he fountain of
Regeneration "among
the ruins of the Bastille"
during the festival
of 10 August 1793.
Contemporary engraving
by Isidore-Stanislas
Helman.
44
occasion: in public squares but also in popular
assemblies and meetings, in prisons, theatres, and
even at the tribune of the National Assembly.
Once when a citizen had sung at the bar Danton
inveighed against what he called this "singing
mania". "I have in my nature a good measure of
French gaiety," he cried, "but I demand that from
now on at the bar of this Assembly we should
only hear reason in prose." Everything was good
for a song: public events, swings of opinion, the
decrees of the National Assembly. All the
struggles of the time, internal and external, found
expression in song.
Every popular insurrection was punctuated
with singing. The great revolutionary "days"
sometimes ended with spontaneous festivals, as
on 5 and 6 October 1789, when almost 7,000
angry Parisian women marched on Versailles,
invaded the royal château and won satisfaction
for their demands.
Louis XVI was brought back to Paris amid
a dancing, yelling, laughing crowd. Thousands of
people accompanied the royal coach: "We're
bringing him!" they shouted at the bystanders.
Women seated on cannon, wearing the hats of
grenadiers of the National Guard who had come
to lend a hand, surrounded the king and several
wagons loaded with grain, flour and barrels of
wine. It was a day of rejoicing and fraternization
symbolized by the poplar branches which
protruded from the gun barrels and which some
carried in their hands. It was a day of gaiety, in
spite of the deaths of the bodyguards whose heads
were borne on pikes: woe betide anyone who
dared resist the sovereign people!
The heads were warnings rather than
trophies. "The Parisian," wrote Sébastien Mercier
in his Tableau de Paris, "makes a joke out of these
tumultuous days." It is true that the most
fantastic and outlandish tricks were played amidst
the shouts of a people which, Mercier added,
"wished to repair in one day the painful
repression which it had endured for several
centuries." A vast crowd took to the streets and
mingled with this strange procession, while
certain onlookers were struck dumb at the sight
of the "terrible gaiety" of the "multitude" which
surrounded the monarchthe last absolute king
to rule by divine right as if he were a prisoner.
These popular demonstrations inevitably call
to. mind the traditional carnival. The people
expressed their joy in impromptu dancing and
gesticulation. They treated with derision all that
societythe old societyheld sacred, giving vent
to a vast outpouring of revolutionary feeling. In
spite of the battles, the deaths and the blood, they
danced with mingled gaiety and fury. They
danced to exorcise their fear as they consigned
the past to oblivion.
During the insurrection of 10 August 1792
which inaugurated the Republican era, the Paris
mob sacked the château of the Tuileries, mas¬
sacred the Swiss guards who had fired on the
crowdtheir heads were brandished on pikes
and danced to celebrate its victory over the
monarchy. The Carmagnole, a famous song still
sung today, exalts that day of the "second revo¬
lution". Its refrain, "Let's dance the Carmagnole!
Long live the cannon's roar!", is a good illustra-

tion of those hours of joy and violence. Groups
dancing farandoles and rounds were seen again
on 21 January 1793 at the place of execution of
Louis XVI, known as "Louis the last".
The triumph of the goddess
of Reason
The popular festivals which made the strongest
impact on contemporaries were undoubtedly
the dechristianizing masquerades. The promul¬
gation of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy
in 1790 divided the French clergy into those who
agreed to swear an oath of loyalty to the new
Constitution and those who refused after the
Constitution had been condemned by the Pope.
An important section of the clergy gradually took
the side of the counter-revolution and for the
people the Church became an enemy of the new
liberty.
New saints, the "martyrs of liberty" who had
died for the Revolution, replaced the old. The
deputy Lepeletier de Saint-Fargeau, the journalist
Marat (author of the popular newspaper L'Ami
du peuple) and the municipal official Charlier
all three of whom were assassinated in
1793became the focus of popular veneration.
Their busts were displayed at crossroads, in
squares, meeting-places and theatres, and adorned
with flowers"civic crowns". Processions were
organized and hymns composed in their honour.
The names of these republican heroes were even
bestowed on new-born babies.
On 10 November 1793 a great festival in
honour of liberty was held in Notre-Dame
cathedral. An actress from the Opera played the
role of the goddess of Reason. While hymns were
sung, a procession of floats decked out with
flowers, of sans-culottes, children, members of
popular societies and official bodies accompanied
the goddess as she symbolically released a black
slave from his chains at the foot of an artificial
mountain erected outside the cathedral. The
attributes of royalty and religion were burned in
a bonfire around which people danced and drank
to fraternity until dawn. After this festival, Notre-
Dame became the Temple of Reason. The cult
of Reason soon spread throughout provincial
France, and the churches were secularized.
Such was the setting of the wave of dechris-
tianization which took place during the first six
months of the Year II of the Republic (autumn
1793-spring 1794). In Paris and in provincial
villages grotesque and disorderly processions
assembled. Rigged out in priestly garments,
dressed up as bishops or the Pope, riding donkeys,
pigs and goats which were also decked out with
crosses, mitres and Bibles, the participants in these
carnivalesque gatherings mocked the Church and
all established forms of power. Pantomimes were
staged, people drank from chalices, and made a
terrific din as they followed wagons laden with
holy-water stoups, confessionals, ciboriums,
statues of saints, crosses, the feudal titles of former
lords, carved fleurs de lys (symbols of the
monarchy) and effigies of foreign kings or the
Pope.... This hétéroclite cargo was unloaded
on to an immense bonfire. Everyone danced
farandoles around the fire or the tree of liberty
and drank wine"the holy water of the
Republicans".
No more kings, no more impostors,
liberty or death!
The French leaders were alarmed by these
manifestations of popular rejoicing in what were
simultaneously festivals of destruction and
regeneration. Efforts were made to bring order
and morality to outbursts which some compared
to orgies. In opposition to these atheistical
happenings, a festival of the Supreme Being (God)
was established in 1794. It was also intended to
celebrate the universal religion of nature in
which, it was solemnly declared, "the French
people recognizes the immortality of the soul".
It was as part of a Rousseauist desire to promote
social education and community spirit that the
festivals were arranged for and by the people
Above, the "Festival
of the Supreme Being",
staged by the artist
Jacques Louis David
and celebrated on the
Champ de Mars, Paris, on
8 June 1794. Contemporary
engraving.
1 op, Planting a Tree
of Liberty, a watercolour
by Etienne Béricourt
(18th century).
45

46
which was both "spectator and actor". The com¬
mittee of public instruction of the National
Assembly was still responsible for organizing
them.
The aim was to dramatize the break with the
old inegalitarian society and to glorify a new
social harmony by emphasizing the republican
"virtues": love of man and nature, of one's
homeland, of friendship and justice, but also
hatred for kings and tyrants.
Festivals such as those of 14 July and
10 August which commemorated the great
revolutionary "days" legitimized the events
whereby the Republic had been founded and the
break with the past. The festivals held on the
tenth day of every ten-day week were republican
liturgies which glorified the peoples of ancient
Greece and Rome of whom the French people
were the heirs. Civic songs and oaths were the
order of the day at these festivals which were
dedicated to modesty, truth and conjugal love and
were supposed to present the new code of
morality. The oaths were all more or less in the
same vein. This one was pronounced by the
people with arms outstretched towards a bust of
Brutus, who had assassinated Julius Caesar to save
the Roman Republic: "Brutus, we swear to fol¬
low thy example, to maintain the Republic one
and indivisible. No more kings, no more impos¬
tors, liberty forever, liberty or death!"
The festivals included such popular features
as trees of liberty and bonfires, as well as sans¬
culotte symbols such as the Phrygian bonnet and
the pike. They proclaimed a political and social
messagethe unity of the country.
The festival of 10 August 1793 in Paris,
commemorating the popular insurrection of 1792
which had brought about the fall of the
monarchy, was one of "Unity and Indivisibility",
a true republican slogan. Conceived as an old-
style procession, the festival brought together
the population in arms, arranged according to sex
and age. For hours the procession wended its way
through streets decorated with oak-leaves.
The first of several places where it halted was on
the site of the Bastille before a fountain of
Regeneration; the second was before an arch
of triumph representing the women of 5 and
6 October 1789 with cannon and laurel crowns.
The third halt was on the Place de la Révolution
(today Place de la Concorde), where thousands
of birds were released while emblems of the
monarchy and feudalism were thrown on to an
immense fire beside an effigy of Liberty carry¬
ing a pike and wearing a bonnet. Next stop was
the Invalides opposite a colossal statue represent¬



ing the French people, with cudgel and fasces,
slaying the hydra of aristocracy. The fifth and last
stop was at the Champ de Mars where, near the
altar of the patrie, 200,000 persons took the oath:
"Liberty, equality and fraternity, or death". The
festival ended after a fraternal banquet on the
grass, with the celebration of the victory of the
revolutionary armies over the combined armies
of the tyrants.
In spite of their official aspect and, in some
cases, their obscure symbolism, the national
festivals were a great popular success, above all
in the towns and cities. Opposing superstition
with reason, they made it possible to weld
together the new society by a civic cult which
gradually engrafted itself on to the old practices.
But in rural France the Fête-Dieu, the festival of
St. John and the patron saints were still celebrat¬
ed and retained the pagan character which they
had had long before the Revolution.
1 he Festival of Unity
and Indivisibility",
10 August 1793,
Place de la Révolution,
Paris. Painting
by Pierre Antoine Demachy
(1723-1807).
LAURENCE COUDART,
French historian, is a staff
member of the Institute of
the History of the French
Revolution at the Sorbonne,
Paris.
