HAFEZ
The golden age of Persian literature
BY CHARLES-HENRI DE FOUCHECOUR
View of the interior of the Regent's Mosque, Shiraz, Islamic Republic of Iran. Hafez was born in Shiraz and spent most of his life there.
SHAMS od-Din Mohammad (c. 1325-1389), known
throughout his life as Hafez, was born and died at Shiraz,
Persia, a town he rarely left during a lifetime of over
sixty years.
The year 1353 was a milestone in Hafez' life. He was near¬
ly thirty years old and his obvious talent had already earned
for him the patronage and protection of the Vizier Qevam
od-Din Hassan. In 1353, however, his protector died and was
replaced in the seat of power by a certain Mobarez od-Din
Mohammad, who imposed a rigorous religious and moral
régime that was totally at odds with the lifestyle of many of
the citizens of Shiraz. Poems by Hafez and others, ironizing
on the tyrant's rigid attitudes, were circulated surreptitiously.
Mohammad's reign lasted eleven years, until the day when
his son, Djalal od-Din Shah Shoja, rose up against him and took
his place. Shoja was to reign from 1364 to 1384. These were
golden years, especially for Persian literature, and it was in this
period, when he enjoyed the patronage of the ruler and of court
and state functionaries, that Hafez achieved his greatest liter¬
ary output. It was not long, however, before Hafez fell out of
favour again, for a period of some twelve years during which,
it appears, he frequented the courts of Ispahan and Yazd.
It remains difficult to establish an accurate chronology of
the poems of Hafez on the basis of these facts. The details of
the poet's life can only be deduced, and then very summarily,
by taking the political life of his period as a starting point and
searching in his works for allusions to that life. What else do
we know of him? Many legends, but virtually nothing of which
we can be certain. In a manner typically Persian, he was very
discreet about himself and he may have lived his true life else¬
where than in the court circles in which he earned his living.
Here, for the record, are a few more facts about him. The
13

Seated in a garden in flower, a monarch reads a manuscript as a servant pours him some wine
and musicians play. This miniature from a Divan by Hafez, published in the 16th century,
accompanies one of the poet's ghazals (poems).
date of his death, the year 792 of the Hegira (1389 AD), is
known to us from the introduction to an anthology of poems



by Hafez compiled by an anonymous copyist (later identified
as a man called Golandam). There is no indication that he ful¬
filled any particular function at the court, not even that of poet.
Could it be that he worked as a teacher at a Qur'anic school,
as his pseudonym Hafez ("he who has learned the Qur'an by
heart") has led many, to believe? In Tashkent, there is a
manuscript copy of the works, in five volumes, of the poet
Amir Khosrow Dehlavi (1253-1325) which is signed by Hafez
and dated 1355. Perhaps Hafez was himself working as a copyist
at that time. One of his ghazals (lyric poems of from six to
fifteen couplets) laments the death of a child; Hafez, then, like
Ferdowsi or Nezami, wept for the death of a dear one.
Although the elements that can be gleaned from the poet's
works are insufficient to provide even the skeleton of a
biography, it should be noted that, as the British critic
G.M. Wickens has pointed out, his Divan is much more directly
related than it was once widely thought to the court circles in
which the author moved at the time of its composition, and
which provided the patronage essential to literary life.
The works of Hafez mark the apogee of the lyric poetry
produced by the giants of Persian literature. The borrowings
he made from the works of his forerunners are gracefully trans¬
formed and exemplify his mastery of the finest figures of the
Persian poetic tradition; he conjures with them, turning them
upside down and giving them new life. The intellectual skill
with which he gives meaning and implosive force to all these
14 	

figures, simply and as though at play, is such that a hearing
of a ghazal by Hafez is an occasion of high rejoicing. Each figure
is set within the poem in such a way as to give off an endless
series of allusive ripples. Properly to understand Hafez, there¬
fore, we must first place him as a poet.
A ghazal is a poem, that is to say, in the spirit of the time,
a formal construction within which a number of propositions
can be arranged. This construction has two constituent ele¬
ments: a group of scanning lines with a single rhyme. Each line,
or beyt, has two scanning sections each with the same metre.
The metre is the same throughout the poem. The two sections
of the first beyt rhyme with each other.
Consisting normally of eight to twelve beyt, this poetic form
is to be found among the earliest examples of Persian litera¬
ture that have come down to us. Short, highly elaborated, it
was the preferred form in which to speak of love and to sing
the praises of wine. Because of its formal constraints, the ghazal
is very demanding, obliging the poet to develop a technique
and an artistry by which he will for ever be judged.
It was in the twilight of his career, or, more often, after his
death, that a poet's works were brought together in a compila¬
tion known as a divan. Hafez' Divan consisted basically of
ghazals,which was rather unusual, since Persian poets normal¬
ly write their poems in a variety of forms.
However, as it happens, we do not have the authentic texts
of Hafez. Of course, a ghazal was written down by its author,
but it was also recited aloud, with all the niceties of accentua¬
tion, pauses, voice manipulation and articulation. Thus we have
several scattered ghazals of Hafez that were taken down in¬
dividually in writing during his lifetime. Perhaps the author
of the introduction to the Divan mentioned above was the very
first compiler of his works. It would seem, however, that col¬
lections of Hafez' ghazals circulated both before and after his
death and that, as they circulated, he made alterations to some
of his poems.
The two oldest anthologies (consisting of forty-three and
thirty-six works) date from 1404 and before 1408. The first more
or less complete manuscript of the Divan (455 ghazals) dates
back to 1410. But a century after the death of Hafez, there had
been a multiplication of both manuscripts and ghazals (up to
725) and the manuscript tradition had become corrupted. To¬
day, there are numerous printed editions of Hafez' works. They
include a notable critical edition by Parviz Natel Khanlari, pub¬
lished in Teheran in 1983 and based on fourteen ancient and
reputable manuscripts.
Thousands of studies of Hafez' works have been published
in many languages. The central question that they address has
been, and continues to be, the meaning that should be given
to Hafez' poetry. Is it hedonistic, mystical, or pure lyricism?
As early as the fifteenth century, the historian Khandamir
reported that, one day, Shah Shoja reproached Hafez for the
lack of homogeneity in his ghazals, each of which, he said, spoke
of wine, then of mysticism and then of the Beloved One. To
16th-century miniature depicting the all-conquering Tamerlane
(1336-1405). He may have met Hafez at Shiraz in 1387,
when he was seeking to gather sages and poets around him at
his court at Samarkand.
15

jj$k ,
"%.
7'; fX
*s**»
*
Map of Shiraz and its surroundings from "The Book of Highways and
Kingdoms" (Kitab al-masalik wa I-mamalik), by al-Istakhri or
al-Farisi (10th century).
which Hafez is reported to have replied that all this was true,
but that he was the only poet whose ghazals were famous
throughout the world.
Critical studies of his works were first undertaken in the
Ottoman empire and took the form of commentaries. Those
of Sham'i and of Sorouri stressed Hafez' mysticism and by the
sixteenth century, in the time of the Safavids, this had become
the accepted interpretation in both Persia and India. The great
sage Soudi, who also wrote commentaries on the works of Sa'di,
restricted himself to a sober study of Hafez based on grammat¬
ical analysis and, in so doing, gave a lead to European critics.
Modern commentators on Hafez abound. The rich scope
of the ghazals is such that none of the accepted interpretations
has succeeded in excluding the others, an exclusive interpreta¬
tion being taken as a sign of weakness.
Two major elements attract our attention. The first is that,
very often, it is difficult to say whether the person to whom
Hafez is addressing his poem is the object of his praise (mam-
douh), his love (mahboub) or his adoration (ma'boud): prince or
friend, beloved one, or God. The second is that, despite the
seeming disconnectedness of many of the ghazals, they all have
a subtle unity which becomes apparent in the atmosphere they
exude. As a number of commentators have expressed it: the
intertwining of figures and allusions around a few central themes
(Wickens); a symphony of themes (Arberry); a hidden coher¬
ence (Stolz); a delicately rational lyricism (Bausani); a symbol¬
ic structure taken to the third degree and capable of offering
incomparably rich resonances (Lazard).
The ghazal has much in common with a diamond, bringing
out all the sparkle of the poetic imagery accumulated in the
literary tradition, and, with a prism, diffracting all the mean¬
ings with which word sounds have become loaded over the cen¬
turies. The commentator Nasrollah Pourdjavadi has aptly



demonstrated the weight of mysticism with which the word
"glance", for example, has become charged as used in the writ¬
ings of Ahmad Ghazali and retained in the sure hand of Hafez.
And the same applies to countless other imagesa glass of wine,
Noah's Ark, a tavern, a mirror, the blood, the wise man, the
libertine, the face ...
Another commentator, Anne-Marie Schimmel, has rightly
spoken of the circular nature of Hafez' ghazals. The mind of
the poet does not focus on a single point, it transports the
listener into the heart of his own realities and breathes mean¬
ing into them. If Hafez succeeds in speaking to each one of us,
it is because his language encompasses two spheres, the world¬
ly and the spiritual, to both of which he belongs. In Hafez'
writing there is a kind of accomplishment of unification, the
towhid at the heart of all Persian mysticismthe reality of hu¬
man life, of love, of wine and, especially, of the prince are in
fact but a metaphor for spiritual reality.
CHARLES-HENRI DE FOUCHECOUR, of France, is professor of classical
Persian literature (10th-15th century) at the University of Paris III (New
Sorbonne). His most recent publication is a study of the concept of morality
in the Persian literature of the 9th to the 13th century.
16 	
