A unique source of contemporary
information about Genghis Khan
and the empire he founded, the
Mongolian national epic blends
folklore and legend with a vivid
account of steppe society in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
The Secret History
of the Mongols
BY SHAGDARYN BIRA
Alan-qua, the legendary
mother of the clan of
Genghis Khan.
36
KJpposite page, Genghis
Khan is shown receiving
distinguished visitors in this
Persian miniature
illustrating Rashid al-Din 's
Jami at-tawarikh, an
important source for
Mongolian history.
JL HE Secret History of the Mongols (Mongyol-un
ni'uca tobca'an) is the earliest surviving literary
monument of the Mongolian people. Its author
is unknown, ?nd although it is widely thought
to have been written in 1240, both its original
title and the exact date of its composition are still
matters for debate.
What is beyond doubt is the fact that The
Secret History is a historical and literary document
of major importance. Not only does it recount
the genealogy of the early Mongol khans and the
life and times of Genghis Khan, founder of a uni¬
fied Mongol state, it also paints a vivid and ac¬
curate picture of the nomadic Mongol way of life
and provides rich source material for an under¬
standing of Mongol society in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries.
Soviet Academician Boris Vladimirtsov has
described The Secret History as a "history-
chronicle" retold in epic style and "impregnat¬
ed with the aroma of the steppe". A British scho¬
lar, David Morgan, has pointed out that whatever
hesitations historians may feel about the work
as a strictly accurate record of historical events,
there can be no doubt that it provides a unique
and authoritative insight into the way of life, pat¬
terns of thought and beliefs of the thirteenth-
century Mongols.
Genghis Khan, the warrior
who united the Mongol tribes
The Secret History may be divided into three
partsa genealogy of the ancestors of Genghis
Khan, stories about the life of Genghis Khan, and
a short section on his son and successor Ogödei.
The first part records the legendary history
of Mongolia as reconstructed from very ancient
oral traditionsmyths and legends, stories and ac¬
counts of historical events. It opens with the
legend that the forefather of the Mongolian peo¬
ple was "a bluish wolf which was born having
[his] destiny from Heaven above", whose "spouse
was a fallow doe".1 The image of the wolf ap¬
pears in the mythology of many Eurasian peo¬
ples, closely connected with ancestor cults of the
tribal chief or the founder of a clan.
The following well-documented genealogy of
the Mongol khans exalts the glory of the "Golden
Horde" and is the genealogical basis for studies
of the early history of the Mongolian people.
The main theme is developed in the second
part of the epic, in which legend and myth give
way to more reliable historical data. Although
the narrative continues in the epic style, it begins
to assume the characteristics of a chronicle. An
ancient Eastern system of chronology, based on a
twelve-year animal cycle, is used to date events in
the history of the numerous Mongolian tribes and
their unification into a single state by Genghis
Khan, the central figure of the story.
Genghis Khan is portrayed not only as a

38
legendary hero and warrior, the embodiment of
the "steppe aristocracy", but also as a great po¬
litical figure and statesman who decided by his
"iron will" to put an end to the discord among
the Mongol tribes, where anarchy prevailed:
The Heaven with stars
Was turning round about.
The many peoples were at strife.
Not entering into their beds,
They were spoiling one another.
The earth with crust
Was turning backward and forward.
The whole nation was at strife.
Although the main hero of the story is
Genghis Khan, one of the greatest conquerors in
world history, the author does not seem to at¬
tach great significance to his military campaigns
against other countries, as if he had deliberately
ignored that aspect of Genghis' career. On the
other hand, he constantly stresses to readers and
Kjenghis Khan. Painting
on silk of the Yuan period
(13th-14th centuries).
listeners the benefits and privileges to be enjoyed
within a centralized Mongolian state.
The third, much shorter, part of The Secret
History summarizes the reign of Ogödei
(1228-1241), the second great khan of Mongolia.
It is thought to be a later addition to the main
text.
The cult of Light
A work of great literary merit, The Secret Histo¬
ry is a unique phenomenon in the history of
nomadic peoples. It has been compared to monu¬
ments of world literature such as Homer's Iliad
and Odyssey, Alexander Romance literature, the
French Chanson de Roland, and the Russian Lay
of Igor's Campaign.
The Mongolian people lived at a crossroads
of world communications and it would be a mis¬
take to assume that such an epic could have been

created by them in isolation from other civiliza¬
tions. The script in which it was written had its
origins in Phoenician, Aramaic and Sogdian sys¬
tems of writing. Close examination of the text
reveals traces of religious and mythological con¬
cepts of ancient Oriental peoples, especially the
influence of the Zoroastrian-Manichaean cult of
Light. This cult is reflected in the Mongolian
legend of the immaculate conception of Alan-qua,
the foremother of Genghis Khan's clan, by the
"Father-Light". Alan-qua recounts her experience
in the epic:
Every night, a bright yellow man entered by
the light of the hole at the top or [by thai] of the
door top ofthe tent and rubbed my belly. His light
was wont to sink into my belly. When he went out,
like a yellow dog he was wont to crawl out by the
beams of the sun or moon.
Scholars have shown that some of the tales in



The Secret History are of very ancient origin and
have a close affinity with Central Asian and Eu¬
rasian legends. The following tale of the five
arrow-shafts tied into a bundle, for example,
recalls a story that was current among ancient Ira¬
nian peoples, particularly the Scythians:
One day, in the spring, while boiling the dried
[flesh of] a sheep, making these herfive sons.. .to sit
in a row, she gave unto each [of them] a single ar¬
row shaft, saying "Break [h\'"...each [ofthem] brake
and cast away. Again, she boundfive arrow shafts
together in a bundle and gave [them unto them],
saying "Break [them]!"Allfive, holding, every per¬
son, the five arrow shafts bound in a bundle, were
in turn not able to break...
She said, 'Ye, myfive sons, were born ofan only
belly. If, like the five arrow shafts ofa little while
ago, ye be each alone, like those single arrow shafts,
[ye] will each [ofyou] easily be broken by any one.
If together [ye] be of one purpose like those arrow
shafts bound in a bundle, how will ye easily be
[broken] by any one?"
Plutarch tells how the Scythian king Skilur
(second to first century BC) gathered all his sons
around him before his death and asked each of
them to break a bundle of darts. When they re¬
fused, the king broke the darts one by one, with
the admonition that, united, his sons would be
invincible.
\jenghis Khan (left) and
Ogödei, his son and
successor.
SHAGDARYN BIRA,
Mongolian historian, is a
member of his country's
Academy of Sciences. He
has published many studies
on the history and culture
of medieval Mongolia,
including a book on
Mongolian historiography
from the 13th to the 17th
centuries which has been
translated into Russian and
Chinese.
A sourcebook
for Oriental historians
Ever since it was written, The Secret History has
been known throughout the Orient, and for 750
years it has been one of the main sources for the
history of other countries of Central Asia as well
as Mongolia. It has been used as a source in fun¬
damental historical works of the Orient such as
fami at-tawarikh, the universal history compiled
by the Persian author Rashid al-Din (1247-1318),
and the Yuan shih ("History of the Yuan Dy¬
nasty"), the famous Chinese chronicle of the
Mongol empire in China (thirteenth to four¬
teenth century).
As a result of Rashid al-Din's work, most of
the contemporary information recorded in The
Secret History has been retold and reinterpreted
in many important historical writings of Central
Asian countries, including those of the Mughal
empire in India.
The Akbarnama, the chronicle of the em¬
peror Akbar and his ancestors written by the
great Mughal historian Abu-1-Fazl (1551-1602),
gives a detailed version of the Alan-qua story
which compares Alan-qua with the Virgin Mary,
raises her to the rank of Mother of God, and
urges: "If you listen to the tale of Mary, believe
the same of Alanguwa (Alan-qua)".2 Abu-1-Fazl
also does his best to prove that Akbar was
descended from the legendary foremother of the
Mongols.
The Secret History has also been esteemed in
China as a valuable source for the history of the
Mongolian people, and fourteenth-century
Chinese bibliophiles actually helped to preserve
the epic for posterity by transcribing into Chinese
characters the original Mongol text, which has
not survived, and by making verbatim and
abridged translations. In 1866, a first Russian
translation of The Secret History was made from
the abridged Chinese version, and since then the
Mongolian masterpiece has become available to
the international academic community.
1. Quotations from The Secret History ofthe Mongols, Vol. I, trans¬
lated into English and edited by Francis W. Cleaves. Harvard
University Press, 1982.
2. From The Akbarnama o/Ahu-l-FazI, translated into English by
H. Beveridge, Delhi, 1972. 39
