The Gray Tree (1912), oil on canvas by Piet Mondrian. Haags Gemeentemuseum, The Hague (Netherlands).



Why we need forests
The conservation and management of
tropical forests are matters of vital impor¬
tance for the peoples of the countries in
which they are situated (some 1 ,600 mil¬
lion people, about a third of the world's
population, live between the Tropics of
Cancer and Capricorn).
With their unique diversity of plant and
animal life, tropical forests represent an
immense, renewable source of food, fibre,
medicines and fuel. If properly managed
they can provide a wealth of useful prod¬
ucts and values.
They provide timber and paper and are
an important source of foreign currency
earnings for tropical countries.
The inappropriately-named minor forest
products (all products other than timber)
can also be of considerable commercial
importance. Rattan, for example, has án
estimated annual value in world trade of
$1,200 million and tends to benefit local
villagers much more directly than many
timber operations.
Other forest products include bamboo,
resins, food, medicinal plants, phar¬
maceutical products, mushrooms and
honey. One conservative estimate values
the annual trade in these products at
$10,000 million.
Tropical forests fulfil other important
functions. They help in the regulation of the
quality and flow of water and they protect
soils from erosion. They are also of great
cultural, spiritual and aesthetic signifi¬
cance to the peoples of the tropics.
Forests are of concern to the world com¬
munity as a whole. They affect the climate
by helping to maintain the Earth's temper¬
ature and are a significant element in the
Earth's carbon budget.
The rare trees and plants of which they
consist constitute a gene pool whose value
has only just begun to be explored in the
search for drugs to cure some of man¬
kind's most serious diseases.
10

Human beings grew up in forests; we
have a natural affinity for them. How
lovely a tree is. straining toward the sky.
Its leaves harvest sunlight to photo-
synthesize (...) Trees are great and
beautiful machines, powered by sun¬
light, taking in water from the ground
and carbon dioxide from the air, con¬
verting these materials into food for
their use and ours. The plant uses the
carbohydrates it makes as an energy
source to go about its planty business.
And we animals, who are ultimately
parasites on the plants, steal the car¬
bohydrates so we can go about our
business. In eating plants we combine
the carbohydrates with oxygen dis¬
solved in our blood because of our
penchant for breathing air, and so ex¬
tract the energy that makes us go. In
the process we exhale carbon dioxide,
which the plants then re-cycle to make
more carbohydrates. What a marvel¬
lous co-operative arrangement -plants
and animals each inhaling the other's
exhalations, a kind of planet-wide,
mutual, mouth-to-stoma resuscitation,
the entire elegant cycle powered by a
star 150 million kilometres away.
11
