THE QUEST FOR AUTHENTICITY
DURING the past few years, there
has been a heightening of interest
in the question of textual authen¬
ticity, a question to which little attention
had been paid previously except by phi¬
lologists, who studied only classical,
medieval and Renaissance texts. Such
scholars believed that contemporary texts
lacked the value and distinction which an¬
cient documents possess because they be¬
long to a recognized literary tradition.
The writer betrayed
Most readers were indifferent to the
question of authenticity, and cared little
whether the novel, poem or essay they
were reading corresponded exactly to
what the author had written and intend¬
ed to publish. And almost invariably the
published text not only did not represent
the author's intention, but altered and oc¬
casionally even betrayed it. In the past,
it was easy to blame a scatterbrained cop¬
yist or compositor, or the interference of
a censor. It was up to the philologist to
restore the text to its original form, or at
least produce a version as close as possi¬
ble to the presumed intention of the
author. This task consisted in detecting
and eliminating the interferences, addi¬
tions and alterations to which these texts
had been subjected for centuries due to
faulty transmission and inaccurate trans¬
lations and interpretations.
In the case of nineteenth- and
twentieth-century literature, scholarly in¬
difference and threats to freedom of
speech and opinion have introduced more
distortions into original texts than those
inflicted on medieval works. Ideological
intolerance, overt or concealed censor¬
ship by writers and editors, the disappear¬
ance or wanton destruction of
manuscripts and rough drafts
occasionally even their acquisition by
booklovers who jealously hoard them
piracy or the publication of works
without the author's control, have often
altered the conditions in which these
works were conceived, written, transmit¬
ted and published.
Readers and scholars have now
changed their attitude. Some have under¬
stood the importance of the integrity of
literary works and increasingly demand
accurate editions endorsed by informed
Scene of a performance of The Barber of Seville (1816), by Gioacchino Rossini (1792-1868),
at the Festival of Aix-«n-Provence, France.
criticism. Othersfrom the outset or af¬
ter a life dedicated to the laborious recon¬
stitution of texts ravaged by timehave
discovered the satisfaction of working on
texts for which, in most cases, the process
of elaboration from the first draft to the
final version can be reconstituted.
The establishment of real or pre¬
sumed authenticity is of fundamental im¬
portance. A civilization like ours, based
essentially on books, that is on the writ¬
ten word, requires a text to reflect,
without excessive distortion or deforma¬
tion, all the conventions of the social con¬
tract, the ideologies, the cultural
traditions, the very structure of society.
Law books and holy scriptures, classical
and contemporary literature, historical
documents and music scores, must all be
error-free if clear and precise norms are
to be set and the legacy of which we are
the beneficiaries and the guardians is to
be preserved intact.
The text transformed between
1st draft and final proofs
There is a big difference between con¬
temporary literary texts and those of the
past. In the case of the latter, manuscripts
and printed versions rarely correspond to
what the author wished to say, because
they were copied or printed without his
control, often long after they had been
written. In the case of the former, one or
several versions usually exist, all original,
corresponding to different stages in the
14

BY GIUSEPPE TAVANI
For want of a horse
The pre-text consists of everything
that goes into the creation of a work of
literature, everything that reflects the
writer's imagination and vision. This
complex and ever-changing pattern of ele¬
ments abandoned and retrieved, of frag-
\\\"*,&*"-- HB
i
Sheet from the
manuscript of the
opera La Bohème
(1896), by the Italian
composer Giacomo
Puccini (1858-1924),
above.
composition of the text.
This difference reveals one charac¬
teristic of a work of literature which has
been hitherto ignored or neglected.
Manuscripts which show how many
transformations it undergoes while it is
being created indicate that a work of liter¬
ature is never one-dimensional and is
something more than the current edition
or even the fair copy that the writer
delivers to the printer. On the contrary,
every work of literature has several
dimensions. It takes shape slowly, some¬
times very slowly, as a result of a series
of transformations and variations which
form what might be called the "pre¬
text" all the textual material and docu¬
ments, from the first draft to the proofs
corrected by the author, and subsequent
editions where further changes occurred.
IV-
ments of writing covered with later
additions or abridged to the point of ob¬
scurity, of dissected and reassembled state¬
ments, of passages which themselves do
not change but whose meaning changes
as they are moved around, is a source of
valuable information. It is possible to find
in the pre-text not only clarification of
the published work, but also the mechan¬
isms of its creation. A reading of the
rough drafts allows us to verify, for ex¬
ample, the extent to which the author's
modifications of a work can be useful for
its interpretation, and how well they har¬
monize with or modify its context and
in which sense.
y«*.jl.*
The first stanza of Alfred de Musset's
poem Venise, which originally read Dans
Venise la rouge /pas un cheval qui bouge
/pas un pêcheur dans l'eau /pas un falot
("In Venice the red / nary a horse was
moving / nor a fisherman in the water
/ nor a lantern") was modified by the
poet who, perhaps realizing that horses
are not to be seen in Venice, replaced
"horse" by "boat" (nary a boat was mov¬
ing). In so doing, as a modern critic has
pointed out, "he substituted an incoher¬
ent image for a coherent one which
opened the poem with a synthesis deve¬
loped in the following stanzas", and this
substitution "eliminates the contrast of
15

Right, page 8 of the
manuscript of Piú che
l'amore ("Only Love")
by the Italian novelist
Gabriele d'Annunzio
(1863-1938). Above,
D'Annunzio (at right
in photo) with the
French writer and
politician Maurice
Barres, during the
First World War.
drafts, notes and successive revisions must
be used not only to clarify the meaning
of the text and interpret it as correctly as
possible, but also to give the reader an op-
P
déficha
k
VtHW
%^mV mL"U',,A ,AMm¿ > * U ?**
T ' * ;.,.)(liï, ,\i**n*. t> T"'1^ ** '*"
body of original material and making a
chronological classification of the
author's alterations to the text through
the analysis of paper, ink, pens and hand¬
writing. The methods and techniques of
this procedure have given rise to a new
discipline: manuscriptology.
These operations are often so com¬
plex that they are beyond the capacities
of a single person, and most critical edi¬
tions of contemporary literary
manuscripts are the work of teams which
almost invariably use computers to help
them perform a task which nevertheless
takes several years. Cases of this kind in¬
clude the Corpus Flaubertianum on which
Giovanni Bonaccorso and his collabora¬
tors are currently working; the drafts of
Marcel Proust's A la recherche du temps
perdu (Remembrance ofThings Past) which
a team of scholars at the Institute of
Modern Texts and Manuscripts at the
French National Centre for Scientific
Research has been studying for several
years; James Joyce's Ulysses; Franz Kaf¬
ka's Schriften, Tagebücher, Briefe ("Writ¬
ings, Diaries and Letters") in addition to
the contemporary Latin-American works
which are being studied by over a
hundred teams of specialists one for
each of the planned critical editions be¬
ing prepared under the scientific direction
of an international committee (see arti¬
cle page 18).
the earth (horse) and water (fisherman),
weakens the spatial notations and des¬
troys the totalizing function of the first
stanza"1.
A service to the reader
Of course, if all variants are signifi¬
cant, they do not all necessarily modify
only a short segment of text, as in the case
of de Musset's boat. The alterations may
involve entire sentences, even paragraphs
or chapters. Sometimes, the minor vari¬
ants, in addition to the modifications that
each one independently introduces in the
text, may be so numerous that they re¬
quire, no less than the major variants, sus¬
tained and constant attention. A modern
edition of a literary work cannot ignore
this textual mobility. Manuscripts, rough
portunity to grasp its dynamism. In the
case of censored or self-censored texts, a
return to the pre-text usually makes it
possible to establish the authentic word¬
ing through the identification and elimi¬
nation of superfluous additions and the
re-establishment of fragments of text
banished by the censor's blue pencil.
The new science
of manuscriptology
The first problem raised by rough
drafts is that of decipherment. A glance
at the manuscript of Gustave Flaubert's
story Un Coeur Simple is enough to show
that decipherment is not alwayi easy. A
second problem, in this case of a strati-
graphic nature, is that of retracing the his¬
tory of the text by taking the complex
The tribulations of Ulysses
It required seven years of work to
produce the critical edition of Ulysses and
correct the 5,000 errors of the current edi¬
tion, which reproduces the very corrupt
text of the eighth edition (1960). The mis¬
fortune which has pursued this text since
the first edition of 1922 is not unusual in
the history of printing. Joyce's complaint
in a letter to Harriet Shaw Weaver"I
am extremely irritated by all those
printer's errors ... Are these to be per¬
petuated in future editions? I hope
not."is of a kind frequently found in
writers' correspondence, even with seem¬
ingly less justification, such as matters of
punctuation, which is more often subject
to the house style of printers, rather than
the author's wishes. Thus, Jean-Jacques
Rousseau wrote on 17 June 1758 to Marc-
16

Michel Rey, with regard to his Lettre à
d'Alembert sur les spectacles: "there are
however suspension points added after
certain words on pages 27 and 48. I un¬
derstand why they have been put there,
especially the last ones, but I don't like
them, and would ask you not to do so
again, unless found in the copy. I also find
too many commas. Different divisions
within the same sentence should not be
marked by the same punctuation. It com¬
pletely obstructs the meaning"2.
These examples reveal how persis¬
tent authors can be in their quest for the
ideal printing which entirely respects
their stylistic requirement. This ideal to¬
day's critical editions aspire to achieve.
They also illustrate the value of writers'
private correspondence for re-establishing
the authentic textual order wished by
them.
Authentic scores
ofgreat operas
It is obvious that the problem of re¬
establishing the authenticity of a text is
not limited to literature, but concerns all
creative works, including music scores.
For the past thirty years, original scores
(or at least transcriptions controlled
directly by the author) have been reco¬
vered and critical editions prepared by
research teams working directly on the
manuscript sources and first editions, in
order to locate alterations and additions
introduced by the transcribers and the
performers, to eliminate them and to
bring the text back to its original form.
This tremendous undertaking has begun
to bear fruit. Critical editions of // Bar¬
biere di Siviglia, Cenerentola, La Gazza
ladra, L'ltaliana in Algeri, Tancredi, Il Sig-
nor Bruschino, and // Turco in Italia have
recently been published by the Fondazi-
one Rossini at Pesaro, and editions of
Verdi's Rigoletto, Emani and Requiem
Mass have been published by the Institu¬
to di Studi Verdiani at Parma, the Ricor-
di publishing house and the University
of Chicago. A critical edition of Pucci¬
ni's La Boheme and of Bellini's Norma are
in preparation.
Texts restored by musicologists are
usually favourably received by the pub¬
lic and critics. The critical edition of The
Barber ofSeville was performed 192 times
in 1984 and 178 times in 1985, while the
traditional score was only used for 44 and
57 representations respectively. Prefer-
«
' 1 flri.fF