Gorky Street,
fifty years
of change

VJORKY Street, Moscow, formerly known as
Tverskaya Street, after the city of Tver (now Kali¬



nin) to which it led, epitomizes the changes the
Soviet capital has experienced over the past fifty
years. As Tverskaya Street it was the main trad¬
ing link between Moscow and Tver, one of the
oldest cities of Russia. Lined with luxury shops,
their signs written in both French and Russian,
it was at that time one of Moscow's liveliest
thoroughfares. It was here that Muscovites had
their first experience of traffic jams, and photo¬
graphs taken at the beginning of the century show
among the bustle of horse-drawn vehicles and
trams the first automobiles imported into Russia.
Despite its commercial importance, Tver¬
skaya Street, like most Moscow streets, was nar¬
row and twisting. For although by the mid-1920s
the city had a population of some two million
inhabitants, it had more the air of an overgrown
village than of the great capital it was to become.
This large village was clearly ill-suited for its role
as capital of the Soviet Union and, in the immedi¬
ate aftermath of the Revolution, a multitude of
plans for its redevelopment were put forward,
ranging from a first project, which would have
made of Moscow a sort of Roman forum but
which never got beyond the blueprint stage, to
a plan dating from 1935, some provisions of
which are still in force. The 1935 plan revolved
around Tverskaya Street, by then renamed
Gorky Street.
A 'model' thoroughfare
The objective of the 1935 plan, the Plan for the
Reconstruction of Moscow, as it was called, was
to make Moscow "a model communist city". It
put an end to the often stormy quarrels between
those who favoured moderate urban decentrali¬
zation and the protagonists of total decentraliza¬
tion. It confirmed the concentric structure of
Moscowopposed by the modernistsand
turned Gorky Street into a "model" thorough¬
fare. Execution of the plan was entrusted to the
architect Arkady Mordvinov who, in the ideo¬
logical struggles of the early 1930s, was responsi¬
ble for the victory of the concept of socialist
realism in architecture over the theories of the
constructivists, who favoured a modern form of
architecture close to that of Le Corbusier or the
German Bauhaus school.
In practical terms, the operation consisted
1 verskaya Street (now Gorky Street)
at the turn of the century.
/»
^&£^7»
> _
»-' '

m
¿\
Larger-than-life statue
of workers from
a collective farm.
Aloscow's Main Telegraph
Office on Gorky Street.
basically of widening and straightening Gorky
Street. Several buildings considered to be of lit¬
tle interest were demolished and replaced by
more imposing structures in the new official style,
a mixture of Italian Renaissance and Russian Im¬
perial. Others were detached from their founda¬
tions, jacked up and transported to new sites on
frameworks of railway lines. By the eve of World
War II, Gorky Street looked much as it does to¬
day and was referred to as the "Champs Elysées
of Moscow".
Gastronom No. 1



Going north up Gorky Street, from the junction
with Marx Prospekt to the headquarters of the
Moscow City Soviet, whole chapters of the his¬
tory of the city unfold. The typically fin-de-siècle
National Hotel housed the members of the Soviet
Government and their families when Moscow be¬
came the capital of the USSR. The taller annexe,
built some fifteen years ago a few metres from
the old building, breaks the roofline established
in the 1930s. During the pre-war years, militants
and administrators of the Comintern occupied
the Lux Hotel until the Third International was

dissolved in 1943. Farther on is the elaborate win¬
dow display of Gastronom No. 1, the pre-
Revolution delicatessen in which caviare from the
Caspian lay cheek by jowl with foie gras from
France. Elisseiev, the owner of Gastronom, later
emigrated to Paris.
Next stop is a large rectangular square on the



Gorky Street side of which stands the headquart¬
ers of the Moscow Soviet, an eighteenth-century
building designed by the great Russian architect
Matvey F. Kazakov. Opposite stands the Marx,
Engels, Lenin Institute. Built in 1926, its unclut¬
tered style heralds the beginning of modernism
in the Soviet Union. Together with the Main
Telegraph Office (1927), also in Gorky Street,
it is one of the buildings whose completion
coincided with the tenth anniversary of the
Revolution.
The square is the site of two historic monu¬
ments: a statue of Prince Yuri Dolgoruky, the
legendary founder of Moscow, and the offices of
the newspaper Izvestia ("News"). Resolutely
jMoscow City Hall. In
foreground, statue of Prince
Yuri Dolgoruky, Moscow's
legendary founder.
ANATOLE KOPP,
French architect, is a
professor emeritus at the
University of Paris VIII and
a specialist in modern
architecture, especially that
of the Soviet Union. The
latest of his many published
works, a history of Soviet
architecture from 1918 to
1980, is scheduled for
publication in 1990.
modern in style, the Izvestia building dates from
the late 1920s. Its windows were filled with
photographs, graphics and displays heralding a
new era.
Ancient buildings and modern constructions
are, however, the exception. Taken as a whole,
Gorky Street is the work of Arkady Mordvinov
and his collaborators. More than any other
grouping of buildings in Moscow it epitomizes
a bygone architectural era. With its colonnades
and cornices inspired by the palaces of Leningrad
and thence by Italian classicism and the Renais¬
sance, it represents the triumph of socialist real¬
ism in architecture.
Yet the statues that crown these buildings are
not the familiar deities of graeco-roman mythol¬
ogy. They are the heroes, real or imaginary, of
the first Five-Year Plans. Workers, peasants and
Red Army soldiers stand guard over Gorky
Street, bearing witness to an age that strove to
consummate the marriage of architectural forms
and social objectives. 29
