MICROWAVES THAT SAVE
MANUSCRIPTS
BY DENIS SERGENT
DEACIDIFICATION of manu¬
scripts, books and archival docu¬
ments is necessary today for two
main reasons: the inferior quality of cer¬
tain types of modern cellulose-based
papers (dating from the second half of the
nineteenth century); and atmospheric
pollution. Paper was formerly manufac¬
tured from textile fibres (linen, hemp or
cotton) obtained from rags. Since 1850,
cellulose fibres from broadleaf and
coniferous trees have been used. The
wood pulp is produced either by chemi¬
cal or mechanical methods. Chemical
pulp is of good quality, but paper made
from mechanical pulp acidifies, especial¬
ly when treated with sizing agents such
as alum. This type of paper, used for
newspapers or paperbacks, turns yellow,
hardens, becomes brittle and finally
disintegrates, a process that is aggravated
by atmospheric pollution.
A method of deacidifying paper, dis¬
covered by an American and tested in
Canada, has been adapted and improved
at the French research centre for the
preservation of illustrated documents in
Paris, resulting in the design of the first
assembly-line deacidifying plant in
Europe. In 1988 a prototype was installed
in the French Bibliothèque Nationalen
preservation centre at Sablé-sur-Sarthe.
The main advantages of this appara¬
tus are that whole books can be treated
and it is no longer necessary to take a
book apart and soak the pages one by one
in the treatment solution. Several books
or documents can be treated at a time (as
many as 250 a day).
The bound books are vacuum dried
and heated, and the acid is then eliminat¬
ed by soaking them in a basic alcohol
solution. Subjected to a pressure of 4 bars,
this solution penetrates all the pages.
In any attempt to preserve paper in¬
volving deacidification in an aqueous
medium or strengthening by thermal
sizing, or to restore flood-damaged paper,
problems arise when it comes to the
drying process. The paper is either dried
in the open air on racks, or by means of
traditional heating devices which are not
really suitable (hot air blowers, heated
plates or rollers, or infrared radiation).
But these methods toughen the cellulose
fibres and thus partially cancel out the
effect of the previous treatment.
J
Traditional heating devices work by
conduction, convection or radiation.
Water is evaporated by purely thermal
effects which act indiscriminately on the
water and on the paper. For rapid dry¬
ing (a few minutes), the wet paper has to
be heated quite fiercely, and the thermal
energy may alter the mechanical proper¬
ties of the paper or even burn it.
The electrical energy of microwaves,
on the other hand, acts selectively on the
molecules of "free" water that have not
seeped into the paper. It is thus possible
to eliminate the water without unduly
raising the average temperature of the
paper and without extracting its constitu¬
tional water (sometimes known as residu¬
al moisture). There is then no danger of
destroying a document through drier
malfunction or operator error.
By using microwaves it is possible to
dry both old and modern paper while
preserving its chemical and physical qual¬
ities, and in particular its mechanical
resistance to stretching and tearing. The
drying is homogeneous, so that no "hot
spots" are created, and it takes place at
a low temperature (30° C to 43° C). The
drier can be adapted to the dimensions of
the material to be treated. During treat¬
ment, paper flow can be regulated (from
a few sheets to 10-20 sheets per minute),
and the belt on which the paper is spread
can be run with a backwards and for-
'"Z^fSPZ
4M ISIITATIOM
1 Partez -itvtis vous- mt'mc , il hum tout
rons; mais que le Seigneur ne MMN parti
peur r¡ttc now M MlwiflU, ( Exod. 2
* n'csl pas l:i , Seigneur , ce n'esl \v
; mais [ilulùl , je vous en conjure
île 4érá*, comme ie prophète Sum
eigneur, parce que votre servitcut
;.5.9. 10 »
Paper made from some kinds of wood pulp is
at risk from acidification, which causes it to
turn yellow, become brittle and eventually
disintegrate.
wards motion or continuously in one
direction.
The prototype microwave drier has
now moved into an industrial and com¬
mercial phase. Two were in operation by
1987, one in the Bibliothèque Nationalen
preservation centre at Sablé-sur-Sarthe
and the other in the laboratory for
research on historic monuments at
Champs-sur-Marne. In 1988, a third dri¬
er was installed in the restoration work¬
shop of the University of Tübingen
(Baden-Würtemberg, Federal Republic of
Germany).
DENIS SERGENT, of France, is a scientific jour¬
nalist in the Press Office of the National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS), Paris.
Paper deacidifying plant at the French Bibliothèque Nationalen manuscript preservation centre at
Sablé-sur-Sarthe.
