Bound by economic ties as well as kin¬
ship, the traditionalJapanesefamily has
undergone sweeping changes in modern
times. Its members have achieved greater
independence..but at what cost?
T
28
HE traditional form of the Japanese family is
designated by the word ie, which denotes an
original concept embracing not only the struc¬
ture of the family but the bonds uniting its
members, the family assets, and the activities con¬
nected with it.
In most cases, this basic family unit consists
of a sonusually the eldest son living with his
parents after marriagehis children, and his un¬
married brothers and sisters. But ie also includes
deceased forebears and unborn descendants. The
continuity of the family depends largely upon the
maintenance of the material basis which
guarantees its social status and way of life. Since
its survival is closely connected with the
maintenance of its activities, the Japanese family
is often defined as a family business. The heritage
is just as important as the continuation of the
family line, and more so than the prosperity or
even the life and death of individual members of
the household.
The ie is primarily based upon family ties,
the most important of which are those with
parents and ancestors. The eldest son is
responsiblein most cases alonefor
perpetuating the ie. When they get married, the
younger sons will in turn be called upon to found
other ie. In theory the younger branches continue
to owe allegiance to the senior branch, but in
practice they soon achieve autonomy and their
founders become ancestors of new ie. The only
ones which remain linked are those families
which are bound to each other by strong finan¬
cial interests, or which live in the same
neighbourhood. Few Japanese are well acquainted
with their collateral family, and it is not uncom¬
mon for a Japanese to be incapable of quoting
the exact names of his eight great-grandparents.
The wife as servant of the ie
In this typical organization, the wife's role is
essentially to provide heirs for her husband's
family. If the marriage proves to be sterile, the
wife is sent back to her parents, and the adop¬
tion of a male child must then be considered. A
wife's entire education prepares her to become
the servant of her husband's lineage. In the early



Under new
Nlealtime in a modern
Japanese household.

management BY KURIMOTO KAZUO
THE
FAMILY
PAST
AND PRESENT
THE CHANGING
JAPANESE FAMILY 29

1 he women of a Japanese
household prepare a family
meal c. 1930.
eighteenth century, the principles which should
govern a wife's behaviour were defined by the
moralist Kaibara Ekiken. They can be summariz¬
ed as follows:
When a wife enters her husband's house she
must follow the instructions of his parents, wait
upon them and be agreeable to them at all times.
They should avoid excessive affection which
would make her capricious, and they should not
allow her to have a will of her own.
A wife must respect her husband's brothers and
sisters.
She should be prudent and strict in her personal
behaviour, rise early, retire late, and her atten¬
tion should be concentrated upon the house
throughout the day.
She should rarely appear in public before the
age of forty.
Her behaviour should be dignified and
reasonable, because her misconduct would ruin
the house.
Even a wife who is surrounded by servants
should take an interest in everything, because
"that is the wife's law".
And so the heavy task of maintaining the
peace and ensuring the proper functioning of the
house falls upon the wife. Her personality should
be relegated to the background.
By contrast with the subordinate status of the
wife, the powers enjoyed by the head of the fami¬
ly are very extensive. He can remove from the
family register (koseki) any member who might
harm the ie. Since the end of the nineteenth cen¬
tury, he has been the sole owner of the family
assets. No other member of the family, even an
adult, may 'enter into a contract without his per¬
mission. His powers, which may seem exorbitant,
are based upon a profound consensus within the
family.
The head of the family
On the other hand, the head of the family has
certain responsibilities, and he may be
stripped of his authority if he proves incapable
of managing the family fortune. The "instruc¬
tions for the head of a family" of a retail kimono
merchant in Kyoto laid down that "even the head
of the family may not neglect his work by lying
in bed late or going out frequently in the even¬
ings and indulging in gambling. If this happens,
the older members of the shop's staff, who are
responsible, should report the matter to his
parents. When the family's capital and goods have
been valued, compensation shall be paid to the
head of the family and he shall be obliged to retire
from management of the family business". The
head of another Kyoto family stipulated that "if
any of my potential successors begins to spend
irresponsibly, and there is reason to think that
he is not a trustworthy heir to the family
business, the family, after consulting the parents,
shall give him 5 per cent of the family assets and
create a branch for him. When this separation has
30

been completed, a reliable person shall be chosen
to succeed him".
Although succession is hereditary, the head
of the family or any other undesirable relative
can be excluded. Such is the overriding impor¬
tance of the ie's continuity, that it is not uncom¬
mon for a new member to be adopted.
The basis of the nation
The traditional ie is more in the nature of a socio¬
economic institution than a community linked
by blood-relationships. The head of the family
strongly resembles the head of a business. When
the question of his succession arises, this business
does not necessarily give priority to his "blood
child". The paramount consideration is that the
enterprise be headed by a competent manager.
The ie system is of very ancient origin. It goes
back to the eleventh century, but it was during
the second half of the Tokugawa shogunate that
it became consolidated and officially established,
partly under the influence of Confucian doc¬
trines. The ie type of organization soon ceased
to be confined to the samurai caste and the rich
merchant and farmer class, and became a model
for all Japanese families. It became the very basis
of the nation and one of the main components
of Japanese identity.
Although it was criticized after the Second
World War on the grounds that it had justified
militarism and was an obstacle to democratiza¬
tion, the ie concept has survived in big firms,
although divested of its former political and
ideological connotations.
Absentee fathers
The Japanese family has evolved considerably
since the 1946 Constitution came into force.
Although the traditional ie still survives, new legal
structures favour the development of nuclear
families (63.4 per cent in 1970) by granting equal
rights to men and women and imposing a
distribution of the estate among the children.
This trend has been strengthened by post-war in¬
dustrial and urban changes. Nowadays, families
are much smaller, usually consisting of only one
or two children. The generations live apart from
each other and the children, even the unmarried
ones, soon acquire their autonomy.
This trend accelerated from the 1960s on¬
wards, with the growth in the number of jobs
and the resulting mobility. Initially it was main¬
ly young workers who left rural areas for the ur¬
ban industrial centres. Then, many heads of rural
families took seasonal employment in expanding
urban areas, leaving the cultivation of the land
to their wives, children, or other members of
their families. These seasonal jobs soon became
permanent and so it became common for heads
of families to be absent most of the year. This
trend is not confined to manual workers.
A group of men eat together in a
Japanese restaurant. Because of
professional commitments Japanese fathers
today are more often absent from the
family table than in the past.
jMLany elderly persons live with their
children, whereas in the past it was the
children who lived under their parents'
roof." Below, a little Japanese boy makes
music for his grandfather.
31

In today's small two-
generation families the
bond between mother and
child is closer than ever.
32

Transfers of managerial and executive staff to new
project sites are becoming increasingly necessary
because of economic expansion.
It is difficult for a family to follow the father
if he is moved around too often. Finding family
accommodation is quite a problem, and too many
moves are bad for children and their studies.
The phenomenon known as tanshin hunin
(unaccompanied transfer of a member of the fami¬
ly) is common in Japan today, but it is giving rise
to problems. The family head may find a
substitute for ie in his links with his firm-
employment for life, membership of a communi¬
ty, concern for its prosperity and its perpetuity
but he suffers from the loosening of family ties.
Many men only see their families at weekends.
This may be one of the causes of the depressions,
stress and alcoholism which afflict so many men.
The solitary wife
The wife suffers no less than her husband. She is
increasingly isolated. Even when he lives at home
during the week, her husband goes to work early
in the morning and comes back late in the even¬
ing. Children are at school all day or go off in the
afternoon to juku (extra private lessons). Many
married women react to this solitude by looking
for a job or taking part in the activities of cultural
groups.
Relations between mothers and their children
are also changing. The bonds between them are
close and exclusive. Because of the decline in the
birth rate, children find fewer playmates in their
neighbourhood and almost none at home.
Deprived of contacts with children of their own
age, they cling to their mothers' apron strings.
In the extended families of the past, the
psychological link with the mother was only one
family relationship among others. Since children
formed their own society within the group, they
had less difficulty leaving home. Now separation
from the mother is becoming much more painful
for both mother and child. For the mother, the
chief concern is her child's success at school. For¬
ty years ago a child who was accompanied to
secondary school by his mother would have been
the laughing-stock of his schoolmates. Nowadays,
many mothers accompany their children, not on¬
ly to secondary school, but even to the university.
Newspapers wax ironical about mothers who ac¬
company their sons as far as the door of the firm
on their first day at work.
The ageing of the population is having other
consequences. For a long time life expectancy in
Japan was 50 years, but by 1982 it had risen to 75
for men and 80.4 for women. In 1930 most
fathers died before their youngest child had com¬
pleted university studies, and the mother rarely
outlived the head of the family. Now, when the
youngest child has finished his or her studies, it is
common for the father to have a life expectancy
of a further twenty years and the mother thirty.
In many cases the parents are neither financially
nor psychologically prepared for the departure of
their children. This is an unprecedented situation,
and no cultural model exists to help them to cope
with it. A new life-style will have to be created
which will enable older people to take an activé
part in the life of the community, assume their
social responsibilities and define their new iden¬
tity. In fact, there is no ready-made answer to this
problem.
Many elderly persons live with their children,
whereas in the past it was the children who lived
under their parents' roof. Under the present law,
each descendant receives an equal share of the
family estate, and the question arises which of the
children shall take in the elders. The average
household rarely possesses the necessary resources
and space. The nuclear family is often faced with
a crisis when it has to assume responsibility for
the health care of its elders.
The broken bond
This crisis is reflected in customs relating to the
organization of meals. Formerly, meals were ritu¬
als which strengthened the cohesion of the fami¬
ly group. Now this essential function is on the
wane and in many families most meals are no
longer taken in common. About 60 per cent of
fathers do not take part in the family breakfast,
and 30 per cent of them are absent at dinner time.
Most mothers have lunch alone at home. The
decline in the frequency of meals eaten in com¬
mon is weakening the psychological bonds be¬
tween members of the same family.
Developments in the mass media also run
counter to the family spirit. The family is ceas¬
ing to be a place for the exchange of news. With
the growth in the number of channels, cable tel¬
evision and the diversification of programmes,
watching television is becoming an individual ac¬
tivity. Increasingly, each member of the family
has his or her own sources of information and
tends to share them less and less with the rest of
the family.
However, this may be just a passing phase,
and new modes of behaviour may emerge. For
instance, there is an increase in the number of
"houses for two generations", in which elderly
parents and their children can live together while
preserving their independence. It is also proba¬
ble that the revival of traditional feasts, bringing
together members of different generations, and
in which everyone has a role to play, points to
a tightening of family links. Perhaps a new cul¬
tural model is about to emerge?
I
KURIMOTO KAZUO,
of Japan, is a Unesco staff
member specializing in
educational administration
and management.
ill 33
