VILLAGE WISDOM
An unsung resource for rural development
BY SANJIT BUNKER ROY
WHEN I began working in the
villages in 1967 1 used to think
that India needed trained ur¬
ban professionals to develop the rural
areas. I used to think with the arrogance
that young people acquire in public
schools that rural India had nothing to
offer and that its people needed us. Now,
after twenty years of interaction with
needy villagers, I have totally changed my
position.
I respect the skill of the traditional
midwife and believe she is much more im¬
portant to rural India than the alienated
urban-trained Auxiliary Nurse Midwife.
I value the wisdom and knowledge of the
village priest and marvel at his patience
as a teacher.
Tilonia, in the district of Ajmer, Rajas¬
than state, runs fifty evening schools
Pottery from Rajasthan
	 25

irtf^Á . &<&*&
spread over an area of 1,300 square
kilometres. These schools attract over
1,500 children who have dropped out
from the regular school system. Among
those who train the teachers in charge of
these schools is a village priest. Another
priest installs and maintains the sophisti¬
cated solar panel systems that provide
three hours of light in many of the
schools. Neither of them holds a teacher's
diploma and would never obtain a
government teaching post. When a
professor from the Indian Institute of
Technology came to see who was main¬
taining the solar units he was astonished
to learn that there was no electronics en¬
gineer on our staff.
Planners have consistently under¬
estimated the skill, knowledge and wis-
This 19th-century miniature depicts a scene of
famine. Overall food production gains in
India since the Green Revolution
began two decades ago have eliminated
imports. Since 1964 wheat production has
more than quadrupled.
Adult education using satellites and community television sets. The programmes, which combine
adult education with practical advice on sanitation, health care and improved farming techniques,
have proved effective as awareness builders among the rural poor.
dorn of people in rural India. No concen¬
trated attempt has been made to identify
the unused or under-used human
resources which could help villages to
achieve self-reliance, reduce their depen¬
dence on government and reduce the cost
of social and economic services.
It was a roadside bicycle mechanica
primary school dropoutwho drew up
the outlines of a system of hand pump
maintenance which is currently being im¬
plemented, with community support, to
repair over 40,000 hand pumps in Rajas¬
than. This Hand Pump Mechanic (HPM)
scheme, for which the ex-bicycle mechan¬
ic is now responsible, is a practical alter¬
native to an expensive, top heavy system
which was designed by highly-trained en¬
gineers, and is not accountable to those
who actually use the pumps. The HPM
scheme is the only one of its kind being
encouraged by India's Technology Mis¬
sion on Drinking Water.
Such cases show that village people
can think and propose solutions that are
practical, inexpensive and widely applica¬
ble. But they have not been provided
with a forum where they can share their
views. The 1986 National Policy on Edu¬
cation mentions the need to reject the
26 	

Construction workers, Trivandrum, Kerala
state. Women work as hard as men, often
carrying very heavy loads, but despite equal
wages legislation are frequently paid far less
than male workers.
linkage between degrees and jobs. This is
a welcome and long overdue step. Why
should we penalize a person who pro¬
vides a competent service to the commu¬
nity as a midwife, priest, water diviner,
traditional bone-setter or hand pump
mechanic, just because he or she does not
hold a degree? Such people are assets to
their communities.
This is not to deny that their skills
need to be upgraded. Instead of replacing
them and diminishing their worth in
rural society we should do all we can to
share our knowledge with them, give
them the opportunity to choose those
parts of our knowledge which are useful
to them, and help them to become more
effective. They alone know how to de¬
mystify technology, processes and
methods. We must find time to listen to
them, for they have an answer to T.S.
Eliot's eternal question:
"Where is the wisdom we have lost
in knowledge
Where is the knowledge we have lost
in information?".
SANJIT (BUNKER) ROY is Director of the Social
Work and Research Centre at Tilonia, Rajasthan
state, in northern India.
A family planning poster in northern India.
By the year 2000 India's population is
expected to reach 1,000 million. Population
growth has eroded the increase in industrial
and agricultural production.
	 27
