HIGH DAYS
AND
HOLIDAYS
The ratha or temple chariot being taken out in procession, Tamil Nadu, south India. The chariot, which weighs several tons, is pushed by elephants
and devotees.
VISITORS who come to India with the
notion that the Indian outlook on life
is austere and pessimistic are surprised
to see the zest for life which Indians display.
This enthusiasm is seen in a vivid and pic¬
turesque light during the fairs and festivals that
have been held since remote Antiquity.
Festivals afford glimpses of the continuity
and diversity of Indian life. People of differ¬
ent regions, speaking different languages, can
be seen wearing a variety of costumes. There
are farmers and aristocrats, mendicants and
astrologers, poets, preachers and wandering
singers. There is colour and pageantry, faith
and devotion. And, amidst all this diversity,
we feel the living presence of India.
Most of the festivals have a strong religious
basis. There are discourses, hymns, chants, and
readings from scriptures. Many festivals are
associated with specific deities. Rama Navami
(March or April), Shiva Ratri (February or
March) and Krishna Janmashtami (August) are
celebrated in honour of Rama, Shiva and
Krishna respectively. The festival of the god¬
dess Durga comes in October, while Sarasvati,
goddess of learning and the arts, is worshipped
in early spring.
The Indian calendar is lunar. Special sanc¬
tity attaches to festivals held on nights of full
moon or new moon. Apart from the moon,
other phenomena of Nature are commemo¬
rated with affection and reverence. A day is
set aside for expressing gratitude to the banyan
tree, another is devoted to the nagas (serpents).
Seasons are welcomed with festivities. Vasant
Panchmi (early February) is the festival of
spring. The autumn is greeted on the brightest
moonlit night of the year, Sharad Pumima
(usually in late October). Many fairs and
festivals are held on the banks of sacred rivers.
At the confluence of the Ganges and the
Yamuna rivers at Allahabad, a festival is held
throughout the month of Magha (January-
February). Every twelfth year, this religious
fair is known as the Khumba Mela. During the
Kumbha, sometimes more than five million
people come to bathe at the holy confluence
on the day of amavasya (new moon).
	 31

The most important Muslim festival is
Id al-Fitr, at the end of the month-long fast
of Ramadan. People wear new clothes and
offer special prayers at mosques. This is fol¬
lowed by a feast. The Parsi new year (Nauroz),
and the Christian festivals of Christmas and
Easter, are celebrated with great enthusiasm.
The birthdays of Buddha, Mahavira and Guru
Nanak (founders of Buddhism, Jainism and
Sikhism respectively) are national holidays.
The majority of festivals, however, belong to
the Hindu tradition.
On these occasions, the religious and secu¬
lar aspects of life are happily blended. Reli¬
gious ritual is combined with cultural
programmes: folk dances, concerts, popular
plays, puppet shows, poetic symposia. Way¬
side shops spring up, and bargaining is a popu¬
lar diversion. In recent years, even politicians
have started addressing the crowds that gather
at festivals.
Dussehra, Diwali and Holi ire the three
major Hindu festivals. The ten-day Dussehra
festival commemorates the victory of Rama,
an incarnation of the Divine, over Ravana,
king of the demons. Episodes from the ancient
epic, Ramayana, are enacted on the stage.
Three weeks after Dussehra, which usual¬
ly occurs in October, comes Diwali, the Fes¬
tival of Light. Houses are cleaned and
illuminated in order to welcome Lakshmi, the
goddess of well-being and prosperity. There
is a display of fireworks, and traditional sweets
are served after the ceremonial worship of
Lakshmi. An interesting feature of Diwali is
the honour paid to the materials used in
various vocations. Goldsmiths and carpenters
polish their tools and place flowers upon
them. Merchants honour their account books.
Artists and writers express their gratitude to
their brushes, pens, pencils and inkpots!
'V -- A
m i
The Hindu festival of Holi is linked to Lord
Krishna, who is often shown throwing colour
on Radha, his beloved. This 18th-
century miniature from Rajasthan depicts a
typical Holi scene, with celebrants throwing
coloured powder on each other.
A plaster statue of the elephant god Ganesh being carried in procession in Bombay before
immersion in the Arabian Sea. The son of Lord Shiva, Ganesh is the remover of obstacles and
the god of intelligence.
While Diwali is celebrated on a night of
new moon, Holi, the festival of colour, begins
on the night of the full moon in the month
oiPhalgun (March-April). Bonfires are kindled
at street corners, symbolically cleansing the
atmosphere of all that is evil. The following
morning, people are on the streets, spurting
coloured water over each other. Like the bac-
chanalia of ancient Greece, Holi is a folk fes¬
tival at which inhibitions are shed, women
come out of their seclusion, and caste barriers
are set aside. At mid-day, the shouting, sing¬
ing and colour-pelting all stop. Then, after a
bath, people embrace each other and partake
of sweets.
It is said that Holi was the favourite festival
of the divine Krishna, the pastoral hero whose
beauty enchanted all the cowherd girls of the
village. On the day of Holi, Krishna danced
with themespecially with his beloved
Radhaand drenched them with coloured
water. That is why even today Holi is celebrat¬
ed with special joy and zest at Vrindavan, the
home of Krishna. V.S.N.
32 	
