SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
Africa's 'wonder weed'
M,
48
I ILLIONS of people in the developing
world may be spared the debilitating and
sometimes fatal effects of schistosomiasis,
a parasitic infection also known as bilhar-
zia, if the results of a discovery made by
an Ethiopian scientist twenty-five years
ago are fully exploited.
It was in 1 964 that a young Ethiopian
parasitologist, Aklilu Lemma, discovered
that the berries of a bush commonly found
in areas of Ethiopia where schistosomiasis
is endemic were a safe and effective
molluscicide against snails which carry the
bilharzia parasite.
Sent to Adwa in northern Ethiopia
after a recent outbreak of bilharzia, Dr.
Lemma discovered that life for the people
of Adwa revolved around the Guagua and
Asem rivers. He began to examine the
snail population along the banks of the
rivers. It was known that the snails were
hosts to the parasite, and the objective
was to find a way of interrupting the
breeding cycle during their earliest
development.
"Over a period of time," says Dr. Lem¬
ma, "I began to notice a pattern of dead
snails in the areas downstream from
where the women washed their clothes.
I saw this repeatedly and wondered if
there was some connection."
Dr. Lemma decided to gather some
live snails in a small bucket and take them
to where the women were washing. "I
asked a woman to put a little of her suds
in the bucket, and when she did, the snails
fizzed and died, shrinking in their shells."
The suds which killed the snails were
produced by berries from the wild endod
plant (Phytolacca dodecandra), which had
been known to Ethiopian women for cen¬
turies as the "soapberry bush". The
women had collected the unripened ber¬
ries and dried them in the sun. On
washing days they would grind a handful
of berries in a basin, and mix in a little
water to produce a foaming lather. This
traditional detergent was credited with the
stark whiteness and softness of their
dresses.
The young scientist reaffirmed the ef¬
fects of the suds on snails in the
laboratory, and in doing so began a strug¬
gle for scientific recognition of the plant
and its low-cost molluscicidal properties
which continues today.
Dr. Lemma's discovery led to a five-
year survey which measured the incidence
of bilharzia in each household in Adwa
Abridged from ATAS News, a
publication prepared by the Centre
for Science and Technology for
Development of the United Nations
Secretariat.
'£&.
V
a^F A 1 «
B
before and after the introduction of scien¬
tifically measured berry extract to the
rivers.
"Before the introduction of endod we
found that about 50 per cent of the
children between the ages of one and five
years were infected by bilharzia," says Dr.
Lemma. "Five years later that figure had
been reduced to about 8 per cent."
Further research showed that the
natural berry product was biodegradable,
breaking down into inert organic materials
similar to food spices within 48 hours.
The cost of producing an endod berry
extract$10 to $25 per person per year
in infested areasis a key factor in the en¬
dod equation. One of the most effective
commercial molluscicides on the market
is Bayluscide, which also kills the snail host,
but which has remained prohibitively ex¬
pensive (about $25,000 a ton) to poor
communities which need it most.
A discovery of such potential in a
western country would have excited ma¬
jor financial support, but with a few
notable exceptions in the US, Canada and
Europe, endod has not generated much
enthusiasm.
"It has been very difficult to overcome
the biases," says Dr. Lemma. "One of the
problems is that it's too simple, too cheap.
There are already chemicals in the
marketplace and people don't want to in¬
vest in something which is unlikely to
make a lot of money. We have been
unable to attract the kind of resources
necessary to develop a product quickly
which has all the seals of approval."
The constraints appear to be easing,
however. A high-yielding endod plant has
been developed which is resistant to insect
pests, has high potency berries, and grows
to a size suitable for large-scale cultivation.
Scientists who have worked on the
development of the new "Type 44" plant
believe it has considerable economic
potential for farmers in poor highland
areas of the developing world where it
could be intercropped with maize and
potato and sold to the lowland com¬
munities where bilharzia is endemic.
Cultivars of 'Type 44" have been
transplanted internationally and are doing
well in Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Zim¬
babwe, Zambia, Swaziland and Brazil.
The main obstacle to this low-cost ap¬
proach to schistosomiasis control is the
passage of endod through various inter¬
national scientific protocols which would

endorse it as a safe product, and give the
green light to greater financial support
from the international community.
Professor John D.H. Lambert of the
Department of Biology at Carleton Univer¬
sity in Ottawa, Canada, is confident that
endod will ultimately pass muster : "What
one has to realize with this product," he
says, "is that it has been safely used by
people ¡n Ethiopia for centuries. We are
dealing with a product which people have
used to wash themselves and their
clothing, and if there is a problem it should
have manifested itself in some way by
now. The whole idea now is to extract the
product from the berries on a large scale
using the same low-cost water extraction
they use for traditional soap making."
An endod Scientific Advisory Group
formed by the International Development
Research Centre of Canada (IDRC) has met
under the chairmanship of the World
Health Organization's Pesticides Section
and laid down procedures for repeating
some of the laboratory work done in
Ethiopia in the 1 960s and early 1 970s. The
IDRC will be covering much old ground,
but the outcome will be recommendations
from internationally recognized
laboratories under "Good Laboratory Prac¬
tices" (GLP) standards. The Group has also
identified the necessary toxological tests
to be done in tandem with agronomic
studies, prior to large-scale field evalua¬
tions in a number of countries, including
Ethiopia, Zambia, Swaziland and
Zimbabwe.
The final irony emerging from the en¬
dod story is that the industrialized nations
which ignored it for so long may ultimately
be among the principal beneficiaries. Dr.
Robert M. Parkhurst, senior organic
chemist at Stanford Research Institute in
California, says that most of the chemistry
to identify the active principles in the en¬
dod berry has been done at Stanford, and
that the berry is just the tip of the iceberg
as far as the plant is concerned.
Parkhurst has labelled endod the
"wonder weed of Africa". "Every time we
examine this plant we find a new poten¬
tial for it," he says. In addition to the key
molluscicidal saponins, which Stanford has
named "Lemmatoxins" after the
discoverer, the Institute has identified a
score of other commercial possibilities
ranging from liver fluke control for
livestock and larvocides against malarial
mosquitoes, to the development of
natural skin cosmetics. B
