llya the invincible
BY HELENE YVERT-JALU
I
32
,N a famous painting by Viktor Vasnetsov, three
valiant knights, breastplated and helmeted,
mounted on powerful chargers, are shown guard¬
ing Russian soil against the enemy. Their names
are llya of Murom, Dobrynia Nikitich and
Aliosha Popovich, and they are the heroes of
Russian byliny or epic poems.
The byliny tradition may go back to the end
of the tenth century. In the large, bright hall of
Prince Vladimir's palace at Kiev, minstrels accom¬
panying themselves on the gusli, a kind of zither,
sang of the extraordinary exploits of bogatyrs (gal¬
lant warriors), while cup-bearers filled the boyars'
and other noblemen's glasses with "a blend of
herbal wine and unchanging honey".
Heroes that live on
Since those times, byliny have been transmitted
orally from generation to generation, an uninter¬
rupted river of poetry in which many historical,
social and geographical currents are mingled.
At the beginning of the twentieth century in
the Arkhangelsk and Lake Onega regions of
northern Russia, rustic bards known as skaziteli
still related these heroic deeds. Usually men of
a ripe old age, they used a special technique to
recount their stories, keeping up a slow rhythm
of three or four beats to the bar, which brought
a majestic grandeur to the old songs. Woodcut¬
ters, fishermen and hunters would gather round,
listening attentively.
Lovers of folk traditions have collected ex¬
amples of this national treasure of historic songs.
In the eighteenth century an Englishman, Richard
James, was the first to transcribe some of them.
Fuller collections which appeared in the follow¬
ing century met with tremendous success, and in¬
fluenced literature (Pushkin, Lermontov, Gogol),
music (Mussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakov, Borodin),
painting (Vasnetsov, Repin, Vrubel) and films
such as Eisenstein's Alexander Nevsky. The
popularity of these gallant warriors of legend has
even influenced the spoken language. In Russian
today, the word bogatyr designates a man of
llya ofMurom and Soloveï
the Brigand. A 19th-century
example of the Russian folk
art known as lubok.
powerful stature or someone of exceptional
vigour. These epic heroes, mythical figures in the
national consciousness, have scarcely changed
down the ages. Above all, they have kept the pro¬
digious strength which enables them "to crush
ten adversaries with one blow". Let us follow the
exploits of llya of Murom, perhaps the most
popular hero of the Kiev byliny cycle.
llya, a peasant's son, has been paralysed for
thirty years (thirty-three in some versions), when
one day three pilgrims pay him a visit. Twice they
ask him to rise and offer them food and drink.

Even the most terrifying monsters quail before
lion-hearted llya ofMurom. This redoubtable
hero of ancient Russia is still a much-loved
figure ofpopular mythology.
»-TÎV7V f-.'J-JJ*'^
A -Mil!
"Alas," the cripple replies, "I can move neither
arms nor legs." At the third demand, llya
miraculously manages to stand up and walk. He
offers a cup of wine to his guests, who ask him
to drink of it too. He has barely tasted it when
he feels within himself a Herculean strength. The
three men then predict that llya will be a great
warrior and that he will not die in combat, and
they disappear. Thus the crippled llya suddenly
becomes an invincible titan.
Like any Russian peasant of the Middle Ages,
llya first uses his power to clear the surrounding
forest. In the twinkling of an eye, he uproots all
the oaks and hurls so many of them into the
Dnieper that the course of the powerful river is
dammed. He then heads for Kiev to defend Holy
Russia, which is constantly under threat.
In order to procure a mount for himself, llya
follows the instructions of the mysterious pil¬
grims. When he meets up with a peasant leading
a small, shaggy stallion by the bridle, he immedi¬
ately buys it. Then he walks the animal three
times through the morning dew. It turns into a
marvellous steed which "with each stride covers 33

llya ofMurom (centre),
Dobrynia Nikitich (left)
and Aliosha Popovich
(right), the three most
popular knightly heroes or
bogatyrs ofRussian epic
poetry. Painting by Viktor
Vasnetsov (1848-1926).
34
Illustrations from llya of
Murom and the Tsar
Kalin, a cartoon slide
show. Above, the terrible
Tsar Kalin; below,
Vladimir's daughter, the
kind princess.
a full verst (1.06 kilometres), leaping from hill to
hill, over rivers, lakes and forests". Even better,
it can speak and warn its master of imminent
danger.
Before he reaches Kiev, Bya engages in several
combats, including a confrontation with Solov-
eï the Brigand. This "nightingale" (soloveï) is a
strange and terrifying bird which has built himself
a nest in the branches of seven oak trees at a cross¬
roads in the forest. The bird's song bends the lar¬
gest trees tó the ground and strikes humans stone
dead. Not a whit dismayed by this terrible sound,
llya draws his bow and pierces Soloveï's right eye
with an arrow. Soloveï falls from the nest and
llya chains him to his stirrup. The monster's three
daughters, perched in their father's nest, send
their mates to attack llya. Soloveï asks them to
negotiate a ransom for him instead. But their ef¬
forts are in vain, as llya disinterestedly refuses the
precious gifts offered to him.
With his prisoner in tow he arrives at the
prince's palace in Kiev, where Vladimir questions
him. The bogatyr introduces himself and displays
his captive. Vladimir invites Soloveï the Brigand
to sing, but the monster will only obey llya.
Thereupon llya repeats the request, with the
proviso that the bird must sing only half as loudly
as usual, in order to spare the prince and his
courtiers. Soloveï mischievously sings as loudly
as he can, sowing death and destruction. Vladimir
is saved by the sable-lined coat with which he has
covered his head. As a punishment for this act
of disobedience llya cuts off the Brigand's head:
"Thus Soloveï will no longer fill mothers' and
fathers' eyes with tears or make widows of young
women, and will cease to turn little children into
orphans."
llya is appointed ataman, or chief of the
Prince of Kiev's bogatyrs, and from then on
guards the gates of the capital. One day he is
challenged by a giantess armed with an immense
club. She is a polenitsa, a wild beast that roams
the steppe. llya emerges victorious from the ter¬
rible fight that ensues. On discovering that the
giantess is his own daughter, however, he spares
her life. But to avenge her mother, whom llya
has deserted, she goes into his tent while he is
sleeping and with all her might plunges a hunt¬
ing spear into his chest. This would have been
the end of llya, but the spear strikes the cross
weighing a pud-and-a-half {zpud is over 16 kilos),
that he always wears. Awakened by the noise of
metal on metal, llya opens his eyes and tears the
treacherous girl to shreds.
The homeland before the prince
The enemies which have to be fought, in¬
discriminately referred to as Tatars, are always
depicted as caricatures. Idolishche the Pagan is
"two sagens high and one wide" (a sagen is 2.13
metres). "His head is like an enormous vat, and
his eyes are mugs of beer, and the nose on his
face is a cubit's length."

fe
Left, A Valiant Knight,
by the Russian artist
Mikhail Vrubel (1856-1910).
:
1$ -V- Z .
HPÜ
Facing the massed ranks of enemy armies
"all black, like black crows"the prince's knights
are often terror-stricken. llya alone proves him¬
self to be a fervent and loyal defender of the
homeland. Despite tempting offers from the ene¬
my, he steadfastly refuses to leave the prince's
service. He nonetheless has good reasons for do¬
ing so, as Vladimir, who bears little resemblance
to the historical figure of the same name, often
rewards the loyal services of his bogatyrs with
ingratitude.
One day, after a quarrel with llya, the angry
Vladimir has him thrown into a deep cellar with
the order to let him starve to death. The other
bogatyrs, indignant over this unjust treatment,
desert the prince's court. Three years go by. Ka¬
lin, the tsar, turns the situation to his advantage
and attacks Kiev with a formidable army.
Vladimir grows afraid and his daughter advises
him to go and set llya free. To his great surprise,
the prince discovers that llya is still alive. The
young princess has dug an underground passage
leading to the dungeon, and each day has brought
the prisoner sweetmeats. Vladimir throws him¬
self at the hero's feet and begs him to save Kiev,
llya agrees to fight "not for the prince, but for
the churches of the Virgin, for Holy Russia, and
for the widows and orphans".
One of Ilya's most characteristic traits is re¬
vealed in this episode: he serves the Russian land,
not an occasionally despotic sovereign. This cou¬
rageous and unselfish peasant with no false pride
unhesitatingly speaks his mind when he sees the
prince abuse his authority. When he is not an¬
gered or engaged in Homeric combat, he is a
good-natured fellow who likes a joke. llya, the
gallant knight, has become a kind of national
hero.
- ii'iiw
Aliosha Popovich, the wily
companion in arms of llya
ofMurom. This hand-
coloured engraving dates
from the 18th century.
HELENE YVERT-JALU,
of France, is a lecturer at
the University of Paris I.
She is the author of a
number of studies on social
and cultural questions in
the Soviet Union. 35
