'Man is to woman as the sun is to the
moon. He leads, she follows; thus har¬
mony reigns.' In ancient China, an
unchanging order based on ancestor
worship and the submissiveness of
women ruled the traditional family.
ay
X. HE virtue of the Emperor is like the wind,
that of the common people is like the grass; the
grass must bow at the passage of the wind."
"A prince must bear himself like a prince,
a subject must act like a subject and a son must
behave like a son."
For centuries Chinese society was imbued
with the concept of the social hierarchy embodied
in these sayingsan immutable order in which
each person had his own station in life. Under
the influence of Confucianism, in particular, the
Celestial Empire conformed to a strict order
based above all on the family.
The traditional Chinese family was a larger
unit than the nuclear family of today, consisting
of three or four generations all living under the
same roof and encompassing not only direct
descendants but also collateral kinsfolk such as
aunts and uncles.
The existence and durability of this type of
family grouping were reinforced by the standards
and teachings of religion as well as by civil law
and social custom.
The complexity of the relationships that
governed family bonds was such that it even af¬
fected the development of the language. Whereas
in the West such general designations as aunt,
uncle and sister are considered adequate, the
Chinese language is richly endowed with more
precise appellations: "Jie Jie" (elder sister), "Di
Di" (younger brother), "Jiu Jiu" (maternal un¬
cle), "Shu Shu" (father's younger brother) "Sheng
Sheng" (wife of a father's younger brother).
While this kind of family was the norm for
the bourgeoisie and the aristocracy, the situation
was quite different among the lower classes.
Economic difficulties resulting from famine and
sickness as well as from the fragmentation of land
holdings into tiny plots, made the task of main¬
taining large family units such as these well-nigh
impossible. And once a family was broken up
there was little chance of it ever being
reconstituted.
Ancestor worship and duty
Ancestor worship was one of the essential
characteristics of the traditional Chinese family.
It emphasized the strength of the ties that bound
its members even beyond the grave. The spirits
of the ancestors, with whom the spirits of the liv-
BY QI YANFEN
1 his 19th-century painting
depicts yin (the feminine
element) and yang (the
masculine element), the two
complementary forces or
principles which are present
throughout nature (sky and
earth, light and darkness,
fire and water, etc.). Their
interplay, according to
traditional Chinese
cosmology, creates the
harmony of the universe.
A family meal in China
at the turn of the century.

The empire of the ancestors
THE
FAMILY
PAST
AND PRESENT
ANCIENT CHINA 17

ing, themselves "future ancestors", would one
day be reunited, were so many links in the con¬
tinuous chain of humanity.
Emperor Qang Si (1662-1722) of the Qing
dynasty once told the Papal Legate: "We know
perfectly well that the souls of the ancestors can¬
not come and dwell in the tablets and cartouches
that bear their names, but we try to convince
ourselves that we are in their presence."
Hence the practice of offering them gifts
which varied according to locality: pigeons,
chickens, fruit, wine, wheat or rice. A part of
every house was set aside for ancestor worship
and, if the family was wealthy enough, a temple
would be erected. On great occasions, such as the
anniversary of Confucius, ceremonies were held
in the house of the headman of the village.
These religious traditions go far back into An¬
tiquity. From the fifth century BC, the teachings
of Confucius laid great stress on the importance
of filial piety. Above all, this involved the duty
of ensuring the continuity of the family line. For
a man, this meant fathering a son; for a widow,
it meant rejecting all thought of remarriage and
devoting herself to bringing up the children,
especially the male children, of her deceased hus¬
band or adopting one of her husband's nephews.
A couple that had only girl children had to adopt
one of their sons-in-law who then took the name
of his father-in-law.
Respect for the hierarchy of the social classes,
which upheld the structures of the traditional
feudal society, was firmly rooted in the family.
Power was in the hands of the oldest generation.
Then, within a single generation, the elder
members always dominated their juniors. Thus,
a nephew, even though he might be older than
his uncle, still owed him respect and obedience.
The power an older man exercised over his in¬
feriors (members of younger generations,
younger brothers and women) was virtually ab¬
solute and even gave him the right to inflict
violence upon them.
Obedience and segregation
of boys and girls
The established order was inculcated into children
from the earliest age by teaching them the rules
of filial piety and fraternal duty. During the first
years of education, even though the two sexes
were educated together, the difference of status
between boys and girls was clearly defined.
The birth of a boy was an occasion for ritual
and ceremony and an official presentation. The
arrival of a girl into the world went by virtually
unremarked. Very early on, the boys would be
taught to show their dominance and the girls to
be humble and submissive. A little later, the two
sexes would be physically separated. The children
would no longer sit on the same school bench
or take their meals together.
Even before they reached adolescence, the
children belonged to two totally separate worlds.
The precept "Nan Zhu wai, Niizhu nei" (man
is master of the outside, woman of the inside) was
QI YANFEN
is a member of the Chinese
permanent delegation to
Unesco. A former professor of
French at the University of
Beijing, she has published a
study of Western civilization
and several articles on French
literature. She has also
translated a number of works
from French into Chinese,
including Simone de
Beauvoir's novel Le sang des
autres (1944; The Blood of
Others, 1948). Her thesis,
published in 1983, was a study
of female characters in the
works of Simone de Beauvoir.
CW>
A notary distributes the
family property among its
members. (19th-century
Chinese engraving)

1 his photo of an early
20th-century Chinese
courtesan illustrates the
traditional Chinese
criteria offeminine beauty:
beautiful features,
a perfect figure, and above
all small feet.
one of the corner-stones of Chinese society. Boys
therefore would be taught the rules of social
behaviour and the girls the principles of domestic
life.
Although these basic principles were the same
for all social classes, there were, nevertheless, im¬
portant differences. Women of the upper classes
did not work and lived within a very closed
setting. Their activities were restricted to running
the house, supervising the servants and the
feeding arrangements and looking after the
children. Working-class women, however, had to
share in the work of the family and sometimes
even work in the fields. Apart from bringing up
the children, their work usually consisted of look¬
ing after the mulberry trees and the silk worms,
weaving, and being responsible for the seed store
and the distribution of foodstuffs. Their
economic contribution, therefore, was far from
negligible.



The feminine ideal
of ancient China
Children were prepared for their future situation
in life. The future father was given considerable
power and, if he was destined to become the head
of the family, this power was virtually absolute.
The future mother was readied for a life of sub¬
mission and humility. Anything that might make 19

20
her more free and independent was strictly for¬
bidden. Thus it was held that "lack of culture is
a virtue in women".
Naturally enough, a girl of strong character
occasionally succeeded in rebelling against this
kind of education and in affirming her identity as
an individual. Such an attitude, however, met
with general disapproval and was seen as a
catastrophe for her parents. Some confirmation is
to be found in literature of the existence of such
exceptional girls, but their story is always
presented as an example not to be followed.
The ideal young lady should as far as possi¬
ble be pleasing to the eye. Beautiful features and
a perfect figure were very important, but not
more so than having small feetfeet "like the
crescent new moon that danced divinely on a
large golden lotus flower". A woman with small
feet acquired an air of nobility and fragility which
enhanced her chances of making a good marriage,
aroused the esteem of those around her and, so
it was said, ensured that her husband would re¬
main faithful.
This criterion of physical perfection emerged
very early on. It was widespread among the
wealthier classes under the Song dynasty
(960-1280) and by the end of the seventeenth cen¬
tury it was common to all classes. The custom
of binding the feet, one of the most unusual to
emanate from Chinese society, did not disappear
until the time of the protest movement of 4 May
1919, under Sun Yat Sen.
Wedding procession in
Beijing, 1911.
A woman's grace did not, however, depend
solely upon physical attributes. Her mother
would have taught her a whole range of
behaviour patterns: she must be humble, good-
natured and respectful, open her lips as little as
possible when she spoke, laugh without being
noisy, never raise her voice, make sure she could
not be seen if she looked outside, drink no
alcohol, never go out at night. These rules com¬
plemented certain moral qualities that were
judged to be important: she should always place
herself a little in the background, never mention
her own qualities, never make excuses for her
faults, accept criticism without seeking to defend
herself, always be discreet.
This "ideal" education did nothing to en¬
courage the development of a woman's personali¬
ty, but it prepared her to fit perfectly into the
family structures of traditional society.
Feminine submissiveness
A girl brought up in this fashion was ready to
conform to the principles propounded in the
classic formula: three obediences, four virtues.
The three obediences were those owed to her
father by a girl, to her husband by a married
woman and to her son by a widow. The four vir¬
tues involved a woman's duty to her parents-in-
law, respect to her husband, good relations with
her sisters-in-law and good neighbourliness.
Woman's permanent obedience to man is in-

herent in the traditional Chinese cosmological
system: the Yin (female principle) is always subor¬
dinate to the Yang (male principle), while at the
same time being linked and complementary to
it. Confucius embodied this immutable order in
the following formula: "Man is to woman as the
sun is to the moon. He leads, she follows; thus
harmony reigns."
Absolute obedience to the father became ap¬
parent in marriage as in all other matters, and a
girl would take as her husband the man chosen
by him, nor could she refuse to do so. As the pro¬
verb puts it: "Marry a cock and follow a cock,
marry a dog and follow a dog." In this particular
domain a young man was no freer than a young
woman. If he did not like the girl but she suited
his parents who felt that "she is just what we
want", he would still have to perform his con¬
jugal duties towards her to the end of his days.
If, on the other hand, he liked her but his parents
found her unsuitable, he would have to renounce
all thought of her.
The young wife had as many duties towards
her parents-in-law as to her own parents. Often
she would find herself at the foot of the ladder
of the family hierarchy and cast in the role of a
servant, especially if it was a modest rural fami¬
ly. In some cases, if her situation became in¬
tolerable, she might have no other recourse than
to flee or commit suicide.
Against such a background, the importance
attached to female virginity can well be imagined.
Its loss was considered to be particularly scan¬
dalous and to provide justifiable grounds for the
annulment of a marriage. A woman's virginity
was an essential bargaining factor in the marriage
settlement and a key indicator of her virtue.
Wife to one man only
In traditional Chinese society, therefore, marriage
was primarily a family affair rather than the
union of two individuals and was often arranged
at the time of the birth of the future bride and
bridegroom. In no circumstances was it based on
love or personal choice. Indeed, a marriage ar¬
ranged on such a basis would have been viewed
with scorn. Even when the engaged couple had
been secretly intimate before marriage, the girl's
family could promise her to another. In China,
just as anywhere else, love affairs and elopements
could occur, but under the Ming and Qing
dynasties the fugitives would be pursued by the
forces of the law, brought back and forced into
submission. If one of the lovers were to die,
decency demanded that the other did not survive
him or her. The legend of Liang and Tso, the
Chinese Romeo and Juliet, is an exemplary story
of lovers who died for their love.
When a girl got married, she became a full
member of her husband's family group and her
primary duty was to produce a son to continue
the family line. Confucians viewed inability to
produce a male child as a serious fault, since it
deprived the husband of his posterity. In such a
case, therefore, the man was permitted to take a
second wife or mistress to ensure continuation
of the family line. Nevertheless, the first wife kept
her position in the family hierarchy and the se¬
cond wife was subordinate to her. The children
of a second union were "attributed" to the first
wife, who remained the only legitimate spouse.
If a wife was widowed, she was expected to
remain faithful to her deceased husband. A de¬
cent woman was wife to only one man. The
virgin widow who married the spirit of her
fiancé, who had died before the wedding had
taken place, was held in the highest esteem:
The man has vanished like the morning dew,
The woman in the frost of night remains,
The river in its endless flow runs on,
The lone-left bird laments eternally.
On the other hand, there is a proverb which
says that "while it is easy to remain a virgin,
widowhood is hard to bear"; so after three years
of mourning the widow could think of remarry¬
ing. The parents-in-law would then arrange the
marriage contract and would receive the gifts of¬
fered by the new husband, a just recompense for
those they themselves had given for the bride pur¬
chase. The parents-in-law might also remarry the
wife or fiancée of their dead son to a man without
fortune and adopt the child of this second union.
In this manner, then, the Confucian family
was perpetuated down the years and it was not
until the end of the nineteenth century that
thousands of women rose up to throw off the
shackles of their enslavement.
A two-wheeler for
transporting all the family.
»is
4
<
Í
t 5 1 21
