POLLUTION UNLIMITED
24

BY FRANCE BEQUETTE
MOST human beings seem to be
quite unaware that the small
blue planet on which we live
is very fragile. Although, some twenty
years ago, general concern began to be
expressed about the state of our natural
environment, we continue to inflict
irreversible damage upon it.
The atmosphere, our water resources,
the soil, even our food, are all contami¬
nated, largely as a result of our own ac¬
tions. Rather than the quality of life, the
level of industrial development achieved
is taken as the yardstick by which we
judge our civilization. We create deserts
and cause floods by destroying our
forests. Our homes and work-places are
polluted by the tobacco we smoke, by
harmful particles from the materials we
use and the emanations from ill-adapted
fireplaces. We can no longer afford to ig¬
nore the warnings we are given byíour
most capable and conscientious scientists.
If we do not want to condemn our chil¬
dren to a life of stagnation on a decaying
planet, it is time for us to reflect upon
the consequences of our daily actions.
Once' the atmosphere was pure. Now
the quantity of polluting gases emitted
into the atmosphere exceeds Nature's ca:
"pacity to absorb them. The equilibrium
is broken and we are threatened by an
ever-lengthening list of ' perilsthe
"greenhouse effect", the gap in the ozone
layer, climatic change, a rise in the sea
level.
This copper smelting plant at Douglas,
Arizona, was closed down in January 1987 by
order of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency. Noxious gases and particles
from its smokestacks had caused untold
damage to the environment of the American .
southwest and of neighbour country Mexico.
What is happening? The more the
world becomes industrialized, the more
energy is consumed. No source of ener¬
gy, however, is completely innocuous.
Combustion is a chemical reaction in
which carbon, sulphur and nitrogen ox¬
ides are produced as well as all kinds of
molecules, some of which are highly
toxic. Since wood contains chlorine, an
ordinary domestic fire gives off dioxin (a
highly toxic substance made notorious by
the Seveso disaster1), in minute quanti¬
ties only, it is true, but which augment
the other pollutants present in the air,
especially in poorly-ventilated dwellings.
And the use of fossil fuels (coal, oil, natur¬
al gas), and the need for them; are
continually increasing. Industry, trans¬
port and heating systems emit a constant
stream of pollutants into the atmosphere
in quantities which, though they may
seem small compared to the volume of
the Earth's atmosphere, are sufficient to
have a marked effect.
The greenhouse effect
The most widespread pollutant is car¬
bon dioxide, annual emission of which
has increased from 90 million tonnes in
the last century to 5,000 million tonnes
today. The two World Wars and increases
in the price of oil have slowed this up¬
ward trend somewhat, but the United
Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) estimates that output of carbon
dioxide may double by the year 2050.
Carbon dioxide is the principal cause of
the greenhouse effect. It is transparent to
incoming radiation from the sun which
penetrates the Earth's atmosphere,
although a large proportion of the ultra-
	 25

violet rays are absorbed by the ozone
layer, situated some 10 to 50 kilometres
above the Earth's surface. On the other
hand, it traps the infra-red radiation
reflected back by the Earth, like the glass
of a greenhouse, thus causing a heating
up of the atmosphere .
Other gases also contribute to the
greenhouse effect. These include the chlo-
rofluorocarbons (CFCs), 700,000 tonnes
of which we release to the atmosphere an¬
nually through the use of aerosols,
refrigerators, and air conditioners and the
manufacture of plastics and the cleaning
of electronic components.
With a lifetime in the atmosphere of
about one hundred years, a CFC
molecule is 20,000 times more efficient
at trapping heat than is a molecule of car¬
bon dioxide, so, proportionately to their
This Canadian scientist is analysing the composition of tiny bubbles of air trapped in glacier ice at
the beginning of the 19th century.
Desert scene in North Dakota. The three-month drought that hit the central United States last year could presage the onset of global warming.

concentration in the air, CFCs contrib¬
ute much more to the greenhouse effect
than does carbon dioxide. Furthermore,
CFCs are capable of destroying ozone.
The gap in the ozone layer observed over
the Antarctic has become-40 per cent larg¬
er since 1957 and another gap has ap¬
peared above Australia and New Zealand.
The B type ultra-violet rays which can
now pass through these gaps and reach
the Earth's surface are thought to be the
primary cause of some skin cancers.
Nitrous oxide, another gas which
contributes to the greenhouse effect, has
a life of nearly 200 years. It is released by
microbial fermentation in the soil and the
burning of wood and fossil fuels. Of the
12 to 15 million tonnes released into the
atmosphere annually, nearly 10 per cent
is due to the use of nitrogen fertilizers.



Other forms of atmospheric
pollution
Until recently, the industrialized
countries were the main propagators of
atmospheric pollution, but they are being
rapidly caught up by countries which are
becoming industrialized. In Eastern Eu¬
rope and China, for instance, factories
and non-nuclear power stations draw
their energy from cheap, locally-
produced coal. The combustion of coal
releases sulphur dioxide to the
atmosphere. When mixed with rain and
carried by the wind it can travel thou¬
sands of kilometres. The acid deposits it
produces attack forests and buildings and
can also be harmful to man.
The alarm was sounded in 1970 by the
Scandinavian countries where "acid rain"
has destroyed all life in many of their
lakes. These countries soon realized that,
since the prevailing winds were from the
west, the sulphur dioxide being deposit¬
ed on their territory came from British
and American factories. Winds from the
east, however, were the source of the
sulphur dioxide deposited on the Feder¬
al Republic of Germany, which was in
turn responsible for deposits reaching the
forests of the Vosges in France.
In addition to burning tree leaves and
pine needles, these acid deposits also seem
to make the forest floor itself sterile.
Furthermore, they are causing severe
degradation to historic monuments that
were still intact at the beginning of the
century, such as the Parthenon in Greece,
the Coliseum and Venetian palaces in
Dhaka inundated. The catastrophic flooding to which Bangladesh is subject may be in part due to deforestation on the slopes of the Himalayas.
27

Italy, the Cathedral of Strasbourg in
France, the Taj Mahal in India, and vari¬
ous buildings in the United States. As
these few examples show, the phenome¬
non occurs wherever industrial concen¬
tration is accompanied by heavy
automobile traffic releasing exhaust gases
rich in sulphur dioxide.
Exhaust gases also contain lead,
emissions of which are estimated at
450,000 tonnes annually and are harmful
to health. The struggle for lead-free petrol
is still far from being won.
Soiling the soil
Other heavy metals pollute not only
the atmosphere but also the soil, ground¬
water and the water table. The quantities
involved annually include: mercury,
11,000 tonnes, cadmium, 5,500 tonnes,
and arsenic, 78,000 tonnes. At present we
are handling over seven million different
chemical products and new ones are con¬
stantly being produced. Production,
which amounted to 250 million tonnes
in 1985, appears to be doubling every
seven or eight years.
Although the accumulation of small
quantities of these products, dangerous
though it may be, passes unnoticed,
major disasters, which are becoming
more frequent,- draw our attention to
them. In 1959, for example, at Minama¬
ta, in Japan, mercury which drained into
the water table resulted in 400 deaths and
left 2,000 people seriously ill or deformed.
Farmers continue to lavish fertilizer on
their fields to obtain ever greater yields,
while the nitrates these fertilizers contain
pollute the adjoining water resources.
Another scandalous example of pollu¬
tion is the stocking of dangerous toxic in¬
dustrial wastes on the ground in humid
areas with permeable soils. The industri¬
alized countries do not know what to do
with their industrial wastes and allow
themselves to be cajoled by unscrupulous
agents who are prepared to take these
wastes off their hands and dispose of them
in poorer, less populated countries where
environmental protection is not a priori¬
ty consideration.
Beauty discountenanced. Air pollution and acid rain have defaced this once-graceful marble maiden
(420-415 BC), at the Acropolis, Athens.
As they become more industrialized,
the developing countries are experiencing
similar problems. The factories and
refineries installed around the Bay of
Hann, at Dakar, have caused a level of



pollution of the sea which is causing the
Government of Senegal great concern.
The techniques necessary to master this
problem are costly and take a long time
to learn. An equally dangerous and daily
occurrence, is pollution by untreated hu¬
man wastes. Illnesses linked to water pol¬
lution account for 25,000 deaths per day,
mainly in the developing countries.
Climatic change
It is in these countries that the hydro-
logical cycle has been the most disturbed,
owing to the deforestation of mountain
areas to make way for agriculture, to sup¬
ply the timber trade or to provide wood
for fuel. After the trees have been cut
down, rain water streams down the slopes
carrying with it the cultivable topsoil and
causing flooding. A recent example has
been the serious flooding in Bangladesh,
which was due to deforestation in Nepal.
28 	

If the practice of firing the bush continues
in Guinea, the Fouta-Djalon mountain
massif, where floods alternate with
seasonal periods of drought, may well
soon cease to be "Africa's water tower".
The danger for the world is very real.
Twenty hectares of forest disappear every
minute and it is estimated that 160 mil¬
lion hectares of woodland are degraded
annually. Clearing Amazonian forest
impairs the Earth's "green lung". For
carbon dioxide is taken up not only by
the oceans, but also by plant life which
transforms it, by photosynthesis, into
carbon hydrates. The fewer trees there
are on the planet the more carbon dioxide
there will be in the atmosphere, and this
can only aggravate the greenhouse effect.
If, as most experts predict will happen,
global warming, a process that has already
begun, drives the planet's average temper¬
ature up by 2°C to 4.5°C, melting of
continental glaciers could cause ocean
levels to rise from 40 to 120 centimetres.
The great deltas of the Ganges, the Nile
and the Mississippi would disappear, as
would the Netherlands and a host of
islands of the Pacific and Indian Oceans,
including the Maldives, Tuvalu and
Tonga.



A joint counter-attack
The fight against pollution comes up
against powerful economic and social
interests. Old, heavily polluting factories
which could not afford to install costly
anti-pollution devices would have to close
down, leaving their workers unem¬
ployed. The installation of catalytic
converters would increase the cost of
automobiles and discourage buyers, thus
dealing a blow to the automobile indus¬
try. The new propellant gases for aerosols
now under study are more expensive than
the existing chlorofluorocarbons. Renew¬
able energy sources which could perhaps
replace fossil fuels, such as solar and tidal
power, are still far from being competi¬
tive. Only nuclear energy can supply
cheap and abundant electricity, thanks to
which certain highly toxic wastes can be
destroyed in very high temperature
incinerators.
Unfortunately, no country wants to
stock on its territory nuclear wastes,
which have an extremely long radioactive
life. Furthermore, it is impossible to
eliminate the risk of recurrence of acci¬
dents such as those that occurred at Three
Mile Island in the USA in 1979 and at
Chernobyl in the USSR in 1986. Final¬
ly, the further the cost of oil falls, the less
justification there is for economizing on
energy consumption and the more pol¬
lution will increase.
Nevertheless, the international com¬
munity seems determined to take action.
Negotiations on global reduction of the
emission of sulphur oxides opened in
1979 under the aegis of the United
Nations Economic Commission for
Europe. Seventeen countries undertook
to reduce their emissions of sulphur oxides
by 30 per cent within twenty years. At
Vienna, in 1985, and in Montreal, in
1987, a Protocol was signed concerning
the production of chlorofluorocarbons.
It was agreed that the heaviest users of
CFCs would reduce their consumption
by 50 per cent by 1999. An extended time
limit was agreed for the developing coun¬
tries, whose annual consumption
amounts to only 0.30 kilograms per cap¬
ita. However, since the ozone layer is
being damaged at a faster rate than that
predicted by experts before the Protocol
was signed, it may be questioned whether
these undertakings are sufficient.
One of the steps being taken by
Unesco for the conservation of the en¬
vironment is the creation, within the
framework of its Man and the Biosphere
(MAB) Programme, of a network of
Wind power is harnessed to pump water for irrigation for these garden-smallholdings in Malta.
Greater use of non-polluting, renewable energy sources would help to reduce atmospheric pollution.
29

biosphere reserves. This work is being
undertaken in collaboration with the
United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP), the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) and the Internation¬
al Union for the Conservation of Nature
and Natural Resources (IUCN). There
are now 273 biosphere reserves in some
seventy countries. Some of these reserves,
such as the Kavkazskiy reserve in the
USSR, are specially equipped to monitor
atmospheric pollution.
Conservation in daily life
Quite apart from the efforts being
made at the national and international
levels, each one of us should become
more aware of the consequences of our
actions. Throwing a mercury or a silver
oxide battery away on a rubbish tip could
lead to the pollution of a cubic metre of
soil or 500 litres of water. Emptying out
the engine oil from an automobile on to
the ground could pollute 5,000 cubic
metres of water. Each time we press the
button on a CFC-powered aerosol we
contribute to the destruction of the ozone
layer. To respond to the state of emer¬
gency call put out by the world's scien¬
tists, we must all react, and react quickly.
Pollution knows no boundaries. The
greenhouse effect could have dire conse¬
quences for the environment and for
human societies. It is already late in the
day both for study and for action.
Yet the stakes are highthe survival of
the Earth itself. .
1. In July 1976, as a result of a leak in a reactor at a chemi¬
cal plant producing chlorophenol, a cloud of poisonous
vapour spread over the town of Seveso, near Milan, kill¬
ing hundreds of birds and small animals and causing respira¬
tory problems, burns and other skin lesions among many
of the inhabitants. Editor
FRANCE BEQUETTE is a French-American
journalist with a special interest in environmental
topics. For the last four years she has been
responsible for training African journalists in the
fields of health and the environment for Unesco's
West and Central Africa News Agencies
Development Project (WANAD).
At Donon in the Vosges, France, a research worker examines a batch of young pine trees that have been exposed to acidic fog.
30 	
