SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
Mapping the human genome
BY JACQUES RICHARDSON
BPlOLOGISTS, aided by mathemati¬
cians, engineers, computer specialists
and a variety of industrial researchers,
began last January a generation-long ef¬
fort to trace and identify every gene and
related material representing the hu¬
man body's "blueprint". This analysis
of our biological architecture is called
the human genome study"genome"
meaning how a living organism is as¬
sembled in its finest details.
The research is expected to require
between fifteen and thirty years of in¬
vestigation, costing perhaps between
$3,000 and $4,000 million. Sir Walter
Bodmer, president of the British Associ¬
ation for the Advancement of Science,
calls the genome plan the "most excit¬
ing" of all the current, large-scale inter¬
national research ventures.
Why so much costly effort, and for
what purpose? One reason is that, af¬
ter a century of intensive biological
research, we still do not understand pre¬
cisely how the body is built and works
(or sometimes fails to). We still need to
learn the complete instructions for
"making a human being", how these
are communicated through all the
body's cells to the various tissues and
vital organsbrain, heart, liver and so
forthand why some instructions go
wrong.
A second reason is that, once we
have understood how the genome is
constructed and functions, we should
be able to take appropriate precautions
or corrective steps to deal with errors
in the system: disease and disability.
Medicine and public health are thus ex¬
pected to benefit enormously from the
new knowledge. We should then be
able to resolve, thirdly, some of the
many mysteries of human heredity. A
fourth goal is to save some of the en¬
dangered biological species facing pos¬
sible extinction.
Not counting the blood's red cells,
54 your body or mine contains between 1 0
Biologists embark on
a vast new international project
to identify and locate
every human gene.
million million and 100 million million
cells, so that each cubic centimetre of
living tissue contains many millions.
Each microscopic cell has its own
smaller nucleus, within which the "in¬
structions for living" are coded along
an extremely long DNA molecule. DNA,
or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the basic
genetic puzzle solved in 1953 by three
researchers, Francis Crick, Rosalind
Franklin and James Watson.
The animal organism's cells com¬
bine their structures to form increasingly
large and complicated components
so that cell biology is now more and
more important for us to be able to un¬
derstand:
how oxygen helps decompose and
absorb food
how protein (essential in diet) is
manufactured
role of water in transporting
calcium and sodium
how cells reproduce
why cells fall ill, and
why these various mechanisms exist
in so many combinations that each of
us possesses undisputed uniqueness of
body and mind.
THE GENE, THE BASIC UNIT
OF BIOLOGICAL INHERITANCE
The cell's nucleus, the very hub of the
living universe, houses 46 chromosomes
upon which is distributed the DNA ar¬
chitectural information. This very long-
chained substance has four nitrogen-
based components called adenine (A),
thymine (T), cytosine (C) and guanine
(G). Depending on how the A, T, C and
G are linked, they join to form proteins.
We call that portion of DNA linkage
which issues the commands to make an
entire protein a gene.
The genes next combine by thou¬
sands to form the 46 chromosomes cit¬
ed: 23 pairs of them. Because the
chromosomes constituting each pair are
somewhat different, these miniscule
differences serve as markers to identi¬
fy the constituent genes. In reproduc¬
tion, a father and a mother contribute
a gene corresponding to every chromo¬
some pair found in their offspring. It is
the combination of the similarities and
differences that make each of us male
or female, tall or short, black-haired or
blond, dark-skinned or light, prone to
disease (and which ones), long-lived or
otherwise, mentally alert or handi¬
capped, musical, manually dexterous,
sports-minded, and so on.
In terms of poor health, for exam¬
ple, chromosome pair no. 3 is already
known to bear the "disease genes" for
maladies such as certain protein defi¬
ciencies, intolerance to some sugars, a
tendency to develop kidney-cell cancer,
an inability to process thyroid hormone,
or difficulty in breathing.
But the exact location of the
offending gene or genes is difficult to
establish because it is tucked some¬
where along what is a very long chain
indeed. One has to imagine a piece of
cord 1 cm in diameter, but 10,000 km
long! This is the nature of the challenge
facing the genome explorers.
GENE THERAPY
TO CURE DISEASE
What happens after much of the bio¬
logical sleuthing is accomplished?
Remember the second reason, listed
above, for all this effort: to improve
medicine and public health. Here is how
"gene therapy" could be put to work
to cure someone with a medical
problem centred, for example, in bone
marrow. The technique described is al¬
ready familiar to Couner readers (see
March 1987 issue) as that of recom¬
binant DNA, in use today in some plant
and farm-animal biotechnology and in
the pharmaceutical industry.
The appropriate gene (embedded
in some surrounding DNA) is taken from

a healthy donor, then "spliced"via a
microscopic chemical methodto a
specially prepared virus. The virus is per¬
mitted to "attack" one of the defective
cells removed from the patient afflict¬
ed with bone-marrow disease. The in¬
fecting virus then inserts the normal
gene, as part of the DNA material the
treated virus has brought with it, into
the DNA of the receiving cell. Finally, the
manipulated or engineered bone-
marrow cells are returned to the pa¬
tient, where they reproduce and be¬
come an entire population of healthy
bone-marrow cells. The patient is now
well.
Before the genome researchers at¬
tain this degree of scientific discovery,
however, there are other factors to be
considered. Hence, the length of time
required for research. Even the experts
cannot be sure, for instance, of how
many genes might exist. Victor McKu-
sick of the Johns Hopkins University in
the United States has advanced a low
estimate of 50,000, although 100,000
may prove to be the case once all iden¬
tification has been completed. So far,
less than 5,000 genes have been given
labels and only 1,500 of these have
been located accurately on their host
chromosomes.
Another factor is that the success
of the undertaking will lie in its appli¬
cation to men and women everywhere.
Both the research and its expected
Genetic Message (1985),
by French artist Nicole d'Agaggio.
results are burdened, furthermore, with
disturbing ethical problems. Who will
establish the authority to perform
genetic interventions? (France has led
the way; President François Mitterrand
has created a special bio-ethical com¬
mission, at national level, chaired by
blood specialist Jean Bernard.) What
might be the technique's effects in
terms of law and justice (on whom
might the technique not be used)? How
can everyone, regardless of social or
economic position, be assured of access
to the new therapies?
The international Human Genome
Organization, known familiarly as
HUGO, a non-profit professional associ¬
ation registered in Switzerland and
headed by Professor McKusick, will
meet in October of this year under the
sponsorship of the American weekly
magazine Science. The experts will ap¬
portion research tasks among almost
300 workers from nearly fifty countries,
prepare to reconstruct important early
biological phases in man's prehistory
(before records were kept), search for
genes involved in immune-response
mechanismssuch as the deficiencies
leading to AIDS, and try to identify
genes responsible for growth disorders
and such devastating illnesses as cystic
fibrosis or Huntington's chorea (a type
of degeneration of the brain and ner¬
vous system).
The HUGO experts include French
Nobel prize-winner Jean Dausset,
Michio Ito of the University of Tokyo,
and Hans Zachau of the University of
Munich. They hope to achieve major
results by the year 2005, calling upon
not only molecular and cell biologists
throughout the world but also on the
fast computing machines available
chiefly in the industrialized countries.
Unesco's Director-General, Federico
Mayor, a biochemist, has appointed a
special consultant to assist in the co¬
ordination of the basic research under
the aegis of United Nations agencies
and throughout the global scientific
family. He has also called directly on the
resources of the Unesco-affiliated Inter¬
national Cell Research Organization,
the Microbiological Resource Centres,
and the International Brain Research
Organization.
JACQUES G. RICHARDSON
was editor of Unesco's international
quarterly journal Impact of Science
on Society from 1972 to 1985.
55
