Knights of the Far West
BY GARY N. GRANVILLE
The cowboy starred in epics
which unfolded on cinema screens
the world over. Has this modern
knight on horseback ridden into
the sunset for the last time?
m

BUFFAU" B -
50
The Sioux chief Sitting Bull and Buffalo Bill
(William Frederick Cody, 1846-1917) in a spectacular show
which dramatized life in the Wild West.

NeI O myth is more widespread or more deeply
woven into the fabric of contemporary culture
than that of the western. As the twenty-first cen¬
tury approaches, it is striking that a. historical
phenomenon over a hundred years old should
still be so fresh and alive. The behaviour patterns,
aspirations, styles of dress, and even the kind of
food depicted in westerns have become familiar
models for people the world over to dream about.
Blue jeans, the cowboy's trademark, are the
most popular garment on earth. And clothing,
surely, is the most visible emblem of the image
of themselves people want to project. Hundreds
of millions of would-be cowboys walk around in
jeans. Why has the western had such a universal
impact? Two of the main reasons would seem to
be the archetypal power of the myth, and the
technological and cultural background of the
twentieth century.
From knight to cowboy
The cowboy is the democratic heir of the mythi¬
cal knight in shining armour. He evokes and
adapts for the modern public the countless
legends that have grown up through the ages, all
over the world, around the taming of the horse.
The chivalrous knight is someone who
masters his animal nature, thereby raising him¬
self above other men. He is more powerful, more
mobile and freer than they. He shoulders the
noble responsibility of restoring justice and
defending the weak and the oppressed. But he is
vulnerable, because if he wavers and falls from
grace, he has a long way to fall. He is lonely, too,
for not everyone can become a knight. The at¬
traction of the myth of the chivalrous knight is
rooted in the twofold dream we all harbour, of
achieving self-control and meting out justice. For
a long time the fulfilment of this dream was be¬
yond the reach of most of us.
Then, with the American and the French
Revolutions, the great principle of human equal-
TMlW|M
AND
WrlATTTT
Ideally Did.
OKI TO® B3BH11S
- SCLh6~ -5
ity came to the fore and transformed ways of
thinking. The ideal of the western was the per¬
fect substitute for an over-élitist myth. The dig¬
nity and freedom of the knight were now within
the grasp of everyone, at least in imagination. A
figure from the New World, the cowboy, was
grafted onto an ancient myth, ready to captivate
the whole world.



The Golden Age of the Far West
Then along came the cinema, an invention that
has had inconceivable repercussions. Like Guten¬
berg's printing press, it revolutionized commu¬
nications. It propagated the same dreams to a
worldwide audience. As early production and dis¬
tribution techniques were cumbersome and ex¬
pensive, only a limited number of films were
available to an ever-widening public.
The sheer size of the American market meant
that the United States would play a dominant role
in world cinema: films whose costs had already
I oster for a western
featuring the American
actor Tom Mix and his
famous horse, Tony. In
films Tom Mix portrayed
the decent cowboy,
committed to the struggle
for justice.
51

I" aventuras Extra0Pd¡napias'*í|
LANZADOS AL ABISMO f
\
U V- Ba.íaiana
I\ight, three knights on
horseback (15th-century
French miniature). Left,
Buffalo Bill depicted on the
cover of a Spanish
illustrated magazine.
GARY N. GRANVILLE
is a Paris-based American
writer who has worked in
films, television,
photography and
advertising.
52
been recouped at home could be exported at
prices that defied all competition. Add to this the
extraordinary popularity of American films, and
the result was that the whole world began to see
the same films and to share the same cinema
landscape.
In response to the production needs of a
rapidly increasing output, the American film in¬
dustry set up in California, where there is sun¬
shine practically all the year round. Film-makers
need décors as well as light and actorsand
California has plenty of outstanding natural lo¬
cations, ideal for westerns.
The advent of television meant that the
myths vehicled by the American cinema reached
an even wider audience. The whole planet began
to tune into the Hollywood wavelength. But it
was the Far West, without a doubt, that most
strikingly captured the popular imagination.
Adventure in the wide open spaces and per¬
manent confrontation with danger gave a man
the opportunity to reveal the best (or the worst)
of himself, to go beyond the frontiers of civiliza¬
tion and escape from its reassuring but repressive
grip. What a thrilling experience for modern
man, confined to a world of daily routine and
mundane hopes, ground down by conventions
and constraints!
The end of a myth?
But the values underlying this myth were slow¬
ly turned upside down. The form remained the
same, but the content changed. The ideal became
the anti-hero, not the hero. The search for in-
ÉP
lala^Ha^Rù!
Ijr y**&
dividuality and liberty, the rebellion symbolized
by the western, persisted, but there was a shift
in one of the myth's intrinsic values: belief in di¬
vine justice. This virtually universal idea presup¬
poses that harmony, if disturbed, always
re-establishes itself, in human society as in the cos¬
mos. Order triumphs over disorder. This notion
is expressed in the Oriental "karma", in the
West's "as you sow so shall you reap".
This concept of justice had always been an
integral part of the scenario (the cavalry which
always arrives in the nick of time), or a presup¬
position of the narrative (crime doesn't pay). Just
as the knights of old defending a just cause in¬
variably came out victorious from the "judge-

W*4.
r
I
ment of God", it was impossible for the "bad
guy" to draw his gun before the "good guy" in
their ritual duel.The idea that the forces of good
always win in the end gave the myth its transcen¬
dent quality. It is perhaps no coincidence that the
sheriff's badge is a six-pointed star, like Solomon's
seal, a symbol of equilibrium and wisdom.
Until the 1970s, then, audiences delighted in
the triumph of order, which reaffirmed their faith
in justice, honesty, in short, in all the great moral
values. Then ways of thinking changed and these
values were challenged. Everything was called
into question, even myths.
The systematic and sometimes naive moral
stance commended to us by the American cine
ma, particularly in westerns, was no longer in
tune with modern thinking. A reaction was in¬
evitable. The idea of divine justice and the stereo¬
typed hero were less clearly defined. In recent
years most westerns have been pastiches of the
mythical West or have set out to demystify it.
Now the outlaw is defended, even glorified, and
there is a feeling that the other traditional adver¬
saries, the Indians, can no longer be seen as the
bad guys. The keynote is realism, sometimes even
squalor. The solitude of the cowboy has become
selfishness, his dignity has become a form of
provocation. The legendary cowboy no longer
exists. By a curious coincidence, he died around
the same time as John Wayne. 53
