Thomas Paine
The antimonarchist who
tried to save a King
BY JEAN LESSAY
From L'Américain de la Convention, Thomas Paine,
professeur de révolutions, Perrin publishers, Paris 1987
I
18
T was 11 December 1792, and a trial that the Girondins were unable to
delay any longer was due to open before the Conventionthe trial of King
Louis XVI.
The foremost and most inflexible champion of the Republic, Tom Paine
did not believe in the inviolability of the sovereign. His position on this point
was clear. Louis Capetthe name he was among the first to use to designate
the kingwas subject to the judgement of the French people.
"I think it necessary that Louis XVI be tried, not out of a spirit of ven¬
geance, but because such a step seems to me to be just, legitimate and in con¬
formity with wise policy. If Louis is innocent, let us give him the opportuni¬
ty to prove his innocence. If he is guilty, then let the nation decide whether
he is to be pardoned or punished."
But putting the king to death might provide England, in its turn, with
a pretext to declare war. Would this be in France's interest? Furthermore,
execution of the kingand Paine could bear witness to thiswould be badly
received in America, France's foremost ally, whose help with supplies she
needed at this time. Although they were confirmed Republicans, the Ameri¬
cans had not forgotten that Louis XVI had given them his constant support
during the course of their own revolution. Would not his execution appear,
in some way, as a way of punishing him for having acted thus? Whilst taking
advantage of the pretext of the execution to declare war, hypocritical En¬
gland would delight in seeing the French themselves become the instrument
of their vengeance by killing her former enemy and the ally of her rebel
colonists. Did they really want to give such pleasure to the tyrant George III?
On 15 January 1793, Paine, as a deputy to the Convention, put forward
his arguments before the assembly:
"Citizen President, my hatred of and aversion to monarchy are well
known. They are based on reason and on conviction, and you would have
to take my life before you could eradicate them. Yet my compassion for any
man in his misfortune, whether he be enemy or friend, is just as keen and
sincere..."
There were, he added, grounds for abolishing capital punishment, that
cruel vestige of the monarchical régime; furthermore, the Convention had
been given no mandate to kill anyone. "Abolition of the death penalty has
already been proposed, and I recall with great pleasure the excellent speech
on this subject pronounced by Robespierre in the Constituent Assembly...
Since France has been the first of all the nations in Europe to abolish royalty,
let her be also the first to abolish the death penalty and to substitute for it
some other punishment."
Paine pointed out that it is impossible to eliminate monarchy simply by
eliminating the king, since the execution of Charles I had not prevented
Charles II from coming to the throne. He also drew attention to another
point which was worth consideration. So long as Louis XVI was alive, his
two brothers, the Comte de Provence and the Comte d'Artois, could not
lay claim to the throne. To kill the king would be to furnish them with a
pretext to give free rein to their ambitions as possible successors.
His speech ended with this twofold proposition: that the Convention
should pronounce the sentence of banishment upon Louis Capet and his fa¬
mily, that Louis Capet should be detained in prison until the end of the war
and that the sentence should come into force at that time.
1 he Convention
decrees the abolition of
slavery in the French
colonies on 4 February
1794. Drawing by
Nicolas André Monsiau
(1754-1837).
JEAN LESSAY,
a French writer specializing
in the American
Revolution, has published
studies on Lafayette
(Bordas, Paris, 1983) and
Washington (J.-C. Lattes,
Paris, 1985). His book on
the Count of Rivarol, a
royalist in the era of the
French Revolution, will be
published shortly.
