LOVE SACRED AND PROFANE
Decoding Hafez' mystic message
BY REZA FEIZ
HAFEZ is considered in
the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the land of his birth,
and beyond the frontiers of the
Persian-speaking countries, as the
poet of love and as one of the
greatest Muslim Sufi mystics, even
though his worldly language
presents him as a very human and
sensual poet.
The meaning of love in Hafez
must first be elucidated and an at¬
tempt then be made to establish the
relationships between "Love", "the
Lover", and "the Beloved". This
may help to clarify Hafez' use of
language and to define the level at
which his poetry should be read
and appreciated.
For a Sufi like Hafez, love has
a sacred dimension and cannot be
understood in its profane sense.
Love is enacted in a sphere in which
even a profane act automatically be¬
comes sacred. Thus for a Sufi, even
humdrum everyday life remains
spiritual. It is in this sense that
Hafez sings the praises of love:
/ have never heard a sweeter word
than the word love,
It is the only memory that remains beneath the cupola ofthe heavens.
However, this "sweet word" is accompanied by pain, the pain
of man's separation from his celestial origin, a theme magnificently
treated by another great Persian Sufi poet, Mawlana ("Our Lord")
Jalal ad-Din ar-Rumi (1207-1273), in his great work the Masnavi.
Thus all the poetry of Hafez is a hymn to love; for him poetry
is simply a way of revealing and glorifying it. He is also intensely
aware of love's influence on the success of his verse, for he says:
Since love has taught thee eloquence
Thy words are heard in every gathering.
What is the place of love in this movement of the lover towards
the Beloved? The starting point of the process is surely the lover's
longing. For Hafez, however, the Beloved is always the originator,
It is when the Beloved is fully revealed that the lover's ecstasy and
passion come into being. The lover finds the beauty and perfec¬
tion to which he aspires embodied in the Beloved:
In the beginning the reflection of thy beauty revealed itself
Love appeared and enflamed the whole universe.
In Sufi forms of expression, the lover's overwhelming need for
union with the Beloved is called Soluk, which might be
15th-century miniature from a Divan (collection of poems)
by Hafez.
translated as "spiritual journey".
The circle of love begins and ends
with the Beloved. He who accom¬
plishes the journey towards union
with the Beloved lives in the materi¬
al world but also inhabits a spiritu¬
al universe. He sees the world as the
reflection of the beauty of the
Beloved, but he is not thereby
attached to it. Hafez says:
/ was not interested in the affairs of
this world,
It is thy face that has made it beauti¬
ful for me.
Contrary to what might be sup¬
posed from his worldly and even
licentious language, Hafez is a great
Sufi who becomes a poet and not
a poet who speaks as a mystic.
He approaches poetry from a sacred
and spiritual viewpoint. He speaks
of wine, cabarets, cup-bearers; of
loved ones, singers, harpists; of curls
and tresses, of beautiful faces and
marks of beauty ... Ostensibly these
are all worldly images, but to accept
them at their face value is to mis¬
understand completely the social and
cultural ethos of the society of
which Hafez was writing.
The personality of Hafez ("he who has learned the Qur'an
by heart"), also known as "the tongue of the invisible" lisan-ol
ghayb), and "the interpreter of mysteries" (tarjoman-ol asrar), directs
the reader to look for a further meaning to his words. It is evident
that his is a symbolic and allegorical language written in the liter¬
ary style of the period and still valid. The fact that those poems
which seem the most worldly are sung as psalms at Sufi gather¬
ings is proof that Sufis consider him to be a spiritual master.
Hafez' poetry is universal because he touches on eternal truths.
For Hafez, light comes straight from the sun, unfiltered by any
earthly medium, and it is through this pure light of inspiration
that he distinguishes between truth and illusion and, with unusual
realism, recommends forgiveness and tolerance:
Forgive the quarrel of seventy-two rites and religions
Not having known truth, they have followed the path of illusion.
REZA FEIZ, of the Islamic Republic of Iran, is the author of a number of articles
and papers on philosophical themes. A former director of the Iranian Centre for
Cultural Studies, he is currently serving as his country's Ambassador to Unesco.
12
