THE DAWN OF A NEW AGE

BY LUIS FILIPE BARRETO
AT the end of the fourteenth cen¬
tury, the extent of the known
world was, at most, equivalent to
barely one quarter of its true area. Islam¬
ic civilization was the repository of this
knowledge. When, during the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, gaps in geo¬
graphical knowledge were gradually
filled, it was on the initiative of Christian
Europe.
As a result of the great maritime ex¬
peditions of this period Portugal became
largely responsible for bringing Europe
closer to Africa, Asia, the Americas and
Oceania. The significance of the Portuguese
discoveries in the history of civilizations is
that they made an extraordinary contribu¬
tion to the opening up of the planet. As
a result of Portuguese endeavours, Euro¬
peans sailed round the Capes of Tarfaya
and Bojador, the traditional limits of navi¬
gation along the west coast of Africa,
which had only seldom been passed.
They went on to reach equatorial regions
and the southern hemisphere and gave the
lie to the traditional European idea that
these regions were uninhabitable. These
discoveries established for the first time
that there was a link between the Atlan¬
tic and Indian Oceansthe so-called
"route to India"thus refuting the
widely-held traditional view that the
Indian Ocean was landlocked.
A new world-picture
As a result of this revolution in com¬
munication and knowledge, a relatively
accurate picture of the planet began to
emerge for the first time. The tropics and
the southern hemisphere were not inferi¬
or to the northern hemisphere but differ¬
ent, possessing a wider variety of
minerals, and plant and animal life. The
The Tower of Belém, left, has stood like a
sentinel at the mouth of the Tagus since the
early 16th century, when it was built to
defend the port of Lisbon. This jewel of
Portuguese Renaissance architecture became
the symbol of the voyages of discovery. From
here sailed ships bound for India, the
Americas, Africa, China and Japan.
revolution also made a decisive contribu¬
tion, in both theory and practice, to the
discovery that humankind, one and the
same, existed all over the world.
The new awareness of life on a plan¬
etary scale, which came into being with
the discoveries of the fifteenth and six¬
teenth centuries, began to stimulate a
world economy based on the unequal
terms of trade which the Europeans im¬
posed in their dealings with other socie¬
ties. A mercantile economy centred on
cities such as Lisbon and Seville came into
being, with central and northern Europe
and the Italian cities providing the main
outlets and sources of finance.
The first signs of a world culture also
began to emerge. Books, letters, reports
and maps were published and circulated
in southern Europe but also in Goa,
Macao and Nagasaki. The Portuguese dis¬
coveries thus made a fundamental contri¬
bution to the transition from an age of
tightly-knit societies to a wider, more
open world.
Portuguese navigators settled in
Madeira and the Azores in the 1420s and
1430s and then advanced through the At¬
lantic and along the west coast of Africa.
Gil Eanes rounded Cape Bojador in 1434.
Between 1440 and 1460 further progress
was made along the coast of Guinea and
the Cape Verde islands were discovered.
The islands of Fernando Po, Sao Tomé,
Príncipe and Annobón were discovered
in 1470. In 1483, Diogo Cào reached the
River Congo and then, in 1487-1488,
Bartolomeu Dias established the existence
of a link between the Atlantic and Indian
Oceans by sailing round the Cape of
Good Hope, which he called the Cape of
Storms. Vasco da Gama's great voyage of
1497-1499 opened the sea route between
Europe and Asia.
In the sixteenth century, the drive for
expansion took the Portuguese into the
interior of Africa, with the exploration
of the Monomotapa empire (present-day
Zimbabwe) in 1514, and to the Americas,
with the arrival in 1500 of Pedro Alvares
Cabrai in Brazil and of the Corto Real
brothers in Newfoundland. Joäo Rod¬
rigues Cabrilho played a decisive role in
the exploration of Florida in 1539 and of
California in 1542-1543. The Portuguese
also went on to Asia and Oceania, reach¬
ing Malacca and the East Indies in
1509-1511, China in 1513 and Japan in
1542-1543.
Other European peoples spread out
into the wider world later than the Por¬
tuguese, who can be said to have ushered
This map drawn in 1519 by the Portuguese cartographer Lopo Hörnern is an attempt to reconcile
new data collected by European navigators with the time-honoured canons of Ptolemaic
geography. The regions of the East and Far East seem to be joined to the lands discovered in the
West by Portuguese and Spanish explorers.

in a new era of knowledge and human
history in the 1420s and 1430s. The first
significant date in Spanish expansion was
1492, when Christopher Columbus
(1451-1506), who had been enlisted in the
service of the Catholic monarchs Ferdi¬
nand and Isabella, reached the West
Indies. French and British expansion only
began in the 1530s. Portugal's geograph¬
ic discoveries were not only ahead of
those of other European countries, but
the Portuguese were also the first to reach
all the continents (Africa, Asia, the
Americas and Oceania) and the major
oceans (the Atlantic, the Indian and the
Pacific).
As a result of this vast enterprise, Por¬
tugal became the repository of a data
bank on a planetary scale. For the first
time, a worldwide system of material and
intellectual exchanges took shape. Never
before had such a mass of information in
so many fieldsfrom the determination
of latitudes, watersheds, and magnetic
declinations to botany, zoology,
mineralogybeen compiled and classi¬
fied. The first attempts were also made
towards the systematic application of in¬
formation gathered from different oceans,
continents and societies.



An age of expansion
There were two main stages in the
Portuguese discoveries, separated by a
period of recession between 1460 and
1469, as a result of the death of Prince
Henry the Navigator and of hesitations
in the geostrategical policy of King
Afonso V (1438-1481).
The first stage began in 1415, with the
conquest of Ceuta in Morocco, and end¬
ed in 1460 with the arrival of the Por¬
tuguese in Sierra Leone. This period
corresponded to the emergence of a so¬
cial, technical and ideological structure
geared to the expansion of Portuguese
power in the Atlantic and Africa. The
thrust of this expansion was directed
towards three main objectives: settlement
in North Africa, a determination to sail
further south than Cape Bojador, and the
Modern marine charts on this page and opposite show (above) the route taken by Vasco da Gama
along the coast of Africa and (opposite page) the Atlantic voyages of Diogo Câo, Bartolomeu Dias
and the route of Pedro Alvares Cabrai to Brazil.
organization of an area of production in
Madeira and the Azores.
The first stage was dominated by
Prince Henry the Navigator (1394-1460),
a great figure who strove to coordinate
the activities of the nobles and merchants,
who coveted wealth from agriculture and
trade and aspired to control the trade
routes, and to reconcile these activities
with the imperatives of nationhood and
Christian Europe (as dictated by the
Papacy and the Order of Christ, a reli-
Joäo de Castro (1500-1548), a Portuguese
scholar and explorer who served for a time as
viceroy to India, made a major contribution
to the science of navigation with his
celebrated roteiros (pilot books). This portrait
is from the Codex Lisuarte de Abreu (1558),
in the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York.
»UíQÉVTOÍCRASTOCrW
1ERNÄ1XW95CR
gious order of which Henry was made
grand master in 1420).
The second stage lasted from 1469,
when King Afonso V made a contract
with Fernào Gomes for the exploration
of the African seaboard, to 1498, when
Vasco da Gama arrived in Calicut (in the
present-day Indian state of Kerala), and
opened the way for the establishment of
a maritime link between Europe and
Asia. King Joäo II (1455-1495) was the
main figure behind the organization of
this move to conquer the south Atlantic
and to link the Atlantic and Indian
Oceans. As a result of his policies, Por¬
tuguese expansion was largely state-
controlled and mercantile. The spheres of
influence of the Portuguese crown under
its new policy were laid down in the
Treaty of Tordesillas concluded with
Spain in 1494, which defined the limits
to the area of Spanish and Portuguese
conquest in the Americas. However, the
prime goal of Portuguese policy was the
Orient, as witnessed by the overland jour¬
neys of Pêro da Covilhä, with the empha¬
sis being placed on navigational
technology and science.
Strategic locations
All through the sixteenth century, the
Portuguese strove to develop communi¬
cations within their Estado da India
("State of India") and to create a new so¬
ciety in Brazil. The "State of India" con-
