FERNANDO PESSOA AND THE
SPIRIT OF DISCOVERY
BY JOSE AUGUSTO SEABRA
THE Portuguese voyages of disco¬
very left behind them a broad,
indelible wake on the surface of
modern history and culture. In literature,
not only did they inspire the sixteenth-
century epics of Camôes, they also pro¬
foundly marked the works of his spiri¬
tual successor, Fernando Pessoa,
Portugal's great modern poet. In Pessoa's
writings, however, the voyages of disco¬
very are treated not simply as a tribute
to a glorious past, but as a prophetic pro¬
jection of that past into the future. In the
first poem of his Mensagem ("Message"),
a collection of verse published in 1934,
Pessoa writes of the "future of the past",
and throughout the book he develops the
visionary, messianic theme of the "Fifth
Empire"1 and of the "Portuguese Sea"
symbolically spreading out to become the
"universal mother".
Two of Portugal's greatest poets, Luís de
Camôes and Fernando Pessoa, as portrayed by
the Portuguese artist José Almada Negreiros.
Pessoa, the poet of many hetero¬
nyms,2 made no attempt to duplicate
The Lusiads, the national epic that
recounts Vasco da Gama's voyage of dis¬
covery against the background of the his¬
tory of Portugal. Instead he transforms
his country's history into an initiatory
voyage with other ships and other sea¬
farers, symbolic figures on a spiritual
quest for the occult, like the quest for the
Holy Grail, under the banner of the
Rosicrucians. Dom Sebastian, the
"Longed-for, Hidden King" of the Por¬
tuguese, is the mythical embodiment of
that quest and his return, like that of
Ulysses, is awaited with endless patience.
Returning to the homeric sources and tra¬
cing through Greek, Roman, Christian
and European tradition, Pessoa announ¬
ces the advent of a "New Renaissance"
that Portugal would bring to the world
	 37

and whose minstrel would be a "Super-
Camôes".
This prophecy had already figured in
the first major writings to appear under
Pessoa's signature on his return to
Lisbon, fired with patriotism that had
religious and universalist overtones, fol¬
lowing his childhood and adolescence in
South Africa. These writings were pub¬
lished in the magazine A Aguia ("The
Eagle") of Oporto, the organ of the "Por¬
tuguese Renaissance" movement. In the
Republic then established in Portugal,
this movement preached the values of
"Lusitanian civilization", invoking
saudade1 in the sense of nostalgia for the
past, but also for the future.
Drawing inspiration from the move¬
ment's charismatic poet, Joaquim
Teixeira de Pascàoes (1877-1952), Pessoa
attempted to define the trends of the
"new Portuguese poetry", under the pre¬
text of carrying out a sociological and
psychological analysis, so as to draw from
it the elements of a poetic form of a sta¬
ture to match his exalted vision of new
caravels setting out to discover a "New
India", not an earthly geographical and
historical place but a transcendent land
of dream. "And its true, supreme destiny,
of which the deeds of the navigators were
but an obscure and flesh-bound dress
rehearsal, will achieve divine fulfilment"
he concludes, in an outburst of messia¬
nic zeal.
It can be sensed that, in his mysterious
pronouncements, the poet, who surrep¬
titiously equates himself with the "Super-
Camöes", takes as his starting point the
concept of "discovery", to which he
attaches more importance than to the
actual discoveries themselves, giving it a
new meaning which, like King Sebastian,
remains for ever hidden. He goes from
the exoteric to the esoteric; the more one
discovers about things external to oneself,
the more deeply is the truth hidden; error
piles upon error and deviation upon
deviation. The initiatory voyage is, in
fact, always an interior voyage. As he
wrote in another poem from Mensagem:
Far from ourselves we go in search
Of who we really are.
And in the same poem he talks of the
impossibility of return, since "God allows
us no departure".
In his writings Pessoa constantly harks
back to the Portuguese discoverers, whom
he sees as the creators of the "modern
world". But their discoveries were, above
all, a cultural, a "civilization-creating act".
This is why the founding of a colonial
empire never was and never would be of
importance to Portugal. "Colonies are not
The emblem of Lisbon is a ship, sometimes
shown with 2 ravens as in this allegorical
depiction dating from the late 16th century.
necessary for what I imagine to be the des¬
tiny of Portugal", he wrote in 1934. For
Pessoa dreamed of a Portugal which he
conceived of as a "cultural empire" and a
"spiritual force". For the "ridiculous old-
fashioned imperialism" of the "generals"
and the "politicians" he substituted "the
imperialism of the grammarians" and "the
imperialism of the poets".
As the poet of a language become
homeland, a universal homeland, neverthe¬
less, with multiple tongues and many iden¬
tities, the Super-Camöes would be the poet
par excellence of this new imperialism. The
same Pessoa who wrote "my country is the
Portuguese language", also affirmed, faith¬
ful to his religious, Rosicrucian ecumenism,
that "God speaks every language".
This God who, in the spirit of Pessoa's
"neo-paganism", encompasses all other
gods, is not the God of Camôes. Nor are
the gods of the Mensagem the same as those
from pagan mythology who throng the
pages of The Lusiads, superimposing them¬
selves upon the Christian God. Pessoa's
gnostic brand of Christianity, like that of
the Templars, proclaims another kind of
"Holy War", the struggle for peace and
fraternity made possible by the Portuguese
discoveries which brought into contact the
beliefs and civilizations of East and West,
of North and South:
For God desired that all the world be one,
And that the sea unite and not divide.
This is the divine plan traced out in the
poem dedicated to Prince Henry the Navi¬
gator, the opening poem of the Portuguese
Sea, the second part of Pessoa's anthology.
And in The Ascension of Vasco da Gama,
after the "Gods of the Tempest", symbo¬
lized in myth as "The Monster", we see
"the heavens open up to receive the soul
of the Argonaut", the "Last Captain" who,
following the route traced and marked
with stone pillars by Diogo Cäo and
Bartolomeu Dias, finally rounded the Cape
of Good Hope and opened up the long-
dreamed-of route to India.
The "New India" has now become an
India where berth caravels built of "such
stuff as dreams are made on", where the
symbolic and the imaginary dissolve into
a new reality of which the myths of
"Sebastianism" and the "Fifth Empire" are
the poetic expression.
It is to this new spirit of discovery and
voyaging that Pessoa invites the Portuguese
of today: "We must begin by intoxicating
ourselves with this dream, absorbing it into
ourselves and embodying it... Then, in the
very soul of the Nation, will occur that un¬
foreseeable alchemy from which will spring
New Discoveries and the Creation of a
New World ..."
1. A reference to a myth which relates that King
Sebastian of Portugal, who died at the battle of
Alcazarquivir (1578), will one day return to found a
"Fifth Empire" of universal peace.
2. Pessoa created a series of alter egos ("heteronyms")
whom he endowed with their own life-stories and
whose poems he wrote for them. (See Unesco Courier,
November 1988).
3. A feeling of intense nostalgia and of being torn
between the call of the sea and attachment to the
homeland. Editor
JOSE AUGUSTO SEABRA, Portuguese poet and
essayist, is professor of literary theory and of
Portuguese literature at the University of Oporto
and a specialist on Fernando Pessoa. A former
member of parliament and Minister of Education,
he is currently serving as his country's Ambassador
to Unesco.
