New family structures
.oTW:Wrrj*#
h
\,
in ,.
MTW*
n
I
42
THE
FAMILY
PAST
AND PRESENT
QUEBEC

BY FRANCINE DESCARRIES AND CHRISTINE CORBEIL
«?
» J-U^à
J\ing and Queen, a work
by the British sculptor
Henry Moore (1898-1986).
Past Recovery (1979) by
Esther Parada. This
monumental family
portrait (2.50 x 3.70 m)
consists of one hundred
hand-toned photographs.
With the works of other
artists ofpast and present,
it features in an exhibition
on "The Family" being
held at The Museum of
Fine Arts, Houston (USA)
from 30 April to 6 August
1989.



The impact of change on the patri¬
archal and pro-natalist pattern of
traditional family life in Quebec
JL HERE have been many changes in family
structures and standards in North America over
the past twenty years, but nowhere else in the
West have these changes been so spectacular as
in Quebec. The religious and legal traditions of
Quebec society long favoured the maintenance
of a conservative matrimonial and family ethic
and provided a rigid framework for conjugal and
parental relationships. It was not until the end
of the 1960s, very late in comparison with other
areas of North America, that traditional family
behavioural and reproductive norms began to
change, as part of the wider movement towards
secularization which was then current in Quebec.
Three statistics demonstrate the scope and
direction of the changes that have occurred since
then.
In 1965, the marriage rate, that is, the
percentage of single people likely to get married
before the age of fifty, was around 85.9 per cent
for men and 93.5 per cent for women. Twenty
years later, the rate had gone down to about 49
per cent for men and 51.7 per cent for women.
In other words, during that period there was a
significant trend towards rejection of the
traditional rules governing the organization of
family life and a diversification of forms of union.
This phenomenon may also explain the fact that
in 1988 a third of all births occurred outside
marriage, whereas in the late 1960s the
proportion was less than 10 per cent. The fact
that births occurred outside legal marriage,
however, does not necessarily imply that they
were not the fruit of some form of union.
The divorce rate provides another significant
pointer. In 1988, it was estimated that more than
one in three marriages contracted during the year
would end in divorce. Twenty years earlier, when
divorce was legally more difficult to obtain, only
one marriage in ten was likely to be dissolved.
Finally, with the women of Quebec being
among the most fertile in the West, Quebec had
long had a steadily increasing birth rate. On the
eve of the 1990s, however, the situation has
changed radically. The current (1988) fertility rate
of 1.47 is not enough (2.1) to ensure maintenance
of existing population levels. In recent years,
Quebec has experienced one of the lowest fertility
rates in the world. 43

A family of Quebec
farmers. According to a
survey of Quebec
households carried out in
1986, women do three
times more housework than
men: an average of36.6
hours per week as opposed
to 11.2 hours.
The role of mothers
in family change
More than ever before, women are playing a
critical role in the evolution of Quebec society.
The family is no longer the only setting in which
they can achieve personal and social fulfilment.
Their position strengthened by the advances
made by the women's movement in promoting
the equality of the sexes, the right to abortion
and to the use of contraceptives, and the right to
autonomy and self-fulfilment outside the family
and marriage, they are no longer obliged to
44
FRANCINE DESCARRIES,
of Canada, is a professor of
sociology at the University
of Quebec, Montreal, where
she is head of the Feminist
Research Centre. Among
her recent publications are
L'école rose et ¡es cols roses
("Pink School, Pink
Collars") and, with Shirley
Roy, an essay on currents
of thought in the women's
movement.
CHRISTINE CORBEIL,
of Canada, is a professor of
social work at the
University of Quebec,
Montreal. She is engaged on
research with Francine
Descarries, with whom she
has published a study on
maternity and the women's
movement in the Revue
Internationale d'Action
Communautaire (1987).
choose in such a limited and uncompromising
manner as before between "being" a wife, "be¬
ing" a mother and "having" a profession.
One woman in two of working age is now
in the market for gainful employment and the
percentage of women with children under sixteen
who are part of the working population has risen
from under 40 per cent at the beginning of the
1970s to about 60 per cent today.
Care of children after their birth raises ques¬
tions of planning and organization and leads to
discussion and hard bargaining among couples,
especially when each partner has career ambi¬
tions. Who will be prepared to forego his or her
professional activities, either wholly or in part,
to take on this other unpaid, singlehanded,
unremarked task? Which of them will agree to
give only secondary consideration to job securi¬
ty, promotion prospects and participation in
society in order to devote himself or herself to
the service of the child and the family?
In a society in which the objectives of a lov¬
ing relationship, the family and professional life
are no longer necessarily compatible, the declin¬
ing acceptance of the model of the full-time
mother and housewife is leading to a re-alignment
of roles and functions within the couple and the
family.
The delicate task
of sharing responsibilities
Apart from the two parents' normal, permanent
participation in family life, it is difficult to speak
of any real sharing out of tasks or any real
redefinition of models and roles. It is still the
woman who feeds, washes, dresses, nurses, super¬
vises, listens, advises and consoles. At best, fathers
only make a supplementary contribution,
specializing mainly in social activities such as
playing, educating and punishing. The paternal
contribution remains part-time, ad hoc and in¬
termittent, whereas the mother's is permanent,
unchanging and continuous.
A survey of 1,332 Quebec households carried
out in April 1986 revealed that women do three
times more housework than men, on which they
spend an average of 36.6 hours per week as op¬
posed to 11.2 hours for men. These statistics show
an increase in the contribution made by men, but
according to those who carried out the survey,
each hour of work in the home carried out by
men adds a quarter of an hour to that done by
their womenfolk. The women of Quebec are still
fighting to get men to take a more equitable share
in domestic tasks and family responsibilities.
The fathers' response
For some years now, certain groups of men have
been demanding an extension of the paternal
sphere of action, thus expressing a desire to play
a larger part in their children's lives. They are
demanding the right to be more fully involved
in their children's arrival into the world, in their
introduction to society and in their education.
They are critical of the old parental stereotypes
and want to establish new parent/child relation¬
ships based on collaboration and generosity.
Playing down their role as "providers", they
want to accentuate the psychological and affec¬
tive aspects of their relationships. Only a minori¬
ty of men, however, favour this redefinition of
the father's role, which does not necessarily in¬
clude an explicit desire to take a share in
housework. Nevertheless, it forms part of a
movement towards the sharing of parental rights,
privileges and duties upon which the survival of
the Quebec family ultimately depends.
In Quebec over the past twenty years, as
elsewhere in North America, the death of the
traditional family has more than once been an¬
nounced. The media increasingly extoll the two-
parent, two-salary family as the height of social
success, whether bound together by marriage or
not, in which more flexible hierarchical relation¬
ships between its members replace, at least out¬
wardly, the traditional order based on patriarchal
authority and the submission of wife and
children. In this egalitarian-type family, the hus¬
band would, ideally, share in the parental respon¬
sibilities, duties and privileges, participating more

actively than formerly both in household tasks
and in the upbringing of the two children who
are seen as the couple's joint project.
The revival of the family
Thus, transcending structural change, the tradi¬
tional family continues to be seen as the setting
above all others in which the affectivity of the
individual, whether child or adult, can be given
expression. Similarly, the great majority of
Quebec women still share the desire to have
children. In a recent survey, 93 per cent of
women between the ages of eighteen and forty-
nine said that they wanted to have at least one
child.
This emotional attachment to the family unit



and to children, coupled with the emergence of
new family structures based on new ways of
managing conjugal and parental relationships,
reflects a renewed appreciation of privacy and of
the home as the place of understanding, loving
relationships and comfort that is to be found to¬
day throughout North American society. In
short, while free unions, reconstituted families,
divorce, a drop in the birth rate and gainful
employment for women provide the backdrop
to the family scene in Quebec today, paradox
al competitor in a snow
sculpture contest held
during the Quebec city
carnival puts the finishing
touches to a carving of a
family on a sledge.
ically, the family and its values are more than ever
perceived and sought after as a shield against the
cold loneliness and violence of the outside world.
After the final break with the traditional
patriarchal family with its rigid, inegalitarian
structure, we must now look towards the family
of the year 2000. We must abolish sex-based divi¬
sion of labour both in the public and in the
domestic arena, revitalize social services con¬
cerned with marriage partnerships and family
support, and encourage the state and the various
agents of society to find new solutions to the
problems facing women and their families. It is
only on this basis that we can resolve what some
have described as "the major crisis facing the
family in Quebec", but which we prefer to see
as the crisis of a model of family relationships
which today is outmoded.
4.
r
& it
45
