The sacred tree
Theties that bound the destinies of
men and trees were so strong,
among the peoples of every
continent, that it is natural to feel anx¬
ious about the future prospects of a
human race, that has broken them. Be
that as it may, if an attempt is to be made
to avert the very real danger that defor¬
estation represents for our planet, it
seems necessary to examine, however
briefly, the relationships that existed be¬
tween men and trees until the present
century.
All over the world there lingers on the
memory of a giant tree, the primal tree,
rising up from the centre of the Earth to
the heavens and ordering the universe
around it. It united the three worlds: its
roots plunged down into subterranean
abysses, its loftiest branches touched the
empyrean. Thanks to the Tree, it be¬
came possible to breathe the air; to all
the creatures that then appeared on
Earth it dispensed its fruit, ripened by
the sun and nourished by the water
which it drew from the soil. From the
sky it attracted the lightning from which
man made fire and, beckoning skyward,
where clouds gathered around its
crown, it bade the life-giving rains to
fall. The Tree was the source of all life,
and of all regeneration. Small wonder
then that tree-worship was so prevalent
in ancient times.
In torrid Egypt the sacred sycamore
reigned, and in icy Scandinavia, land of
the Teutons, Ygdrasill, the ash. Acvat-
tha, the pipai (Ficus religiosa) of India, is
identified with Brahman and at its foot
the Gautama Buddha attained Enlight¬
enment. In China, Kien-mou, the "erect
wood", stood at the centre of the empire
and of the world. For the ancient Mex¬
icans, the cosmic tree sprang up in all its
many colours from the belly of the
earth-goddess in the fifth dimension of
space, which unites the upper realm to
the lower. Until recently, the sacred tree
in Africa was the kilena of the Dogon,
the balanza of the Bambara and the ase
of the Dahomans, the ancestral tree, the
abode of the god and of humanity. Some

BY JACQUES BROSSE
American communities went so far as to
regard the sacred tree as the place of
their birth.



In most cases, a god uses the tree as his
dwelling on Earth, thereby making it
sacred; sometimes he speaks to human
beings through the medium of the tree.
In Greece the oracle of Dodona was
given by the rustling of the leaves of the
oak of Zeus, which was interpreted by
the priestesses officiating in the sanc¬
tuary. However, just as the gods come
down from the trees, so human beings
can climb them in order to reach the sky
and meet them there. So it is with the
Siberian shaman who goes up into the
birch tree; so it is with the Arunta initi¬
ate who, in Australia, hoists himself up
to the top of the sacred post, in the form
of a tree without branches.
Some trees bore the mark of a particu¬
lar god and were especially revered. But
all trees were considered to possess a
soul. They were inhabited by spirits
whose bodies they formeddryads,
hamadryads and caryatids in Greece,
lechy and roussalki among the Slav peo¬
ples. Hence no cut could be made in a
tree until the tree-spirit had been re¬
quested to remove itself. The felling of
sacred trees was always punishable by
death. Ronsard, the great sixteenth-cen¬
tury French poet, echoed these folk be¬
liefs in his sublime "Elegy Against the
Woodcutters of Gâtine".
The idea of a divine tree naturally
gave rise to a belief in a sacred grove,
which achieved the status of a religious
institution, not only among the Greeks,
Romans and Celts, but also in Iran,
throughout Asia, and in Africa and
America. Vestiges of these sacred groves
still remain in India, China and Japan,
and among the Berbers in North Africa.
In former times there was no other sanc¬
tuary. The sacred grove inspired rever¬
ence and fear and was ringed around
with severe interdictions, but it was also
the place where initiates gathered and
received secret oral teachings from the
priests. The sacred grove was at the
origin of the temple, whose columns
were initially trees, and later of the
Christian church which still evokes it by
the alignment of its pillars, the semi-
darkness within it, and the soft, col¬
oured light that filters through its
stained glass windows.
In former times kings would sit be¬
neath a majestic tree to administer jus¬
tice. Sometimes the sacred tree consti¬
tuted the heart of the city, which it
protected, and although in the process
of urbanization the traces of this belief
nearly always vanished, examples can
still be found in the writings of Anti¬
quity. In the centre of Eridu, the holy
city, the Sumerians of the third millen¬
nium BC worshipped Kiskanu, the cos¬
mic tree. On the Acropolis in Athens
grew the olive tree planted by Athena,
A Bamboo plantation, Anduze, France
^ Rheims cathedral, France
TJ "The Forest of Steel", Helsinki. Memorial
to the Finnish composerJean Sibelius
(1865-1957)

who had by that means taken possession
of the land and founded the city. In the
forum at Rome grew the fig tree under
whose boughs Romulus and Remus
were suckled. According to Tacitus the
withering of the tree in the year 58 AD
was considered to be of ill omen. The
following year Nero killed his mother
Agrippina and thereafter gave himself
up to a life of unbounded cruelty and
debauchery, triggering a crisis which
almost brought about the downfall of
the Roman empire.
As well as being linked to the destiny
of cities, trees could also be directly
associated with the fate of individuals. A
particular tree would be seen as a per¬
son's double, affording him protection
and communicating to him its vigour
and also, so it was hoped, its longevity,
which far exceeds that of human beings.
All over the world trees were planted on
the occasion of a child's birth, and there¬
after the twins constituted by the child
and the tree would be considered to
share the same fate. Great care was taken
of the tree, for if it withered, the person
would be in danger. Pliny relates that
one famous Roman poured wine at the
foot of his tree in order to fortify it.
In certain traditional societies, this
custom survived into the twentieth cen¬
tury. In some cases the link between a
person and a tree was established when
an attempt was made to heal a sick child
by passing his naked body three times
through a split made in the living wood.
Once a widespread cure for rickets or
hernia, this ritual would usually be car¬
ried out at sunrise, when the tree's ener¬
gy is at its peak. The sick child would
draw on this energy and the tree take the
sickness upon itself. After the ceremony
the edges of the split would be brought
together and sealed with clay. In this
way a lasting affinity was created be¬
tween child and tree. If the gash in the
tree closed up, the child would be cured,
but if it remained open, the sickness
would persist. If the tree died, so would
the child. When he grew up, a child
treated in this way would take great care
of his tree. Nobody else would be
allowed to touch it.
Equally widespread was the belief
that trees harboured the souls of the
dead. Among some peoples, such as the
Warramunga of central Australia, it was
thought that trees served as a refuge for
souls before their reincarnation. The
ancient Egyptians believed that the spir¬
its (ba) of the newly-dead would alight
in the form of birds on the branches of
the sacred sycamore, and that the Lady
of the Sycamore, the cow-goddess
Hathor, would appear among the
foliage and welcome them with water
and bread. But often the souls are iras¬
cible and dangerous. This was the case in
Korea and many other countries, where
only the souls of those who had died a
violent death took shelter in trees.
Elsewhere trees were believed to har¬
bour souls who had been condemned to
remain on Earth in order to atone for
their sins. In his Légendes de la mort en
Basse-Bretagne ("Legends of Death in
Lower Brittany"), the French folklorist
Anatole Le Braz described remarkable
examples of such beliefs as late as- the
end of the last century. Long ago a dead
man was sometimes seen in a tree where
he could be heard moaning and
groaning. Masses then had to be said for
him in the parish church and afterwards
he came to thank the person who had
thus delivered him. Sometimes trees
could be heard walking in the night
towards a house where they again be¬
came the kinsfolk of the proprietor and
warmed themselves at his hearth.
The choice of trees to be planted in
graveyards thus had to be made with the
utmost care. In Brittany the yew was
chosen as the funerary tree whose roots
grew down into the mouths of those
who were buried beneath it. In the
Mediterranean region the funerary tree
is always the cypress, a symbol of
mourning as long ago as the Cretan era,
but also, on account of its shape which
suggests an eternal flame rising heaven-

Above, pipal tree with altar, Kirtipur, Nepal
Fresco in the royal palace, Bangkok, depicting
the "Bodhi" tree beneath which Gautama
Siddhartha achieved enlightenment, to become
the supreme Buddha.
Below, Egyptian goddess Hathor, Lady
of the sacred sycamore
wards, a symbol of prayer and a pledge
of immortality. In China too the cypress
or another evergreen, the pine, were
chosen to be planted over graves.
For our ancestors, who were attentive
observers of Nature, the different
species of tree also corresponded to, and
in a sense illustrated, the rhythm of the
seasons. In Europe there was in ancient
times a tree calendar which the British
poet and scholar Robert Graves suc¬
ceeded in piecing together again in its
most recent form, as it was known to the
Celts when it formed part of the esoteric
teachings of the Druids. However,
Graves showed that the tree calendar
dated from a much earlier period since it
was already familiar to the Greeks in
pre-classical times. The Celtic calendar
was also an alphabet, paralleling in this
the mnemonic techniques used for the

purposes of exclusively oral instruction
by those peoples who prohibited writ¬
ing in order to guard against the divulg-
ence of knowledge that was by its nature
sacred and hence secret.
The tree calendar was called Beth-
Luis-Nion, from the names of the first
three trees of the year, Beth, the birch,
Luis, the rowan, and Mow, the ash.
Beth, Luis and Nion were three con¬
sonants in the early Irish alphabet,
which contained thirteen of them, cor¬
responding in Graves' view to names of
trees. The calendar as restored by him
should be set out as follows:
B for Beth, the birch:
24 December-20 January
L for Luis, the rowan:
21 January-17 February
N for Mo«, the ash :
18 February-17 March
F for Fearn, the alder:
IS March- 14 April
S for Saille, the willow:
15 April-12 May
H for Uath, the hawthorn:
13 May-9 June
D for Duir, the oak:
10 June-7 July
T for Tinne, the holly:
8 July-4 August
C for Coll, the hazel:
5 August- 1 September
M for Muin, the vine:
2 September-29 September
G for Gort, the ivy:
30 September-27 October
P for Peith, the whitten:
28 October-24 November
R for Ruis, the elder:
25 November-22 December
The calendar was based on the lunar
year which, consisting of thirteen
months of twenty-eight days, compris¬
ed only 364 days. There thus remained
an intercalated day, 23 December, the
eve of the winter solstice in this calen¬
dar. This was the most ill-omened day
of all because it was then that the year
died. It was consequently represented
by the yew, the death-tree. The follow¬
ing day, however, 24 December, when
the sun begins again to climb towards its
zenith, the time of Christmas and the
birth of the Divine Child, was governed
by the silver fir, the birth-tree.
The trees in the tree calendar were not
chosen at random. Each one was associ¬
ated with the month when it was at the
height of its beauty, in flower or bearing
fruit. Account was also taken of the
correspondence between the symbolic
value of each species and the time of the
year associated with it.
Does any trace remain of this tree
calendar? If February is the only month
to have retained the same number of
days as the lunar month, plus one in¬
tercalated and therefore ill-omened day
every four years, it is because it was
formerly the month of great purifica¬
tions whereby preparations were made
for the rebirth of the vegetation and the
approach of more clement weather.
May gave its name to the may tree,
generally the 'hawthorn, as in the tree
calendar, which was planted all over
Europe on the occasion of festivities
among village communities, in order to
celebrate the triumph of spring over
winter. And as for the silver fir of
24 December, it has become our
Christmas tree.
Man's brief passage on Earth is symbolized by
this illustration from an Etruscan vase, right.
Man is seen poised between the tree of life
and the tree of death.
Below, the tree, symbol of Christ, flanked by
two horses representing believers. Roman
mosaic in the Bardo Museum, Tunis.

The Maya Indians of Central America believed that the Ceiba, or silk cotton tree (below), was
the first tree and the source of all life.
îL. W
What lessons can be drawn from this
multiplicity of beliefs whose universal
character we have just seen? If we con¬
sidered trees to be divine, attributed
souls to them and treated them as mod¬
els for human beings, would we not be
yielding to superstitions from another
age, to obscure, outdated beliefs un¬
worthy of a civilization that purports to
be rationalistic, scientific and strictly
materialistic? In fact, however, it is the
scientists themselves who are beginning
to call into question this dismissive atti¬
tude. In the 1920s, an eminent Indian
physiologist and botanist, Sir Jagadis
Chandra Bose, demonstrated by experi¬
ment that plants have a real sensibility
and a capacity for memorizing which
correspond to a very rudimentary form
of mental life. His experiments have
since been verified and supplemented by
American and especially by Soviet sci¬
entists. In other words, the watertight
divisions that, in the name of an exces¬
sive rationalism, were thought to exist
between plants and animals, and be¬
tween animals and human -beings,
appear unfounded. In a less controver¬
sial area, phytotherapists and ethnobo-
tanists are at present regaining accept¬
ance for traditional plant remedies,
virtually abandoned not so long ago,
many of which derive from trees. In
many cases it can even be said that
certain superstitions of bygone days
are now acknowledged to be based on
real observation.
The Swiss psychologist and psychi¬
atrist Carl Gustav Jung (1875-1961)
showed that the image of the tree still
survives as an archetype in the indi¬
vidual and collective unconscious. In¬
deed, it is one of the most fertile, vital
and universal symbols. In a time of crisis
like the present, it is in himself that man
might usefully rediscover the meaning
of that image and at the same time re¬
cover a sense of union with Nature, of
cosmic harmony which, unhappily for
him, he has often lost.
JACQUES BROSSE, French naturalist and
writer, has published several books on trees and
tree myths. One of them, Les arbres de France:
histoire et légendes, won the 1988 Pierre Delbès
Prize, which was established in memory of a noted
French agronomist and plant ecologist and is
awarded annually for a book which contributes to
the study and preservation of the environment.
Jacques Brosse's latest work, Mythologie des
arbres, will be published this year.
