The fragile forest
12

BY SANDRA POSTEL AND LORI HEISE
(1) The relentless march of deforestation
Before the dawn of agriculture,
some 10,000 years ago, the
Earth boasted a rich mantle of
forest and open woodland covering
some 6,200 million hectares. Over the
centuries, a combination of land clear¬
ing for crop production, commercial
timber harvesting, cattle ranching and
fuelwood gathering has shrunk the
Earth's forests to some 4,200 million
hectares a third less than existed in pre-
agricultural times.
For centuries, this reduction in the
Earth's biological stock hindered hu¬
man progress little, if at all. Indeed, the
clearing of trees to expand food produc¬
tion and the harvesting of forest pro¬
ducts were vital aspects of economic and
social development. But the relentless
loss of tree cover has recently begun to
impinge on the economic and environ¬
mental health of numerous nations,
mostly in the developing world. Large-
scale reforestation, combined with con¬
certed efforts to protect remaining
forests, now appears essential to im¬
proving the human prospect.
Most tree planting efforts over the last
several decades have aimed at increasing
supplies of marketable timber, pulp and
fuelwood for cities forest products
that yield obvious economic benefit. By
contrast, reforestation for reasons that
lie outside the monetized economy has
been vastly under-attended. Yet trees
quite literally form the roots of many
natural systems. With the inexorable
march of deforestation, the ecological
integrity of many areas is dis¬
integrating severe soil loss,
aggravating droughts and floods, dis¬
rupting water supplies and reducing
land productivity.
Trees are also a vital component of the
survival economy of the rural poor.
Hundreds of millions of people rely on
gathered wood to cook their meals and
heat their homes. For them, lack of ac¬
cess to wood translates into reduced
living standards and, in some cases,
directly into malnutrition. In addition,
trees and soils play a crucial role in the
global cycling of carbon, the importance
of which has been magnified by the
emergence of carbon dioxide-induced
climate change as arguably the most
threatening environmental problem of
modern times.
Efforts to slow deforestation certain¬
ly deserve redoubled support. But even
if forest clearing miraculously ceased
today, millions of hectares of trees
would still have to be planted to meet
future fuelwood needs and to stabilize
soil and water resources. Increased



planting to satisfy rising demands for
paper, lumber and other industrial
wood products is also crucial. Expand¬
ing forest cover for all these reasons will
reduce pressures on remaining virgin
forest, helping thereby to safeguard the
Earth's biological diversity. At the same
time it will mitigate the build-up of
atmospheric carbon dioxide, which
gives industrial countries sound reason
to step up support for tree planting in
developing countries.
Successfully reforesting large areas of
degraded lands, however, will require
much more than financial commitments
from governments and international
lending agencies. It will take a shift in
emphasis from government foresters
establishing and maintaining commer¬
cial plantations to the much more com¬
plex tasks of starting nurseries in
thousands of villages and encouraging
the planting of multi-purpose trees
along roads, on farms and around
houses. Only by garnering the know-
13

ledge, support and human energy of
rural people themselves -and planting
to meet their basic needs is there any
hope of success.
Dramatic changes in regional forest
cover historically reflect powerful
societal transformations. Beginning in
the sixteenth century, the expanding
agricultural and industrial needs of Re¬
naissance societies spurred the clearing
of large tracts of forest in Western
Europe. France, once 80 per cent for¬
ested, had trees covering only 14 per
cent of its territory by 1789. Both the



French and the English so depleted their
domestic forest resources that they were
forced, by the mid-seventeenth century,
to conduct a worldwide search for ship
timbers in order to maintain their mari¬
time superiority. Similarly, forest cover
in what is now the contiguous United
States totalled some 385 million hec¬
tares in 1630, around the time when the
Pilgrim Fathers arrived. As colonization
spread along the eastern seaboard and
gradually westward, forests dwindled.
By 1920, trees covered 249 million hec¬
tares, more than a third less than when
European settlement began.
Despite growing recognition of the
importance of forests to the economic
and ecological health of nations, sur¬
prisingly little is known with certainty
about the state of forest resources today.
Many countries have not fully inventor¬
ied their forests and the data that do
exist vary widely in quality. A 1982
study by the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) still
provides the best information available
on tropical forests, even though much of
the data is more than a decade old. Com¬
bining FAO's estimates with those of a
1985 forest assessment by the United
Nations Economic Commission for
Europe and with various individual
country reports yields a rough picture
of the global forest resource base.
Closed forest, where the shade from
tree crowns prevents substantial growth
A forest plantation in Borneo, Indonesia. Plantation forestry is slowing, but not preventing,
deforestation. FAO reports that in the early 1980s 1 1.3 million hectares of tropical forest were
cleared annually, while only 1.1 million hectares of plantations were established.
ft ¿
:^*sw*/<;?i»«*BJfo
. »
Pine trees affected by acid rain ¡n the Vosges
mountains, France. Some 31 million hectares
of forest in central and northern Europe show
signs of damage from acid rain and other forms
of atmospheric pollution.
of grass, covers nearly 3,000 million
hectares worldwide. Another 1,300 mil¬
lion hectares are open woodlands, in¬
cluding, for example, the wooded
savannah of Africa and the cerrado in
Brazil. Collectively, forested lands cover
approximately 4,300 million hectares, an
area almost triple that in crops. Shrub-
land and forest regrowth on temporarily
abandoned cropland bring the total area
supporting woody vegetation to more
than 40 per cent of the world's land.
The most worrisome finding of
FAO's assessment was that tropical
trees were being cut much faster than
reforestation or nature were replacing
them. For tropical regions as a whole,
11.3 million hectares were cleared
annually in the early 1980s, while only
1.1 million hectares of plantations were
established. Thus ten hectares were
being cleared for every one planted. In
Africa, the ratio was twenty-nine to
one; in Asia, five to one. Even these
alarming figures probably under¬
estimate the extent of forest loss in par¬
ticular regions, since tree planting is
often highly concentrated, while cutting
is widespread.
Recent data for individual countries
suggest that forest cover trends in some
regions are even bleaker than FAO's
14

FACTS AND FIGURES
sobering assessment indicates. Satellite
imagery of five States in Brazil, for ex¬
ample, shows that deforestation in parts
of the Amazon has proceeded much
faster than estimates for the entire re¬
gion suggest. Likewise, LANDSAT
data released by the National Remote
Sensing Agency of India reveal that
India's forest cover declined from 16.9
per cent in the early 1970s to 14.1 per
cent in the early 1980s, an average loss of
1.3 million hectares per year. Fortu¬
nately, reforestation is also proceeding
somewhat faster than official estimates
suggest. Spontaneous tree planting by
villagers around farm fields, as wind¬
breaks, or along roadways is frequently
not counted. Indeed, forestry statistics
typically ignore "trees outside of
forests", even though in many areas
they are the primary source of fuel-
wood, fodder and rural construction
materials. In Kenya, for instance, the
number of trees planted by villagers ex¬
ceeds the number established in govern¬
ment plantations. And in Rwanda, scat¬
tered trees planted by rural people col¬
lectively cover some 200,000 hectares,
more than the combined area of the
country's remaining natural forest and
all State and communal plantations.
Nonetheless, the loss of forest cover
in tropical countries remains rampant.
Conversion of forest to cropland is by
far the leading direct cause. Population
growth, inequitable land distribution
and the expansion of export agriculture
have greatly reduced the area of crop¬
land available for subsistence farming,
forcing many peasants to clear virgin
forest to grow food. These displaced
cultivators often follow traditions of
continuous cropping that are ill suited
to fragile forest soils. Eventually, the
soils become so depleted that peasant
colonists must clear more forest to
survive.
Indigenous "shifting cultivators"
clear new fields every few years, allow¬
ing forest regrowth to restore soil fertil¬
ity before they return to clear and plant
again several years later (see article page
26). But even this once sustainable prac¬
tice is being undermined as population
pressures force farmers to recultivate
It is estimated that each year between
11 and 15 million hectares of tropical
forest (an area larger than Austria) are lost.
Tropical forests, which cover only
7 per cent of the world s land area, contain
over half the known plant and animal spe¬
cies, including 80 per cent of insects and
90 per cent of primates.
Half the world's main crops originated in
tropical forests.
25 per cent of drug prescriptions in the
United States owe active ingredients to
plants, but under 1 percent of species
have been investigated It is thought that
about 1 .400 forest plants may have anti¬
cancer potential.
50.000 square kilometres of closed tro
pical forest are logged annually. Loggers
take only between 4 and 10 per cent of
trees, but leave up to one third of the land
surface bare and open to erosion.
80 per cent of all forest lands are owned
by governments.
Europe accounts for 40 per cent of glob¬
al trade in tropical timber by volume and
32 per cent by value.
Over half the European imports of tropic¬
al timber are used for building and joinery.
The remainder goes mostly for plywood,
furniture, transport, packaging and water
resistant pilings.
Data from the Work) Wildlife Funds Special Report
on Conservation ol Tropical Forests
The establishment of logging camps and access roads can involve the destruction of large numbers
of commercially valueless trees.
15

In Latin America large areas of tropical
forest are cleared each year to create pasture for
cattle ranching.
land before it has recovered. FAO esti¬
mates that the breakdown of traditional
shifting cultivation patterns is responsi¬
ble for 70 per cent of closed forest clear¬
ings in tropical Africa, nearly 50 per cent
in tropical Asia and 35 per cent in tro¬
pical America.
Population pressures have also trans¬
formed fuelwood collection into an un¬
sustainable practice. Given a choice,
villagers generally gather dead wood
and branches for fuel; they only cut live
wood if nothing else is available or if
they are converting wood to charcoal
for urban markets. Fuelwood collection



is thus an agent of forest destruction
primarily in the arid woodlands of
Africa, where population density is high
and the natural growth rate of vegeta¬
tion is low, and around large cities of
Asia and Africa, where concentrated de¬
mand over-taxes available tree stock.
Recent LANDSAT data show that in
less than a decade forest cover within
100 kilometres of India's major cities
dropped by 15 per cent or more; Delhi
lost a staggering 60 per cent.
Consumer demand in temperate
countries also fosters tropical forest de¬
pletion. Industrial countries' appetite
for tropical hardwoods has encouraged
many governments of developing coun¬
tries to "mine" their forests to earn vital
foreign exchange. As loggers fell com¬
mercially valuable tree species-which
sometimes account for less than 5 per
cent of any given hectare they often
destroy between 30 and 60 per cent of
unwanted trees as well. Roughly two-
thirds of the logging and the
damage-has occurred in Southeast
Asia, although logging is" likely to in¬
crease in Latin America as Asian forests
become depleted.
One additional agent of forest des¬
truction operates in Latin America the
lure of cattle ranching. Between 1961
and 1978, pasture in Central America
expanded 53 per cent, while forests and
woodlands declined 39 per cent. Much
of this conversion was driven by US
demand for cheap beef, although in re¬
cent years Central American beef ex¬
ports have dropped in response to de¬
clining US beef consumption. Similarly,
by the late 1970s an estimated 1.5 mil¬
lion hectares of pasture had been estab¬
lished in the Brazilian Amazon. In 1979,
Brazil eliminated some of the incentives
that had spurred clearing for pasture;
alas, forest clearing continues as a way
of establishing claims in Brazil's highly
speculative land market.
Pressures on temperate forests have
waned substantially following several
centuries of clearing for agriculture.
Forest cover in most European coun¬
tries is now fairly stable; in some it has
even been increasing as marginal agri¬
cultural land reverts to woodland and as
conscious efforts are made to plant
trees. Since the early 1960s, government
and private plantings in the United
Kingdom have increased net forest cov¬
er an average of 30,000 to 40,000 hec¬
tares per year. In France, forest area has
risen substantially from its historic low
of 14 per cent in 1789. About a quarter
of the country is now forested.
Unfortunately, chemical stresses
from air pollution and acid rain today
place a substantial share of European
forests at risk. Trees covering some
31 million hectares in central and north¬
ern Europe are showing signs of damage
linked to air pollutants. Scientists do not^
know how extensive the damage will
become, but it could substantially offset
recent gains made in expanding the con¬
tinent's forested area.
As in Europe, forest cover in the con¬
tiguous United States was comparative¬
ly stable during most of this century,
following the loss of 136 million hec¬
tares between 1630 and 1920. During
the last two decades, however, forest
area has declined as widening grain ex¬
port markets encouraged conversion of
forest to cropland and as urban and
16

industrial development encroached on
woodland. In 1982, forests covered
233 million hectares of the contiguous
States a 10 per cent drop from 1963 and
less than existed in 1920, the previous
low point.



In the developing countries, nothing
in prospect suggests that forest cover
will stabilize any time soon as it has in
many industrialized countries. The
forces behind deforestation remain
strong and planting efforts are woefully
inadequate to reverse the loss of tree
cover.
More than two-thirds of all people
in the developing countries rely on wood
for heating and cooking.
European bison in the Berezinskiy Biosphere
Reserve (Byelorussian SSR). Forests are home
to several million plant and animal species,
and as forests- whether tropical, temperate
or boreal-are cut down or disturbed, more
and more of these species are threatened
with extinction. European bison used
to abound in the virgin forest that centuries
ago stretched from the Baltic Sea to the River
Bug. Relentless overhunting and forest
destruction by successive waves of invaders
brought the European bison to the verge of
extinction. In a notable co-operative effort,
5 of the few bison that remained in the part
of the forest on Polish territory were handed
over to the Byelorussian authorities. Today
several hundred bison flourish in the security
of the Belowezhskaya puscha, the oldest forest
reserve in Europe, and the Berezinskiy
Biosphere Reserve.
17

THE FRAGILE FOREST
(2) Towards a Green Revolution
in forestry
Nature employs a wide variety of
methods for expanding tree
cover-coconuts that float between
tropical islands, aerodynamic seeds and
luscious fruits that attract animal carriers.
Strategies equally diverse and ingenious are
needed to mobilize human energy and finan¬
cial resources for tree planting sufficient to
satisfy fuelwood needs, stabilize soil and wa¬
ter resources and slow the carbon dioxide
build-up.
Tree planting programmes are most effec¬
tive when local people are involved in their
planning and implementation and perceive
their own interest in success. If fodder is a
critical need, for example; a project that pro¬
motes a non-browsable species like eucaly¬
ptus will receive little popular support. Design¬
ing a reforestation project without local input is
like letting a doctor prescribe treatment with¬
out asking the patient what hurts.
A number of tree planting programmes are
meeting with considerable success. In Haiti a
project to encourage agroforestry and tree
farming has included planting more than
27 million seedlings between 1982 and 1986.
Around the world, women's associations,
peasant collectives and church groups have
taken up tree planting; in Kerala, India, alone,
some 7,300 organizations are involved.
In Kenya, the Greenbelt Movement, spon¬
sored by the National Council of Women of
Kenya, has involved more than 15,000 far¬
mers and half a million schoolchildren in
establishing 670 community nurseries and
planting more than two million trees.
In 1 985, annual planting in China doubled to
eight million hectares, giving renewed cause
for optimism. Tree survival rates that had
averaged only 30 per cent may also be im¬
proving. China seems unlikely to achieve its
ambitious target of 20 per cent forest cover by
the year 2000, but the combination of in¬
creased planting and better management, if
sustained, could mean the nation's tree cover
resumes its upward trend.
The late 1 985 launch of the Tropical For¬
estry Action Plan holds promise of elevating
forestry to its rightful place among develop¬
ment priorities. Jointly sponsored by FAO,
UNDP (the United Nations Development
Programme), the World Resources Institute
and the World Bank, the Action Plan calls for
accelerated investments of $8,000 million
over five years in tree-planting projects and
efforts to arrest deforestation.
In his development agenda for 1985 to
1990, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi
assigned forestry a central place. He almost
tripled funding for forestry, reorgan¬
ized his Ministries to give forestry
new prominence and created" a National
Wastelands Development Board to
spearhead a "people's movement for
afforestation".
What is needed in the coming decade is an
effort somewhat akin to the agricultural Green
Revolution of the 1960s; a dedication to de-
A forestry officer explains details of an FAO-
assisted forestry development project
to villagers near Kathmandu, Nepal.
veloping genetically improved tree species
and to extending widely the technical and
financial resources for reforestation. For¬
estry's Green Revolution, however, needs to
promote indigenous tree species and diversi¬
fied agroforestry systems and must strive to
benefit marginalized populations, including
the landless. Accelerated planting that does
not benefit the poor only masquerades as
success.
A tree-planting campaign in Lesotho
undertaken by the local population.
ms*m*

THE FRAGILE FOREST
(3) The fuelwood crisis
Lacking fuelwood, this Zimbabwean woman
uses maize residue to cook a meal.
ENERGY planners in developing
countries face a markedly diffe¬
rent set of challenges over the
coming decades than their counterparts
in industrial countries. Many of the de¬
veloping countries remain tightly wed¬
ded to wood as a primary energy source,
either in its raw form or after conversion
to charcoal. As wood supplies in the
countryside and around cities continue
to dwindle, growing numbers face a
deepening energy crisis. Even after
more than a decade of increasing recog¬
nition of the problem, only halting
progress has been made towards satis¬
fying future fuelwood demand.
More than two-thirds of all people in
the developing countries rely on wood
for cooking and heating. Rural dwellers
depend on wood almost exclusively,
even in oil-rich Nigeria. In many
countries including most of
Africa-wood not only dominates
household energy use, it provides more
than 70 per cent of energy used for all
purposes.
According to the United Nations
Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO), in 1980 nearly 1,200 million
people in developing countries were
only managing to meet their fuelwood
needs by cutting wood faster than it was
being replaced. Nearly 100 million
people half of them in tropical
Africacould not meet their minimum
needs even by over-cutting the wood¬
lands around them. FAO projected that
by the year 2000 the number of people
lacking wood or over-cutting would
reach nearly 2,400 million, more than
half the projected developing-world
population.
The human and ecological costs of
wood scarcity are already high. In rural
19

parts of the Himalayas and the African
Sahel, women and children spend be¬
tween 100 and 300 days a year gathering
fuelwood. Boiling water becomes an
unaffordable luxury and quick-cooking
cereals replace more nutritious but
slower-cooking foods, such as beans.
Where fuelwood is critically scarce,
people often have no choice but to di¬
vert dried dung and crop residues from
fields to cookstoves, a practice that
diminishes soil fertility and depresses
crop yields. In Nepal, for example, this
diversion reduces grain yields an esti¬
mated 15 per cent.
Rapid urbanization will only magnify
the ecological consequences of increas¬
ing fuelwood scarcity. City dwellers
tend to rely on charcoal rather than
wood because its light weight makes it
more economical to transport from the
countryside. When wood is converted
into charcoal in traditional earthen pits,
more than half the primary wood ener¬
gy is lost. This means that every villager
who moves to the city and switches
from wood to charcoal equals, in energy
terms, two people. Even though urban
areas have traditionally been less depen¬
dent upon fuelwood, urbanization
In Kenya, charcoal is the preferred fuel
for city-dwellers. An improved model (left)
of the traditional/iiostovecancut a Nairobi
household's fuel costs by as much as 50 per cent.
could soon make cities pivotal to
national fuelwood strategies. Indeed,
the World Bank estimates that by the
year 2000 the urban areas of West Africa
will account for 50 to 70 per cent of the
region's total fuelwood consumption.
Experts generally agree that a success¬
ful strategy to meet the fuelwood needs
of the developing countries- must in¬
clude increasing the productivity of
natural forests by making better use of
wood now wasted, including logging
residues and trees cleared for cropland,
by raising the efficiency with which the
wood is burned and by planting more
trees. The World Bank has calculated
that fuel substitution and the use of
more efficient kilns and cookstoves
could reduce fuelwood need's in the year
2000 by about a fourth. Eliminating the
remaining gap between projected sup¬
ply and demand would require planting
the equivalent of 55 million hectares of
high yielding fuelwood plantations, or
2.7 million hectares per year, given a
base year of 1980. If the needed number
of trees were planted less intensively on
farms, around houses and in woodlots,
planting efforts would involve an area at
least four times as large. Actual planting
for fuelwood has averaged about 550
hectares annually, a fifth of what is
needed.
More than a decade of experience
with so-called communal and farm for¬
estry projects has shown clearly that
inspiring large-scale planting of trees is
no easy task. The international donor
community rightly recognized during
the 1970s that villagers in developing
countries themselves formed the only
labour force large enough to plant trees
on the vast areas needed. In many cases,
however, rural people were reluctant to
participate in communal planting be¬
cause they had no idea how the resulting
benefits would be shared. Perhaps the
greatest lesson of the first generation of
fuelwood projects was that villagers
were rarely motivated to plant trees ex¬
clusively for fuelwood.
To outside observers it seems irra¬
tional for people faced with an energy
crisis to be reluctant to plant trees for
fuel. But for most rural dwellers in de¬
veloping countries, fruit, poles, fodder
and shade are higher priorities. They
know that wood, in the form of trim¬
mings and dead branches, will be a
secondary benefit of plantings for these
other purposes. Moreover, people do
not always perceive the national "fuel-
wood gap" that so concerns energy
planners. They may be cutting wood
over and above a sustainable level, yet
still not be experiencing an unacceptable
shortage. And in rural areas where fuel-
wood is not part of the cash economy,
the cost of increasing scarcity is mea¬
sured in women's time, something that
may have little value to male decision¬
makers.
The key to mobilizing villagers is to
promote multi-purpose trees that meet
their immediate needs while also in¬
creasing the woody biomass available
for fuel. Particularly promising is the
potential of agroforestry the com¬
bined production of crops and trees
to raise crop yields while providing
fuelwood and other useful products.
Nitrogen-fixing trees planted in shel-
terbelts or interspersed with crops, for
example, can enhance soil fertility,
increase soil moisture and reduce
erosion.
Agroforestry programmes offer a
20


number of advantages over more tradi¬
tional approaches to addressing the fuel-
wood crisis. They typically cost only 10
to 20 per cent as much as government-
established fuelwood plantations.
Although yields per hectare may be
higher in plantations, agroforestry often
results in greater wood production per
planted tree. Through pruning tech¬
niques known as coppicing and pollard¬
ing, a single tree can yield five to ten
times the wood volume that a plantation
tree would yield upon felling. And in
contrast to communal woodlot projects,
agroforestry does not pose problems
with shared work loads, division of be¬
nefits or the displacement of other pro¬
ductive uses of common land, such as
grazing.
Of course, agroforestry does not
address the fuelwood needs of the mil¬
lions of rural people who do not own
land. Traditionally they have had to col¬
lect wood from common lands or steal it


from forest reserves. Providing fuel for
the landless may well be the greatest
energy challenge facing governments in
developing countries today.
In India, the Government of West
Bengal addressed this problem by allo-
In parts of the African Sahel, women
and children spend up to 300 days a year
gathering fuelwood.
In addition to the many other benefits
they bestow upon mankind, trees pro¬
vide us with an accurate natural calen¬
dar and climatic record.
Many species of tree produce a ring of new
wood every year. The width of the ring (i.e.
the amount of growth) for each year is
determined partly by internal, genetic fac¬
tors and partly by external factors such as
soil and, particularly, climatic conditions. In
a bad year, poor growth is reflected in a
narrow ring, whereas a wide ring indicates
favourable climatic conditions and good
growth. All trees of one species within a
particular area tend to show similar pat¬
terns of rings.
This makes it possible, for example, to
establish the date that a particular tree was
felled by comparing the pattern of rings of
its stump with that of a living tree in the
same forest. A 200-year-old tree will have
a pattern for one hundred of its rings in
common with a tree of the same species
that was cut down one hundred years ago.
By making use of such overlapping pat¬
terns and by studying wood from ancient
buildings and trees preserved in bogs and
fenlands, dendrochronoiogists (scientists
who study the chronological sequence of
annual rings in trees and aged wood) have
succeeded in establishing master chrono¬
logies which, for certain areas, go back to
about 5000 BC.
RINGS OF TIME
Master chronologies enable archaeolo¬
gists and historians to date with accuracy
buildings of which there are no written
records and to see how climatic conditions
varied from one part of a particular area to
another. They also provide a means of
verifying the accuracy of Carbon- 1 4 dating
methods.
z'-UÊl
m
%::Z¿>~:
¿¡ :'
21

THE GREENHOUSE
EFFECT
Carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
has an important effect on world
climate. It lets through most of the
short-wave energy directed at the Earth by
the Sun, but retains a high proportion of the
long-wave energy radiated back by the
Earth out toward space. This is known as
the "greenhouse effect", by analogy with
the garden greenhouse whose glass win¬
dows admit solar radiation, but partially
trap the infra-red radiation re-radiated from
within. This causes the temperature in a
greenhouse to rise to a higher level than
that of the free air outside.
Because of the rise in carbon dioxide con¬
centration in the atmosphere (from
265 parts per million in 1850 to 340 parts
per million in 1985), due primarily to the
combustion of fossil fuels (e.g. coal, oil and
natural gas), scientists predict that signifi¬
cant changes in climate patterns will occur
by the end of the century. They foresee a
rise in average global temperature of be¬
tween 3° and 5° Centigrade before the
year 2010.
Temperature increases in the Polar re¬
gions could be three times the global aver¬
age, which would result in rapid melting of
the Polar ice caps. Sea levels could rise by
as much as 5 to 7 metres causing flooding
of vast areas of low-lying land.
Trees normally act as a sink for carbon
dioxide, which they "inhale", returning
oxygen as waste to the atmosphere as
they "exhale". However, when trees are
cleared or burned, the carbon they con¬
tain, as well as some of the carbon in the
underlying soil, is oxidized and released to
the atmosphere. Since 1860 some 90 to
180 thousand million tons of carbon has
been released to the atmosphere as a
result of forest clearing, as compared with
150 to 190 thousand million tons from the
burning of coal, oil and natural gas.
Many scientists consider the warming of
the atmosphere as posing one of the most
serious environmental threats to man. And
forest clearance is doubly harmful since
not only is the carbon "sink" effect of trees
lost, but more carbon is released to the
atmosphere.
IK
'JL .J
A charcoal kiln at the Subri River Forest
Reserve, Ghana. Waste wood from forest
clearing that was once burned is now converted
into charcoal.
eating more than 5,000 hectares of de¬
nuded forestland to landless families for
cash-crop tree farming. Though families
were not ceded title to the land, they
were granted ownership of the trees. To
encourage participation, the Forest De¬
partment supplied free seedlings, ferti¬
lizer, technical assistance and insecti¬
cide, and it offered small cash incentives
based on the number of trees surviving
after three years. The families harvested
the wood for sale after five years and
with the proceeds bought small parcels
of land suitable for farming. While the
trees matured, villagers collected twigs
and branches for fuel. Where a strong
commercial market for wood exists and
22

¿
f
~-
crucial. Such efforts will never com¬
pletely solve the fuelwood crisis as
population growth would soon outstrip
even the most ambitious dissemination
programme. But improved stoves can
benefit individual households while col¬
lectively relieving pressures on natural
woodlands until tree planting pro¬
grammes take hold.
Particularly promising are prospects
for reducing wood consumption in
cities, where rising wood and charcoal
prices provide a powerful incentive to
invest in efficiency. An improved model
of the traditional charcoal jiko in Kenya
can halve fuel use. For the average
Nairobi family spending 170 shillings
(about S8.35) a month on charcoal, the
stove pays for itself in just two months.
In rural households, where wood is
gathered rather than purchased, no
direct economic advantage exists to
boost wood-burning efficiency. Yet
women, who spend much time collect¬
ing wood, have an incentive to construct
improved stoves if they can do so from
free, locally available materials. A par¬
ticularly successful programme in
Burkina Faso promotes an up-graded
version of the traditional three-stone
cookstove, surrounded by a cylindrical
shield made of mud, dung and chaff.
The new model cuts wood use by 35 to
70 per cent, takes only half a day to
make and costs virtually nothing.
SANDRA POSTEL and LORI HEISE are senior
researchers with Worldwatch Institute, Washing¬
ton, D.C., a non-profit research organization
which was created to focus attention on global
problems and is funded by private foundations
and United Nations organizations. The above
article and those on pages 13 and 18 have been
extracted from State of the World 1988: A World-
watch Institute Report on Progress Toward a
Sustainable Society (W.W. Norton, New York/
London, 1988).
/ .-Jv
sufficient degraded forestland is avail¬
able, such a strategy can bring non¬
productive land into use while provid¬
ing the landless with both fuelwood and
added income. Meeting future fuelwood
needs will depend as much on managing
demand as on increasing supply. Many
policies that could significantly reduce
demand attack the broader economic
and social conditions that underlie fuel-
wood shortages. If birth rates today in
Africa were no higher than those in
Asia, for example, Africa's demand for
fuelwood forty years from now would
be reduced by as much as 30 per cent.
Improving the efficiency of cook¬
stoves in developing countries is also
Pollarded alders, Nagaland State, north-eastern
India. Through pruning techniques known
as pollarding and coppicing, a single tree can be
made to yield five to ten times the volume
of wood a plantation tree would yield on felling.
Tv
.. &4
i
VÍ.OS
23
