REFLECTIONS
'Reflections' is a new Unesco Courier feature. It is intended to stimulate thinking on a topic unrelated
to the main theme of the current issue and will in some cases, as here, enrich our coverage of a
theme treated in a previous issue.


Families of the world
BY HELENE TREMBLAY
In 1983, Hélène Tremblay, of Canada, set out to
investigate and record the daily life of at least one
representative family in every country of the world,
and to publish the results of her enquiries in a
series of books.*
After carrying out research into the social and
economic conditions in each country, Ms. Tremblay
consults academics and social workers who help her
select a family with which to live. She then takes
part in the family's daily life, observing and
listening to its members as they talk about their
problems and aspirations. In the resulting book she
describes a typical day in the family's life. In the
article below Ms. Tremblay presents some reflections
inspired by her experiences on her 'Families of the
World' project.
from left to right:
Mongolia,
Malaysia,
Saint Lucia,
Guatemala,
Samoa,
Malta,
Papua New Guinea,
Canada.
X AMILY life is the one social experience that is
common to all humankind, and sharing this
experience among other families all over the world
is the most powerful force for international
understanding among "ordinary" people that I have
ever witnessed.
There is a particularly urgent need to strengthen
international communication about the family today
when it is feeling the impact of the hurricane of
change that is sweeping through the world.
Everywhere I have found that families are
wondering where the forces of change are taking
them and whether these forces will bring them
better lives.
In the Americas, the Caribbean, East and
Southeast Asia and the Pacific, I have seen some of
the harsh realities millions of families on our planet
face every day. I have accompanied women and
children on the long daily trek to fetch drinking
water which is not always safe. I have lived with
peasant families who were unable to keep up the
anymore." And everywhere grandmothers say with
regret, "Things are not as they used to be."
Young people are impatient to master every
piece of information that comes their way. The old
feel sad and powerless when they see the young turn
their backs on traditional culture. In between these
two groups there is a generation of people in their
late thirties and early forties who act as a buffer and
try to ensure that young and old live happily side
by side and communicate with each other.
Satisfying both groups, however, does not
demand the same responses. The old want the
pattern of their daily lives to be unchanged. They
want to feel that their beliefs are shared. To keep
them happy new ideas must often be filtered and
their impact softened. Meanwhile, the deepest
concern of the world's parents is how to satisfy the
young.
In the developing countries these forces are far
more manifest than in the industrial countries, but
families have less resources to cope with them. To
46
payments on the debt they owed to the local
middleman, and wondered when they would have
to take the road to the city slum. At the other end
of that road I have shared the pitiful but generous
shelter of proud people reduced to the ultimate loss
of dignity caused by rampant disease and chronic
unemployment.
When I visit a country I ask the people I meet
to tell me about their beliefs and traditions.
Invariably someone exclaims, "Oh, grandmother
used to do this or think that, but it is not so
satisfy the aspirations of today's young people, the
buffer generation must find more and more cash.
The first priority, I have found everywhere, is
education, including school clothes, equipment and
transport. Young people are also pushing their
parents out of the subsistence economy in a process
which may start in an apparently trivial way, with
a desire for jeans and T-shirts with a slogan, the
universal uniform of youth. Young people are also
hungry for the new universal music and for the
foreign products that transnational advertising,

television and video offer as daily temptations. They
become dissatisfied with the stillness of village life
and the attraction of the city starts to break the spell
of the extended community.
In this way such families are being propelled into
a materialistic society. As they leave the tranquil
shore for the turbulence of a fast-moving river, they
wonder whether they will be carried along to crash¬
ing waterfalls or to calm waters. Neither sociolo¬
gists nor economists seem able to answer this
question of universal concern.
For millions of people living in societies that
have known a regular, predictable, unchanging way
of life for centuries, today is a time of tumult. They
feel with alarm that their lives are spiralling out of
the control of their community and coming under
the influence of a new, international "paramount
chief", who is motivated by cash and materialism
rather than by spirit and soul.
Meanwhile, as societies and individuals try to
understand what is happening, the daily round con¬
tinues. Children must be fed, roofs must be repaired
before the rainy season, and water must be fetched.
Gardens and fields must be planted, weeded and har¬
vested, rents paid, debts met. And whatever may
be happening to the old cultures and values, every
man and woman who wakes up to start a new day
shares with unknown millions elsewhere in the
world the same desire to live through it in dignity
and faith. How much stronger they would feel in
face of the new doubts, if they knew they shared
this desire!
In every home I have found that in almost every
field of change, from family planning to health, from
new divisions of labour in the home to new
economic enterprise in the community, women are
taking the initiative. Everywhere I have been amazed



by the work of women's organizations in unleashing
the full potential of women within the family.
As family size is getting smaller and parents are
realizing that their financial investment in secondary
education should be given to the most eager of their
children, more and more girls have an opportunity
to study. The women argue, rightly, that whereas
men prefer the social and economic challenge of
urban life, many educated women return to their
communities as nurses, social workers and educators.
The example of these educated women devoting
their lives to the improvement of their people's
For at a time when the people of the world are
coming to know that they share the planet with mil¬
lions of others, I find that most people feel lonely,
thinking that their own worries are the worst.
I take to each family I visit pictures of the fa¬
milies whose lives I have shared in other countries
and continents. Wherever I go I am struck by peo¬
ple's eagerness to know how others live. They are
always interested to see the similarities between their
dwellings and those of others, and to discover how
people in different economic and geographical cir¬
cumstances find different ways of solving the
problems of everyday life and realizing the same
universal aspirations.
conditions is giving other women the confidence to
determine their own destinies and those of their
families.
Everywhere relationships within the family are
being exposed to new stresses and tensions by
international communications, especially messages
such as the Western concept of "love" which reach
young people by TV and video. In Southeast Asia
and the Pacific most parents I visited had been
brought together in arranged marriages, but they
all said that they would let their children choose
their partners. The new relationship between these
partners and their families will change the
individuals involved and their society.
Where these changes are concerned, there are
striking contrasts between rural and urban families.
Rural families cannot live in isolation from the
community and from those members of the
extended family who live within reach. Only
through mutual support, help and generosity can
they cope with the forces of nature, poverty, and
lack of understanding from the urban communities
which they feed.
In the cities, however, behaviour patterns which
were once simply inherited from other members of
the extended family are now increasingly being
modelled on those of people from completely
different backgrounds and are thus much more
unpredictable. Limited space and the proximity of
neighbours who are not part of the clan also incite
urban families to keep to themselves, lead people
to behave aggressively in defence of their interests,
and often end in the severance of family ties and
a descent into loneliness. The urban individual and
the rural family vie with each other in the national
community, with governments increasingly called
on to play a mediating role.
In this new and unstable situation, many would
prefer the pace of change to slow down. Not only
family specialists but also the United Nations system
must help nations and families to understand the
forces of change. Surely families beset with doubts
in the face of change would gain insight and courage
if they knew that the same problems are faced by
all those with whom they share the planet.
"The first volume, which describes 46 families in 35
countries of the Americas and the Caribbean, has already
been published in the United States, Canada and France.
The second volume, covering 34 families with whom
Helene Tremblay has lived in 25 countries of East and
Southeast Asia and the Pacific, will be published in 1990. 47
