SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
An Academy of Sciences for the Third World
sCIENCE has been described as the
highest expression of international¬
ism, the common preserve of the
"haves" and the "have-nots". Yet its
diffusion has been dramatically un¬
even. While science in the industrially
developed nations of the North goes
from strength to strength, in the
South scientists are relatively few.
They work in isolation from the world
scientific community and the
resources at their disposal are scanty.
In the last few years a new insti¬
tution, the Third World Academy of
Sciences (TWAS), has emerged as a
leading contributor to efforts to
bridge the science gap between
North and South. The Academy,
which is based in Trieste, Italy, is the
first international forum to unite men
and women of science from the Third
World with the aim of promoting
basic and applied sciences in develop¬
ing countries.
The Academy is the brainchild of
Nobel Laureate Abdus Salam of
Pakistan, who has devoted more than
forty years of his life to helping scien¬
tists from impoverished developing
countries overcome their isolation
and participate in advanced scientif¬
ic work at the frontiers of knowledge.
The headquarters of TWAS are
in Trieste, Italy, on the premises of the
International Centre for Theoretical
Physics (ICTP), which is celebrating its
twenty-fifth annniversary this year
and which Professor Salam was also
BY AKHTAR MAHMUD FARUQUI
instrumental in founding and has
headed since its inception.
First mooted by Professor Salam
in 1 98 1 , the Academy was officially
launched in July 1985 by the Secre¬
tary General of the United Nations,
Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar.
In the four years since it was
founded, the Academy has floated
and implemented a variety of
schemes to bolster South science. It
has awarded some 300 research
grants to scientists working in a
broad spectrum of fields including
optics, nuclear physics, solar energy,
seismology and laser physics. Appli¬
cants, whose projects are vetted by
four international referees, have been
drawn from many countries-
Jamaica, China, Argentina, India,
Brazil, Pakistan, Mexico, Angola,
Peru, Thailand, Turkey and Madagas¬
car, to name just a few.
Through a donation programme
run in collaboration with ICTP, the
Academy also provides scientific liter¬
ature to developing countries facing
shortages of foreign currency. A joint
appeal to libraries, publishing com
panies, laboratories and individuals to
donate books, journals and equip¬
ment to developing countries has met
with an encouraging response. Un¬
der the programme, some 50,000
books and journals are being supplied
annually to some 500 institutions in
90 countries.
One important TWAS project is
a South-South Fellowship Programme
designed to enable a scientist from
one developing country to work in
another. So far 1 25 of these Fellow¬
ships have been awarded. The Acade¬
my also supports visits by Third World
scientists to biology, chemistry and
geology laboratories in Italy.
In 1987 the Academy instituted
a History of Science Prize to highlight
the work of a scientist from a Third
World country whose achievements
had not been previously recognized.
The first prize was awarded in 1 988
for an essay on the astronomical ta¬
bles which were compiled by the
great mathematician Shams al-Din al-
Khalili and used in Damascus for
timekeeping from the fourteenth
century to the nineteenth. The com¬
petition, which is open to scholars of
any nationality, carries a cash prize of
$10,000.
TWAS has also awarded annual
prizes of $10,000 to outstanding
scientists from Third World countries
in the fields of physics, chemistry,
mathematics and biology, and or¬
ganized conferences on major
problems confronting the Third
World. A Conference on the Role of
Women in the Development of
Science and Technology in the Third
World, held in October 1988 in
Trieste, was attended by 240 wom¬
en scientists from over 70 countries.
A non-governmental, non-profit-
making organization, TWAS is cur¬
rently funded largely by Canada and
Italy. Its members, ten of whom are
Nobel Laureates of Third World ori¬
gin, consist of 106 Fellows from 42
developing countries, 42 Associate
Fellows (scientists from industrialized
countries who were either born in de¬
veloping countries or have distin¬
guished themselves in Third World
science) and 3 Corresponding
Fellows.
In late 1988, only three years
after its creation, Ronald Léger of the
Canadian International Development
Agency commented that TWAS had
already brought significant changes
to many Third World scientists work¬
ing in isolation. "For them," Léger
pointed out, "TWAS has meant spare
parts for a lab, or travel grants and
South-South exchanges for young
scientists, or a subscription to a scien¬
tific journal for an isolated scientist.
Above all, TWAS has meant a new
hope for science and technology in
developing countries."
AKHTAR MAHMUD FARUQUI ¡s editor of the
Newsletter of the Third World Academy of
Sciences.
