Prime
numbers
ANCIENT EGYPT
AND MESOPOTAMIA
BYJAMES RITTER
M,
12
LaTHEMATICS and writing have a close, sym¬
biotic relationship. Indeed, recent archaeological
discoveries have shown that it was the need tó
measure, divide and distribute the material wealth
of societies that gave birth to the first writing
systems.
For a society to develop a mathematics that
goes beyond simple counting, a material support
of some kind is essential. Without writing, the
limitations of human memory are such that only
a certain degree of numerical sophistication can
be achieved.
By allowing us to follow the development of
two writing systems, one in southern Mesopota¬
mia towards the middle of the fourth millenni¬
um BC, and the other in the area around Susa
in Iran, slightly later, archaeological discoveries
in the last few decades have shown that the in¬
verse is equally true. For a society to develop
writing, material needs and, in particular, the
need for record-keeping, are central.
In these societies the material support was
clay, which is virtually indestructible, and the first
documents are accounts. Cuneiform (wedge-
shaped) Mesopotamian writing in. particular
was to know great success over the succeeding
3,000 years. Used to write not only the original
Sumerian and Akkadian, but also Hittite, Ela-
mite, Hurrian and many other languages of the
ancient Near East, it died out only at the begin¬
ning of our era.
Meanwhile, an independent civilization de¬
veloped rapidly in Egypt towards the end of the
fourth millennium. Here the situation concern¬
ing writing is less clear. First of all, the material
support, for other than monumental inscriptions,
was principally papyrus, the reed-like plant grow¬
ing along the Nile and in the Delta, and, to a less¬
er extent, other perishable materials. Egypt has
thus yielded fewer documents than Mesopotamia
by a factor of thousands.
Number systems
The third millennium marks, for both the
Mesopotamian and the Egyptian civilizations, the
gradual emergence of an abstract concept of num¬
ber. Originally each number is attached to a given
system of units. The "four" of "four sheep" and
"four measures of grain" are not, for example,
written with the same symbol.
Above, part of a rod used
in ancient Egypt to measure the cubit, a unit
of length equivalent to 525 mm.
JKight, air view of the site of Ur (Iraq),
dominated by the ziggurat (top).

:tW:
O*
*%
-a /->:
>
"1
v
r t
ft //**#
C i
-.^;
m
m*.*
^f
.
,>4( / //y
as«
V

iL
\ N \ *V V
Equally, the different systems of units are not
connected among themselves. Measures of area,
for instance, have no simple relationship to meas¬
ures of length since the connection between the
twothat area could be calculated from the
product of a length and a widthwas not yet
operational.
But the very practice of writing things down,
yielding permanent records of measures, opens
up the possibility of observing regularities and
patterns. This possibility was taken advantage of
in these two societies over a period of about 1,000
years so that by the end of the third millennium
Egyptian and Sumerian scribes had learned how
to calculate areas and volumes from lengths, how
to divide rations among workers, how to calcu¬
late the time necessary for a given job of work
from volumes, numbers of men, and work rates.
Next our evidence shows how a new level of ab¬
straction was reached in which the concept of
number became more and more detached from
its metrological context.
By the beginning of the second millennium
both civilizations had succeeded in developing
equally abstract systems of numeration, though
they had chosen different paths to represent their
numbers. The Egyptians, like the vast majority
of modern societies, had a written number sys¬
tem based on ten; that is, one counts up to nine
of each unit before moving up to the next higher
unitafter nine "ones" comes a "ten", after nine
"tens" comes a "hundred", etc. But, unlike
JtSelow, two scribes are
shown recording an
Assyrian king's spoils of
war in this drawing of a
lost nco-Assyrian wall
painting.
modern systems, their writing of numbers is "ad¬
ditive", that is there are separate signs for units,
tens, and hundreds, and these are repeated as
necessary.
The Mesopotamians used a base of sixty for
their mathematical calculations, and they deve¬
loped the first known system of position. The
signs for numbers repeat after fifty-nine, the ac¬
tual value being determined by the position of
the digit in the number as a whole.
A scribe's training
Learning how to manipulate such number sys¬
tems requires a specialized training and the
creation of schools can be traced back to the same
time as the invention of writing. Furthermore we
know that the learning of arithmetic began ear¬
ly in the schoolchild's career, along with reading
and writing, and that mathematics, then as now,
was considered one of the "hardest" subjects.
Around 2000 BC, Shulgi, one of the kings of
the Ur III empire in Mesopotamia, was the sub¬
ject of a literary hymn which became a model
text used as a school exercise during the first half
of the second millennium. In this document he

4 ^wsxsyvy
LA
V ' - *î
V.
X't «^
> *
\
boasts of his academic achievements and proud¬
ly states: "I am perfectly able to subtract and add,
[clever in] counting and accounting."
Over a thousand years later the Assyrian king
Assurbanipal was to repeat much the same thing
in one of his hymns: "I can find the difficult
reciprocals and products which are not in the
tables."
What would be the history of a young scribe
destined to become a "mathematician" in ancient
Egypt or Mesopotamia? He (and it is almost cer¬
tain that it would be a boy; girls, while not for¬
bidden a scribal formation, are almost entirely
absent from the records) would of course first go
to school. The sons of the rich and powerful
rubbed shoulders with less fortunate young peo¬
ple, who found in education one of the rare
means of social ascension.
What would the scribe learn during his
schooling, which lasted at least ten years? We pos¬
sess, from both civilizations, examples of school
exercises including mathematical texts, and can
catch a glimpse of student life through the so-
called "scribal disputes". An example from
Mesopotamia has one scribe boasting to another
of his achievements:
"I want to write tablets:
tables [of measures] from 1 gur of barley to
600 gur;
tables [of weights] from 1 shekel to 20 minas
of silver,
with the contracts of marriage that may be
brought me,
the commercial contracts...
the sale of houses, fields, slaves,
pledges in silver, contracts for the rental of
fields,
contracts for raising palm trees...
even the tablets of adoption; I know how to
write all that."
In this typical text from Egypt one scribe
taunts another as follows:
"You come here and fill me up with your
office. I will show up your boastful behaviour
when a mission is given to you. I will show up
your arrogance when you say: 'I am the scribe,
commander of the work gang.' ...
"A ramp, 730 cubits [long] and 55 cubits
wide, must be built, with 120 compartments filled
with reeds and beams; with a height of 60 cubits
at its peak, 30 cubits in the middle; with a slope
of 15 cubits; with a base of 5 cubits. The
jKelief above, from the
tomb ofAkhethotep (5th
dynasty of the Old
Kingdom, 2450-2290 BC)
shows Egyptian scribes
drawing up the accounts of
a funeral precinct.
15

Early Egyptian
and Babylonian numerals
These two groups of symbols show how scribes of
ancient Egypt and Babylon would have written
1989 using their respective number systems.
Egypt
? f f
f ? ?
nnnn
nnnn
1 1 1
1000 900 80
The Egyptian numeral system, here shown in
hieroglyphic writing, was based on 10. We see one
sign for thousands, nine signs for hundreds, eight
signs for tens, and nine signs for ones.
Babylon
<í YYY
33 9
The Babylonian numeral system was based on 60.
Using base 60, one thousand nine hundred and
eighty-nine would be written as thirty-three sixties
and nine ones. The position of the nine to the right
indicates that it constitutes the ones, while the 33,
one place over to the left, represents the sixties.
16
JAMES RITTER,
of the United States, teaches
mathematics and the history
of science at the University
of Paris-VIII. His main
research interests are in the
theory of relativity and its
history, and in the uses of
reasoning in ancient Egypt
and Mesopotamia. He has
contributed to a collective
work, Elements d'histoire des
sciences (Bordas publishers,
Paris, 1989), prepared
under the direction of
Michel Serres.
quantity of bricks is demanded of the troop
commander.
"The scribes are all assembled but no one
knows how to do it. They put their faith in you
and say: 'You are a clever scribe, my friend!
Decide quickly for us, for your name is famous.'
... Let it not be said: 'There is something he does
not know.' Give us its quantity in bricks. Behold,
its measurements are before you; each of its com¬
partments is 30 cubits [long] and 7 cubits [wide.]"
But these are literary and not real mathemat¬
ical texts. In fact, we possess some mathematical
school texts from each civilization, almost all of
them from two distinct periods: the first half of
the second millennium and the period of Greek
and Roman domination at the end of the first
millennium. They are of two kinds, table texts
and problem texts.
A typical example of a table text is a square
root table from early second millennium Babylo¬
nia. The systematic and organized writing of a
table shows the high degree of abstraction already
attained. What does the scribe do if he needs a
square root? If it is not on the table, it can easily
be calculated from the surrounding values that
do appear. This procedure was standard in almost
all cultures including Western ones until a quite
recent date, and this is how the Babylonians and
the Egyptians used their tables of multiplication,
square roots, and sums of fractions. This is also
the way in which they used the problem texts.
A typical example, from an Egyptian papyrus of
the middle of the second millennium, begins with
a statement of the problem to be resolved:
"A pyramid. Its side is 140 [cubits] and its
slope is 5 palms 1 finger [per cubit]. What is
its height?"
Here the data are presented in the form of
concrete numbers rather than abstract variables,
followed by a step-by-step solution with the an¬
swer at the end. Each step makes use of either
the result of a preceding step or of one of the data
given at the beginning of the problem.
No argument is given to justify the procedure
nor is any explanation offered for its form. But
even with the numerical values included, the na¬
ture of this form is quite clear. Thus the student
would be able to solve any other problem of the
same type. Moreover these problems are often
grouped in such a way that the techniques learned
can be immediately applied in other cases. The
above problem, for example, follows a problem
concerned with the determination of the slope
of a pyramid given its length and height, and is
followed in its turn by a problem involving the
calculation of the slope of a cone.
However, not all mathematical problems
were as practically oriented as this one. The main
purpose of mathematical school exercises was to
give the student scribe practice in the mathemat¬
ical techniques used in solving problems. Tech¬
nical drill, not direct application, was the main
point. For this reason many of the apparently
"practical" problems in these texts are far re¬
moved from real life: a Babylonian tablet pro¬
poses a problem in which a broken measuring rod
is used to measure a field; an Egyptian document
asks a scribe to calculate the original size of a herd
of cattle based on the number of cows used to
pay a cowherd's taxes...
The pedagogical purpose of all this is clear.
Moreover, the structure of the problem and
table texts permits an alternative approach to
abstraction and generalization in mathematics.
Rather than take the path of increasing symboli-
zation marked by a hierarchy of "levels of gener¬
ality", the Egyptian and Babylonian approach is
to create a network of typical examples in which
a new problem can be relatedby a form of
interpolationto those already known.
Exactly the same approach can be seen at
work in other areas of ancient thought such as
medicine, divination and astrology. All these sub¬
jects were treated by the Egyptians and Mesopota-
mians as constituting a special domain of
"rational practice".
No word for 'mathematician'
Ample documentary sourcesaccounting texts,
lists of professions, references in literary and
historical texts, even painting and sculpture-
enable us to follow the professional life of the
aspiring scribe once his education is complete. We

-4rr- r - 'J' !/
-All; . «43
: -M
'
1
IA
i '
1
<Wl A-
^ J ÏU
l '..I..
i
1
'
M
=J
i ¿e Rhind Mathematical
Papyrus, a scroll copied
around 1650 BC from an
earlier work, is the source
of much information about
ancient Egyptian
mathematics. Detail, above,
shows part of the table for
doubling odd fractions.
Left, fragments of a
Mesopotamian tablet from
the beginning of the 2nd
millennium BC.
will look in vain, though, for any mention of a
"mathematician" in the modern sense of a per¬
son working within a recognized community of
researchers on the properties of number and
geometric figure. No word for "mathematician"
exists in any of the ancient languages of Egypt
and Mesopotamia.
There were two paths that a young scribe
could follow. A few would become teachers of
mathematics themselves, perhaps exploring fur¬
ther problems that could be presented to a new
generation of schoolboys. In the course of time
this did lead to a deepening and broadening of
the mathematical techniques available to the two
societies.
The graduate could also become an
accountanta calculator of work, rations, land
and grain. Scribes are omnipresent and their in¬
dustrious labourings are carefully depicted on
Egyptian wall frescos and Assyrian palace reliefs,
always hard at work on the business of their
master, who might be either the state or a pri¬
vate landowner. They seem to have held
privileged though subservient positions. Like
their schoolteaching colleagues, they were not the
movers of ancient society but they served those
who wereand well enough to be immortalized
on their patrons' walls as the visible symbols of
that concentration of power and wealth they
laboured so hard to calculate. 17
