SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
Understanding global change
BY ALISON McKELVEY CLAYSON
Fc
OR more than a decade, many scien¬
tists have warned that industry and agri¬
culture were spewing enough gases
into the atmosphere to heat up the
Earth and eventually produce disastrous
climatic changes. The gases are known
as "greenhouse gases", while the phe¬
nomenon of global warming is called
the "greenhouse effect" because the
gases that accumulatelike the glass
panes of the greenhousetrap the
Sun's heat and prevent it from escaping
back into space.
Some of these gases are also res¬
ponsible for destroying the protective
layer of ozone in the Earth's atmosphere.
This too is very serious because without
its protective blanket, the Earth absorbs
increased amounts of ultraviolet radiation
from the Sun, which can cause skin
cancer, cataracts and certain immuno¬
logical diseases.
Despite the scientists' warning,
global warming trends received little
public attention until a string of
weather-related disasters in 1988
seemed to drive the point home. Heat
waves and drought throughout the
United States, hurricanes in the Caribbean,
and flooding in Bangladesh could all be
previews of what will happen with
increasing frequency if the atmosphere
warms by between 2° and 5° by the
middle of the next century, as some
scientists have predicted.
Excess carbon dioxide is the main
48 culprit, although other gases such as the
A cloud of ice in the stratosphere.
Scientists think ice clouds may encourage
chemical reactions leading
to the destruction of the ozone layer.
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used to
pressurize aerosol sprays and insulate
refrigerators are also implicated, as are
natural gases such as methane. Meth¬
ane is produced by bacteria in the guts
of termites and cattle, in the green
muck of rice paddies, in the rotting gar¬
bage of landfills, and in the world's 1 .5
million square kilometres of peat bogs
and tundra.
In 1880, the concentration of car¬
bon dioxide in the atmosphere was 290
parts per million (ppm). It is now about
350 ppm. Most of the extra carbon has
come from burning fossil fuels such as
coal or oil, and as a side effect of de¬
stroying forests: when 1 tonne of carbon
in the form of coal is burnt, it pro¬
duces about 4 tonnes of carbon dioxide.
Studies of air bubbles trapped inside ice
cores from the Antarctic confirm that
roughly the same concentration of car¬
bon dioxide persisted throughout the
past 10,000 yearsuntil the industrial
era disturbed the balance.
Of course, the disasters of summer
1 988 may have had nothing to do with
the greenhouse effect. They may just
have been part of the random and na¬
tural variations in weather that occur
everywhere. The scientists themselves
do not agree in their interpretation of
these events, but no one disputes the
fact that the amount of carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere has increased, that
the rate of climate change is likely to
be faster than at any time in human his¬
tory, and that such change will be fun¬
damentally destabilizing and disruptive
to our planet since living organisms and
the ecosystems they inhabit cannot
adapt that readily to rapid change.
THE CONSEQUENCES
OF GLOBAL WARMING
An increase in world temperatures over
the next fifty years seems likely to cause
a chain reaction. According to com¬
puter models used to predict what might
happen, the greenhouse effect will dra¬
matically alter patterns of rainfall:
some places will be wetter, others drier.
This will affect vegetation, which in turn
will affect the animals that depend on
plants for survival. Changes in vegeta
tion can themselves cause changes in
climate. Global warming may devastate
food crops in some areas, encourage
soil erosion and create conditions in
which pests are unleashed in a new
environment.
The consequences for agriculture
are equally serious: we have seen the
sad effects of the regional warming
trend over the past twenty years in sub-
Saharan Africa, where a growing popu¬
lation, deteriorating soil conditions and
changing climate have combined to
overwhelm the fragile food supply
system, and there have been famine
and misery. In China, the desert is
spreading at the rate of 1,500 square
kilometres a year.
One of the most significant results
of the greenhouse effect is that it causes
the sea level to rise. The oceans have
already risen about 13 cm in the last
century. What would societies do if the
oceans were to rise by 1-1 .5 metres, as
some scientists predict? Major cities like
New York, Bangkok, Calcutta, Rio de
Janeiro and Seoul could be flooded out;
countries like Bangladesh and The
Netherlands might eventually disappear,
while entire populations could become
refugees from low-lying coastal areas.
Another factor in sea level rise is the
melting of icecaps. Researchers suspect
the greenhouse effect to be at work,
for a whole series of massive icebergs
have been breaking off the Antarctic ice
shelf and melting into the sea. Higher

global temperatures not only melt polar
ice, they make water expand, thus
causing floods.
THE QUICKENING PACE
OF CHANGE
In 1 800, at the beginning of the Euro¬
pean Industrial Revolution, there were
a thousand million human beings on
the Earth. By 1930 the number had
doubled, and by 1975 it had doubled
again. If current birth-rates hold, then
the world's present population of 5.1
thousand million should double again
during the next 40 years, with 90 per
cent of that growth occurring in poorer,
developing countries.
Still, it is not so much the numbers
that alarmalthough the prospect of
feeding and providing for 10 thousand
million human beings is dauntingbut
rather the effect that Homo sapiens will
have on the Earth's environment, and
the rate at which human-induced change
and degradation will occur. It is the need
to provide for so many people that puts
an unbearable pressure on natural
resources and the environment.
Change is natural. But in recent
years man has accelerated the rate of
changeby profligate burning of fos¬
sil fuels such as oil and coal, by wan¬
ton desecration of forests, by careless
introduction of poisons into the soil and
water supplies, and by uncontrolled
emission of dangerous automobile and
industrial fumes into the airso that the
delicate equilibrium that has always
regulated the total Earth system and its
component parts has been destroyed:
the geosphere (the planet), the at¬
mosphere (the air around the Earth) and
the biosphere (that overlapping area
between the two where life exists) are
out of kilter. Man has undermined his
own life-support system, and the con¬
sequences may well be irreversible. If
they are, then the 10,000 years since
the last Ice Age may have witnessed the
dawn and the decline of modern man.
THE MOST COMPREHENSIVE
STUDY OF EARTH EVER
UNDERTAKEN
To understand what has happened, it
is necessary to understand the impact
of human activity on the environment,
on the concentrations and mixtures of
gases found in the atmosphere, on cli-
A balloon is launched
at Kiruna (Sweden) early in
1989 as part of an international
scientific research
project to monitor the ozone
layer above the Arctic.
mate, and how these interact. The
scientific community has accepted this
challenge, and through a worldwide
non-governmental organization called
the International Council of Scientific
Unions (ICSU), it has launched an inter¬
national study of Global Change known
as the International Geosphere-
Biosphere Programme (IGBP).
The subject of the study is the Earth
itself and the process of change,
whether induced by human beings or
natural forces. The scientists will seek
to describe and explain these occur¬
rences, perhaps also to predict them.
But the ultimate goal of the Programme
is to translate this knowledge into terms
the decision-makers will comprehend so
that appropriate actions can be taken
at national and international levels to
minimize the destructive consequences
of such changes for man's well-being
and survival.
The Global Change study will be
the most comprehensive investigation
of Earth ever undertaken. It will link
scores of research institutions, inter¬
national organizations and academic
centres, and will engage thousands
of scientists in every continent. For
the first time, the work of physicists,
astronomers, biologists, chemists, data
processors, geographers, oceanographers,
meteorologists, palaeontologists, geolo¬
gists, and many other disciplines will be
harnessed for a common objective,
studying and interpreting changes in the
Earth's physical, chemical and biologi¬
cal systems viewed as an interacting
whole.
In 1 988, under the aegis of ICSU,
a Global Action Plan was drawn up by
a Special Committee of 19 scientists
from 16 countries and six continents.
Their Plan identified four basic research
themes.
Documenting and predicting
global change: This will require a
worldwide network of monitoring
"observatories", both on-the-ground
and by remote sensing from space.
Improving understanding of
major forces of change: Variations in
the Earth's orbit and in amounts of so¬
lar energy reaching the biosphere can
have profound effects on life systems.
So can volcanic eruptions of gases and
dust, which some scientists believe may
be held accountable for mass extinc¬
tions of the past. Human activities are
change forces of comparable magni¬
tude. The Global Change Programme
will assess the relative importance of
such factors.
Understanding interactions in
the Total Earth System: The study of
how physical, chemical and biological
systems, including those influenced by
man, interact in a self-regulating Total
Earth System, is a very new science.
Assessing the effects of global
change on our resource base: As
knowledge about global change im¬
proves, it must be used to predict local
and regional effects on resources such
as agriculture, forests, and fisheries.
These themes are very broadtoo
broad, really, to be of much use in de¬
signing specific research projects,
although they are helpful in providing
a general context and framework. In¬
stead, they are being broken down in¬
to smaller chunks and parcelled out
among an expanding number of com¬
mittees and other groups whose mem¬
bers are drawn from institutions
affiliated with ICSU. The interested par¬
ties include Unesco, the World Mete¬
orological Organization (WMO), the
United Nations Environment Program¬
me (UNEP), regional organizations and
national scientific bodies including 37
national committees, to name but a
few. In the interdisciplinary spirit of the
IGBP, the main project areas being de¬
veloped focus on the linkages between
systems. For instance:
Terrestrial biospheric-atmospheric che¬
mistry interactions;
Marine biosphere-atmosphere
interactions;
Biospheric aspects of the hydro-
logical cycle;
Effects of climate change on terrestrial
ecosystems;
Global changes of the past.
A WORLDWIDE PROGRAMME
OF SCIENTIFIC CO-OPERATION
The challenge of a scientific pro¬
gramme like this one is to go beyond
sectoral viewpoints and disciplinary
biases to achieve a sense of the Total
Earth System and the interaction of its
component parts. Two working groups
whose mandates cut across all specia¬
lizations have been established. One will
study the ways in which modern data
and information systems can be used
in handling the vast and complex mass
of data generated by the IGBP, and the
other will look specifically at the es¬
tablishment of Regional Research
Centres. It is proposed to set up about
1 0 multi-purpose centres for the analy¬
sis, interpretation and modelling of data
based on regional observations. These
centres will be linked to worldwide
monitoring networks and research sites.
The IGBP is a long-term effort to
study the causes and effects of global
change. Some projects may be ac¬
complished in a few years, while others
may take 20 to 30 years just to accu¬
mulate a useful data base. What mat¬
ters in the end, however, is that all the
different pieces of the mosaic we call
Earth should be seen as a whole,
without regard to geographical or dis¬
ciplinary boundaries. Only a worldwide
programme of scientific co-operation
and research can hope to achieve such
a goal.
ALISON McKELVEY CLAYSON,
of the United States, is
information officer for the
International Council of
Scientific Unions and the former
Editor of Unesco's environment
journal Nature and Resources.
49
