Feasts and festivals as a
cornerstone of community life
The festive spirit
BY JEAN DUVIGNAUD
V»
taLKS
HAT is the significance of feasts and fes¬
tivals? Are they celebrations hallowed by custom,
or curious pieces of folklore? Only after the
meeting and confrontation of different cultures
was it possible to grasp the originality and authen¬
ticity of each. Likewise, it was historians, ethnol¬
ogists and psychologists studying other countries
than their own who saw that festivals are acts of
self-expression, manifestations of a dynamism
constantly renewed, and even in some cases the
reflection of Utopian yearnings.
The French sociologist Emile Durkheim,
writing at the beginning of the century, saw feasts
and festivals as an "effervescence" the intensity
of which cements the solidarity of a group or a
people, a representation of the invisible relation¬
ships between man and the laws of nature, a
veritable institution whereby the bonds between
the members of a society are maintained, regener¬
ated and reproduced.
Writing around the same time, but in a to¬
tally different context, Sir James Frazer, the
author of The Golden Bough, saw feasts and fes¬
tivals as acts which reproduce the great systems
of beliefs and mythologies. From these major
celebrations emerged religion, magic and politics.
Similar statements are found in the work of other
anthropologists such as Boas (on the Eskimos),
Frobenius and Griaule (on the Africans), and
Malinowski (on the Melanesians).
A bonfire to celebrate the feast of St. John in the
Marne département of France.
The meaning of feasts and festivals may ac¬
tually be as problematic to those who take part
in their rituals as to outside observers. But rather
than attempting to find a common denominator
between such manifestations, let us try to draw
up a brief catalogue of them.
Some festivals consecrate a milestone in life-
birth, initiation, marriage, burial. Such events are
collective acts whereby a society responds to the
insurmountable constraints of naturesex,
deathand tries to deliver men and women from
their individual fears.
Thus community participation in sexual
union through the marriage feast follows a pat¬
tern which varies little in different parts of the
world. In marriage ceremonies at Douz in
southern Tunisia, for example, families camp on
the side of a dune during the night. The
bridegrooms wait in a tent for their future wives
to arrive, riding on dromedaries accompanied by
a singing and dancing throng. On their arrival,
the whole group springs to life, seized by an ir¬
resistible impulse to take part. In Nepal, this time
in broad daylight, the community is also present
at the bride's preparations for marriage, and
responds with the same magical fervour. Euro¬
pean and American marriage celebrations still
perform a similar function, in highly schematic
form, although the participants may not even
realize it.
The expression "rite of passage" is an inade¬
quate description of such events. In Casamance,
for example, south of the Sahara, the passage of 11

12
a corpse on a stretcher adorned with the horns
of an ox generates an excitement which provides
the living with a way of socializing death.
Brazilian children in a suburb of Salvador laugh
and sing as they follow the coffin of one of their
friends. In Mexico, the Feast of the Dead trans¬
forms the macabre apparatus of funerals into
farce, as if seeking to abolish the anguish caused
by the inevitability of death.
Another type of festival, which could be
described as "restorative", spectacularly revives
the memory of a vanished past or culture. One
example is the Bolivian Diablada at which Indian
miners and craftsmen dress up as figures from the
ancient Inca empire and confront a triumphant
St. George in a symbolic struggle. Another is the
Rocío, the curious Andalusian festival of the
Virgin of the Marshes, in which Arab, Christian
and Gypsy allegories overlap. A celebration on
the beach at Yemanja in northeastern Brazil is
a mirage in mime and dance of a distant Africa
of which the sea is the location and the symbol.
The participant sects abandon themselves to
dancing and trance before leaping into the water
which formed them.
Festivals based on ritual are of a different
order. Their repetition of a liturgy gives them a
dramatic dimension and aesthetic grandeur. In¬
donesia's wayang shadow puppet drama, which
so fascinated Antonin Artaud, belongs to this
category, as does India's Kathakali dance drama,
mass bathing in the sacred river Ganges, and,
more generally, all the celebrations which Budd¬
hism has inspired in Asia. European history con¬
tains a number of accounts of the manifestations
of Roman Catholic mysticism in Italy and Spain.
Something of their spirit has survived in the great
festival held on the cathedral forecourt at Guada¬
lupe, near Mexico City, when Indians and mes¬
tizos reconstitute for a day the union once
concluded between the Virgin and one of their
number, a slave.
Urban festivals such as the processions of an¬
cient Athens, Chinese imperial ceremonies,
"royal entries" into European cities of the Renais¬
sance, the wedding of the doge of Venice and the
sea, and the Lord Mayor's Show in London have
tended to be more highly orchestrated. Traces of
such traditions survive today in the Palio of Siena
and the carnivals of Venice, Bale, Munich and
Flanders.
Other, more serious urban festivals are the
anniversary celebrations organized by all régimes
and all nations to commemorate symbolically the
pact or contract made between a people and a
founder, or the event which led to the formation
of the state. Festivities with a didactic intent, such
as France's National Festival on 14 July and
International Labour Day on 1 May are organized
to provide a seal of political legitimacy.
Even a brief catalogue of festivities would be
incomplete without an evocation of private con¬
viviality. Many kinds of small-scale celebrations
are held purely for the sake of entertainment,
shared enjoyment or for the simple satisfaction
of being together. Communal meals, the agape
("love feasts") of the ancient Greeks, banquets
in town and country, brotherhoods, initiatory
groups, gatherings for dancing and music, inti¬
mate or Utopian celebrationsminiature festivals
of this kind are found in all civilizations and are
flourishing thanks to video and other modern
facilities.
The participants in these often deeply felt
common experiences accept no other ritual than
that which they have chosen themselves. Such oc¬
casions, on which community feeling is expressed
even more intensely than in larger-scale events,
are deeply woven into the fabric of regional or
national life.
A claim on existence
The form and meaning of all these festivals vary
between different cultures and religions and are
influenced by fashion and technology, but each
one, whatever its scale, is the vehicle of a tran¬
scendent power to anticipate or to create.
1 he "Gangaur" spring
festival in honour of
Gauri, goddess of
Abundance, in Rajasthan
(India).
KJpposite page, (above)
Samoan dancers, (below)
shamanistic festival in the
Himalayan monastery of
Matho, Ladakh.
JEAN DUVIGNAUD,
of France, teaches at the
University of Paris VII,
where he is director of the
laboratory of the sociology
of knowledge and the
imagination. He is the
author of several works on
feasts and festivals, notably
Le Don du rien. Essai
d'anthropologie de la fête
("The Gift of Nothingness.
Essay on the Anthropology
of the Festival"; Paris, 1977)
and Fêtes et Civilisations
("Festivals and
Civilizations"; Paris, 1984).

we) ^:>'s
_- . - - - *
When the Indians of the North American
plains draw the great circle of the world and the
Sun, their action cannot be seen as a mere thea¬
trical representation of magical or religious
beliefs. Those who take part in this ritual are
absorbed in an operation of far wider scope, one
that unites their bodies, the cosmos, a common
perception of life, almost a lust for life. This is
metaphysics in action. So-called "tradition" or
"authenticity" is not at all a passive state but a
claim made on existence.
The Africans deported to the "New World"
as slaves revived Yoruba rites in northeastern
Brazil. The drumbeats and frenzied gestures of
the Candomblé and the Macumba conjure up
a trance which brings back the lost homeland.
However repressed these rites were in the past,
however distorted they may appear in some
places, they helped the slaves to maintain their
human estate in the face of servitude and poverty.
The French ethnologist Roger Caillois wrote
of the "hurly burly" which turns established hie¬
rarchies upside down at festival-time. Georges
Bataille believed that feasts have a force which
leads to the transgression of established rules. In
this respect the Paris Commune of 1871 was a
festival, and so was May 1968 in Paris. These
events called in question everyday customs, and
called for a "new deal" in man's relations with man.
Of course these were ephemeral moments,


but their turmoil was a breeding ground for new
attitudes and new desires. Without feasts and fes¬
tivals, would not the human species be reduced
to the state of the beehive or the ant-hill?
Decadence or renewal?
What has become of all these festivals in McLu-
han's global village? What is the outcome of the
confrontations between these celebrations which
were hitherto separated by history, politics, cul¬
ture or distance? Is it true, as some regretfully be¬
lieve, that a process of "planetary banalization"
is underway? Is the audience ruining the show?
For a festival is a show. It needs a public. I
am not thinking here of the pitiful and more or
less faked scenarios rigged up for tourist consump¬
tion. I am thinking of those who are not con¬
sumers of folklore, of the innocent eye of the
African watching an Indian festival on television
or the response of an Amerindian villager who
sees a European carnival for the first time.
Such spectators will feel encouraged, invited
to join in themselves, to accept if they have the
chance, the festive delirium of the Brazilian
"Bumba meu boi" or the collective excitement
of an evening around a marabout shrine in
Morocco. The Aborigines of Australia have made
the choice to present themselves through the me¬
dia to foreign audiences. They have shown the
same desire for recognition as the people of an
Italian village in the Val de Lunigiana who once
came to Paris to stage a single performance of a
local festival.
Does the televising of festivals and their
production before foreign audiences indicate that
they are in decline? This is the belief of purists
who would like to stop the clock and confine fes¬
tive elation to a scenario that never changes, or,
more cunningly perhaps, turn it into a piece of
marketable folklore. And yet, contrariwise, the
ANTICLOCKWISE
FROM LEFT:
1 he Venice carnival
1 raditional Inca feast
to mark the summer
solstice at Cuzco, Peru.
Jtiehind the scenes at
a performance of wayang,
the Javanese shadow
puppet drama.
A funeral rite in
Casamance, Senegal.
\jypsy pilgrimage to the
shrine of the "Virgin of the
Marshes" in Andalusia,
Spain.
global village which has made us all contem¬
poraries seems to encourage the invention of new
forms. Who would complain if the festival were
to become an art form?
The threat which has caused festivals to dis¬
appear from industrial societies has come about
through the development of what Lewis Mum-
ford called megalopolis, of urban and suburban
agglomerations which are not communities but
vast, amorphous concentrations of people. In the
last hundred years or so, what continent has es¬
caped this proliferating centralism?
Where then can festivals be celebrated
without provoking hostility or indignation?
Proliferating slums, streets and squares jammed
with traffic, people living packed together in tow¬
er blocks, alienation within big organizations
which discourages day-to-day contactall these
factors are hostile to the festive spirit.
Religion, ideology and sport attract crowds
to events which sometimes assume the allure of
festivities. But such mass celebrations are short¬
lived. The hypermarkets of the megacities are also
skilled at exploiting the tawdry aspects of the
festive spirit to lull their customers into spending
freely a travesty of joyful and sumptuary con¬
sumption.
Will the story of feasts and festivals end in
these distortions of the festive spirit? Does what
the architect Paul Virilio has called the "censoring
city" present the ultimate barrier to that intense
communion, to that frenzied awakening of
awareness of others, to that perception of the
world and the future through which, as the
French sociologist Marcel Mauss said, "the social
body is truly realized"?
Surely not. Feasts and festivals, with all their
unexpected, transient, gratuitous and spontane¬
ous aspects are a motor of community life. From
them man draws on the exquisite pleasure of what
André Breton called the "limitless infinite". 15
