ANGER OF THE SEA-GODDESS BY THAKAZHI S. PILLAI
In its 14 major languages and several
hundred other languages or dialects,
modern India has many thriving
literatures. One ofthem is that of
Malayalam, the official language of
Kerala State in southwestern India. The
leading living novelist in Malayalam is
Thakazhi Sivasankara Pillai (born
1914), whose mostfamous novel,
Chemmeen, has been translated into all
the main languages ofIndia, where it
became aphenomenal best-seller, and
into many other languages as well.
Chemmeen tells the story ofthe
relationship between Karuthamma, the
daughterofa Hindufisherman, and
Pareekutti, the son ofa Muslimfish
wholesaler. Wepublish below an extract
from thefinalpages ofPillai's novel. It
opens as Karuthamma and Pareekutti
meet on the seashore while
Karuthamma's husband, Palani the
fisherman, is out at sea. The events
described are inspired by the beliefofthe
Hindupeople that Karuthamma's
defiant behaviour willanger the sea-
goddess Kadalamma. The extract has
been takenfrom an English translation
o/Chemmeen by Narayana Menon
which has been included in the Unesco
Collection ofRepresentative Works
(Gollancz publishers, London/Harper
and Brothers, New York).
WHEN Palani was away at sea, was
it right that she should stand talk¬
ing to a stranger? Karuthamma,
however, was not afraid. She had met him be¬
fore alone in the darkness of night. If she could
give a man whose life she had crushed at least
a moment's happiness, shouldn't she grant it?
They stood face to face looking at each
other. The man that she had ruined stood be¬
fore her. She knew for certain that he would
love her forever. He would always understand
her and forgive her. She could do anything to
him. He would put up with anything from
her.
In those few seconds Karuthamma forgot
all the sorrows of her life. She felt she had not
been vanquished. She had the strength few
had. She was under the protection of a strong
man, life was secure. Palani would see to it
that the world outside wouldn't dare touch
her or hurt her. And she also had something
else which gave her spirit sustenance. A man
loved her as no man had loved a woman. Be¬
tween these two, her life was full. Now the
man who loved her stood in front of her.
She entered his extended arms and her
body became one with his. Their faces met.
He whispered in her ears.
"My Karuthamma"
"Yes!"
He stroked her all over and his hands slow¬
ly moved to where he and the rude young
boatmen of the seafront used to stare.
"Karuthamma"
Again she answered him obediently in that
semiconscious state of ecstasy.
"Yes-"
"What am I to you?"
She took his face in both her hands and
looking at him with half-closed eyes, she said,
"Everything. My pot of gold".
Again they became one. And in that state
he whispered gently in her ears.
She could not break herself away from that
embrace.
Far out at sea Palani baited a shark, a real¬
ly big shark. Until that day so huge a shark
had never swallowed any bait of his or of any¬
one else's. No fisherman had ever caught as
big a fish in that sea.
The moment it was baited, the shark struck
hard. The sea churned and the water splashed
upward into the sky. Then it came charging
up. Palani saw it come above the water. He
could see the line coming out of its mouth.
Palani realized that he had caught the big¬
gest fish of that seacoast. He shouted forth his
happiness at the catch. He must make a quick
decision. Should he hold fast to the line and
stop the fish or should he let it go for some
time? If the bait had gone right into its throat,
one pull of the line would be sufficient to stop
that dangerous beast. But it might charge at
the boat and smash it. But if he let it go, the
boat would speed after it. And it was difficult
to say how far the boat would be dragged
along with it.
Palani couldn't see the shore. He had no
idea in which direction the coast lay. He held
the line with one hand and with the other
guided the boat, and looked toward the sky
to find his bearing by the stars. He couldn't
find the star he looked for. Stray clouds had
covered the sky. The boat was being drawn
along at an unimaginable speed. It furrowed
through the water. There were no waves. The
sea was calm. But the sea had darkened and
assumed an ominous character. He looked
carefully at the water to find the direction of
the current. But he couldn't judge it, however
hard he tried.
The shark was pulling the boat with the
speed of wind. Where was it going? How far
had he gone?
Palani cried out.
"Stop, stop there. Stop before you drag me
to the palace of the sea goddess".
He pulled hard at the line. Suddenly the
boat stopped. Then Palani laughed wildly.
"Ha ha hastop there like that".
A short distance away from the boat the
fish was charging in its death throes. Once
more Palani, excited, pulled the line. The fish
jumped up and fell into the sea again. Though
the boat seemed motionless, Palani realized
that it had been caught up in a current and
was drawing a pattern on the expansive sea.
	 37

The current was going round and round in
circles. Again Palani watched it carefully. Was
he caught in a whirlpool? He was sure now
that he was going round in a wide circle. But
he held the line firmly. Palani looked up at
the sky. There wasn't a single star to be seen.
He stood in his boat and looked all round
him. He could only see the sea round him.
But now the water was assuming a different
contour. Now it seemed that all around him
was a mountain, a circular mountain of water.
He and his boat were in a depression. The
head of the boat seemed to rise.
The palace of the goddess of the sea was
at the bottom of the deep sea. There the sea
goddess was enshrined. Palani had heard
descriptions of that palace. He had to get there
through a whirlpool, a whirlpool which made
the whole sea churn round in circles, knock¬
ing at the gates of the sea goddess' abode. Pala¬
ni thought that the mountains encircling him
were getting taller and taller. He loosened the
line a little. Again the boat speeded forward.
From somewhere Palani heard a terrifying
roar. He had never heard a noise like that. It
was a storm rising.
The waves rose as high as a mountain.
Close on one after the other the waves rose.
Palani had never seen the like of such waves.
Those waves were not moving in lines. They
were rising all round him in a circle, the two
ends joining and making a pattern. Palani
looked round him and studied in a moment
the nature of that spectacular angry sea. He
knew how to ride his boat over the waves.
And he knew too how to join forces with a
storm. He had sailed a boat on the darkest of
dark nights.
There was a bright flash of lightning, fol¬
lowed by terrifying thunder. Palani let loose
the line. If he held fast the line and the boat
stopped, the boat would be smashed. He let
the fish pull the boat as it liked.
When the head of the boat mounted the
crest of the high waves, he balanced himself
with the aid of his oar and jumped upward
so as to lighten the weight of the boat. When
he reached the top, the boat again suddenly
came down. The boat became almost vertical.
Then there was another huge wave ready to
swallow up the boat with its gaping mouth.
The sea roared. It roared -with its anger
against that poor fisherman. The storm
provided a drone for that roar. The thunder
provided the rhythm. What a terrible devil¬
ish dance it was. A minute human being.
Should the goddess of the sea unleash such a
fury to smash him? How quickly could she
drag him to her depths if she wanted.
Perhaps these huge waves were making
their way to the shore. Perhaps they were rid¬
ing over the houses on the beach. Perhaps
poisonous sea snakes were crawling over the
beach. In the distance something rose very
high. Was it the crest of some spectacular high
wave, or was it some sea monster raising his
head with gaping mouth like a cave? Was it
that poor fisherman's spirit being broken?
Palani tried to jump over the wave. But he
couldn't rise high. That huge gaping wave
went right over him and his boat.
Not only had the clouds covered the sky
with thunder and lightning, the very sky
seemed to split. All the water in the sea seemed
to have gathered in one spot. The storm
roared as if it was going to smash all. Yet the
head of the boat could be seen over the crest
of still another wave. When that had passed,
Palani was clinging to the boat, now turned
upside down. In a second he found his breath
and shouted.
"Karuthamma!"
Palani's cry rose above the roar of the
storm.
Why did he cry out for Karuthamma? The
guardian angel of the fisherman at sea is his
wife at home. He was begging her to pray for
his safety. Didn't the first fisherman come safe¬
ly home in spite of the storm because of the
power of a fisherwoman's prayer? Palani, too,
believed he could be saved. He had a wife. She
would pray for him. Hadn't she given him her
word even the night before?
The fury of the storm increased. Palani
fought it. But it joined forces with the waves.
Another huge wave came rolling. By the time
he could say "Karu" the wave had rolled on.
There was nothing to be seen. The storm
and the thunder and the lightning joined
together in the destruction.
The water churned devilishly and blew up
to the skies.
The whole sea became a kind of cave. The
storm became an entity. The boat reappeared
on top of the waves. Palani was lying on top
of it. He was clinging to it.
Wouldn't that merciless slaughter ever end?
The boat then got caught up in a whirl¬
pool and sank like a stone.
One single star came out and shone. It was
the fisherman's Arundhati , the star which
showed them their way, but that night the star
seemed to lack in lustre.
The next morning day dawned on the calm
sea as if nothing had happened. Some of the
fishermen said that there had been a great
storm in mid-ocean during the night. The
waves came right up to the front of some of
the houses. And there were sea snakes to be
seen on the white sands. Panchami stood on
the seashore, the tears running down her
cheeks. The baby in her arms was crying bit¬
terly for her father and mother. Palani, who
had gone out fishing the evening before, had
not come home. Karuthamma was not to be
seen.
Panchami wept and as she wept she tried
to comfort the baby.
Two days later the bodies of a man and
woman locked in embrace were washed on the
shore. They were the bodies of-Pareekutti and
Karuthamma.
And at the Cheriyazhikkil seafront a dead
shark that had been baited was also cast on
the shore.
Arundhati was the symbol of chastity.
