The women of Arembepe
Many heads offamilies in Brazil are
women. The case ofArembepe, afishing
village near Bahia, suggests some reasons
why this is so.
38
X HE colonization of Latin America by the
Portuguese and the Spanish was decisive for the
organization of family life in this part of the New
World. Since colonial times, the patriarchal
family has been the predominant model, either
nuclear (essentially in the towns and cities) or
extended (in the countryside). Matrifocal families
centred on a woman and her children are also
found, although in smaller numbers, notably in
the regions densely populated by blacks or
mulattoes.
The black population of Latin America were
brought there as slaves early in the seventeenth
century. The indigenous populations (heirs of
such brilliant civilizations as those of the Mayas,
the Incas and the Aztecs, or fragile communities
threatened with extinction) refused to work for
the European invader, and slavery came to
provide a supply of labour for the gold and silver
mines, and the sugar, tobacco and cotton
plantations.
Even after the abolition of the black slave
trade, clandestine ships continued until the mid-
nineteenth century to bring their human cargoes
to Latin America's two main slave ports, Salvador
de Bahia in Brazil and Cartagena de Indias in
Colombia.
This period saw the establishment of a rigid
social stratification related to economic power
but also to skin colour. The rich landed
proprietors were white, and the poor agricultural
labourers were former black slaves. At the same
time mixed unions brought about a mingling of
the three ethnic groups (indigenous, black, and
white) and a synthesis of their cultures.
By separating the female slaves from their
menfolk (a group of slaves was never allowed to
consist of more than one third of women), the
slave trade actually encouraged their sexual
exploitation by their masters. It was not unusual
for the latter to recognize and bring up the
children they had had by a slave. The slave
woman, for her part, transmitted her own culture
to the master's children along with her milk, her
lullabies, her legends and her games.
'.
--,
1 erra-cotta Maya statuette
of the pre-classical period
(1500 B.C-300 A.D.).
1 he marriage of a black
couple in the house of a
rich family is depicted in
this engraving by the
French artist Jean-Baptiste
Debret (1768-1848).

BY MARIZA DE ATHAYDE FlGUEIREDO AND DANDA PRADO
THE
FAMILY
PAST
AND PRESENT
LATIN AMERICA 39

Migration is a growing
source of insecurity for
women, especially if the
men who leave for the
cities fail to send money
home or leave at a crucial
time of the agricultural
year. " (United Nations
Population Fund "State of
World Population" Report,
1989).
40
MAR1ZA DE ATHAYDE
FIGUEIREDO,
Brazilian sociologist,
journalist and
photographer, is an editor
of the Rio de Janeiro
feminist magazine
Impressoes. She has
published articles in a
number of magazines,
including Tiers Monde and
Feminist Issues. Her doctoral
thesis (University of Paris
VII, 1981) was a study of
the social and economic role
of women heads of families
at Arembepe, Brazil.
DANDA PRADO
is a Brazilian educationist,
psychologist and teacher
with a special interest in the
social role of women.
Among her published works
are O que é familia (1982,
"What is the Family?") and
O que é aborto (1983,
"Vfhat is Abortion?"). She
has contributed to several
anthologies, including
Sisterhood is Global (Archer
Press, New York, 1984).

A Brazilian woman at
work in a light engineering
plant.
1 he man goes, the
children stay."
w*P^B^I
m
JL-ti!
¥ s f^ * ^B
t ... ^' v» :
Families that were not patterned on the white
model were mostly extended families grouping
children around their mother. On the other hand,
the civil code of the whites in most cases upheld
the patriarchal régime. Legislation inspired by the
Napoleonic Code of 1808 attributed inferior


status to women and kept them dependent on
men, according to the norms of the classic patriar¬
chal family. This statute has only recently been
modified to give greater autonomy to women and
to allow marriages to be dissolved.
The contemporary family
Cultural and ethnic intermingling, rampant ur¬
banization (in Brazil today 70 per cent of the
population lives in the towns and cities), inter¬
nal and external migration, changes in women's
status and the profound transformation of models
of reproduction, have contributed among other
factors to the appearance of new family structures
and favoured the emergence throughout Latin
America of the woman as head of the family.
This phenomenon, which is not new, is com¬
ing to be seen as part of a survival strategy for
needy populations. It has been brought about by
circumstances and not choice, since women and
men invariably aspire to contract a legitimate
union before the priest and the mayor.
The man considers himself to be the head of
the family and wishes to be treated accordingly.
The mores of patriarchal society confer authori¬
ty on him whether or not he assumes the obliga¬
tions springing from it, notably that of feeding
his wife and children. Furthermore, by virtue of
the virility cult known as machismo, the man has
a right to maintain extra-conjugal relations or to
gamble and drink, which does not always leave
him enough to provide for his family.
When she is forced to assume the role of head
of the family, the woman generally adopts an am¬
biguous attitude towards her husband or partner.
This ambiguity is the result of her contradictory
situation, since society has promised her a man
who would provide for household needs, leaving
her to do the housekeeping and bring up the
children. She does not boast of being the head
of the family; on the contrary she conceals this
disagreeable status by maintaining that she is
simply helping to meet household expenses.
It was not until 1978 that this phenomenon
became the object of major sociological and
economic studies, notably at the request of the
United Nations. In 1974 it had already been
calculated that one third of the world's heads of
families were women. However, only now is
awareness of the problem and its impact on
developing countries beginning to make itself felt.
Arembepe is a fishing village near Bahia in
Brazil, with a population of 2,000 which is
swollen in summer by an influx of
holidaymakers. There is evidence that it already
existed as a settlement of Tupinamba Indians in
1509 when the Portuguese arrived. A represen¬
tative microcosm of rural communities both in
Brazil and elsewhere in Latin America, in 1981
Arembepe was the subject of a survey on women
heads of families.
The expansion of industry and tourism has
transformed the Arembepe fishermen into
salaried workers. The factories do not employ
women, who are reduced to taking ill-paid jobs
working for holidaymakers. However, 25.5 per
cent of the women of Arembepe are heads of
families and are responsible for one or several per¬
sons. They are more numerous in the poor
categories (57.62 per cent) than among the
better-off.
The situation of these women is not covered
by the official definition of the Brazilian Office
of Geography and Statistics, whereby only the
husband is considered to be a head of the family,
independently of his contribution to the family
budget and the legal situation of the couple.
Thus the single, separated or widowed
women who house and feed their children, grand¬
children and elderly or handicapped parents are
deprived of the title of head of the family. If they
have a partner with them on the day when the
census official arrives, he is considered to be the
head of the family, whether or not he is the father
of any of the children, contributes to the family
income, or has been living there for years or on¬
ly a few months.
The man's role as head of the family is thus
often no more than symbolic. His material
obligations towards his wife and children are
those he wishes to recognize. The woman has no
way of forcing him to assume the role of
economic provider which is socially and cultural¬
ly his.
In general, the women begin by hiding the
reality from themselves by saying that male fail¬
ings are temporary. When they have accepted
that these are irremediable, they look for another
man. If half of the women heads of families at
Arembepe have had a single regular union, 35.59
per cent of them, notably the youngest, have had
two. This second union reflects the search for a
new male social reference, even if it offers no
material guarantee or stability.
After several fruitless experiences, the woman
finally establishes a matricentred family group
and only has occasional relations with men. The
man goes, the children stay.
41
