EDUCATIONAL PLANNERS
GO BACK TO SCHOOL
IN a modern building not far from
Unesco's Headquarters in Paris,
forty-four men and women from all
regions of the world are following a
rigorous nine-month training programme
covering the design, implementation and
evaluation of strategies and plans for the
development of education.
All the participants are specialists who
hold key positions in educational plan¬
ning or training in their respective coun¬
tries. One has been responsible for the
evaluation of Rwanda's educational re¬
form programme; another is deputy
director of -educational planning in
Oman; a third is a section chief at the
State Education Commission in China; a
fourth is responsible for the development
of basic education in Brazil.
They have been selected from a large
number of applicants to participate in
the twenty-fourth annual training
programme organized by Unesco's Inter¬
national Institute for Educational
Planning (HEP). The Institute, which
celebrated its twenty-fifth anniversary in
1988, has so far trained some 850
specialists from 129 countries. It is
acknowledged as the world's leading
training institution in its field. .
The annual training programme
acquaints participants with the most
recent ideas and practices concerning the
relationships between the educational
system and economic, technological,
social and cultural development. It is also
designed to improve their knowledge of
methods of administering educational
systems as well as diagnosing and forecast¬
ing techniques.
In practice this means that a statisti¬
cian from Ghana, grappling with a
problem of cost analysis and budgetary
processes, in his country's technical
education sector, can compare his
experiences with those of colleagues from
Brazil, Finland and Indonesia. An
economist from India, who is particu¬
larly concerned with the relationships
between education, employment and the
labour market, is able to discuss her
problems and learn from some of the
solutions already worked out by her
counterparts in Canada, the People's
Democratic Republic of Korea or
Senegal.
The first phase of the 1988-1989
programme took place last September in
the home countries of the participants,
who began to study specially-produced
teaching materials designed by the
Institute, to update their knowledge of
basic educational planning concepts and
techniques.
The training methods at the Institute
are based on team work and the active
involvement of each participant in exer¬
cises which, as far as possible, reflect
actual working conditions. Simulation ex¬
ercises, seminars, and work in small
groups are combined with lectures, dis¬
cussions, study visits, computer work and
the presentation of experiences in differ¬
ent countries.
During the final stage of the
programme, scheduled for April and
May, each participant will have the
opportunity to make an in-depth analy¬
sis of an educational problem concerning
his or her country.
The annual training programme is
only one component of the IIEP's train¬
ing activities, however. Each year the
Institute organizes several intensive train-
Participation by nationality in HEP training programmes and countries in which research and studies have been undertaken.
A Participants in Annual Training Programme Visiting Fellows Research Studies
33

ing courses on particular aspects of educa¬
tional planning and administration, such
as the evaluation of educational systems,
the utilization of microcomputers in
educational planning or the financing of
vocational and technical education. These
courses, lasting a maximum of four or
five weeks, are held not at the Institute's
Paris Headquarters but in different coun¬
tries. Each one caters for some thirty
planners from the country in which it is
held and often also a few participants
from neighbouring countries. So far,
fifty-one of these intensive courses have
been held, in countries ranging from
Jamaica to Thailand and from Burundi to
China, providing specialized training to
some 1,800 participants.
HEP offers a whole spectrum of other
training opportunities, including an
individually-tailored visiting fellows
programme and a series of workshops
and seminars. Yet training is only one
side of the Institute's activities: an equal
share of its resources goes towards
research.
In carrying out its research
programme, IIEP's basic aim is to in¬
crease understanding of the social, eco¬
nomic and political aspects of education
in order to facilitate planning for educa¬
tional development and reform. In the
twenty-five years since its foundation, the
Institute has carried out research projects
on a wide range of topics in most of
Unesco's Member States. Some of these
projects have been focused on the orien¬
tation and the organization of educational
planning processes in individual coun¬
tries; some have been concerned with de¬
veloping the methodologies used in
educational planning; and others have
examined the implications for planning
of specific policy issues.
The Institute is currently drawing
together the results of over twenty case
studies undertaken during the past five
years on subjects as diverse as education¬
al training policy for the computer indus¬
try in Mexico, the effects of literacy
programmes in Kenya and the Republic
of Tanzania, and the role and utilization
of the information base in Tunisia.
All these studies are reviewed and
evaluated by the HEP in preparation for
the Institute's third main activitythe
dissemination of new concepts, methods
and techniques in educational planning
to individuals and institutions in all
Member States.
A constant effort is made to take
account of the needs of different
categories of clientele. IIEP's traditional
public, which includes decision-makers,
planners and administrators, researchers,
trainers and teachers, is continually
changing and expanding to include
development economists, sociologists,
political scientists and other specialists in
the many branches of the social sciences.
The broad objective of the dissemina¬
tion programme is to ensure that this
clientele is informed of the evolution of
ideas, concepts, practices and techniques
of planning and administration; that prac¬
titioners are kept up to date on impor¬
tant research concerned with their
specialities; and that the results of signifi¬
cant national experiences in the field are
brought to their attention. Special care is
taken to satisfy the needs of the Institute's
clientele in developing countries, who are
very often starved of relevant publica¬
tions and information.
