INTERVIEW
Jean Lacouture
Champollion, a hero of the Enlightenment
The French writer and journalist Jean Lacouture has travelled the world, notably covering major events in the emergence of the
former colonized peoples. He is also the author of major biographies* in which historical intuition and psychological analysis
are combined with outstanding reportorial talent. In this Unesco Courier interview he describes the intellectual odyssey of Jean-
François Champollion, a man in whom the ideals of Unesco seem to have found expression two centuries before their time.
Your portrait ofJean-François Champollion might have Third World in our time, with such outstanding people as
been specially designed to illustrate Unesco's mission of Taha Hussein, the son of an illiterate peasant and blind into
bringing the world's cultures into closer contact. Your hero's the bargain. Yet he became a university lecturer and then
short life was dominated by his determination to enable a minister, and his literary output was of the highest order.
Europeans to decipher the secrets of Egypt. A career like his, which went straight from almost total ig-
Champollion was born in 1790, towards the end of the norance to a masterly command of ideas and language, is
Enlightenment, of which he was one of the most worthy very striking and indeed moving,
heirs. He was born a few months before the first perfor¬
mance of Mozart's Magic Flute, that crowning glory of the To come back to Champollion, he must surely have had
civilization of the Enlightenment. quite exceptional ability and talent?
Yet he came from Figeac, a small town in the Quercy There were three sides to his genius. In the first place,
region of France, which had scarcely been touched by the he was a highly gifted linguist. In the field of Oriental Ian-
Enlightenment and was still shrouded in darkness. guages, his abilities were quite extraordinary. Before he was
I feel that it is quite staggering, almost Promethean, that fifteen, he had learnt Arabic, Hebrew, Persian, Geez, Syri-
Champollion should have been born in such circumstances, ac and Aramaic. In order to have something to do on Sun-
with a father who was a bookseller but had had little edu- days, he asked his brother to send him a Chinese grammar,
cation, and a mother who may well have been illiterate, and He had already made up his mind to decipher hieroglyphic
yet he should have torn himself away, little by little, from script and he felt that Chinese might prove useful in his
the ties of the land to step out into the world of communi- research. When he was fifteen he started to learn Coptic,
cation and knowledge. Admittedly, he embarked on his but we'll come back to that.
career with the help of his elder brother, who was some- He was also a dedicated historian. The lectures he gave
thing of a pathfinder. No pun intended, but it was his at the University of Grenoble have been found and they
brother who "oriented" him. They were a fascinating pair, show that he was already taking a critical approach to his-
The close rapport that grew up between them was one of tory, a discipline which was starting to equip itself with the
the main factors that prompted me to write the story of tools of scientific thinking.
Champollion. Thirdly, he was an artist, a man with a very keen aes-
The first ray of light in the life of Jean-François was his thetic sense, and that was to be a very important factor in
schooling in Grenoble, first at the lycée and then at the his attempts to decipher hieroglyphs. He was captivated and
university. This was the standard route by which it was pos- inspired by the beauty of Egyptian art. He already sensed
sible to climb the cultural ladder in the late eighteenth and that there was a fundamental link between the art and the
early nineteenth centuries. Champollion was to negotiate it writing of Egypt and that the script itself was an art form,
at prodigious speed. He arrived in Grenoble at the age of ten, His artistic sensibility was therefore to be one of the means
went to the lycée at thirteen and became a university profes- he used to penetrate the mysteries of hieroglyphic script,
sor at nineteen, after having studied at the Collège de France He continually progressed on the linguistic, historical and
and the Ecole Pratique des Langues Orientales in Paris. He aesthetic planes alike,
shot out of the darkness into the light like an arrow. Moreover, he was an extremely generous, warm-hearted
The same kind of lightning career can be seen in the man who loved his fellow men. It was perhaps because he
* Including his recent Champollion, une vie de lumières (Grasset publishers, had nad an Unhappy love-life that he projected OntO Egypt
Paris, 1988). Volume i of his 3-volume life of Charles de Gaulle was pub- the very deep affection he felt within himself and trans-
lished ¡n English in 1988 as Charles de Caulk: The Rebel by Holmes and r ir i . .L J " .. 1 L .L
Meier, New York, who have also published his biographies of lion Blum fo hlS l°Ving Urge mtO the desire to plumb the Secrets
(1982) and Pierre Mendès-France (1984). of that great civilization and identify with it.

i
i
I
fe
' í#
1%.

Shouldn't his love for Egypt also be seen against the back¬
ground of his time?
It's true that Champollion grew up in a period marked
by what has been called "Egyptomania", when Egypt
aroused great interest. Eighteenth-century Europe was avid
for Egypt in all the senses of that term. Quite apart from
the colonial projects that were afoot and the looting of the
country's works of art, there was also, in many instances,
a disinterested passion for knowledge.
Colonial appetites were whetted by Egypt, as they were
by many other countries. However, Egypt appears to have
been the object of a special fascination, as if the Europe
of the Enlightenment had sensed that it held the secret of
a source of wisdom affecting the whole of mankind.
This period was, quite simply, a second Renaissance. The
_ first Renaissance, in the sixteenth century, had come about
through Europe's rediscovery of Graeco-Roman Antiqui¬
ty, while the second, in the eighteenth century, stemmed
frem its recognition of the ancient cultures of the eastern
seaboard of the Mediterranean, such as Assyria, Babylon,
Persia and, above all, Egypt. Europe was on the look-out
for other civilizations and was intent on discovering the en¬
tire world.
This is the deep-rooted significance of the spirit of the
Enlightenment. Mankind was one and indivisible. The
imprint of mankind should be sought everywhere. True
humanism was universal: it was no longer confined to
Europe, as it had been in the sixteenth century; it was
worldwide. Like Montesquieu and his Persians, Diderot
and his "Savages", and Rousseau and his natural man,
Champollion wondered who the real savages were when a
tribe of Osage Indians visited the Louvre.
What is more, as Champollion saw things, the world
existed not only in space but in time, across the centuries.
He recognized that, in the eighteenth century, mankind ex¬
isted in China, Morocco or Peru just as much as in France,
but also that mankind had existed forty-five centuries earli¬
er, when the Pyramids were being built. In deciphering hi¬
eroglyphs, he made a stupendous vertical breakthrough,
plumbing the depths of the universe and coming closer to
mankind's early roots. In so doing, he demolished many
preconceived notions about human origins.
In his view, Egypt occupied a fundamental place as a
matrix of history. He saw the first organized social unit as
having emerged in Egypt, the source of European civiliza¬
tion filtered through Greece.
It's important to remember that he had had first-hand
information on Egypt from a very early date, through
meeting people who had been there.
Among other things, European "Egyptomania" had
spawned Bonaparte's expedition! Opinions may differ on
the value of the different aspects of that expedition, but its
scientific contribution was clearly admirable. It produced
three treasures which gave rise to all subsequent research,
especially the decipherment of hieroglyphs. These were the
Description de l'Egypte, the illustrated report made by Vivant
Denon, and the Rosetta Stone.
In the first decade of the nineteenth century, people be¬
gan to draw inspiration from the works of Vivant Denon.
The Rosetta Stone began to be studied, and the Description
was published. It was around this time that Champollion
reached manhood. The coincidence between the blossom¬


ing of his own talents and the compilation of a stock of
detailed knowledge on Egypt was entirely fortuitous.
In addition, Champollion was fortunate enough to meet
three remarkable menFourier, Dom Raphael de Monachis
and Cheftitchiwho had been involved with Bonaparte's
expedition. Who could have imagined that Bonaparte would
have the preposterous idea of appointing Joseph Fourier,
the leading French physicist of his time and his companion
in Egypt, as Prefect at Grenoble, where he asked the Cham¬
pollion brothers to help him write the preface to the Descrip¬
tion? Or that Raphael de Monachis, a priest of Greek-Syrian
origin, would come to visit Fourier in Grenoble and make
the acquaintance of the brothers, thereby enabling Jean-
François to improve his Arabic? Or that a Coptic priest
named Cheftitchi would be appointed as an assistant at
a church near to where Jean-François lived? Champollion
was thus granted an opportunity of practising to his heart's
content that little-known language which, he was convinced,
was the key to everything. Champollion's command of the
Coptic language was to be an important factor in the advance
which he gained over his competitors in deciphering the hi¬
eroglyphs, since it was the spoken version of those same
hieroglyphs. No great discoveries are ever made without a
stroke of luck, and luck smiled generously on Jean-François.
Even so, he didn't start out from zero. Research had been
carried out earlier and others were working in the field...
Champollion was, of course, heir to what had gone be¬
fore him. That is true of all inventors. Nothing important
is ever discovered without the previous work of-pioneers

who may already have covered two-thirds or even three-
quarters of the ground. The first of his precursors was prob¬
ably Kircher who, as early as the seventeenth century, ad¬
vanced the hypothesis that the language spoken in the palaces
of the Pharaohs was the same as that still heard in psalms
sung in the Coptic churches of Cairo. This was a vital clue.
Drawing of an Egyptian
ornament taken from
Champollion's work
"Egyptian Pantheon, or
Collection of the
Mythological Figures of
Ancient Egypt" (1823-1825).
The second path was opened up by the Abbé Barthélé¬
my, who suggested that the "cartouches", or oval shapes
surrounding some groups of hieroglyphs, contained the
names of kings. Since there were only a few dozen names,
there was only a like number of possible readings in each
cartouche. And there were only a few cartouches in the hi¬
eroglyphic inscription on the Rosetta Stone, one of which
was known to contain the name of Ptolemy, since that name
was mentioned in the Greek translation of the inscription.
The third breakthrough came right at the end of the
eighteenth century, just before the actual discovery of the
Rosetta Stone, when Niebuhr and Zoéga came to the con¬
clusion that the hieroglyphs must contain a number of pho¬
netic values.



After the discovery of the stone, Silvestre de Sacy, the
leading Orientalist of the time, set about deciphering parts
of it. The Swedish diplomat Akerblad thought that it was
possible to draw up an alphabet of fifteen signs, and although
this was to prove unworkable, it enabled ideas on the sub¬
ject to move forward. Eventually, the great English physi¬
cist Thomas Young drew a spectacular comparison between
sets of Greek signs and hieroglyphs on the Rosetta Stone.
Young was the last and most brilliant of Champollion's
precursors. The findings he arrived at by inspired step-by-
step guesswork were ingenious. But there was no underly¬
ing method. It was Champollion who was to find the key
to the hieroglyphic system.
Young had managed to decipher the name of Ptolemy
on the Rosetta Stone more or less correctly. Champollion
adopted a more rigorous approach and found each of the
values composing that name, as well as the name of
Cleopatra. However, his most authentic discovery,
representing the real break with the trial and error methods
of the past, came with his decipherment of the classical Egyp¬
tian names of Ramses and Thothmes.
In what way was that revolutionary?
Until then, peopleprimarily Young, after the rough ap¬
proximations of Akerbladhad managed to read a few
names of Ptolemaic kings and queens, with signs that were
all phonetic, such as Ptolemy (p, t, 1, m) and Cleopatra (k,
1, p, t, r). Two things then seemed credible: that the hiero¬
glyphs were mainly phonetic, representing sounds, and that
they had been invented in the Ptolemaic period to translate
the names of contemporary sovereigns of Greek origin. In
short, the script was confined to that period of decline and
only made it possible to decipher the leftovers of Egyptian
civilization, without providing any clue to the writing of
that civilization at its zenith.
Champollion's revolution was based on two crucial dis¬
coveries, namely that the hieroglyphs were identical from
one Pharaonic era to another and that the underlying prin¬
ciple was that they were composed of a mixture of phonet¬
ic and ideographic elements. That was his "Eureka!". That
was the core of the discovery which led to the realization
that the phonetic approach adopted in the Ptolemaic peri¬
od was nothing more than a late simplification of a general
rule. It was also understood why it had proved so difficult
to find the key to the hieroglyphs. In fact there were two
keys: one phonetic and the other ideographic.

By whatpath did Champollion reach thatfateful moment
of discovery?
He reached it through deciphering the names of Thothmes
and Ramses, two kings from the great classical period of the
18th and 19th dynasties. He came face to face with the main
secret of the script. On a copy of one cartouche which had
been sent to him, he found a red disk, which was bound
to be an ideogram representing the sun. He translated it into
Coptic, which gave him the word Ra, and then, below the
disk, he found two signs with the phonetic values "m" and
"s", giving "mses". By pairing the ideographic and phonetic
values, he came up with "Ramses". In the case of Thothmes,
the ideogram was an ibis, which represented the god Thoth,
with the same two phonetic values "m" and "s". This took
place on 14 September 1822.
Other pieces of the jigsaw fell into place in quick suc¬
cession. Champollion noticed that some words were writ¬
ten from left to right, and others from right to left. He also
discovered that some signs were there merely to signify
gender or a family of meaning. This was how he realized
that Hatshepsut was a woman. The identification of the de¬
terminative signs was another fundamental feature of the
decipherment process.
So the celebrated date of14 September 1822 was a tremen¬
dous moment, the point when he suddenly realized that he
had grasped it all?
Yes. It was a moment of incredible intensity for him. He
had discovered the principle, the key. But he had no sooner
announced the news to his brother than he fell into a sort of
trance. He lay prostrate, as though he had been over¬
whelmed, as if the fantastic sum of the efforts he had made
over a period of twenty years had triggered off an explosion,
like a terrifying discharge which condemned him to exhaus¬
tion and total emptiness, now that the goal had been attained.
Yet it was not all over. There still lay before him the
formidable task of drawing all the conclusions from the
discovery and of systematizing them.
Naturally. But there were two other moments of extreme
intensity in his life. These were when, armed with his dis¬
covery, he went first to Italy and then to Egypt, in search
of the civilization on which he had shed light and which
he was to read like an open book.
In the first place, during his visit to Turin to examine
the wealth of Egyptian treasures in the museum there, he
discovered the beauty of Egyptian art. His reaction was one
of pure emotion. In Paris, the linguist had won the day, but
in Turin it was the aesthete who was overwhelmed. It was
not long before the historian, in his turn, was excited by
the piles of papyri which nobody before him had been able
to decipher.
But there was another dramatic moment, which he
described in a passage worthy of Chateaubriand: the papyri
were so fragile that they crumbled into dust as soon as he
touched them. We can well imagine the feeling that took
hold of him. There he was, so near to his goal, with all the
skills needed to discover, in each of those documents, a page
of history that had lain buried for thousands of years, and
then that page disintegrated in his hands. All those dynasties
that were reunited before his eyes were decomposed in a
flash. It was both marvellous and terrifying for him.
Champollion tells us that these papyri had been taken
from their natural environment. They had been produced
in Egypt from an indigenous plant and were meant to be
covered and kept in bamboo canisters, but here they were,
instead, placed in packing cases, tossed about for weeks on
end on the sea voyage, exposed to the deadly effects of
humidity, and dumped any old how in the rooms of the
Turin museum. Fortunately, museum science has made
progress since then...
Then came, at long last, the voyage to Egypt, where the
country, its light and its people revealed themselves to him.
It was as if his decipherment of the hieroglyphs had
miraculously opened a door to Egypt and enabled him to
identify with its civilization.
The comparison that comes to my mind is with the great
mystics. When Champollion entered the Hypostyle Hall

Kjkampollion's camp at Philae is depicted in this
watercolour by Nestor L'Hôte, an artist who
accompanied the great French Egyptologist on his
expedition to Egypt in 1828-1829.
or when he descended into the tomb of Ramses VI or of



Seth I, I think that he felt the emotion of a mystic discover¬
ing the countenance of Christ. It was not so much the cul¬
minating point of his work as the crowning glory of his life.
His decipherment of the hieroglyphs gave him a direct in¬
sight into Egyptian civilization. The monuments spoke to
him through their very beauty. He saw their architecture
as a kind of prayer, a form of expression responding to that
of the hieroglyphs. As he said in one of his letters: "Egypti¬
an statuary is a simplified form of hieroglyphic writing."
Whenever a Pharaoh built a temple to his own glory,
the symbolic language he used was more direct and posi¬
tive than that of a cathedral. There was a physical link be¬
tween the art and the writing of the Egyptians. Champollion
threw himself heart and soul into substantiating this idea.
He spent eighteen months in Egypteighteen extraordinary
months during which he went back across the centuries and
fathomed the innermost meaning of Egyptian civilization.
In this setting, the cry he uttered on 14 September 1822 be¬
came a magnificent hymn to knowledge. But it was also to
be his swansong.
What makes that hymn even more moving is the fact
that it projected on Egyptian civilization a beam of light
which swept away a number of preconceived ideas about
Judeo-Christian civilization and which conveyed to Europe
a message glimpsed in the eighteenth century but perhaps not
very well received in the nineteenththat Egypt was the
cradle not only of human history but of religious thought.
Could monotheism have been invented in Egypt? Such
a hypothesis is often accepted. However that may be, the
great Christian Trinity seems to have been founded on that
of Osiris, Isis and Horus. The originality of Christian dog¬
ma is thus called into question. Champollion sparked off
a genuine cultural and spiritual revolution. He clearly felt
this himself, just at the time when he was returning to the
Christian fold. His Song of Egypt was not altogether free
of a note of anguish.
Moreover, Champollion's dialogue was not only with
ancient temples, but with the flesh-and-blood Egyptian
people, with the Egypt of his time.
That's true. Not only was he appalled by the state of op¬
pression and dire poverty to which the Egyptian people were
reduced, but he ran the risk of speaking openly about it to
the Pashanot the most obvious course to take. Muham¬
mad Ali had received him cordially and had allowed him
to go wherever he liked in the country for as long as he
likedand remember that this was scarcely one year after
Egypt had suffered the debacle of the Battle of Navarino
against the French and English fleets. Champollion could
therefore have simply turned a blind eye to the situation,
since his mission was not a humanitarian one. But he chose
not to. Shocked by the sufferings of the Egyptian people,
he made a point of voicing his dismay to Muhammad Ali.
The example he set was not followed by every Orientalist.
He also drafted a fourteen-point memorandum on "the
safeguarding of the monuments of Egypt", a document in
advance of its time. He had very strong views on the need
for the in situ protection of the monuments at their origi¬
nal sites and, above all, on the need to respect the right of
Egyptians to keep their masterpieces of art in their own
country. Some years earlier, when the zodiac in the Tem¬
ple of Hathor at Dendera had been dragged out and shipped
to France to be erected in Paris, Champollion had written
that the best home for the monument was at Dendera itself.
Nor should we forget the plans which Champollion
made for the Egypt of his time, such as the proposal to ex¬
plore the sources of the Nile which he put to Ibrahim Pasha.
The idea of suggesting a peaceful scientific expedition to that
great warrior seems to me to be worthy of the spirit of the
Enlightenment and far ahead of its time.
The two hundredth anniversary of Champollion's birth
will be commemorated in 1790. The time is ripe for a
celebration and I imagine that Unesco will be marking the
occasion.
