FROM THE MIDDLE AGES TO THE ENLIGHTENMENT
The roots of modern maths
42

BY CATHERINE GOLDSTEIN AND JEREMY GRAY
'-J* beazLDc *yLr*£ir
oy
Icrrmiu tTtlfT cxcud . al«.T Ttnd
JL HE mathematics teaching offered by the Eu¬
ropean universities around the time when they
were founded in the late twelfth and early thir¬
teenth centuries, was largely inherited from the
traditions of classical Antiquity. At Paris, Oxford
and Bologna, the curriculum covered the quad-
rivium of arithmetic, geometry, music and as¬
tronomy. However as the study of divinity,
leading to the elucidation of the basic Christian
texts, was considered to be of more importance,
the arts faculties, which ran mathematics courses,
enjoyed much less prestige than the faculties of
law, medicine and above all theology.
The content of maths courses was rudimen¬
tary, consisting of the elementary principles of
arithmetic and the first books of Euclid's treatise
on geometry, the Elements. Principles of motion
were also studied in the works of Aristotle, and
at Oxford and Paris, mathematical methods were



beginning to be applied to the study of natural
phenomena. The fourteenth-century French
bishop and economist Nicole Oresme, for exam¬
ple, attempted to make a graphical representation
of variations in speed in a given period of time
in certain types of movement.
Measuring the land
and charting the heavens
In the late Middle Ages, mathematics was being
used by two distinct groups of people, in some
cases graduates of the same universities: on the
one hand there were tradesmen such as surveyors,
engineers and accountants, and on the other there
were physicians and astrologers, who had a higher
social status.
Economic change in the fourteenth century,
the development of the towns and of trade,
favoured the rise of mathematicians in society.
The increasing complexity of trade called for
specialized calculating and accounting skills.
Mathematicians gave consultations in "abacus
shops", where they drafted contracts and calcu¬
lations in layman's terms, and resolved banking
problems concerning interest rates, the exchange,
circulation and value of currency, and the distri¬
bution of profits.
In order to make a decent living, these trades¬
men had to prove their worth against their com¬
petitors and convince their employers or clients
that their skills and know-how were useful. Their
mastery of the algebraic techniques borrowed
from the Arab world was one reason for their
professional success.
At first, algebra was not formulated as it is
today, by using symbols to express relationships
between numbers. It served instead to classify the
L Académie des sciences et des beaux-arts,
an engraving by Gottfried Stein (1687-1747)
after a painting by Sébastien Le Clerc. 43

44
possible relationships between unknown values
and to describe general methods of determining
them. These methods were usually set out in
treatises as practical examples. The adoption of
a system of decimal notation in Europe was both
part of and a great incentive to the advancement
of mathematics. Texts packed with approxima¬
tions of roots and complex fractions proliferat¬
ed, their publication facilitated by the advent of
printing.
Thus the growth of mathematics as a skilled
profession, whose prestige was linked to that of
its chief clients, the merchants, was a corollary
of changing economic and social priorities.
New perspectives
Not only the financial world was in a state of up¬
heaval. A number of practical inventions, such
as the compass and binoculars, appeared in the
West towards the end of the Middle Ages, and
descriptions of measuring instruments and how
they worked were sometimes published with
texts on algebra. The voyages of discovery, in fact
all commercial sea traffic, popularized the use of
the astrolabe and the quadrant. Part practical, part
theoretical treatises on perspective were written
by artists, cartographers and architects, associat¬
ed with what is now known as geometrical op¬
tics. There was no hard and fast division between
mathematical theorists and practitioners.
The late fifteenth century saw the rise of the
Humanist movement, which concentrated on the
study and dissemination of the texts of classical
Antiquity. At first the movement did not really
favour mathematical methods. If Humanist
scholars in the late fifteenth century showed any
interest in arithmetic, it was because of their
study of Plato or of Pythagoras, but on the whole
they despised arithmetical calculation.
Intellectual life, of which the Reformation
was one of the most spectacular manifestations,
was more concerned with the study of texts than
contact with craftsmen. Humanist scholars
produced a new batch of translations of key
works of Antiquity, from Arabic, then directly
from Greek. In going back to the Greek geome¬
ters, they were responsible for a revival of interest
in mathematics.
The mathematical heritage of Antiquity
flourished because it did not fall on barren soil.
European rulers increasingly sought the services
of scientists, such as the astronomers Tycho Bra-
he and Johannes Kepler who were attached to the
court of Rudolf II in Prague, not only to cast their
horoscopes but to construct fortifications or
resolve ballistic problems as interest grew in the
application of mathematical skills to warfare.
Mathematics began to find a place in the largely
Humanist education of the aristocracy, and some
military engineers were even ennobled as a re¬
ward for their services. The growing interest in
mathematics in the sixteenth century is typified
in the works of such men as John Dee, the En¬
glish alchemist and astrologer who wrote the
preface to the first English translation of Euclid;
Gerolamo Cardano, the Italian physician and as¬
trologer whose book on the "Great Art" is one
of the cornerstones of the history of algebra; or
François Viète, the French jurist who specializecf
in cryptography and introduced the first sys¬
tematic algebraic notation.
The indifference, bordering on hostility,
which was felt towards applied mathematics be¬
gan to weaken with the backing of certain
reformers of the education system, such as the
French philosopher Pierre de la Ramée (Petrus
Ramus) who dedicated his teaching chair at the
College Royal in Paris to mathematics and its
practical applications. One of his disciples, the
Dutch astronomer and mathematician Willebrord
1 he Banker and his Wife
by Quentin Metsys (1455-1530).


Snell, was active in the introduction of universi¬
ty mathematics courses in Holland, aided by the
foundation of a military engineering school at
Leiden. Mathematics, geography and hydraulics
competed with and then gradually replaced as¬
trology in European universities.
The rise of the academies
The rediscovery of the works of Greek mathema¬
ticians was at its most intense in the early seven¬
teenth century. While translations and reissues
were still widely available, many attempts to
reconstruct lost or corrupt texts show how
widespread mathematical culture was becoming.
Mathematics gained in prestige through such
events as Galileo's discovery of the satellites of
M-^ÍT
46
The Pythagorean quadrivium
The writings of Plato (and of Isocrates) tell us of
the generally accepted organization of the mathe¬
matical sciences that was current during the
Hellenistic era. In the medieval educational system
it was called the Pythagorean quadrivium. It con¬
sisted of arithmetic, geometry, astronomy and
music. Astronomy could mean either elementary
notions about the rising and setting of stars, the
calendar and the seasons, or more elaborate mathe¬
matical notions concerning the real and apparent
movements of the Sun, the Moon and the planets.
The strictly mathematical aspects were sometimes
called Spherics, owing to hypotheses concerning the
spherical shape of the Earth and the cosmos that
were current from the fifth century BC. Similarly,
music in this context signified the theory of musical
intervals, in particular the numerical determination
of consonant intervals. It was also known as canon-
ics. It seems that this system existed from the fifth
century BCperhaps indeed linked to the
Pythagorean school in the context first of
"higher", then of "secondary" education.
Bernard Vitrac
Jupiter, which he named Sidera Medicea in
honour of the Medicis, whose family emblem was
Jupiter. Galileo believed that mathematics was the



key to understanding the language of the
universe: "The Book of Nature is written in
mathematical characters... the triangles, the cir¬
cles and the other geometric figures without
which it is not humanly possible to understand
a single word," he wrote.
Scientific academies modelled on earlier
Italian societies also began to appear in Europe.
Some of them, such as the Academia dei Lincei
to which Galileo belonged, were founded by pa¬
trons of the arts and sciences; others were autono¬
mous groups of scholars who met to exchange
new books, scientific and literary news, to watch
a dissection or to observe the stars.
Printed books and journals, especially scien¬
tific ones, were still few and far between, so these
academies made a considerable contribution to
the dissemination of knowledge. One of the best-
known groups met regularly with the Abbé
Marin Mersenne in Paris and attracted such emi¬
nent scientists as Blaise Pascal, René Descartes,
Pierre de Fermât, Gilles Personne de Roberval
and Gerard Desargues.
Brought up on the great classical authors,
these mathematicians were close to the Humanist
tradition. But they were also the heirs of the
tradesmen-mathematicians, as shown by the im¬
portance attached in their work to algebraic tech¬
niques. Some of them were the sons of merchants
who had grown wealthy and bought patents of
nobility.
Seventeenth-century mathematicians no
longer depended on patrons, nor did they live on
their earnings from writing or even from teach¬
ing. They combined their calling with that of
parliamentary adviser, monk, diplomat or soldier.
Formerly, masters of the art of mathematics
could boost their income by defending their repu¬
tation in public. To best an adversary on a mathe¬
matical problem would bring in clients. Although
mathematicians still offered their interlocutors
tricky problems to which only they knew the an¬
swers, this seemed to be more of a demonstra¬
tion of skill or a way of encouraging others to
study the subject. Following the lead of Descanes,
these men drew a clear line between "geometry",
based on reasoning alone, and "mechanics", ap¬
plicable to the practical demands of craftsmen.
Their geometry did not necessarily resemble
that practised by the Greeks, however. Descartes
and Fermât turned it into an analytical science.
The correspondence and treatises of these men
are packed with references to investigations of
tangents and curves, calculations of surface area,
estimations of probability in games of chance,
problems of whole numbers. They were also
interested in optics, in fact in all natural
phenomenanow held to be governed by mathe-
« I Tí S
In this wood engraving of
1503, arithmetic (centre)
seems to be settling the
dispute between "abacists",
the supporters of calculation
using counters, and
"algorists" who used
written notation, in favour
of the latter.

matical laws. This scientific rigour, a trend which
began at Oxford in the fourteenth century, had
mechanics as its model.
In the mid-seventeenth century, the state
took over from private initiative to support, at
least in part, the development of the sciences. In
1662 a number of academies in England were in¬
corporated by royal charter into the Royal Soci¬
ety of London, and the French Académie des
Sciences, founded by the minister Jean-Baptiste
Colbert in 1666, counted among its early mem¬
bers those who had worked with Mersenne. Peri¬
odicals such as the French Journal des Savants and
the Royal Society's Philosophical Transactions
made the latest scientific discoveries known to
all who were interested.
The second half of the seventeenth century
saw an increase in studies based on analytical
geometry. Other mathematicians' discoveries
relating to methods of calculating area and tan¬
gents were synthesized, independently, by the
English physicist Isaac Newton and the German
philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, each of
whom elaborated a different but in each case
coherent theory of differential and integral
calculus. Neither of their theories was wholly
acceptable to their contemporaries and a major
row went on for years over the priority or the
superiority of both contenders.
These developments marked a new phase in
the relationship between mathematics and the
physical world. In his masterpiece Philosophiae
Isaac Newton, very great
head of school but not
pompous" is the title
of this Japanese engraving
attributed to
Hôshû(c. 1890).
47

Naturalis Principia Mathematica (The Mathemati¬
cal Principles ofNatural Philosophy) published in
1687, Newton set forth a unified theory of plane¬
tary motion expressed in geometrical terms simi¬
lar to those used in Euclid's Elements. This
theory, on which numerous commentaries were
written in the following century, led to greater
understanding of natural phenomena. In the
1730s, following study of Newton's work, the
French mathematician Alexis Claude Clairaut
specified the periodicity of certain planetary
phenomena, including that of the celebrated Hal¬
ley's Comet (named after the British astronomer
who was the first to calculate its orbit).



The Age of Enlightenment
The "tradition established at the end of the seven¬
teenth century was carried on in the eighteenth.
But while soldiers and diplomats, knights and no¬
bles, continued to show an interest in mathemat¬
ics, they were gradually overshadowed by
professional mathematicians looking for full-time
employment. In some countries, mathematicians
were attached to educational institutions, in
others they belonged to scientific academies or
royal courts. Preference was given to the practi¬
cal applications of mathematics and their contri¬
bution to the advancement of technology and to
human welfare. In France, especially, the Enlight¬
enment encouraged the spread of scientific ideas
that would ensure the "march of progress" and
"free minds from religious prejudice". The
French mathematician and encyclopaedist Jean
Le Rond d'Alembert wrote a number of articles
on mathematics for the Encyclopédie. Men too
circulated, as well as ideas. When the Swiss physi¬
cist Leonhard Euler moved from the Prussian
Academy of Sciences at Berlin to the St. Peters¬
burg Academy, the Italian-French mathematician^
Joseph-Louis Lagrange left Turin to fill Euler's
post at the invitation of Frederick II the Great,
on whose death Lagrange went to the court of
Louis XVI in France.
Even more systematically than in the previ¬
ous century, mathematicians were writing, ex¬
changing theses and problems, and publishing
articles on research in progress as well as finished
treatises. They broadened the scope of the calcu¬
lus and sought to increase its applications. Eul¬
er's Introduction to Infinitesimal Analysis (1748),
was one of a number of didactic works written
by leading mathematicians to make the new ways
of thinking accessible to students. They suggest¬
ed methods of notation and standardized the
problems considered to be of interest. Confidence
was growing in algebra as a tool. Calculus no
longer sought justification in geometry and at last
became an independent discipline.
The rediscovery, assimilation and surpassing
of the Graeco-Arab heritage thus spanned sever¬
al generations of social change and intellectual
liberation. It came about through men whose in¬
terests ranged from new techniques of drainage
or construction, to cosmogony and methods of
calculating area.
CATHERINE
GOLDSTEIN, French
mathematician, is a
researcher with the
National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS).
Her research is mainly
concerned with the theory
of elliptical curves and the
history of the theory of
number in the 17th
century. She was a
contributor to Eléments
d'histoire des sciences
(Bordas publishers, Paris,
1989), prepared under the
direction of Michel Serres.
JEREMY GRAY,
of the United Kingdom,
teaches mathematics at
Britain's Open University.
He has published several
works on the history of
modern maths, including
Ideas of Space (Oxford
University Press, 2nd ed.,
1989) and recently co-edited
(with John Fauvel) an
anthology entitled The
History of Mathematics and
the Reader (MacMillan,
London, 1987).
48
1 he solar system according
to Galileo is shown in this
anonymous 16th-century
engraving.
