An authentic historical
figure who became a
legend, Shaka Zulu has
inspired many African
writers.



Shaka Zulu,
a living legend
BY KALAME IYAMUSE BOSCO
« v'.''
44
1 his engraving by James
Saunders King is the only
authentic portrait of Shaka,
king of the Zulu.
¿SIÉE
2«^Ç«te
... :pw?zWm^

s
HAKA Zulu is an outstanding example of a
historical figure who became an epic hero. In the
epic of which he plays the central role, his birth,
rise and fall are closely associated with those of
the Zulu empire.
History relates how the Zulu were a small
clan of the Ngunis, a Bantu people which migrat¬
ed to southern Africa from the north around 1300
AD and settled in the Vaal regions east of the
Drakensberg mountains. The migration trek of
the Ngunis was led by Malendela, who had two
sons, Quabe and Zulu. Little is known of Zulu
except that he became the progenitor of the na¬
tion which bears his name. Chroniclers sum up
his heritage in these terms: "He left the world
cumbered with a grave and richer by a nation.
And therein lie his monument and his fame. No
feats, no follies, not one word of praise of him
is recorded."
A great nation deserves to be born in more
splendid circumstances, however, and this is why
the epic of Shaka is so important. In it Shaka is
attributed with achievements so towering that
they qualify him to usurp from Malendela's son
the role of father of the Zulu people.
Birth of a hero
Shaka was conceived during a pre-marital rela¬
tionship, and his mother Nandi, a member of the
Lengani royal family, only later became the third
wife of his father Senzangakhona, king of the
Zulu. Before his birth, the elders had declared that
his mother was not pregnant but merely har¬
boured ishaka, an intestinal beetle. This "beetle"



later became an emperor.
This beginning of the legend, locating moral
fault in the conception of Shaka as the root cause
of his problems, is important for the structure
of the epic in that it prepares for Shaka's Odys¬
sey of initiation. In fact, Shaka was not really an
illegitimate son, since among the Zulu people pre¬
marital conception was only considered a crime
among the lower strata of society. It was tolerat¬
ed among the aristocracy and both Shaka's par¬
ents were aristocrats.
Shaka's early childhood was unhappy. His
mother's name, Nandi, meant "the Sweet One",
but she hardly lived up to it. Wilful, sharp-
tongued and authoritarian, she was despised by
many, including her husband. Her beauty and her
inferior position in the Zulu royal house pro¬
voked a mixture of jealousy, hatred and scorn,
and Shaka too was treated with derision. This
hostility brought,together mother and son. Shaka
adored his mother and this bond was further
strengthened when the two went into exile.
Banished by Senzangakhona, mother and
child were badly received in Nandi's family.
Their sufferings actualjy became much worse
since a discarded wife had no place in the social
hierarchy. In addition, a child, and especially a
boy, belonged by priority to his father's clan.
Shaka was made to feel the full force of his
mother's humiliation. He was often scolded and
beaten for no valid reason. Defended by nobody
but his mother, he developed into a tough, self-
reliant personality. He was said to have killed a
hyena and saved the girl it was carrying off, and to
have performed other youthful feats of bravery.
Shaka was condemned to enter adulthood prema¬
turely. From this point, the various oral and
written renderings of the epic diverge.
There are two major written versions. Ac¬
cording to one, written by Thomas Mofólo in
1908, Shaka falls into the hands of Issanoussi, an
all-powerful medicine man who helps him com¬
plete his initiation.
The second written version of the Shaka epic
is a poetic rendering by Mazisi Kunene, who is
himself a Zulu. This version is closer to the histor¬
ical facts and to the Zulu literary tradition.* Un¬
like Mofólo, whose version of Shaka's exploits
emphasizes the role of magic, fantasy and supra-
human forces, Kunene dwells more on Shaka's
political, military and visionary qualities. He
takes us directly from Shaka's childhood to his
military apprenticeship under his protector and
mentor, Dingiswayo, the enlightened king of the
Bathethwa, in whose army Shaka becomes a
recruit.
The rise of Shaka
Shaka's intelligence soon brought him to the at¬
tention of Dingiswayo. Above all he distin¬
guished himself as a skilled military leader with
ideas which would revolutionize the art of war.
He advocated the use of the short, wide-bladed
stabbing spear instead of the long throwing spear,
claiming that a soldier who threw his spear not
only disarmed himself, but also armed his ene¬
my. The long spear was also cumbersome and in¬
effective in close combat. According to Shaka, a
good soldier should be a well-trained profession¬
al, hardened and experienced in the techniques
of combat. Dingiswayo listened to his proposals
and gave him the command of a group of young
volunteers who soon proved far superior to all
* Originally written in the Zulu language, Mazisi Kunene's
Emperor Shaka the Great has been published in English as part
of the Unesco Collection of Representative Works by
Heinemann Educational Books Ltd. (1979). Its publication has
not yet been authorized in South Africa in its original form. 45

46
the other troops. Shaka also did away with the
leather sandals that not only reduced the soldier's
speed but also made his feet soft and vulnerable.
His soldiers toughened their unshod feet by
dancing on hard ground littered with thorns.
Shaka then tried to impress on the soft¬
hearted Dingiswayo the idea that an enemy
should either be completely destroyed or forced
to declare allegiance to him, and that the art of
war should be geared to this goal. To this end
Shaka proposed the use of a "cow-horn" forma¬
tion in battle. Three divisions should be engaged
in battle. The bulk of the army should make a
frontal attack with fresh reserve forces at the rear.
The other two divisions should lie in wait, one
on the left and the other on the right. Once the
enemy was engaged in the frontal attack, the
other two divisions should close in, encircle him
and cut off his retreat. Dingiswayo was reluctant
to put these revolutionary ideas into practice, and
Shaka had to be patient.
The return to Zululand
Shaka's glory could not be complete until he
returned to Zululand as legitimate heir to his
father's throne. Before his death, Senzangakho¬
na had named the cowardly leader Sigujana as his
heir. With the blessing of Dingiswayo, Shaka
marched to claim control over Zululand. His ven¬
ture was successful. At the head of his invincible
regiment and flanked by his two trusty lieu¬
tenants Mgobhozi and Mqoboka, Shaka entered
his father's royal palace and ushered in a new era.
He was now in a position to put his revolu¬
tionary military and political ideas into practice.
Bound by respect and loyalty towards Din¬
giswayo, he waited for the latter's death before
pursuing expansionist policies. When Dingiswayo
was slain by Zwide, the dreaded king of the
Ndwandes, Shaka waged war against Zwide.
He lured Zwide's^ army into a trap by mak¬
ing a tactical retreat which enabled him to gain
better fighting ground and to wear out his ene¬
my through fatigue and famine. Zwide's army de¬
pended on provisions collected or looted in the
battle areas, whereas Shaka had formed a brigade
of young men to look after the provisioning of
his forces during mobile warfare. Since Shaka had
previously devastated the zones along which he
lured the enemy, Zwide's army inevitably suc¬
cumbed to starvation. His army destroyed, Zwide
is said to have disappeared in the open mouth of
a mountain and to have been carried along an un¬
derground stream to the land of the evil dead.
Having conquered the strongest of his adver¬
saries, Shaka now began to strengthen and expand
his empire. He had already formed regiments on
the basis of age: the uFasimba, a brigade of sixteen-
to twenty-year-olds, the isimPholo (the
"bachelors' brigade" of twenty- to thirty-year-
olds) and the amaWombe (the "battlers", com¬
prising married men up to forty years old).
In Shaka's empire, hierarchy was based on
merit. More than ever before he made heroism
a central part of the Zulu ethos. A recognized
hero exercised greater political authority than a
born prince. Later this caused conflicts between
him and his brothers, but it was a guarantee of
equal opportunities for all who served under him.
Anyone who defended the interests of the Zulu
nation became Zulu, and it is often said that most
of his generals and close comrades were not of
Zulu descent.
Shaka's death was the result of heinous in¬
trigues by his envious brothers, Dingane and
Mhalangana, with the complicity of Mbopha, his
army commander. His death is seen by many.
African authors as the ultimate betrayal and the
KALAME 1YAMUSE
BOSCO
is a Ugandan writer based
in Paris. His doctoral thesis,
on order and chaos in the
African novel, will be
published shortly.

1 oster and scene from a
1976 production of Le
Zoulou, by the Congolese
playwright Tchicaya
UTam'Si, at the 30th
Avignon Festival, France.
The play was performed
by Théâtre Noir,
a troupe ofAfrican
and West Indian actors.
A Zulu kraal or village in
Shaka's day.
murder of a Christ-like figure. The two brothers
leapt from their hiding place and stabbed him
from behind. Mbopha struck at the astonished
Shaka from the front as he fell. Afraid that he
would rise again, the three assailants continued
stabbing at him furiously even after he was dead.
They then placed guards around his corpse in case
he should rise from the dead.
Just before his death the visionary Shaka is
said to have pronounced the words: "So, my
brothers, you are killing me? And you, Mbopha,
son of Sithayi! You think you shall rule Zululand
after my death. No, you shall never rule over it."
Shaka is a figure of the pre-colonial era, which
colonial historians have often endeavoured to
reduce to a subsistence level of village exploits.
His image is a challenge to this prejudice. Afri¬
can poets such as Leopold Sédar Senghor of Sene¬
gal and playwrights such as Zambia's Twanyanga
Mulikita have composed works inspired by the
Shaka epic. In all these plays and poems, Shaka
is depicted as the hero of an Africa seeking to
overcome tribal divisions before the onset of
colonial domination. There is often an underly¬
ing theme that the hero will rise again.
47
