CLOSE-UP ON
INDIAN CINEMA BY KHALID MOHAMED
CINEMA in India is a ticket to a
world of fantasy, providing an
escape from the harsh reality of
everyday life. Three-quarters of a century
old, it is still eagerly wooing its faithful
audience with stories of virtuous people
battling against the odds and emerging
victorious. At various stages in its history,
Indian cinema has borrowed themes,
ideas and even entire plots from foreign
sources. It has always been heavily
influenced by Hollywood, and costume
Nargis and Raj Kapoor in Kapoor's Awaara
fl951; The Tramp). The fifties were one of the
most creative periods in commercial film
making in India. Raj Kapoor and Nargis
became the golden couple of Indian films and
made several box office hits together.
epics, thrillers, love stories and family dra¬
mas from the United States have often
been refashioned to suit Indian taste,
which is demanding and virtually inflexi¬
ble. As a rule, every film must include at
least half a dozen songs and dances
(although in recent years the more adven¬
turous film makers have sought to slash
this number by half), high melodrama
with a strong emotional impact, and a cli¬
mactic sequence in which the hero
usually destroys the villain with fists or
guns.
Traditionally Indian films have a hero,
a heroine and a villain. On the periphery
there are a mother figure, a comedian to
provide light relief, a child or teenager
12

who will appeal to the young people in
the audience, and a Muslim or a Chris¬
tian character. This is the framework
devised by the Bombay movie moguls
and it is followed by other film-producing
centres in Madras, Calcutta and the
Punjab.
The father of Indian cinema was
Dhundiraj Govind Phalke (1870-1944).
Born into a priestly family in Nasik dis¬
trict, not far from Bombay, Phalke was
trained to be a Sanskrit scholar, but his
interests lay more in the direction of
painting, theatre and magic. When he saw
a film about the life of Christ, he was
excited by the possibilities of the new
medium. The outcome was India's first
feature film, Raja Harisbchandra (1913),
whose plot, drawn from Indian mytho¬
logy, was a celebration of the deeds of the
monarch who sacrificed his wealth, king¬
dom and family in his quest for truth.
Phalke became a prolific film produ¬
cer whose work was popular throughout
the country. Other stalwarts of the Indian
silent cinema included Dhiren Ganguly,
who made the satirical comedy England
Returned (1921); Debaki Kumar Bose,
who directed the adventure movie Kana-
mar Aagun (Flames of Flesh; 1928); and
Chandulal Shah who made Typist Girl
(1926) and Gun Sundari (Why Husbands
Go Astray; 1927), both of which evoke
the strength and dignity of the Indian
woman.
Film making became big business as
well as a medium for artistic expression.
Studios and production groups such as
New Theatres of Calcutta, the Prabhat
Film Company of Pune (near Bombay)
and Bombay Talkies were formed by
entrepreneurs and dictated taste during
the 1930s, the first decade of sound. One
particularly active studio, the Imperial
Film Company, produced India's first
talking feature, Alam Ara (Beauty of the
World; 1931, in Hindi), which included
a dozen songs.
By 1940, 100 films a year were being
made in India, a figure which doubled by
1950. Today, India ranks third in the total
number of films produced after the Uni¬
ted States and Japan, but since 1976 has
led the world in annual film output. In
1983, 763 Indian films were made, most
of them in Bombay and Madras. Current
output is over 900 films a year, and des¬
pite keen competition from television and
video, cinema is still India's best-loved
form of entertainment.
Yet Indian cinema has not confined
itself to entertainment. It has made
genuine efforts to portray the Indian
mind and emotions. It has advanced the
theory that the good must triumph over
evil, taken the side of the downtrodden,
stressed the need for respect for one's
elders, and portrayed the quality of
honesty in a largely corrupt world. The
best examples of such cinema date from
the 1950s, which is generally acknow¬
ledged to have been a golden decade when
film makers were not entirely dominat¬
ed by box office considerations and the
national mood was one of optimism and
hope.
The films made in the 1950s by direc¬
tors V. Shantaram, Raj Kapoor, Guru
Dutt and Bimal Roy are today widely
regarded as masterpieces. Plots were then
The Indian actress Geeta in M.S. Sathyu's
Garm Hawa (1973; Hot Winds). The film won
praise for its sensitive handling of the
problem of the partition of India.
often taken from indigenous literary
sources and were rooted in Indian soil.
The intention was to combine social
conscience with entertainment, a difficult
blend to achieve. There was also a drive
to use more advanced technology.
After the 1950s, with the advent of
colour, the cinema became more light-
hearted and escapist. The tendency was
to produce sugary love stories set in
Kashmir or picturesque hill-towns such
as Darjeeling. From this background
emerged India's best-known film maker,
Satyajit Ray.
Born in 1921 into a cultivated Bengal
family, Ray was influenced in early life
by the great poet Rabindranath Tagore,
and by his own father Sukumar, a noted
Bengali writer. He became acquainted
with the French director Jean Renoir
when Renoir was making his film The
River in Calcutta. Encouraged by Renoir,
Ray started work on Father Panchali
(Song of the Road; 1955). This film, the

by the end of the 1960s, starting with
Mrinal Sen's Bhuvan Shome (Mr. Shome;
1969), the story of a tyrannical bureau¬
crat who meets a dynamic farm girl. Two
of the most original talents in Indian
cinema are graduates of the Pune Film
Institute. Both Mani Kaul (Uski Roti; A
Day's Bread, 1970) and Kumar Shahani
(Maya Darpan; "The Mirror of Illusion",
1972) have refused to compromise with
the dictates of the market, and despite
being criticized for not being "accessi¬
ble", they have worked towards the deve¬
lopment of new narrative techniques in
their films.
A trend commonly known as "middle
of the road" cinema has also emerged
through films treating subjects such as
rural oppression and political chicanery.
The leading figures in this movement are
Still from Mrinal Sen's Ek Din Pratidin (1979;
And Quiet Rolls the Day). Sen's films are
more political than those of his
contemporary, Satyajit Ray, and Sen is often
described as a "committed film maker".
first of the Apu trilogy based on novels
by the Bengali writer Bibhuti Bhushan
Banerji, was completed on a shoestring
budget. At the 1956 Cannes film festival
it was voted the "best human document"
shown.
Ray's work has brought world status
to Indian cinema. The Apu trilogy, Maha-
nagar(The Big City; 1963) and Charulata
(1964) are recognized as masterpieces.
Another Bengal film maker, the late Rit-
wik Ghatak, is also widely considered as
a director of genius. His Ajantrik (The
Mechanical Man; 1958), a fable about a
taxi-driver's relationship with his dilapi¬
dated taxi, and Megbe Dhaka Tara (The
Hidden Star; 1960) are brilliant depictions
of harsh east Bengal reality.
Mrinal Sen, like Ray, is a product of
the Calcutta film society movement.
Inspired by the international classics he
had seen, he made Raat Bhore (Night's
End; 1956) and Neel Akasher Neechey
(Under the Blue Sky; 1958). His Baishey
Shravana (The Wedding Day; 1960) was
well received at the Venice Film Festival.
Changes swept through Indian cinema
in the late 1960s and the 1970s after
Indian film makers had come into in¬
creasing contact with the work of foreign
artists and directors. Both Ray and Bimal
Roy, for example, had been impressed
and influenced by Italian neo-realism.
	 14 	
There was also a growing awareness
of the need to set up an institution where
students could learn the art of film
making, and in response to this the Film
Institute of India was founded in Pune in
1961. Its graduates were taught not to
pander to accepted formulas but to strike
out in new directions. The new move¬
ment in the cinema was supported by the
Film Finance Corporation, later incorpo¬
rated into the National Film Develop¬
ment Corporation (NFDC), which had
a string of artistic successes to its credit
Dharmendra, who has been playing leading
roles in commercial films for almost 25 years.
This is a still from Rezia Sultan, a film about
the life of Queen Rezia of the Delhi
Sultanate shortly before the Mughals came to
northern India in the early 16th century.
A still from Kumar Shahani's Tarang (1982; "Vibrations"). With Mani Kaul, Shahani started the
experimental trend in Indian cinema.

Shyam Benegal (Ankur; The Seedling,
1974) and Govind Nihalani (Ardh Satya).
Among the promising younger film
makers are Ketan Mehta (Bhavni Bhavai;
A Folk Tale, 1980), Saeed Mirza (Albert
Pinto Ko Gussa Kyon Aata Hai; What
Makes Albert Pinto Angry, 1980), and
Kundan Shah Qaane Bhi Do Yaaro). Eclec¬
tic, dynamic and inventive, their work
deals with issues ranging from housing
problems and casteism to the lust for
money in the corridors of power.
In recent years a vigorous, individua¬
listic movement, led by G. Aravindan and
Adoor Gopalakrishnan, has developed in
the region of Kerala in southern India.
Aravindan's Thampu (The Circus Tent;
1978) Chidambaram and Oridath, and
Gopalakrishnan's Swayamvaram (One's
Own Choice; 1972), Kodiyettam (Ascent;
1977) and Mukhamukham, made during
the 1970s and 1980s, have established the
reputation of these directors and reflect
their sensitivity to social conditions in
Kerala state.
Rekha, an accomplished classical dancer, is one of the most popular actresses in India today.
KHALID MOHAMED is a film critic with The
Times ofIndia. He is currently preparing a television
series on major Indian film directors.
Satyajit Ray during the shooting of Sukumar Ray, Calcutta, 1987. Ray, who turned 67 last year, has
begun working again after a period of enforced idleness due to illness.
15
