< 1789
An idea
that changed
the world
The Republic's
citizens
of honour
BY EHSAN NARAGHI
E come from Europe, we come from Asia,
we come from America, we are Humanity!"
Thirty-six foreigners, each wearing the costume
of his country, stood at the bar of the National
Assembly. According to the report of the session
of 9 June 1790, it was like being "at the centre
of the world". Pio the Neapolitan was there, don
Pablo Olavidé the Spaniard, the Prussian Baron
Trenckh, Dutch patriots and others too. Their
leader and self-appointed spokesman was a young
Prussian noble who called himself Anacharsis
Cloots. Flanked by an Arab and an African, he
addressed a silent and respectful audience. After
praising the Assembly for the measures it had
taken in favour of the rights of man, he demand¬
ed the honour of participating in the Fête de la
Fédération1 which, he felt, should not be only
a French celebration, but one of all peoples. With
these words, "a humanitarian exhilaration seized
the deputies and, with lively applause, the Assem¬
bly received 'mankind' within its fold".
Anacharsis Cloots:
'The Republic will be universal'
His real name was Jean-Baptiste du Val-de-Grâce,
baron de Cloots. The son of an adviser to the
King of Prussia, the possessor of a great fortune Anacharsis Cloots 13

l'rom top: Benjamin
Franklin, Thomas Jefferson,
William Wilberforce,
Jeremy Bentham.
14
and an impassioned francophile, Cloots had visit¬
ed England, Italy and even Morocco, before his
enthusiasm for the French Revolution caused him
to settle in Paris. He contributed to Parisian
newspapers and donated 12,000 francs to the na¬
tion to arm soldiers in the "sacred war of men
against tyrants". Elected to the National Conven¬
tion in 1792, he dreamed of creating a universal
republic, a federation of all nations. As the French
historian Jules Michelet stated in his Histoire de
la révolution française (1847-1853; "History of the
French Revolution"), for Cloots Paris was "the
cradle and capital of the general confederation of
men [where] the States General of the world will
assemble.... Thus will there no longer be
provinces, nor armies, nor vanquished, nor vic¬
tors. People will travel from Paris to Peking as
easily as from Bordeaux to Strasbourg. The
Ocean, arrayed with ships, will unify its shores.
Orient and Occident will embrace on the field
of the Federation.2 Rome was the metropolis of
the world through war. Paris will be so through
peace...".
Cloots was one of the eighteen non-French
personalities upon whom the Legislative Assem¬
bly, in 1792, bestowed the title of French citizen:
"Considering that the men who, by their
writings and courage, have served the cause of
liberty and prepared the emancipation of peoples
cannot be regarded as foreigners by a nation
whose wisdom and courage have made it free...,
considering finally that, at a time when a nation¬
al convention will determine the destinies of
France and perhaps prepare those of mankind,
it behooves a generous and free people to call
upon its wisdom and confer the right to partici¬
pate in this great act of reason upon men who,
by their opinions, writings and courage, have
proven so eminently worthy, the National As¬
sembly declares the conferring of the title of
French citizen upon Priestley, Paine, Bentham,
Wilberforce, Clarkson, Mackintosh, David Wil¬
liams, Gorani, Anacharsis Cloots, Campe, Cor¬
neille Pauw, Pestalozzi, Washington, Hamilton,
Madison, Klopstock, Kosciuszko, Schiller."
The example of
the young American democracy
Among these eighteen honorary citizens were
four Americans: Thomas Paine, a participant in
the Revolution; George Washington, first presi¬
dent of the United States; James Madison, fourth
president; and Alexander Hamilton, Washing¬
ton's faithful companion. This was no accident.
The French and American Revolutions were
directly related.
The Declaration of Independence of the
American rebels, proclaimed in 1776 at the height
of the conflict with the British, was the symbol
of courage and hope of the young nation. The
Declaration, especially its preamble, appeared to
the French liberal élite as a triumph of the ideals
of progress, liberty and democracy. Until then,
the only European country which boasted of be¬
ing a home for political freedom was Britain. (Did
its constitution not provide Montesquieu with a
model for the separation of powers from which
the Constituent Assembly drew inspiration?) But,
whereas the British empire was not looked upon
favourably by the French, the new American
democracy received their total admiration. It was
to George Washington, through the intermedi¬
ary of Thomas Paine, that the Marquis de
Lafayette offered the key to the fallen Bastille.
In the eyes of the French, one man, by his
knowledge, wisdom and unaffected simplicity,
embodied the virtues of this new nation: Benja¬
min Franklin. Sent to France to represent a na¬
tion which was not yet even a state, it was his
mission to mobilize and channel French aid for
the American cause. According to the French
historian Jean Lessay, when Franklin arrived in
Paris in December 1776, he was already famous
in all the capital's learned societies and cultured
circles because of his scientific work, and espe¬
cially for his invention of the lightning rod, the
impact of which it is hard to imagine today. He
immediately drew on the considerable capital of
sympathy his compatriots enjoyed in France, and
established close relations with politicians and
scientists. The academies, salons and clubs vied
for his attention. When he died in 1790, the Con¬
stituent Assembly decreed three days' national
mourning, at the close of a vibrant tribute
pronounced by Mirabeau.
Jefferson and Paine
After Franklin's mission, the United States Con¬
gress sent to France in 1785 an urbane and learned
politician who had been the principal drafter of
the Declaration of Independence: Thomas Jeffer¬
son (1743-1826).
The revolutionary intellectuals met often and
discreetly at the home of this brilliant and
hospitable ambassador. Numerous historians
have detected his influence in the draft of the
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
Citizen presented to the Assembly on 11 July
1789 by his friend, Lafayette. Recalled by George
Washington to occupy the post of Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Jefferson continued to be an ar¬
dent defender of revolutionary France. In 1792,
when the French Republic was proclaimed, he
obtained its recognition by the United States,
long before other countries. During his entire
presidency of the United States (1801-1809), his
friendship for France was unfailing.
Thomas Paine was one of the pioneers of
American democracy. With his political shrewd¬
ness and courage, he played a role of immense
importance in Britain and the United States, as
well as in France. Born in Thetford (England) in
1737, he was a labourer until the age of thirty-
eight, before becoming a writer, philosopher and
militant revolutionary of world renown.
Benjamin Franklin, whom Paine met in Lon-

don, encouraged him to migrate to the United
States, where he landed in 1774. Two years later,
he published his masterpiece, Common Sense,
which advocated the independence of the English
colonies. This pamphlet, of which 200,000 copies
were published (for a population of 3,500,000),
made the colonists aware of the necessity of
wresting their independence by force. As one of
his biographers has written, "Washington was the
sword of the American Revolution, Paine was the
pen". Common Sense soon crossed the Atlantic
and was an enormous success in Europe. By May
1776 it had been translated and published in
France.
After the American colonies had achieved
their independence, Paine returned to Europe,
faithful to his motto "My country is the place
where freedom does not yet exist". In 1789 in
London he took up the cause of the French
revolutionaries. To Edmund Burke's attack on
the Revolution set forth in his Reflections on the
Revolution in France, Paine replied with his Rights
ofMan, hundreds of thousands of copies of which
were printed in 1791.
The British government banned the book and
Paine was indicted for treason. He took refuge
in France, where in 1792 he was elected to the
National Convention. There, assisted in the de¬
bates by other deputies who acted as his inter¬
preters, he was, with the Marquis de
Condorcet, the main drafter of the Girondin
Constitution.



From all corners
of Europe...
Among the other Englishmen who were
proclaimed French citizens, David Williams also
helped to draw up the Constitution under the
guidance of Condorcet; James Mackintosh
defended the French Revolution against Burke's
attacks in his Vindiciae Gallicae (1791), translat¬
ed into French and published in Paris in 1792 un¬
der the title Apologie de la Révolution française
("Vindication of the French Revolution"); and
William Wilberforce (1759-1833), co-founder of
the Anti-Slavery Society, was, with his lawyer
friend Thomas Clarkson (1761-1846), a tireless
and ardent pioneer of anti-slavery legislation.
Child prodigy, Oxford graduate at eighteen,
Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832) was one of the
greatest jurists of his time. His first book, A Frag¬
ment on Government, caused a sensation when
it was published anonymously in 1776. Sym¬
pathetic to the French Revolution, he published
four letters in the Courrier de Provence, a
newspaper founded by Mirabeau, an Essay on Po¬
litical Tactics, and a Draft of a Code for the Or¬
ganisation ofthe Judicial Establishment in France.
He wrote a pamphlet for the Convention in 1793,
Emancipate your Colonies. For a long time Ben¬
tham enjoyed greater popularity in continental
Europe and in the United States than he did in
his own country.
^-^
From top: Friedrich
Gottlieb Klopstock, Tadeusz
Kosciuszko, Philippe
Buonarroti, Francisco de
Miranda.
"All law is evil," he wrote, "because all law
is a breach of liberty... Government must be
mindful of two things, the evil of the offence and
the evil of the law." This citizen of the universe,
as he was popularly known, was straightforward,
pleasant, of strict morals, and totally disinterest¬
ed. It was in the Essay on Government (1769) by
the chemist and theologian Joseph Priestley (who
was elected to the National Convention but never
took his seat) that Bentham found the phrase
upon which his life's work was based: "the
greatest happiness of the greatest number".
Fighting
for liberty
For the National Assembly, the German epic and
lyric poet Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock
(1724-1803) symbolized, along with Schiller, the
enthusiasm of the German intelligentsia for the
Revolution. In 1788 Klopstock wrote an "Ode
for the Convocation of the States General" in
which he predicted the rebirth of France. In April
1792, with the aim of defending France against
the European coalition, he composed a poem en¬
titled "War of Liberty", which he sent to the
Duke of Brunswick, commander-in-chief of the
Prusso-Austrian army. He even sent a constitu¬
tional programme to Roland, one of the revolu¬
tionary leaders. But, like most of the foreign
revolutionaries, he lost his illusions during the
Reign of Terror.
The Pole, Tadeusz Kosciuszko (1746-1817),
future statesman and national hero, participated
as a voluntary officer in the American War of In¬
dependence (1775-1783), where he gained fame
through his heroism and military skill, particu¬
larly in the planning of fortifications. He was
made an honorary citizen of the United States
after being promoted to brigadier-general by
Washington. After his return to Poland in 1784
he fought against the Russians, and in 1793 was
delegated to Paris to solicit help from revolution¬
ary France. While there he presented a pamph¬
let recommending the founding of a republic in
Poland, following France's example. Back in the
United States in 1797, he used money from the
sale of his lands, as well as his pension, to buy
slaves to whom he gave their freedom.
The Italian aristocrat Philippe Michel
Buonarroti (1761-1837) joined the Jacobin Club
and later became a French citizen by decision of
the Convention. Sent to Corsica with special
powers, he was entrusted with the task of
propagating revolutionary ideas there. He was ar¬
rested as a follower of Robespierre, and while in
prison befriended Gracchus Babeuf with whom
he became a leader in the planning of art attempt
to overthrow the Directory government in 1796
known as the "Conspiracy of Equals". In 1828
he published his Conspiration de Babeuf, an ac¬
count of this unsuccessful enterprise. During the
last thirty years of his life he organized a vast net¬
work of secret societies in France and Italy, be- 15

Jrrom top: revolutionary
emblems of the "German
Jacobins"; Mary
Wollstonecraft; Etta Palm,
a contemporary miniature
in which the ardent
feminist can be seen
rejecting her husband's
advances.
16
EHSAN NARAGHI,
former director of Unesco's
Youth Division, is an
Iranian sociologist and
writer. He was the authoi
of the first major study of
the brain-drain. His other
publications include
L'Orient et la crise de
l'Occident ("The East and
the Crisis of the West",
Entente publishers, Paris,
1977), and he is currently
preparing a book on the
sociological evolution of
Iran.
tween which he was a tireless emissary of revo¬
lution.
Miranda, forerunner
of Latin American independence
Francisco de Miranda (1750-1816), another
foreigner closely connected with the Revolution,
played an important role in both Europe and in
South America, where he fought for the indepen¬
dence of Venezuela and the Spanish colonies. He
left the Spanish army in 1783 to fight in the
American War of Independence, and then went
to France where he served in the revolutionary
army.
He was a notable commander of French
troops during the campaign against the Austro-
Prussian armies in Belgium. He then went to
London where he became the leader of a group
of South American rebels working for the liber¬
ation of their countries. He formed the Gran Re¬
union Americana ("Great American Union"),
which counted among its members the Argen¬
tine patriot José de San Martín; Bernardo O'Hig-
gins, future liberator of Chile; and Antonio
Nariño, an early champion of Colombian in¬
dependence. The enthusiasm aroused by Miran¬
da's arrival in Caracas in 1810 was such that the
"Patriotic Society", of which Simón Bolívar was
a member, proclaimed the independence of
Venezuela in the following year.



In the name of women citizens...
All credit, finally, to the non-French women who
devoted themselves to the revolutionary cause,
notably the English writer Mary Wollstonecraft
(1759-1797), and the Dutchwoman, Etta Palm.
From the outset, Mary Wollstonecraft was
a supporter of the Revolution, and like Paine and
Priestley published a reply to Burke, her Defence
of the Rights ofMan (1790). She went to live in
Paris and joined the group of British people who
supported the Revolution. A pioneer feminist,
she published in 1792 a book entitled y4 Vindica¬
tion of the Rights of Women.
Etta Palm also intervened in the course of the
French Revolution. L'Orateur du Peuple reports
that, during a meeting of the Cercle Social on 26
October 1790, a speaker expatiating on "the civil
and political status of women in a well constituted
state", was unable to continue his speech. A
woman called for silence and took the floor in
the place of the exhausted orator. Without giv¬
ing anyone time to interrupt her, this "foreign
lady, remarkable for her imposing height, said,
'Gentlemen, could it then be possible that revolu¬
tionary society, which renders unto men their
rights, has rendered Frenchmen unjust and dis¬
honest with regard to women? ... I request, in the
name of all women here present, that the orator
continue.' "
At the close of the meeting, the women sur¬
rounded Etta, who urged them to unite. She

founded a "Society of Women Friends of Truth",
a kind of charitable circle which stood up against
prejudice and soon became a centre of feminist
activity. Her first speech as president of the So¬
ciety, addressed to the forty-eight Paris Sections,
denounced the social conditions to which wom¬
en were subjected. Her speeches, read during
meetings in Paris and the provinces, won the ap¬
proval and enthusiasm of women. She was pos¬
sibly the first woman to use a vocabulary of
feminism, and it is probable that her expansive
personality strongly influenced Olympe de
Gouges (1755-1793), author of a "Declaration of
Rights of Women and the Citizen" published in
1792.
Hope and tragedy
Faced with the excesses of the Terror, all these
men and women experienced a period of despair.
A great admirer of the Revolution, the English
poet William Wordsworth (1770-1850) wrote that
the Terror revealed "what man can make of
man". Disillusion reached the depths of his com¬
mitment to the Revolution and pervaded his in¬
tellectual life.
In the space of a few years, the atmosphere
of universal fraternity and human solidarity, un¬
equalled in modern times, which had reigned at
the beginning of the Revolution, gave way to ar¬
bitrary rule and fear. Could Paris, capital of hope
and refuge of the free from all over the world,
be relentlessly pursuing those she had so warm¬
ly welcomed? What had happened? Could it be
explained by the collapse of the Revolution in
face of the absolutist monarchies of Europe? Or
by a gradual move towards dictatorship? Or by
a stroke of fate that Cloots, before mounting the
scaffold, described in these terms: "Revolution,
men have been thy undoing."? How did the
foreigners who rallied to the Republic live
through this drama? What lessons did they learn
from it?
These questions continue to haunt not only
historians but all free people, not only in France,
but throughout the world.
1. The Fête de la Federation was a festival held on 14 July 1790
to commemorate the first anniversary of the fall of the Bastille.
2. The "field of the Federation", now the Champ de Mars in
Paris. Editor.
Left, a Polish engraving
celebrating French liberty
V*
17
