BY MALCOLM HADLEY



Farming the forest
Fire is a tool used extensively in the tropics in the shifting agriculture cycle. Above, a plot being burned prior to planting.
Shifting cultivation has for centur¬
ies been practised successfully,
and with no harmful environ¬
mental effects, by root-crop farmers of
the humid tropics and by dry-rice culti¬
vators of the forested hill regions of
Southeast Asia.
Though it has many variations, this
widespread form of agriculture, also
known as swidden or slash-and-burn
agriculture, basically involves clearing
small areas of forest for crop planting by
cutting down and burning trees and
vegetation. The ash acts as a fertilizer
and the plot is relatively free of weeds.
After a few years of cultivation,
however, the fertility of the land de¬
clines and weeds increase. The shifting
cultivators then move on .to another
area, abandoning the plot to natural re-
growth and recuperation during a fal¬
low phase before returning to the same
plot a number of years later.
Traditional cyclical shifting agricul¬
ture is based on sound ecological princi¬
ples and in the past represented a sus¬
tainable use of the forest. In India, this
jhum cycle, as it is called, used to stretch
over thirty years or more, which gave a
reasonable time for recovery of the
forest and the soil as well as yielding
acceptable returns to the farmer. The
enure jhum operation involved efficient
recycling of resources to maximize
yields, by such means as using crop and
weed residues as organic manure and as
feed in swine husbandry.
However, increased population
pressure (in northeast India population
more than quadrupled between 1900
and 1975) and reduced land area due to
site degradation have forced farmers to
26

resort to very short jhum cycles of only
four or five years. In turn this has
accelerated the land degradation spiral,
further slowed the recovery of soil fer¬
tility and diminished economic returns.
Rapid population growth in many
tropical areas, combined with the many
other social and ecological changes that
have occurred over the past two de¬
cades, has been accompanied by a re¬
lentless increase in the rate and extent of



forest clearing and the intensity of forest
exploitation. Small-scale cultivators,
estimated to number some 250 million,
cause final elimination of around
five million hectares of forest a year and
serious degradation of a further ten mil¬
lion hectares. Although these farmers
are well aware that their activities are
harmful both in general terms and in
terms of their own long-term prospects,
they have nowhere else to go and no
alternative employment outlets.
Because of the rapidity of these
changes, it is important that more effec¬
tive, sustainable forest exploitation be
linked with development that benefits
people who live in or near the forest and
who make use of it. Attempts to achieve
these objectives have, however, been
hampered by lack of information on
how people in various parts of the tro¬
pics interact with the forest and how
they respond to changing economic
opportunities.
Under Unesco's Man and the Bio¬
sphere (MAB) Programme, several field
studies have been made to investigate
this problem. One of these studies, con¬
ducted in East Kalimantan, Indonesia,
produced some unexpected results.
The remote interior Apo Kayan
plateau is the homeland of several
thousand Kenyah people who live in
long-house communities and practise
forest-fallow shifting cultivation. The
study revealed that, far from being the
reckless destroyers of forest that they
had long been thought to be, the
*?*
Crops growing in a clearing created by the "slash-and-burn" technique. Borneo, Indonesia.
Weed invasion under a short shifting agriculture cycle. The plot is covered with Mikania michantha,
a weed which contributes to the regeneration of soil fertility.
I
mi
27

Kenyah people maintain, tend and re¬
use sites. For the last 200 years at least,
there has been a fairly consistent con¬
servative pattern of forest exploitation.
In the Apo Kayan, the Kenyah have
converted the virgin forest into a mosaic
of secondary forest of different ages plus
unfelled reserves where they can harvest
products that are rare or non-existent in
secondary forest.
Most swiddens (sections of forest
cleared for agriculture by cutting and
burning) are created on more fertile
soils, on slopes of intermediate grade,
and in secondary forest eight to twenty
years old, with primary forest reserves
being maintained close to the villages.
Results of studies on the seed bank
(the seeds actually present in the soil), of
sampling of one- to four-year-old fields
and of surveys of secondary forest, pro¬
vide consistent evidence that shifting
cultivation at Apo Kayan is a forest-
maintaining agricultural system. Those
tree species common in secondary forest
seem to be particularly well adapted to
regeneration after shifting cultivation
because they re-sprout or their seeds
survive burning.
Many of the cyclical agroforestry sys¬
tems studied to date in the tropics have
been those practised by relatively re¬
mote tribal groups that are largely out¬
side the chain of active commerce. This
suggests that such systems of resource
management are suited only to subsist¬
ence production. However, recent in¬
vestigations carried out by a number of
independent researchers indicate that
they can also be important cash pro¬
ducers.
One study examined a market-
oriented system practised by farmers at
Tamshiyacu, Peru. The Tamshiya-
quinos are a non-tribal group, some
2,000 strong, of mixed Amazonian and
European ancestry, living about
30 kilometres southeast of the regional
market centre of Iquitos. They engage in
a large number of agricultural and ex¬
tractive activities, exploiting a wide vari¬
ety of the land and water resources
available to them.
The techniques used by the Tam-



shiyaquinos include the farming of up¬
land sites under both high forest and
fallow growth of varying ages, the cul¬
tivation of seasonally inundated, low-
lying sites, as well as fishing, hunting
and the extraction of a variety of forest
products. Foods, fibres, handicraft
materials and charcoal are among items
obtained from the fields and forests of
Tamshiyacu that appear on the local
market and the urban market of nearby
Iquitos.
The agroforestry cycle begins with
the cutting of the standing vegetation. In
secondary forest areas, the Tamshiya-
quinos cut down the vegetation but do
not burn it in the typical slash-and-burn
fashion. Instead, the larger woody
vegetation is usually converted into
charcoal.
After clearing, a variety of crops, such
as corn, rice and cow-peas, are planted.
Some of these crops are re-planted dur¬
ing the second year, together with a
number of other crops such as manioc
and peanuts, and a start is made on the
planting of fruit and nut trees.
Annual crop production is gradually
phased out after an initial two- to five-
year period. Fruit and nuts from the
trees become the most important source
of income from the plot and production
may continue for twenty-five to fifty
years if the fields are protected from
cattle. At first, fruit and nut crops are
picked from selected trees, but this is
One stage in a long shifting agriculture cycle:
the ground has been cleared but tree stumps
have been left in situ.
gradually reduced in frequency to once
or twice a year, just before the harvest of
the Umari, the most important tree
crop. As soon as production drops sig¬
nificantly (after between about twenty-
five and fifty years) the larger items of
vegetation (the Umari and the Brazil nut
trees) are cut down and converted into
charcoal.
Following this second round of char¬
coal-making, the field is generally
allowed to Jie fallow for six years or so.
Secondary growth invades the plot and,
according to local farmers, begins to
restore it so that another production
cycle can be set in train.
Most households have several agro¬
forestry fields operating at any one time.
Since these are in different stages of the
production cycle, farmers tend to obtain
an income from the sale of a variety of
resources. This limits the risks inherent
in specialization, spaces out the need for
often scarce labour and assures house¬
holds of some cash flow throughout the
year.
The limited observations so far made
indicate that, thanks to their cyclical
agroforestry methods, the Tamshiya-
quinos enjoy some of the highest aver¬
age annual incomes to be found among
rural dwellers of the region. In one sur¬
vey of thirteen villages in the Iquitos
region, some Tamshiyacu households
were found to have gross yearly in¬
comes of nearly $5,000, and the mean
for village households, some $1,200,
was still above average.
The results of these people/environ¬
ment studies highlight a way forward in
the search for an improved basis for
ecologically sound development in the
tropics that of integrating the re¬
source-based knowledge of local people
(in such areas as multiple-cropping and
the manipulation of swidden fallows)
with modern technological know-how
in flexible ways that are capable of
adapting and being adapted to changing
social and economic circumstances.
.
<^*,
m$m
MALCOLM HADLEY is a staff member of Un¬
esco's Division of Ecological Sciences. A zoolo¬
gist, he is responsible for the co-ordination of
activities in the humid tropics within Unesco's
Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme.
28
