'OUR HOME IS YOUR HOME'



A visit to an
A French journalist specializing in family questions
describes a recent visit to Soviet Uzbekistan.
M,
46
LY husband and I stayed in an Uzbek household
comprising a couple, both university teachers, whose
second daughter lived with them. Their elder daughter
was already married. Despite its European
characteristics, this family of intellectuals is firmly at¬
tached to a traditional way of life that reveals the vigour
of an ancient culture and religion.
Like all visitors, we had to leave our shoes in the
hallway. The apartment was a blend of east and west.
Modern furniture was set among an array of rugs and
cushions.
Uzbek hospitality is legendary. Throughout our
stay, we were showered with kindness and copiously
fed. "Our home is your home," the mistress of the
house said time and again, her hand on her heart as
a sign of respect.
We were offered a wide range of national dishes,
including the celebrated plov, a rice and mutton dish
traditionally eaten with the fingers from a vast earthen¬
ware platter (see Unesco Courier, December 1984). We
were never given pork, which is prohibited among
Muslims.
Most of the time it was the daughter of the house,
Rano ("Rose-Red"), who served the meals, without sit¬
ting down herself. She followed a particularly graceful
ritual when serving the green tea, slowly pouring a little
of the hot liquid into red and gold porcelain goblets
which she offered to us, held in the tips of her fingers
without touching the rim, palm upwards.
Her mother, Ferouza ("Turquoise"), confided to
me how important it was that her daughter should have
good manners and be a skilled housekeeper, for these
are the qualities which will be most appreciated by her
future in-laws.
Rano was twenty years old. Matchmakers had
already been calling on her parents for two years, but
the latter were in no great hurry to give her hand in
marriage, partly because they wanted her to finish her
economics studies at university, and partly because
weddings are very expensive and it was not long since
Rano's elder sister had been married. "With us," they
explained, "it is usual to have a large number of guests
at the weddingone or two hundred, sometimes even
three hundred, and the celebrations go on for at least
three days. People often run up huge debts."
The bride's dowry also had to be constituted.
Rano's parents, who enjoy a comfortable standard of
living, must provide the furnishings for two rooms:
all the carpeting, bedding and crockery for a bedroom
and a dining room. Their daughter's trousseau would
include around forty outfits and a dozen pairs of shoes.
Ferouza was extremely concerned about this. "We
can't do less for the younger one than we did for her
sister," she said with a sigh, "otherwise we shall be
criticized."
Custom dictates that a young couple should go to
live with the husband's family. The in-laws must
therefore provide their son with two rooms, even if
this entails moving house.
Lengthy preparations are made before an Uzbek
marriage is celebrated. In Tashkent, the capital of the
Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic, marriages are normal¬
ly contracted only between natives of the city. "There's
no chance," explained Ferouza, "of a city girl marry¬
ing a provincial, and a Muslim girl wouldn't usually
marry a non-Muslim."
When a young man has reached marriageable age,
his mother looks for a wife for him. Generally accom¬
panied by one of her female relatives, she pays an in¬
itial visit to the family of a suitable girl. The two
women note the conditions in which the potential in¬
laws live and ask about future prospects. If this
preliminary meeting is considered satisfactory, the
women will come back again and the two families will
get to know one another better. Each side does some
detective work. If the two families eventually reach
agreement, an informal rendezvous is arranged between
the two mothers, accompanied by the young people.
The meeting occurs as if by chancewhen leaving
work, for example.
"I don't want to marry Rano off against her will,"
Ferouza explained. "Nadir, my husband, had to resort
to trickery in order to marry me. After turning down
several girls which his mother had picked out for him,
he finally pretended to give in to her reluctantly when
she suggested my name. In fact he had already chosen
me. But she was convinced that she had chosen her
son's wife herself."
Ferouza abides by family traditions but finds them
onerous. "There are a lot of family reunions and
festivities," she said, "and I always have to serve a dish
that I've made myself, which means that I have to stay
up late to prepare my lectures. On top of the prepara¬
tions for Rano's wedding, I also have to prepare for
my grandsons' circumcision feast, which is coming up
soon. New clothes will have to be bought for them
and there'll be lots of guestsit will be very expen¬
sive. After Rano is married, there will be more children,
more family festivities and more expense. I'm a bit tired
of it," she admitted.
Her husband seemed more relaxed. A high-spirited
man, he organized entertainment for us. It will be a
long time before I forget a trip we made into the coun¬
tryside, with the beautiful mountain scenery, the warm
welcome we received everywhere, the eastern-style
dances, open-air barbecues and traditional pastries. All
Nadir's relatives would have been asked to contribute.
"We'll do anything he asks of us," said his brother-in-
law Farkhad, who is slightly younger than Nadir.
"He's the head of the family because he's the oldest."
Much respect is shown to the elders. To put elderly
relatives in an old people's home would be unthinkable.
They are looked after, we were told, by the family.
Respect for older people and the extent of Uzbek
hospitality were the things that most impressed us dur¬
ing our stay. After wishing us a safe journey home,
Ferouza, Nadir and Rano, hands on their hearts, said:
"Come back. Our home will always be yours..."
NLarriage of an Uzbek
couple at the madrasah of
Shirdar, Samarkand.
