<F fe- I m
An IDEA
THAT CHANGED
THE WORLD
The ideas and principles of the French
Revolution were fully implemented on
the island ofSan Domingo, one of the
worst ofall colonial societies, the anti¬
thesis ofEnlightenment Europe Here, in
the future Republic of Haiti, came
revolt, the abolition of slavery, and
independence
In the Antilles,
'Liberty for alV
BY YVES BENOT
%HEN the alarm bells of insurrection rang in
Paris in July 1789, what could a plantation slave
in the Antilles, in Guyana or in the Mascarene
Islands know or make of these happenings in a
far-off land? The question is all the more perti¬
nent in that the victory of the people of Paris on
14 July was not achieved swiftly, with the sud¬
denness of a thunder-clap. It was the fruit of sever¬
al months of intense political activity, of waiting,
of hope, of a release of tension expressed in in¬
numerable tracts and pamphlets.
Overseas, the France of the ancien régime
consisted of three social strata: the whites, the
dominant, governing majority, numbering
75,000; the 35,000 "coloureds and free blacks"
(known as mulattos), who were theoretically free,
but whose status was inferior to that of the
whites; and the 750,000-strong mass of black or
half-caste slaves. This population was spread out
over five Caribbean islands (San Domingo, Mar¬
tinique, Guadeloupe, St. Lucia and Tobago), two
islands in the Indian Ocean (the Ile de France,
today Mauritius, and the He Bourbon, today La
Réunion), plus Guyana and St. Louis, the form¬
er capital of Senegal.
Among these overseas territories, both by the
number of slaves and the wealth it engendered,
San Domingo had the lion's share, with at least
two-thirds of the slaves, half the whites and two-
thirds of the half-castes. Yet San Domingo (to be 19

precise the French part of the island with its
northern, western and southern regions, the rest
belonging to Spain) attracts our particular atten¬
tion because another revolution broke out and
triumphed there at the same time as the Revolu¬
tion in France. Reflecting the prosperity of the
slave trade in the mother country, slave-ship ac¬
tivity in the Atlantic and Channel ports (Le
Havre, Honfleur, Saint Malo, Nantes, La
Rochelle and Bordeaux) did not let up: of the
3,300 slaving expeditions recorded from 1713, 420
took place between 1 January 1789 and 31 Janu¬
ary 1793.
The flash-point, a false rumour
The slaves did not wait for the sound of the can¬
non of the Bastille to rise in revolt. Despite the
absence of books and newspapers, the memory
of these heroic uprisings remains alive in the oral
tradition. In San Domingo this memory goes
20
back to 1758 and to the maroon (runaway slave)
insurgent Macandal. None of these uprisings had
succeeded, it is true, but a group of maroons, the
Barohucos, established themselves on the fronti¬
er between the French and Spanish possessions
and by 1784, after almost a century of resistance,
had obtained the recognition of the authorities.
Meanwhile, desertions from work, flight to the
maquis and revolts in one or another plantation
never stopped.
Even before the news of the taking of the
Bastille reached the islands, another false rumour
was abroadthat the king had granted freedom
to the slaves but the governors and the colonists
were opposed to this and were keeping the news
secret. One can speculate that this strange rumour
originated with the convocation of the States
General, the freedom of expression and publica¬
tion conceded temporarily for the period of the
elections and perhaps from the speeches of the
Marquis de Condorcet and the activities of the
Society of Friends of the Blacks. However this
may be, the rumour acted as a spur to the rising
of slaves in Saint Pierre, Martinique, at the end
of August 1789.
When towards the middle of September 1789
the news of the Paris revolt ofJuly finally reached
the islands, it was received with different feelings
and was differently interpreted in the various cir¬
cles of colonial society. For the whites, the liberty
thus acquired simply meant rejection of the pow¬
ers of the governors and other servants of the king
and thus authorization to give free rein to their
convictions and desires. Since these convictions
were not the same for the planters as for the
tradesmen and craftsmen of the towns, violent
conflicts arose. Some proclaimed themselves to
be Patriots (and later Republicans or even
Jacobins), while others declared their loyalty to
the king and to the ancien régime.
Patriot or royalist
but still pro-slavery
The political labels imported from France
changed meaning completely, however, when
used by the whites of the colonies. "Patriots" and
"Royalists" were united in their common pro-
slavery stance and, in San Domingo at least, in
their hatred of their mulatto competitors. This
was not clearly understood in Paris where the
Patriots thought of the "Patriots" of the colo¬
nies as their brothers. The Declaration of the
Rights of Man and of the Citizen was of little con¬
cern to the members of this white minority who
took it for granted that only they could claim the
rights of citizens. Aware of the dangers of the sit¬
uation, however, the whites of San Domingo hur¬
riedly established censorship of mail coming from
France and treated the mere fact of reading the
Declaration to slaves or free coloureds as a seri¬
ous offence.
In San Domingo, the slaves, just like the in¬
habitants of the popular quarters of Paris, saw
in the revolutionary cockade the symbol of
liberty. But here, as in Martinique and
Guadeloupe, those who demanded this liberty
were immediately executed in the traditional
manner, being first beaten and then hanged. From
1789 to 1791, the slave population of San Domin¬
go experienced or was subjected to conflicts be¬
tween whites themselves and between whites and
free coloureds, repression by the whites and the
colonial militia, made up of mulattos, of sporad¬
ic attempts to achieve liberation and the silence
of the French Constituent Assembly on the ques¬
tion of slavery.
In August 1791, there was a massive, violent
uprising by the slaves of the northern plain, the
richest area of the colony. Basing itself on the
provisional ideology of a "King Liberator", this
insurrection upset all previously accepted ele¬
ments of the situation. Despite a series of cam¬
paigns against the slave trade and, to some extent,
against slavery itself, the Constituent Assembly
refused to make any move against the slave sys-
Above and left, Colonists
and Punishments (1989), a
diptych by the Haitian
painter Edouard Duval-
Carrie.

The Republican army of
San Domingo (1988), oil
on canvas by the Haitian
painter Edouard Duval-
Carrie. The central figure is
François Dominique
Toussaint, known to
history as Toussaint
¿ouverture (1743-1803). A
former slave, leader of the
black insurgents of San
Domingo, he entered the
service of the French
Republic after the abolition
of slavery. In 1796 he
gradually achieved control
of the island, expelling the
Spaniards, forcing the
British to withdraw, and
setting forth a Constitution
which made him the
president for life of the first
black republic in history,
what is now Haiti.
Arrested on the orders of
Bonaparte, he was deported
to France where he died in
1803.
tern. On the contrary, by recognizing the legali¬
ty of the colonial assemblies, which were domi¬
nated by the large plantation owners, and by
undertaking to make no changes to "the status
of individuals" (in other words, the status of the
slaves) except at the request of the colonial assem¬
blies (in other words, never), the Constituent As¬
sembly reinforced the status quo. This, perhaps,
explains why the slaves, who had at first en¬
thusiastically adopted the symbols of the Paris
revolution, made their appearance on the politi¬
cal scene draped in the white flag of the ancien
régime. In fact, they were no more Royalists than
the "Patriots" of the colonies were Patriots in
the French sense of the word. From the very start
there was no doubt at all about the revolution¬
ary nature of the general uprising of the slaves
of the northern part of the island.



Liberty for all
From the famous night of 23 August 1791, the
insurrectionists numbered 50,000. And the strug¬
gle continued after their leaders were tempted,
in December, to accept the offer of an honoura¬
ble compromise which, in the end, the whites
withdrew. With covert aid from the Spanish
authorities, which became overt after the out¬
break of hostilities with Bourbon Spain in 1793,
they held out throughout 1792. The constant ob¬
jective of the black insurgent army, which was
proclaimed and then achieved by Toussaint Lou-
verture, was "Liberty for All". This did not mean
obtaining freedom for a few slaves at the whim
of their masters, or the recognition of a few
groups of maroons, as had been the case in 1784.
Neither did it mean the kind of conditional
liberty obtained by the North American slaves
who enlisted in the British army at the time of
the War of Independence. The slogan "Liberty
for All" meant the immediate and uncondition¬
al abolition of slavery. Thus it was these slaves,
officially Royalists though they may have been,
and not one or other group of whites or mulat¬
tos, rather hastily assimilated to the colonial
Third Estate, who fought to make the Declara¬
tion of Rights a reality in the Tropics.
A step towards the abolition
of slavery
It might well have been thought that Article I
of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of
the Citizen of 1789, "Men are born and remain
free and equal in rights...", and, more specifical¬
ly, Article XVIII of the Constitution of the year
I (1793), "No man can be sold or sell himself; his
person is an inalienable property", both implied
freedom for all. Yet the silence of the Constituent
Assembly on this was "echoed" by its successor,
the Legislative Assembly (1791-1792), whose
progress was limited to a concern for equality for 21

mulattos. For nearly a year and a half after that,
the National Convention continued in this way
and the voices raised in protest were ignored.
Among those who spoke out were two men,
Sonthonax and Polverel, then journalists, whom
the Legislative Assembly and then the Conven¬
tion had sent to San Domingo as civil commis¬
sioners with extensive powers, not to abolish
slavery but to supervise the application of the law
of 4 April 1792 on full equality for "coloureds
and free blacks" and nothing more. Of course, ,
they also had to proclaim the Republic and then
ensure the defence of the island after the begin¬
ning of the war with Britain and Spain. It required
>ra«ft«»3£
1 he opening of the States
General by Louis XVI in
the great hall of the Hôtel
des Menus Plaisirs at
Versailles on 5 May 1789.
For the first time since
1614 a King of France
publicly and solemnly
addressed the representatives
of the nation.
22
YVES BENOT,
of France, is a teacher,
journalist and writer.
Among his published works
are Diderot, de l'athéisme à
Vanti-colonialisme ("Diderot,
from Atheism to Anti-
Colonialism", Paris, 1970)
and La Révolution française
et la fin des colonies ("The
French Revolution and the
End of the Colonies", Paris,
1988).
the persistence and resistance of the black insur¬
rection to force them to go beyond the powers
expressly vested in them and to act not only in
conformity with the law but also in accordance
with the dictates of their own consciences. Fur¬
thermore, they had to call on the slaves of the
Cape and the Cape region to put down the white
rebellion led by General Galbaud on 21 June
1793. Of course, the slaves who came to fight for
the Republic were immediately granted their
liberty; but this was still not enough.
Slavery effectively abolished
for the first time
On 29 August, Sonthonax finally decided to
proclaim the immediate and unconditional abo¬
lition of slavery in the northern region. On 21
September, his colleague Polverel followed suit
for the southern and western regions. Unlike the
abolition decrees of the nineteenth century, these
allowed for no form of indemnity for the slaves'
former owners. This was a logical decision in
view of the fact that, according to the Declara¬
tion of Rights, slavery was contrary to natural
law and therefore could not be recognized in
any way.
The two decrees of Sonthonax and Polverel
were the first decrees declaring the abolition of
slavery issued by any slave-trading European
power. The famous decree of the Convention of
16 Pluviôse of the year II (4 February 1794)
abolishing slavery merely ratified a fait accompli
and made it applicable to all French colonies,
something the Committee of Public Safety failed
to do for the Indian Ocean islands or for Saint-
Louis, Senegal. In any event, in San Domingo
there came about a convergence between the con¬
victions of the envoys of the Convention, as well
as Governor Laveaux, and the realityof the situ¬
ation created by the tenacious insurrection of the
former slaves. It required this convergence with
an insurrection that was not merely a distant
aspect of the French Revolution, but a revolu¬
tion in its own right, to convert the abstract
general principles of 1789 and 1793 into the first
effective abolition of the slave system.
It should, however, be emphasized that
whereas in the northern region abolition seems
to have been imposed by the military and politi¬
cal situation, this was not the case in the west and
south. In these two regions the uprising was
either put down, indeed crushed (at Les Cayes),
or else it had no permanence. Thus, Polverel,
who signed the decree of 21 September, effective¬
ly liberated a large number of town and planta¬
tion slaves who, until then, had been forced to
work in servitude.
Toussaint Louverture
rallies to the Republic
Other circumstances arose which led Toussaint
Louverture to inform General Laveaux on 6 May
1794 that he was rallying to the support of the
Republic with an army of between 4,000 and
5,000 men. One of these was the policy adopted
by the British, who invaded the island with the
help of French émigrés and re-established slavery
everywhere. Another was a change of policy by
the Spanish who, having first backed the black
insurrection as a military force, decided to align
themselves with British policy. Another, perhaps,
was a bluff by Sonthonax who, at the end of
February 1794, took the risk of announcing the
abolition of slavery by the Convention, when he
could not have known of itLaveaux and Tous¬
saint Louverture did not receive official confir¬
mation of the Paris decree until the beginning of
July 1794. In any event, since abolition of slav¬
ery was supported only by France, Toussaint
Louverture rallied to the Republic because in that
way his own objective of freedom for all would
be realized.
Under Toussaint Louverture, in the new kind
of state that he was to build with his own hands
in San Domingo, the slogan of liberty for all was
to take on a new meaning, perhaps unique in his¬
tory, just as the constitutional situation of the
colony was unique from 1797 onwards. In that
year, Toussaint Louverture, a general of the
French Republic, was named Governor by Son¬
thonax in the name of France, a position he was
to hold until 1801. In fact, from 1797 he was the
only real power in the colony, the representatives
of the Directory Sonthonax, whom he sent

packing in August 1797, Hédouville, who
suffered the same fate a year later, and Roume,
who stayed until 1801no longer took any deci¬
sions. It was a de facto independence, yet formally
within the framework of the French Republic,
the only European power to have made the abo¬
lition of slavery part of its fundamental code of
law.
But independence for whom? Clearly, the
overwhelming majority of the "newly-freed", the
former slaves, benefited from it, but so too did
the mulattos. It is true that Toussaint Louverture
waged war against some of them between 1799
and 1800. Yet this was not a war against mulat¬
tos as such but against the attempt of the southern
region to secede under the mulatto leader, Gener¬
al Rigaud. Before, during and after these hostili¬
ties Toussaint Louverture always hoped that the
mulattos would take their proper place in the
new unitary state. Independence was also on offer
for those whites who were prepared to work
August 1791: the
beginning of the
insurrection of the black
slaves of San Domingo.
within the new system, whether as planters,
magistrates or technicians. Thus, the first state
to emerge from the revolt of a European colony
was, in the widest sense of the term, a non-racial
state in which flourished the equality of men of
a variety of origins, traditions and cultures.
Whites and a mulatto were among the chief
draughtsmen of the constitution Toussaint Lou¬
verture had drawn up in 1801. It was this type
of revolution, based on human fraternity, that
Bonaparte set out to destroy when he came to
power, just as he put an end to the Revolution
in France itself.
Nevertheless, Toussaint Louverture's origi¬
nal initiative, which, after his death in prison in
1803 at Fort-de-Joux in the French Jura, was to
lead to the independence fought for and won by
Dessalines, remains a solid illustration of how the
principles of the Enlightenment and of 1789 were
brought to fulfilment outside the bounds of the
Old World of Europe. 23
