Unjustified
intrusions
by the
sensationalist
press pose a
threat to the
freedom of
information
Private life and
the public eye
by Jonathan Fenby
0,
a»?
"ne definition of news is that it is informa¬
tion which somebody somewhere does not want
published or broadcast. While much of the news
which appears day by day is unlikely to cause
anybody lost sleep, that definition does contain
more than a grain of truth. The information
which makes most impact in the world's
newspapers and airwaves deals with exceptional
eventsthe one airliner which crashes rather than
the thousands which land safely, a change of
direction by politicians rather than the steady
implementation of known policies, the exception¬
ally good or bad crop yield rather than the
average harvest. Often these exceptional events
are, by their nature, news which somebody some¬
where would prefer not to be publicizedfor a
multitude of reasons ranging from political or
business embarrassment to considerations of per¬
sonal grief and pain.
The media's emphasis on the new and the
unusual has often been decried, most notably in
criticism of Western media organizations for con¬
centrating on "bad news" in reporting from
Africa, Asia and Latin America. But it flows
inevitably from the service role of the press and
broadcasting organizations. The media and the
news they transmit cannot exist in a vacuum.
However fine its principles and admirable its
writing, a newspaper without readers would be
a pointless entity.
Satisfying a market is not a sufficient condi¬
tion on its own, but the existence of a market
is a necessary condition for the independent, com¬
mercial media of the kind found in democratic
nations. Without customers, the media become
a collection of propaganda organs for which the
crucial choices on content are made by those who
pay the bills, and it seems to me a matter of
everyday observation that, for the most part,
these customers are interested in information
about the exceptional, the new and the unusual.
Like it or not, it is human nature to be
interested in the occasional aircraft crash rather
than the thousands of safe landings, and the media
cater to this trait. The media, of course, fulfil
many other rolesas commentator, analyst,
observer, cultural guide, provider of good writing
and even of humour. But the primary role is to

In 1936, Edward VIII
abdicated from the British
throne and was crea.ed
Duke of Windsor. Left, a
Journalist types his copy on
a portable machine after
being ejected from the
grounds of a château where
the ex-King was staying.
discover and communicate news which is impor¬
tant and relevant to an audience and to do this
effectively the media need a political and social
environment which acknowledges the free pro¬
vision of information to the public as a social
good, rather than something grudgingly accorded
to the media on condition that they behave them¬
selves by standards set by the political authorities.
Those authorities may regard such freedom
as unpalatable in practice, even if they pay lip
service to the general principle of the freedom
of the press. It is only natural that those who exer¬
cise power should find it uncomfortable to have
their failures, misdeeds and secret activities
brought to light. The understandable, if regret¬
table, tendency of those in power to take a res¬
trictive view of what the media should and should
not do is heightened in many democratic coun¬
tries by the adversarial relationship between the
press and broadcasting, on the one hand, and
those in powerbe it in politics, business,
administration or other fields.
The media's role as discoverer and publicizer
of abuses of authority makes an uncomfortable
bedfellow for those who want to get on with run¬
ning things with a minimum of public scrutiny.
Add to that the media's role as critic and com¬
mentator and the adversarial relationship
becomes inevitable if the media are to play their
proper part in open societies.
As a recognition of the need to protect the
media's position in such a relationship, some
countries enshrine freedom of information in
their constitutions. Elsewhere some governments
have adhered to international conventions which
guarantee such freedom. The media in these coun¬
tries may still run into problems with govern¬
ments and in the law courts: given the nature of
the relationship and the way that the media will
always be pressing to the limits of their freedoms,
it would be surprising if they did not. But the
basis from which the argument starts is usually
relatively clear.
Press indiscretions
In my own country, Britain, the situation is much
more cloudy and contains distinct dangers for the
freedom of information. We have no statutory
guarantee of freedom of expression and, in recent
court cases, the media have found themselves
having to argue to show why they should be free
to reportrather than the prosecution being
required to demonstrate why a certain piece of
information should be withheld from the public.
The notion of serving the public interest does
not always carry great weight in such cases. Two
journalists have been fined in recent years for
refusing to disclose the sources of stories. Under 21

a new Official Secrets Act, civil servants who dis¬
close information will not be able to invoke the
public interest as a defence. In one recent case,
the government held that an injunction obtained
against two newspapers on a story prevented all
other newspapers from publishing similar
material, opening the way to blanket bans which,
for instance, could be based on legal action against
small, poor publications unable to fight it
through the extremely expensive British legal
process.
It is not surprising, therefore, that many
people in the British media believe that freedom
of expression is being constrained by political and
legal decisions which take little or no account of
the essential contribution of freedom of informa¬
tion to the public interest. On top of this,
extremely large libel damages running to £1 mil¬
lion or more in several recent cases have added
Below, filming the Bastille
Day procession in Paris.
22
JONATHAN FENBY,
British journalist, is deputy
editor of The Guardian. A
former correspondent for
Reuters and editor of the
agency's international news
services, he has also served as
correspondent in France and
Germany for The Economist
and as home editor and
assistant editor of The
Independent.
to press concerns. Even if a newspaper feels it has
a good case, the prospect of an inconclusive legal
outcome in which it will be left to pay the very
high costs of legal representation may act as
another deterrent to publishing an accurate but
legally tricky report.
This adversarial, exceptional, uncomfortable
part which I have sketched out for the media
inevitably raises a question about how far their



legitimate role in unearthing and publicizing news
should go. When it comes to political scandals,
business frauds or administrative malpractice, the
public service line should be easy to draw: pub¬
lish and, if you are wrong, be damned. Where
things get more difficult is in weighing up the
balance between disclosure in the public interest
and the rights of individuals to privacy.
Not even the most ardent advocates of the
freedom of information would, I think, deny the
individual's right to privacy. The question is at
what point that right ceases to be a protection
against intrusion by the media. "Intrusion" is a
loaded term, with a pejorative implication. But
without intrusion, many of the most notable
media disclosures of wrongdoing would never
have taken place. There is nothing easier than for
a corrupt public figure or a shady businessman
to try to block investigation by the media on the
grounds that reporters are intruding into their
private affairs. Equally, there may be few things
more difficult for an ordinary person than to face
journalists poking into his or her life in the hope
of finding information.
The press on probation
To return to my own country, there have been
several cases recently in which media intrusion
has taken place without any immediately
apparent public interest being served. The parents
of a young television actor who committed sui¬
cide have recently been vocal in attacking what
they see as press harassment as the cause of his
death. In another case, journalists from a tabloid
publication which specializes in sex and sensation
entered the hospital room of another television
star as he was recovering from brain surgery and
took pictures and questioned him before being
ejected by security staff.
Such examples have fuelled calls from some
politicians for greater controls over the press and
stronger protections of privacy against media
intrusion. After two members of parliament
unsuccessfully introduced bills into the House of
Commons to establish the right to privacy, the
government warned last year that the press was
on probation and a special commission was set
up to look at privacy and related matters. This
commissionknown after its chairman, David
Calcutt, as the Calcutt Commissionreported in
June 1990. It laid down measures including
making physical intrusion onto private property
a criminal offence and the threat of statutory con¬
trols if the media are held to have misbehaved
during a twelve-month probationary period of
self-regulation.
The reaction of the media in Britain was over¬
whelmingly hostile. The excesses of some popular
papers which led to the establishment of the Cal¬
cutt Commission are often difficult to excuse.
One commentator referred to such newspapers
as "filthy rags", while others acknowledged that
the behaviour of parts of the tabloid press made
the press as a whole fair game for regulation.
Attempts at self-regulation which the national
newspapers have made over the past year appear
to have had little lasting effect, and have raised
the question of whether tabloid newspaper
proprietors are more ready to risk disapproval
or the falling sales which might result from
greater self-restraint.
But the problem for the media as a whole is
that any system which prevents intrusion into
privacy in the case of an isolated, powerless
individual could also be used to protect those
whom the press and broadcasting should be free
to expose if they are to play their proper role.
The deputy leader of the British Labour Party,

A swarm of paparazzi In
Federico Fellini's film La
Dolce Vita (1959), which
describes the life of a
Journalist.



Roy Hattersley, recently acknowledged the differ¬
ence between the privacy of those in public life
and that of private individuals, and added that it
was almost impossible to protect the privacy of
politicians in the same way as that of other
individuals.
The difficulty is where such a line should be
drawn. In most cases, the distinction between
public and private is obvious. But private
individuals can suddenly become subjects of
public interest because they are caught up in
events which make newsand then fall back into
obscurity. Equally, there is a continuing debate
about whether the private lives of public figures
should be subject to the same kind of reserve as
the private lives of private individuals. Should
newspapers report on, say, the way political
leaders spend their leisure time? Or, to take
another example, are the problems of relatives of
well-known figures proper material for news
reports? Should the arrest of the son of a promi¬
nent politician on a drugs charge be treated as if
it concerned a public figure or a private
individual?
Different newpapers and broadcasting sta¬
tions handle such questions in different ways,
according to their own definition of their own
responsibilities and their view of what most
interests the public at which they are aiming. The
diversity of the media in many countries means
that stories which may appear on the front pages
of tabloids may not even be reported in broad¬
sheet quality newspapers. The danger point for
the freedom of information comes when the
public considers that unjustified intrusions into
privacy justify legal restraints on the press.
Newspapers may say that regulation of the press
is worse than irresponsibility by the press. But
if the media are to enjoy the freedom they need
to carry out their job properly, they have to
know how to use that freedomand where abuse
begins.
They cannot expect to be popular with those
in authority, and must be ready on occasion to
be unpopular with at least some of their own
audience. Their role as a source of disclosures and
investigation means that they have to be prepared
to delve into areas which involve sensitive ques¬
tions of privacy, but they have to be certain that
in doing so intrusion is balanced by the public
interest it is serving. When that balance is
achieved, the media are on firm ground. When
it is not, they put their place in society at risk,
and open the door to regulation from those who
regard freedom of information as an irritant
rather than an absolute good.
23
