The complex role of the monetary system
in modern societies
BY GHISLAIN DELEPLACE
-«Ät
^í. Í ^ * ».
V .<-
. .»V
J_J
"V
ECONOMISTS often seem to have a very curious
view of money. In the eighteenth century, when
banks were beginning to issue notes, which made
it possible to create money without being depen¬
dent upon the production of precious metals,
economists spread the idea that money was a
secondary phenomenon which could be ignored
in the study of fundamental economic laws. Yet
this viewpoint, which has been dominant ever
since, does not prevent economists from ful¬
minating regularly against the evils of monetary
disorder, which they hold responsible for eco¬
nomic instability, whilst according money only
a secondary role in the functioning of economies.
This doubly paradoxical attitude at least has the
merit of focusing attention on the complexity of
the role money plays in modern societies.
Nevertheless, it was the problem of the
monetary analysis of society that gave impetus
to the development of economic thought in
Renaissance Europe. Money was seen as both the
symbol of merchants' wealth and an attribute of
royal power. At the time, the relationship be¬
tween princes and merchants was the central
theme of monetary analysis and the basis of an
economic theory of society.
This approach was to change radically in the
eighteenth century, as witness these words of the
British philosopher David Hume (1711-1776):
"Money is not, properly speaking, one of the sub¬
jects of commerce; but only the instrument
which men have agreed upon to facilitate the
exchange of one commodity for another. It is
none of the wheels of trade: it is the oil which
renders the motion of the wheels more smooth
and easy."
Making copper coins at the Royal Canadian Mint 41

42
This purely instrumental view of money was
part of a vision of society in which the market
was the sole regulating mechanism. Its effect was
to leave the monarch, or the state, on the side¬
lines with no co-ordinating role to play between
private agents, since these were all merchants
naturally interlinked within a "commercial
society". It also reduced money to little more
than a veil that cloaked the exchange of goods
and that had to be pulled aside if the realities of
economic phenomena were to be analysed. Any
attempt by the state to take an active hand in the
management of money was therefore seen as a
threat to social harmony, which the laws of com¬
petition were assumed to engender automatically.
Thus the progressive "dematerialization" of
money is seen as a means of simplifying the proce¬
dures of trade. Some object in common currency
within a community is used as money. We have
seen this role fulfilled successively by some form
of metal, gold or silver bullion, coins, gold
certificates, bank notes, cheques and credit
cardsand electronic money is on its way. As a
result of this "dematerialization" process, money
has become nothing more than a transfer mechan¬
ism with no link to any material object as a
guarantee of its value.
A form of wealth
or a transfer mechanism?
However well it matches up to a view of society
that favours the regulating influence of the
market, this liberal, instrumental conception of
money is not without its own paradoxes. Chief
of these is that, leaving aside any question of
intervention by the state, the very nature of
monetary exchanges makes the existence of
"good" money, that is to say an instrument that
properly fulfils its function as a medium of
exchange, difficult, if not impossible.
Unlike barter, in which the buyer of item X
is at the same time the seller of item Y, exchanges
involving money comprise two distinct transac¬
tions which do not take place simultaneously.
The vendor first sells Y for money (i.e. he buys
nothing), and then uses this money to buy X (i.e.
he sells nothing). If money is merely an instru¬
ment of exchange, the person involved in the
transaction will not go ahead with it unless it is
to his advantage. According to the textbooks, one
advantage is that it is easier to find a buyer of Y
and a seller of X than to uncover the double
coincidence of a single person wanting to buy Y
and sell X.
The problem remains, however, of ensuring
that this advantage is not reduced to nothing by
some impediment that will prevent the individual
from using the money obtained from selling Y
to buy X, or that he may not obtain as much of
X with money as he would have done by barter.
For the private individual to choose the mone¬
tary exchange methodand it is essential to the
This Austrian silver thaler
struck in 1780 bears the head
of the archduchess Maria
Theresa. Such coins
circulated from the Red Sea
to the Atlantic.
-
liberal, instrumental approach argument that he
should do soit is necessary that the money he
has obtained as a seller remains a store ofpurchas¬
ing power throughout the period of time that
elapses between the two transactions.
Herein lies the paradox. If the instrument
chosen as money fails properly to fulfil its func¬
tion as a store of purchasing power (in the sense
that there is nothing to guarantee that this pur¬
chasing power will remain constant), those who
hold it will be induced to get rid of it as soon
as they have received it, or even simply to go back
to barter. This is often seen to occur in situations
of hyperinflation.
On the other hand, if the instrument chosen
as money fulfils this function well, the private
Checking banknotes
in the Bank of England,
London (1871).
Opposite page: Top, the
French numismatist Joseph
Pellerin (1684-1782), who
had a collection of 32,500
rare coins. The impact of
inflation in Germany in
1923 is illustrated by the
50,000 million mark note
(centre) and the children
paying for their schooling
with food (below).
* Fiat money is money declared
by a government to be legal tender
though it is not convertible into
specie. Editor
individual will tend to hold it as a form of wealth,
taking it out of circulation and preventing it from
fulfilling its other function as a medium of
exchange.
This phenomenon, which has become
known as "Gresham's Law" (after the sixteenth-
century English financier Sir Thomas Gresham
who observed that "Bad money drives out
good"), was recognized very early on with regard
to metal-based coins. However, it is equally
applicable to fiat money"" since it is based on the
trust placed in it by business as a store of pur¬
chasing power. In the 1930s, the British
economist John Maynard Keynes maintained that
"liquidity preference" was the main reason why a
monetary economy was unable to achieve a stable
level of full employment. At the international
level "Triffin's dilemma" (so named for the
American economist Professor Robert Triffin)
highlighted the fact that, in the 1950s, the United
States was no longer in a position both to ensure
world liquidity and maintain confidence in the
dollar as a reserve currency.
It is thus illusory to consider money as
merely a medium of exchange engendered by
market forces; and if it is taken as a principle that
business people "choose" to hold money simply
on the basis of an economic calculation, this will
increase the risk of monetary disorder.

In opposition to the liberal, instrumental the¬
ory of money there is the institutional, interven¬
tionist approach, which introduces a number of
interesting concepts. Money is not an appendage
but the sine qua non of the existence of the
market, and its appropriate management
produces less disorder and makes it possible to
act favourably on the economy as a whole.
This concept, however, became associated



with the notion that money is basically created
by the state and that the state's monetary power
is reflected in the institution of legal tender for
fiat money. This was notably the case after the
First World War. This reduction of money to the
status of an attribute of state power itself led to
some paradoxical situations, the main one being
that the history of money is the history of the
struggle of private individuals against this aspect
of state power.
Constraints on the monetary
power of the state
This situation had arisen before with metal-based
money. In the sixteenth century, this money did
not circulate as stamped gold or silver
ingots but as coins, the minting of which was the
monopoly of the monarch and to which he
attributed a legal value in units of account. Gold
and silver were not commodity money; they
became metal coinage by royal decree. Private
business was unceasingly hostile to this legally
fixed circulating value and instead adopted
"voluntary values" which were usually higher.
The depreciation of the currency that resulted
because in practice the unit of account represent¬
ed less gold or silver than officially maintained
was effectively a form of inflation, which went
to show that the monarch could not simply regu¬
late money as he thought fit.
The monetary power of the state was thus
subject to two important constraints. Firstly, the
decisions taken by private business had their
effect on the creation of money, both on the
supply side (the impossibility of ensuring rigorous
control of the minting of metal coinage; the rela¬
tive autonomy enjoyed by the banks in the field
of fiat money), and on the demand side (the
volume of money created being ultimately depen¬
dent on the decisions of individuals as to whether
to bring their gold to the mint or to borrow from
the banks). Secondly, the attitude of private
individuals with regard to the circulation of cur¬
rency could express their resistance to public con¬
trol of the currency and lead to its internal
depreciation (inflation) or external depreciation
(a fall in the exchange rate).
If these two conflicting views of money are
considered together, it can be seen that money
is neither a form of merchandise (with its own
intrinsic value) nor an attribute of state power.
Rather, it is a prerequisite for the existence of
markets and the expression of a certain social
cohesion that enables the state to fulfil its 43

44
functions. A monetary regime is a set of rules of
conduct specific to a given society.
What then is the difference between the
money of the past and that of today? It is often
stated that modern money is fiat money, whereas
the money of the past was commodity money;
that the metal-based money of the past had its
own intrinsic value regulated by the mechanisms
of the metal market while the "dematerialized"
money of today is based solely on the confidence
inspired by the state, which imposes its legal
tender. Such an assessment is inadequate. No
of a lender of last resort. This "banks' bank", or
central bank, plays a dual role. On the one hand
it acts as a clearing house for payments between



banks and to this effect sets the bank money rate
in terms of the national monetary unit. Contrary
to what is generally thought, a franc, a dollar or
a pound issued by one commercial bank is not
the same as that issued by another. The accep¬
tance of cheques drawn on this or that bank
and thus the use of bank deposits as money-
implies a system of compensatory payments
organized by a central body.
monetary economy can exist without some form
of abstract unit of account, and this can perfectly
well coexist with a metal-based coinage.
Money today
Modern money can, however, be defined in terms
of two characteristics of a bank-based monetary
regime. Firstly, the banks' issuing function
enables a certain category of people, the entre¬
preneurs, to obtain money on the basis of a
promise offuture activity. Even though bank credit
is today made available to people of all economic
categories, there is a .fundamental difference
between thosein particular wage earnerswho
can borrow on the strength of income received
in the past (or the probability that they will con¬
tinue to receive such income in the future), and
thosethe entrepreneursto whom credit is
advanced on the basis of a planned trading project
the success of which (on which repayment of the
loan depends) is uncertain. This credit issuing
function of the banks thus introduces an element
of social discrimination. It is, however, a factor
that promotes economic dynamism, since, as
Keynes observed, "it allows entrepreneurs to go
ahead with assurance".
Secondly, the banking system is hierarchical
in organization, with the activity of the second
rank of banks being dependent on the existence
Looking into the strongroom
at a major French bank.
GHISLAIN DELEPLACE,
of France, is professor of
economics at the University
of Orleans. He is the
author of Théories du
Capitalisme (Maspéro
publishers, Paris, 1979) and
co-author (with Marie-
Thérèse Boyer-Xambeu and
Lucien Gillard) of Monnaie
privée et pouvoir des
princes: L'économie des
relations monétaires à la
Renaissance (1986), an
English version of which is
currently being prepared for
publication.
On the other hand, the central bank guaran¬
tees the other banks against defaults on loans,
which are a risk inherent in the loan mechanisms
described above, by allowing these banks to
refinance such loans in central bank money. This
method of insurance, while certainly not auto¬
matic, tends through its effects on inflation and
the exchange rate to spread over society as a
whole the burden of the consequences of the
failure of some entrepreneurs to meet their obli¬
gation to repay loans. Nevertheless, as we see
today, it provides the system with a degree of
elasticity which tends to prevent the multiplica¬
tion of bankruptcies.
These characteristics demonstrate that the
origins of the modern monetary system predate
the time when it supplanted metal-based coinage.
To find them we have to go back to the sixteenth
century and the relationship between metal
coinage minted by monarchscentral money
and the bills of exchange that the Italian merchant
bankers circulated throughout Europebank
money.
The yardstick of social intercourse, money
is the embodiment of the rules that make possible
the complex interplay of economies. Paradoxical
in nature since it appears to be the consequence
of the economic activity of which it is a pre¬
requisite, it is hardly surprising that money is
both a matter of practical concern and a source
of theoretical debate.
