From Horus to Aïda
BY MONA ZAALOUK
20

THE FARAWAY SOURCES
EGYPT
SUSPENDED in time between the medieval and the
modern, a handful of Cairo buildings inspired by Art
Nouveau principles have survived in a city in the throes
of a building boom as monuments to the complex cul¬
tural relationship between Egypt and Europe in the
nineteenth century.
Art Nouveau was an eclectic movement and its
adepts sought new ideas and sources of inspiration out¬
side Europe. In this they continued a trend that may be
said to have started in the eighteenth century when the
Baroque movement had shown an interest in Oriental
motifs. In the nineteenth, an age of rapid political, tech¬
nological and economic upheaval, new developments in
popular journalism, the increasing use of photography
and the telegraph and many other improvements in
communication and transport hastened the propagation
of ideas, forms and discoveries from country to country.
A flow of travel books, guidebooks and magazines were
produced, stimulating European interest in distant lands
and peoples. Late in the century Art Nouveau was a
mirror of this new receptivity and among the many
influences that shaped it those of ancient Egyptian art
and thought played a part, albeit subtle and indirect.
A key episode in the transmission of Egyptian cul¬
tural influence to Europe was Napoleon's expedition
to Egypt in 1799. Over 120 scholars accompanied the
expedition with instructions to study and catalogue
Egyptian monuments. The results of their work, pub¬
lished in illustrated folio editions after 1809, laid the
foundations for a European vogue for styles in architec¬
ture, arts and crafts inspired by ancient Egypt.
Towards the end of the nineteenth century, echoes
of ancient Egyptian art and mythology can be found
in the work of European artists and thinkers seeking
to re-establish spiritual values in a materialistic society.
The fantastic dream world of Symbolism, one of the
many currents that flowed into the stream of Art
Nouveau, is in several ways reminiscent of Egyptian
mural paintingin its interest in themes of death and
the afterlife, in its fondness for the feminine.
A more direct Egyptian influence on Art Nouveau
can be seen in many of the decorative objects and
Top, falcon bowl in faience,
by Emile Gallé, 1885-1889.
Above, brooch with hornet
and lotus motifs, by Georges
Fouquet, 1901.
Below left, entrance to a
Brussels apartment building,
1900.
Opposite page, cigar box with
scarab motif, in wood and
"Favrile" iridescent glass, by
Tiffany Studios, Corona, New
York, c. 1900.
MONA ZAALOUK, an
Egyptian artist, has published
many articles in Cairo Today, a
magazine on art and literature.
jewellery created in the 1900s by artists such as Gaillard,
Gautrait, the Pier brothers and Georges Fouquet.
Working with precious metals and stones, coloured
glass and enamels, they used motifs from ancient Egyp¬
tian art such as the lotus flower, the scarab, the snake
and the winged god Horus. In ancient Egypt too, art
had permeated everyday life, an ambition shared by
Art Nouveau artists.
While Europe was discovering Egypt, Egypt began
to turn its eyes to Europe. As part of his drive to
modernize the country, the visionary Egyptian leader
Mohammed Ali (1769-1849) created scholarships and
encouraged scholars, thinkers and researchers to go to
France to study. By the second half of the nineteenth
century many upper class Egyptians were looking to
Europe as a source of fashion. The Cairo Opera House,
built by Khedive Ismail for the first performance of
Verdi's Egyptian-inspired opera Aïda, staged to mark the
opening of the Suez Canal, is a smaller replica of La Scala
in Milan. Both in Europe and in Egypt it had become
current to look to other cultures for inspiration.
When, around the beginning of this century, many
European artists, craftsmen, architects and intellectuals
emigrated to Egypt, they thus found no lack of patrons
among well-to-do Egyptians who were eager to adopt
European habits and models. One result of this encoun¬
ter was that a new style of architecture inspired by Art
Nouveau began to appear in Cairo and Alexandria,
replacing the traditional style practised since the
Fatimid era. Elaborate sculptural ornamentation was
introduced into private homes and public buildings.
Human figures or columns, or intertwined plants,
replaced the more sober traditional architecture which
also, however, had featured ornamented ceilings and
was initially a source of inspiration for Art Nouveau.
Notable buildings of this period include the Cecil
Hotel in Alexandria and Cairo's Cosmopolitan Hotel
and Groppi tea-rooms, the latter built by a Swiss
emigrant. Patient exploration would reveal other more
anonymous examples of the period dwarfed beneath
the tower blocks of modern Cairo. 21
