A vintage crop
E.»ARLY in the morning a cream 1929 Ford
truck bearing red inscriptions stands outside a
shop in a Montevideo street. At the wheel a
milkman prepares to set off on his round.
In any other country this might be a scene
staged for an advertisement, but in Uruguay
such a sight is fairly common. The truck is one
of a fleet of veteran utility vehicles, some of
them fifty years old, which are still being used
by the same firm to which they have always
belonged.
Veteran cars of all kinds, some of them
dating from the 1920s, are also an everyday
38
sight on the roads of Uruguay. The owners of
1930 Grahams, 1947 Singers, 1950 Panhards
and 1960 Hansas, find it quite natural to go out
in these old-timers for a daily spin.
Never mind if the model is out of date and
spare parts are impossible to find. In Uruguay
all vehicles are systematically used, repaired,
cannibalized, and kept on the road, whatever
their make or their age.
There are so many old cars and so many
makes in Uruguay because when cars became
popular there were no specific import restric¬
tions on vehicles. For many years Uruguayans
had no trouble importing cars of all kinds. Then,
when heavy customs duties began to be levied
on imports during a period of economic crisis
in the 1950s, car owners took care to preserve
their cars for as long as they possibly could.
Since then the frontiers have been opened,
with certain restrictions concerning engine
capacity and type of coachwork, and a local
In Uruguay, vehicles of all makes
and ages are kept on the road.
industry has developed to assemble imported
cars and manufacture spare parts. But Uru¬
guay's fleet of cars had already been largely
constituted, and even today many Uruguayans
prefer to drive a museum piece which costs less
to buy, and less in road tax and insurance, than
to invest in a new car whose price can easily
represent two years' salary for someone who
earns a good living.
This is why the Montevideo milkman still
drives his old Ford gas-guzzler. Perhaps he
thinks that fuel is the least expensive item in
running a car!
