HISTORY
OR DESTINY?
BY MIGUEL LEON-PORTILLA
ELexicans have always exhibited an obstinate
determination to safeguard the memory of the
major events that have marked their society and
this has coloured the way in which they view
their identity and destiny. From pre-Columbian
times they have been engaged in a continuous
battle to save their history from oblivion.
Knowledge of the past was the foundation on
which their priests and diviners based their as¬
tronomic calculations and their predictions of the
future. Countless archaeological remains from the
two thousand years before the arrival of the
Spaniards in 1519 bear witness to the Mexican
desire to interpret and record the history of gods
and man. The stelae known as danzantes
("dancers") at Monte Albán in the Oaxaca valley,
on which are inscribed a record of the passing
days and years, place-names and the names of
kings and other notables, constitute the oldest
Two of the danzantes
("dancers") stelae carved in
Olmec style, c. 300 BC. Pre-
Columbian city of Monte
Albán, Mexico.
m
yjfr
known chronicle (600 to 300 BC) of the New
World.
The people, or rather peoples, who succeeded
one another on Mexican soil met with mixed for¬
tunes. Bursts of creativity were punctuated by
times of crisis and war which even led to the
abrupt disappearance of entire populations and
civilizations. The memory of these events lives
on in the thousands of inscriptions and the
legends of oral tradition.
The greatest and most tragic clash of cultures
in pre-Columbian civilization was recorded by
some of those who took part in the conquest of
Mexico. Hernán Cortés himself sent five remark¬
able letters (Cartas de Relación) back to Spain be¬
tween 1519 and 1526; and the soldier-chronicler
Bernai Díaz del Castillo (c. 1492-1580), who
served under Cortés, fifty years after the event
wrote his Historia verdadera de la conquista de la
&<
/
.:*S
( i \
m
\ ) n y
*<r-H: /
j
¿L'.-,'
.>.*- .n
i z-
r

Zapatistas (1931; "Followers
of Zapata"), a painting by
the Mexican muralist José
Clémente Orozco
(1883-1949).
Nueva Espana ("True History of the Conquest
of New Spain"). The vanquished peoples also left
written records. A manuscript dated 1528, now
in the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris, recounts
in Náhuatl, the language of the Aztecs, the trau¬
matic fate of the Indians:
All this happened literally before our eyes; we
were aghast and filled with anguish at the piteous
fate which was ours. Broken spears lay strewn about
the ground, men on horseback were everywhere, our
houses were roofless and their walls were red [with
blood]. The water was red also, as ifit had been dyed,
and when we drank it, it had a brackish taste. We
beat our fists against the mud walls at the sight of
our heritage lying in tatters. We sought protection
behind our shields but no shield could protect us in
our isolation...
The beginning
of a new history
This evocation of the tragic fall of the ancient
capital of Mexico contrasts with Bernai Díaz'
equally astonishing description of the city as it
appeared to the conquistadors on their arrival:
We saw the three causeways that led into
Mexico... We saw thefresh water which camefrom
Chapultepec to supply the city.... We saw too that
one could not passfrom one house to another ofthat
great city and the other cities that were built on the
water except over wooden drawbridges.... We saw
cues and shrines in these cities that looked like
gleaming white towers and castles: a marvellous
sight.... We turned back to the great market and the
swarm ofpeople buying and selling.... Some ofour
soldiers who had been in many parts of the world,
in Constantinople, in Rome, and all over Italy, said
that they had never seen a market so well laid out,
so large, so orderly, and so full ofpeople. *
These accounts, from the vanquished and the
30
victorious, record the passing of ancient splen¬
dours and herald the emergence of a new destiny.
How then can Mexicans, as they search for their
identity, ignore the shock of this encounter be¬
tween two peoples, which gave rise to so much
discord yet from which their mixed culture was
born?
There are hundreds of chronicles of "New
Spain", covering three centuries of history. Their
authors wished to record the upheavals they were
witnessing. In the sixteenth century an extraor¬
dinary man, the Spanish Franciscan Bernardino
de Sahagún, assisted by Indians old enough to
have lived through the Spanish conquest or
young enough to be his disciples, gathered invalu¬
able, first-hand information on the pre-
Columbian era. Meanwhile, indigenous chroni¬
clers such as Tezozómoc and Chimalpahin were
writing in their own languagesNáhuatl, Aztec,
Yucatán Mayain order to preserve their history.
A Mexican identity was gradually emerging,
but those who were trying to define it were faced
with a mass of contradictions. Some felt that the
ancient pre-Columbian heritage was dead and
gone. Others foresaw a glorious destiny for "New
Spain". At the same time, more and more
newcomersAfrican slaves, Spaniards from all
walks of life, adventurers from other countries
of the Old Worldwere mingling with the
descendants of the Aztec, Olmec, Maya, Zapotee
and other peoples.
Reasserting Mexican identity
As time went by, the feeling grew that traditional



chronicles should be replaced by a more rigorous
historiography which would help the Mexicans
grasp their identity and learn from the past in
order to prepare for the future. An outstanding
example of the new methodology was the Historia
antigua de México ("History of Ancient Mexico")
by a Mexican Jesuit, Francisco Xavier Clavijero
(1731-1787), which was so popular that it was im¬
mediately translated into several languages. This
was the first cultural history of the country be¬
fore the Spanish conquest. The author empha¬
sized the importance of accepting their ancient
heritage as the only means by which Mexicans
could come to terms with themselves in order to
face the great changes in store.
Clavijero's foresight was soon borne out by
events. Mexico gained its independence in 1821.
Some of those who fought for independence
recorded their views on what the revolution
meant to them as a harbinger of major political,
social, economic and religious change!
The contradictions in Mexican historiogra¬
phy thus reflect the different aims of historians.
Liberals fought to strengthen republican institu¬
tions, while traditionalists, looking to the past,
dreamed of a monarchical system. Historians
* Quotation from The Conquest ofNew Spain by Bemal Díaz,
translated by J.M. Cohen. Penguin Classics, 1963.

studying the struggles of the new nation attempt¬
ed to resolve the great issues at stake and to ex¬
plain the more tragic episodes.
In 1847-1848 Mexico went to war with the
United States and lost half of its territory. Internal
conflicts in the following years conjured up the
fleeting dream of a new empire, culminating in
the dramatic confrontation between Maximilian,
crowned emperor of Mexico with the support of
France, and Benito Juárez, backed by the Mexican
people. The history of this era, sometimes written
in blood, again raised the tormenting questions:
who were we, who are we now, and what will
become of us?
Historiography in modern Mexico
The most recent convulsion in Mexican history
was the revolution of 1910. The names of its
leading figures have become legendary: Francisco
Madero, Emiliano Zapata, Venustiano Carranza,
Pancho Villa.... The revolution heightened the
Mexican sense of identity and purpose, and was
expressed not only in politics but in the visual
arts, literature and music, as well as in history and
anthropology. From the 1920s onwards the great
muralist painters Orozco, Rivera, Siqueiros
Detail from "Cortés
arriving at Vera Cruz in
1519", one of a series of
frescos by the Mexican
painter Diego Rivera
(1886-1957) illustrating the
Spanish conquest of the
New World. National
Palace, Mexico City.
MIGUEL
LEÓN-PORTILLA,
of Mexico, is currently
serving as his country's
ambassador and permanent
delegate to Unesco.
Professor emeritus at the
Autonomous National
University of Mexico, he is
the author of a number of
books, articles and papers
on pre-Columbian cultures,
which have been translated
into several languages.
took inspiration for their frescos from both past
and present. At the same time a new generation
of historians, sociologists and anthropologists,
better educated and professionally trained, were
concentrating on the obsessive theme of the iden¬
tity and destiny of Mexico.
Historical research on Mexico today, whether
carried out by Mexicans or others, represents a
variety of schools of thought and ideologies. Even
if nationalist tendencies are, at times, apparent,
the highly professional quality of the work of
these historians has to be recognized. The three
main stages in the history of Mexico its pre-
Columbian roots, the mixing of cultures and
its existence as an independent countryare cur¬
rently being studied in depth. Although the main
research centres are in the capital, work is also
being carried out in the most remote regions of
the country. The expansion of historiography is
part of a general movement in which historians
have extended their interest beyond the specifi¬
cally Mexican field.
Faithful to the spirit of their Indian ancestors,
modern Mexicans feel that a people which reflects
on its historical identity comes to understand the
meaning of the present and is better equipped to
face the future. 31
