WORLD
RHYTHMS
BY ROBERT BONNAUD
%HAT are we entitled to ask of a "universal his¬
tory"? First, that it should maintain a certain balance
and not give too large a place to Western history and its
antecedentsthe triumphal progression from the Egypt
of the pyramids to Europe's belle époque. To borrow
the titles of works published during the eighteenth cen¬
tury, we would expect it to be "the history of all the
peoples of the world", or "the history of mankind".
We would also expect it to be more than a series
of separate histories juxtaposed, a parade of witnesses
that are perfect strangers to one another. It would have
to be a comparative history, a confrontation that would
reveal differences and similarities, a drama whose plot
unfolds, a mosaic pieced together to create a global land¬
scape, a common adventure.
Yet this would still not be enough. There might
be one character so central to this drama that, even
if all proportions were respected and all the links were
made, the work as a whole might take on the aspect
of an apologia. This universal history could be a com¬
parative history of all the peoples of the world but yet
be a history that always favoured the same group and
which, however vast and however meticulously exa¬
mined the terrain might be, nevertheless aimed to set
that group off to advantage. Such was the compara¬
tive history written by Max Weber (1864-1920). His
was an impressive, all-encompassing inquiry with India,
China and Islam called for examination before a pains¬
taking judge, but a judge who thought that Western
culture was superior to the others and who felt the need
to provide irrefutable proof of this.
Some brave attempts
Like Copernicus putting the Earth back in its place
among the planets, Oswald Spengler (1880-1936) over¬
turned this vision by "de-Westernizing" history.
Western culture was placed among the eight human
cultures. Like the others with the exception of pre-
Columbian culture which had disappeared, prematurely
assassinatedit was to have its thousand years of his¬
tory (from the year 1000 to the year 2000), passing
through four phases, each of 250 years, with its periods
of greatness and of decline. It demonstrated no greater
originality than the seven other cultures. Its superiority
was an illusion.
Spengler's vision was of cultures of equal worth,
with a common destiny and all subject to the same law
of development. The cohesiveness of universal history
seems, however, to be given the lie by the deep diver¬
sity of cultures, compartmentalized and shut in upon
themselves like monads [indivisible and impenetrable
units]. Could it be that there are eight histories rather
than one? Ethnic particularities fragment humanity and
the "spirit of peoples" effaces the "spirit of the times",
that is to say, the similarities and parallels engendered
by an epoch.
For Spengler, contemporaneity did not mean being

\ 1
of the same chronological time. Around 200 BC, the
culture of Antiquity, then in decline (it lasted from
1000 BC to the beginning of the Christian era), ex¬
perienced a wave of religious enthusiasm, a recurrence
of which Spengler detected in Western culture from
1800 AD. Such parallels are valuable, but others, absent
from Spengler's "model", contradict them. For exam¬
ple, around 200 BC the ancient Mediterranean world,
in harmony with the Indian, Chinese and pre-
Columbian worlds, was experiencing a moralistic and
religious wave that swept over all humanity. Similarly,
around 1800, the Western world was not unique; the
religious renewal of that period was not only Catholic
and Protestant, but Orthodox, Islamic, Hindu and
Buddhist as well.
Spengler's model was adapted and improved by
Arnold Toynbee (1889-1975). He added to it the theory
of creative challenge and cultural response, whose pos¬
sibilities are far from having been fully exploited by
social scientists. He rid it of much of the emphasis on
decadence and cultural polycentrism which Spengler
had taken to absurd lengths in his Der Untergang des
Abendlandes (1918-1922; The Decline of the West,
1926-1928).
In his major work, the twelve-volume Study ofHis¬
tory (1934-1961), as well as in some of his other books,
Toynbee propounded a kind of progressionism that
was heedful of convergences of human thought, even
at times of its worldwide synchronism at the universal
turning-points of history. After the Second World War,
however, Toynbee the philosopher of history became
more and more Toynbee the historian and his interest
iii historical universals declined. It is thus difficult
tp speak in the full sense of a "Toynbee model" of
universal history.
Guiseppe Ferrari, universalist
If we are looking for a model of universal history
that attempts to portray the usually barely visible, com¬
monly unsuspected "identity of mankind", that brings
out the unity of the "noösphere" (the wholly human
area of conscious thought) in its structures and
rhythms, that aspires to give a picture of the "human
norm" across the ages, with all its qualitative and quan¬
titative fluctuations, then it is to Guiseppe Ferrari
(1811-1876) that we should turn. Considered in Italy
to be an important social thinker but unknown in
France despite the fact that he lived there for twenty
years, Ferrari published two books that are now vir¬
tually completely forgotten: "The History of State
Politics" (1860), in which he expressed his intuitive
belief in the convergence and temporal coincidence of
world events, and "China and Europe" (1867), in
which he developed this theme.
Similar ideas are to be found in the writings of
other authors of the period: in Antoine-Augustin
Cournot's Traité de l'enchaînement des idéesfondamen¬
tales dans les sciences et dans l'histoire (1861; "The Links
between Fundamental Concepts in the Sciences and in
History"), in which he urged the need for a compara¬
tive history describing the "strange analogies and tem¬
poral coincidences" to be found in Chinese and
European history; in Ernest Renan's Vie defésus (1863;
Life offesus, 1869), in which he affirms that "history
is full of strange temporal coincidences as a result of
which, with no communication between them, widely
separated groups of human beings come simultaneously
to share almost identical ideas and perceptions"; in the
works of Sir Edward Tylor, anthropologist, Quaker
and apostle of brotherly love, who set out in 1855 in
"The Red Tree" (1908-1910),
by the Dutch artist Piet
Mondrian (1872-1944).
ROBERT BONNAUD,
French historian, teaches
the history and theory of
history at the University of
Paris VII. His publications
include Le système de
l'histoire (Fayard, Paris,
1989) and contributions to
the Hachette Atlas
historique (1986).
41

42
search of the "correspondences" that exist between the
peoples of the world.
Did not the prophet-historian Michelet himself,
from 1825 to 1826, put forward the idea that, since the
history of the world was a "system", we should study
what had happened throughout the world at given mo¬
ments in the pastthe idea, in other words, of basing
a "truly universal history" on worldwide, time-based
cross-sections of history? Did he not also write in La
Bible de l'humanité (1864; "The Bible of Humanity")
that a universal history should give men "the sense of
a common, fraternal past", the feeling that "men have
always thought, felt and loved in the same way"?
Though Ferrari died before the turn of the century,
his ideas are present in the work of certain twentieth-
century writers. In Die Neuentstehende Welt (1927;
"The Burgeoning World"), by the German philo¬
sopher Hermann von Keyserling, contemporaries are
seen as "partial and complementary expressions of
a higher unity"; in one of his biographies, Vie de
Vivekananda, Romain Rolland views separate histories
as "branches of a single tree, which together share the
changes of the seasons". These ideas are also present
in the works of certain authors of universal histories,
such as H.G. Wells' The Outline ofHistory (1920), and
Pierre de Coubertin's Histoire universelle (1926-1927;
"Universal History"). In Vom Ursprung und Ziel der
Geschichte (1949; The Origin and Goal ofHistory, 1953),
Karl Jaspers added the notion of the "axial period"
(roughly 600 to 200 BC) during which time, through¬
out Eurasia, thanks to an exceptional surge of inven¬
tion and innovation, the cultural future of the greater
part of humanity was determined.
Ferrari's ideas are also to be seen in attempts to
produce comparative histories of art (Elie Faure), world
philosophies (Paul Masson-Oursel), world literatures
(René Etiemble), and in the thinking of many impor¬
tant historians, both general historians and orientalists,
such as Karl Polanyi, Marshall Hodgson, Lewis
Mumford, Jan Romein, Gaston Roupnel, Fernand
Braudel, René Grousset, Joseph Needham, Jean
Filliozat and Jacques Berque.
Similar concepts are evoked by those observers
who note with surprise that different or even opposed
cultural and geopolitical areas appear to move in the
same direction, experiencing upsurges and stagnation
at identical periods and that, despite disparities in the
form and degree of change, taken together they provide
a mean of planetary significance, curves on the graph
of progress that are applicable to all humanity, turning-
points that affect the entire noösphere.
Obstacles to be overcome
Nevertheless, the "Ferrari model"the systematic
search for universal rhythms and world turning-
pointshas yet to be applied and there are many ob¬
stacles to its application. The backward state of Western
historical studies on non-Western peoples is one.
"Common sense", of the kind that observes that the
Sun goes round the Earth and that plant life has no
connection with animal life, is another and more
serious obstacle. This kind of "common sense" admits,
the moment that there is some form of contact or
influence transmitted between the histories unfolding
at the four corners of the Earth, that there may be
resemblances between them. Thanks to the "global
village" effect and television screens, history becomes
universal.
It must, however, be acknowledged that long
before the modern media, before the geographical dis¬
coveries of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and
the beginnings of the world market, quantitative and
qualitative planetary rhythms existed in the wholly
human world of thought. To my mind, these plane¬
tary rhythms are evidenced in the three areas that make
up this world: that of high level creativity, invention
and thought in the strictest sense of the term; that of
structural change (political, technical, economic and
cultural), of innovation and pioneering activities; and,
finally, that of consolidation, standardization, expan¬
sion and action.
From 1300 to 200 BC, inventive, innovative power
was manifest in the Mediterranean countries (the
Greeks, from Mycene to the Roman conquest), in the
kingdoms of China (from the Yin and the Zhou to the
extinction of the latter and the triumph of the Qin)
and in India. It has recently been discovered, however,
that this power, which has given rise to such expres¬
sions as "the Greek miracle", the "axial period" of his¬
tory and the "lighthouse" of the future, was also an
attribute of the Olmecs of pre-Columbian America.
Today, specialists also date to the same period the emer¬
gence in the Pacific of the Polynesian civilization. For
this period, then, we have two additional, contem¬
porary "miracles". This gives us a better grasp of the
overall explanatory value of examination and cross-
comparison of epochs, of successive human mean
achievement levels.
Another obstacle lies in the fact that whereas his¬
tory is more or less universal, development is more or
less uneven, according to the moment selected. The
world spread of positive innovation varies as does the
range of time-based coincidental convergence. Prehis¬
tory (up to about 3000 BC) was more universal than
historical timesprogress was more evenly spread (the
strength of the evidence now forces us to accept that
the neolithic age originated from multiple points of
departure).
Historical times can be divided into three major
periods: ancient-medieval (from 3000 BC to the
fifteenth century), modern (from the fifteenth century
to the beginning of the twentieth century), and con¬
temporary (which began at about the time of the First
World War). The least universal of these was the second
period (the one, oddly enough, in which the world
market was created), during which almost all impor¬
tant, positive developments occurred in Western
Europe, North America and Japan.
For all that, worldwide parallels and synchronic,
coincident developments continued; they were merely
less obvious. From about 1630 to 1800, China, like the
West, experienced a phase that was more rationalist
than the one that preceded it. The English revolution
of the seventeenth century and the American and
French revolutions of the eighteenth century were not
the only events of this nature to occur in the world,
but they were exceptional in character. This modern
period was very "Western". For four and a half cen¬
turies, great achievements in thought and action were
concentrated in one corner of the globeand for this
reason seemed all the more brilliant and dazzling. But
this remains a unique stage in world history.
The last obstacle to the application of the "Ferrari
model" of history is by no means the least. To be able
to describe the universal turning-points of history, for
them to be revealed and accepted as such, historians
need a theory which is able to determine the unvarying
common elements associated with such turning-points
and which jostle for dominance. Inspired but prema¬
ture, the "Ferrari model" lacks such a theory. Without
an understanding of these few dozen elements and the
countless combinations to which they can give rise,
it is impossible to pin-point the novel quality of an
epoch and to recognize its relative homogeneity
throughout the world in terms of simultaneous changes
of direction in human progress.
Despite the many approaches that have been tried,
it would appear that twentieth-century historians are
still struggling to define the prerequisites of an authentic
universal history. The most important of these precon¬
ditions is full recognition of the existence of world
rhythms. To achieve this goal we shall have to stop
concentrating on the study of a limited section of
humanity, renounce specificity and open history up
to its universal reality.
From top to bottom:
Baule mask, Côte d'Ivoire.
Black polished wood.
Ceremonial mask, pre-
Columbian Chancay
culture, central Peru. Baked
clay painted in three
colours, c. 1100 AD.
Beaten iron mask from
Gaul. 1st century AD.
Bronze Buddha. Thailand,
15th-16th century.
