African history finds its voice
BY BOGUMIL JEWSIEWICKI
ANDV.Y.MUDIMBE
Above, a griot (poet,
musician and story-teller)
of the Senufo people,
Côte d'Ivoire.
Opposite page, young
visitors in the museum at
Jos, Nigeria.
40
AJVEN relatively recently, the history of black
Africa existed for non-Africans only in the form
of writings by the European conquerors. Today
it has become a discipline in its own right. No
one would now dare claim, as scholars were still
doing at the middle of this century, that although
Africa may have a past, it does not have a history
because written evidence is lacking. These scho¬
lars believed that the societies of black Africa had
no grasp of time, a "technical" incapacity which
was bound to marginalize even further a conti¬
nent which, according to Hegel, was not a histor¬
ical part of the world.
This exclusion from Judeo-Christian historic¬
ity, which, like monotheism, set itself up as the
universal norm of reason, profoundly influenced
the thinking of Western-educated African intellec¬
tuals in the 1950s and 1960s who struggled in the
name of African dignity for what they had been
expressly denied: the right to universality, and
hence the recognition of the African contribu¬
tion to humanity. A growing awareness of Afri¬
can achievements in the arts was accompanied by
a realization that the continent had a history
which implied a factual reconstruction of the
African past.
African intellectuals drew much of their in¬
spiration from the blacks of the diaspora who,
in their fight for the recognition of their own hu¬
manity, had devoted themselves to a search for
antiquities relating to blacks in the West. They
were essentially trying to establish the legitimacy
of black humanity within the concept of culture
formulated by the thinkers of the Enlightenment
on the basis of Greco-Roman and Judeo-Christian
ideas. This combat was bound to expose the fal¬
sity of the Hegelian philosophy of history.
Collecting and comparing a mass
of oral and written data
The Senegalese thinker Cheikh Anta Diop issued
a Hegelian riposte when he put forward the
theory that the origins of the West can be traced
to pharaonic Egypt, which was essentially a black
civilization. Like several other leading African in¬
tellectuals of that period, Diop was astonishingly
faithful to Hegel. The pioneers of the academic
history of black Africa, Ade Ajayi and Joseph
Ki-Zerbo, have depicted colonialism as a
"parenthesis" in African history, a kind of des¬
cent into hell which is fit only for oblivion. They
see the future of Africa as rooted in a glorious
past, traced back to pharaonic Egypt by Cheikh
Anta Diop, and to a less distant pre-colonial
period, by Ki-Zerbo and Ajayi.
The concept of négritude formulated by Aimé
Césaire and Leopold Senghor led the West and
the world at large to a recognition of black Afri¬
can cultures, in the wake of which historians set
out to demonstrate the historicity of African so¬
cieties. Tensions arose between academic histori¬
ans of Africa and those such as Cheikh Anta Diop
who had a philosophical perception of the past,
but they all believed that writing on the past
should be dovetailed into a political philosophy
for the present. Academic historians saw this
philosophy in terms of nation-states. Diop and
the historians of the diaspora dreamt of a unitary
state.
In the three decades between 1950 and 1980,
African history became established as an academic
discipline and gave privileged treatment to the
state as a historical subject. Today there are two
basic works in the field, Unesco's General Histo¬
ry ofAfrica and the Cambridge History ofAfrica.
In a single generation, academic knowledge of
Africa has become part of the story of humanity.
There has been a far-reaching effort to collect and
translate oral testimony relating to the past of
hundreds of African societies and to compare this
information with written data from Western and
Islamic cultures. As a result and thanks to the
development of archaeology, linguistics and new
technical facilities, and to the imagination and
rigour of researchers faced with the chronological
fluctuations of the oral tradition, we now pos¬
sess an immense amount of factual information
about the African past.
Good popular works have also been
produced, notably those written in French by I.
Kake and E. M'Bokolo, while Unesco is planning
to publish an abridged version of the General His¬
tory ofAfrica and to have it translated into Afri¬
can languages. However, as a general rule the
results of academic research have still not been


42
incorporated into the teaching of history in
Africa, a situation aggravated by the crisis of book
publishing and distribution there.
Close collaboration
between historians,
anthropologists and linguists
The use of oral traditions, while not exclusive to
African historiography, has given this form of
evidence academic legitimacy and contributed to
the development of a methodology in which the
historian Jan Vansina was and still is a pioneer.
Analysis of these traditions, right from the start,
required historians, anthropologists and linguists
to work closely together. It tended to reduce com-
partmentalization between these disciplines and
led a number of researchers to accept the an¬
thropological concept of the "ethnographic
present". The result was the creation of an ar¬
tificial division of the African past, with coloni¬
zation as the watershed. Precolonial history was
presented as the crucible of authentic African ex¬
perience and colonial history was neglected or
treated as an interlude of acculturation and domi¬
nation. From the concept of the "ethnographic
present" there also grew the idea, today no longer
current, that black Africa was a living museum
of human evolution.
The notion that oral traditions are not
worthy of attention, or even that they only ex¬
isted in the colonial period, is false and possibly
dangerous. It is akin to the equally erroneous idea
that African societies completely lost control over
their destiny during the colonial period. Such
thinking has given rise to the myth that the
urbanized African is a cultural misfit and only
the "traditional" rural African is a true African.
This and other myths have had a profound effect
on the scientific study of African history. Aca¬
demic institutions and individual scholars have
written accounts of the traditions of African states
and the courts of important chiefs. A sense of
urgency has invariably pushed them towards
Excavations at Jénné in
Mali, on the site of an
ancient trading centre.
BOGUMIL JEWSIEWICKI,
of Canada, teaches history
at Laval University
(Canada). He is the author
of African Historiographies:
What History for Which
Africa? (Sage Publications,
London, 1986).
V.Y. MUDIMBE,
of Zaïre, is professor of
romance languages and
comparative literature
at Duke University
(United States).
the oldest tradition because, as the saying goes,
"Whenever an old man dies, a library dis¬
appears".
There was thus a tendency to give promi¬
nence to the documentary aspect of orally trans¬
mitted history. But efforts to legitimize oral
traditions as archival documents have obscured
the fact that they are also pieces of historical dis¬
course in their own right. West African griots or
"traditionalists" at the courts of precolonial Afri¬
can kingdoms were, above all, historians.
The 1960s saw a transformation in African
historical studies as classical methods of critical
examination of sources were adapted to the anal¬
ysis of oral data. The need to prove to a largely
sceptical world that the concept of African his¬
tory was valid won credence for the idea that the
oral mode of preserving information, provided
that the continuity of political structures guaran¬
tees its transmission, can be as faithful to the facts
as the written word.
Historians of Africa today take a strong in¬
terest in social and a recent development
intellectual history. They are paying closer atten¬
tion to "micro-history". Through their efforts
we are learning to respect and value the continu¬
ous record of the past which African societies
have always kept. Actually, Africans have been
writing their history for centuries, ever since
Islamic culture gave them the Arabic alphabet,
an instrument adopted by scholars who became
integrated into the life and culture of Sahelian
Africa.
There, as elsewhere in the continent, Africans
speak, sing, dramatize (through dance, poetry,
puppet theatre), sculpt and paint their history.
Like other peoples, they have always had a grasp
of their past. Their historical narratives which
respect the facts are set in an explanatory and
aesthetic framework which makes sense of the
past and links it to the present and the future.
In this way a useful, authentic and credible dis¬
course has come into being and found its place
in world history.
Let us accept the contribution of black "hu¬
manity" to the making of our common history.
Egypt was not only an African civilization, it was
a black civilization, as early humanity seems also
to have been. St. Augustine, like many later
scholars, belonged to the culture of a racially mixed
population. It is now possible to bring a more
balanced viewpoint to bear on African history
and the historiography of African societies.
We now know that academic history, which
until recently glorified the written word on
which it was based, is not the only valid method.
Oral history also has its own time-honoured
criteria and forms of logic for interpreting the
past. Why then should we feel obliged to value
it merely as archive material awaiting the scruti¬
ny of the modern historian?
