Ancient
Egypt
In the
to maintain
.1
equilibrium
of the
universe

Precincts of eternity
BY JEAN-CLAUDE GOLVIN
'1PYMY* Y-^iill % I
A HE sites of Pharaonic temples were chosen in
accordance with a tradition whose origins are
sometimes lost in the mists of time. The great
temple of Amon-Re at Karnak, for instance,
marked the spot where the first mound emerged
from the waters of noun (the primordial ocean),
a pointed knoll which the god Amon caused to
rise at the beginning of the world and around
which he continued to shape his creation. The
very name of the god {Imm, Amon) means "the
hidden one", in other words, he who might
assume any shape or size and who was present
in the inmost depths of all creatures and all the
material world.
The Egyptians thought, however, that the
forces of evil, over which the god alone could tri¬
umph, could not be defeated once and for all. It
was therefore vital to encourage Amon to fight
them constantly and regularly to perform anew
his act of creation. Such was the underlying sig¬
nificance of the devotions offered to him in all
the temples. Through suitable offerings, made at
the proper times and under ritual conditions laid
down in detail, an attempt was made to keep the
god in the frame of mind needed to ensure that
the universe remained in a state of balance.
A tiny part of the divine substance was con¬
centrated in a small gold statuette barely more
than a cubit high (52 cm), placed in a kind of
monolithic granite shrine (the naos) capped by
a pyramidal form and provided with wooden
shutters which could be opened. The Egyptian
temple was not a place of worship where
large numbers of the faithful could gather, but
god's home on Earth, a dark and mysterious
dwelling accessible only to officiating priests and
to the first among them, the Pharaoh, who
enjoyed the rare privilege of being able to gaze
upon the god's face.
The most important part of the temple,
where the tremendous energy needed to uphold
creation (the divine statuette) was stored, was also,
paradoxically, the smallest part. The successive
monumental encasements in which it was set
were intended to protect it from any aggression
or harmful influence. The statuette and the naos,
which served as the first encasement, were located
in a small dark chamber, the sanctuary. They
were flanked by the private apartments of the god
which possessed all the attributes of a sumptuous
palace and where he lived and reigned like an
earthly king. The only function of the priests was
to be his faithful servants.
The god was worshipped daily just as though
he were a person of flesh and blood. Ritual acts,
chants and prayers accompanied the various parts
of this recurring ceremonial. In the morning the
officiating priest broke the clay seal affixed at the
end of the previous day. He thus released the cord
that held the wooden shutters closed, affording
access to the divine statue. He then proceeded to
wash and dress the god and to ensure throughout
the day that the necessary offerings of food were
made to him. The god was believed to feast on
the essence of these provisions which were sub¬
sequently sent to the royal altars and then to the
Low-relief carving In the
temple of queen Hatshepsut,
Karnak, shows the ruler
kneeling as she moulds the
first brick of the edifice.
Right, artist's reconstruction
of the great temple of Amon-
Re, Karnak.
Left, the pylon erected by
Ramses II at the temple of
Amon-Re, Luxor. Before it are
two colossal statues of the
royal dynasty and an obelisk.
J3^"
Í3Y ^ 'JS& I

16
priests, for whom more material forms of satis¬
faction were appropriate.
Many other temples in Egypt, including the
famous temple at Luxor, were dedicated to
Amon. How could the same god, who was
proclaimed to be unique in hymns and prayers,
be in several different places at the same instant?
To the Egyptians there was no contradiction
here. In reality, the statues of Amon placed in
the heart of the sanctuaries served simply as
points of "concentration" and "emergence" for
this omnipresent god.
Some cities also honoured other gods, but
their temples have not been so well preserved. The
great sanctuary of Heliopolis, dedicated to Re, has
been almost entirely destroyed, while those of
Ptah at Memphis or Thoth at Hermopolis, which
have greatly suffered from erosion, cannot com¬
pete with the impressive ruins at Karnak.
Karnak, a dynastic temple
The temple of Amon-Re at Karnak was probably
founded in the twentieth century BC, during the
reign of Sesostris I (1971-1929 BC). It steadily
grew in size, ending up as a colossal complex of
buildings forming a four-sided figure measuring
600 metres from corner to corner. It assumed
such proportions and underwent so many
metamorphoses because it became the great
dynastic temple of Egypt to which each Pharaoh
came to find the source of his legitimacy. Hardly
had he assumed office than the new sovereign had
a building put up for his divine father, Amon,
in order to secure further benefits from him. A
system of give-and-take was thus established
between the god and the king, which under¬
pinned the country's stability. Each monument,
which was first and foremost an offering, might
very well be destroyed in the next reign by a king
who wished in his turn to perform a notable act.
The dismantled stones were used again in new
monuments.
Karnak is thus the product of a long history
of destructions, additions and alterations, and its
foundations and thick walls are consequently
made up of thousands of stone blocks, scattered
around and jumbled together. These are patiently
being restored to their former positions and
studied by archaeologists seeking to reconstitute
the original form of the vanished monuments.
A form which, in itself, has nothing special
about it: all the temples of ancient Egypt resem¬
bled one another. In front of the sanctuary were
rooms paved with huge flagstones. At the
entrance to the hypostyle (pillared) halls set along
the main axis of the temple there were great stone
doors framed by two massive towers symbolizing
the two mountains at the confines of the land of
Egypt: the Arabian chain in the east and the
Libyan chain in the west. The doors and towers
together formed a structure known as a pylon
which marked the boundaries of a sacred place.
Before the doorways huge wooden poles were
adorned with banners that waved in the wind,
revealing the movements of the "divine breath"
through the world.
The general orientation of the temples was
also a matter of deliberate choice. The main axis
of the temple of Amon-Re followed the east-west
course of the sun. It was intersected by a second
perpendicular axis, running from south to north
like the Nile. This royal axis, followed only by
solemn processions, consisted of a series of court¬
yards and pylons preceded by colossal statues of
the royal dynasty, which expressed in material
form the eternal presence of the sovereign in the
temple.
The way in which scenes were set out on the
walls was patterned on the world in which the
Egyptians lived. The bottom was bordered by
geographical sequences in which the Nile gods
alternated with the goddesses of the countryside
Right, gold-plated shrine
(naos) from the tomb of
Tutankhamen.
Far right, replica of a naos
made for a recent exhibition.
Ancient Egyptian texts record
that such shrines contained a
cult statuette of Amon-Re.
Below, the temple of Khons,
the moon god, at Karnak. A
series of doors led to the
sanctuary, before which stood
an altar to receive votive
offerings.

JEAN-CLAUDE GOLVIN,
of France, is a research
director at the French National
Centre for Scientific Research
(CNRS). He is currently director
of the Franco-Egyptian Centre
at Karnak and of the CNRS
permanent mission in Egypt.
His publications include Les
bâtisseurs de Karnak (with
Jean-Claude Goyon, 1987) and
Amphithéâtres et gladiateurs
(with Christian Landes, 1990)
and figures symbolizing the different administra¬
tive districts of the country, known as nomes.
The ceiling was decorated with motifs inspired
by astral themes: stars, constellations, zodiacs or
representations of the sun's celestial course within
the body of the goddess of the sky, Nut.
A precise system of symbols
The bas-reliefs on the walls indicated the func¬
tion of each room. Divinities and plants that were
emblematic of the north (the Nile delta, Lower
Egypt) were placed on the northern side and
those relating to the south (the Nile valley or
Upper Egypt) on the southern side. Along the
axis of the high cornices projecting out from over
the doors the disk of the sun could be seen, pro¬
tected by two upright cobras facing in opposite
directions. The sun's celestial course was por¬
trayed by the unfolding of two large wings. Inside
the rooms were religious scenes depicting the
essential ritual acts that were accomplished with
the participation of divinities, the king and
priestsofferings, processions, acts of consecra¬
tion, acts performed on the occasion of corona¬
tions or jubilees. On the outside, scenes were
portrayed that showed the exploits achieved
during the reign: the slaughtering of enemies, con¬
quests and battles.
The founding of a temple was marked by
ceremonies in which the succession of building
operations was accompanied by symbolic acts.
Many scenes depict the king marking out the
layout of the temple with string, scooping out
the first furrow with a hoe, purifying the foun¬
dations with natron, laying the cornerstones with
the help of a lever and finally presenting the
dwelling to his master, Amon-Re.
The temple was thus ushered into existence
like a living being. In one corner of the temple
a "foundation deposit" was buried. This was a
collection of objects comprising scale models of
tools, representations of offerings (glazed earthen¬
ware lettuces, ox legs and heads and sacrificed
geese) and briquettes marked with the name of
the king who had founded the temple. These
deposits are a boon to archaeologists as they serve
as the equivalent of birth certificates, enabling
them to assign a date to the building of a temple.
Other temples formed part of a complex
designed to ensure the dead Pharaoh's survival
in the hereafter. Human beings were considered
by the ancient Egyptians to have several compo¬
nents: the body, which was the material covering
of the human spirit (which was mummified in
an attempt to preserve it), but also the Ba (the
soul), the Akh (the immortal principle), the
shadow and the Ka (the life-force). The Ka of the
king was the very embodiment of his royal rank,
of the indestructible, cosmic part of his being, and
after his death joined up with that of his divine
ancestors.
The pyramid was associated with the royal
tomb, both in its form, which was a symbolic
reminder of the original mound and hence of the
birth of the world, and through its alignment
with the four cardinal points with, inside or out¬
side as the case may be, its flights of steps. It
thereby enabled the king to ascend to heaven, or
in other words to eternity. Continually reborn
like the morning star which rises every day in the
east, he was then assured of living for "millions
of years". 17
