THE SACRED TREES OF MADAGASCAR
BY VOAHANGY RAJAONAH
42
Ihe people of Madagascar believe
that a place without trees is a place
of infertility and death. A source of
food and wealth, trees are also
inhabited by invisible forces with
which human beings must come to
terms.
The amontana and the aviavy,
which are related to the sycamore
and the fig-tree, are royal trees. They
symbolize the life-force and epitomize
power. Their flowers blossom and
bear fruit before their leaves, which
appear only when the fruit is ripe, as
though to protect it from the sun.
According to the elda^Jto reveal
one's fruit and then conceal it
beneath graceful foliage is the pre¬
eminent sign of royalty, which openly
proclaims its designs for the good of
the people, but then conceals them
modestly because they are sacred.
The king's tree
King Andriamanelo is thought to
have been the first to plant these
trees in his realm of Alasora, one of
the twelve sacred hills of the Merina
people. He made them a symbol of
royalty and would not allow them to
be planted anywhere but in the resi¬
dences of kings or their representa¬
tives. He liked to say that the fruit of
the aviavy left a bitter taste on the
tongue, which then turned sweet.
"May my kingdom," he said, "have
this sweet aftertaste."
In Betsileo country, in the centre
of Madagascar, when a king was en¬
throned an aviavy tree was planted
to the east of his house, and when
he died, his funeral ceremony took
place beneath it. The royal family
would then plant seedlings belonging
to the same variety or produced
by the original tree in order to per¬
petuate the memory of the dead king
and symbolize his survival through his
succession.
The hasina, or "dragon tree",
has an important position in the
mythology of northern Madagascar,
on the east coast and in the high¬
lands. The very name of this tree is
synonymous with spirituality and
especially with saintliness. It is con¬
nected with the cult practised by the
earliest inhabitants of the island, the
Vazimba, who are feared and conse¬
quently venerated by the population.
Hasinas grow in the areas where the
Vazimba used to live, or near their
tombs, and the local people would
not uproot or desecrate them for any¬
thing in the world.
Unlike the amontana or the
aviavy, the hasina grows near the
dwellings of kings and ordinary folk
alike. It legitimizes the authority of
the head of the household or of the
village who plants it to the north-east
of his dwelling, in the sacred plot
reserved for the ancestors. As a
general rule, the north is considered
to be a noble and auspicious direc¬
tion; it is linked to water, which sym¬
bolizes purity, life and prosperity.
On the north-east coast, among
the Betsimisaraka people, the man-
drorofo represents the permanence
of life by virtue of its longevity, which
is comparable to that of the oak or
the sequoia. According to legend the
mandrorofo, traditionally planted at
the entrance to villages, is the
primeval tree brought by the ances¬
tors from distant Indonesia and is
thus the repository of the past. Since

Left, in northern Madagascar, a
mourner pours a libation on a
stone erected to the memory of a
dead kinsman. A sapling of the
venerated hasina or "dragon tree"
can be seen in right foreground.
Right, baobab trees (Adansonia
digitata), Madagascar. Centre, a
Malagasy youth begs forgiveness
after offending his ancestors,
whose spirits dwell in the sacred
tree. By laying his hands on the
youth's head, the ritual master
helps him communicate with the
ancestor spirits. Below, silhouetted
against a glowing tropical sky, a
young villager of southern
Madagascar.
it came with the ancestors, surely it
must be considered an ancestor it¬
self? And since it still survives, it also
casts its shadow into the future.
The bamboo, also considered a
tree, represents the family. The young
shoots that grow at its foot all year
long stand for posterity, a paramount
concern of the Malagasy people, who
attach the highest importance to the
perpetuation of their name and of
their line. As an evergreen, the bam¬
boo symbolizes eternal youth, the
dream of all human beings. Its
slender stem thrusting up towards
the sky is the very image of beauty.
Because they are sacred, trees
also possess protective qualities. In
stock-raising areas, where a man's
wealth is measured by the size of his
herd, the zebu pen is placed beneath
the protection of a tree, usually a
hasina, which is always planted in the
north-east. This practice is supposed
to protect the herd against disease
and theft. A would-be thief who
enters the enclosure will not be able
to get the animals out and will him¬
self remain a prisoner. The mere
presence of the tree is enough to dis¬
suade him from going in.
A tropical country, Madagascar
is subject to spectacular storms which
often cause fires. Formerly, when
stone was used only for tombs, dwell¬
ings made of plant fibres would burst
into flame at the slightest spark. As
a protective measure, a lendemy tree
(literally, "which makes mild") would
be planted within the village precincts
to keep away lightning.
Trees are also the refuge of
spirits. In the south of Madagascar
the kily (a tamarind tree) and the bao¬
bab are reputed to be inhabited by
what the ¡slanders call "things", in¬
definable spirits that are widely vener¬
ated because they are reputed to be
evil.
These spirits may be released by
the trees that hold them captive,
especially at nightfall when it is inad¬
visable to go near them. If there is no
alternative, the best ploy is to put a
blade of grass at the foot of the tree
or tie together three blades of the
grass growing beside it.
Trees that harbour spirits can be
recognized by the bottles of toaka (a
local alcohol) placed beneath them
and by the strips of cloth hanging
from their branches or wound
around their trunk.
Other trees are venerated be¬
cause they have been witness to an
exceptional event which has left its
mark on the popular imagination. In
Tanosy country in the south-east of
Madagascar, a kily is held to be
sacred if there has been a spectacular
case of healing or an apparition in its
vicinity, if an important person has
rested in its shade, or, in more recent
times, if ¡t has caused the death of
the passengers of a car that has
crashed into it. Funeral processions
stop beneath the kily just long
enough to prepare and eat a meal:
the tree is thus regarded as the last
earthly resting-place of the dead
person, united with the community.
The kily and the baobab produce
edible fruit. The fruit of the baobab
in particular is an important source
of food in southern and south¬
western Madagascar. However, even
in periods of scarcity, it is strictly for¬
bidden to pick and eat fruit from
sacred trees. Anyone who defies this
rule will suffer misfortune or even
death. The same punishment awaits
those who dare to defile or fell sacred
trees or lop their branches
It is hard not to draw a parallel
with the Garden of Eden and the
archetypal ¡mage of the Tree of Life,
which man can never know because
he tasted the forbidden fruit.
VOAHANGY RAJAONAH,
Malagasy geographer, is a lecturer at
the University of Madagascar and
permanent representative at Unesco of
the Société Africaine de Culture, a
non-governmental organization. An
editor of the French magazine
Présence Africaine, she has published
a number of articles on the geography
and civilization of black Africa.
43
