ïïie serene pleasure of speed BY FRANÇOISE SAGAN
Extract from Avec mon meilleur souvenir, © Gallimard, Paris, 1984.
he tempi of speed are not those of music. In
a symphony it is neither the allegro, the vivace
nor the furioso that corresponds to 200
kilometres an hour, but the andante, a slow,
majestic movement, a kind of plateau you get
to when you go beyond a certain speed, where
the car no longer resists or accelerates, where,
on the contrary, it lets itself go, the body too,
in a kind of wideawake, alert daze which is
usually described as intoxicating. It happens on
deserted roads at night, and occasionally in the
daytime when you are miles from anywhere.
It happens at moments when words like "pro¬
hibited", "safety first", "insurance", "hospital"
and "death" cease to have any meaning, their
sense annulled by a simple word which men
have always used when describing a silver rac¬
ing car or a chestnut horse: the word "speed".
This is a speed at which something inside one¬
self transcends something outside, a moment
when reckless violence erupts from a machine
or an animal running wild, and is barely con¬
trolled by the intelligence, the senses, skill-
sensuality tooat any rate not controlled
enough to prevent it from becoming a pleas¬
ure, perhaps a deadly pleasure. How odious is
this age of ours, when risk, the unpredictable,
the unreasonable are constantly rejected, con¬
fronted with figures, deficits, calculations; a
wretched age in which people are forbidden to
kill themselves not because of the incalculable
value of their souls but because of the calcu¬
lated price of their carcasses.
In fact a car, his own car, gives the person
who is at the same time its master and its slave
a paradoxical sensation. He is free at last, back
at his mother's breast, in a state of primal soli¬
tude, and far, very far from any prying eyes.
Neither pedestrians, nor police, nor other
motorists, nor the woman who waits for him,
nor life which does not wait, can dislodge him
from his car, the only possession, after all, in
which for an hour a day he can again return to
the physical state of solitude, as when he was
born. And if, in addition, the waves of traffic part
before his car like those of the Red Sea before
the Hebrews, if the red lights become fewer,
then disappear altogether, and the road starts
to vibrate and murmur at the pressure of his
foot on the accelerator, if the wind rages
through the door, if every corner is a threat and
a surprise and if every kilometre is a small vic¬
tory, then is it surprising that mild bureaucrats
marked out for brilliant careers should execute
a beautiful pirouette and, a jumble of iron,
gravel and blood, make a final plunge to earth
and a final rejection of their futures? These
somersaults are described as accidental, it is
said that the victims were distracted, they had
something on their minds people totally miss
the point, which is this sudden, unfathomable
and irresistible encounter between a body and
its mind, the joining of an existence to the sud¬
denly luminous idea of that existence: "What,
who am I? I am myself, I live; I live like this. I
go at 90 kilometres an hour in town, 110 on
the main roads, 130 on the motorway, 600 in
my head and 3 in my body, in obedience to all
the laws of the constabulary, of society and of
despair. What are these ill-adjusted rules which
have surrounded me since childhood? What is
this speed imposed on the course of my life,
my one and only life?..."
But here we are getting away from pleas¬
ure, from speed considered as a pleasure,
which is ultimately the best definition. Let's say
at once, like Morand, like Proust, like Dumas,
that it's not an impure, diffuse or shameful
pleasure. Going too fast is a precise, exultant
and almost serene pleasure, leaving behind the
safety of a car and the road it takes, slipping
the bonds of earth, and perhaps one's own
reflexes. And let's say too that it is definitely
not a question of passing a self-imposed test,
an idiotic challenge to one's own talent, it is not
a contest between self and self nor a victory
over a personal handicap, it is rather a kind of
light-hearted bet between pure luck and one¬
self. When you go fast, there is a moment when
everything starts to float in this iron canoe in
which you are on the razor's edge, on the crest
of the wave, hoping that the current, not your
skill, will keep you from capsizing. Love of speed
has nothing to do with sport. Just as speed has
something in common with gambling and
chance, so it does with living happily and con¬
sequently with the vague hope of dying which
is always part of a happy life. Ultimately, that
is all I believe to be true: speed is neither a sign,
nor a proof, nor a provocation, nor a challenge,
but an upsurge of happiness.
FRANÇOISE SAGAN, French writer (b. 1935). Her works
translated into English include Bonjour Tristesse (1954), A
Certain Smile (1957), Wonderful Clouds (1960), Unmade Bed
(1977) and Painted Lady (1981). 15
