From fantasy
to
functionalism
BY ANDREAS LEHNE
I
Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer,
by Gustav Klimt, 1907.
N 1895, a German specialist in Oriental art
named Samuel Bing (1838-1905) opened a gallery
in Paris which he called "L'Art Nouveau".
Among the modern artists whose works he
showed were Henry van de Velde, Louis Com¬
fort Tiffany, Félix Vallotton and Constantin
Meunier.
These works were praised in the German
press, and some of them were shown in Dresden
in 1897 at an international art exhibition at which
van de Velde's interior designs caused a sensation.
Van de Velde, who was soon inundated with
commissions, became the driving force behind
Jugendstil, the German version of Art Nouveau.
Jugendstil in Munich
However, it was Munich, not Dresden, which
became the main centre from which the influence
of Jugendstil would spread in Germany. A rela¬
tively small city, Munich had become the leading
artistic centre of nineteenth-century Germany
thanks to the ambitious policies of the Wittels-
bachs, the Bavarian ruling house. In 1893, the 27

. £: x-.:.~.
riin.i lÉiÉiiini
Entrance to the Vienna
Secession House, by Joseph
Maria Olbrich, 1898-1899.
28
ANDREAS LEHNE, Austrian
art historian, works with the
Austrian National Office of
Historical Monuments. He has
published several works on 19th-
and 20th-century art.
Munich public discovered the works of the Dutch
Symbolist painter and illustrator Jan Toorop
(1858-1928), who displayed his mastery of the
new style in the sinuous locks of the Javanese girls
who feature in many of his paintings.
Hermann Obrist (1863-1927) was one promi¬
nent member of the new movement. In 1894, this
great traveller, familiar with all the trends of
avant-garde art, transferred to Munich the
embroidery workshop he had set up in Florence.
His embroidered wall hanging entitled Peitschen¬
hieb (1895; "Whiplash") is one of the finest
examples of German "floralism". This "brilliant
interlacing of stitches flowing over ornamental
forms like the cells of a living organism" has some
affinities with the celebrated stucco relief (now
destroyed) which embellished the façade of the
Berlin architect August Endell's Elvira photog¬
raphy studio (1897-1898), a fantastic piece of deco¬
ration which was also endowed with organic life.
Both these artists sought to vie with Nature.
The Munich painter Richard Riemerschmid
(1868-1957) revolutionized interior design
through his blend oíJugendstil and local tradition.
In 1900 his "Room for an Art Lover" was shown
at the Paris Exhibition. He designed a theatre
whose fluent, elegant lines expressed a balanced,
mature style which had not yet become purely
geometrical. Riemerschmid was one of the co-
founders of the Vereinigte Werkstätten für Kunst
im Handwerk ("Workshops for Arts and Crafts")
which set out to raise the aesthetic standard of
everyday objects but, unlike the British Arts and
Crafts Movement, fully exploited the technical
possibilities of mass production.
The reputation of Munich was based essen¬
tially on its art journals such as Pan and the
popular magazine Jugend from which the German
Art Nouveau movement took its name.
Otto Eckmann (1865-1902) gave illustration
and typography a completely new look. In his
work plant forms meld into zoomorphic or
abstract motifs, in an endless metamorphosis.
Water changes into plants and plants into swans
or snakes which then acquire human attributes.
Typographical characters are intertwined like
creepers, then transmogrified into flames and bil¬
lowing columns of smoke.
Freshness, humour and satire are the
hallmarks of these journals, partly illustrated in
colour, which propagated the ideas oí Jugendstil
with great speed. In the pages of Pan and Sim-
plizissimus artists such as Gulbransson, Arnold,
Thöny and Paul published vitriolic caricatures;
a stylized dachshund playfully drawn by Theodor
Heine is transformed into a decorative motif full
of irony.
Jugendstil in Berlin
By the turn of the century, Berlin had become
a great modern city with a vigorous cultural life
which placed it in the forefront of modern trends.
In 1898, the artistic avant-garde finally turned its
back on the outmoded cultural policy of the
imperial court. Major architectural projects
showed the influence of passing trends. Van de
Velde designed spectacular shop interiors. With
modest resources at his disposal, August Endell
redecorated the auditorium of the Buntes
Theater, creating a world of bizarre, fantastic,
organic forms in a similar style to that of his
Elvira studio. The same harmony of colours was
used throughout, even in the uniforms of the
attendants. The department stores designed by
Bernhard Sehring and Alfred Messel still bore the
influence of historicism, but some features such
as the visible structure of the display windows
and the glass surfaces into which the façade dis¬
solves, prefigure modern architecture.
Above all, Berlin offers monumental, eclectic
variants oíJugendstil, one notable example being
the law-court in the Littenstrasse (1896-1905),
with its startling contrast between the building's
colossal dimensions and its graceful staircases.
Unlike Germany, the Austro-Hungarian
Empire (although Hungary had enjoyed a large
measure of autonomy since 1867) was a multina¬
tional state subject to the centralized power of
Vienna.

The Vienna Secession
In Vienna Art Nouveau found a champion in
Otto Wagner (1841-1918), who was professor
of architecture at the Vienna Academy and a pas¬
sionate advocate of the need for an architectural
style detached from historical pastiche and
responsive to the demands of the modern age.
"Only the functional can be beautiful," he told
his students.
In the stations of the Vienna metropolitan
railway, which he was commissioned to design
in 1894, Wagner initially exploited all the graphic
resources of floralism, but soon moved towards
a more economical, functional style. He faced
his "Majolica House" with a cladding of ceramic
tiles to provide easy maintenance and a solid
appearance, deliberately limiting embellishment
to surface decoration. The influence of Art
Nouveau was totally absent from his Cubist-
style apartment blocks on the Linke Wienzeile.
The Austrian version of Art Nouveau was
created in 1897 by a group of avant-garde artists
who founded the movement known as the
Wiener Sezessionthe Vienna Secession. "This
freshly kindled flame needs an appropriate setting
to display it, a home of its own", wrote one con¬
temporary art critic. Such a building, the Haus der
Left, Samuel Bing's Art
Nouveau pavilion at the
Universal Exhibition, Paris,
1900.
Below, auditorium of the
Buntes Theater, Berlin, by
August Endell, 1901.
V
.V.NVhV.V.
.\V.7mV..i
	 -I. .Z, a.-. -,..	-	 '«
29

Wiener Sezession (the Secession House, 1898-
1899), was designed by Joseph Maria Olbrich
(1867-1908), the most gifted of Wagner's pupils.
It resembles a classical temple, but is surmounted
by a dome of golden leaves, symbolizing Art
Nouveau's break with traditional conventions.
In 1898, the Secession launched an ambitious
review, Ver Sacrum, and organized in the Seces¬
sion House successful exhibitions encompassing
all the arts. For one exhibition devoted to
Beethoven in 1902, Gustav Klimt (1862-1918), the
undisputed leader of the Secessionists, painted
frescoes inspired by the Ninth Symphony, which
was conducted for the occasion by Gustav
Mahler.
At the same exhibition, Josef Hoffmann
(1870-1956), another Secessionist and former
pupil of Otto Wagner, showed an abstract, Cubist
sculpture which, despite passing virtually unno¬
ticed at the time, heralded an important turning-
point in the history of Viennese Art Nouveau.
The age of ornamentation was coming to an
end. Following the example of Hoffmann (and
also displaying a strong Scottish influence),
geometrical forms suddenly took over. From
now on, ornamentation was only sparingly used
and priority was given to exploiting the beauty
of natural materials.
Hoffmann showed the full measure of his
talent in the residence he built in Brussels
between 1905 and 1911 for the Belgian financier
Adolphe Stockt. A total work of art, in the spirit
of Horta, the Palais Stoclet, despite a certain
luxuriance, marks the triumph of pure, unembel-
lished forms displayed to full advantage by quality
materials and fine craftsmanship.
30
Left, façade of the
Majolikahaus ("Majolica
House"), Vienna, by
Otto Wagner, 1898.
Right, detail of the
Hochzeitsturm
("Wedding Tower") at
Mathildenhöhe,
Darmstadt, by Joseph
Maria Olbrich,
1905-1908.
In a series of brilliant articles Adolf Loos
(1870-1933) attacked Jugendstil as contrary to
the very principles of modern (by which he
meant something like "hygienic") civilization.
Hostile to ornamentation, he was the pioneer of
an international urban style.
In other parts of the Austro-Hungarian
empire the use of folk imagery was seen as a
means of creating a genuinely national architec¬
ture. The Hungarian version of Jugendstil con¬
tains many references to folklore. The tension
between Viennese cosmopolitanism and national
roots was felt by many of Otto Wagner's pupils
during the inter-war period. It was most fruitfully
expressed in the work of the Slovak architect
Josef Plecnik, known as the "Slav Gaudi", who
successfully reconciled the demands of function-
alism, formal invention and inspiration from
folklore.

Darmstadt:
the rigours of form
A notable champion of new ideas in the arts,
Grand Duke Ernst Ludwig of Hesse-Darmstadt
(1868-1937) commissioned two British architects,
M. H. Baillie-Scott and C.R. Ashbee, to work on
the private apartments of his palace. Wishing to
encourage his country's arts and crafts, he invited
a number of leading modern artists to settle in
Darmstadt and work there in complete freedom,
their material needs taken care of. The colony
of artists which came into being in 1899 on
Mathildenhöhe hill near Darmstadt was thus
meant to express one of the major aspirations
of Jugendstil, the synthesis of art and life. One
member of the colony, the young Viennese
architect Olbrich, designed a "House of Work",
a "Temple" to the cult of artistic activity, as
well as the houses of all the artists except for
Peter Behrens (1868-1940) of Hamburg who
built his own. The almost crystalline limpidity
and rectilinear design of Behrens' house con¬
trasted with Olbrich's decorative approach
and aroused considerable interest. This building
marked the second, "purified", phase oí Jugend¬
stil. In Vienna, but also more generally, Jugend¬
stil now seemed to be simply a fashion, whose
commercial and industrial exploitation aroused
criticism.
Behrens was a key figure in these develop¬
ments. The former painter and illustrator of
Pan not only sealed the fate of floralism in
Germany, but soon became the pioneer of
architectural functionalism. The turbine factory
which he designed for the electrical firm A.E.G.
heralded the era of industrial architecture.
A number of architects who worked in his studio,
such as Walter Gropius, Mies van der Rohe
and Le Corbusier, later won an international
reputation.
31
