Hub
of the
Islamic
community
.
BY CHRISTIANE NAFFAH
A,LNY religious building, when a believer sets
foot in it, becomes the "centre of the universe".
The mosques that have been built over the past
thirteen centuries in countries asjîàr apart as Spain
and India are a magnificent illustration of this.
Mosques are places of worship and also, to
some degree, centres of cultural activity. A wide
range of subjects are taught in them, from the
Arabic language and the Islamic religion to law,
geography, medicine and astronomy. Their links
with authority, with powerful and devout public
figures, set them at the hub of a network of social
institutions, such as hospitals, hospices, alms¬
houses, colleges and schools.
But their location in the heart of the city, sur¬
rounded by the bazaar and its multitude of
craftsmen, the starting or culminating point of
the vast urban spiral, bears witness to their imme¬
diate, essential and universal role, which is to beat
in time with the pulse of Islamic communities in
countries all over the world.
The Five Pillars of Islam
Mosques are dedicated to prayer, the most impor¬
tant of the five obligations which constitute the
"Five Pillars of Islam". Individual prayer culmi¬
nates in the gesture by which Muslims prostrate
themselves and touch the floor with their fore¬
heads. The word "Muslim", which means "one
who submits to God", takes its significance from
this act of submission. Wherever believers may
be, they perform that act five times a day.
Collective prayer in a place of worship, with
at least forty people present, strengthens the links
between the community, the umma, which is
bound together not by ties of blood like a tribe,
but by faith. The great mosque in which these
.
m
*

The mosque
At the heart of the
b '
Islamic city, the
mosque is not
separated from
everyday life but
integrated into it
^Bst.
Above, stucco mihrab of the Masjid-i
Jum'a ("Friday mosque"), Isfahan,
Islamic Republic of Iran (1310).
Left, dome of the "Blue Mosque" of
sultan Ahmed at Istanbul, Turkey
(1609-1616).

prayers take place is known as the jami, from the
word jum'a (gathering), which also designates the
day for those prayers, Fridayium eljum'athe
day of gathering.
The prayer of the Prophet
In 622 AD, on his arrival in Medina, the Prophet
had the first mosque built so that his community
of the faithful could assemble without being dis¬
turbed. A space was cleared to form a kind of
courtyard. Walls made of sun-baked bricks were
erected on stone foundations, with three openings
framed by stone uprights. At the beginning, the
Prophet and the faithful turned towards Jerusalem
36
to pray and hence, for some time, the direction
of prayer, the qibla, continued to be perpendi¬
cular to the north wall of the building. Two rows
of palm-tree trunks supported a roof made of clay
and palm-leaves to provide shade.
This sanctuary made of earth and palm trees,
of areas of shade and sunlight, was meant to
express the immateriality of a building dedicated
to prayer. Many oratories of this type were cons¬
tructed at places where the conquering armies
halted. At the outset, they were completely bare
of decoration.
In cities that had been conquered, mosques
were sometimes housed in earlier shrines or were
built on the sites of traditional places of worship.
Simple geometrical shapes, such as rectangles or
squares, were used. Gradually, however, a variety
of factors relating to the liturgy, the climate or
local traditions came to influence the design and
construction of mosques. In aesthetic terms, a
significant step was taken in the eighth century,
with the emergence of the architecture of the
caliphate, an imperial style enhanced by contact
with earlier civilizations.
After breaking with the Jews of Medina,
Muhammad turned the qibla away from Jeru¬
salem to face Mecca, so that it became perpendi¬
cular to the south wall.
Spiritual and temporal
The Prophet's apartments, and notably the rooms
of his wives, gave onto the courtyard of the
mosque, which soon became a communal area
used for a variety of purposes such as tending the
wounded, resting, discussion and even guarding
prisoners. At this headquarters of the new com¬
munity, Muhammad led the prayers and preached
sermons, urging obedience to the one and only
God and the precepts of social order. Here he
exercised his function as the religious and poli¬
tical leader of Islam.
In the mosque at Medina, the Prophet sat
facing the congregation on the minbar, a kind of
pulpit set in the centre of the qibla wall. The
minbar was made of tamarind wood and con¬
sisted of a seat on a two-step dais. Its right upright
Above, the Mosque of Ibn
Tulun, Cairo (876-879). The
ablutions fountain stands in
the centre of the courtyard.
Left, prayer-hall of the Great
Mosque of Kairouan In Tunisia
(836), which has 17 naves.
CHRISTIANE NAFFAH,
of France, was formerly
curator of the Islamic section
of the department of Oriental
Antiquities at the Louvre, and
has been since 1987 director
of the Museum at the Institute
of the Arab World, Paris. She
has published many articles on
Islamic art.

was surmounted by a small silver socket, which
was probably intended to contain the spear which
the Prophet held out before him to mark the
direction in which to pray. Later, the person prea¬
ching the sermon, the khutba, would hold a sword
or battle-standard. And while it is true that there
are no clergy in Islam, the imam leading the
prayer is, in fact, the spiritual, temporal and mili¬


tary leader of the community.
The minbar therefore represents the merging
of civil and religious power. From the aesthetic
standpoint, it was one of the first religious
symbols to be extensively changed. Its height was
raised and it was fitted with doors and a dome,
thereby conferring an aura of sanctity on the
person sitting in it.
The qibla wall contains a hollowed-out niche
or recess known as the mihrab, which indicates
the direction of Mecca. After the Prophet's death,
it came to symbolize his presence and, through
him, the presence of God, whose envoy he was.
There has to be a mihrab in every mosque.
This recess is surmounted by a dome, a shape
which has symbolized the celestial vault ever
since Antiquity. It must not contain any statue
or image of the Prophet. In fact, figurative repre¬
sentations are forbidden in Islam since God alone
has the right to instill life into a figure and any
attempt to measure man's work with that of God
would be sacrilege. Even so, the decoration of the
mihrab, the Holy of Holies, is exceptionally rich
and often extends to the wall surrounding it. It
x>
WmEBmsb
Above, dome of the Shah
Jahan Mosque, Tatta, western
Pakistan (1647).
Below, the Badshahi Mosque
at Lahore, Pakistan (1674).
is culturally revealing as a reflection of the domi¬
nant artistic current in each locality.
Mosques are closed-in buildings whose main
façades are on the inside, round a courtyard or
along the side of the prayer-hall. This introverted
form of architecture isolates the Muslim commu¬
nity in an enclosed space.
The mosque is usually flanked by a tower,
or minaret, in some cases more than one, from
the top of which the muezzin calls the faithful
to prayer. Its function and shape are largely
influenced by those of Christian bell-towers and
the towers of Byzantine fortresses. It is a symbolic
line of force, which provides communication bet¬
ween the inner spacethe mosqueand the outer
spacethe cityand it also becomes an aesthetic
line of force.
The courtyard in front of the prayer-hall con¬
tains a fountain for ablutions, in the shape of an
open or closed basin at which Muslims can
achieve the state of moral and physical purity
necessary for prayer.
The Arab period
Many large mosques were built under the
Umayyad (661-750) and Abbasid (750-1258) cali¬
phates, in other words during the Arab period
of Islamic history. Their design followed the ori¬
ginal plan, but at the same time they were being
built in countries which had artistic traditions of
their own and where the services of local
í.iUV... iff,*
r>

craftsmen were enlisted. Hence, the Islamic art
and architecture of this period bear the mark of
the civilizations which had flourished in those
countries, and the plans of mosques evoke those
of Christian basilicas, Byzantine palaces or Per¬
sian audience chambers. Local traditions would
again dictate the evolution of the mosque in the
centuries that followed.
In Syria, the Great Mosque of Damascus was
built in the eighth century on the site of a temple
dedicated to Jupiter, which had become the
church of St. John the Baptist in the intervening
period. The ground plan is rectangular, in keeping
with the celebrated Golden Number of the archi¬
tects of Antiquity. The central nave, oriented in
the direction of Mecca, is higher and wider than
the side aisles, thereby stressing the majesty of
the building and its political role as the Great
Mosque of the Empire. Next to the mihrab, a
dome marks the enclosure reserved for the sove¬
reign inside the prayer-hall. Byzantine influence
can clearly be seen in the structure and in the geo¬
metric and plant motifs of the decorative mosaics.
In the same way, the T-shaped plan of the
prayer-hall of the Great Mosque of Kairouan in
Tunisia (836) is reminiscent of the transept of
Western churches. The same influence can be seen
in the Great Mosque of Cordoba in Spain (785).
In Iraq, the Abbasid dynasty founded its
capital in Baghdad and then transferred it to
Samarra between 833 and 889. The Great Mosque
is built of hollow bricks, the local material. Its
plan is strictly modelled on that of the mosque
of Medina. By contrast, its spiral minaret is ins¬
pired by the ziggurats of Mesopotamia. In Cairo,
the simple plan and balanced proportions of the
Mosque of Ibn Tulun (876-879) reflect a desire
to return to the sources. Like the Kairouan
mosque, the building has the strength and
sobriety of Western Cistercian art. These two
mosques are the expression of the spiritual mes¬
sage of a religion reduced to essentials and
without any hierarchy.
Persian and Turkish mosques
In Persia, under the Seljuk dynasty from the
eleventh century onwards, a new design was
introduced and became the predominant model.
This is the mosque with four iwan, opening onto
a central courtyard. The iwan is a vaulted hall,
closed on three sides. It is a kind of monumental
porch symbolizing the opening into the divine
world. Whereas Arab mosques were built by a
process of accretion, these mosques were cons¬
tructed symmetrically around a central point and
their plans are clearly recognizable from both the
outside and inside of the building. The Masjid-i
Shah or royal mosque in Isfahan (early seven¬
teenth century) is a notable example of this strong
architectural unity.
In India, where Iranian influence can be seen
in the structure of minarets and entrance portals,
an original plan was introduced during the
Moghul period in the Great Mosque of Delhi
which was built in 1650. Indian mosques usually
have a relatively small prayer-hall surmounted by
a dome, and a far larger courtyard. They are
designed for receiving large congregations and
for a climate that is suited to holding prayers
out of doors.
Ottoman mosques are of a distinctive type
and are built on strict geometrical lines around
a central space. The transformation of the Chris¬
tian space of the Saint Sophia basilica in Cons¬
tantinople into a Muslim space inspired Mimar
Sinan, the architect of Süleyman the Magnificent
in the sixteenth century, to produce authentic
imperial designs. With their sophisticated inter¬
twined domes and half-domes, his mosques
magnify the power of the sovereign, the shadow
of Cod on earth.
Whether Arab, Turkish or Persian, the
mosque is a microcosm which believers must
intuitively decipher through their faith. In the
words of the Qur'an:
We show the signs to those who understand.
The Selimiye Mosque at Edirne (formerly Adrianople), Turkey,
built between 1569 and 1575 by the architect Sinan.
The cathedral
Soaring lines
and the play
of light
and shadow
endow
cathedral
architecture
with
an ethereal
quality
