China:
the emperor's
all-seeing eye
BY HUO DATONG
Tall
Above, Cang Jie, legendary
inventor of Chinese
characters, as depicted in a
17th-century painting.
Right, the emperor Xuan
Di. Detail from a scroll of
portraits, The Thirteen
Emperors, attributed to Yan
Liben (7th century AD).
RADITION has it that the first Chinese historian
was a man called Cang Jie. An official in the service
of the legendary founder of the Chinese Empire, the
"Yellow Emperor" Huang Di (third millennium
BC), he is said to have invented the shi, or ideogram,
and thus made possible the writing of history. The
ideogram for the word shi is, in fact, a representa¬
tion of a hand and a bamboo writing tablet.
From the beginning, historians were all-powerful,
mysterious figures. Astrologers and geomancers,
they ensured the proper application of the
pronouncements of the oracles, kept an eye on

Sima Qian
father of Chinese history
Jima QIAN (145-86 BC), the founder of Chinese
historiography, succeeded his father in the post of
Grand Historian at the court of the emperor Wudi
of the Western Han dynasty (206 BC-9 AD). His
masterwork, the Shiji ("Historical Records"), was
written over a period of some twenty years. Its 1 30
chapters, comprising almost 528,000 Chinese
characters, cover 24 centuries of history from the
reign of the first emperor to the beginning of the
first century BC.
It is organized according to a five-part plan, with
separate sections for dynastic annals (Benji); annals
of noble families (Shijia); genealogical tables (Biao);
monographs (Shu) on various aspects of government
such as ritual, astronomy, the calendar, the economy,
geography, or hydraulic projects; and biographies
(Liezhuan) of a variety of famous individuals including
politicians, scholars, strategists, writers, officials,
knights, doctors, astrologers and merchants.
Sima Qian's biographies, which take up 70
chapters, marked a new departure in historiography.
To a general history of the reigns of successive Sons
of Heaven (dynastic emperors) and an account of
actual events, he added the histories of individuals
as representatives of different social and professional
groups.
In an age when the Grand Historian of the court
was still an astrologer responsible for the calendar,
Sima Qian's approach was that of a modern historian.
Following in the footsteps of Confucius, the compiler
of "Spring and Autumn Annals", he built his work
on painstaking research and the selection and
criticism of documents.
In order to be worthy of the task ahead, he
began to study classical texts from the age of ten.
When he was twenty he left his study and set out
on a long journey through the provinces where he
struck up friendships with notable personalities,
investigated famous sites and made contact with
great scholars.
In this way he prepared the ground for the
writing of his monumental work. The remarkable
style and acute perception of the Shift soon made it
the model against which all subsequent dynastic his¬
tories would be judged. Later historians would adopt
the ¡deal method as defined by Sima Qian: "to ana¬
lyse in depth the relationship between the universe
and the human, and to grasp the meaning of historical
change in order to form one's own doctrine."
HUO DATONG
22
everything that the sovereign and his ministers did,
and presided over investiture ceremonies and the
worship of the ancestral heaven and earth spirits.
Every time an audience was given at the palace,
two historians, one on each side of the sovereign,
noted down his words and deeds. From these daily
records emerged two great historical works: a trea¬
tise, the Shahgsu, or "Speeches of the Preceding
Monarchs", and a chronicle, the Chunqiu, or
"Spring and Autumn Annals".
History was also closely linked with philosophy.
As a historian, Laozi (sixth-fifth century BC), the
father of Taoism, was responsible for maintaining
the archives of the Chou dynasty. The philosopher
and thinker Confucius (551-479 BC) is traditionally
believed to have compiled the annals of the kingdom
of Lu. The commentary on this work, the Zuozhuan,
or "Tradition of Zuo" by the blind historian Zuo
Qiuming, has become a classic of Chinese literature.
The man generally considered to be the father
of Chinese history, however, was Sima Qian
(145-86 BC), Grand Historian at the court of the
famous Han emperor Wudi (141-87 BC). His
Shiji, or "Historical Records", about half of which
consists of biographies, brought a new look to the
traditional vision of history by giving pride of place
to individual, human activity (see box this page).
This model was followed by all subsequent dynastic
histories, including the renowned Hanshu, or "His¬
tory of the Han", written by Ban Gu (32-92 AD)
and members of his family.
The Shitong, or "Treatise on History", written
by Liu Zhiji (661-721 AD), historian to the Wu
empress Zetian, was the first treatise on historical

method. The author demanded three qualities of the
budding historianliterary talent, knowledge and
a critical mind. He identified six schools of historical
thought and classified all historical works under two
main headingschronicles and biographies.
Another work of synthesis was the Zizhe
tongjian, or "Comprehensive Mirror for Aid in
Government", by Sima Guang (1019-1086). This
vast selection from source chronicles consists of 295
chapters and spans over 1,300 years of history, going
up to the middle of the tenth century AD. It is
actually a collective work. Sima Guang's three main
collaborators, themselves celebrated historians,
gathered the greatest number of documents possible
from official and private libraries and then classi¬
fied them under theme headings and in chronolog¬
ical order. Sima Guang made the final selection,
taking as his criterion of choice from the enormous
range of material available those items that he con¬
sidered would provide the information most useful
to a sovereign.
During the troubled political times of the
Northern and Southern dynasties (222-598 AD), the
function of the Grand Historian of the court was
limited to astrology and the calendar. These were
secretary/historians who simply recorded the deeds
of the emperors.
The Historiography Office
In the seventh century, the early T'ang emperors
were keenly interested in the idea that history could
be an "instructive mirror", and the reign of emperor
Tai Zong (626-649) saw the establishment of the
Above, Tai Zong, second
emperor of the T'ang
dynasty (7th century AD).
Stylized portrait on silk by
an anonymous artist of the
Qing period (17th-20th
century).
Above left, plan of the
town of Chengdu, capital of
the Shu dynasty at the time
of the Three Kingdoms (3rd
century) and today the
capital of Sichuan Province
in central China.
23

CC^aC=SC
24
Shiguan, or Historiography Office, whose prime
task was the compilation of dynastic histories. This
task was entrusted to specially appointed civil
servants and no longer to hereditary historians. The
emperor almost always maintained firm control
over the Office, for which the heads of the great
ministries acted as principal editors.
This process of bureaucratization was to have
decisive consequences. The historians became less
independent with regard to anything concerning
politics and public opinion. The director of this vast
collective enterprise, in addition to being a good
historian, had also to be a first class administrator,
qualities rarely to be found in combination in a
single individual. The work was divided up in such
a way that the historians tended to get lost in a sea
of documents. Finally, they were recruited from the
ranks of the literati regardless of whether or not they
had any aptitude as historians and this tended to put
the stamp of official approval on the traditional
blurring of the boundaries between literature and
history.
In view of the mediocrity of the output from
the imperial Historiography Office, parallel dynastic
histories began to appear. From the time of the
T'ang to that of the Yuan dynasty (1277-1367), the
centre of historiographical interest shifted. Works
of a new kind appeared, such as the Tongdian, the
first general history of institutions, by Du You, the
Tongzhi, or "General Monographs", by Zheng Qiao
(1104-1162), and the Wenxian tongkao, or "General
Critique of Documents", by Ma Duanlin (1254?-?).
These were veritable "encyclopaedias" containing
sections on a variety of subjects such as economics,
politics, teaching, religions, customs and even
language.
During the transition between the Ming and the
Qing dynasties (1644-1911), Huang Zongxi (1609-
1695) published his Mingru Xue'an, or "Treatise on
the Doctrines of the Ming Confucian Schools", the
first in-depth study of the history of doctrines and
The legendary meeting of
Confucius and Lao-Tzu
(Laozi) is shown in this
19th-century Chinese
drawing.
HUO DATONG
is a Chinese historian who
is engaged in research at
the museum of the imperial
palace, Beijing.
of the great thinkers. The Dushi fangyu jiyao, by Gu
Zuyu (1624-1680), analysed the interconnection
between history and its geographical setting.
Under the Manchu Qing dynasty (1644-
1911), the Wenshi tongyi, or "General Significance
of History and Literature", by Zhang Xuecheng
(1738-1801), extended the concept of history to
every field and drew a distinction between works
that were doctrinally inspired and those that were
purely informative.
The Manchu emperors, especially Kangxi
(1662-1722) and Qianlong (1736-1795), attached great
importance to the compilation of histories. A
historiographie bureau traced the history of the
recently overthrown Ming dynasty, producing 336
volumes over a period of 81 years. Other bureaux
drafted the history of the reigning dynasty, the his¬
tory of the nation or that of the emperor's daily life.
The latter type of document is a mine of infor¬
mation for the modern historian. From the moment
the emperor leaves his apartment to hold his first
audience, a complete record is made of everything
he does, what clothes he is wearing and even what
food he eats. The observations noted down would
have been condensed and completed by the staff of
the administrative archives and published under the
following emperor under the title Shilu, or
"Authentic Documents".
Large compilations were also made of both
ancient and modern texts, such as the Gujin tushu
jicheng and the Siku quanshu, in which over 3,000
works were reproduced. Another vast labour initiated
by the emperors was the compilation throughout all
China of monographs on local geography, ethnog¬
raphy and archaeology.
The role of the official historian reached its
pinnacle during the reign of Qianlong. With the
decline of the Manchu dynasty, most Chinese
historiographical traditions disappeared. The Qing-
shigao, "Draft Official History of the Qing Dy¬
nasty", is their swan song. H
