FEDERICO MAYOR
10

A
JL JL momentous chapter in the history of our and wisdom, before the outlines of a situation
century has opened. Suddenly, in vast areas where recalling that of 1945 began to emerge,
once there was silence voices can be heard and For many people today, the collapse of the
freedom is beckoning. In autumn 1989 the bicen- Berlin wall symbolizes a time of renewed promise
tenary of the Declaration of the Rights of Man because it is a culmination of the quest for free-
and of the Citizen was commemorated in magni- dorn, dignity and solidarity which has been under-
ficent fashion: within a few short months, Europe taken on every continent in recent decades. It is
witnessed the fall of bastilles, the disappearance the sign of a new maturity, which has been won
of watchtowers, the opening of frontiers and the at high cost by the peoples of both North and
reawakening of dormant enthusiasms. The rever- South and has led them to seek common cause
berations of these events are being felt through- rather than war, co-operation between inde-
out the world, encouraging questioning and hopes pendent nations rather than power struggles
which in turn herald new democratic harvests, between the dominant and the dominated, demo-
Such a historic moment bears some resem- cracy as a means to individual fulfilment and
blance to the aftermath of the Second World War, social development, culture as an essential feature
when citadels of hatred and contempt were also of life,
swept away on a rising tide of optimism, and the
future was bright with promise.
Unesco and the other organizations of the
United Nations system were founded in an
The winds of Freedom have begun to blow
again, and with what force! They urge us to
shoulder the formidable task of constructing
attempt to realize this tremendous promise, democracy everywhere. It is a task of paramount
Unesco itself was entrusted with the mission of importance and urgency. Now as in the past the
mobilizing the world's finest intellects in order keys to success are dialogue between cultures, the
to encourage the mutual exchange of knowledge mobility of persons, ideas and creative works, the
and learning on a global scale and the acceptance widest possible intellectual exchange. This time
of collective responsibility for a cultural and shall we come closer to realizing the great dream
natural heritage which had become indivisible... of universal citizenship?
But for a long time there were only limited Moments so rich in possibilities are rare,
chances that this message would be heeded. The When they occur no effort should be spared to
flame of hope lit when the fighting ended soon grasp them and make the fullest use of all they
flickered out. New walls between peoples were offer.
erected, and new restraints were placed on their It is thus more timely than ever for Unesco to
freedom. The last days of colonialism were dan- pursue wholeheartedly its mission as interpreter
gerously prolonged, and the Cold War set in, sus- of the collective hopes of humanity. With this
tained by the arms race and proliferating local and in mind, the Unesco Courier has asked some
regional tensions. Four decades would pass, years leading figures of today to identify and interpret
of countless sacrifices, struggles and compromises, for us some of the signposts pointing to the world
of tentative initiatives and mistakes, of heroism of tomorrow. 11
