N W
was born in Galicia in 1916, was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Literature in 1989. In this
interview he talks about the process of
literary creation, the role of the writer in
society, and the wide international influence
of literature written in Spanish, to which his
own work has made a major contribution.
Camilo José Cela
How would you judge Spanish literature of the past few
decades, and what is your opinion of the "boom" in Latin
American literature?
I hate passing judgement on anybody, and I am neither
a historian nor a literary critic. We creative artists are poor
judges and critics, since we tend to applaud everything that
approximates to our own view of art, although that is rather
presumptuous of us.
Nevertheless, I would say that the Spanish novelists of
my own generationMiguel Delibes, Torrente Ballester,
Ana María Matute and Juan Goytisolo, for exampleare
excellent, much better than the younger generation of
writers.
As for the "boom" in Latin American literature, I think
that it is mainly being created by publishers. Some very
important writers are being left out. There is no reason to
believe that today's star Latin American novelists are any
better than their predecessors, such as Rómulo Gallegos,
Benito Lynch or Miguel Angel Asturias, all of whom have
unfortunately faded into oblivion. Being Latin American
does not necessarily make anyone a great novelist, surely.
I would have thought that was obvious.
Do you think that the fact that you have been awarded
the Nobel Prize will have any direct impact on Spanish
literature?
It may well arouse enthusiasm for literature, in much
the same way as the passion of Spaniards for tennis was
stimulated by the successes of Manuel Santana, their passion
for football by the victories of Real Madrid, and their
passion for golf by the exploits of Severiano Ballesteros.
You have lived through a golden age ofliterature, with such
writers as Camus, Huxley, Moravia and Sartre in Europe,
and Hemingway, Dos Passos, Faulkner and Steinbeck in
the United States. What do you think now of that period
and how do you see your own work in relation to it?
It was an extraordinary period and my own work is
permeated by it. I have always said that we are influenced by
the atmosphere around us. When Albert Camus published
The Outsider and I published The Family ofPascual Duarte,1
people even wrote doctoral theses about the cross-influences
between them. Later on, when we became friends, we found
this very amusing because at the time when our novels were
published, we were both completely unknown and certainly
did not know one another.
You have devoted your life to literature. Have you ever
asked yourselfwhat purpose literature serves and what it
represents for a people?
In my case, writing is a necessity. If I want to make
contact, with myself or with my fellow human beings, it
has to be through words. In the history of mankind, the
moment when the first man uttered the first word is much
more important than the discovery of America, or the moon
landing, quantum physics or theories of the atom.
What is the purpose of literature? Certainly not to put
the world right. That is not the writer's role. We must
remember that literature is one of the fine arts. Its purpose
is to make art out of wordsthat's all. For a people, litera¬
ture is everything, because it gives it a sense of permanency,
much more so than architecture. Words last much longer
than stones.
How do you write? How do you go about composing a
novel, for example?
If only I knew! The novel is a protean art-form which
nobody has ever really managed to define. A novel is a piece
of prose with a title and the word "novel" attached to it
except that a novel may also be written in verse, since the
poem El Cantar de Mío Cid is a novel.
A novel comes to me spontaneously. It is not something
I set about deliberately. When I have a novel inside me
and it may stay inside me for several yearsI do not think

about how I am going to develop it. At some point, it will
begin to take shape by itself, at a steady pace, over a period
of eight to ten months. I do not believe in writing scenarios
first. If the characters are alive, you have only to open the
door for them and see what they do. And the story of what
they do is the novel.
a4s a methodical writer, do you believe in inspiration?
No, not in novel-writing, although inspiration may be
useful in lyric poetry. Dostoevsky said somewhere that
genius is a matter of long and patient endurance. When you
are writing a novel, you have to work on it for hours on
end, day in day out. And you need great physical strength
to reach the end.
It has been said that the Spanish identity is the result of
afusión ofChristian, Arab andJewish cultures. Is that also
true of Spanish literature?
I once wrote a book called Jews, Moors and Christians.
Might that have something to do with your question? Spain
has had some great "marrano" writers who were descended
from the Jews, like Cervantes and Saint Teresa of Avila. Yes,
indeed, there was a melting-pot and I do not believe that
"The Bullfight" (1945),
oil on canvas (114 x 144 cm),
by the Catalan artist Joan Miró (1893-1983).
there is a single Spaniard who could put his hand in the fire
and solemnly swear that he does not have a drop of Jewish
or Moorish blood in his veins. Ferdinand and Isabella made
a glaring political mistake when they decided to expel the
Moors who were working the land and the Jews who were
in trade, banking and jewellery-making, while the Christian
noblemen waged war. Fortunately, very few of them left
the country, and those who stayed on produced the
Spaniards of today.
There are two magnificent lines of verse by Fernando
Villalón, which read:
Islands of the Guadalquivir,
Where now are your Moors, who did not want to leave?
Spanish culture's leap to the Americas five centuries ago
made it universal...
In fact it already was universal, since it was present in
Italy and the Netherlands, at least. Its universal character
was consummated in the Americas, if you like.

"Don Quixote meets a group
of comedians". One of the
plates executed by Spanish
painter and illustrator José
Albert Segrelles (1885-1969) for
an edition of Don Quixote
published in 1966 to
commemorate the 350th
anniversary of the death of
Cervantes.
Do you think that Spanish as a language, with its extraor¬
dinary heritage, is now rigorous andflexible enough, or rich
and varied enough, to contend with English?
In a few years' timeI don't know how manythere
will be only four languages left in the world, English,
Spanish, Arabic and Chinese, and I am not citing them in
any particular order. All the rest will have retreated into
the spoken idiom or into lyric poetry. It is true that we in
Spain do not defend the Spanish language vigorously
enoughand by Spanish, I don't mean Castilian, which is
only spoken in Castile. We have no confidence in it, and yet
ai. v-

it is one of the world's major languages. Our government
in Madrid should learn a lesson from the heroic efforts which
the Basques and Catalans are making to ensure the survival
of their languages.
What contribution, in your view, has the Spanish novel
made to world literature?
I have always believed and maintained that the novel
was born in Spain. El Conde Lucanor, the first book of fables
in our literature, was written several years before Boccaccio's
Decameron, which is generally regarded as being the first
real novel.
Be that as it may, the Spanish novel has had a far-
reaching influence on world literature. There is an essay-
by Gertrude Stein, I seem to rememberwhich demonstrates
that the modern novel originates in the Spanish picaresque
tradition. From the nineteenth century until today, all
novels, including the great American novels of the 1920s
and those of the Spanish Generation of '98,2 have been
offshoots of the picaresque model.
Cervantes is a landmark in the history of literature, but
Don Quixote is an even greater landmark. I have often won¬
dered whether Cervantes, like Homer, was not a number
of people writing under a single name, since there is such
an enormous gap between Don Quixote and his other works,
such as the Novelas ejemplares. Don Quixote is a work of
genius and even when we read it today and see its many
imperfections, we realize that they are so brilliantly inspired
that there are grounds for thinking that they may have been
deliberate. I am not claiming that this is so: I am just guessing.
Having said that, I consider that the greatest writer in
the Spanish language is, and will long remain, Quevedo.
When I think oí Don Quixote, Quevedo, the medieval poets,
the picaresque novelespecially Lazarillo de Tormesthe
Generation of '98 and the 1927 generation of poets,3 1 feel
that Spanish literature has always been great and out of all
proportion to Spain's paltry achievements in economics and
politics.
In the twentieth century, the Spanish contribution to
painting, prose and poetry has surpassed everything that
France, England, Germany and Italy combined have
managed to produce. Picasso, Miró, Dalí and Tapies are there
for all to see, while in literature you have poets like Miguel
Hernández, Lorca and the Generation of 1927, and prose-
writers like Unamuno, Valle-Inclán, Baroja, Azorín, Ramón
Gómez de la Sernathe list could go on.
There has been a great deal of talk in recent years of the
"global village", ofthe trend towards a worldwide culture...
I don't believe in it.
What do you see as the factors that can give a universal
bearing to a circumscribed work of local literature?
The geographical setting and the plot are less important
than what lies beneath the action of the characters because,
when all is said and done, the great overriding passions are
universal. The Spanish picaresque novel was centred on the
landscapes of Spain, much as the great Russian novels are
=r.
a*
^
ffc ÎÇ #fc
-¡r.
:¿
Cover of one of the earliest Japanese editions of
Don Quixote, published in 1914.
wreathed in the atmosphere of the steppes. And yet they
are both read all over the world.
We live in a culture that is dominated by images and yet
never have so many books been published. Do you think
that the written word will be capable ofwithstanding the
onslaught of the audio-visual media?
I am not sure that contemporary culture is "dominated"
by images. I do not believe either that television has a
stultifying effect on people or that a single image is worth
a thousand written words. I believe that anything that can
arouse interest in culture is worthwhile, and such interest
may well be aroused by television.
Writing will survive television, just as it will not be
abolished by tactile perceptions, because the senses
stimulated are different. I do not think that one sense should
prevail over the others. The important thing is for the senses
to work together. Interview by Ramón Luis Acuña, Madrid.
1. English translation published by Little, Brown and Company, Boston,
USA, 1964. Reissued 1989. Other works by Camilo José Cela translated into
English include: Journey to the Alcarria (1964), University of Wisconsin Press,
USA; Mrs. Caldwell speaks to her Son ( 1968), Cornell University Press, USA;
The Hive (1983), Ecco Press, New York.
2. Spanish novelists and essayists who analysed their country's ills at the time
of the Spanish-American war of 1898 were dubbed the "Generation of '98".
3. A group of outstanding Spanish poets was known as the "Generation of
1927". Editor
