Art Nouveau: an international
BY ARTHUR GILLETTE
10
X OMPOSITY of intent and orthodoxy of
stylethese were the main traits of European
architecture against which Art Nouveau rose up
towards the end of the last century. It was a time
of rapid urban growth, when the rich wanted to
show off their newly-acquired wealth in town
houses and other architectural statements that
took themselves so seriously that they seemed
heartless. Art Nouveau, in contrast, was a vision
that sprang straight from the heart as a rejection
of the grey uniformization of the environment:
of dwellings, furniture, tableware and other
artefacts that strongly shape the ways in which
people live and feel about their daily lives.
Art Nouveau expressed nostalgia for Nature
and the past, for the non-urban and the non-
modern, for the anti-rational swirls of vines and
flower stems, the rough texture of pine cones,
and more generally for pre-industrial asymmetry.
It also grew in tune with the medieval longings
that so marked the aesthetics of the late
nineteenth century, and were often connected
with movements of national revival. But Art
Nouveau also looked ahead, happily seizing the
materials of its day and proving itself to be a
force for ingenious innovation. Did stone attest
to the solidity and incomes of the wealthy,
whose pomposity Art Nouveau mocked? The
new style flaunted its creativity by making this
staid material come alive with turbulent
vegetation, mythical beasts and human beings
with expressions so pure they seem to pre-date
the very notion of sin. Art Nouveau worked
stone as though it were clay, and also embraced
new media such as polychrome glazing, wrought
iron, exposed steel, and glass (stained or
futuristically sworled), often in astonishing and
unprecedented combinations in the same work,
be it a house or a piece of furniture.
In terms of inspiration and impact, the Art
Nouveau vision also looked outwards. Japanese
pictorial treatment of Nature was an explicitly
recognized source, and japonisme was seldom far
from the minds of many Art Nouveau
practitioners. Moghul influence can also be seen
(in certain towers, for instance), and some Art
Nouveau exponents in Central Europe drew on
references from further to the east.
And what of impact? There is today a
widespread misconception according to which
Art Nouveau was an overwhelmingly European
expression, with some minor overflow reaching
the shores of North America. Nothing could be
further from the truth. After flowering in the
Old Worldfrom Helsinki to Rome, from
Moscow to Paristhe seeds of Art Nouveau
spread far and wide on the winds of what turned
out to be the first truly international architecture
and design movement of our century. An
indigenous and vigorous branch sprang up in the
United States (whose influence returned to
Europe), while the Catalan Modernist variant
(Modernismo) disembarked in Cuba (where it was
"tropicalized", in cigar box labels for example),
and Belgians and Italians built sumptuous Art
Nouveau villas in Argentina and Chile
respectively. The movement also made its way to
North Africa, Turkey and Japan.
In its international embrace, as well as its
innovative choice and use of materials and forms,
the Art Nouveau vision was intimately linked
with its epoch. One expression of this, and a
further indictment of stolid pomposity, was the
movement's sense of humour and whimsy. A
widespread feature was the
omega-shaped door, which might be interpreted
as a happy mouth: Art Nouveau's approach has
understandably been called "architecture with a
smile". The horror of the First World War
struck the movement a death blow.
With its swirls and humour replaced in the
1920s by Art Deco's angular obsession with
(apparent) functionality, Art Nouveau began its
trek through the wilderness. And still today it is
mocked, despised, or simply ignored in many
quarters. At present, there is cause for serious
concern about the fate of Art Nouveau
ornaments and even entire buildings in Dublin,
Moscow, Paris, Tunis and Valparaiso, to cite but
five cities among many others where Art
Nouveau creations are threatened.
Yet the present state and prospects of Art
Nouveau are contradictory. On the one hand, its
buildings continue to be torn down or simply
left to rot; on the other, there is growing
international recognition that Art Nouveau has
an intrinsic and timeless value, that it should be
viewed as part and parcel of humanity's
architectural and stylistic heritage, and
consequently should be protected and preserved.
In the last twenty years, Art Nouveau has
come back into fashion. Already in the 1970s in
some European cities Art Nouveau décors were
being designed for certain new restaurants and
shops. In Glasgow, designated Cultural Capital of
Europe 1990 by the European Community, a
"House for an Art Lover" designed by the
Scottish architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh
(1868-1928) is at long last being built. Perhaps
Art Nouveau, born on the eve of the twentieth
century, will enjoy a revival on the eve of the
twenty-first.
ARTHUR GILLETTE is editor-in-chief of Unesco's
international quarterly Museum.
Stained-glass skylight (detail),
auditorium of the Palau
de la Música Catalana, Barcelona,
by Lluis Domènech i Montaner, 1905-1908.
W5»V
