1
World literacy:
where we stand today
A,T least 960 million people in the world today
are "total" illiterates. According to the definition
established by Unesco thirty years ago, a total il¬
literate is someone who "is unable to read, write
and understand a brief and simple exposé of facts
in relation to his or her daily life". There is also
a considerable number of so-called "functional"
illiterates, for whom reading and writing are not
part of their daily lives, even though at some
period, usually on leaving school, they have been
able to read and write. If the functionally illiterate
adults in the industrialized countriesestimated
by some at between 10 and 20 per cent of their
populationswere to be counted in with the
totally illiterate, the world figure for illiteracy
would exceed one billion adults, the majority of
whom would be women.
The highest concentrations of the totally il¬
literate are to be found in the densely populated
areas of the globe, notably in Asia, where they
number some 700 million (490 million of them
in China and India alone), and in Africa where,
By Sylvain Lourié
The struggle
against illiteracy
can only be
effective as
part of a wider
strategy to
eradicate
poverty,
exclusion and
injustice
in 1985, 54 per cent of the population consisted
of illiterates, of whom 65 per cent were women.
As far as functional literacy is concerned, a
recent (1986) study showed that one adult out of
eight in the United States could not read and that
in the United Kingdom, of a sampling of twenty-
three-year-olds, 13 per cent had difficulty in read¬
ing, writing and counting. Similar figures were
obtained in Canada, France and other industri¬
alized countries.
These figures, however, are but snapshots or
stills from a film which, as it unfolds, enables us
to detect trends and assess the efforts made by
some governments in the fight against illiteracy.
At the end of the Second World War, 75.4 per
cent of the population of Albania, for example,
was illiterate; ten years later this proportion had
been reduced to under 30 per cent. In 1962, 90
per cent of the population of the United Repub¬
lic of Tanzania was illiterate; by 1978 the figure
was down to 53.7 per cent. In 1970, there were
more than ten million illiterates aged over ten in 13

Ethiopia; by 1983 this figure had been halved. In
Latin America, Mexico went from an illiteracy
rate of 77.7 per cent in 1900 to one of 9.7 per
cent in 1985. In Cuba, the rate fell in a few
months from 23.6 per cent to 3.9 per cent. In
1984, Nicaragua also succeeded in reducing its rate
from 50 per cent to about 13 per cent in just a
few months.
Some countries, unfortunately, are far from
having achieved such good results. Burkina Faso
and Mali, for example, have illiteracy rates that
exceed 90 per cent. In Afghanistan, Benin, Guinea
Bissau, Liberia and Togo, the rate is over 80 per
cent. In India the rate in 1981 was 67.3 per cent,
that is, more than 200 million people, of whom
120 million were women. In 1982, China had 230
million illiterates (34.5 per cent of the popula¬
tion), of whom 160 million were women.
Illiteracy
and poverty
A glance at some statistics other than those for
illiteracy reveals that one billion human beings
live below the poverty line, that one and a half
billion people lack medical facilities, that one
billion people live in insanitary conditions.
The parallel with the billion total and func¬
tional illiterates speaks for itself; it is difficult not
to recognize that the map of world illiteracy
coincides with that of world poverty. This shock¬
ing fact applies primarily to the developing coun¬
tries, but the odds are that the functional illiter¬
ates in the industrialized countries will almost
always be found among the unemployed and those
who have been left behind by the mainstream of
the economy and of modern technology.
Clearly, then, any discussion of illiteracy will
be merely academic unless it is placed within a
wider social context than that of teaching
methods and of learning to read and count. Il¬
literacy, it must be repeated, is but one form of
marginalization or exclusion. Society has become
polarized into those who have the means to im¬
prove their material and social standing and those
CONTINUED PAGE 18
Reports from
around
WJ the world
Right, a school in
Guatemala; centre, a Burkina
Faso schoolgirl; far right,
outside a post office in
Karachi (Pakistan), a typist
performs an essential service
for those who cannot write
or who need a typed letter.
Left, The Columns of Liberty
(1989), a monumental
sculpture created by 700
pupils of 17 different
nationalities at the Pablo
Neruda secondary school,
Grigny, France.
LATIN AMERICA


CONTINUED FROM PAGE 14
18
who are unable to secure for themselves a mini¬
mum standard of well-being. It is in the latter
group that illiterates, who have neither access to
existing sources of knowledge nor the ability to
create new knowledge, are to be found.
Very often, therefore, those whose standard
of living is extremely low are also those who can¬
not communicate with people living only a few
kilometres away simply because they speak differ¬
ent languages or dialects and have no common
system of writing by means of which to exchange
information.
This poverty and this cultural isolation are
accompanied by isolation with regard to what
might be termed the "mechanics" of social life.
The ability to communicate is not only a form
of cultural expression, it is also an essential ele¬
ment in the organization of society, promoting
the association of people with common aims and
the structuring of the community. These are com¬
plementary elements necessary to the creation
and strengthening of the modern social fabric.
Schools of illiteracy
Who are these illiterates? And why do they re¬
main illiterate? They are adults who have not had
access to education, or young adults who have
been unable to complete their schooling or train¬
ing and who live in a milieu to which writing
is alien and thus, after a few years, relapse into
illiteracy.
Does this mean that, in a country where the
illiteracy rate is high but where the rate of school
enrolment is rising rapidly, illiteracy will gradu¬
ally disappear as new groups of children who
have passed through the school system reach
adulthood? Unfortunately, the data available at
present tend generally to record only the num¬
bers enrolling in schools and give no indication
of how long the entrants stay there. The num¬
ber of children enrolled is not the same as the
number of those who remain in school long
enough (a minimum of four years) to attain a rela¬
tively "irreversible" level of literacy.
In recent years there seems also to have been
a tendency for the rate of school enrolment itself
to drop. Many parents no longer see the school
as a means of finding employment and achieving
better living conditions. The economic crisis, in
particular the growing burden of debt, which has
been reflected over the past decade in a reduction
in public expenditureparticularly in expenditure
on social services and educationhas led almost
everywhere to the freezing of teachers' salaries,
with obvious results. The teachers are obliged to
take on other jobs and the time they spend in the
classroom is proportionately reduced. With most
of the education budget devoted to the payment
of salaries, what is left for the purchase of essential
teaching materialstextbooks, exercise books,
pencilsand for the maintenance of school build¬
ings has been pared to the bone. Contact between
teachers and pupils has become less regular and
of lower quality and instead of being a source of
stimulation for the children's creative capabilities,
teaching has been reduced to routine parrotting
of words and numbers. Teaching has lost all its
real meaning.
It is to be feared that if present trends con¬
tinue, far from reducing illiteracy, the school sys¬
tem will in fact be contributing to its increase.
Literacy training
is a political act
In these conditions, it is impossible to consider
the drive for literacy apart from the political con¬
text that has engendered ignorance. I am not
thinking of literacy education as only teaching
people to read, but as a form of basic training
making possible, in the words of the declaration
made by the International Council for Adult Edu¬
cation at Toronto (Canada), in 1987, "the acqui¬
sition of the sum of knowledge necessary" for
the improvement of the living and working con¬
ditions of adults. Literacy campaigns must be
accompanied by change in other areas of society.
This was clearly stated during a symposium
organized by Unesco at Persepolis (Iran) in 1975:
"Literacy work, like education in general, is a
political act. It is not neutral, for the act of
revealing social reality in order to transform it, or
of concealing it in order to preserve it, is political."
A study carried out within the framework of
In 1987 a group of 15
children and 5 teachers
from Evry, France, helped
rebuild the Issa Arame Seek
school at Bargny, Senegal.
iff* *t\
SYLVAIN LOURIE
is Unesco's Deputy Director-
General for Planning,
Budgeting and Evaluation. A
Unesco staff member since
1965, he was Director of the
International Institute of
Educational Planning from
1982 to 1988. He is the
author of Education and
Development: Strategy and
Decision-making in Central
America (1985) and many
studies and articles on aspects
of educational strategy.

ULJl "
International Literacy Year draws the following
conclusions from experience acquired in this field:
"National commitment and political priority for
literacy have been crucial for attaining such posi¬
tive results. Above all, the successful literacy
programmes have been part of a wider process
of mobilization among the people. The successes
achieved have not primarily been a question of
the number of books printed, rural libraries in
operation or vehicles supplied. Although these
components certainly are required for a literacy
programme, they can never substitute for or
inspire mobilization of the people, nor determine
the programme contents or the implementation
approach."*
Only if the entire social, cultural and political
environment is favourably disposed is it possible
to pass from words to action and to encourage
those at whom a literacy campaign is directed
actually to learn to write.
There are many governments whose desire
to reduce illiteracy is virtually nullified because
other priorities (defence, the creation of infra¬
structures, the purchase of manufactured goods,
debt repayment) leave them with insufficient
resources.
Other countries" see their efforts come to
nothing because they have been unable to make
a decision on the language on which a literacy
campaign should be based, or because the cam¬
paign comes up against the passive resistance of
certain sections of the population or even of the
civil service itself.
On the other hand, when there is free circu¬
lation of information within a society, when the
members of the community communicate and
are in a position to participate and to act in the
general interest, literacy teaching plays an effec¬
tive role in general development policy as a sup¬
port for changes in customs and structures that
go far beyond the education of young people and
adults. After all, what is the point of teaching peo¬
ple to read and write if there is no follow-up, no
post-literacy training and no social change which
would enable a person who has learned to read
and write to obtain a loan, for example, to join
a co-operative or to continue his or her studies
within the framework of a lifelong education
programme?
Adult illiterates (age 15 and over) and illiteracy rates
Adult illiterates
(in millions)
Illiteracy rates
(%)
Developing countries in:
Sub-Saharan Africa 133 6 138 8
Arab States 58 6 61 1
Latin America / Caribbean 44 2 43 5
Eastern Asia 297 3 281 0
Southern Asia 374 1 397 3
2000
146 8
65 8
40 9
233 7
437 0
Developing countries (total) 908.1 920.6 918 5
59 1
54 5
176
28 7
57 7
39.4
1990
52 7
48 7
152
24 0
53 8
35.1
40 3
38 1
11 3
170
45 9
28.1
Developed countries (total) 57.0 42.0 23.5
World total 962.6 942.0 26.9
Decrease
1985-2000
188
164
-63
11 7
11 8
11.3
-3.9
-7.9
Unesco's two-pronged strategy
If literacy education is seen as one of the neces¬
sary instruments of emancipation, mobilization,
higher productivity and the satisfaction of in¬
dividual needs, then the whole arsenal of tried and
tested methods and techniques can at last be
brought into play. In this way, step by step, us¬
ing the two-pronged strategy that Unesco has
been propounding for many years, of providing
* International Co-operation in Literacy Training: two good
examples, by Agneta Lind, of the Swedish International
Development Authority (SIDA), and Mark Foss, of the
Canadian Organization for Education and Development. 19

effective schooling for children and literacy train¬
ing for adults, spectacular results can be achieved.
As far as adults are concerned, there is not a
single illiterate peasant-farmer who is incapable
of dividing his land among his sons, assessing with
almost scientific accuracy and care the number
of trees, the richness of the soil, its slope, irriga¬
tion and surface area. There is no illiterate who
cannot convey his deepest thoughts verbally.
There is no illiterate who has not learned from his
ancestors and passed on their teachings to his own
children, who, whether literate or not, consider
this heritage to be their most precious possession.
Any literacy teaching strategy or technique must,
therefore, take as its starting point the existing
knowledge of the person to whom this new code
of communication is to be imparted. Only by
gaining an understanding of how illiterate persons
i :
20
communicate and calculate will it be possible to
bring them gradually to understand the new
coding system, which will enable them signifi¬
cantly to widen their range of activities.
Similarly, school systems should fully recog¬
nize that the transmission of factual knowledge
is much less important than the inculcation of
learning skills, and that this goal can be reached
by a wide variety of paths depending upon the
individual, his or her age and social and cultural
condition. Only then will schools cease to be
simply marshalling yards in which all those who
cannot follow the main line route of memoriza¬
tion, deduction and theory are shunted off on
to secondary tracks and dead end sidings. They
will begin to become more empirical in their
approach, to appreciate gestural and artistic qual¬
ities, and to recognize that aptitudes are not all
acquired at the same time and that each individual
follows a pathway that corresponds to his or her
talents, tastes and aspirations. Only when the way
in which each pupil receives information and
Children in Cuzco,
Peru, take part in a
demonstration calling for
the reopening of their
school.
Top, for an immigrant,
illiteracy is but one form
of exclusion.
transforms this into knowledge is seen as being
much more important than the actual nature' of
1 the information imparted to him or her shall we
be able to speak with justification of an improve¬
ment in the quality of teaching.
For literacy to become rooted in the individu¬
al's experience and for education to become the
reflection of each individual's qualities, agents
other than teacherswhose role will always be
decisive, but not exclusivewill have to be
brought into play. Communities and the fami¬
lies involved will become the new "partners" in
an enterprise whose goal must not be access to
the educational system so much as the success of
the educational process.
A huge amount of experience has been ac¬
cumulated and many specialists are now available
who could train teachers, help in the preparation
of teaching materials and assess the motivation and
knowledge of pupils. Thanks to its educational
networks and the experience it has acquired over
the past forty years, Unesco, for its part, is well
placed to promote the exchange of information
and personnel and to contribute to progress in
this field.
Governments may favour strategies based on
literacy campaigns carried out over several years
or on the gradual improvement of the quality of
basic education for children and young people.
Alternatively, they may prefer to adopt a policy
of promoting intensive literacy campaigns involv¬
ing the nation-wide mobilization of resources and
the media or, for example, calling on secondary
level pupils to act as teachers in literacy cam¬
paigns. Such programmes, however, will only
succeed if they are accompanied by a whole range
of measures relating to public health, housing and
to import/export policies.
Undertaken in isolation, literacy campaigns
or educational reforms will remain ineffective.
Only if they become an integral part of an overall
movement of reform and change will they bring
to fruition the hopes expressed in the United
Nations resolution which designated 1990 as In¬
ternational Literacy Year.
