
>% *
s * *r?^^
San Miguel, a Kogua
village.
...


cosmos BY FLOR ROMERO
Ahe Kogua, or Cagaba, people are a mainly
farming community of South American Indians,
who number some 5,000 and live on the slopes of
the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, in Colombia.
They farm scattered plots of land to which they
travel along stone-paved roads made in the forests
by their ancestors, great builders whose customs
and beliefs they still observe.
The Kogua do all they can to avoid cutting
down trees, to ensure that the rivers run unfet¬
tered along their natural courses and to preserve
the tombs and sanctuaries of their forefathers.
The stars, the vagaries of the wind and the pat¬
terns of plant and animal life are an open book
to them. They have learned to read the heavens,
where "everything is written, everything can be
seenthe past, people and animals". From their,
mountain-dwelling ancestors they have inherited ',
% i*«*


32
a very ancient calendar which features Huso (the
crab), Neuiheldji (the otter), Mebbtashi (the jaguar)
and Tarbi (the serpent).
They treasure the ancestral lore concerning
the laws of nature and the governance of the
universe, and they have a sense of helpless despair
as the "civilized ones" push them ever higher up
the mountains and confound the laws of the
Mother.
The Mother is the symbol of fertility. Her
laws regulate the reproductive cycle, and obe¬
dience to them guarantees its perpetuation for all
time. For the Kogua, true "knowledge" is



knowledge of the laws of Mother Nature as
reflected in traditions about the birth of the
universe, in myth, and in the lives and genealo¬
gies of the great heroes. Living at one with the
Mother is the key to the preservation of the
universe and the constant renewal of life in the
great, unending cosmic cycle.
The ancestral message
Seated on a mound in the Ciudad Perdida (the
"Lost City"), dressed in a white tunic and wear¬
ing a pointed hat, the high priest of the Kogua
contemplates the blue skies, lost in meditation.
Beside him lies a cloth bag filled with bananas,
avocados, corn cobs, pineapples, potatoes and
yams. He is on his way back to his humble home,
high in the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, and
has stopped for a while to meditate on the desti¬
ny of his people.
Long ago, the Kogua reigned as lords and
masters of the region stretching from the foothills
of the Sierra to the snow-clad peaks overlooking
the Caribbean Sea. Everything was theirsthe
sky, the sea, the snows, the mountains, the rivers
and the sacred cities. And they held sway over
the neighbouring peoples.
They had been masters of the universe ever
since time immemorial, when the Universal
Mother gave birth to them, for "She is the
Mother of all the races of men and of all the
tribes..."
The high priest, or Mama, of the Kogua is
responsible for watching over the universal order
as well as the spiritual and social order of the
tribe. He knows the cosmogony of his tribe (see
page 33) by heart and zealously preserves the
ancestral message handed down from generation
to generation. His knowledge of the laws of
nature, inherited from the forefathers, enables
him to understand the Law of the Mother. She
is the Mother of the lakes, the rivers, the trees
and of all things. She is the Mother of song and
dance, of the ancient brethren of stone, of fruit
and of all things. She is also the Mother of the
lesser brethren, or foreigners. She is the Mother
of musical instruments and of all temples, of the
sun and the Milky Way, of fire and of rain.
Like their ancestors, the Kogua believe that
they alone hold the secret, passed down from
father to son, that governs the way all things are
born, grow, reproduce and die, that causes the
rain to fall, the springtime to come and the sun
to rise in the morning. The Kogua are, indeed,
the guardians of the universe.
The high priest, with his sad face, his stony
stare and with all his knowledge of nature,
watches impotently over the destruction of the
universe. Like an elder brother, it is his duty to
ensure that the laws of Mother Nature are not
altered; yet what more can he do than recite the
ceremonial invocations and prayers in her tem¬
ples so close to heaven?
From time to time he may go down to the
plains, but only to implore the foreigners and the
authorities to let his people live in peace, not to
encroach any further on their lands, not to im¬
pose upon them the customs of the newcomers
and to stop the white intruders' impious destruc¬
tion of Mother Nature, who is the fount of all
things.
On 9 June 1987, worried about the violation
of their holy places, the Kogua priests gathered
in conclave in the Ciudad Perdida. As a result of
their deliberations a letter was sent to the govern¬
ment requesting protection for these sites. "These
great cities contain the true secrets of our tradi¬
tional wisdom and of our philosophical thought.
This is one of the reasons why the priests of the
Kogua have a duty to watch over their legitimate
possessions."
The Kogua stress, in particular, that Teyuna
(centre of power and symbol of fertility and of
the future) is a sacred place to which their priests
go to meditate. Placed in their safe-keeping, it is the
heritage bequeathed to them by the gods.
- ' 4*a
The "Lost City" of the
Kogua in the Sierra Nevada
de Santa Marta (Colombia).
FLOR ROMERO,
is a Colombian writer whose
published works include
novels such as Triquitraques
del trópico (1972; "Tropical
Reverberations") and Los
sueños del poder (1979;
"Dreams of Power") and
biographical studies. She has
also published collections of
stories based on pre-
Columbian myths and
legends.

THE NINE
WORLDS
OF THE
KOGUA
A simplified, adapted version of the
cosmogonie myth transcribed in its
original form by Gerardo Reichet
Domatoffin The Kogua, Volume II,
published by Procultura, Bogotá, 1985.
In the beginning was the sea. All
was darkness. There was neither
sun nor moon, no people, plants
or animals. There was only the
sea; and the sea was everywhere.
The sea was the Mother (...); and
the Mother was neither person
nor thing, nor anything at all. She
was the spirit of that which was
to come; and she was thought and
she was memory.
Thus, the Mother already ex¬
isted, when, gradually, the lands,
the worlds took shape until they
became the world that we know
today. In this wise were fashioned
nine worlds. In the First World
was the Mother, the water and the
night. There was as yet no dawn.
This is why, at that time, the
Mother was called Se-ne-nuláng.
There was also a Father, who was
called Katakéne-ne-nuláng. They
had a son, whom they named
Bunkua-sé. Yet still there were no
people, no things, not anything at
all. They were Aluna,* that is,
they were spirit and thought.
Such was the First World.
The Second World had a
Father who was a tiger. In the
Third there emerged worms and
maggots. In the Fourth there
were two Mothers, Sáyaguaeye-
yumang and Disi-se-yuntaná, and
a Father, Sai-taná, who knew
what people would be like. In the
Fifth World appeared the Mother
Enkuâne-ne-nuiâng, who pon¬
dered on the human beings to be;
but these were humans without
ears, without eyes, without noses,
without hearing, yet they had a
form of speech, incessantly chant¬
ing in a mad refrain "sai-sai-sai"
(night, night, night).
The Mother, Bunkuáne-ne-
nuMng, and the Father, Sai-chaká,
of the Sixth World gave birth to
the first two Masters of the
World, the two Búnkua-sé, Blue
and Black. The world was divided
into two partsthe Blue and the
Blackand then, in each part,
there were nine Búnkua-sé. Those
to the left were all Blue and those
to the right were all Black.
Ahúnyika was the Mother of
the Seventh World in which
blood began to form in bodies and .
worms multiplied but still had no
bones or strength.
In the Eighth World the
Mother, Kenyajé, and the Father,
Abuinakatana, gave birth to the
thirty-six Fathers and Masters of
the world.
Finally, the Ninth World was
formed, in which there were nine
White Búnkua-sé. Then the
Fathers of the world encountered
a huge tree in the sky above the
sea; and above the sea they built
a great house of wood and liana
and they called it Aluna.
* For the Kogua, the concept of Alina in¬
cludes the notions of spirit, memory,
thought, volition, soul and intention. The
concrete, visible manifestation of things is
symbolic only and their true value and es¬
sence are embodied in Aluna. 33
