The wrong
track
BY NICOLAS LANGLOIS
NICOLAS LANGLOIS,
of France, has been a
journalist with the French daily
Le Monde (1972) and
the weekly (.'Express
(1973-1978). In 1979
he launched a bimonthly
magazine, Le Journal de
l'Automobile, of which he is
editor-in-chief.
Xhings have changed in the East. And what
slipped through the first breach in the Iron Cur¬
tain but the automobile. The car-manufacturing
West, whose ramifications stretch as far as
Southeast Asia, had found a new stamping
ground. In the Soviet Union, perestroika and
automobile are hand in glove. All the world's car
makers have made the trip to Moscow.
So does the automobile mean freedom? Yes,
if we're talking about free market economics.
Yes, when we remember that buying a car is
always an exciting event. Yes, when we think of
some drivers, the privileged citizens of
unprivileged countries. Or when we dream of
exploring wide open spaces.
But are we not being taken in by a myth, the
myth of freedom to go anywhere, effortlessly, at
a speed that mere physical effort cannot permit?
The idea is seductive, but given the way it has
been put into practice it seems likely to defeat
its own object. Won't a surfeit of cars bring the
traffic to a halt?
Taking the world as a whole, the car is no
more than a dream for nine persons out of ten.
In Western Europe it means a job for one person 27

28
out of ten. In Europe, North America and Japan,
cars are the occasion for trade fairs, the object of
market strategies, a social issue. Their fantastic
magnetism leads to all kinds of abuses.
On the road
Let's not indulge in misplaced nostalgia. Let the
so-called developed world sort out its inconsisten¬
cies and burn its own idols. The rich have taken
the car for a ride, side-tracked it from its voca¬
tion. A wonderful contrivance has become an
intrusive machine, a chrome-finished gadget, a
status symbol. The modern equivalent of the
circus games of ancient Rome, motor sports eulo¬
gize speed and reach a worldwide audience
through television. But cars can also kill, damage
the environment, pollute. Let's not be indifferent,
either. The spoiled children are far outnumbered
by the forgotten millions excluded from the
benefits of growth. More than 85 per cent of the
cars manufactured in 1989 were sold in North
America, Western Europe and Japan.
This versatile mechanical aid has so many
uses. Cars, trucks, buses and coaches break down
the barriers of isolation, facilitate trade, bring
people together, and realize certain hopes for
development.
The materialization of a dream of freedom,
the car also promotes a kind of equality. It is
industry's gift to democracy and a social leveller
second only to television. Drivers trapped in a
traffic jam are all equal, however much their
vehicles cost and however fast they can go. But
at a time when the world's population is tending
to concentrate in towns and cities, the car is
becoming an expensive amenity. But to think that
we are poisoning the planet just to travel in some
kind of comfort...
Great expectations
Dreaming and negligence have turned the car into
a scourge of our times, but a scourge which is
considered indispensable, sought-after and
encouraged. It is a fomentor of disarray, a lord
of misrule. Once an instrument of pleasure, it has
become a necessity, an indispensable means of
coping with the constraints of new life-styles. Its
reign heralds anarchy and overpopulation. The
car factories produce in order to provide much-
needed jobs. They turn out cars; the cars are
bought. Everybody wants one. What can be done
to put this juggernaut back on the right track?
Perhaps a few restrictions are starting to be
imposed here and there. Some uses of the car have
been codified. Many people think that cars are
being used as a scapegoat for the pollution of the
planet. Cars may cause pollution, but they are
an exposed target. We pay lip service to the
quality of the air, but at the same time we carry
on digging, building roads, underpasses and
highways to absorb the constantly increasing den¬
sity of traffic.
We ask so much of the car. Think of all those
young Americans who have to learn to drive at
the age of fifteen if they want to go anywhere.
Think of all those poor souls cooped up for hours
on end in their steel containers. What does it
matter whether they are going on holiday or
going to work? There is no other transport
system to get them into town. For the private
individual, the car is the least costly modern
means of transport.
Why, at the end of the twentieth century, in
a so-called developed country, does a middle-class
homo sapiens spend more of his income on his car
than on his house? Because the car is all things
to all men: source of taxes, dynamo of economic
development, provider of jobs. The automobile
industry is set to create new jobs in Eastern
Europe just as it once rescued southern Italy and
northern France, and still helps sustain the British
economy.
The commuter's nightmare
When the traditional mainstays of the economy
fail, when the steel industry winds down and the
construction industry goes into recession, the
motor industry is always there to save the day.
Whatever burdens they may have to shoulder,
drivers love their cars and go on doing so whatever
the price. It's a good thing too, since they often
have no choice.
Back in the 1950s, the idiotic game of com¬
muting to work by car was invented. In the cities
the tramlines were torn up, dormitory suburbs
were built, and trains were replaced by coaches
and trucks. Little thought was given to the
victims.
In modern cities white lines, have taken the
place of tramlines. These are the major achieve¬
ments of an age which will not accept that
different things have different uses. Versatile
though it is, the car is doubtless not made to com¬
pete with the aircraft, the train or the bicycle on
their own terms. But people are the easiest com¬
modities to transportthey know how to wait,
they travel alone, they do not deteriorate.
Competitor In the Kenya
Rally, 1984. In background,
Mount Kilimanjaro.
Cadillac-shaped villa
In California.

r
And so we have decided not to think too
much. We build roads to accommodate the
machines which pour from the factories at a rate
of over 150,000 a day. And so it goes on, an endless
game of follow-my-leader.
The mainspring of the economy must not
give way. When the Japanese rely on their cars
to set the seal on their economic supremacy,
other countries try to riposte in their own way.
To escape invasion, loss of profits and jobs, coun¬
tries add more muscle to their own automobile
industries. But perhaps without thinking about
what they should really be doing. In other fields
we listen to the experts. The ideal range of an air¬
craft is well known. It is common knowledge that
up to a distance of 700 kilometres, the train is
superior to air transport. We know that we're
producing the wrong kind of vehicle.
Only a few years ago, the budget of a country
like France was equivalent to the turnover of the
world's leading car-maker. Today, in the world's
seven richest countries, car firms, followed by the
oil companies, still lead the economy in terms of
turnover and profit.
The dream of blue horizons
So far the elastic has not given way. The lust for
cars is still as powerful as ever. It still keeps the
wheels of big business turning, and fuels interna¬
tional trade. These colonizers do not even need
to evoke other culturesthey make and sell a
dream. Has car-worship not been a religion in the
so-called developed countries?
So let's take it easy. Too bad if the car slows
to a halt. Too bad if certain inequalities appear
again. The dream is getting some rough treat¬
ment. It's had its day. Today only advertising can
show wide open spaces, our dreams of blue
horizons and the romance of travel.
What does it matter? Let maturity wait for
another century, for other generations worship¬
ping other gods. Let them try to sort things out...
as long as they can still draw breath. 29
