An international
civil servant describes how
he was wrongfully detained
in his own country for
two years
IN THE HANDS
OF THE SECURITATE
BY SORIN DUMITRESCU
XJLt the end of 1969, 1 was appointed to the
post of Director of the Office of Hydrology
in the Science Sector of Unesco.
Shortly after taking up my appointment,
like everyone else who becomes an interna¬
tional civil servant, I took an oath to fulfil my
functions and generally to conduct myself
"with the interests of the Organization only
in view, and not to seek or accept instruc¬
tions.. .from any government..."
Aware as I was of the full meaning of these
words, I never suspected that, a few years later,
they were destined to play such an important
part in my life.
An uncompleted mission
On 6 June 1976, I left Paris to represent
the Director-General of Unesco at two meet¬
ings first in Romania (8-13 June), the
second in Bulgaria (15-18 June). I made the trip
in my own car, accompanied by my wife and
my daughter.
At the end of my stay in Romania, just
as I was preparing to cross the frontier into
Bulgaria, I was stopped by the Romanian
police. I was told that I had to return immedi¬
ately to Bucharest to see the deputy minister
for foreign affairs, Mr. Vasile Gliga. I tele¬
phoned Mr. Gliga and explained to him that
I had urgent business to attend to in Varna,
SORIN DUMITRESCU,
Romanian-born hydrologist and Deputy
Assistant Director-General in Unesco's Science
Sector from 1985 to 1988, is currently an adviser
to the Director-General of Unesco. The author of
a number of publications on hydrology and water
resources management, he was awarded the
International Hydrology Prize in 1988.
Bulgaria, but to no avail. I had to return to
Bucharest for an appointment with Mr. Gliga
who told me that I could not leave the country
until "certain important matters" had been
settled.
I told him that in the circumstances I
would have to inform the Director-General
of Unesco that I had been prevented from ful¬
filling my mission in accordance with my
instructions. The deputy minister advised me
to do nothing, so as to avoid an incident.
According to him the problem would shortly
be solved. Anxious not to worsen the situa¬
tion, I agreed to wait until the morning of
18 June.
On that day I was again summoned to the
office of the deputy minister, who told me that
the Romanian government had decided to
"withdraw my status as an international civil
servant". I was to return to the ministry on
the following day to draw up a letter to the 45

46
Director-General announcing my resignation
from my post at Unesco. I was forbidden, on
pain of instant arrest, to contact Unesco in any
way whatever. When I asked the reasons for
this decision, the deputy minister said that he
was not authorized to divulge them to me. I
told him that I considered this to be an abuse
of power since the government of Romania
had no right to revoke my status as an inter¬
national civil servant. But I did not leave his
office until I had agreed to draw up, by the
following day, a letter of resignation.
Once outside the confines of the deputy
minister's office, I thought for a moment
of contacting Mr. Thomas Keller, head of
Unesco's European Centre for Higher Edu¬
cation (CEPES), whose headquarters is in
Bucharest. Mr. Keller, however, was on holi¬
day and it would be risky to try to telephone
Paris or to contact an embassy, since I was
clearly being followed. In the end, taking enor¬
mous risks and adopting methods worthy of
a detective novel, my daughter succeeded in
transmitting to the French embassy a message
which I requested the French authorities to
pass on to the Director-General of Unesco.
The same day, 18 June,' an official from
the "Post Office" came to our house to change
our telephone which, he told us, was certainly
not working properly.
The fourth paragraph
During the night I attempted to draw up a
letter of resignation that would be as "clear"
as possible:
"Dear Director-General,
"I have the honour to inform you that the
government of Romania has decided that I
should resume my duties at the National
Hydrological Service.
"I therefore ask you to accept my resig¬
nation from Unesco to take effect im¬
mediately.
"Since, under present circumstances, I am
unable to return to Paris, I would be grateful
if you would ask the Bureau of Personnel to
let me know the steps I should take to meet
my obligations to Unesco and the terms under
which I can benefit from rights relating to ter¬
mination of service.
"At this time when I am leaving Unesco,
I would like to thank you for the confidence
you have shown in me and to assure you that
I remain faithful to the ideals of the Organi¬
zation."
On reading the letter, my wife and daugh¬
ter both had the same reaction: "Do you really
think they will be so stupid as to let you send
such a letter?". I wrote my answer on a piece
of paper which we burnt after they had read
it: "I am trying to negotiate."
On 19 June, I presented myself at the
ministry of foreign affairs with this draft letter.
The person responsible for Unesco affairs read
it and asked me: "Couldn't you give some
other reason for your resignation? Why not
say that you are unwell, for example?" I re¬
plied that under the circumstances no one
would believe this and that it was better to tell
the truth. The deputy minister, to whom my
interlocutor referred the problem, accepted
the explanation given, but wanted to strike out
the fourth paragraphthe one in which I
expressed my fidelity to the ideals of Unesco.
For me the two essential paragraphs were
the first and the third. The fourth paragraph
did indeed reflect my feelings, but it was much
less important for the "transparency" I wished
to convey in my letter. I could have given it
up, but I made a show of wanting to keep it
in, stressing the fact that it helped to soften
the excessively brusque tone of the letter over¬
all. After further discussion with the deputy
minister my interlocutor returned with, to my
great surprise, his consent to the contents of
the letter. I left the ministry feeling greatly
relievedthe Director-General would have no
difficulty in understanding my message. I felt
that I had scored a point.
'You are and you remain
a member
of the Unesco Secretariat'
Two weeks passed and nothing happened. I
began to have doubtshad the Romanian
authorities sent my original letter? Had they
perhaps concocted another letter and forged
my signature? At the ministry they had told
me that I would receive a reply from Unesco
within a week at the latest. The utter uncer¬
tainty about the possible outcome of the send¬
ing of my letter of resignation was one of the
hardest things to bear.
Around 5 July, unable to restrain myself
any longer, I decided to risk everything and
telephoned Unesco headquarters in Paris. The
Director-General was not in Paris and so I
asked to speak to the Deputy Director-
General, Mr. John Fobes. When I heard his
voice, I asked him if he was aware of my
problem. He said that he was. I then explained
that owing to the conditions under which I
was telephoning I could only speak to him
briefly and that I had one single question to
put to him: "Was I still a member of the
Secretariat?". In calm, serious tones which I
shall never forget, he replied: "You are and
you remain a member of the Secretariat." The
Director-General considered my letter of resig¬
nation as inadmissible and he had written a
letter to this effect to the Romanian Perma¬
nent Delegate to Unesco.
I hung up and then gave a brief account
of the situation to my family. There was a
feeling of euphoriawe were saved. Our
problems would now be rapidly resolved and
we should soon return to Paris. We did not,
alas, know enough about the nature of the
Romanian regime.
I learned later that the original version of
my letter of "resignation" had been delivered
to the Director-General's office on 21 June.
In a covering letter which accompanied my
letter, the Romanian Ambassador indicated
that he was forwarding it "on the instructions
of his government". Mr. Amadou Mahtar
M'Bow, Director-General of Unesco, immedi-
Prapor (1981), oil on canvas, by the Romanian
artist Horia Bernea. (Art Against Apartheid
Collection, see page 38.)
ately summoned the Ambassador and in¬
formed him that the form in which my resig¬
nation had been presented did not comply
with the correct legal procedures. To avoid
causing the Romanian authorities any embar¬
rassment, he preferred not to reply to the
letter for a period of ten days. Once this delay
had elapsed, if I had still not returned to Paris,
he would be obliged to react officially.
Since nothing happened during the follow¬
ing ten days, on 1 July the Director-General
sent an official letter to the Ambassador declar¬
ing my letter of resignation to be inadmissible
and adding: "the conditions under which Mr.
Dumitrescu's request was formulated and
presented place in serious jeopardy the very
basis of the international civil service."
On 14 July, I met Mr. Thomas Keller,
head of Unesco's Bucharest Centre. He had
been instructed by Mr. M'Bow to contact me
and find out from me personally exactly what
my position was. Being uncertain whether I
would be able to reach the Centre, I asked Mr.

Keller to meet me at the corner of the street.
He reached the meeting place before I did. We
walked together in a nearby park followed by
several members of the infamous Securitate.
Although I had never met him beforethe
person who awaited me could have been an
impostorI spoke to him frankly and asked
him to tell the Director-General that I con¬
sidered my resignation to be null and void.
At that time, I still believed that the whole
affair was due to a handful of over-zealous civil
servants and that once it came to the
knowledge of the highest ranks of the Party
and the state we should be allowed to leave.
I wrote a number of explanatory notes for
their attention, explaining that I had nothing
to reproach myself for and requesting an ex¬
planation of why I had been retained against
my will. I never received a single reply. Then,
one day, through an official's indiscretion, I
learned that the Romanian head of state,
Nicolae Ceausescu, was fully aware of my case
and that he had personally given the order not
to give way to pressure from Unesco. There
was no room for further compromise. I real¬
ized that I had to put everything at stake.
On 6 August, Mr. M'Bow wrote a letter
to Ceausescu which began with these words:
"Convinced that I have exhausted all
other possible paths of action I am taking the
liberty of informing you personally about a
matter to which I attach the utmost impor¬
tance. It concerns Mr. Sorin Dumitrescu,
Director of the Office of Hydrology at the
Unesco Secretariat and a Romanian national
who, having been detained on Romanian ter¬
ritory through which he was merely passing
before carrying out a mission I had entrusted
to him, has been unable to return to his post
in Paris. To my knowledge this is the first time
in the history of the United Nations system
that a high-ranking international civil servant
has found himself in such a situation."
The state of Unesco
This letter went unanswered. The Director-
General then decided to bring the matter to
the attention of Unesco's Executive Board.
The matter was discussed for the first time
during a private session of the Board on 9 Oct¬
ober. After presenting the facts of the case,
Mr. M'Bow stressed that if he accepted the sit¬
uation created by the Romanian authorities
he would be failing to observe the oath he had
sworn when he had assumed his functions as
Director-General in 1974 and that, if he did
not receive the support of member states in
this matter he would feel obliged to submit
his resignation to the Executive Board. He
received very widespread and very strong sup¬
port from the Board.
Impressed by this turn of events, the
Romanian government, through its represen¬
tative on the Executive Board, declared that
it was ready to discuss the matter further.
Some ten days later, Mr. Luis Marques, Direc¬
tor of Personnel at Unesco, went to Bucharest
as representative of the Director-General.
Meanwhile, in Bucharest, I was quite un¬
aware of what had taken place at the meeting
of the Executive Board. The people with
whom I was dealing the gentlemen of the
Securitatetried to demoralize me: what they
said to me in substance was that "in no coun¬
try can an ordinary citizen oppose the head
of state; the Director-General cannot refuse
to accept your resignation..."
A few days before the Director-General's
representative arrived in Bucharest, I was sum¬
moned to appear before the Central Commit¬
tee of the Party. The deputy head of the
foreign affairs section told me that they held
nothing against me and that I had been re¬
tained in Romania simply because I had been
too long abroad. I should immediately agree
to return to employment in the national ad¬
ministration. "You must understand that
Romania, which has resisted the pressures of
its great neighbour to the east, is not going to
yield to the pressure of the state of Unesco."
To which I replied: "That is where you are
wrong. Unesco is not a state, but a commu¬
nity of 150 member states with which it is not
in the interest of Romania to quarrel."
I was able to meet Luis Marques when he
arrived on 20 October. The Romanian auth¬
orities requested me to inform him clearly that
I no longer intended to return to Paris.
However, when he told me what had taken
place at the meeting of the Unesco Executive
Board, I confirmed to him that I was, on the
contrary, ready to return to my post at
Unesco as soon as possible and that I refused
any compromise on this matter. The next day,
at the Central Committee, I informed my
usual interlocutor that he could no longer
count on my co-operation. He replied that my
behaviour put me in a very serious position
and that my case was no longer in his hands.
A week later, I was taken to court by the
minister of finance. I owed the Romanian state
a sum of about 70,000 francsevery Romani¬
an citizen working abroad must, by law, turn
over to the state the greater part of his earn¬
ings. In my case, it was a question of arrears,
since I had already paid over more than
120,000 francs. The case was judged in Decem¬
ber and was a pure formality. I declared that
I was ready to pay what I owed as soon as I
was in a position to do so. The money was
deposited at the Unesco Centre in Bucharest
in January 1977, thus settling the only formal
legal difference I had had with the Romanian
authorities.
At the beginning of February 1977, Mr.
M'Bow paid an official visit to Romania. Ini¬
tially arranged for September 1976, the visit
had been postponed several times at the re¬
quest of the Romanian government. Mr.
M'Bow hoped to obtain the government's
agreement to my leaving the country, but no
such agreement was forthcoming. During an
interview he had with Ceausescu, the latter
stated that Unesco's request was inadmissible
since a matter of national sovereignty was in¬
volved. The Director-General explained that,
on the contrary, it was a question of interna¬
tional law and that the Romanian government
was acting in violation of international agree¬
ments to which it was a signatory. The inter¬
view came to an abrupt end.
As arranged, I was waiting at the head¬
quarters of the Unesco Centre for Mr. M'Bow
to return, when I received a telephone call,
supposedly on his behalf, telling me to go
straight to his hotel and meet him there. I un¬
derstood at once that this was a stratagem to
prevent me from meeting him and I continued
to wait at the Centre until he arrived. He as¬
sured me that he would redouble his efforts
to obtain my liberation and that he would
soon make the whole affair public.
The repression begins
On 4 March, a violent earthquake struck
southern Romania. On 30 March, an officer
appeared at my house with a summons for me
to report for five months military service, be¬
ginning the following day, in a military unit
whose task was to rebuild a town about a
hundred kilometres from Bucharest that had
been almost entirely destroyed in the earth¬
quake. This decision, I later learned, was 47

enshrined in a decree, signed by Ceausescu
himself, on which mine was the only name
to appear.
Unesco protested against this new viola¬
tion of my status as an international civil ser¬
vant and requested the Romanian authorities
to suspend this measure, but once again
received not a whisper of a reply.
At that time I was not at all well. At the
military hospital in Bucharest to which I was
taken, a risk of hepatitis was diagnosed. Af¬
ter having decided to have me hospitalized, the
commander of my unit told me, with regret,
that he had been ordered to release me right
away. Flanked by two soldiers, I was taken
by car to my home to collect my belongings.
My family watched as I was driven away, not
knowing how or when they would see me
again.
I was ill for several days, without medical
attention, without food and scarcely able to
sleep. One of my relations succeeded in find¬
ing me and told my wife and daughter where
he had seen me. Our telephone had been cut
off. Two members of the Securitate had been
to the house and had ordered my wife and
daughter to refrain from all contact with
Unesco representatives. Otherwise I ran the
risk of being taken before a military tribunal
and they themselves could be arrested.
The purpose of the military service was
to cut me off from all my contacts and it did,
indeed, increase my isolation. Nevertheless, at
Unesco the affair was following its course and
in April the Executive Board reaffirmed its
wholehearted support for the action taken by
the Director-General.
Bargaining
Despite their blustering, the Romanian auth¬
orities were on the spot. They had to find a way
out. In May, I was summoned to Bucharest
to meet the deputy minister of the interior and
head of the Securitate, N. Plechitza. For the
first time I received an explanation for my
retention in the country since June 1976. 1 was
suspected of not wanting to return to Romania
at the end of my contract with Unesco.
Plechitza recognized that a mistake had doubt¬
less been made but said that it was too late to
reverse matters. It was now important to find
some way of saving the face of the head of state,
who had refused to authorize my return to
Paris. I replied that, in my opinion, the pres¬
tige of a head of state could only be increased if,
having discovered that an injustice had been
committed, he took steps to put that injustice
right.
I saw the deputy minister and his col¬
leagues several times. They made acceptance
ofs.my resignation by Unesco a prior condi¬
tion to any settlement of my problem. Once it
had been accepted they would offer me a post
as a deputy minister and, if I so wished, I could
go and work abroad. To which I invariably
answered that the plan was flawed, that
Unesco would never accept my resignation
until I returned to Paris and that my sole am-
4o bition was to continue with my work there.
In August the Romanian authorities came
up with another plan. As my contract with
Unesco was due to end on 31 October, all I
had to do was to ask the Director-General not
to renew my contract. In this way the
problem of resignation would be avoided. My
interlocutors asked me to send a letter to the
Director-General containing this proposal and
suggesting that he should send a representa¬
tive to Bucharest so that I could confirm my
decision in person. I decided to accept in the
hope that my daughter at least would regain
her liberty and be able to continue her studies
in Paris. I told myself that in this way I would
have a chance of speaking to the Director-
General's representative and of revealing my
real intentions to him.
The meaning of a gesture
Towards the end of August, I was told that,
following my request, Mr. M'Bow had decided
to send an Assistant Director-General, Mr.
Jacques Rigaud, accompanied by the deputy
director of the Bureau of Personnel, to
Bucharest and that they would arrive on 6 Sep¬
tember. I took advantage of this to bring my
military service to an endit had, apparently,
been decided that this should be extended
beyond the original five-month periodby
maintaining that, if I remained a member of
the armed forces, I would refuse to talk to the
Unesco representatives. This the authorities
accepted.
However, they had still not authorized
my daughter to return to Paris. On the very
day that Mr. Rigaud arrived, a Securitate agent
told me that he had tried to obtain the autho¬
rization from Ceausescu at the airport as he
was preparing to leave on an official visit to
Bulgaria, but that he had replied with a gesture
of the hand the meaning of which was not
sufficiently clear. In the circumstances, it
would be necessary to await the President's
return in order to discover what exactly the
gesture had meant. I was assured this would
only be a matter of days. It was made very
clear that it was essential for me to respect the
arrangements made and to ensure that the
Assistant Director-General left fully convinced
that I did not want my contract renewed. If
this was not the case I should be subject to
severe repression and all hope of a com¬
promise would be lost. I was also incidental¬
ly reminded that I should beware of road
accidents since the traffic in Bucharest had
become very dangerous.
I met Mr. Rigaud in the afternoon of 6
September. I explained to him why I had writ¬
ten my letter to the Director-General and, of
course, confirmed my desire to continue to
serve Unesco. I told him, "I feel in no way
bound by this kind of 'gentlemen's agree¬
ment', those with whom it was made are no
gentlemen." Mr. Rigaud assured me that he
understood my position perfectly. I then made
a tape-recording in which I stated, among
other things: "I declare that I have not in any
way acted in a manner contrary to Romanian
law or the interests of the state of Romania.
Nothing-Nobody III
(1989), collage on wire mesh by the
Romanian artist Christian Paraschiv.
All I have done is to remain faithful to the
oath I took when I joined Unesco. I see no
incompatibility between this oath and a
citizen's duty to his country. There is no ques¬
tion of my changing my position. The
Director-General should not hesitate to act in
accordance with what he believes to be right,
even if that might put my safety at risk. The
life we have been subjected to since June 1976
is no life at all. My wife and I are ready to
face death, but to face it standing up."
Following Mr. Rigaud's report, my con¬
tract with Unesco was renewed for two years.
The Executive Board examined my case again
at its 103rd session in September/October
1977. On 6 October, for the first time, the Ex¬
ecutive Board held a public session on the
problem. The chairman traced the unfolding
of the affair. Referring to the United Nations
Charter and Unesco's Constitution, he
recalled that international civil servants had to
carry out their functions in a totally indepen¬
dent manner subject only to the authority of
the Director-General of the Organization.
"The Executive Board," he concluded, "is

very concerned by what appears to be the
breaking, by a member state, of international
agreements freely entered into. It unreservedly
supports the position adopted by the Director-
General and accepts as its own the decisions
he has taken."
Taking the floor in the name of his
government, the Romanian representative,
Marcel Ghibernea, rejected the declaration by
the chairman of the Board and bitterly at¬
tacked the position taken by the Director-
General. He also made a number of calumni¬
ous statements about me, going so far as to
say that I had "spent large sums to acquire as¬
sets whose value largely exceeded my legal
income".
The Director-General replied in these
terms: "All the measures I have taken in this
affair have been brought fully to the attention
of the Executive Board and fully approved by
it. I can therefore affirm to Mr. Ghibernea that
I here enjoy the trust of all the members of
the Boardwith the exception, perhaps, of
Mr. Ghibernea himselfbecause I refuse to
betray the oath I swore on the day I was
elected Director-General of the Organi¬
zation."
Meanwhile, in many countries, the media
had begun to talk about my case. My name
was becoming known.
A foreign organization
The Romanian authorities then decided to pull
out all the stops. On 13 October, criminal
proceedings were opened against me and I was
accused of "treason by the transmission of
secret information". According to article 157
of the Romanian penal code, this crime is
punishable by a five- to fifteen-year term of
imprisonment and the confiscation of assets.
I was accused of having "passed on to agents
of a 'foreign organization' (Unesco) informa¬
tion the use of which by that organization
threatened the security of the state".
The inquisitors gave me two hours to
reply, in writing, to this accusation. I was pre¬
pared for this eventuality, which I had been
expecting since I had been threatened with it
before. In less than twenty minutes I developed
the following defence:
"I consider this accusation to be without
any foundation whatsoever. None of my ac¬
tions can be held to constitute an infringement
of article 157 of the penal code. According to
the report of the commission of inquiry, the
accusation is based on contacts I had, between
June 1976 and October 1977, with represen¬
tatives of Unesco, of which Organization I am
a staff member. With regard to these contacts
I give the following details:
(1) I have never transmitted to anyone in¬
formation likely to endanger the security of
the state.
(2) I consider the idea that an organization
like Unesco could use information passed on
by an individual to threaten the security of
one of its member states, in this case Roma¬
nia, to be absurd.
(3) My contacts with the representatives
of Unesco during the period designated were
exclusively concerned with the obligations to
the Organization implied by my functions as
a member of the Secretariat and by the oath
I took when I became a servant of the Organi¬
zation. These contacts were made in my ca¬
pacity as a Unesco staff member and therefore
do not fall within the terms of article 157 of
the penal code. They are, however, in confor¬
mity with the provisions of the Convention
on the privileges and immunities of special¬
ized agencies, article VI, section M, paragraph
(a). This Convention has been ratified by
Romania.
(4) In view of the foregoing, I shall hence¬
forth refuse to answer any further questions
relating to the above-mentioned accusation."
I thought that I was going to be arrested.
However, I was told that I was to remain at
liberty, but that I must report to the head¬
quarters of the penal inquiries section of the
Securitate every day from eight in the morn¬
ing until ten at night. This was how I came
to experience things I had previously only seen
in filmslong corridors with many doors,
each topped by a red light which lit up
whenever there was someone inside, interro¬
gation rooms with barred windows, listening
equipment...
The inquisitors began by asking me such
questions as: "Do you admit that you passed
letters to the Director-General of Unesco via
agents of Unesco?", and "When did you first
meet the Director of CEPES?" Sticking to the
line I had adopted in court, I invariably re¬
plied: "I refuse to answer that question."
The inquisitors were very disappointed
and said that I was only smoothing the path
for my imminent condemnation. To which
I replied: "So much the better; I shall return
to Paris all the sooner."
After a time the officials in charge of the
investigation began to lose heart. The sessions
ended earlier and we even got round to talk¬
ing about subjects other than my case.
The stick and the carrot
On 25 October, seven Securitate agents en¬
tered our house in the early morning to make
a search and to place our possessions under
notice of sequestration. I believe, however,
that the real purpose of the operation was
to convince us that my condemnation was
imminent.
This was not so. On the contrary, on 12
November I was sent for by deputy minister
Plechitza. He was all sweetness and light and
told me that the judicial pursuits against me
were being abandoned for lack of valid
grounds. Furthermore, "to demonstrate the 49

50
generosity of the authorities", he announced
that he had decided to allow my daughter to
return to Paris to continue her interrupted
university studies. We all found it difficult to
believe that this was not some new form of
trickery, but three days later my daughter
received her passport. Until her arrival in
Paris, however, we remained anxious. After
all, she could have been taken somewhere else.
But a few hours after she had left we received
a telephone call from her which included the
agreed password to indicate that she had ar¬
rived safely.
The following morning the deputy
minister called me to say in substance: "We
have been generous to you; now it is your turn
to show your gratitude by helping us to put
an end to the dispute with Unesco. In a few
months you will be able to leave the country
and rejoin your daughter if you so wish." I
replied that the right granted to my daughter
to resume her studies seemed no more than
normal to me, so why should I change the po¬
sition I had held since the beginning of the
affair? The conversation went on for hours
and was resumed on subsequent days. The
deputy minister assured me of his esteem and
appealed to my "patriotic feelings". At times
I found these "conversations" even more pain¬
ful than those in which my Securitate inqui¬
sitors had made all kinds of threats.
After about a fortnight, the tone changed
once again. If I continued to refuse to co¬
operate with them, said Plechitza, my daughter
would be killed on the streets of Paris or
brought back by force to Romania. "We have
already done this in other cases," he told me.
I took this new threat seriously and informed
the Director-General of it and he immediately
asked the French authorities for protection for
my daughter.
After a brief lull, the repressive measures
began again early in February 1978. I had
several interviews with a secretary of the Cen¬
tral Committee of the Party and former
minister of the Securitate, Ion Stanescu. He
in his turn threatened to have me thrown in
prison and, when I invoked the law, he re¬
plied: "There is no law for people like you."
I was told that my trial was entering its
final stage.
The end of the affair
On 28 February, the press published extracts
from a statement I had sent to Paris and which
my daughter had made public:
"The tragedy that I have lived through
since June 1976 is chiefly that I find myself
a prisoner in my own country.... My loyalty
to my country is no reason for me to accept
the injustice that has been done to me, for me
to be the victim of calumny, of abuse of power
and of disregard for the law.... On several oc¬
casions, those representing the authorities have
put forward to me as their major argument
that: 'You are a Romanian citizen and the state
can do with you what it will.' Since I dislike
the feudal undertones of this argument and
since any dialogue with the authorities is
Design for Frustration (1981), charcoal on paper,
by Konrad Klapheck (Fed. Rep. of Germany).
impossible, I have asked to give up Romanian
nationality."
On 8 March 1978 one of the most impor¬
tant purges of the Ceausescu regime took
place. All the officials with whom I had had
dealings were victims of it and I immediately
made it known that I would refuse to respond
to any judicial summons until I had an oppor¬
tunity to talk to their replacements.
Meanwhile, international pressures were
growing stronger and stronger. Governmental
and parliamentary delegations visiting Romania
all raised my case, which was also raised on
the occasion of Ceausescu's visits abroad.
The United Nations Organization, which
until then had remained out of the affair,
adopted a position in my favour at a meeting
of the Administrative Committee on Co¬
ordination held in April 1978 and chaired by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The Secretary-General gave his support to Mr.
M'Bow and took a number of steps: my case
would be raised in the United Nations and at
the next Unesco General Conference. At a
meeting in May, Unesco's Executive Board
was informed of a proposal to have the dispute
brought before the International Court of
Justice at The Hague. Unesco's Staff Associa¬
tion and the Federation of International Civil
Servants Associations (FICSA) condemned
this attack on the independence of the inter¬
national civil service and adopted a number
of plans of action.
Finally, Ceausescu yielded. On 6 May, I
was summoned by the authorities who told
me th,at I was authorized to return to Paris.
On 12 May 1978, my wife and I left
Bucharest on a tourist visa, and arrived in Paris
two days later after an absence of twenty-three
months. On 16 May I resumed my normal
duties at Unesco.
I had won, but I shall remain marked for
life by this ordeal.
Acknowledgements
Cover, page 3: © Isabelle Wolff, Pans. Back
cover: © G.F.-Giraudon, Pans. Page 2: © Gervais
Bataillé, Conques-sur-Orbeil, France. Page 5:
Gilles Bassignac © Gamma, Pans. Pages 6-7:
Claude Gaspari © FDAC, Conseil General du Val
de Marne, 1988. Page 8: Gabina Farova © Vu,
Paris. Page 9: © Amnesty International, Paris.
Pages 10-11: ©J. Bottin, Paris. Pages 10 (below),
40 (left): Unesco/Dominique Roger. Pages 12-13,
14-15, 16-17: Stephane Duroy © Vu, Paris. Page
14 (left): © W.W. Norton & Company, New
York. Page 15 (below): © Keystone, Paris. Pages
16 (below), 45: Manuel Vimenet © Vu, Paris.
Pages 18-19: © Andreas Sterzing 1990, New
York. Page 20 (left): © Anne Truffaut, Paris.
Pages 20-21: M. Renaudeau © Hoa-Qui, Paris.
Page 22: © Edimedia, Paris. National Museum of
Modem Art, Georges Pompidou Centre, Paris.
Page 23: © Nicole Dufour, Hong Kong. Pages
24, 37 (above), 38, 46-47, 50: © Artists of the
World Against Apartheid, Paris. Page 25: Lee
Fatherree, Berkeley, USA © Galerie Claude
Samuel, Paris. Pages 26-27: © AIAP/Bibliothèque
des Arts, Paris/Unesco, from Unesco, 40 Years, 40
Artists, 40 Countries. Page 28 (above): Gaby
Sommer © Gamma, Paris; (centre): © National
Museum of Modern Art, Georges Pompidou
Centre, Paris; (below): Lavaud © Artephot, Paris.
Pages 28-29: H. Silvester © Rapho, Paris. Page
29 (above): © Rapho, Pans. Pages 30-31: ©
Humano S.A./Les Humanoïdes Associés, Paris.
Page 32 (left): Gaywood-Spooner © Gamma,
Paris; (right): © Yury Mirakov, Moscow. Page
33: © Galerie du Génie, Pans-Bast ille. Pages
34-35: © Giraudon, Paris. Page 34 (below): ©
CAPC, Museum of Contemporary Art,
Bordeaux. Phoebe-Chason Collection, New York.
Page 35 (below): Setboun © Rapho, Paris. Page
36: © Edimedia, Paris. Tretiakov Gallery,
Moscow. Page 37 (below): Ferry © Gamma-
Liaison, Paris. Page 39: © Edimedia, Pans.
Museum of the October Revolution, Leningrad.
Page 40 (right): © Bogolan-Kasobanc group,
Bamako. Pages 40-41, 44 (above): © Hassan
Massoudy 1988, Paris. Page 41 (below): © Galerie
du Dragon, Paris. Page 42: © Iradj Emami, Paris.
Page 43 (above): © Ung No Lee 1988, Paris;
(below): © Jovica Veljovic 1988, Yugoslavia. Page
44 (below): © Jean Larcher 1988, Paris. Pages
48-49: © Christian Paraschiv, La Courneuve,
France.
