Thucydides
A dramatic vision of stirring events
%E know next to nothing about Thucydides apart
from the little he chose to say about -himself in the one
work he wrote but did not complete, the History of
the Peloponnesian War. He was born around 455 BC
into a rich, aristocratic Athenian family with valuable
foreign connections. The anti-Persian Aegean empire
of Athens was at the height of its power, based on a
warfleet of 170-oared triremes, and its democratic
system of government was newly radicalized by the
reforms associated with Pericles. Empire, democracy,
Pericles: these were the three axes around which
Thucydides rotated his charged account of the war
between Athens and Sparta (431-404 BC, although his
narrative breaks off in mid-sentence in the summer
of 411).
He was himself a participant in this conflict of
ideologies and military armaments, but no ordinary
one. In 424 BC he was elected general (strategos) by the
democratic assembly of Athenian citizens, only to be
forced into exile that same year for a failure that was
not his sole responsibility. He remained in exile for the
remainder of the war, profiting, he claimed, from his
ability to see things more from the other, Spartan side.
But for all his vaunted objectivity, it is difficult not
to read his exalted praise of the statesmanlike Pericles
and his correspondingly bitter condemnation of the
folly of the Athenian masses and their "demagogue"
leaders as a commentary on his own political fate as
well as that of Athens.
Thucydides wanted his History to be and to be seen
as "a possession for all time". There are two reasons
why that wish has so far been granted. First, as the
title of his work subtly implies, Thucydides' vision of
the conflict has achieved a unique authority. For from
the Spartan point of view it was of course the "Athe¬
nian" war, the war against Athens and her imperial
allies and subjects. By no means everyone shared
Thucydides' emphatic opinions that it was the Spartans
who started it and that there was a single, twenty-seven-
Detail of an Attic terracotta
bowl in the black-figure
style, signed by
the potter
Nikosthenes,
520-510 BC.
BY PAUL
CARTLEDGE
PAUL CARTLEDGE
is a Lecturer in Classics at
the University of
Cambridge (UK) where he
is a Fellow of Clare College.
He is the author of Sparta
and Lakonia: A Regional
History c. 1300-362 B.C.
(Routledge & Kegan Paul,
London, 1979) and Agesilaos
(Duckworth, London, 1987).
year war as opposed to two ten-year bouts of fighting
interrupted by seven years of admittedly troubled
peace. Yet such is the power of his rhetoric that it is
difficult now to see not only the Spartan-Athenian mili¬
tary conflict but the entire second half of the fifth
century BC, the so-called golden age of Periclean
Athens, in any but Thucydidean terms.
Secondly, there are the speeches and debates in the
History, based no doubt in most cases on reliable
information as to what was actually said or at least what
were the main lines of argument, but invariably written
up by Thucydides with all the force of his remarkable
intellect and inimitable style. Massive controversy still
prevails over the precise relationship between these
Thucydidean creations and their supposed originals,
and over their intended functions within the structure
of the work. None has generated more heat than the
"Melian Dialogue", Thucydides' version of the negoti¬
ations conducted in camera between the Athenian high
command and the oligarchic government of the Aegean
island-state of Melos in 416-415 BC. Since he could not
possibly have known exactly how the negotiations
went, and since the issue was not in itself of the greatest
historical significance, I suggest that it is here that the
"scientific historian" in Thucydides most clearly gives
way to the moralist, political theorist and tragic
prose-poet.
What was the lesson of permanent utility that
Thucydides hoped to teach by this (to us) utterly
alien dramatic expository device? In my judgement it is
that human beings, when organized within states, do not
act towards other states in accordance with the moral
standards they normally recognize within their own
communities, but in accordance with their collective
self-interest as perceived chiefly in terms of security,
prestige and economic advantage. In which of the
world's potential flashpoints today does that iron law
not hold good? Thucydides will be with us for some
time yet.
20
