Kustom cars in the USA
i
32
n the United States kustom cars are one of
a kind, unique expressions of an owner's dream.
They cannot be found in a manufacturer's
advertisement or in a dealer's showroom.
Instead, they are created, painstakingly, in
specialized garages and backyard workshops.
Owners often design, then build and rebuild
these cars which are either stripped for speed
(the "hot or street rods") or so heavily loaded
that they can barely move (the "lead sleds" and
"low riders").
Hot rods began as small Fords from the
1930s, especially the 1932 Ford two-door or
"deuce coupe". Although Ford did not build
these cars for speed, with a few changes, race
cars they became. The body needed to be
streamlined so off came all the chrome. Door
handles, bumpers, sometimes even fenders and
running-boards, were stripped away. The roof
was lowered and windows reduced in height.
Hot rod owners challenged each other to
races on city streets, "burning rubber" in their
quick starts. Thus tyres often had to be
replaced. Moviegoers will remember such
challenges in the film American Graffiti. Speed
was the message even in the rod's paint.
Instead of wings, painters laid patterns for
flames beginning at the engine and curling back
to engulf the sides and doors of the cars.
Today's flames come in many hues. Numerous
layers of metal flake and candy coloured
acrylics allow iridescent effects to shine
through. Flames in combinations of green over
purple, blue against yellow, or pink with red are
then outlined with the thin calligraphic lines of
pinstriping.
The lead sled aesthetic is in sharp contrast
to that of the hot rods or street rods. Builders
of lead sleds use the heavier, bulkier body of
a 1936 Ford or a Mercury, Chevrolet or Dodge
from the 1950s. The body is lowered by cut¬
ting away horizontal sections, chrome is
removed and the holes may be filled with lead.
Exhaust pipes attached to the sides of the car
emphasize its new ground-sweeping ride. Head¬
lights and taillights may be recessed or
"Frenched", and rear wheels covered by fender
skirts, again extending the low line of the car
body. Unlike the classic car owner who insists
on repairing his automobile with original equip¬
ment, the lead sled builder is more concerned
with the look than the source. One lead sled
owner spoke proudly of the parts he had used
from twenty-two other cars to create his
masterpiece.
Inside the lead sled, the owner replaces
upholstery, installs air conditioning and a tape-
deck. Lead sled owners like smooth tuck and
roll upholstery, while low rider owners from the
southwest prefer crushed velvet upholstery
inside the car and often inside the trunk as well.
When the car is finished, the proper final touch
is a pair of large fuzzy dice hanging from the
rear view mirror.
The lead sled's exterior paint will match the
name given to the car. "Toad", for example,
was a 1949 Oldsmobile painted a dark lilypad
green. "The Black Widow", a 1951 Ford, was
black with red pinstriped webs near door and
trunk handles. Pinstriping, flames and scallops
have been painted on lead sleds since the
beginning, but murals are a more recent style
of decoration. Airbrushed murals became
fashionable for the side panels of vans and
small trucks in the 1970s. A recently painted
mural of the California Raisins animated clay
characters appears on the trunk of a 1935
Hudson lead sled.
Both the fast and slow members of the
kustom car world originated in southern
California. Car shows, car clubs and car maga¬
zines soon proliferated across the United
States, so that today rods and sleds can be ;
found almost everywhere. Low riders or carros
bajos are mainly found in the Hispanic cities of
the southwest from San Antonio, Texas, to San
José, California.
So much time and expense is involved in
building them that these cars are no longer
driven every day. They once provided cheap,
basic transportation, but are now too valuable
for such duty. Many lead sleds and street rods
are driven only in good weather when they will
"cruise", or drive slowly to car shows. Slowly
they cruise so everyone can admire them.
Slowly they cruise because for the hot rods,
lead sleds and low riders it is, above all, the
custom.
