Where
'foreigner'
means
'guest'
BY ANDRÉ KÉDROS
XEARS ago, a French friend of mine told me of
a memorable experience he once had while on
holiday in the Péloponnèse.
"I was on my way to the Taiyetos Moun¬
tains," he said. "The sun was setting when my
car broke down near a remote and poor village.
Cursing my misfortune, I was wondering where
I was going to spend the night when I realized
that the villagers who had gathered around me
were vehemently arguing as to who should have
the honour of receiving me as a guest in their
house. Finally, thinking that I would cause less
disturbance to her than I would to a man with
a family, I accepted the offer of an old peasant
woman who lived alone in a little house sur¬
rounded by a courtyard at the edge of the village.
While she was getting me settled into a tiny but
clean and freshly whitewashed room, the mayor
of the village was hitching up his mule to my car
to haul it to a small town some 20 kilometres
away where there was a garage.
"I had noticed three hens running free in my
hostess's courtyard and that night one of them
ended up in a stew on my table. Other villagers
brought me goat's cheese, figs and honey, and,
of course, some ouzo. I ate with a hearty appe¬
tite and, despite my ignorance of the language,
we drank together and made merry till far into
the night. The following day, the garage man
brought back my car which he had patched up.
The engine seemed to be running as well as ever.
He presented me with a very reasonable bill and
with a request that I should drop him off at his
home town on my way.
"When the time came for me to say good¬
bye to my friends in the village, I wanted to
A typical springtime landscape in the Péloponnèse.
Inset, polychrome earthenware relief of Odysseus and
Penelope (5th century BC).
;.
**-?3«
~ Cue

The Acropolis of Athens
(1877) by the French painter
Marcel Lambert (1847-1928).
The work is an imaginary
recreation of the west façade
of the Acropolis as it was at
the time of Pericles (5th
century BC).
reward the old woman for the trouble to which
I had put her and for the hen she had sacrificed
for me. She refused the money I offered with loud
cries of indignation. The more I insisted, the more
vexed she appeared. I too was embarrassed and
upset. I still am. Do you think I should send her
a present from Paris?"
"Do nothing of the kind," I said. "Greek
hospitality is not for sale."
Homeric times
Greek hospitality is part of a long tradition. In
Homeric times it was considered a sacred duty.
When Telemachus left Ithaca in secret in search
of Odysseus, he and his companions were greeted
on the shore at Pylos by Nestor and his sons who
were celebrating the festival of Poseidon. They
were immediately invited to join in the festivi¬
ties. Not until they had eaten and rested did
Nestor declare: "Only now that they have tasted
the pleasures of food is it fitting to ask the
strangers who they are."
Telemachus and his men enjoyed similar dis¬
creet hospitality from the hands of Menelaus. On
learning that Telemachus was the son of his
former brother-in-arms, the king showered him
with sumptuous gifts. These Telemachus refused,
but in the end, so as not to offend his host, he
accepted a silver vase and a scarf woven by Helen.
Meanwhile, Odysseus himself, having braved
the tempest brought down upon him by his
sworn enemy, Poseidon, was cast ashore on the
island of Scheria, naked and with nothing to
indicate who he was. Nevertheless, he was
received with great courtesy by Nausicaa and her
father Alcinous, king of the Phaeacians, who
promised him a ship to take him home even
before Odysseus had made himself known. It was
only after the bard Demodocus had greatly
moved him by singing of the Trojan horse that
Odysseus disclosed his identity and told his hosts
of his adventures and his wanderings.
Landing at Ithaca, where suitors were laying
siege to the virtuous Penelope and squandering
his wealth, Odysseus, aided by the goddess
Athena, disguised himself as a beggar and, in ac¬
cordance with the laws of hospitality, was
received at the palace. He was treated with scorn
by the suitors, but Penelope made ready to wash
his feet. This Odysseus refused to allow and the
task was undertaken by his old nurse Euryclea
who, as she did so, recognized her master by an
old scar from his boyhood.
The Golden Age of Athens
During the fifth century BC, free citizens and
slaves accounted for only half the population of
Athens. The remainder were foreigners. Most of
these "immigrant" Athenians were Greeks from
elsewhere, but they included many Phoenicians,
Phrygians, Egyptians and Scythians. They were
not fully-fledged citizens and could neither be
elected to the Assembly nor become judges. In
other words, they took no direct part in the
political affairs of the city.
Nevertheless, their presence was more than
% Irw
i -r
26
i
FAÇa\CE
RESTAVF
II 0$
'
*Mfc*>w.

merely tolerated and they enjoyed considerable
rights. Businessmen and craftsmen were allowed
to set up shop and to employ workers or slaves.
Armourers such as Cephalos and bankers such
as Lysias both natives of Syracusepainters like
Polygnotus of Thasos and doctors like Hippo¬
crates of Cos, professors of oratory such as Pro¬
tagoras of Thrace and Gorgias of Sicily, were all
free to exercise their professions without hin¬
drance and to enjoy the prestige that their excel¬
lence merited. As Pericles proudly boasted to
Thucydides: "Our city is open to all. No laws
keep foreigners away or exclude them from the
education or the entertainments available here."
This is all the more understandable since Pericles
himself had Anaxagoras of Clazomenae as his
counsellor and the renowned Aspasia of Miletus
as his mistress.
The Greek tradition of hospitality, and the
spirit of tolerance that went with it, continued
down the centuries, to be found in other guises
in the Middle Ages in the Byzantine empire.
Foreigners who abused
their privileges
To build Constantinople, the emperor Constan-
tine called in 40,000 German workers. When the
task was completed, these foreign workers were
granted the right to remain and gradually merged
into the local population. The same was true of
the Goths, Vandals, Armenians, Persians, Moors
and Ethiopians who had served in Justinian's
army. In the tenth century, the ranks of the im¬
perial armies were full of Russians, Scandinavians,
Khazars, Petchenegs, Georgians andafter the
Battle of Hastings and the conquest of England
by the NormansAnglo-Saxons. Most of these
mercenaries finally settled in Byzantium. Under
the Comnenian dynasty (1081-1180), all these
foreigners, almost equal in numbers to the original
Greeks, had become completely assimilated, a fact
that can only be explained by the enduring Greek
tradition of hospitality.
Some foreigners were, unfortunately, to
abuse that hospitality. From the time of the First
Crusade, Bohemond and his men, who had asked
Alexius Comnenus for the right of passage
through Asia Minor, behaved with callous lack
of restraint in Constantinople. Alexius' daughter
Anne relates in her memoirs how they would
burst into the palace at all hours and how the em¬
peror did nothing to restrain them for fear that
they would attack his people and damage his
property. Later, the Byzantine capital was sacked
by the unbridled soldiery of the Fourth Crusade.
Venice too became involved in these scan¬
dalous abuses. To reward the Venetians for
having helped him in his struggle with the
Telemachus lands on
Calypso's island. Engraving
from an 18th<entury edition
o/Télémaque, a romance by
the French bishop Fénelon
(1651-1715) which is based
on the adventures of
Telemachus in search of his
father, Odysseus.
ANDRÉ KÉDROS
is a Greek author who
writes in French. He has
published thirteen novels,
which have been translated
into as many languages, and
several historical essays
including a study of the
Greek Resistance from 1940
to 1944 (1956, Robert
Laffont publishers, Paris).
Normans, Alexius Comnenus had allowed them
to set up trading centres in certain districts of
Constantinople. Showing scant respect for the
duties they owed in return for the hospitality
offered to them and relying on the naval might
of their native city, the Venetians in Byzantium
soon established a state within a state. The Com-
nenians tried to get rid of them by playing on
the rivalries between Venice, Genoa and Pisa. The
remedy, however, proved worse than the disease.
The Pisans and the Genoese extorted similar ex¬
orbitant privileges from the Comnenians, and
rivalled the Venetians in their arrogance.
Byzantium's over-generous hospitality cer¬
tainly appears to have precipitated the empire's
decline. To open one's doors to the foreigner may
be a virtue, but it should not be done indiscrimin¬
ately. Hospitality may cost you dear when the
foreigner takes advantage of it to place a knife
at your throat.
After the fall of Constantinople, in 1453, 27

..tt-*^ >, w OS
Greece suffered four centuries of Turkish occu¬
pation. Throughout this period the Greeks of the
mountains offered refuge to "Klephts" (thieves)
when they were pursued by the authorities. These
Klephts were, in fact, members of the resistance
fighting the army of occupation. The hospitality
they were thus given was strongly coloured by
a sense of national solidarity and a deep longing
for liberty.
During the Second World War, the nazis
responded to mass demonstrations (such as that
during which the ministry of labour was stormed,
forcing Hitler to abandon the idea of imposing
forced labour on the Greeks) by sealing off whole
districts and making police round-ups. Thousands
of resistance fighters were saved on these occa¬
sions by slipping through doors opportunely
opened by friends, who would take them in and
shelter them.
The fall of Mussolini also gave rise to a
number of hospitable actions. Many Italian
officers and soldiers, themselves former occupiers
of Greece, decided to make a break with Hitler's
forces. They deserted and were hunted down by
the nazis and in some cases massacred. Overlook¬
ing the fact that the Italians had been their ene¬
mies during the Albanian war and had often
treated them with brutal repression, the Greeks
hid them and provided them with civilian cloth¬
ing and with food. Thanks to this hospitality,
thousands of Italians managed to survive until the
liberation.
Even today, the Greek word "xenos" means
both "foreigner" and "guest".
í^i'A;
£ S»5
%i
Time-honoured mode of transport on the
Greek island of Hydra
if ' ' '%V * if
28 &
