Claude Lévi-Strauss
You are the author ofa considerable body ofwork which
has won respect all over the world. Those who know
your name are more numerous than those who arefamiliar
with your work. And so we should like to ask on behalf
ofour wide internationalpublic some basic questions about
the key elements in your thinking. But first of all, could
you tell us something about your career, about your
early days?
As a writer I was actually a comparatively late starter.
My career has had its ups and downs. After embarking on
the study of law I turned to philosophy and then moved
on first to sociologyit was to teach sociology that I went
to the university of Sào Paulo in Braziland then to eth¬
nography. It was only during the war, when I had taken
refuge in the United States, that I began to write. On the
one hand I used some of my field studies on the Nambik-
wara, and on the other I began my theoretical work by writ¬
ing The Elementary Structures ofKinship.
This early research was doubtless accompanied by
anxieties...
I would prefer to speak of uncertainties rather than anxi¬
eties. It would be more exact. My theoretical thinking took
a certain direction which I could not see clearly. Then, while
I was in the United States in 1942, 1 met the linguist Roman
Jakobson and discovered that these vague ideas existed in
the form of a body of doctrine in structural linguistics. I
was immediately reassured.
At that time we were both teaching at the New School
for Social Research in New York, a kind of university in
exile which had been founded by French-speaking refugee
scholars. We attended each other's lectures. I found in Jakob-
son's teaching the interpretative guidelines I needed. He en¬
couraged me and even urged me to go further with my
lectures on kinship.
Lectures which led to a book...
Yes, my first major book, The Elementary Structures of
Kinship, which was also my doctoral thesis.

The great French social anthropologist
looks back at his life's work and
retraces the steps
of his intellectual development
What coincidences did you find between the linguistics of
Jakobson and the ethnographical research you were then
carrying out? Linguistics and ethnography are two very
different disciplines.
The differences are enormous. I was in no way attempt¬
ing to transpose mechanically into ethnology what was be¬
ing done in linguistics. It was rather a question of the same
overall inspiration. With this very clear feeling, right from
the start, that we were certainly not talking about the same
things and that we could not talk in the same way about
different things. But linguistics confirmed two points which
until then I had only vaguely realized.
The first is that, to understand very complex phenome¬
na, it is more important to consider the relationship between
them than to jstudy each of them in isolation. The second
is the notion of the phoneme, as Jakobson developed it. Pho¬
nemes are distinctive sounds such as e, t, q, a, b, c, which
signify nothing in themselves. It is the way in which they
are combined to make words which makes it possible to
differentiate the meanings and r mean nothing but in
English they differentiate pot from tot.
This idea seemed to me to be extremely fertile. Once
again, it was not a question of comparing ethnological facts
with phonemesthey are realities of a different order. But
when I tried, for example, to understand the extraordinary
and apparently arbitrary diversity of the marriage rules
which prevail in a given society, I did not ask myself the
question people had asked until then: what does this rule,
taken by itself, mean within this society? On the contrary,
I considered that the rule meant nothing in itself, but that
the way in which all the rules were combined, in opposi¬
tion or in juxtaposition, was a means of expressing certain
significations. For example, these rules served to formulate
or stimulate cycles of exchange within the social group.
Cycles of exchange which are themselves significant and
which vary from society to society.
How would you sum up this new method?
Let's say that in all human societies there are first-order
ensembleslanguage, kinship, religion, and law, to name
only a few. In the early stages of research, it is perhaps wise
to consider them as separate units. But at a later stage, one
must ask what relationship there can be between these first-
order units and the more complex second-order units which
they constitute when combined. We thus gradually reach
the idea of the "total social fact" as formulated by the French
sociologist and anthropologist Marcel Mauss. It comprises
a variety of representations, at once linguistic, legal, religious,
and so on.
But this is within a given society taken as a totality...
Initially yes. But later one tries to understand the corre¬
lations and oppositions that may exist between neighbour¬
ing or distant societies.
You have written of "hot" and "cold" societies to differen¬
tiate between societies with a historical perspective and
static societies...
These are theoretical poles. All societies are actually lo¬
cated somewhere along a spectrum. So-called primitive so¬
cieties are not primitive at all. Their ideal is not to change,
to remain in the state in which the gods created them at
the beginning of time. Of course they do not succeed. They
also exist in history. But they have a tendency to neutralize
changes, to maintain an ideal statethat represented by

myths. On the other hand, in societies which I have called
"hot", we try to define ourselves in opposition to our an¬
cestors. Change is thus much more rapid. We are not only
aware of the existence of history but we wish with the
knowledge we have of our past to reorientate the future,
legitimize or criticize the evolution of our society. History
for us is an element of our moral conscience.
Would you definefor us the notion ofmyth as you present
it in your work Mythologies?
Basically the notion of myth is a very flexible one. For
an American Indian, myth is a story of the time when hu¬
man beings and animals were not distinct. I think this is
a very good definition. For, in spite of the efforts deployed
by the Judaeo-Christian tradition, no situation seems more
tragic for the heart and mind than that of a humanity which
coexists with other living species on an earth which they
share, without being able to communicate with these spe¬
cies. Myths refuse to see this flaw in creation as something
which always existed. They see its appearance as the event
which inaugurated the human condition. Myth, unlike the
Cartesian approach to a problem, refuses to divide the
difficulty, never accepts a partial response, aspires to expla¬
nations which englobe the totality of phenomena.
I have tried to see the role played by myth in the think¬
ing of members of a society. I have tried to discern its inner
logic before going on to ask myself about its social func¬
tion. In all the sciences there is a question that could be de¬
fined in biological terms, like the relations between anatomy
and physiology, between the way in which an organism is

constituted and the way in which it functions. Of course
myths function within societies-they perform a role. But
before asking how they function it is necessary to know how
they are made, it is necessary to know their anatomy. We
could not have had Darwin if Cuvier had not gone before
him. My Mythologies corresponded to the Cuvier stage. I was
trying to anatomize myths.
You gave two lectures at Unesco, at an interval of twenty
years. The first was entitled "Race and History", the se¬
cond "Race and Culture". Would it be true to say that in
each ofthem your main preoccupation was to reconcile the
notion ofprogress with the principle ofcultural relativism?
The notion of progress implies that certain cultures are
superior to others, at given times and in given places, that
Poster for an exhibition on
"The Americas of Claude Lévi-
Strauss" (Paris, October
1989-Aprll 1990) shows an
oil painting by the French
artist Jean-Baptlste Debret,
Indian Giving the Signal to
Attack (1827).
Left, Tllnglt Indian mask,
British Columbia (Canada).
Below, painted wooden frontal
mask of the Makah Indians.
Washington State, USA.
some produce works that others would have been incapable
of producing. According to cultural relativism, which is one
of the bases of my ethnological thinking, there is no absolute
criterion for asserting that one culture is superior to another.
If some cultures "move" while others do not, it is not
because the former are superior to the latter. It is because
some historical situations lead to collaboration between
societies which are not unequal, but different. These cultures
then begin to move through mutual imitation or opposi¬
tion. They fertilize and stimulate each other. At other times
and in other places it happens that cultures remain isolated
and static.

] HB
flft H^B^^^^BI ^JIF I £'<: V
F
^BWS^^^fc
BLiP Jç ' 1
HF
M^Eé^C^) * hV ««1
' frT^S^^^A ¿ir^ jBtt*
i §/7 j í* iV^^B ^llaU
> ii' nP^I in. :^ - 1
jniK t Ly uftv «f %m^«
Does thefunction ofart also vary between one culture and
another? Is it not more collective in the societies which you
call "cold"?
I think this is because art in such societies is closely linked
to collective beliefs. The purpose of art in these societies
is not individual or group enjoyment. It has a function,
which is to provide communication between the society and
a supernatural world in which all its members believe. Art
thus here performs a function which is indispensable to the
group.
A social function...
Social and religious. When religion, religious beliefs, are
shared by the totality of a group, it is impossible to dissoci¬
ate the two aspects.
This function has ceased to exist in "modern" societies.
I think this is largely related to the disappearance of a
great common faith. Our societies have lost this capacity
for a great collective belief, a common élan.
7s this one manifestation of the separation between the in¬
dividual and the world brought about during the history
of Western culture?
By isolating human beings from the rest of creation,
Western individualism deprived them of a protective wall.
As soon as people believe that their power is limitless, they
are heading for self-destruction. Think of the concentration
camps. Think, for all humanity this time, of environmental
problems.
Looking back to your early days, how do you judge the
results ofyour research? How do you see the path you have
taken?
I feel that I have always done the same thing in the sense
that I have tried to study different fields using the same ap¬
proach. I started out by grappling with problems of family
and social organization. Then one thing led to another and
I was invited to take a chair in the religion of peoples without
writing at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes in Paris.
And so I turned towards religious matters, especially mythol¬
ogy. The problems to be solved were even more difficult
than those of kinshipa field in which a lot of work had
already been done, even if not satisfactorily in my opinion.
Apart from extremely old and confused theories which
everyone could see were out of date, myths belonged to a
field of study that was still largely unfilledexcept, of course,
through the pioneering work of Georges Dumézil, and he
explored the circumscribed field of Indo-European
mythology.
The problems raised by this new research were of the
same order as those relating to kinship. Just as the marriage
rules of the different societies I had studied seemed arbitrary,
so myths seemed incomprehensible, and even absurd. When
the myths of different, even very distant populations are
compared, they can be seen to have common characteris¬
tics. After trying to instil a little order into the chaos of kin¬
ship and marriage rules, I wanted to do the same thing for
mythology. And drawing inspiration from principles that
I had defined at the beginning, to try to understand what
myths meant.
This long-term project took me twenty-five years be¬
cause of the immense volume of material I had to absorb.
The ethnographic literature contained a mass of myths
which ethnologists had collected over a century with ad¬
mirable zeal and then transcribed into a corpus of publica¬
tions which no one had used. I felt that this was an even
richer source of material than that we possess for ancient
Greece and Rome. "For two thousand years," I told my¬
self, "commentators have been studying the beliefs of the
Greeks and Romans without exhausting the subject, and
constantly finding new interpretations."
And so I tried to exploit this unexplored continent of
documents relating to North and South America. I hope
that I have succeeded in showing how the mythological
world of the American Indians is constructed.
Interview by Peruvian journalist Manuel Osorio.
