JAPAN
A fresh look
iT is widely recognized that the Japanese aesthetic,
and especially its penchant for disymmetry and decora¬
tive surfaces, was one of the principal sources of inspi¬
ration for Art Nouveau, which reached Japan in the
early years of the twentieth century. What kind of
reception did it have in this country to which it owed
so much?
Art Nouveau was introduced to Japan by a handful
of artists and architects returning from Europe. In 1900,
the artist Asai Chu, who was studying in Paris with
the decorator Fukuchi Fukuichi, was invited by Samuel
Bing to visit his Art Nouveau pavilion at the Universal
Exhibition. A champion of the avant-garde and a col¬
lector of Oriental art, Bing had visited Japan in 1875
and had become a promoter of Japanese art forms and
culture in France.
Another friend of Asai was Natsume Kinnosuke,
who under the pen-name of Natsume Soseki became
one of Japan's leading modern novelists. He too visited
the Paris Exhibition and then moved to London where
he lived for three years. He was a great art-lover and
a regular reader of the avant-garde English magazine
The Studio.
On his return to Japan, Asai was appointed profes¬
sor at the School of Decorative Arts that had recently
been founded in Kyoto. Besides working as a painter,
he was responsible for a number of creative innova¬
tions in the decorative arts, especially in the techniques
of maki-e (painting in gold and silver on lacquer). The
influence of Art Nouveau on his work, as well as on
that of Fukuchi, is evident.
Natsume was equally receptive to Art Nouveau.

at traditional forms BY HIROYASU FUJIOKA
In 1905 he published the first volume of his novel
Wagahai wa neko de aru ("I Am a Cat"). The cover,
by Hashiguchi Kiyoshi (also known as Goyô) was in
Art Nouveau style. Art Nouveau influence was even
stronger in the cover designs of the second volume
(published in 1906) and of his other books, which were
produced by the same artist, closely supervised by
Natsume himself.
Outside this restricted circle, Art Nouveau had
little effect on the decorative arts. Much greater was
its influence on architecture, which reached Japan via
architects who visited Europe or the United States or
who had contacts with Europeans.
The new style from the West influenced the design
of many shops, especially their façades. One noted
example of this fashion, which continued until the
mid-1910s, was the "Kamimoto Barber Shop", built
at Osaka in 1903 but since demolished.
The best known of these architects was Takeda
Goichi, who visited Glasgow during a trip to Europe
between 1901 and 1903 and was greatly impressed by
the works of the Scottish architect Charles Rennie
Mackintosh. On his return to Japan, Takeda designed
a house for Fukushima Yukinobu which was the most
typical of the buildings inspired by Art Nouveau in
Japan. In this house, completed in 1907 and now
demolished, the influence of Art Nouveau was apparent
throughout, from the front door to the motifs on the
fusumathe traditional movable partitions.
Few buildings incorporated the sinuous lines dear
to Horta or Guimard. Takeda himself favoured the
rectilinear style of Mackintosh and the architects of
the Vienna Secession as being more in keeping with
traditional Japanese architecture.
Generally speaking, Japanese artists, bound up as
they were with the artistic style and craftsmanship of
their own country, showed little enthusiasm for Art
Nouveau. Even Takeda only worked sporadically in
what he regarded as just one new style among others.
This lack of interest may perhaps be explained by
the resounding success achieved by Japanese decora¬
tive arts at a number of great international exhibitions
held in Europe and the United States. Seeing this as
an opportunity to develop Japanese exports, the
government strongly encouraged the traditional arts.
The important thing for Japanese artists was to create
a purely national art rather than a European art form
seen through Japanese eyes.
The situation in architecture was different. The
Meiji government, established in 1867, wanted to show
the people of the West that Japanese civilization was
a match for their own. Buildings comparable to those
in Western cities should be constructed as a matter of
prestige. And Art Nouveau did not seem to lend itself
to the concept of "prestige architecture".
The overall impact of Art Nouveau in Japan was,
however, far from negative. Art Nouveau demonstrated
that it was possible to look at traditional forms through
new eyes and gave Japanese architects an opportunity
to concentrate once more on design, to emphasize the
importance of surfaces and the aesthetics of disymmetry.
It also helped them to achieve a new awareness of their
own traditions.
From left to right: cover
design by Hashiguchi Kiyoshi
(Goyô) for the second volume
of Natsume Soseki's novel /
Am a Cat, 1906. Ink blotter
in silver and horn by Ernest
Cardeilhac, France, 1900.
Netsuke (Japanese ornamental
toggle) carved from boxwood
in a mushroom design, late
18th century. The Watch of
the Angels, appliqué on felt by
Henry van de Velde, 1893.
Woman with an Umbrella,
print by Okajima Toyohiro
(1773-1828).
HIROYASU FUJIOKA, of
Japan, is associate professor in the
architecture department of the
Tokyo Institute of Technology.
A specialist in modern
architecture and town planning,
he has published a number of
articles on Japanese architecture,
focused particularly on the
conservation of his country's
cultural heritage. 19
