'Give us the light of life and
of death'
34
Araditional cultures portray the origin of
the universe in strikingly similar ways. The spec¬
tacular dividing of the waters of the sky and of
the depths, of the firmament and of the ocean,
in Basque cosmogony thus parallels the creation
of land described in the first chapter of Genesis
as a place for the earth's creatures to live.
The traditional Basque New Year ceremony
of the presentation of water derives directly from
this world picture and from ritual practices
associated with the New Year ever since very ear¬
ly times. In Navarre, when the last stroke of mid¬
night chimes from the clock in the Urdiáin tower,
solemnly marking the end of the year, a band of
young people offers the local dignitaries a jar
brimming with water in order to wish them
success and happiness in the coming year. The
dignitaries must accept the gift, drink the water,
and offer in return a roll (opila), or, nowadays,
a traditional pastry.
The form of the greeting that accompanies
this ritual varies from one part of the Basque
country to another. The words that I learnt as
a child in Arruazu (Navarre) are: Ur goiena, ur
barrena! Urteberri egun onal Graziearekin osasuna,
pakearekin ontasuna: jainkuak dizuela egun onal
("Water on high, water below, New Year greet¬
ings! Grace and health, peace and prosperity: may
God give you greetings!")
Although such ancient myths have ceased to
be current, the rural Basques still observe certain
customs that can be traced back to them. For



example, the pagan prayer to the sun and the
moon (emaiquzu biziko ta hileko argia us
the light of life and of death") persists in Chris¬
tianized form in popular religious practice.
The symbolism of light plays a fundamental
role in traditional Basque funeral rites. When the
head of a rural household dies, the family beehive
is covered with a black sheet as a sign of mourn¬
ing. If it is not, the bees are believed to be in
danger of dying. This rite is accompanied by an
incantation which has a very practical objective:
"Give us more wax this year as the master of the
house is dead."
Like many other peoples who are the heirs
to an ancient civilization, the Basques attributed
a sacred character to atmospheric disturbances,
and some practices associated with worship of the
forces of nature still survive today. Many people
still believe that fossils are thunderbolts that have
fallen from the sky. The inhabitants of the valley
of Burunda in Navarre call them Jangoikoaren
harriak ("stones of God") and pick them up to
keep in their kitchens, where sometimes over a
dozen can be found, of all shapes and sizes. The
fossils are thought to protect the house from
BY JOSE M. SATRUSTEGUI
Echoes from
ancient myths
survive in
Basque
customs and
folktales
lightning and, by extension, from evil action by
occult forces.
Metal implements such as axes, knives or
sickles are also believed to be effective lightning
conductors. I once saw an old woman who lived
alone in Valcarlos, in Navarre, brandishing a
sickle during a storm. To be on the safe side, she
had opened all her doors and windows, heedless
of the wind blowing through the house. She was
convinced that she was doing the right thing.
Other Pyrenean villagers adopt a more radical
solutionthey fire a rifle into the clouds to make
them disperse. If there is no man in the house,
the woman will shoot in the direction of the
storm from an upstairs window. I have seen nor¬
mally sensible men take down their rifles at such
times and fire them up the chimney.


Left and opposite page,
Illargi-Amandre
("Lady Moon"), 1972,
bronze casting on
oak pedestal by the
Basque sculptor
Nestor Basterrechea.
JOSE MARIA
SATRÚSTEGUI,
Basque ethnologist, is
secretary of the Royal
Academy for the Basque
Language and a
corresponding member of
the American Institute of
Basque Studies. He is the
author of several studies on
Basque ethnography.


Legends of the sun and moon
Every day the sun strolls across the firmament
and turns around his mother the earth, who
welcomes him to her bosom at nightfall. Legend
has it that man once lived in fear that one day
the sun would forget to wake up. He sent a sentry
accompanied by a cock to the ends of the earth
in order to disturb the sun's slumber should the
need arise. When he arrived at his destination,
the envoy discovered that the primitive people
living in that place usually banged the ground
with sticks or other instruments every morning
to make sure that the sun began his daily round
on time.
According to Basque tradition, everything
connected with the sun has an auspicious, sacred
character. The sun is said to rise on Midsummer's
Day (24 June) by leaping over the horizon and
in the evening he is besought to return: Iruzki
Saindia! Haugi bihar muga onez ("Holy Sun! Be
on time tomorrow morning").
The moon reigns over the night and the here¬
after and is sometimes less obliging and indeed
downright vindictive towards mortals.
It is said that a peasant returning home laden
with branches was once overtaken by nightfall.
Worn out and weighed down by his burden, he
grew impatient with the whims of the moon who
seemed to be playing hide-and-seek with the
clouds like a crazy she-goat, and shouted: "I'd like
to see you in this godforsaken hole with a load
on your back!" Nettled by his aggressive tone,
the moon seized the insolent fellow and carried
him off, and ever since then his silhouette can be
seen on the face of the moon.
This is why old women implore the moon
not to get angry.
Heaven's revenge
A Basque legend has it that the wagon of the
Great Bear is drawn by oxen. It is also said that
one day some robbers stole a team of oxen from
a peasant who lived on his farm with his wife and
two children. Discovering the theft the next day,
the farmer sent his son after the thieves. The son
followed the usual paths, but did not return.
Next, the farmer sent his daughter to look for
her brother, but she did not come back either.
Then the family dog went off in turn in search
of the children, leaving the house unguarded.
Finally the father, beside himself with anxi¬
ety, decided to set out in pursuit of his children.
After walking fruitlessly for a long time, over¬
come by weariness and sorrow, he began to curse
the fugitives, saying: "By Almighty God, wher¬
ever you may be, you can stay there!"
This terrible curse brought a punishment that
was even more terrible. Ever since, all those
involved have been condemned to wander one
after the other without ever being able to meet,
in the trail of the constellation which the Basques
call for this reason "the ox-thieves" (idi-ohoinak).
According to another legend, one year when
the month of March had been particularly harsh
for shepherds, a shepherd insulted March by
saying, "May you be gored to death!".
Sorely offended, March decided to take
revenge, but it was already noon on the 31st day
of the month. He therefore asked April to lend
him two and a half days during which he un¬
leashed a violent storm of snow and hail through¬
out the region. All the rivers and streams
overflowed, carrying away the flock of the
imprudent shepherd, who stood by helplessly.
Seeing that the ram had got caught on a branch,
the shepherd went to get it back, exclaiming, "By
your mother, I'll save you at least!". But the
panic-stricken animal struggled so violently that
with a sudden jerk of its head it gored out the
eye of the unfortunate shepherd who was already
one-eyed and now became completely blind. Such
was the vengeance wreaked by the baneful month
of March during those three "borrowed" days
(ordiz-egunak), which are understandably feared
by shepherds. 35
