How far does the law recognize the journalist's self-imposed duty
not to divulge the source of information given in confidence?
The protection of sources
by Patricia Wilhelm
This time we'll get them."
X
16
PATRICIA WILHELM,
Belgian lawyer, is national
secretary of the Belgian
Journalists' Association. She is
the author of Protection of
Sources: An International
Review of Journalistic and
Legal Practice (Norwegian
Institute of Journalism,
Frednkstad, 1988), a survey
commissioned by Unesco and
carried out by Ms. Wilhelm on
behalf of the International
Federation of Journalists.
.O observe professional secrecy and not to
divulge the source of information obtained in
confidence" is the seventh article of the Declara¬
tion of Rights and Obligations of Journalists,
adopted by the International Federation of Jour¬
nalists in 1972. This dutysince from the point
of view of professional ethics it is indeed an obli¬
gation journalists have towards their
informantsshould be considered in parallel with
the first of the rights set forth in the Declaration:
"Journalists claim free access to all information
sources, and the right to freely enquire on all
events affecting public life. Therefore, secrecy of
public or private affairs may only be opposed to
journalists in exceptional cases and for clearly
expressed motives."
A right or an obligation?
In most countries, journalists have to fight to
obtain official recognition of their right not to
disclose the sources of their information, when
this is given in confidence. However, as a matter
of professional ethics, journalists consider this to
be a duty, an obligation towards their informants
(sources), which is a corollary to their duty to
provide the public with freely collected infor¬
mation.
Whatever the consequences for themselves
may be, journalists thus consider it their duty not
to reveal the identity of their informants or to
allow their identity to become known. Non-
official sources of information are likely to dry
up for fear of retaliation if their anonymity is not
guaranteed. But, if journalists relied exclusively
on official information, they would be reduced
to the status of official mouthpieces, and this con¬
ception of press freedom would bear little rela¬
tion to the public's right to be informed.
This duty of confidentiality is claimed as a
right because most national legal codes do not
exempt journalists from the general obligation of
the citizen to testify in a court of law when called
upon to do so. In other words, journalists are
often faced with an uncomfortable dilemmaon
the one hand they commit themselves to abso¬
lute discretion towards their information sources,
but on the other the authorities deny them the
right to do so.
The public's right
to be informed
Countries that are signatories to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights nevertheless recog¬
nize, in Article 19, that: "Everyone has the right
to freedom of opinion and expression; this right
includes freedom to hold opinions without inter¬
ference and to seek, receive and impart informa¬
tion and ideas through any media and regardless
of frontiers." It is evident, however, that the
authorities and the courts do not give priority to
this right when it conflicts with other rights
whether collective, such as state security or the
administration of justice, or individual, such as
the right to privacy in libel or slander cases.
This leads to two conclusions.
First of all, when journalists claim the right

*m
V
t y r.
Above, photojournalist
Russell Price (Nick Nolte) in
Under Fire (1983), a film by
the American director Roger
Spottiswoode which
examines the moral and
political dilemmas faced by
reporters.
Left, detail of a poster for a
Cuban film festival (1969),
by Rostgaard.
to protect their sources, they are not demanding
a privilege for themselves, any more than they
hold themselves to be the sole beneficiaries of the
freedom of the press and the free flow of infor¬
mation. They are merely the professional link in
the information chain and the protection of their
sources is an essential corollary to the collective
right of the public to be informed. The public
is thus the real beneficiary of this form of secrecy.
Secondly, the right to freedom of opinion and
expression, as well as to the free flow of infor¬
mation, is a fundamental right on a par with other
human rights. Where there is a conflict of rights
it should be remembered that the right to infor¬
mation is a right that concerns society as a whole
and there is therefore no reason for it to be con¬
sidered in any way a "second category" right.
Confidentiality under attack
Is there a need for a specific law to guarantee to
journalists the right to protect their sources? On
the face of it, all that would be needed would be
an exemption from the general obligation to tes¬
tify imposed by law on all citizens.
However, the authorities, in particular the
judicial authorities, have other means of forcing 17

journalists to reveal their sources. They can be
summoned by the police to attend a judicial
inquiry, be called to appear before a parliamen¬
tary committee or to give evidence to a tribunal.
Warrants can be issued for their homes or places
of work to be searched and for items to be seized.
Their telephone calls can be monitored, they can
be sued, or even arrested, as being guilty of, or
accomplices to, a crime or a misdemeanour. They
can even be accused of complicity in a civil ser¬
vant's breach of the professional code of secrecy
or of stealing or receiving official documents.
In libel cases, journalists called upon to prove
the truth of what they have written often have
to choose between revealing the source of their
information, so as to exonerate themselves, and
remaining silent, in accordance with their profes¬
sional code, and finding themselves condemned.
No protective legislation, however well con¬
ceived, can guarantee the free collecting of infor¬
mation. It will always be possible to get round
such a law and bring pressure and intimidation
to bear on the journalist.
For these reasons it is of fundamental impor¬
tance that the principles of freedom of expression,
freedom of the press and the right of the public
to information should not only be a matter for
legislation but should also become embodied in
custom and practice. Political will, in the widest
sense of the term, is needed if freedom of the press
is to become anything more than a pious hope.
Journalists, publishers and trade unions all
have a role to play in the campaign to bring these
problems to the attention of their colleagues, the
public and the authorities. General awareness of
the vital importance of the question of the pro¬
tection of sources, as a corollary to the right to
freedom of information, is an essential adjunct
to legislation on this matter.



A law on the protection
of sources
A number of basic principles that can be used as
guidelines in the drawing up of laws guaranteeing
the highest possible level of protection of the

Above, drug traffickers are
denounced in a front page
story from a 1989 Issue of
El Espectador, a leading
Colombian daily. The paper
has been the target of
attacks from organized
crime and several of its
journalists have been killed.
Left, journalist Paul Kerjean
(Patrick Dewaere) engaged
on a dangerous assignment
in Mille Milliards de Dollars
(1981), a film by the French
director Henri Verneuil.
confidentiality of sources can be derived from
legal provisions that already exist, in particular,
in Austria and Sweden.
The Austrian press law, which came into
force in January 1982, allows journalists to refuse
to give evidence in a court of law or, in the con¬
text of an administrative process, to reply to ques¬
tions concerning the identity of the originator or
other source of a piece of information. This right
also exists for publishers and all other workers,
from clerks to printers, and is applicable in all
branches of the media.
The Swedish law provides similar protection,
but instead of granting a right it imposes an obli¬
gation of silence on journalists and others
working in the media, so as to protect the
anonymity of informants. It reinforces this obli¬
gation by a general prohibition of investigation
into the source of information. To ignore this
prohibition is a punishable offence.
The Austrian law is further strengthened by
a general ban on searchesnot only of editorial
offices, but also of all media premises, including
print shops and despatch departmentsand on
the seizure of editorial materialarticles, photo¬
graphs, films, sound recordings and electronic
material. This ban extends also to the homes of
journalists and other media employees.
To sum up, any law on the protection of
sources of information must apply:
to all the medianewspapers, magazines, radio,
television, press agencies, the electronic media;
to all forms of informationarticles, photo¬
graphs, video-tapes, magnetic tapes, computer
materials;



to all personnel engaged in the processing of
informationpublishers, journalists, executives,
technicians, printers.
Such a law must be accompanied by a prohi¬
bition on searches and on the seizure of materials
from places of work or from the homes of jour¬
nalists and other media personnel.
Above all, however, the authorities, and in
particular the judicial authorities, must recognize
that the free flow of information, the youngest
of the human rights, is one of the bases of the
democratic system of which free access to all
sources of information is a sine qua non. 19
