D U N
Joseph Ki-Zerbo, the noted Burkinabé historian and author of many articles and books including Histoire de l'Afrique
noire (1978; "The History of Black Africa"), here reflects on the importance of oral tradition as a source for the
writing of African history. This key text is an extract from his introduction to Volume I of the General History
of Africa, published in 1981 under the auspices of Unesco (see page 50), of which he was the general editor.
Oral tradition
as a historical source
BY JOSEPH KI-ZERBO
B
Above, a Senegalese griot.
ESIDES the two major sources of African
history (written documents and archaeology),
oral tradition takes its place as a real living
museum, conserver and transmitter of the social
and cultural creations of peoples purported to
have no written records. This spoken history is
a very frail thread by which to trace our way
back through the dark corridors of the labyrinth
of time. Its custodians are hoary-headed old men
with cracked voices, whose memories are often
dim, who have the stickler's insistence on etiquette
(vieillesse oblige!), as behoves potential ancestors.
They are like the last remaining islets in a
landscape that was once imposing and coherent
but which is now eroded, flattened and thrown
into disorder by the sharp waves of modernism.
Latter-day fossils!
Whenever one of them dies, a fibre of
Ariadne's thread is broken, a fragment of the 43

44
landscape literally disappears underground. Yet
oral tradition is by far the most intimate and the
richest of historical sources, the one which is
most filled with the sap of authenticity. As an
African proverb puts it, "The mouth of an old
man smells bad, but it says good and salutary
things". However useful the written record may
be, it is bound to stiffen and dry up its subject.
It decants, dissects, schematizes, petrifies: the
letter killeth. Tradition clothes things in flesh and
blood and colour, it gives blood to the skeleton
of the past. It presents in three dimensions what
is often crowded onto the two-dimensional
surface of a piece of paper. The joy of Sundiata's
mother,* overwhelmed by the sudden recovery
of her son, still bursts forth in the warm and epic
tones of the griots of Mali. Of course, we have
to skirt many pitfalls in order to winnow the
material offered by oral traditionto separate the
wheat of fact from the chaff of words that are
only there for the sake of symmetry or polish,
and of set phrases that are only the formal wrap¬
ping of a message from the distant past.
Speech is a weighty matter
It has been said that oral tradition does not
inspire confidence because it is functionalas if
every human message were not by definition
functional, including archives, which by their
very passiveness, and beneath an appearance of
neutrality and objectivity, conceal so many lies
by omission and clothe error in respectability.
It is true that the epic tradition in particular is
a para-mythical recreation of the past, a sort of
psycho-drama revealing to a community its roots
and the corpus of values which nourish its per¬
sonality; a magic passport enabling it to travel
back up the river of time to the realm of its
ancestors. That is why epic and historical utter¬
ance are not exactly the same. The first overlaps
the second, with anachronistic projections for¬
ward and backward in real time, and with con¬
certina effects like those found in the earth in
archaeology. But do not written records suffer
from these enigmatic intrusions too? Here as else¬
where we must seek the nugget of sense, try to
find a detector which identifies pure metal and
rejects slag and dross.
Of course, the Achilles' heel of epic is the
weakness of the chronological sequence. Mixed-
up temporal sequences cause the image of the past
to reach us, not clear and stable as in a mirror,
but like a fleeting, broken reflection on the
surface of a ruffled stream. For example, the use
of the average length of reigns or generations
for measuring distances back into the past by
* Sundiata, founder of the Mali empire in the 13th
century, is one of the most popular heroes of African his¬
tory. Editor
extrapolation from recent periods has been
vigorously disputed, and has to be accepted with
great reserve, since demographic and other
changes may have taken place. Sometimes an
exceptional and magnetic monarch polarizes the
exploits of his predecessors and successors around
his own person, and the others are literally
eclipsed. This applies to certain dynasts in
Rwanda, and to Da Monzón, King of Segou in
the early nineteenth century, to whom the griots
attribute all that kingdom's major conquests.
Furthermore, an oral account taken out of
its context is like a fish out of water: it dies.
Taken in isolation, oral tradition resembles
African masks wrested from the communion of
the faithful and exhibited to the curiosity of the
uninitiated. It loses its significance and life. Yet
it is through that life, because it is always being
taken over by fresh witnesses charged with trans¬
mitting it, that oral tradition adapts itself to the
expectations of new audiences, an adaptation that
relates mainly to the presentation of the message,
although this does not always leave the content
intact. Moreover, some modern sharks and
mercenaries of oral tradition even serve up
rehashes of written texts which they reinject into
the oral one!
Even the content of the message is often
hermetic or esoteric. For the African, speech is
a weighty matteran ambiguous force which can

4 V-\ \'
«w\mm
¡m
-
,yZ^Z
make and unmake, which can be the bearer of
evil. That is why the message is not articulated
openly and directly, but wrapped up in fable,
allusion, hints and proverbs that are hard to un¬
derstand for the common run of people but clear
for those who possess the antennae of wisdom.
In Africa, speech is too weighty to be wasted,
and the more authoritative one's position the less
one speaks in public. But if someone says to
another, "You have eaten the toad and spat out
its head", he understands at once that he is being
accused of avoiding part of his responsibilities.
The hermeticism of this "half-speech" shows at
once the inestimable value of oral tradition, and
its limits. It is almost impossible to transfer all
its richness from one language to another, espe¬
cially when that other is structurally and socio¬
logically very remote. Tradition does not stand
up well to translation. When uprooted it loses
its vigour and authenticity, for language is "the
home of being". Many errors ascribed to tradi¬
tion itself are due to incompetent or un¬
scrupulous interpreters.
The solid substance
of historical reality
Be that as it may, the validity of oral tradition
has today been amply proved, and confirmed by
crosschecking with written and archaeological
sources, as in the case of the Koumbi Saleh site,
the Lake Kisale remains and the events of the
sixteenth century as transmitted by the Shona,
which D.P. Abraham has observed to be in agree¬
ment with the writings of Portuguese travellers
of the period.
To sum up, the mode of discourse of oral
tradition, whether in epic or prose, whether
didactic or ethical, may be of historical value
from three standpoints. First, it reveals the values
and usages which motivate a people and condi¬
tion their future acts through representation of
archetypes from the past. In doing this, it not
only reflects but also creates history. When Da
Monzón is addressed as "master of waters and
master of men", this signifies the absoluteness
of his power. But the same stories also show him
constantly consulting his warriors, his griots and
his wives. From the famous line in the Song of
the Bow in honour of Sundiata (Sundiata Tasa),
"Saya Kaoussa malo ye" ("Death is preferable to
dishonour"), we can appreciate that a sense of
honour was one of the values of Malinke society
in the thirteenth century.
The same idea is also beautifully expressed
in the story of Bakary Dian's struggle against the
Fulani of Kournari. The valiant Bakary Dian has
retired in anger to his village, Dongorongo, and
the people come to beg him to return to the head
of the Segou army. He gives way finally when
they touch the sensitive chord of pride and glory:
"Forget old words exchanged. It is your present
name you must think of. For one comes into the
world to make a name. If you are born, grow
up and die without a name, you have come into
the world for nothing, and you have left it for
nothing." Then he cries: "Griots of Segou, since
you have come it is not impossible. I will do what
you ask, for the sake of my fame. I will not do
it for Da Monzón. I will do it for no one in
Right, a historian
consults an elderly
chief in Mali.
Above, musicians in
a Côte d'Ivoire
village. Three of
them are playing the
balafon, a West
African xylophone
with gourd
resonators.
Segou. I will do it just for my reputation. Even
after my death, it will be added to my name."
Similarly, the workings of both civilization and
law can be seen when Silamaka says, "You are
fortunate that I am forbidden to kill messengers".
Second, oral tradition offers incidental
descriptions of facts and objects. The reconstruc¬
tion of the past is by no means wholly fictional.
There are passages of recollection, veins of his¬
tory which are often more prosaic than the vivid
decorations of the epic imagination: "Thus began
this institution of collective herding in Bambara
towns. If you were chosen and made a herdsman,
you became a public Fula. The public Fulani
kept the flocks of the King. They were men of
different races, and their chief shepherd was
called Bonke." Again: "At that time people did
not wear slippers, but leather samaras of tanned
ox-hide, with a strap round the nose [the big toe]
and a strap round the heel."
The epic is strewn with allusions to tech¬
niques and to objects which are not essential to
the action but suggest the setting. "Da Monzón
sent for his sixty Somono paddlers, thirty men at
the prow and thirty at the stern. The canoe was
richly decorated." "Ladders were got ready and
set against the wall. The Segou infantry attacked
and infiltrated the town... The Segou horsemen
launched flaming arrows. The houses of the
village caught alight." Saran, the woman in love
with Da Monzón, goes and wets the Kore war¬
riors' gunpowder... It is only through a careful
analysis, sometimes even psychoanalysis, of the
very psychoses of the transmitters of the tradi¬
tion, and of their audience, that the historian can
get to the solid substance of historical reality.
The number of different versions transmitted
by rival groupsfor example, by the various
griot clients of each noble protector (horon,
dyatigui), far from being a handicap, is on the
45

46
contrary only a further guarantee for critical his¬
tory. When accounts agree, as in the case of the
Bambara and Fula griots, who belonged to
opposing camps, the authenticity of the evidence
is reinforced. And as is shown in the case of the
Gouro, with whom a liberal and integrationist
exoteric tradition, transmitted by the lineage,
coexists with the oligarchical and hairsplitting
esoteric tradition of the secret society, spoken
history contains self-censoring elements because
of its very different origins. In fact, it is not
private property, but a common fund which
derives from and provides for various groups in
the community.
The important thing is that internal criticism
of these records should be supported by a
thorough knowledge of the genre in question,
its themes and techniques, its codes and stereo¬
types, its set phrases of padding, the conventional
digression, the evolution of the language, the
audience and its expectations of the storytellers.
Above all, the historian must know about the
caste to which the latter belongedtheir rules
of life, how they were brought up, their ideals,
their schools. We know that in Mali and Guinea,
for example, there have for centuries been actual
schools of initiation at Keyla, Kita, Niagassola,
Niani, and so on.
The language of music
This rigid, formal and institutional oral tradition
to which structure has been imparted in training
schools is a third aspect of its historical value.
The structure is usually reinforced and supported
by court music, which is integral to it and un¬
derlines its didactic and artistic elements. Some
of the instruments used, such as the sosso baila
(the balafon of Sumarro Kante), are so old that
they would repay an archaeological investigation
in themselves. But the correspondences between
types of instrument and music, types of song and
African harps,
zither (top centre), and drums.
dance, make up a minutely ordered world, in
which anomalies and later additions are easily
detected.
Every genre has its own special instrument
in each cultural region: the baila (xylophone) or
the bolon (harp-lute) for epic in Mali; the bendre
(a big round one-sided drum made out of a gourd
and beaten with the bare hands) of the Mossi for
the exaltation (often silent) of the zabyouya (noms
de guerre) of the kings; the mvet (harp-zither) for
the tropical Niebelungen of the Fang poet-
musicians. These instruments, the vehicles of
spoken history, are sacred, the object of venera¬
tion. In effect they are part of the artist, and their
importance in communicating the message is all
the greater since, because language is tonal, music
has direct meaning; the instrument becomes the
artist's voice and he does not need to utter a
word. The triple rhythm of tone, intensity and
duration becomes music with meaning, the kind
of "semantic melodism" Marcel Jousse spoke of.
As a matter of fact, music is so much a part of
oral tradition that some stories can only be told
in song. Popular song, which epitomizes the
will of the people in a satirical form, sometimes
spiced with black humour, which still retains
its vitality even in the present age with its
election campaigns, is a valuable genre, com¬
plementing and counterbalancing the evidence
of official records.
What has been said here of music applies
equally to the other modes of expression, such
as the visual arts. As in the bas-reliefs of the king¬
doms of Abomey and Benin, or in Kuba sculp¬
ture, we sometimes find a direct expression of
historical characters, cultures and events.
Thus oral tradition is not just a second-best
source to be resorted to only when there is
nothing else. It is a distinct source in itself, with
a now well-established methodology, and it lends
the history of the African continent a marked
originality.
