The eternal
bloom of
Art Nouveau
BY MANFRED SPEIDEL
A,Lnyone who has ever seen dried flowers and
leaves that have been pressed for years between
the pages of a book and remembers how the faded
petals, leaves and stems were twisted and entwined
in a two-dimensional pattern should be able to
visualize some of the favourite decorative motifs
used by Art Nouveau artists to decorate the
façades of buildings.
Flowers and plants depicted in this way are
quite different from the naturalistic flower pic¬
tures painted by late nineteenth-century artists
who made pastiches of Gothic or Renaissance
ornamentation. Often enclosed within a frame,
Art Nouveau plants are stylized, they are
geometrical iff shape or their proportions are so
different from those of real plants as to be almost
unrecognizable. The graphic effect is invariably
surprising. The images have a pent-up vitality so
explosive that they seem ready to burst out of
their frames.
Anyone who has observed the world of
plants is sure to have noticed how twigs are
thicker where they part from the branch and at
the bud; how branches twist and turn to form
complex concave and convex patterns; how rocks
are sometimes embraced by an overgrowth of
roots. Using moulded plaster or cast iron, expo¬
nents of Art Nouveau like the French architect
Hector Guimard transformed such natural sculp¬
tures into architectural forms so ambiguous that
they might equally well have been inspired by
pictures of bones and muscles in anatomical text¬
books. These artists would take the functional
aspect of walls and other architectural features as
the starting point for the creation of organic
forms, just as a pearl grows around a grain of sand
in an oyster or a branch grows around an
obstacle.
Art Nouveau artists and architects were also
fascinated by the way in which the tendrils of
climbing plants such as pumpkins spiral around
a support. Using the elasticity and tensile strength
of wrought iron they produced such creeper-like
effects in their designs for stair railings, lamps and
other features of interior decoration. In the
houses he designed in Brussels, Victor Horta com¬
bined the standards and other structural compo¬
nents of electric lamps with more flexible
supports and wiring to make a lattice of sinuous
interwoven lines.
The influence
of the Far East
The inspiration for using plant images in this way
and transforming them into works of art came
from Japanese prints and Japanese and Chinese
calligraphy, which began to appear on the
Western art market in the 1860s. European artists
were excited by the skill with which Oriental
artist-calligraphers drew complex characters with
ink and brush, and by the balance they achieved
between black ideograms and white background.
Victor Horta (in his use of woodwork with
wrought iron) and Henry van de Velde (in his
early designs for chairs) were among the brilliant
exponents of this kind of balance between figure
and background.
This method of transforming flat surfaces was
also used by Horta to break up structural ele¬
ments and dissolve the heavy monumental wall
structures of traditional European architecture so 13

14
as to produce effects of light and a sense of fluid
movement which give the same impression as late
Rococo.
How was this impression of lightness
reproduced on solid stone walls? In Brussels
Horta made the transition from stonework to
ironwork by paring down the stone where it
meets the metal into two or three fine steps so
that the stone seems to consist of thin layers. The
iron is embedded in a hard inner layer of stone
which is enfolded in the thin and softer outer
layers as if in a piece of cloth. The effect of fine
drapery enwrapping a clumsy load-bearing struc¬
ture could be achieved more cheaply in plaster,
and consequently the Art Nouveau period
marked a high point in the use of stuccoed surfaces
which gave a rich and light appearance through
variety of texture.
The graphic explosion
The idea of using a beautiful surface both to pro¬
tect and embellish an architectural structure had
been put forward in the early nineteenth century
by the German architect and writer Gottfried
Semper, who pointed out that in early times the
walls of dwellings had often been covered with
fabric which, like the carpets in a nomad's tent,
was both decorative and a means of insulation.
Around 1895 the Viennese School led by
Otto Wagner took up this idea and began to
experiment with it. Perhaps stimulated by
developments in architecture, graphic artists were
working along similar lines. Thus another facet
of Art Nouveau design originated in Vienna: the
construction of thin layers of surface materials
in stone and glass. One way of suggesting that
these were thin, non-load-bearing slabs was to
leave exposed the screws with which they were
fixed to the wall; another was to enclose them
within a frame. Wagner and his school thus tried
to achieve delicate effects through simple
geometrical façades without having to transform
stone surfaces into patterns of plants and drapery.
So much for the work of Art Nouveau artists
as designers of façades, interiors and furniture.
The less gifted architect or craftsman could pick
up from art magazines their ideas and patterns
for stucco decoration and, by adding a curved
gable here or an omega-shaped window there,
make it seem that he had designed a building in
a new style even though its ground plan was tradi¬
tional in conception. However, wealthy clients
Above, detail of gilt
bronze plate by
Hector Guimard, 1909.
Right, "Waterlily" lamp in
chased gilt bronze from a pair
created by Louis Majorelle in
collaboration with Daum
brothers glassworks, 1905.
Below right, stair railing,
Folkwang Museum, Hagen
(Fed. Rep. of Germany), by
Henry van de Velde, 1901.

Above left, arum lily vase in
"Favrile" iridescent glass, by
Tiffany Studios, Corona, New
York, c. 1900-1910.
Left, front door handle,
Brussels.
Below, detail of stair railing
in Victor Horta's house (now
the Horta Museum), Brussels,
1898.
and their architects sought to create surfaces
which were nothing less than works of art. The
most ambitious architects supervised every detail,
inside and out, of the buildings they designed,
from heating equipment to door handles. They
created a fantastic illusory world of mirror walls
and translucent stained glass. Today it is hard not
to be amused by the extravagance of invention
displayed in the design of such accessories of a
luxurious life-style as a door handle transformed
into the erotic figure of a woman wrapped in
whirling drapery.
An international movement
with national variants
Is it possible to subsume this great variety of
decorative art into a single "style"? Although the
forms differ, they are linked by a common inten¬
tion to create an impression of lightness in load-
bearing structures. But finding a generic name for
this style is not easy. Unesco's project on this
theme (see page 42) uses both the French term
Art Nouveau and the German term Jugendstil. We
should also speak of Sezessionstil in relation to
Austria and Modernismo for Spain. Each of these
terms refers to a specific situation.
"L'Art Nouveau" was the name of a shop
opened in 1895 in Paris by Samuel Bing, a dealer
in Japanese prints and East Asian objets d'art who
also exhibited contemporary furniture and crafts.
When he showed his collection in Dresden in
1897, it was billed simply as "Bing. Art Nou¬
veau." Around 1900, by which time Bing had
begun to turn to other styles, art critics adopted
the name of his shop to describe the work of Gui-
mard or Horta. Horta disliked being labelled as
the exponent of a style. He considered himself
to be a rationalist. Guimard wrote on his
drawings "Style Guimard".
The German word Jugendstil is derived from
the Munich weekly Jugend ("Youth"), which was
launched in 1896. In 1900 Berlin critics wishing
to disparage nonconformist paintings coined the
word Jugendstil ("Jugend style"), but in 1902
another critic took up the word as an apt descrip¬
tion of the fresh spirit of the new movement.
The German term Sezession ("secession") was
used to denote separatist movements opposed to
established and officially-supported groups of
artists and conservative, nationalistic cultural poli¬
cies. Secessionist exhibitions at Munich in 1892,
at Vienna in 1897 and at Berlin in 1898 were
15

16
ostentatiously internationalist. But the term Sezes-
sionstil ("Secession style") eventually came to be
associated with the work and approach of artists
working in Vienna.
All these terms were used both by conserva¬
tive critics and by advocates of the new trend,
which was known in Italy as Stile Liberty (after
Liberty of London, a leading manufacturer of
printed cotton fabric), and in Britain as "Modern
Style". Many ironical names were also coined,
including Dolce Stile Nuove in Italy, Style Nouille
("noodle style") in France, and Paling Stijl ("eel
style") or Coup de fouet ("whiplash") style in
Belgium.
In many countries the new style became an
emblem of a struggle for political independence
and cultural identity, and artists often claimed to
belong to the movement even when their work
showed otherwise. In Finland and Hungary, for
example, the more abstract motifs of Art Nouveau
Above, detail of façade, 185
rue Belliard, Paris, 1913.
Right, 34 avenue de Wagram,
Paris, by Jules Lavirotte,
1904. Sculpture by Laphilippe.
were enriched by borrowings from folklore and
history. There seems to have been a common
effort to discover and define through the move¬
ment a truly national art which could replace out¬
moded international and historicist styles. In
many cases Art Nouveau proved unsatisfactory
for this purpose and more monumental styles
were evolved to satisfy national aspirations.
Architects
and art magazines
The search for distinctive national styles seems
inconsistent with the rapid international vogue
for Art Nouveau. Few Art Nouveau architects
worked exclusively in their country of origin.
Although Horta in Brussels, Guimard in Paris,
Saarinen in Helsinki and Wagner in Vienna all
found commisions in their native cities, the Bel¬
gian architect van de Velde emigrated to Ger¬
many and worked at Hagen, Berlin and Weimar.
His hopes of settling in Paris came to nothing.
Joseph Maria Olbrich of Vienna, who founded
the artists' colony at Darmstadt in 1889 on the
invitation of the Grand Duke of Hesse, worked
in Germany until his death in 1908. One of the
finest Jugendstil buildings in Munich is by the
Hungarian architect F. Nyilas, and the Italian
architect Raimondo d'Aronco was employed by
the Sultan in Istanbul when he designed the
pavilions for the 1902 Turin Exhibition which
made his name. Charles Rennie Mackintosh
worked in Glasgow (Scotland), but also executed
commissions for Viennese clients. The Viennese
architect Hoffmann's best-known design is the
Palais Stockt in Brussels.
The new theories were also transmitted
through Europe by schools of architecture. Otto
Wagner's classes at the Vienna Art School
attracted pupils from the countries of the Austro-
Hungarian monarchy and their neighbours,
including Italy. Yugoslavians and Scandinavians
studied at German universities and Scandinavian

From left to right and top
to bottom: entrance to
machine hall, Zollern coal
mine (Fed. Rep. of
Germany), by Bruno
Möhring, 1902. Pediment of
private house, Calle Llausá,
Barcelona. Window of
Saint-Cyr hotel, Brussels, by
Gustave Strauwens, 1903.
Entrance to apartment
building, Katajanokka
residential district of
Helsinki, c. 1900. Faenza
theatre, Bogota, c. 1900.
Entrance, Gallery of
Modern Art, Subotica
(Yugoslavia), by F. Reichl,
1904. Detail of façade,
Avenue Cogels-Osylei,
Antwerp (Belgium), by Jos
Bascourt, 1895.
MANFRED SPEIDEL is
professor of the theory of
architecture at the Technical
University, Aachen (Fed. Rep. of
Germany). The author of a
history of traditional and modern
Japanese architecture (1983), he
has recently edited the complete
works of the German architect
Bruno Taut (1880-1938).
students visited Britain. Finland and Hungary had
artistic connections with many other countries.
It was largely due to these schools, and to
magazines such as The Studio in England, Dekora¬
tive Kunst in Germany, and many others, that
the new ideas spread so rapidly. Only two years
after it had begun publication, Jugend was
warning against the dangers of copying the new
style. The designs which appeared in its pages
became so popular that after 1900 they were pro¬
tected by copyright.
Outside Europe the new ideas spread through
colonial or post-colonial connections, such as
those between Britain and the Commonwealth
and between Spain and Latin America. European
architects and their local colleagues enriched the
new style with injections of local tradition. It is
impossible to list all the exchanges, direct and
indirect, national and international, which created
the paradox of an international movement
embracing a tangle of national and local Art Nou¬
veau styles.
This complex and subtle style became so
widespread that there are few cities where
unknown local builders or plasterers have not
enriched entrance halls, staircases or windows
with Art Nouveau motifs, thus endowing entire
urban districts with a distinctive appearance and
atmosphere.
The triumph of asymmetry
Elaborate decorative effects and the subtle inter¬
play of surface textures were not the only achieve¬
ments of Art Nouveau. The freedom of
asymmetry was rediscovered in planning floor-
space, together with new ideas about movement
and space in domestic architecture. A new
architectural vocabulary was created at Otto
Wagner's School in Vienna, expressed in the
extensive use of horse-shoe- and omega-shaped
arches over doors or windows, perhaps
influenced by Islamic or Chinese architecture.
Equally typical is the contrast between massive
walls, pillars and other structural elements and
the airy lightness of the roofs and skylights
between them. The Wagner School also
introduced the curtain wall, a concept adapted
by Olbrich for his entrance gate to the Darmstadt
Exhibition in 1901 in the form of a huge piece
of cloth hung between two towers.
The shapes of buildings were also radically
modified. Olbrich, for example, designed houses
at Darmstadt with oblique or curved polygonal
walls which foreshadowed the dynamic lines
made possible by reinforced concrete in the 1920s
and the automobile-age architecture of Erich
Mendelsohn.
Art Nouveau, bold yet delicate, has some¬
thing in common with the art of Debussy. Once
again it has captured the imagination of a world
tending towards uniformity, but its subtlety, like
that of the plants which inspired it, renders it
fragile and difficult to preserve. 17
