i
'*
,^7 si v» /,
BY PIEDAD PENICHE RIVERO
16



When cocoa was

used as currency
Money literally grew on trees in parts of
pre-Columbian America, where cocoa
was invested with the magic attributes of
the god Quetzalcóatl and brought wealth
and prestige to those who owned it
Above, Maya stone sculpture
of a warrior. Left,
Quetzalcóatl and his
companion as depicted in an
Aztec manuscript, the
Codex Borbonicus. ^B
'M<LONEY grows on trees," the Spanish
chroniclers who followed the conquistadors to
Mexico noted with amazement when they saw
that cocoa beans were used as currency.
At that time there were three major cocoa-
producing regions: Chontalpa and Soconusco in
Mexico, and the Ulúa basin in Honduras. Produc¬
tion, circulation and consumption of the precious
beans were tightly controlled by the nobles and
merchants of the Valley of Mexico and Yucatán.
Cocoa was expensive because of low yields and
transport problems.
Cocoa was a primitive form of currency and
could not perform all the functions of money.
It was widely used as a medium of exchange, but
to measure value the Aztecs and Mayas tended
to use quachtli, pieces of cotton fabric which
represented a given amount of work.
In Yucatán, one quachtli was equivalent to
450 hours of work. And while we do not know
how many hours it took to make each of the
pieces of cloth which formed part of the tribute
raised by the Aztec emperors, we know that each
one was worth almost 100 cocoa beans. 17

Above, the Pyramid of Kukulkan at Chichén Itzá, one
of the great cities of the Maya-Toltec civilization, north
of Yucatán, Mexico.
Right, cacao tree (Theobroma cacao). Far right, cacao
fruit cut open to show the seeds (cocoa beans).
18
It seems certain, then, that the value of most



of the goods in circulation could be expressed in
cocoa, but was actually assessed in pieces of cloth
at constant value. Cocoa was used as money
because, unlike the pieces of cloth, it could be
divided up as required.
The ancient Mexicans used cocoa to prepare
chocolate, a ritual drink consumed exclusively by
aristocrats and warriors. Most people only had
the right to pulque, a fermented drink made from
agave. This prohibition strengthened the power
of the aristocracy, since chocolate was supposed
to be the food of the gods and to possess magical
properties.
Aztec 'chocolate soldiers'
Perhaps chocolate was associated with the blood
of human sacrifices, notably when the heart was
torn from victims offered to Quetzalcóatl, the
"plumed serpent", in the Toltec towns of Yucatán
and the Valley of Mexico.
According to Mexican mythology, Quetzal¬
cóatl, the "gardener of paradise", taught men how
to grow cocoa when he lived at the city of Tula.
When he left for the coast, he buried the "cur
rency" of that timesea-shells, feathers and pre¬
cious stones. Cocoa then began to be used as cur¬
rency instead, and was invested with the magic
attributes of the god who had introduced it.
The Aztecs were the last masters of the Valley
of Mexico. Their flourishing empire, which domi¬
nated all the peoples which had fought for con¬
trol of the Valley, owed its prosperity to tribute
rendered by its thirty-eight provinces, among
which Soconusco contributed, according to the
Codex Mendoza, 400 of the 980 loads of cocoa
demanded by the state.
The beans were deposited in "cocoa-houses"
and then taken to the centres of imperial
powertemples and barracks where it is recorded

PIEDAD PENICHE
RIVERO,
Mexican anthropologist and
archaeologist, is a former
staff member of the
anthropology faculty at the
University of Yucatán,
Mérida, Mexico. She is the
author of numerous
publications on the Maya
and Itzá civilizations,
including studies on the use
of cocoa beans as wealth
and a symbol of power.
that the Aztec soldiers consumed massive
amounts of chocolate.
Unlike those of the Aztecs, the Maya political
and mercantile élites overlapped, so that cocoa
entered Maya society through trade not tribute.
The circulation of cocoa beans was duplicated
by the production of an equivalent quantity of
cotton squares. Cocoa beans and cotton squares
served as standards of value for all kinds of com¬
modities including certain areas of land which
produced cash crops. Slavery came into being
when manpower was levied from among the
peasant communities. Men were bought and sold
with cocoa. According to the chronicler Diego
de Landa, the Mayas of Yucatán were "Strongly
inclined to trade. They dispatched salt, clothes
and slaves to Ulúa and Tabasco, and bartered
them for cocoa and rows of stones which served
them as money and enabled them to buy slaves
and other fine stones..."
Thanks to Maya and perhaps even Aztec
slaves, the increased productivity of the cocoa-
growing regions probably encouraged the circu¬
lation of cocoa among the lower classes, still
under the control of the aristocracy. Several eth¬
nographic chronicles from colonial times confirm
that cocoa was used as an offering and as a gift
at weddings and funerals.
What role did cocoa play in the accumula¬
tion of wealth? Among the Mayas and the Aztecs
different attitudes prevailed, generally dictated by
social status. In the Valley of Mexico the mer¬
chants had to behave with great circumspection
so as not to offend the emperor. Consequently,
records the chronicler Bernardion de Sahagún,
they were modestly, even poorly dressed. As for
the Pochtec merchants, they were forced by the
avarice of the nobility to give up large quantities
of cocoa as gifts and offerings to temples.
Whereas in the Valley of Mexico the posses¬
sion of cocoa was a status symbol, among the
Itzás of Yucatán fortunes in cocoa ostentatiously
displayed by rich lords who owned many slaves
and opulently decorated palaces also served to
stimulate production since they could be invested
in commercial farming and the acquisition of
captive manpower. This may explain why the
Spaniards retained the use of cocoa as money in
Yucatán, replacing cotton with their own currency,
the real, as an indicator of value, but continuing
to relate it to fluctuations in cocoa production.
Cocoa was still being used in the nineteenth
century to pay the wages of workmen in Yucatán
and other parts of Central America. This is clear
from an account by a North American traveller,
John L. Stephens, who noted in 1842 that in
Yucatán there were no copper coins nor any
specie less than the half real, that the Indians
earned very low wages with which they procured
the bare necessities, and that cocoa beans were
widely used as small change. 19
