
M
Ihe European Academy of Arts,
Sciences and Humanities, founded in
1 979, brings together eminent artists,
scientists and writers who wish to
contribute to the analysis of major
world problems.
The Academy is a three-tiered
institution. It has some 200 titular
members, forty of whom are Nobel
prizewinners, from fifty-five national
academies spread over five conti¬
nents. A similar number of cor¬
responding members are chosen
from among young people who are
making an outstanding creative con¬
tribution to the arts and the sciences.
The Academy is served by several
committees, notably a committee of
honour whose members include
heads of state, government ministers,
ambassadors and representatives of
several intergovernmental organi¬
zations.
Ever since it was founded, the
Academy has collaborated with
Unesco. Initially it was agreed that an
international symposium should be
organized annually in a European
capital under the auspices of one or
several national academies. The first
symposium, on relations between the
sciences, the arts and philosophy,
was held in 1980 at Unesco Head¬
quarters in Paris. Subsequent meet¬
ings were held in Brussels, Lisbon,
Stockholm, Uppsala, Bucharest, Paris,
Rome, Sofia and Geneva.
Two particularly important meet¬
ings were a symposium on "The
European Cultural and Scientific
Community and its Role in North-
South Dialogue", held at Unesco in
its fortieth anniversary year (1985),
and a workshop on the theme of
"Science, Culture and World Health"
jointly organized by the World Health
Organization, Unesco, and the Euro¬
pean Academy, held at Geneva in
1 989 on the tenth anniversary of the
founding of the Academy. An instru¬
ment of co-operation between the
three organizations is being drawn up
with a view to adopting a joint plan
"Cellular Machinery",
a painting by the French artist Nicole d'Agaggio
inspired by phenomena from the world of molecular biology.


THE EUROPEAN
ACADEMY OF ARTS,
SCIENCES AND
HUMANITIES
BY RAYMOND DAUDEL
International co-operation is founded on a network of daily
contacts, exchanges and initiatives which create bonds of
solidarity between men and women all over the world. In
addition to the intergovernmental agencies of the United
Nations system, hundreds of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) today form part of this network. These organizations
exist thanks to the dedication of people with similar professional
interests or common aims who wish to share their experience
and combine their efforts. "Forum", a new feature launched this
month, gives them an opportunity to talk about their activities.
of action to strengthen the role of
universities in the promotion of
health.
Under the aegis of Unesco and
the European Federation on AIDS
Research, nine laboratories in Europe
and North America are engaged in
joint research on an AIDS vaccine, on
improved treatment for those suffer¬
ing from AIDS, and on the origins of
the disease. This "Man against
Viruses" group is chaired by Professor
Luc Montagnier of the Pasteur Insti¬
tute in Paris, whose team was respon¬
sible for identifying two of the AIDS
viruses.
Together with Unesco, the
French Ministry of Research and Tech¬
nology and the Descartes Associa¬
tion, the Academy is currently
preparing a workshop to study links
between biological diversity and cul¬
tural diversity. Questions examined at
the workshop will include the role of
natural and artificial reserves, and the
need to create gene banks for the
preservation of certain varieties of
maize, coffee and Sahelian plants.
In association with the Hungari¬
an Academy of Sciences, a seminar
is being prepared for 1991 to foster
the promotion of ethical, humanist
and cultural values in education.
In 1992, to mark the five hun¬
dredth anniversary of the "Encounter
between Two Worlds", America and
Europe, the Academy and Unesco
intend to organize a major workshop
in Madrid on the importance of dia¬
logue between cultures, a process
which is often threatened by the
rising tide of intoleranceethnic,
nationalist, ideological or religious.
RAYMOND DAUDEL,
French scientist, is president of the
European Academy of Arts, Sciences
and Humanities and of the
International Academy of Quantum
Molecular Sciences. He is editor of the
International Journal of Quantum
Chemistry, and the author of a
number of scientific works including
Quantum Theory of Chemical
Reactivity (1973) and (with others)
Quantum Chemistry (1984). 49
