USSR:
the
thaw
Three days after the accident at the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant In the USSR,
a photographer flies over the site.



CHERNOBYL
BEFORE AND AFTER
by Vassil Plioutch
Deputy Editor of
Uteraturna Ukrayina, Kiev
X HE weekly magazine Literaturna Ukrayina
was not part of the clandestine press and does
not date from the age of perestroika. It was
founded in 1927, but it remained virtually
unknown in the West until 26 April 1986, the
date of the explosion at the Chernobyl nuclear
power plant.
A month before the accident, Literaturna
Ukrayina had published a highly-critical article
on the faults of the plant and the lack of
respect paid to technical standards during its
construction. The author of the article and the
editorial staff were inundated with indignant
complaints. They were accused of malice and
of trying to undermine the reputation of hard¬
working engineers. What saved them from the
serious consequences which might have fol¬
lowed publication of this article was...the catas¬
trophe itself! The same cannot be said, alas,
of the thousands of Ukrainians, Byelorussians
and Russians who were bombarded with radi¬
oactive dust. But today the whole world knows
that story.
We can now see how cramped our
common European home is, and how fragile
and vulnerable are the peace and happiness
within it. There is no need to erect a barrier
of medium-range missiles to see it go up in
smoke. A moment of carelessness in the sup¬
posedly peaceful use of the atom is enough.
What is the point, in a country like France,
of painstakingly equipping nuclear plants with
a double or triple security system, when the
slightest act of negligence committed else¬
where is enough to spark off a general catas¬
trophe? Take it from me, as a man working
at Kiev, 120 km from the plant, who receives
a daily dose of radiation: I have first-hand
knowledge of the tragedy of the sick children
for whom Canada sent a second plane-load of
medication, and of the incredible difficulties
in certain districts of Kiev and Jitomirwhich
were not included in the security zone around
the plant and which, four years later, are
having to be urgently evacuated...
In such circumstances, journalists' courage
and public-spiritedness will never be suffi¬
ciently appreciated. We know from personal
experience what they can accomplish. After the
Chernobyl catastrophe, our magazine was so
successful in mobilizing opinion on ecological
problems that we managed to bring about the
closure of a nuclear power plant built on a tec¬
tonic fault in the Crimea, as well as have work
stopped on the Chiguirinsk plant on the banks
of the Dnieper River, the source of water for
35 million people.
Extract from a contribution to the Informal East-West
Press Meeting held at Unesco Headquarters, Paris, 27-2S
February 1990.
