R V I
A leading Soviet medievalist sounds the alarm at the onset
of a hedonistic culture in modern technocratic societies
Sergei S. Averintsev
A sense of écency
You are both a scientist and a man ofculture. How would Then there's the total disappearance of a culture character-
you describe the cultural situation today? What trends ized by a sense of decency or modesty, and finally an absurd
encouraging or disturbingdo you see? ~ syncretism of capitalist and Marxist values that has nothing
The most encouraging factor is the total breakdown of to do with tolerance and even less with a desire for synthesis,
ideological folly. It may return, of courseGod help us if and lumps "Ford", "Freud" and "Marx" together on the
it doesbut only as a kind of sinister mystification. Never same level in a godless world,
again will it lead the human mind astray. Never again. The Libido is invading life. Not a carnal libido. It is as if
blood of innocent victims has washed the altars of these machines have become consumed with lust or human nature
inhuman cults. The errors of the past, the fruits of worthy is becoming machine-like.
thinkers of the late nineteenth century and the beginning.. It's very hard to talk about a sense of decency today,
of the twentieth, have been dethroned along with totalitarian especially in my country where people reject wholesale a
ideologies. The roots of the evil must be sought much earlier code of good behaviour which is forcibly imposed on them
in the history of thought. as though they were eternal children. It is true that this code
There is still reason for anxiety, however. Let's take of conduct is only a caricature of a true culture of decency,
two contemporary anti-utopian works as signposts with Good behaviour cannot replace nobility of soul. It can even
"Impasse" written on themGeorge Orwell's 1984 and be said that the road which leads from good behaviour to
Aldous Huxley's Brave New World. It looks as if we shall nobility of soul is a hard one. On the other hand, the road
be spared the horrors described by Orwell, but we're moving that leads to such deviations as mass hypocrisy is, alas, so
dangerously close to the prophecies of Huxley.1 In our much easier. How can one fail to deplore the fact that rock
everyday lives we can detect warning signs of a brave new groups (at best) and sex shops (at worst) have become the
worlda vulgar hedonism, which in my country can only inevitable accompaniment and even in a sense the emblem
be partially indulged because of the lack of consumer goods of liberal democracy?
but which is all the more powerful since it is unsatisfied. Let's not forget that there is a civic tradition in Europe,
	 however imperfect it may be, and that this tradition was
. ,,. , r,, -. , .i- 1 i imQ u i. established by puritans. The legend that is at the origin of
1. Nineteen Eighty-Four, a novel published in 1949 by the ; r ö ö .
English author George Orwell (1903-1950), evokes a totalitarian the Western ideal of freedom-that to defend the honour
world in which people are at the mercy of a bureaucracy which 0f a virtuous woman the Romans rose up and overthrew
records secret information about them. In Brave New World Mr kings_has become a joke tod It's sad> not onl for
(1932) Aldous Huxley depicts a future in which people are . , , n r r j
psychologically conditioned according to the planned needs of vlrtue but above aü ior freedom.
a technological civilization directed by a few individuals. Editor Today's extreme permissiveness is as different from sin

committed in the heat of passion as a cancer is different from
a benign tumour. The defenders of nature who are, thank
God, so active today should remember that human nature
is threatened too, that such a systematic destruction of the
ideal of decency is not restricted to sexual morality and may
have unforeseeable consequences.
The culture of decency belongs to history. Its manifesta¬
tions are recorded in the relativity of history," so that, for
example, the sense of decency of the pagans of Antiquity is,
from a Christian or Muslim point of view, indecent. But
never in history has humanity been able to do without the
principle of decency. Those who study the problem of
mutual comprehension between cultures must take into
account the fact that, for Islam, for example, the universal
sub-culture of sex shops is mortally offensive. I mention
Islam because no one seems to think about Christianity
anymore. Although of course when a sex shop is opened
near York Minster, a medieval cathedral in one of the
oldest cities in Christendom, it is impossible not to see this
as an attack on the rights of believers.
It's not easy for me to talk about this, since in my
country the rights of believers have been treated even more
roughly, and still are, as I know from my experience as a
member of parliament. But take these two examples, one
Orwellian, the other worthy of Huxley. The first is sym¬
bolized by a ruined Church, the second by a church flanked
by a sex shop. I couldn't say which is worse.
Below, Epiphany festival at
the Cathedral of the Nativity
(13th century), in the Kremlin
at Suzdal, Central Russia.

The development ofhumanity is comparable to that of a
person. Its path is marked by remarkable cultural gains
but losses seem to be inevitable, too. Which do you think
are the most regrettable of these losses and which do you
consider normal and justified?
It's always a pity to lose something. I can't "justify" any
loss. Humanity can survive without such and such a code
of honour, but not without the very notion of honour. I
am very sad that the classical languages, Greek and Latin,
are disappearing from European life. Fewer and fewer people
will be capable of reading Aristotle in the original, but that's
not the whole point. The far more important question is
whether Aristotelian thought will survive.
Cultures influence each other, but is there a line between
the fertilization ofone culture by another and its destruc¬
tion? Is not every action by one culture vis-à-vis another
a form ofaggression? In any case, is there such a thing as
a "pure" culture?
There is nothing intrinsically aggressive in the action of
one culture on another. A "pure" culture would be just as
absurd as a series of incestuous marriages within the same
family, inevitably resulting in degeneration. The originality
of a culture is measured, among other factors, by its ability
to creatively assimilate outside influences. Nearly all the lines
of the Aeneid contain echoes of Greek verse, but that doesn't
prevent Virgil from expressing the very essence of Rome.
It is usually factors that are not strictly speaking cultural
that are the most destructive of other traditions. The effects
of unbridled consumption, the excessive influence of distant
colonial or imperial centres. As when the Seleucid king
Antiochus IV Epiphanes ordered a small people to forget
that they were the people of the Bible.
The freedom ofhumanity is the freedom of culture. What
can the tide which is carrying the world towards democracy,
pluralism and non-ideological international relations bring
to world culture?
Nothing less than its chance of survival. God knows that
democracy can be accompanied by barbarity, but it can also
be synonymous with culture. In a way it has a choice. But
totalitarianism can never be synonymous with culture, no
matter how strong the cultural forces with which it seeks
to associate itself. The logic of totalitarianism forbids culture
to be culture. This logic has infinitely more weight than the
plebian origins of the seminarist Dzhugashvili or Corporal
Schicklgruber.2 "Freedom of thought" is a pleonastic
expression, because thought only exists when it is free.
Thought can .develop on the foundations of faith, but
it has no place in ideology. Tasks can be fairly divided
between faith and thought. The one can't replace the other
GeageOrodl 1984 le meilleur
Illustration Jean Alessandnni
ALDOUS HUXLEY
Illustration- Michel Simeon
Covers of French editions of
Orwell's 1984 and
Huxley's Brave New World.
because faith, by definition, is concerned with what is tran¬
scendental to thought. Ideology, also by definition, deals
with what should legitimately belong to the realm of
thought, because unlike faith it has no specific object of its
own, it is parasitical. It is an unworthy error for faith to
wish to take the place of thought. But ideology can't do any¬
thing else: it has no choice.
How do you see the future of religions and their place in
the world today and tomorrow? How are the concepts of
religion and freedom connected?
I am absolutely convinced that religious traditions are
stronger than anything else. Their propensity to survive in
extreme conditions is extraordinary. Everything new soon
becomes obsolete, but these traditions endure. After the
worst ordeals, they are regenerated. This has happened
several times in history and today is one of those times.
The major threat to religions isn't the "death" that is
predicted for them, but degeneration. Homo technicus neo-
barbarus, the dominant human species, is more dedicated
to technology than to culture. Early on, he transformed
religion into "parapsychology" or, rather, parapolitics. In
short, a kind of ideology. I once heard an Italian priest
quoting Teilhard de Chardin, for whom I have great esteem,
with an intonation that was all too familiar to my Russian
ears as that with which "the classics of Marxism" were
recited for decades in my country. A religious ideology is
just as inconceivable to me as a scientific ideology, and for
the same reason: the intolerance of ideology denies the very
existence of the need for the spiritual lucidity and the close
perception of objective data that are indispensable to both
the religious impulse and scientific analysis.
2. Joseph Stalin and Adolf Hitler. Editor

On the Banks of the Jordan, oil on canvas by the French painter
Georges Rouault (1871-1958).
Religions once inspired great works of art. Are they still
capable ofthat today?
Who knows? Great works of purely Christian inspira¬
tion have been produced in our century. I think of the
paintings of Georges Rouault, the icons of Father Gregory
Krug, a Russo-Estonian hermit working in France, of the
music of Olivier Messiaen, the poems of Charles Péguy and
Paul Claudel, the late work of Vyacheslav Ivanov, and the
novels of Georges Bernanos. That's quite a list. Without their
religious undercurrent, the works of Heinrich Böll, Graham
Greene, Akhmatova, Pasternak, Solzhenitsyn, Alfred
Schnittkeour greatest living composerand so many
others would be unthinkable. And lest I be accused of
prejudice in favour of Christians I will also mention some
Jewish names, if only those of Bialik, Nelly Sachs and Samuel
Agnon. Only ignorance prevents me from adding Muslim
artists to the list. Which said, I'm not entirely convinced
that we shall soon be returning to the days when entire
peoples, borne on a tide of collective enthusiasm, built
cathedrals. I don't expect to see any "New Middle Ages".
Nothing repeats itself. God doesn't repeat anything. He
"always creates anew".
