The Philippines !
Between freedom
and anarchy
Demonstration
in support of press
freedom,
Manila.
In the euphoria
of liberation,
the media try
to find
their bearings
Xhe people of the Philippines, who for decades
had been fighting a seemingly losing battle against
an oppressive regime, will remember 1986 as the
year that ushered in a new era. In the February
revolution, millions of Filipinos fought with
nothing but prayers and a firm determination to
restore freedom and democracy to their land. The
phrase that inspired them was "people power".
During those four days in February, the mass
media were very much in the forefront, in¬
forming, mobilizing and directing. What made
this media "coup" even more spectacular was that
journalists were operating in a climate of fear
and apathy created by years of repression. When
Ferdinand Marcos came to power, he trans¬
formed almost overnight what had been regarded
as the freest press in Asia into an instrument for
the perpetuation of his own regime.
For many years, the people oPthe Philippines 27

28
had no access to media that told them what was
really happening in the country. Information was
manipulated, either by direct censorship or by
self-censorship based on fear. All kinds of infor¬
mation were considered secret, from Marcos's
state of health to government investments and the
transactions of financial institutions. Reporters
could not even obtain statistics on malnutrition
in the Philippines. Secrecy reached such heights
that even certain laws that were passed remained
secret.
Various presidential decrees were designed to
stop the free flow of information. Presidential
Decree 33, for example, penalized the printing,
possession, distribution and circulation of certain
leaflets, handbills and propaganda, while Presi¬
dential Decree 90 penalized any person who
published, distributed, circulated or spread
"rumours, false news or information" that could
prove "divisive" to the people.
The intimidation and harassment of journa¬
lists was a common occurrence. Those who dared
to speak out could lose their jobs, or were the
object of administrative and legal charges. Some
were imprisoned, tortured or even killed. It is esti¬
mated that twenty-seven journalists were killed
during the Marcos years.
Radio station managers and newspaper edi¬
tors were not exempt. They were intimidated,
risked ' imprisonment or found that they no
longer had a paper or station to run. Immedia¬
tely after the imposition of martial law in Sep¬
tember 1972, the government took over the
ownership of a number of media. Others were
shut down. Some of them resurfaced, but the new
owners were friends or associates of President
Marcos. Indictments against the media increased
in force and frequency, creating an all-pervasive
climate of fear and insecurity among media
professionals.
The turning point finally came in August
1983 with the assassination of opposition leader
Benigno Aquino. Suddenly, "alternative" media
began to surface. A handful of tabloid newspa¬
pers and radio stations created by journalists
dared to defy government instructions on how
to handle news stories, despite the constant
harassment and intimidation. Though they had
little or no advertising, they somehow managed
to survive and by late 1985 they had more credi¬
bility than the pro-Marcos "establishment"
media. In the end, they brought about their own
liberation, and in the process they liberated the
country as well.
The new head of government, Corazón
Aquino, the widow of the assassinated opposition
leader, kept her campaign promises. One of her
first acts was to free the media. Presidential
Decrees 33 and 90, which led to the worst abuses
against journalists and media institutions, were
revoked. More than 500 political prisoners, many
of them journalists, were released. A Presidential
Commission was set up to investigate all forms
of human rights violations, past and present.
Shreds of paper flutter from
a Manila building during a
popular demonstration in
1983 following the
assassination of opposition
leader Benigno Aquino.

1
% m à
t r-
For the media, liberation proved to be heady.
Newspapers sprang up overnight and ran column
after column on opinions and letters to the editor.
Never before had the press, radio and television
enjoyed such freedom. The press promised the
new president a hundred-day "honeymoon"
during which time there was to be no adverse cri¬
ticism of the government. This was intended to
allow the president and ministers time to adjust
and make the transition.
But the "honeymoon" lasted barely a month.
As the then minister of information told a
Washington Post reporter, "...immediately after
the revolution, before anyone had a chance to do
anything wrong, the press turned on the govern¬
ment. There were personal attacks ridiculing the
eccentricity of this or that minister." (He came
under attack himself for delays in issuing press
passes for the presidential palace.)
As the end of the hundred days drew near,
the media began to criticize the president for her
"lack of major accomplishments so far". This
struck Corazón Aquino as eminently unfair.
"Getting rid of Marcos," she stated, "was no
mean feat, and so was the restoration of freedom,



and particularly press freedom." Although she
has publicly regretted the adverse media reporting
which gives the impression that government
policies do not do anyone any good, there is no
doubt that she is committed to freedom of the
press: "I would rather have a press that goes over¬
board than a censored press. ..even if reporters
don't always get their facts straight, and media
reporting sometimes takes 'destructive forms',"
she told the Press Foundation of Asia in April
1986.
The dangers of irresponsible
reporting and sensationalism
Readers in the Philippines today have never had
a greater choice. There are twenty-three newspa¬
pers, not to mention weekly magazines and other
publications, in fierce competition for readers and
advertisers.
To attract readers and stay in business, quite
a few newspapers have been indulging in sensa¬
tional reporting. Rumours are exaggerated out of
all proportion and sometimes presented as hard
facts. Irresponsible reporting is bringing into
question the newly regained credibility of the
media. President Aquino was even led to charge
that "there is too much disinformation going
around". The Archbishop of Manila, Jaime Car¬
dinal Sin, also criticized the media in a pastoral
letter that was read in all the Catholic churches
of the capital, accusing them of "tale-bearing and
vicious rumour-mongering" and asserting that
there was a definite tendency to undermine the
social order in the critical times the Philippines
were going through.
At a national conference on communication
and journalism held in June 1986, a group of 29

"The press destabilized
by rumour."
educators warned that certain publications were
tending towards the type of "wayward" media
that were prevalent during the period preceding
martial law. Certain senior journalists concurred,
especially as far as the "new" journalistic prac¬
tices were concerned, which one of them summed
up as follows: "Mere rumours are blown up as
factual stories. Confidence is sometimes violated.
Some resort to unethical means in getting stories.
All in all, there is mayhem..."
Whereas in the past Filipinos accused the
Western press of depicting their country as if it
were on the brink of civil war, many leaders in
the country agree that today the Filipino press
itself must take a good part of the blame for the
climate of uncertainty. They also accuse the
media of encouraging intrigue among top govern¬
ment officials, a practice that leads to acrimonious
and damaging political infighting.
The military have their own grievances. They
have accused reporters and broadcasters of giving
unusually heavy coverage to communist leaders.
Media professionals retort that the communist
rebel movement is important, and that its leaders
have made themselves readily available for com¬
ments and interviews.
Another common complaint concerns the
type of news covered. By and large, newspapers
are urban-oriented and what happens in the pro¬
vinces tends to be buried in the inside pages. Only
stories of crime, violence or natural disaster make
the headlines.
Among the many shortcomings of the media
in the Philippines, there is a lack of journalistic
professionalism. In spite of the freer environment,
which means that sources of information are
easier to approach, some journalists still rely pri¬
marily on press releases. According to the presi-
30
dent of Radio Philippines Network: "While we
may have gained precious freedom for journalistic
endeavours, some of us still find it difficult to
break the habit of being spoon-fed the news."
During the Marcos regime, the lack of press
freedom gave journalists an easy excuse for not
doing in-depth, investigative stories. Today, one
wonders just how many journalists have the
appropriate skills for that kind of reporting. If
more investigative reporting is not done, it is not
for a lack of issues: hidden wealth, human rights
abuses, the communist insurgency, graft and cor¬
ruption.. .all are stories worth doing in depth.
It may be that the present orientation of jour¬
nalists is part of the unwanted legacy of the past.
Fourteen years of repression stifled not only the
investigative capacities but also the imagination
of Filipino journalists. As the former president
of the National Press Club of the Philippines
noted, during the Marcos years the press was inca¬
pable of fostering young talent to take over from
their seniors. This was manifest when press
freedom was restored: semi-retired and expatriate
journalists had to be pressed back into active duty
to provide staff for the new publications.
Freedom on the airwaves
Traditionally, radio and television were entertain¬
ment oriented, but during the February revolu¬
tion stations became deeply involved in covering
the fast-changing political situation. This depar¬
ture in favour of the news did not last much
beyond the change of regime, though announcers
will now cut into regular programmes to cover
major national events.
The same mixed loyaltiesto Marcos or to
the new regimecan be found among radio and
television commentators. Unfortunately, they are
also open to the same kinds of criticism as the
press. Some radio stations loyal to Marcos have
been accused of "abusing freedom of expression",
to the point of polarizing the population. Even
the government-operated station has been taxed
with subjective reporting and, in some instances,
of systematically taking an anti-government
stance.
Concerned citizens have raised the issue, com¬
plaining of licentious and even seditious use of
the airwaves. "Distortion, libel and sedition are
rife in the broadcasting industry", noted a leading
columnist of the Philippine Daily Inquirer, who
attributed this deplorable situation to "overcrow¬
ding". There are 308 radio stations and 44 televi¬
sion stations, owned and operated by 96
companies. Of these, the government operates 25
radio stations nationwide and one television net¬
work. As a result, station managers tend to
choose "the more sensational broadcasters, who
attack the government instead of trying to main¬
tain a balanced newscast".
Another unhealthy practice in radio and
sometimes in television is the selling of block-
time, whereby the station sells a set number of

minutes or hours to an independent producer.
This has led certain unscrupulous broadcasters to
accept funds from politicians and use the time to
attack their opponents.
The new government has been caught bet¬
ween its seemingly sincere desire to foster
freedom of information and the need to protect
the democratic regime that was established by the
1986 revolution. Almost all the editors inter¬
viewed for this study stated that there is no
government censorship in the Philippines today.
There have been a number of cases, however, that
show how fragile freedom can be and how great
the temptation to intervene.
A journalist working for the DYEC People
Power station, for example, claimed that the
management temporarily suspended him for
advocating land reform on his programme.
According to him, the landlords in question, who
also happen to own many businesses in the area,
threatened to withdraw advertising. When
newsmen questioned the validity of official
figures on cases of cholera, the minister of health
refused to give statistics, claiming that they might
adversely affect export industries. And many
observers believe that there have been attempts
to withhold information concerning aborted
coups. In 1986, cases were reported, then denied,
only to be confirmed later, to the confusion of
the public.
Yet no one can accuse the present govern¬
ment of arresting or killing journalists. Cases of
harassment and intimidation have generally con¬
cerned government media, and cases of with¬
holding information are usually about financial
matters.
It is worth noting that when the new govern¬
ment took control of a number of broadcasting
stations, it had no clear-cut policy on their role
and functions. In the aftermath of the revolution,
people were anxious to exercise their newfound
freedom. The management of the government
stations either took no notice or actually con¬
doned criticism of the government and official
personalities as part of the newly regained "demo¬
cratic space".
Thus, as various sectors of society attempted
to destabilize the Aquino administration, the
government found itself helpless. It could not
even count on the state media as allies. When
government station managers decided to dismiss
a number of overly critical commentators, the
latter accused the government of censorship.
The government justified its position by in¬
voking the sanctity of employer-employee loyalty.
Whoever wishes to criticize the government
should first leave government service and join the
privately-owned media. But this position inevi¬
tably raises a question: to whom do journalists
working on state-owned media owe their loyalty?
To government officials only? Or to the public
as well, who pay the taxes needed to keep these
stations operating? Do journalists working for
state-owned media not have a duty to respect the
public's right to full information?
To answer these questions, it could be said
that criticism of the government can be seen as
self-criticism; its aim is to improve government
service and not to malign it. However, it cannot
be denied that there have been cases of intentional
maliciousness designed to destabilize the govern¬
ment. The secretary of state for the press summed
up the situation well: in his opinion, criticism of
the government is permissible so long as presen¬
tation is fair and balanced. If this policy is faith¬
fully implemented by the government and by the
media, then the issue of censorship in the govern¬
ment media can one day be laid to rest.
The newsroom of a Filipino
journal.
Extract from a study by the
Asian Institute of Journalism,
published in The Vigilant Press:
a collection of case studies,
No. 103 of Unesco's Reports
and Papers on Mass
Communication series. Pans,
1989. The study was carried
out by Concepción L.
Madarang, Reynaldo P.
Monreal, Elizabeth K.
Dimasuay, Maria Teresa R.
Robles and Floranel Rosario
Braid (consultant), under the
direction of Ramon R. Tuazon. 31
