DE
48
"espite the billions of dollars that
are spent on science, much of the
best scientific information and under¬
standing is not getting through to key
decision-makers in government and
business.
To a large extent this is because
government, science and business are
three separate worlds, each with its
own language, cultural norms and
motivations. They are organized
differently and frequently fail to
recognize when there is a need to
work in co-operation. Even when
they do recognize such a need, they
are often unable to communicate.
Furthermore, while relatively lit¬
tle science gets through to business
and government decision-makers,
what does get through is not neces¬
sarily good science. The science that
crosses the barriers Into the worlds
of business and government often
does so only because it is noisy, dra¬
matic or threatening and receives
sensational media coverage.
The International Federation of
Institutes for Advanced Study (IFIAS),
an international association of lead¬
ing independent research institutions,
exists to bring the best science to
decision-makers in government and
business at the national but especially
at the international levels. To do this
effectively, it focuses on a limited
number of selected global issues, and
develops international scientific
research programmes around them.
The dissemination process is carried
out through symposia, seminars and
workshops attended by research
scholars and corporate and govern¬
mental decision-makers, and through
IFIAS publications.
Originally established in 1972 in
Stockholm (Sweden), where it still has
premises, IFIAS today has its interna¬
tional headquarters and secretariat
in Toronto, Canada, and a project
development office at Maastricht,
the Netherlands. IFIAS research
programmes are developed and car¬
ried out through a network of 43
research institutes from 27 countries
which constitute the core of the Fed¬
eration. Their participation in IFIAS ac¬
tivities mobilizes individuals from a
wide range of disciplines and from
many nations in a research effort
which is neither bureaucratic nor
politicized.
In addition to the scientific exper-
YÍ f*
Computer simulation of the seasonal changes in a fruit tree.
The technique makes it possible to visualize plant growth processes.



Science for
decision-makers
THE INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF
INSTITUTES FOR ADVANCED STUDY
tise of its member institutes through¬
out the world, IFIAS is supported by
corporate affiliates which contribute
to the development and execution
of its research programmes and help
to bring the results of these
programmes to the attention of the
business community.
The hallmark of IFIAS pro¬
grammes is that they are multi-
disciplinary in character and global in
reach, and seek to be policy relevant.
Efforts are concentrated on issues
which have yet to be comprehensive¬
ly addressed by other organizations.
IFIAS activities are currently
focused on three programmes:
Human Dimensions of Global
Change, Coastal Resources Manage¬
ment, and the International Diffusion
of Biotechnology.
The Human Dimensions of Global
Change Programme (HDGCP) was
launched in 1 987 as a joint initiative
International co-operation is founded on a network of daily
contacts, exchanges and initiatives which create bonds of
solidarity between men and women all over the world. In
addition to the intergovernmental agencies of the United
Nations system, hundreds of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) today form part of this network. These organizations
exist thanks to the dedication of people with similar professional
interests or common aims who wish to share their experience
and combine their efforts. Our regular feature "Forum" gives
them an opportunity to talk about their activities.
of IFIAS, the International Social
Science Council (ISSC), the United
Nations University (UNU) and Unesco.
Its purpose is to create a network for
research which will bring the resources
of the social sciences and the exper¬
tise derived from the management of
human activities to bear on the anal¬
ysis and understanding of change ¡n
the global environment.
The earth's coastal regions host
much of the world's population and
a large proportion of global economic
activities. Pressures resulting from
continued population growth and an
intensification of economic activities
have increased user-conflicts and en¬
vironmental damage along many of
the world's coastlines. Efforts to
manage coastal zones are usually car¬
ried out in a piecemeal way by differ¬
ent agencies responsible for separate
activities in each area, thus failing to
take into account the complete pic¬
ture of local resources. IFIAS's Coastal
Resources Management Programme
attempts to develop a more integrat¬
ed approach.
New ecological problems have
led to a rethinking of the human role
in transforming the environment and
the need for alternative development
strategies. Biotechnology has the
potential to transform economic sys¬
tems and provide a wide range of
benefits, but it could lead to social,
economic and environmental
problems. IFIAS's International Diffu¬
sion of Biotechnology Programme
grew out of an earlier IFIAS
programme on science and technol¬
ogy in global economic change. The
aim of the programme is to help un¬
derstand knowledge and techniques
relating to biotechnology so that de¬
veloping countries can formulate poli¬
cies that will encourage sustainable
development and ensure that the im¬
minent "biotechnological revolution"
proves as beneficial as possible. A
network of research teams has been
established which involves research¬
ers from both developed and de¬
veloping countries.
IFIAS
c/o Royal Society of Canada
P.O. Box 9734
Ottawa, Ontario
K1G 5J4 Canada
