A common
responsibility
Through the work of the World Heritage Committee, Unesco has over the
last two decades been winning support for the new notion that the safeguard¬
ing of the world's heritage of monuments is a matter of concern to the human
community as a wholeeven if it is a responsibility that devolves primarily
on the country in which each monument is located.
Although there have been many obstacles and although a spirit of domi¬
nation has not yet entirely been replaced by a desire for co-operation, we
are slowly but surely feeling our way towards a philosophy of the cultural
heritage. This philosophy implies the end of a romantic view of history. Monu¬
ments can live again, but the past can never be revived. It also means, above
all, the rejection of political history. There is no question of commending one
civilization and discrediting another, of drawing up a kind of pecking order
of cultures. The aim is to make known the many forms of human creativity
that have left their mark on the centuries. Appreciation of the creative works
of the past should not be seen as an attempt to revive obsolete values. It
is, rather, an effort to find roots and define national identity and to confer
universal dignity on these works.
But through the World Heritage Convention Unesco is pursuing another
goal of great importance. When human beings express themselves by working
for the continuity of their culture, they must not in so doing harm the natural
world. They must safeguard their natural environment and consider it too
as an irreplaceable heritage.
By regarding the heritage as both cultural and natural, the Convention
reminds humanity of the fundamental need to preserve the balance between
man and the environment, and of the interaction between culture and nature.
As the time approaches for a preliminary assessment of the impact of
the Convention, which will be twenty years old in 1 992, one might point
already to the way in which the network of solidarity between all countries
has expanded and to the way in which information about the heritage of
each country has been transmitted all over the world.
It is gratifying to be able to say that today the catalogue of wonders
of the world no longer stands at seven. Thanks to the World Heritage Con¬
vention, the world is starting to realize that cultural monuments form a single
immense memorial to the centuries and that the preservation of natural sites
is becoming a categorical imperative for all humanity.
Azedine Beschaouch
Chairman of the World Heritage Committee
Restoration work In the convent of San
Francisco de Lima, Peru.
Right, the emblem of the World
Heritage Convention.
Opposite page, Mount Taishan, China.
for the state concerned, which
must ensure that the property is
protected and take responsibility
for it vis-à-vis the international com¬
munity. The World Heritage Com¬
mittee, with the support of the
media, may remind a state of its
obligations if these are not being
respected. Many positive results
have been achieved by this kind of
pressure, such as the cancellation
of projects to construct dams, pol¬
luting factories, or over-intrusive
tourist facilities.
The World Heritage Commit¬
tee also acts directly on behalf of
protected sites at the request of
states parties to the Convention.
Through the World Heritage Fund
(some $2.5 million a year), interna¬
tional co-operation can be or¬
ganized, specialists and equipment
can be provided, training and
educational activities can be under¬
taken, and funds can be raised for
major projects such as the restora¬
tion of monuments or the manage¬
ment of nature reserves. Such
projects may be carried out as part
of International Safeguarding Cam¬
paigns like that in which Unesco is
currently engaged for the old city
of Sana'a in the Republic of Yemen.
45
