Desmond Tutu, Anglican
Archbishop of Cape Town,
Nobel Peace Prize laureate
(1984) and a leading figure
in the struggle against
i-i



from the Unesco Courier
'NO ONE WILL STOP US...'
BY DESMOND TUTU
Freedom and human rights are major issues in
Eastern Europe today. Isn't that also the case in
South Africa?
Yes, and the movement towards freedom and
respect for human rights in Eastern Europe is as
exciting as the potential for the same movement
in South Africa.
However, there are clear differences between
the two situations. The oppression of the
majority of people in South Africa has been on
the basis of race. The iniquity of racism is that
it leads people who feel superior to others to treat
them as less than human. So racists facing mass
protests are, for example, less hesitant in ordering
police or troops to kill demonstrators than
rulers who feel they would be killing their com¬
patriots. In most East European countriesthe
exception being Romania the rulers appear to
have been more restrained than in South Africa.
In addition, many people in Eastern Europe
have had more opportunities to control their lives
and to participate in economic development than
our people have had in South Africa. There has
been a tradition of democratic experience in
previous eras in many East European countries.
In South Africa our people have suffered racial 37

38
After Apartheid (above), Brimstone (top), and Tribute to Steve Biko
(preceding page), acrylic and fluorescent paint on canvas (1978), by
Fluoman (pseudonym of the French artist Antoine Tricon). See also
pages 24, 46 and 50.
ART AGAINST APARTHEID
"Apartheid: a harsh, mean word that resounds in one's ears like
a trapdoor opening beneath a gallows" (Michel Lerris).
Artists of the World Against Apartheid, an association founded
with support from the United Nations in 1982, has built up an
important collection of works of art donated by their creators in
response to an appeal to the world's artists and intellectuals to
demonstrate publicly their belief in freedom and human dignity
and to protest against racial discrimination in South Africa.
The collection, comprising some 200 works by artists of inter¬
national reputation, has been exhibited in many parts of the world.
A specially produced catalogue includes texts by noted contem¬
porary writers such as Jorge Amado, André Brink, Julio Cortázar
and Michel Leiris.
The collection will form the basis of a future museum against
apartheid and will be presented to the first free and democratic
government of South Africa to be elected by universal suffrage.
oppression for three hundred years. They have
constantly struggled to be able to participate in
a democratic system but they have never achieved
it. Economically, for the whole of the industri¬
alized era our people have been denied opportu¬
nities for learning and for jobs because of the
colour of their skins. As a result, as we begin to
see a democracy emerge in South Africa, we are
going to need massive international assistance to
give the opportunities for industrial development
which our people have never had throughout
their history.
Is there, in your opinion, a link between
democracy and development?
Development depends on democracy. People
are decision-making creatures. God has given
them free will and they must be able to exercise
control over development through a democratic
political system if they are to feel fully involved
in it. Development which is imposed on people
in a paternalistic way, on the basis of big brother
knowing what is good for people, will fail.
In South Africa in particular, is there truly a
movement towards democracy? To what extent
is the system of apartheid coming to an end?
In many ways, we are now where we were in
1960. Our political organizations are again un¬
banned and able to operate more freely than in
the past thirty years. But black people still have
no vote and the core of apartheid is the denial
of political power. Also, the laws which form
what we call the "pillars of apartheid" are still
firmly in place. The difference between now and
1960 is that the white-controlled government says
it is prepared to negotiate the sharing of power
and to reconsider those laws. But we have yet to
see what it is going to offer. So from the point
of view of what the government is offering, we
are standing on the threshold of interesting pos¬
sibilities. But from the point of view of what our
people want, then, yes, there is truly a movement
towards democracy. We are determined to
achieve it, and we shall achieve it ultimately. No
one, least of all the South African government,
will stop us. '
Are there specific forms, specific conditions, for
a democratic evolution in the South African con¬
text? Will theprinciple of "one person, one vote"
be viable between communities that have been
hostile for so long?
Democracy depends on universal franchise.
Without the vote, there is no democracy and no
prospect of co-operation among communities.
Protection for every individual, irrespective of
community, is provided by a bill of rights, en¬
forced by independent courts of law. Only once
the human dignity of all South Africans is guaran¬
teed by equal rights can we expect to see true
co-operation between South Africans begin to
develop, from whatever community they come.
