OFF THE RECORD
AN ARCHIVIST'S NIGHTMARE
BY MICHEL MELOT
Intent on wresting a secret from
the real world, the hero of the film
Blow-Up repeatedly enlarges a detail
in a photograph. The title of the film
is a play on words: when the man
blows up the ¡mage, he explodes it.
Finally all that can be seen ¡s a myriad
of silver nitrate particles. In a similar
vein, the writer Jorge Luis Borges
went even further when he imagined /
a group of geographers doing their
best to produce the most accurate
possible map of their country. Ulti¬
mately this meant reproducing it
exactly as it was, on a scale of one
to one.
Although it is clear that what the
geographers project is crazy, and the
situation is so implausible that no
reader could believe for a second that
the story is true, hardly anybody
seems surprised that historians should
harbour the same Utopian ambitions.
46 According to one definition, the
purpose of modern archives is the col¬
lection, conservation and classifica¬
tion of "all the documents produced
in the functioning of an institution",
and the provision of access to them.
Imagine! The kilometre of shelf space
becomes the true yardstick of History.
Every day 5,000 different period¬
icals arrive at the French national
library, the Bibliothèque Nationale in
Paris. Nobody has ever calculated the
probability of a copy of one of these
periodicals some day being
consultedthe figures would prob¬
ably be too cruel. "Sacrilege!" cry the
librarians, thereby revealing that they
are engaged in a sacred enterprise.
And the absurd stock reply to critics
is, "Even if, there is only a chance in
a billion that a future historian might
want to consult a single one of these
documents, that document should be
preserved".
The "future historian" is the
hypocritical pretext for all our fanta¬
sies about historicity, the scapegoat
for our present anxieties. Is it really
because of this hypothetical figure
that we shoulder this impossible task,
this remorseless unending business of
collection and classification? In doing
so we enter the nightmare world of
total conservation, of History as a
kind of protected species, of the
reconstitution of Time past.
The issue is not that the quantity
of documents is growing exponential¬
ly, but what criterion should be used
to decide which ones to preserve.
After swallowing our amazement at
the legal definition of archives, so
comprehensive as to be self-
defeating, let's look at the astonish¬
ing system of legal deposit, whereby
national libraries receive, by legal
right, one free copy of each book,
periodical and other printed matter
produced in the country. . Forget
about books. They take up little space
and if, as everyone wants, a few
thousand more curators are recruited,
the problem will soon be solved.
But take posters. Every advertis¬
ing poster displayed in France is sub¬
ject to legal deposit. Consider just
those that are featured nationwide.
Since they are produced in large for¬
mat, they generally arrive at the Bib¬
liothèque Nationale in sixteen pieces,
each one folded in four. Vast quan¬
tities of them are delivered and no¬
body even bothers to unfold them
any more, which is just as well since
they would be sure to get damaged
owing to the poor quality of the
paper. But even if these posters were
catalogued, it would be impossible to
give the public access to them (what
kind of table or shelving would be
needed to lay out flat a poster meant
to be seen on the side of a building?)
and, in any case, the paper on which

they are printed is perishable. As a
result, they are condemned to remain
in their folded state until they
decompose.
And yet the posters pile up at the
Bibliothèque Nationale. I know. I have
piled them myself, meticulously and
with a heavy heart, often wondering
why I was doing it. I have been
haunted by another nightmare
that the man was openly infringing
copyright law, I wondered whether
his customers should not be com¬
pelled to go and deposit copies of
their shirts at the national library,
which happened to be just round the
corner.
I don't intend to ignore the
problem of the preservation of soft¬
ware. You may think that nothing is
keeping records for historians is only
an excuse to justify our mania for
conservation, what possible use can
be found for these heaps of objects?
Here again the answer is simpler
than it might appear. There are only
two reasons why most people visit
the public record office. They go
there either to consult the register of
births, marriages and deaths in order
image: why not collect advertise¬
ments painted directly on walls,
moulded in polystyrene or printed on
sheet metal? Why only posters? The
answer is simple. You can fold
posters in four and pile them up, but
you can't do that with sheet metal.
Admittedly, that's all you can do with
posters, but at least you've done your
best.
Please don't think I'm exagger¬
ating, or making fun of French
officialdom. I have visited the Lenin
Library, the Library of Congress and
the National Diet Library in Tokyo and
everywhere I have asked: "What do
you do with your posters?" And
everywhere I have been given the
same answer: "We pile them up."
When we have solved the
problem of posters and photographs,
what about photocopies and desktop
publishing? The other day I came
across a street trader who was selling
phials of a liquid that could transfer
any printed ¡mage (especially scenes
from comic strips) onto any surface
(especially T-shirts). Besides noting
simpler to file than magnetic tape or
floppy disks. Quite true. However, as
well as the floppy disks you really
should preserve the computer on
which they can be used. There ¡s an
unfortunate tendency for computer
hardware to be superseded very
quickly. Why not change the law on
legal deposit so as to make it com¬
pulsory for computer manufacturers
to deposit all their models and keep
them in working order forever?
And what about the new tech¬
nologies? What about digital photo¬
graphs that are transmitted
electronically, and fourth-generation
printers whose typographical skills are
part of the program that directs the
laser beam?
Why this madness? There must
be a patch of firm ground some¬
where in this morass. Let us, for ex¬
ample, ask what we actually do
preserve, since clearly we do not
preserve everything. The answer is
that we preserve only objects. Any
object is liable to be preserved and
only objects can be preserved. Since
to determine kinship, or to consult
the land register in order to deter¬
mine ownership. Only archives of this
kind seem to have much importance
in the life of the community. This is
proved by the fact that, when revo¬
lutions break out, one of the first
things revolutionaries do is go to the
record office to burn property deeds.
Between revolutions, the archives
that remain interest few but
historians.
How did the "utilitarian" func¬
tion of conservation, which explains
the revolutionaries' love of bonfires,
yield to a sacred or "cultural" func¬
tion in the service of historiography?
The origin of the idea of preserv¬
ing objects can be traced back to the
worship of relics, to the regalia which
attested to the legitimacy of royal
power, and to property deeds in
general. Have objects become the
"regalia" of a society that produces
objects, a new form of relic adapted
to democratic market economies
which find an overall legitimation in
these symbolic tokens? Believing that
our survival hinges on the production
of objects, which we have made the
basis of our community life, we pre¬
tend to believe that our knowledge
also hinges on them. This accounts
for the religious fear inspired by the
idea that they might be allowed to
disappear, suggesting a kind of an¬
cestor worship in which catalogues
and inventories serve as the litany.
I have become aware that the
passion for conservation is growing.
Far from declining into insignificance
as it has become more and more
ridiculous and frenzied, the conser¬
vation principle has on the contrary
gained in strength, as can be seen in
the burgeoning of ecomuseums and
nature parks, the use made of private
archives, the protection of sites and
entire cities and the growth of mu¬
seums of every kind. The amount of
satisfaction that this has generated
is proportional to the regret ex¬
pressed at the wholesale destruction
of other objects, due not so much to
wars as to rampant urbanization, the
industrialization of rural areas, the re¬
allocation of land, the building of
motorways, the harnessing of energy
sources, and so on.
In other words we seem to be
gaining on the roundabouts what we
are losing on the swings. We worship
and wish to preserve some objects,
just as we destroy for economic rea¬
sons other objects which themselves
tend to destroy landscapes, ways of
life and beliefs. The life cycle of ob¬
jects is becoming shorter with the in¬
creasingly rapid rotation of stocks,
which is designed to encourage con¬
sumption. Some believe that the life¬
span of a hundred-storey skyscraper
should not exceed ten years. How
can we accept this built-in obsoles¬
cence when we take such extrava¬
gant measures to preserve an old
mantelpiece for posterity?
MICHEL MELOT,
French writer and librarian,
is vice-president of his country's
higher council on libraries.
Between 1983 and 1989 he was
director of the public library at the
Georges Pompidou Centre
in Paris.
47
