Wheelers and dealers of
Renaissance Europe
An influx ofprecious metals from the New
World stimulated the money economy but
also unleashed turbulent forces
BY LUCIEN GILLARD
McLoNEY is generally thought of as a medium
in which prices and values are expressed, a means
of payment and a store of purchasing power. As
the standard by which the value of traded com¬
modities is measured, it creates a coherent area
within which people have a common yardstick
with which to assess their credits and debts.
In sixteenth-century Europe, these areas coin¬
cided with national frontiers, beyond which
money was a kind of standard-bearer for each
nation. A convenient means of payment, money
also promoted the circulation of goods. The spec¬
tacular development of production and trade
in sixteenth-century Europe is thus generally
associated with the growth of the money supply
in the form both of commercial bills and of coins
minted with metal from the Americas.
Finally, as a store of purchasing power,
money introduced a new conception of temporal¬
ity, which made it possible to circumvent much
of the anguish of daily life. Time no longer
belonged entirely to God, but became instead the
32
a . .- '
^
'fSM
y
Left, the fabulous silver mines
of Potosí in Upper Peru
(modern Bolivia) which were
intensively exploited by the
Spaniards during the colonial
period. Engraving by Théodore
de Bry (16th century).

The Weigher of Gold
by the Dutch painter
Gerard Dou (1613-1675).
foundation on which people could base their
plans. The notion of money as capital was recog¬
nized, as is shown by the debates on interest on
loans, on the indexation of debts, on the causes
of price rises and even on the sale of indulgences.
Money, therefore, seems to have fulfilled its
functions satisfactorily and to have contributed
to the strengthening of social ties in Renaissance



Europe. There are, however, two sides to every
coin; money also lay behind such disruptive
forces as monopoly acquisition and exclusion.
And the doubling of the population in Europe
during the Renaissance period only served to
accentuate the turmoil these forces induced.
Debasement of the coinage
The first problems occasioned by money during
this period were related to its issue. Within a
given national territory, the minting and legal
valuation of money was the responsibility of the
political authorities, a principle adopted, after
much vacillation, from Roman law. Despite the
severity of the measures taken against those who
contravened this principle (such as being boiled
alive), the official monopoly to mint coins was
very often contested.
The first frauds were the work of traffickers
in debased coinage which contained less than the
official quantity of precious metal, but was
accepted at the same face value. Debased coins
were to be found everywhere, because minting
techniques were then too rudimentary to ensure
that every coin was exactly the same. Any smart
merchant, money changer, or even tax collector
would carefully sort through the coins that came
into his possession and withdraw the heavier
coins from circulation. All he had to do then to
get more for them than their face value was to
sell them by weight, at a good price, to the gold¬
smiths or silversmiths. Another method was to
shave off minute slivers of the metal before
putting the coins back in circulation, banking on
the reluctance of those receiving them to have
them checked against the official standard (they
ran the risk of having to bear the expense of the
assay if the coin was found to conform to the
standard).
Attempts to put a stop to this practice by
milling the edge of the coins and stamping a circle
around the effigy-head met with little success. No
country succeeded in introducing the new milling
techniques, which could have eliminated these
problems altogether, during the sixteenth
century. Machine methods for producing coins
were both too expensive and strongly opposed
by the workmen who hammer-struck the coins
by hand in the traditional way. Finding that
simply having their likenesses engraved on the
coins was not enough to guarantee their authen¬
ticity, rulers were gradually obliged to require
that coins be weighed at each transaction. Their
attempts, by a plethora of prohibitive edicts, to
prevent the uncontrolled price-fixing of precious 33

metals by goldsmiths and silversmiths proved
equally ineffective.
More radical contradictions became apparent
between counterfeiters and what might be termed
the "anti-coin" diehards. Sixteenth-century coun¬
terfeiters, that is to say minters of fake coins,
tended to specialize in Spanish coins, especially
the smaller ones which were cheaper to make and
more difficult to check. Meanwhile, many rulers
themselves minted imitations of the coinage of
other countries, so as to keep for themselves
the minting tax (in the case of small states that
did not have their own coinage) or to retain
some of the precious metal by minting debased
imitations.
There were some famous examples of coun¬
terfeiting. In France, over a ten-year period, sup¬
porters of the Pope organized the parallel minting
of coins to undermine the official coinage of the
Protestant king. Another such case was that of
the fake Spanish coins struck from cargoes of pre¬
cious metals pirated on their way to Europe from
the Americas.
Following the discovery of the Antilles and
the Americas, Spain embarked on the systematic
exploitation of the precious metals found there.
Twice a year, these metals were brought under
military escort to Seville, where the Spanish
coinage was minted. Imports of metal recorded
during the sixteenth century were impressive:
around 250 tons of gold and 200,000 tons of
Spanish silver 8-real coin
minted in 1597 during the
reign of Philip II.
Below, hammer-striking coins
in France at the time of
Louis XII (1462-1515).
silver, amounts equal to a third of total previous
stocks. Some historians, however, estimate that
clandestine imports not recorded by the Spanish
authorities and destined for rival mints may well
have amounted to as much again.
There have also been less complicated forms
of coinage abuse. One of these consisted of
individuals agreeing amongst themselves to use
coins prohibited by royal decree. Periodically,
monarchs would decree that a specific coin was
no longer legal tender for trading purposes
because it was of unacceptable quality. Such coins
had to be taken to treasury offices to be clipped
and bought back at their value by weight. These
decrees were often ignored by private individuals,
who would fix an agreed value for the coins in
question, particularly when coinage was in short
supply. This is what happened to small Spanish
coins in France during the second half of the six¬
teenth century.
An even more common practice was that of
using authorized coins in trading but at a so-called
"voluntary" value, ignoring the value officially
fixed by the ruler. In those days, and for 200 years
afterwards, the value of coins was taken from
public announcements and not from inscriptions
on the coin itself. Distrust of the official coinage
was thus increasing and in some regions at cer¬
tain times the private value quoted for a coin
could be as much as double that of the official
rate. In these circumstances, the function of
34

money as a generator of homogenous societies
was seriously compromised.
Among the anti-coin lobby there were two
distinct groups. First there were those who re¬
fused to give up barter. Despite the expansion of
trade in goods throughout Europe, barter was still
favoured by countless rural communities. Also
anti-coin, in a sense, were those who clung to the
principle of the weight of precious metals (or even
of salt) as a measure of value, thus excluding from
their transactions the intrusion of any money-
minting public authority.
This principle could be applied in a number
of ways. A so-called "gold clause" could be in¬
cluded in a fixed-term contract stipulating that
payment would be made in a certain weight of
metal or in a certain number of named coins,
whatever their official value at the time as a unit
of account. This clause, a relic from Roman law,
did not disappear for a very long time. In on-the-
spot transactions, distrust of the coinage meant
that payment had to be made in raw metal on
the basis of an agreed tariff. In sixteenth-century
France, between a quarter and a third of all trans¬
actions were concluded in exchange for gold
objects such as rings or goblets or for gold dust
found in rivers (panning for gold was still prac¬
tised) or even filed from coins.
Venture trading
In venture trading between Europe and the rest
of the world, payment in metal was the only
procedure employed. It is true that minted coins
were used for the purchase of silk and spices from
Above, The Usurers by
Marinus van Reymerswael
(Dutch school, 16th century).
Left, early 16th-century
German miniature shows
the banker Jakob II Fugger
the Rich (right) checking the
books with his chief
accountant. Fugger's business
interests stretched across
central and western Europe.
LUCIEN GILLARD,
of France, is a researcher
with the National Centre
for Scientific Research
(CNRS) with a special
interest in the history of
monetary policy and
practice. He is co-author
(with Marie-Thérèse Boyer-
Xambeu and Ghislain
Deleplace) of Monnaie
privée et pouvoir des
princes: L'économie des
relations monétaires à la
Renaissance (1986).
the Orientchiefly the Spanish excellente and the
Venetian sequin up to the mid-sixteenth century,
and after that the Spanish silver real.
These rather rare coins had certain specific
characteristics which'made it impossible to sub¬
stitute others for them. Made of pure metal at
a virtually constant weight of between 3 and 4
grams, they were difficult to imitate and the heads
with which they were stamped guaranteed only
their conformity to this standard. They bore no
unitary value whatever outside the realm which
struck them. In trading between European
countries these coins were exchanged by number
or by weight in pure metal and they had no
monetary status. In this respect, quite apart from
the war, piracy and slave trading that accompa¬
nied it, the venture trading developed by the Eu¬
ropeans did not act as the cement of a world
society.
The same was true of the deposit certificates
that circulated within the various European coun¬
tries. These certificates, which were not replaced
by bank notes until a century or two later, had
been issued from the fourteenth century by
certain bankers against monies deposited in their
coffers. They were the equivalent of a promise
on the part of the banker of immediate payment
on presentation and circulated like cash. 35

36
The sluggish development of industry and the
crafts was in part the cause and in part the con¬
sequence of the monetary practices of the time.
Not enough wealth was being produced for there
to be a consensus in society about its distribution,
and priority expenditure on wars, land, services
and imported luxury goods benefited primarily
the non-productive social categories. Production
thus remained basically agricultural. Surpluses
were sold locally or at regional fairs, only at cer¬
tain times of the year. Entrepreneurs had not yet
arrived on the scene and the money dealers sym¬
bolized economic activity.
Merchant bankers
Among them were the merchant bankers, who
reached their apogee during the sixteenth centu¬
ry and provide a perfect illustration of the nature
of monetary operations at that time. Since the
Middle Ages, there had been a redistribution of
goods and raw materials between the various
countries of Europe, and luxury goods from the
Orient, and this gave rise to an intensive im¬
port/export trade concentrated on half a dozen
large towns at which fairs were held periodically.
The need to pay for goods purchased at these fairs
gave rise to a specific activitythe conversion,
at a price, of the various national units of account,
that is, money-changing.
Carrying on a tradition dating back to the
Champagne Fairs of the thirteenth century, the
merchant bankers had the monopoly of the pur¬
chase and resale of the ordinary merchants' in¬
ternational debts (bills of exchange). They
acquired their monopoly by their presence at all
the European fairs, forming a network of agents
through which other merchants were obliged to
deal. This monopoly led to an agreed evaluation
of each international debt expressed originally in
the currency of a single country. In this way,
during the sixteenth century, the merchant
bankers, from their headquarters in Lyon, created
what was in effect a Europe-wide monetary
system.
In determining the international value of the
various currencies, the merchant bankers inevita¬
bly came into conflict with their merchant
clients, from whom they extracted a margin of
profit. They also found themselves in conflict
with rulers, who established official rates of
exchange for foreign coinage that was allowed to
circulate in their respective countries. Many var¬
iations and rises in price resulted from these con¬
flicts of interest and these were aggravated by
financial and banking rivalries within the circle
of merchant bankers itself.
Thus, although through its function as a com¬
mon yardstick of value money created social
bonds, it was also, in practice, a cause of dissen¬
sion. And though, in sixteenth-century Europe,
it had become the new divinity, money, like man
in whose image it was created, was still seeking
the limits of its power.
jfHE'UNITED STatVnsS
v y ;/_ Li ií-uj.
