From hospitality
to right of asylum
BY JOSE AUGUSTO SEABRA
¥,
3rf-X'fat&
ELCOMING visitors, especially foreigners, has
been a sacred duty from the time of Ancient
Greece, when visitors were even believed to enjoy
the permanent protection of the god Zeus. In the
Iliad, Homer showed that to harm a visitor was
contrary to religion.
The sacred tradition of hospitality has lasted
for centuries and is shared by various civiliza¬
tions. From the Middle Ages on, Christian pil¬
grims were lodged and fed in churches and
monasteries, and the Order of the Knights Tem¬
plars was specially founded to ensure their pro¬
tection on their way to Jerusalem during the
Crusades. In Islamic countries, pilgrims travelling
to Mecca were also treated with consideration.
This kindness towards pilgrims can be found in
other religions and is a mark of respect and frater¬
nity that transcends frontiers.
With increasing travel, the duty of hospitali¬
ty, both religious and secular, expanded. The mar¬
itime discoveries enabled peoples to get to know
each other better and to appreciate traditions of
hospitality that were different but often inspired
by the same spirit. This is expressed in such works
of Portuguese literature as Luis de Camôes' The
Lusiads, that great epic poem about the Por¬
tuguese navigators, and Peregrination by Fernào
Mendes Pinto, an enlightened traveller who ven¬
tured into the East where he experienced hospi¬
tality that was often more refined than in the
West.
In the modern world, one category of
foreigners has become particularly important,
that of political exiles. While they have always
been the subject of humanitarian attention, their
status has been more strongly protected since the
proclamation of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights in 1948. During the French Revo¬
lution, in spite of a certain nationalism, foreigners
and notably those who had fought for liberty 39

40
were welcomed in France as citizens enjoying full
rights. This practice has been extended to other
countries during the last two centuries.
This obligation, combining tradition and
modernity, has strongly influenced the Por¬
tuguese way of welcoming foreigners. At different
times, under different forms of government,
mainly under the liberal government and the
republic, foreigners who took refuge in our coun¬
try because of their convictions and beliefs were
welcomed in a spirit of solidarity and congenial¬
ity, and this kind of behaviour is typical of the
Portuguese attitude to life. The Portuguese always
leave their doors wide open to visitors, whether
pilgrims, refugees or simply guests. From north
to south, from the coast to the interior, everyone
is happy to entertain generously and gracefully.
This open-hearted attitude is expressed in the
Constitution of the Portuguese Republic of 1976,
a product of the democratic regime which fol¬
lowed the Revolution of the Carnations. Article
15 stipulates that foreigners and stateless persons
shall enjoy the same rights and accept the same
obligations as Portuguese citizens, except for spe¬
cifically national rights, which may be extended
to nationals of Portuguese-speaking countries
under reciprocal agreements or international con¬
ventions.
Sailors' graffiti on a jetty
wall at Horta on the island
of Faial, Azores, which has
been an anchorage since the
days of sailing ships.
JOSE AUGUSTO SEABRA,
Portuguese poet and
essayist, is professor of
literary theory and of
Portuguese literature at the
University of Oporto. A
former member of
parliament and Minister of
Education, he is currently
serving as his country's
Ambassador to Unesco.
Article 33 of the Constitution provides that



"the right of asylum be granted to foreigners and
stateless persons who are persecuted or gravely
threatened with persecution because of their ac¬
tivities in favour of democracy, social or national
freedom, peace between peoples, freedom and hu¬
man rights".
This text incorporates the oldest sources of
our civilization as well as the most recent acqui¬
sitions of democracy. Tolerance and fraternity are
characteristic of the sense of hospitality of Por¬
tuguese democrats, who themselves often ex¬
perienced exile during the period of dictatorship
and colonial war, and found refuge in friendly
nations. When elected as representatives of the
Portuguese people, the former refugees wished
to include in the foundation document of their
own country the sacred principle of hospitality
towards foreigners and stateless persons and es¬
pecially towards those who are persecuted be¬
cause of their convictions and beliefs.
"We are strangers wherever we are", wrote
Fernando Pessoa, the poet of exile and homecom¬
ing. We must know how to welcome each other
everywhere in the world. Like religious pilgrims
or political exiles of all times, we know that
hospitality will be extended to us wherever we go.
