1,
^^MáM*==M±:A_ Û
|R ,!. ^
ITH the advent of the three great monotheis¬
tic religions, all creationmaterial and intangible,
natural and supernaturalwas attributed to a
single omniscient and omnipotent god. Mytho¬
logical cosmogonie concepts were replaced by
more speculative ways of thinking. Islam, like
Judaism and Christianity before it, did not escape
this upheaval, although traces of ancient cos¬
mogonies survived in certain popular traditions
and literary allusions, and were reflected in forms
of architecture and music.
The Qur'anthe Word of God as "recited"
by its last messenger, the Prophet Muhammad,
does not provide a continuous narrative of the
creation of the cosmos, but contains many direct
allusions to it. God, "the Lord of the Worlds",
is the Creator of the universe: "In truth, We have
created all things according to Our Law" with
"seriousness" and perfection. "Thou seest in the
Benefactor's creation every thing in true propor¬
tions." Inveighing against the polytheists, He
declares: "Do not the unbelievers see that the
heavens and the earth were joined together,
before We clove them asunder? We made from
water every living thing. Will they not then
believe?"
Thus, before the heavens and the earth were
formed, they were inextricably joined. Water is
the source of life. The worlds, the heavens, the
earth and life thus appeared in several stages: the
universe and its inhabitants were the result of a
process of gradual differentiation. "God is He
Who created seven firmaments and of the earth
a similar number. Through the midst of them
descends His command: that ye may know that
God has power over all things, and that God
comprehends all things in His Knowledge."
According to some scholars, the number seven,
which appears elsewhere in the sacred text, indi¬
cates an indefinite plurality.
God created
the heavens and made
the stars
In addition to those verses that allude specifically
to the creation of the universe, there are others
which inform us of its organization and arrange¬
ment, notably on "the nearest heaven". God
created the heavens "without visible pillars" and
"established" in them many heavenly bodies:
constellations of stars, or "lamps". As proof of
His bounty, this harmonious stellar arrangement
is useful to mankind: "It is He Who has made
for you the stars that they may guide you in the
depths of darkness on land and sea", as it is also
"He who created the night and the day, the sun
and the moon, each in a navigable sphere". "It
The first two surahs, or chapters,
of the Qur'an in a manuscript
of Islam's Holy Book
produced in the 16th century. 15

1ljpj**>]4iü¿
16
is He Who made of the sun a brightness and of
the moon a lamp, and Who determined the
phases of the moon so that ye may know the
number and the count of the years."
Direct allusions to the creation in the Qur'an
must be considered primarily as "signs" of God's
omnipotence. Their fragmentary nature and the
mysteries they conceal are typical of Qur'anic
predication, for "God conceals what He will"
and "alone knows the unknowable".
So is all speculation forbidden in Islam? Cer¬
tainly not: the signs must be deciphered and their
true meaning understood. According to Ali, the
son-in-law of the Prophet, "there is no Qur'anic
verse that does not have four meanings: the exo¬
teric, the esoteric, the limit and the divine
project". We need, therefore, to go beneath the
surface of the facts. The quest for God's truth
calls for reflection on this "miracle" of the crea¬
tion of a diverse sensory world, while God is
spirit pure and unique.
Avicenna1 made a major contribution to
Islamic cosmogony. In his metaphysics, he clas¬
sifies beings according to whether they are neces¬
sary or possible. In essence, the necessary being
is by its nature unique; it has no cause nor does it
consist in multiplicity. As First Principle, Pure
Intelligence and Pure Truth, the necessary being
is God. Creation is an intellectual act. It is the
Illustration from a 17th-
century edition of
"Wonders of Creation", a
work by the 13th-century
Arab cosmographer
al-Qazwini.
NORREDDIN
MAHAMMED,
of Algeria, teaches
mathematics and the history
of science at the University
of Lille, France. He is the
author of a number of
scientific publications,
notably on algebraic
topology.
knowledge that God has of Himself; it is the
Primary Emanation or Primary Intelligence.
From this primary creation new entities emerge.
After a series of contemplations and intelligences
the Tenth (active) Intelligence is reached, from
which springs a flux of sublunary matter and the
multitude of human souls. This is "our" world
the world of the senses and corruptible matter.
Avicenna's theory of emanation, with its con¬
tinuous creation of differentiated and hierarchical
beings, has been the subject of lively debate in
Islam, Christianity and Judaism. Thus, Averroës,2
who wished to restore a cosmogony which con¬
formed to Aristotelian concepts, rejected the
notion of hierarchy between separate intelli¬
gences. He considered the idea of successive ema¬
nations from a single Being as fundamentally
absurd. According to him the cosmos proceeds
from an "eternal beginning" of which the
manifestation, without creative cause, is simul¬
taneous and continuous, with God as Prime
Mover.
For Al-Ghazali,3 all these contortions were
simply metaphors for establishing the necessity
of the Demiurge and the reality of creation.
Rejecting philosophical speculations, he consi¬
dered that only the way of the heartfor God
is pure lovecan lead to knowledge. By seeking
communion with God it becomes possible for

some to raise themselves from the "lower
world"that of the sun, moon and starsto the
"upper world" wherein dwell the "luminous sub¬
stances", the angels.
Several schools of thought reject emana¬
tionism, which appears to limit and even exclude



God's freedom in the act of creation. To uphold
the idea of divine omnipotence, the Ash'arites,4
for example, go so far as to deny intermediary
causes and the universal cause. They consider that
matter is indivisible, and reduce its multiple
differentiations to a transcendent principle, which
is God the Creator. The idea of the indivisibility
of matter leads to the recurrence of creation. In
each of its parts and at any given moment the
universe is, or can be, subject to modification.
Furthermore, it cannot be eternal: its cohesion
and duration are matters for the free will of God.
Esotericism
and philosophy
Nevertheless, many currents of Islamic thought,
including hermeticism, Shi'ite speculation (and
its Ismaeli variants), and some mystics, have given
Avicenna's cosmogony a better reception. In
such thinking, modes of philosophical and theo-
sophical knowledge, visionary and prophetic
perceptions often merge in a single theory.
Typical of these currents, but also descended from
other cultic and cultural traditions, is
Suhrawardi's philosophy of light.5 Starting from
verses of the Qur'an in which God is qualified
as "Light on Light", Suhrawardi identifies
separate intelligences as pure lights, each one
emanating from another. The Tenth Intelligence
is the Angel of Revelation, the Holy Ghost, the
one who spoke to the Virgin Mary and to the
Prophet Muhammad.
A universe is affixed to each of these primor¬
dial lights. The cosmos is the sum of these
universes, including the lights that govern them
and the radiation they mutually reflect. It is
organized into four worlds: the world of pure
intelligence, the world of celestial spheres, the
world of sublunary elementary beings, and the
world of subtle forms and images. The latter
world, which is halfway between the worlds of
the sensory and the supra-sensory, plays a leading
role in Suhrawardi's reasoning, where rational
speculations and imaginative visions are resolved.
It sets out and opens up the path to a refined
gnosis.
These concepts bear witness to the fact that
in Islam, cosmogony is ontologically necessary
for accession to the Supreme Truth. As theory
and reflection on the formation of the cosmos,
it englobes all aspects of the process of creation.
But in its ultimate development it can become
one with God Himself. In fact, many Muslim
V. _>-	--a
a 1
l M^J )
\ ' >»_ Y
,;>-	tC---
Yjö-t'Öra-íY^i¿^TZ9ÍM»
'-¿í>¿ i '¿»¡fif/j^/çf*
m 1 '
"' (' a. , . .
.
a^a/VaU-^.
. - - . ^- f - -
mystics maintain that the cosmos was created to
satisfy God's desire for self-knowledge. Did not
Ibn 'Arabi6 state that "God wished to see His
own essence so as to demonstrate His mystery
to Himself"? So the final consequence of the one¬
ness of Being"there is no Being but the Pure
Being"is that cosmogony is a reflection of this
divine desire. It thus attains a metacosmic level
which only the most vertiginous form of
knowledge is permitted to reach!
These concepts, which had wide currency in
the intellectual circles of classical Islam, engen¬
dered many passionate arguments. It is extraor¬
dinary that this philosophical and religious
ebullition did not hold back scientific studies of
astronomy and cosmography.
Above, portrait of the
great Islamic philosopher
Avicenna (Ibn Sina,
980-1037 AD), painted
on a wall in Bukhara,
Uzbek SSR.
Left, description of a lunar
eclipse in a Persian edition
of al-Qazwini's "Wonders of
Creation".
1. Avicenna (Ibn Sina). Born 980
AD near Bukhara. Died 1037. A
great thinker who wrote over 240
works and contributed to many-
fields of knowledge.
2. Averroës (Ibn Rushd), born at
Córdoba in 1126, was a
champion of Aristotelian thought.
His philosophical works exercised
great influence on the Jewish and
Christian intellectuals of medieval
Europe. Although he was doctor
and adviser to several rulers, he
often had problems with the
zealous representatives of
"official" Islam, for whom the
prescriptions of the sharía took
precedence over all forms of
speculation. He died in Morocco
in 1198.
3. Abu Hamid Mohammed
Ghazali (1059-1111). Islamic
theologian and philosopher,
taught in Baghdad until 1095,
then spent ten years travelling as
a sufi through many parts of the
Islamic world. The insights he
gained from his meditations and
mystical experiences are enshrined
in one of his major works, The
Revival of the Religious Sciences.
4. Ash'arites: members of a
school of theology which takes
its name from its founder,
Abu *1-Hassan al-Ash'ari
(c. 873-943).
5. Yahya Suhrawardi (born 1155
in Media, in what is now north¬
western Iran) originated a revival
of traditional metaphysics in
Shi'ite Islam. He set forth a body
of Islamic doctrine in which he
integrated ancient wisdom
(notably inherited from ancient
Persia), classical philosophy and
mystical practices. Imprisoned
and executed at Aleppo in 1191.
6. Ibn 'Arabi, Andalusian
theosophist, was born at Murcia
in 1165 and died at Damascus in
1240. Editor 17
