A leading Arab poet claims
that some societies in the
Third World are both
dependent on the West
and paralysed by regimes
hostile to all forms of
new thinking. His solution
lies in the recognition
of culture as the dynamic
principle in social life.
CULTURE AND FREEDOM IN THE THIRD WORLD



THE SPIRIT
OF CREATION
BY ADONIS
JLxS we witness the awakening of identities on
the world stage today it is as if we were in a
theatre watching a play. A tragic drama is
unfolding in which the only way for some to
achieve self-expression is to deny self-expression
to others; in which the long struggle through
which man has sought throughout history to
draw closer to his fellows is suddenly being
transformed into a battle waged by man on man;
in which the fears we had for freedom are giving
way to fear of freedom itself.
By a strange paradox, perhaps the remedy is
suddenly becoming the disease. Could this be 39

Preceding page, Freedom in
the Sun (1918), watercolour
and ink on cardboard, by
the Russian artist David
Sterenberg (1881-1948).
Right, Peace and Freedom
(1983), Arabic calligraphy
by Hassan Massoudy.
Below right, Purification,
vegetable dyes on cloth, by
Bogolan-Kasobane, a group
of 6 artists from Bamako,
Mali.
Opposite page, The
Precarious Equilibrium of
Enterprises (1987), oil on
canvas by the Cuban-born
artist Ramon Alejandro.
because the awakening of identities heralds a
return rather than a new departure, a retreat
rather than an advance? Because it is taking
advantage of religions, races or nations? Because,
in short, it is the awakening of what should have
remained dormant?
Or perhaps this awakening is the expression
of an error being committed in an attempt to
correct an earlier error which resulted from
the crossing of technological culture and ideolog¬
ical culture, with its right-wing and left-wing
fascist elements? If this is so, then in what is
awakening today under the banner of Freedom,
there may be something whichcontradictorily
accentuates the problems relating to freedom.
Under the impact of Western technological
and ideological culture, the development of the
economic and political structures of the modern
1
\*H
I
ADONIS
is the pen name of Ali
Ahmad Said Esber, Lebanese
poet and one of the leading
figures in contemporary
Arabic writing. He is
currently Assistant
Permanent Delegate to
Unesco of the League of
Arab States. He has
published some twenty
volumes of poetry and
literary criticism, many of
which have been translated
into other languages. English
translations of selections of
his poetry include The Blood
of Adonis (University of
Pittsburgh Press, 1971),
Mirrors (TR Press, London,
1976) and Transformations of
the Lover (Ohio University
Press, 1983).
40
world has tended to harness human efforts to
the satisfaction of material needs. In the mirror
of this culture, man seems bereft of aspirations
to freedom, love, and poetry, and his needs seem
reduced to those of subsistence.
The media, and certain cultural activities,
seem dominated by the urge to achieve the
highest possible level of prosperity. Even educa¬
tion tends increasingly to elevate the satisfaction
of material needs to the status of a moral value,
a symbol of civilization. It sometimes even sug¬
gests ways of satisfying these needs and holds up
for approval an image of man as a creature who
actually savours his "enslavement", accepts him¬
self as a piece of merchandise, and allows him¬
self to be transformed into a mere cog in a
machine.
The Third World today is a vast laboratory
in which these trends are being tested, gaining
widespread acceptance and taking root to such
an extent that man as a free and creative being
scarcely seems to exist.
These trends are accompanied by a
pervasivealbeit sometimes concealedsense of
the supremacy of the West. It is true that the
West is engaged in a continuing struggle to
monopolize the central role and is determined
neither to abolish that role nor to harmonize its
relations with the non-Western world. This mere¬
ly increases the hostility of the latter, which is
transformed into a dependency, a captive mar¬
ket. In accordance with the logic of the balance
of power, this trend is becoming more marked
since it is linked to an arms race. Let us not dwell
on the contempt it implies for other cultures, for
those who possess nothing but their culture and
who, if they were to lose it, would lose every¬
thing, including themselves.



Culturethe product
of free creation
We can measure the value attached to freedom
in a given society by taking as a yardstick the
value attached to its culture and that culture's
openness to the future. Action and efficiency are
implied in the etymology of the word "culture",

which has connotations of skill, talent and tech¬
nical accomplishment. (Is there not a close etymo¬
logical link between the Arabic word 'atqana and
the Greek word tekhnef) In the sense that it is
efficient, culture is the product of free creation.
As such, it is not just one factor among many
others in human development; it is its very foun¬
dation, its dynamic principle.
However, culture in this sense is today very
often absent from many Third World societies.
Perhaps this may help to clarify some of the rea¬
sons for the lack of freedom in these societies,
the most profound of which are perhaps related
to the jurisprudential interpretation of religious
texts. This dominant interpretation connects the
religious-jurisprudential to the socio-political, and
explains why freedom is not thought of as a "po¬
litical" or "civil" concept, but simply as a reli¬
gious concept.
In this context freedom has gradually be¬
come, paradoxically, an exercise in obedience, in
allegiance to the custodian of authority to whom
all power is delegated. And this is the origin of
the unity between truth and power, and also, in-
cestuously, of the unity between freedom and
power, and between thought and power.
The existence of the individual is thus root¬
ed in obedience. He thinks and speaks like the
group of which he is an organic part. Is not mar-
ginalization from the group or tribe a form of
unbelief, usually leading to exclusion and some¬
times to death? Intellectual marginalization thus
assumes the guise of political and jurisdictional
marginalization, since it is an expression of dis¬
obedience of the power established in the name
of the group. What can the individual do?
Stripped of property rights and the right to work,
man can continue to struggle. But when he is
stripped of his very language, that is, of his right to
speak, he is in a sense stripped of his right to live.
History has shown that all those who have
exercised their natural right to speak out against
the power-group have paid for it dearly, usually
with their lives. Many others have imagined that
the possession of objects could liberate them from
the power of thought! They abdicated to the
powers-that-be their right to speak, and restricted
themselves to material goods and trade. Perhaps
this explains the mutation of culture in these so¬
cieties. Essentially, culture is the achievement of
an awareness of the world, an act of creation. In
our societies it has become a form of embellish¬
ment, an instrument, and the intellectual has
become a functionary in the service of the
power-group.
Paralysis of thought
In certain types of society, earthly progress is
measured in terms of its conformity to injunc¬
tions from heaven, and the happiness of the in¬
dividual is measured in terms of his dependence
on the powers-that-be. This dependence is em¬
bodied in the concepts of harmony, conciliation 41

.S*:
^\.y 3Ça-
The Prisoner
(1979), by the Iranian
sculptor Iradj Emami.
42
and unity. Harmony to deny social conflict, con¬
ciliation to deny intellectual conflict and unity
to deny division and fragmentation.
This being so, progress is no more than a
higher form of return to the original precepts.
Unity is simply that of the group-nation, which
is based on the uniqueness of the original texts,
which is in turn based on the uniqueness of the
truth, which is itself based on the uniqueness of
power. Such oneness means the simultaneous
stifling of man and of knowledge. The individual
is a stranger unto himself. For heaven, he exists
through religion; on earth, he exists by virtue of
the power-group.
Today, the dominant mode of thinking in
many Third World societies has theologico-
ideological roots. This world is assailed by two
types of knowledge. The first type is a vehicle
of the past. It is concerned with the hereafter and
with means of gaining eternity. The second type
is a vehicle for Western modernity. It is above
all concerned with the processing of material
things and with technologies of production and
consumption. On the one hand there is the litur¬
gy of the celestial paradise; on the other, the litur¬
gy of the earthly paradise. It is a world which
paralyses the mind because it produces neither
thought nor technology. The dominant cultural
trend confirms this paralysis: it represents total
conformity with the authority of a text which,
in practice, is that of the powers-that-be.
The prospects
for freedom
To explain the nature of freedom in the Third
World, I would add that the West (that "Other",
modern world) governs this world with ration¬
ality and technical skills oriented towards con¬
sumption, which assimilates it and makes it
dependent. The market, energy and strategy are
more apparent than man, his freedom and his
great cosmic problems. It is a functional vision
which masks man and reveals the machine.
Today, just as in the traditional theological
vision, Western-style production is geared more
closely to the renewal of means than to the
renewal of man. The means of enslaving man, not
of liberating him. What is produced becomes, in
practice, more important than man himself. It is
as if man exists as part of a machine. And some¬
one who is part of a machine loses possession of
his self (Al Farabi), since the self then belongs to
someone else. It matters little whether the
machine is textual-linguistic or material-
technological.
What then are the prospects for freedom in
the Third World? First of all I must stress that in
this world there is a current of democratic think¬
ing, writing and action. In social terms, this
current is marginal, but in cultural terms it is
most significant and holds the greatest promise
for a future worthy of man. It looks for inspira¬
tion to a world to which it does not belong.
What may seem a paradox is in reality the
very principle of the creative movement, which
produces and reproduces the pastbut in a differ¬
ent, renewed form, within the context of differ¬
ent knowledge. The relationships which this
movement establishes with the past (the heritage)
are no longer horizontal but vertical. They are
relationships which represent the continuing
growth of the past, through the present, towards
the future.
It is a movement rooted in language and not
in vocabulary, in man and not in an institution
or a regime, in life and not in ideology and in¬
struction. It is bound up with symbols, legends,
and the dynamics of imagination and creation.
Chronological time ceases to exist, and is replaced
by another kind of time, vertical time. There is no
more room for a single, definitive, total meaning.
Meaning is open, indefinite, shifting, and it is in
this changeability that freedom, democracy, mul¬
tiplicity and the right to be different are rooted.
This being so, what are the prospects for free¬
dom on a world scale?
I think that, essentially, these prospects hinge
on the West's future conception of the Third
World and on the nature of the West's relations
with the Third World. Misunderstanding about
freedom in the world will begin to be dispelled
when the West undertakes a complete and radi¬
cal reappraisal of itself, of its culture and of its
relationship with the "Other", non-Western
world. A new awareness of this other world must
emerge in the West and become another facet,
an extension of itself.
In the light of this new awareness, man's iden¬
tity would no longer be predetermined, it would
become the fruit of a creative process which is
renewed with each new project. The past (reli¬
gious or national), would then be simply the most
primitive, the least rich, the least profound com¬
ponent of that identity, which can only be the
result of a continuing process of creation. Alone
among all living creatures man makes his own
identity through his creative work and thought.
Human identity is not a fixed quantity: it does
not derive from any kind of past; it is a perma¬
nent quest for the future within a continuing
creative destiny.
To achieve this level of awareness of the du¬
ality of identity and otherness, politics must
become an integral part of a whole, that of cul¬
ture. The former must be subject to the latter;
political action must be primarily a means of
reinforcing the exchange between oneself and
others, it must satisfy a cultural desire for dia¬
logue, exchanges, complementarities.
Politics must then, above all in the West,
achieve wonders. It must do so in order, at long
last, to give the lie to Saint-Just's remark that "All
the arts have achieved wonders; only the art of
governing has produced nothing but monsters."
