Mollusc money
Cowries and other colourful shell currencies
have circulated in Africa for many centuries
BY A. FELIX IROKO
Left, girls wearing cowrie
shell headdresses in
Karamoja province,
northeastern Uganda.
Below, cowries braided
into a fibre rope from
Papua New Guinea,
which was used either as
ornamentation or as
money.
X ROM the dawn of time to the twentieth cen¬
tury, many commodities were used as currency
in sub-Saharan Africa. They included metal rods
and bracelets, fabrics, salt, pearls, shirt buttons
and seashells. Of all these mediums of exchange,
shells enjoyed the widest circulation.
Cowries, marginellas and olive shells, of
marine origin, were those most often used.
Cowries (Cypraea annulus and Cypraea moneta)
are white or pale yellow shells the size of a hazel¬
nut, with a humped back and a ventral opening.
They are only found in warm seas, especially in
the South Pacific and the Indian Ocean. Most of
the cowries that circulated in Africa for over a
thousand years came from the Maldive and
Laccadive archipelagos, south-west of India, and
from the islands of Zanzibar and Pemba, off the
east coast of Africa.
21

Cowries were traded wherever they were
fished or collected, and were often carried as
ballast in Arab, Jewish or European ships sailing
for ports on the African mainland, where they
were sold again.
Marginellas (Marginella) are marine molluscs
whose shells, especially those from the west coast
of Africa, are small and colourful. They are also
found in American tropical waters, notably off
the coast of Brazil.
There are more than 300 species of olive
shells. More elongated than cowries, they have
an agate-like sheen. The species most commonly
used in sub-Saharan Africa was Olivancillaria
nana, found off the coast of Luanda which was
a monetary reserve used exclusively by the rulers
of the Kongo kingdom until the Portuguese
arrived in the late fifteenth century.
Markets for shell
currencies
Until the sixteenth century, the Nzimbu (the
Kikongo name for Olivancillaria nana) was used
as currency in the Kongo kingdom, marginella
shells were used only in the Niger bend, while
cowries were common throughout West Africa,
and, to a certain extent, in Central Africa. Before
the sixteenth century cowries were also used as
currency in Egypt.
From the sixteenth to the late nineteenth cen¬
tury the cowrie was more widely used than any
other form of shell moneyfrom Senegal to
Uganda, from the Sahel to the Slave Coast (Gulf
of Guinea). It was seldom used in the Sahara and
never gained ground either in northern or
southern Africa.
This was also the period when marginella
shells were most widely circulated in West
and Central Africa, where they were used as a
medium of exchange among the Olée, Ngilima,
Tsambitso, Obaa, Koyo, Eboyi and Akwa
peoples of the Congo basin.
Olive shells were always exclusive to the
Bantu, and do not seem to have circulated out¬
side the Congo. In order to ruin the rulers of the
Kongo kingdom, the Portuguese introduced '
other species of olives from the Brazilian coast
and cowries from the Indian Ocean. Inevitably,
Dorsal and ventral views of three varieties of cowrie.
Above left, the eyed cowrie (Cypraea argus); left, the
onyx cowrie (Cypraea onyx); right, the money cowrie
(Cypraea moneta), which has served as currency in
Africa and elsewhere.

4^. _

Above, a dancer at a Papua
New Guinea festival
brandishes a shield encrusted
with shell money, a
traditional form of wealth
which features on the
modern 5-kina note, right.
24

the Nzimbu was gradually forced out of circula¬
tion. The Portuguese also exported olives from
Luanda and used them as a secondary form of cur¬
rency, along with cowries, in the black slave
traffic in colonial Brazil.
2,000 cowries for a gourd of salt
These shells were not simply used for barter.



They had all the characteristics of money in the
sense that they were measures of value and finan¬
cial reserves as well as mediums of exchange.
They symbolized wealth.
They could be used as cash to buy yams,
knives, cattle and slaves, or to pay for services
rendered. They also served as units of account for
fixing the price of certain commodities without
necessarily being used to pay for them. In the
nineteenth century, the French explorer Louis
Gustave Binger recorded the following negotia¬
tion between two merchants from northern
Ghana: "A gourd of salt is worth 2,000 cowries,
a hundred kola nuts are 1,000 cowries. So I'll give
you 200 kola nuts for a gourd of salt."
Shells thus encouraged trade and were excel¬
lent indicators of fluctuations in the price of
goods at different times and places. They were
assembled in multiples for ease of handling. One
or more holes were pierced in cowries and they
were strung in groups of 12, 20, 40 or 100 accord¬
ing to the number system used in the trading area
where they were in circulation.
Similarly, Musanga (small discs of snail-shell
used as currency in some African countries) were
strung through a central hole to make necklaces.
In the early twentieth century, ten of these neck¬
laces measured from the big toe to the heel were
worth a doti or 3.60 m of indigo-blue cloth, and
ten necklaces measured from the little toe to the
heel were worth a doti of any other cloth.
In some regions of sub-Saharan Africa the use
of shell currencies led to the development of
monetary policies. The authorities controlled the
import and circulation of the shells. Taking steps
to avoid an overabundance of shells, which would
have caused inflation, or scarcity, which would
have inhibited trade, gave them substantial power
over the economy. From Abomey to the Slave
Coast, as in the Congo, rigorous and highly effi¬
cient monetary policies were practised.
Shells began to be withdrawn from circula¬
tion at the beginning of the colonial period and
gradually lost their role as a medium of exchange.
Today only cowries still circulate, on a very small
scale, between the peoples of south-west Burkina
Faso and northern Ghana. This is the only region
in the world where their monetary value has been
preserved to some extent but for how much
longer?
Top, a huge symbolic cowrie
adorns the façade of the
Bank ofMali at Bamako.
Above, a copper ankle-
bracelet, once used as money
in the Congo.
A. FELIX IROKO,
of Benin, is head of studies
in the economic and social
history of Africa at the
National University of
Benin, Cotonou. The
author of over sixty articles
on economic history and
related subjects, he is
currently writing a book on
the use of the cowrie as
currency from 3000 BC to
the present day. 25
