
Bracelet
by Lluís Masriera, 1900.



Modernist
Barcelona
BY ALBERT GARCIA ESPUCHE
W.HEN Barcelona's ancient fortifications were torn
down in the late nineteenth century to provide much-
needed room for the city to expand, the vast open
spaces around the old city became the site for develop¬
ment that made a major contribution to the history
of modern town planning.
In the 1870s the new Barcelona began to take shape
with the construction of a middle-class residential area
around the famous Paseo de Gracia thoroughfare. The
transformation and development of this part of the city
mark the emergence of Modernism (Modernismo), the
Catalan version of Art Nouveau.
By 1900, the high-water mark of Modernism, the
new city had already been mapped out. Around the
centre known as the Eixample (the Paseo de Gracia
and the streets nearby) with its prestige buildings, were
a number of cheaper housing schemes, large buildings
such as hospitals, prisons, and abattoirs, and an indus¬
trial estate.
In this area, Modernism found full expression in
major urban complexes such as the Sant Pau hospital
on the outskirts, and, in the centre, in the development
of the elegant area around the Paseo de Gracia which
came to be known as the "Quadrat d'Or" ("Golden
Rectangle"). Much private housing was built. Some
apartment blocks, such as Gaudi's Casa Milà (1905-
1910), popularly known as La Pedrera ("The Quarry")
replaced earlier buildings.
But as well as designing new apartment blocks,
Modernist architects transformed, improved and em¬
bellished existing buildings. The famous Modernist resi¬
dences in the Paseo de Gracia such as the Casa Lleó
Morera, the Casa Amatller and the Casa Batlló,
designed by the architects Lluís Domènech i Montaner,
Josep Puig i Cadafalch and Antoni Gaudi respectively,
were conversions of earlier buildings. Luxury shops
built on the ground floors of older houses were another
expression of this trend.
One striking feature of the new style was its
propensity to invade all forms of aesthetic expression.
At the turn of the century, the exuberant inventions 35

À
i
^ - %* ~E¿2
: ""
1 '"'
s*
Itp 1
Palau de la Música Catalana,
by Lluís Domènech i
Montaner, 1905-1908: above,
staircase; left, mosaic ceiling
(detail).
Below left, detail of mosaic
ceiling by Josep Pey, Casa
Lleó Morera, Barcelona.
Below right, settee by Joan
Busquets i Jane, 1902.
36
ALBERT GARCIA ESPUCHE,
Catalan historian of architecture,
is the author of a number of
publications including studies of
urban space and society in pre-
mdustrial Barcelona (1984), and
the architecture and design of the
1888 Universal Exhibition in
Barcelona (1989).
of Modernism formed the setting of middle-class life
in Barcelona, and fine Modernist paintings, drawings
and sculptures by Catalan artists such as Ramon Casas,
Santiago Rusiñol and Juan Llimona can still be admired
in the city's museums today.
The ornate interiors created by Modernist ar¬
chitects gave the impression that the refined and or¬
namental treatment of the façades had spilled over into
interior walls and ceilings. Floors, ceilings, chimney-
pieces, doors, windows and other features were all
designed and made with meticulous craftsmanship.
Tables, beds, cupboards, screens and other furnishings
were perfectly integrated into their setting, together
with other decorative elements such as carpets, lamps
and door-knobs.
The leading Modernist architects excelled at creat¬
ing such "total" environments. They enlisted the col¬
laboration of specialized artists and craftsmen who
under their direction produced a consistent output of
work that was as robust and exciting in its overall
design as in its component parts. The Palau de la Música
Catalana and the Sant Pau hospital designed by Lluís
Domènech i Montaner and his team are impressive
examples of this approach.
But architects such as Domènech and his contem¬
poraries Gaudi, Cadafalch, Rafael Masó, and Josep
Maria Jujol revealed even more astonishing skills when
they produced "total" works of art in more modest
settings. The Casa Lleó Morera is an outstanding
example of this. On a small triangular site with uneven
contours, Domènech i Montaner was faced with the
difficult task of embellishing an existing building and
transforming it into a representative example of the
new style. He made imaginative use of the site and
directed the work of artists and craftsmen who designed
all the external and internal features, from stained-glass
windows and sculptures to tiling and furniture. The
result was a marvellous transformation of a small non¬
descript building into a palace.
There are many examples of the outstanding skills
of Catalan Modernist architects and craftsmen. In
Gaudí's La Pedrera it is impossible not to admire the
ingenuity with which the stucco ceilings and stone
pillars were designed by his collaborator Josep Maria
Jujol, a man who could make a humble brass inkstand
that was a small masterpiece.
