Media empires:
a necessary evil?
by Joseph Fitchett
Giant media
groups have
masterminded
a technological
revolution
with some
unexpected
spin-offs
38
XHE emergence of media mega-groups is one of
the striking features of our age. Sometimes
national, often international, these conglomerates
dwarf the biggest media operations of previous
generations. Sometimes they attain a position
close to horizontal dominance in publishing or
broadcasting in a region or even a nation. Some¬
times they strive for vertical integration, with
holdings in every sector of an industry. This con¬
centration means that they are fewer in number
and therefore stand out from their competitors.
As a result, debate about the proper functioning
of the press seems likely to focus in the next few
years on the role of these media empires.
In the 1980s, international debate about the
media was dominated by quarrels over censorship
and press freedom. This agenda among media-
watchers seems to be losing urgency now that the
Soviet bloc has largely abandoned ideological con¬
frontation and started to pay at least lip service
to the values of Western democracy. In this sense,
the West has "won" the battle against press regu¬
lation in favour of a concept closer to a free
market for the media.
But these quarrels about the power of a free
press have been buried by events, not settled.
Sooner or later, we will have to look again at
the self-congratulatory euphoria among some
Western commentators, who say that changes
in Eastern Europe can be "explained" by the
impact of communications and therefore of
the press. In practice, it is hard to find any evi¬
dence that changes in Eastern Europe, Central
America or China owed much to the role of the
local press.
Western electronic media, by conveying
developments in different Eastern European
countries, undoubtedly heartened opponents of
the regimes in these countries. But "press
freedom" was a rather insignificant part of a
larger symbolic image of "Western" freedom and
prosperity. Extravagant claims about the role of
the media in the revolutionary changes of 1989
must be put on a par with French leaders' habit
of dwelling on the coincidence that the changes
last year occurred simultaneously with celebra¬
tions to mark the bicentenary of the French
Revolution.
Multi-media groups
of a new kind
The issue has already been spotlighted from
another angle in the 1990s: the power of media
groups. Seen by some as a new evil empire, they
may be a necessary evil of our time.
Ironically, the end of the Cold War has
brought about the destruction of the great media
empires that rose and fell in communist-run
nations. So concern has shifted to the role of
Western capitalists forging multi-media groups of
spectacular size and transnational scale. Inciden¬
tally, some of these Western press groups are
seeking a major role in redeveloping the media
in Eastern Europe.
Many of the old familiar questionsin short,
what kind of media is good for you?will be
articulated anew, this time around an emerging
trend in the West to concentrate the media in
fewer, bigger holdings. As we try to get to grips
with this phenomenon, some fundamental ques¬
tions need to be asked. Is the trend inevitable?
Will it enhance or undermine freedom? What will
improve quality and what will weaken it?

The headlines tell the story, often in a con¬
fused manner, of a fundamental trend toward
media empires of a new kind. Typical flashes
show developments such as media magnates
Rupert Murdoch and Robert Maxwell trying to
fuse newspapers and television; the Japanese com¬
pany Sony and the American media giant,
Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), bridging
remote cultures; international alliances fighting
for control of French television; technical stan¬
dards converging to allow global broadcasting.
At the start of the 1980s, the media were
glaring exceptions to the overall pattern of re¬
structuring that was being forced on all the tradi¬
tional sectors in industrialized democracies.
Technology had come to the end of a cycle, with
satellite broadcasting finally ready to challenge
the traditional ways of doing business. In many
cases, the inroads of television had driven
newspaper revenues and profits to an all-time
low. Magazines, caught in their old formats,
needed to be massively overhauled and renewed.
Even news agencies were unable to survive unless
they created new kinds of businesses, a notable
example being the spectacular success of Reuters
in developing electronic financial services.
To survive this transitional period, smash
through old habits, bring in new technology and
usher in a new era, the Western media concen¬
trated their assets into fewer, stronger companies
designed to weather the storms of change. Was
it necessarily the best approach? Perhaps there
was no alternative.
The lesson of the 1980s
A major lesson of the 1980s was that any enter¬
prise needed to operate on a vast scale in order
to prosper in a period of global economic muta¬
tion. New technologies seemed to be crackling
to life like an exploding boxcar of ammunition.
Markets were being redrawn as people's habits
changed under the impact of revolutions in trans¬
portation and communications. Suddenly people
in Tokyo and Sào Paulo, New Delhi and New
York, Lagos and Johannesburg, wanted and
expected to consume the same products, from
Japanese-made transistor radios to world-class
entertainment or information services.
Instead of buying radios packaged differently
in each country in order to appeal to local sensi¬
bilities, customers all over the planet turned to
the severe black boxes that were a Sony trade¬
mark andagainst the prevailing wisdom about
marketing caught on as a selling point. The 39

40
attractions of the readily recognizable, familiar
local product evaporated under the impact of
standardized products. Television around the
world lost much of its local flavour as interna¬
tional products gained more air time.
Analysing this new, fiercer international
competition, specialists frequently used the word
"entrepreneurial", meaning that success required
new ideas from dedicated inventors. The stress
on individual vision and dedication was a
refreshing reminder of virtues such as initiative
and readiness to run risks.
To have lasting success, however, an
entrepreneur needed to be able to sell quickly into
a large market so that he earned enough to
expand. This concern about the size of the market
was the driving force behind the European Com¬
munity's commitment in 1985 to develop a
Europe-wide single market by 1992. The need for
continuous innovation was even a factor in new
Soviet thinking that recognized the need to break
down an empire that was not working in order
to obtain greater diversity of expression and, it
is to be hoped, release more energies.
In most industrialized countries, which do
not have media monopolies, change ran in the
opposite direction. Concerned about being able
to compete profitably, media owners pursued a
visionary concept of expanding their markets
across borders and across sectors, and many of
them sought to diversify their investments in
ways intended to provide profitable synergies. In
France, the publishing group Hachette dreamed
of creating an almost self-sustaining circle of news
media and magazines, publishing, television, films
and even space technology. The plan, to carica¬
ture it only slightly, was that news coverage
would produce stories, which could be turned
into books and then into documentaries or films
which could be transmitted by satellite.
A global market
Similar visions spurred the rise of similarly ambi¬
tious media groups in many countries including
Britain and Italy, Japan and India, Brazil and the
United States. The trend was perhaps pursued
more boldly in Europe than elsewhere: despite
the obstacles of overcoming language barriers,
Europeans were under greater pressure to develop
a single market large enough to recoup the invest¬
ments needed to competein magazines or tele¬
vision, films or even journalismin the global
market.
In the United States and Japan, these pres¬
sures have, on the whole, concentrated media
ownership in fewer, stronger hands: in Europe,
on the whole, they have helped to forge alliances
among different types of media holdings. In both
cases, the objective is to mobilize enough
resources to survive the transition and emerge in
a strong position for the late 1990s.
Beyond their capacity for survival, the
emerging large media groups can be credited with
many benefits, of which the most important is
unquestionably innovation. This may sound para¬
doxical after so many attacks on media groups
accusing them of standardizing their products and
pitching them at the lowest level to obtain the
largest market, but in the process they often
develop technology that restores the autonomy
of new, smaller and stronger competitors.
Large media groups were instrumental in
creating a global market for video cassettes that
contributed to a crisis in the movie industry, espe¬
cially outside Hollywood. Today, revenues from
cassettes exceed the box office earnings from most
films, but the cassette market has provided a
major new revenue source for the industry, espe¬
cially for films intended for smaller, specialized
audiences.
Even films with strong local appeal in their
country of origin were threatened, as the cost of
movie-making grew too high for a single country
to offer a big enough potential market. Now
minority-interest film-makers have more oppor¬
tunities to find investment backing because of
the additional potential revenue from the video
market.

The broadcasting satellite
Astra.
Televiewing in Japan (left)
and Egypt (right).
Invariably, innovations involve large invest¬
ments, to pay for the new technology and sus¬
tain it long enough for the public to adopt it. By
mobilizing funds, the big media groups have been
the midwives to a global explosion of specialized
magazines on subjects ranging from travel and
women's interests to sexually titillating "true sto¬
ries" or computer services available by telephone.
With German investors now dominating key
sectors in the French market for periodicals and
European proprietors and products making big
inroads in the US market, there can be no doubt
that the improved overall performance of maga¬
zines owes a great deal to the intensified interna¬
tional competition between giant media groups.
Two innovations stand out in any evaluation
of the impact of these mega-groups. The successful
campaign to introduce new printing technology
in Europe must be largely credited to the single-
handed determination of Rupert Murdoch, the
Australian-born publisher whose main business
is now in London. After taking over The Times,
London's venerable mainstream newspaper,
Murdoch introduced electronic production
instead of traditional type-setting, defying the
unions that had prevented other British papers
from switching to the new technology.
It was a daring gamble, risking financial dis¬
aster and even violence, but Murdoch rode out
the unions' siege. His costly victory transformed
the economic outlook for the whole industry. If
The Times could be produced on computers,
without typesetters, so could other newspapers.
As â result, funds quickly emerged for a new
quality dailythe first such fresh start in Fleet
Street since the Second World Warand The
Independent has become The Times's toughest
competitor.
The impact of Murdoch's victory has echoed
beyond Britain, helping newspapers large and
small in other Western European countries to
keep pace with other industries that have had
to override union objections to job-killing
technology.
When the media make the news
The repercussions have been just as great from
a second innovation that could only have come
from a media group with deep enough pockets
to pay for high-flying visions: the Cable News
Network (CNN) of Turner Broadcasting. By
using satellites for worldwide, round-the-clock
broadcasting of news, CNN has revolutionized
our sense of the pace of history and news-
gathering. Government officials take account of
what they call the "CNN factor", meaning that
CNN coverage of breaking news is capable
of turning an event into a global issue almost
instantaneously.
As CNN broadcasts pictures of a press con¬
ference or a natural disaster somewhere in the
world, capitals everywhere else are immediately
involved. Stock markets oscillate, parliamentary
questions are asked, the press starts speculating.
It seems clear already that CNNand the quick¬
ened pace of all media coverage that CNN has
stimulatedis starting to play a role in shaping
the outcome of events. Even if the international
media do not initiate the great human movements
that make history, the coverageinstantaneous,
near to saturation, heavily larded with
commenthas created a new matrix in which
diplomacy must operate. Because of their size, the
big media groups have great potential for
safeguarding the role of the press. A big, rich and
diversified publisher can stand up to the pressures
of a single advertiser or group of advertisersor
even to a government. In an era when many
nations' budgets are no larger than the funds avail¬
able to drug traffickers or even terrorists, it is
reassuring that some of the press is rich and
powerful enough to withstand bribery. Similarly,
big media organizations have the resources to
help protect their journalists, so the freedom of
the pressto get the news and publish itbenefits
from their power.
But the big media groups have often failed 41

42
to use their potential to improve quality. The pat¬
tern of awards for public-service journalism in the
United States clearly reveals the strength of
smaller, independent papers in this respect. In
covering news of planetary concernecological
and other global trends, problems in developing
countries, defence of human rights the establish¬
ment press, despite its resources, has often trailed
behind smaller, more concerned specialists.
Size, by its very nature, seems to blunt the
sense of individual initiative that so often is the
source of history-making journalism. Small
newspapers, not big media groups, often break
new ground with stories of corruption, pollution
or surprising shifts in public attitudes because
they are close to the local situations. Such sto¬
ries are often pivotal precisely because they are
not on the agenda of the politicians, whose daily
activities are the focus of the metropolitan
newspapers.
Although the big media have the stature to
protect their journalists, they rarely endanger
themselves, either physically or politically. In
Japan, for example, which has the world's largest-
selling newspapers, reporters operate in press
clubs that suppress much of the news, and none
of the newspapers runs the risk of providing more
independent coverage. Even in Britain, few
newspapers have ever rebelled against the system
of government briefing, known as the lobby, that
prevents reporters from identifying the source of
news stories.
The return of quality journalism
Many journalists have found it frustrating to
work in organizations run by media magnates
such as Rupert Murdoch in Britain or Robert
Hersant in France. For example, The Times is
reportedly suffering because Mr. Murdoch's funds
are being heavily drained by his satellite televi¬
sion venture, Sky Channel. Similarly, in France,
the need to put together large groups of investors
for expensive ventures, such as a television
channel, means that multiple political influences
are at work in the media.
Even government intervention, which in
France plays a substantial role in decisions about
who runs newspapers and broadcasting stations,
has been ineffective in imposing any guarantees
about the quality and variety of the content of
publications or programming. While the new
technology offers the potential of a closer match
between media and public by bringing specialized
audiences within commercial reach, so far it has
not noticeably improved the media.
In terms of sheer economic efficiency, there
is mounting evidence that the media behemoth,
far from being a new kind of animal that benefits
from cross-connections among its different limbs,
is liable to prove an inefficient and wasteful crea¬
ture with little sense of direction.
The future, once thought to be bringing
mega-corporations that would provide a full
entertainment cycle starting with the raw
material of events, seems more likely to bring
smaller units newspapers and magazines, televi¬
sion production companies, film-makers,
publishersthat excel in their own specialities.
They can exploit the new technology to operate
profitably in domains and markets once thought
uneconomic.
Similar prospects exist for the media in coun¬
tries with little tradition of modern communica¬
tions. Often accused of squeezing small countries
and weakly defended cultures from the interna¬
tional consciousness, the media groupsby
forging international markets and developing
cheaper technology have opened up wider per¬
spectives in which newcomers in the press and
in entertainment can make themselves heard.
And the strength of the local press in any country
will be a decisive factor in determining how much
and how well the rest of the world follows affairs
there.
To break the constricting old order, we
needed nothing less than the mega-power of the
huge consortia, dedicated to their balance sheets,
to mobilize the vast funds to transform media
technology and markets. It was a necessary evil,
imposing the new technologies that, in turn, will
give back the media to writers and publishers
whose first loyalty is to their audiences.
The Berlin headquarters of
the German media magnate
Axel Springer.
JOSEPH FITCHETT,
American journalist, is a
correspondent on East-West
affairs and other aspects of
international political and
cultural life with the
International Herald Tribune. A
former Middle-Eastern
correspondent for the London
Observer, he appears regularly
as a commentator on
television in the United States
and elsewhere.
