Chinese painting The sound of silence
BY FRANÇOIS CHENG
AND NAHAL TADJADOD
'T
Opposite page, White and
Black (1926), negative and
positive prints by the
American painter and
photographer Man Ray
(1890-1976).
This page, Dreaming of
Immortality In a Thatched
Cottage, detail of a hand
scroll by the Chinese painter
T'áng Yin (1470-1523).
lHERE are painted landscapes that can be
passed through or contemplated; others in which
one can walk around; and yet others where one
would like to stay or live. All these landscapes
attain a degree of excellence. However, those in
which one would like to live are superior to the
others." Such was the view expressed by Kuo Hsi,
a great landscape painter of the Song dynasty who
lived in the eleventh century.
The painters of ancient China dreamt of a
total communion between man and nature. Inas¬
much as it partook of the mystery of creation,
painting was considered to be an almost godlike
activity. Underlying the practice of art, and
indeed all Chinese aesthetic thought, was a
philosophical vision based on the concept of the
Void (that is, empty incipience).
The idea of the Void was already present in
that seminal work of Chinese culture, the "Book
of Changes" (I Chmg). The philosophers who
made it a central part of their doctrine were those
of the Taoist school, the two founders of which,
Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu,* exercised an unfailing
influence on most art critics.
To the Chinese mind the Void was not some¬
thing vague or non-existent but a highly dynamic
and essential dimension of human life and of the
life of the universe. Characterized by the perfect
balance of the breath of life and of the Yin-Yang
duality, at the heart of the interactions by which
all things are governed, it was regarded as a space
in which true plenitude could be achieved. It was
through the Void that human beings could arrive
at an all-embracing view of the universe. For this
reason, in classical China the idea of the Void
provided a key to mastering the noblest pursuits,
ranging from the various forms of art to medicine
or warfare.
'Straw sandals visits
Son of Heaven'
In music, for instance, the Void is expressed by
certain syncopated rhythms that punctuate the
silences. Breaking the line of development, the
silence creates a space through which the sounds
can reach beyond themselves and attain a kind
of resonance that outreaches resonance.
In poetry, one way of introducing the Void
is to miss out certain grammatical links, known
as "empty words". The linear, temporal progres¬
sion of language is thus severed by the poet for
the sake of an open-ended reciprocal relationship
between the subject and the objective world. No
longer is there any distinction between the inner
world and the outer world. A kind of direct com¬
munion with things is thus established, as though
the heart were speaking through them. .
One day Tu Fu (712-770), a famous poet of
the Tang period (seventh-tenth centuries),
appeared in rags before the emperor in exile. To
point up the contrast between his pitiful state and
-
23

24
the solemnity of the occasion, he left out the per¬
sonal pronouns in the poem he then composed,
declaring simply, not without a touch of irony,
"Straw sandals visits Son of Heaven".
In a poem describing a farewell scene, Li Po
(701-762), another famous poet of the Tang
period, deliberately omits the words normally
used to introduce a comparison: "Floating cloud
peregrine mood/Setting sun spurned heart". He
thereby "organically" links together human life
and the world of nature, which does not serve
as an external setting but forms an intrinsic part
of the drama.
Those who have the dimension of emptiness
within them efface the distance separating them
from the outside world. The subject becomes at
one and the same time absent and profoundly
present. This fragmented language in which the
Void is a driving force leaves room for the move¬
ments of the breath of life and thereby suggests
the unsayable.
'By means of a slender brush,
recreate the Void'
It is in painting however that the Void is given
the most striking expression. In some paintings
dating from the time of the Song and Yuan
dynasties (tenth-fourteenth centuries), when
Chinese painting was at its zenith, as much as
two-thirds of the picture may be given over to
the Void or, in other words, left unpainted. Emp¬
tiness is not an inert presence but is felt, on the
contrary, to be charged with a vibrancy that links
the visible world to an invisible world.
Even within the visible world (the painted
area) the Void is still present. Thus between the
mountain and the water, which are the two poles,
the cloud represents the intermediate Void. The
painter creates the impression that the mountain
can be transformed into waves and, conversely,
that the water can rise up in the form of a moun¬
tain. Both cease to be regarded as partial,
opposing, unchanging elements; they embody the
dynamic principle of reality as a whole.
By upsetting all linear perspective, the Void
reveals this ever-present interaction between man
and nature within the painting, on the one hand,
and between the person looking at the painting
and the painting itself on the other. The painting
is thus meant to be "listened to" even more than
to be seen. Producing a painting, or contem¬
plating one, becomes an act of participation, a
form of meditation in which reality is eased out
by truth.
In this sense, painting in China is a
philosophy in action, a sacred activity whose pur¬
pose is human fulfilment. Far from being seen



as no more than an aesthetic object, a painting
tends to recreate an "open" space where real living
becomes possible. In the words of the poet and
painter Wang Wei (699-759), "By means of a
slender brush, recreate the immense body of the
Void".
For Chinese painters, the brushstroke truly
represents the process whereby man partakes of
the act of creation. It is the link between man
and the universe. It is a line that seeks to capture
the breath of things. In China the art of the
Right, pen and ink portrait of
the 8th-century Chinese poet
Li Po, by Liang Kai (12th-13th
century).
Opposite page, landscape
painted on satin by Zhu Da
(1626-1705).
FRANÇOIS CHENG,
Chinese-born writer, translator
and poet, is professor of
Chinese at the National
Institute of Oriental Languages
and Civilizations, Paris. His
many publications on the art
and poetry of China include
L'écriture poétique chinoise
(1977), Vide et plein: le
langage pictural chinois (1979),
and L'espace du rêve: mille
ans de peinture chinoise '
(1980, 1988).
NAHAL TADJADOD,
Iranian Sinologist, is the author
of a doctoral thesis on the
influence of Buddhism on
Chinese Manichaeism (Man/, /e
Bouddha de Lumière, Editions
du Cerf, Paris, 1990). She is
currently participating in
Unesco's Silk Roads Project.
!
^

brushstroke has been aided by the existence of
calligraphy and by the instantaneous and rhyth¬
mical execution of a painting, following a long
period of study and rapt attention. Before taking
up his brush, the painter must have achieved a
mastery of the many types of brushstroke
representing the many types of beings or things,
with each brushstroke being the result of close
observation of nature.
"Before you can paint a bamboo," wrote Su
Dongpo (1036-1101), "the bamboo must have
grown deep inside you. It is then that, brush in
hand, gazing intently, you will see the vision rise
up before you. Capture the vision at once by the
strokes of your brush, for it may vanish as sud¬
denly as a hare at the approach of the hunter."
The opposing link that unites the different
natural phenomenamountain and water, trees
and rocks, animals and plantsis expressed
through the Void, and it is thus that the painter
succeeds in recreating the pulsations of an
invisible world at the heart of the seen world.
Only then can each being enter into communion
with all things. Does not legend have it that Wu
Tao-tzu (701-792) disappeared into the mist of a
landscape that he had just painted?
The completed painting, once rolled up,
becomes a universe in itself. Unrolling it (in
China, unrolling and gazing upon a masterpiece,
hour after hour, is an almost sacred ritual), means
each time translating experiential time into a
living space. The Void recreates in the heart of
the beholder the visual music of the universe.
* The former lived in the sixth century BC, the latter at the
end of the fourth century BC. 25
