Ä desire to receive guests'
BY GEORGES LISOWSKI
ELOSPITALITY seems to be a virtueif that is
the right word to describe itmore natural to a
rural than to an urban civilization; and the Slavs
of today are still very close to the rural civiliza¬
tion that their ancestors and even their parents
knew.
In the city, asking for hospitality is begging,
asking for charity. Why should a person ask
hospitality from, say, the tenants of the apart¬
ment on the second floor, right, rather than from
those of the third floor, left, or, indeed, from
either of them, rather than go to the hotel oppo¬
site? In the countryside where inns are rare and
journeys are long, requests for hospitality seem
much more natural.
Since the beginning of this century we have
lost all sense of distance. Space probes travel for
years at thousands of kilometres an hour to take
photographs of distant planets, and it is hard for
us to imagine that at the beginning of the century,
before the advent of the automobile, a day's jour¬
ney was 40 kilometres. During my childhood, be¬
fore the Second World War, this was still the case
in eastern Poland. The nearest railway station was
80 kilometres away and, more often than not, the
ancient bus would be under repair. It is in this
context that Slav traditions of hospitality should
be seen.
'Guests are like fish...'
In the Linde, the venerable dictionary of the
Polish language, the word "hospitality" (goscin-
nose) is defined delightfully and somewhat naively
as "a desire to receive guests". It is a pretty con¬
ceit, is it not, the idea of a pleasure that one gives
oneself, of a desire that one satisfies by being of
service to others? This desire, however, was quite
understandable in view of the relative isolation
in which people lived, the boredom of their
dreary autumn evenings and their curiosity about
what was going on in the world at large. Visits
were not limited to an hour or two, as they were
in town. After spending a day getting to your
neighbour's house, you would generally stay for
two or three days, sometimes longer, despite the
Latin saying that has become proverbial in some
European languages: "Guests are like fish, after
three days they stink".
Hospitality of this kind presupposes a certain
Music-making in the home of
a Polish peasant family
about 50 years ago \ 17

18
level of affluence. Practised between people of
the same social standing, it was a phenomenon
limited to a particular class and smacked more
of sophisticated social intercourse than of charity.
The Poland of old, of the days before the parti¬
tions, claimed to be "a republic of nobles". Un¬
like the other European feudal societies, Poland
had an unusually high proportion of minor
nobles. The higher aristocracy was very limited
in numberapart from those of a few great
princely families, all other titles such as count,
marquis, baron or margrave were imported from
abroadbut the nobility nevertheless accounted
for about 10 per cent of the population and
provided the electoral support of the various great
aristocratic families.
Cutting a dash
All these petty squires, however, considered
themselves to be the equals of the king. At times
they were barely distinguishable from their
peasant neighbours, yet even the most im¬
poverished of them nurtured the highest ambi¬
tions. The snobbery of this social class and its
attachment to appearances have had a marked in¬
fluence, right up to today, on its more or less
direct successor, the Polish intelligentsia.
The virtue of hospitality was cultivated with
fervour in the country residences, the manor
houses and modest country seats of this petty
A farmhouse in the Tatra
Mountains, southern Poland.
Interior of a farmhouse in
Little Poland.
GEORGES LISOWSKI,
of Poland, is a literary
critic, translator and
director of the literary
review Tivorczosc. He has
translated many works of
modern French literature
into Polish and is currently
completing a bi-lingual
(Polish/French) anthology
of poetry in 4 volumes, 2 of
which have been published
by Czytelnik, Warsaw.

Members of an aristocratic
family photographed with
some of their staff outside a
manor near Cracow.
nobility. It was a hospitality which sometimes
reached embarrassing levels. It was not unknown
for the wheels of the coaches in which the guests
had arrived to be removed and hidden in. out¬
houses so that it was impossible for them to leave.
On special occasionsthat is to say, not only at
baptisms, weddings and burials but also during
visits of guests, whether planned or unexpected
the normally frugal way of life gave way to the
heights of extravagance.
Appearances were what mattered! A well-
known Polish saying, still current today, might
be translated as "Run up debts, but show that you
can". On festive occasions people ate and drank
until they were fit to burst.
Poles still often like to provide hospitality be¬
yond their means. An English journalist who
visited Poland a few years ago summed up his im¬
pressions in these words: "In my country, the
shops are full and there are no shortages, but
when you visit people, the table is bare. In your
country, there is a crisis and everything is in short
supply, but when you go visiting, the tables are
groaning with food." Run up debts, but show
that you can!
To be fair, Slav hospitality is not just a matter
of feasting and is not only inspired by curiosity
about the local news. It is heartfelt, truly cordial,
perhaps a little naive and conventional, but totally
sincere. Give an honest answer to a Frenchman
who asks "Comment allez-vous?", or to an
Englishman who says "How do you do?" and
they will both be terribly embarrassed. A Slav
will be equally embarrassed if you reply to his
query about your health with a conventional "ça
or "fine".va
The third time
of asking
Slav hospitality is highly ceremonious. It is not
enough for the hosts to place everything available
in the house on the table and for the guests to
set about these offerings eagerly. The hosts must
insist several times that the guests help themselves
to what is offered. The guests, in their turn, must
politely refuse at least three times. This routine
must be followed so as to demonstrate the sin¬
cerity of the hosts and the good manners of the
guests.
The hold of this ceremonial is still strong
today, even within families. When my father used
to dine with me, he would be quite prepared to
go to bed hungry if I did not insist strongly
enough that he should eat. Eventually it became
a joke. "Don't stand on ceremony in my house!"
"But I'm not standing on ceremony." "All right,
then, one, two, three, I insist three times that you
take some more." "No, no, no, I couldn't", he
would reply before helping himself to some food
which he obviously wanted. Even with his own
son, the custom was too strong for him. 19

African
20
This extravagant, at times wearisome, Slav
hospitality shows tinges of oriental influences.
Oriental hospitality, based on religious prohibi¬
tions, is less convivial and has a certain aggres¬
sive quality. While he is under your roof, the
guest is free to do as he pleases, even to the extent,
so it is said, of taking your wife or your daughter
to his beda form of hospitality that I have never
sampled; but once he has stepped outside your
door, you are at liberty to murder him in cold
blood.
I once had a taste of oriental hospitality in
Georgia. It was truly phenomenal. On the first
day, sated, replete, made much of, you feel that
you are in paradise. On the second day, you are
still in paradise, but you say to yourself that if
things go on like this they will finish you off. On
the third, there are no two ways about iteither
you leave or you've had it.
A Danish welcome
The most moving experience of hospitality I have
ever had, however, occurred neither in a Slav
country nor in the Orient, but in Copenhagen.
I arrived there one Saturday, just before midnight,
on the eve of a big football match between
Malmö and Copenhagen. Half Sweden had
arrived on the ferry and not even the smallest
broom-cupboard was available in any of the
hotels. The tourist officeopen at midnight-
had compiled a list of addresses of families
who had offered to put up visitors with nowhere
to go.
I ended up at about one o'clock in the
morning in the home of people who had risen
from their beds, run me a bath and placed sand¬
wiches on the table for me, to the accompaniment
of great gestures of friendshipand all this
without a word being exchanged, since they knew
none of the languages in which I could manage
a few stumbling phrases. I stayed with them for
two days and, when the time came for me to
leave, they got together a few friends to give a
party in my honour, still communicating with
sign language, since their friends were no better
linguists than they were. They refused to let me
pay for the room and I had to go back to the
tourist office and leave the money there. Yet no
one ever talks about Danish hospitality. Now I
have tried to make amends. Forty years later I
have repaid my debt.
