THE ORIGINS OF AESTHETICS
BY LUC FERRY
I
Left, detail of The
Annunciation (c. 1430), by
the Italian painter
Fra Angélico.
Below, Child with Top
(c. 1738),
by the French painter
Jean-Baptlste-Siméon Chardin.
N everyday language aesthetics is roughly
equivalent to the philosophy of art or the theory
of the beautiful, and people are apt to think that
these expressions denote a human preoccupation
so basic that in one form or another it must
always have existed in every culture. But (as so
often happens) the general opinion is misleading:
aesthetics proper is a recent discipline, born of
a real revolution in our perception of the
phenomenon of beauty.
The first book to bear the title "Aesthetics"
appeared in 1750. This was the German
philosopher Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten's
Aesthetica, which was itself made possible as the
result of a twofold upheaval in the position of
art, from the points of view of the artist and of
the onlooker.
Let us deal first with the artist's side. In
bygone civilizations works of art fulfilled a sacred
purpose. As recently as in ancient Greece their
function was to reflect a cosmic order entirely
external to mankind. By virtue of this externality,
41

given that the divine is essentially whatever eludes
and transcends humanity, they acquired a semi-
religious dimension. They were microcosms
(etymologically "little worlds") supposedly
representing in miniature the harmonious proper¬
ties of everything the ancients called "Cosmos".
It was this that gave them their "impressive
greatness"their ability actually to impress
people, who accepted them as phenomena from
without.
In this context works of art had "objec¬
tivity". They expressed not so much an
architect's or sculptor's genius as divine reality,
which they apprehended in their capacity as
modest rhapsodists. We are still so conscious of
this that it does not really matter very much to
us who carved a given statue or bas-relief, any
more than it would occur to us to look behind
the Egyptian cats in the British Museum for the
artist's name. What matters is that they are sacred



animals, transfigured as such in the realm of art.
The modern image
of the artist
Our attitude to works of art has changed radi¬
cally. In some ways it has actually done a U-turn,
in the sense that we may well be acquainted with
the names of creative artists, and even with some
aspects of their lives, and yet know nothing about
their work. The French composer Pierre Boulez
is admired as an intelligent, cultured man who
appears on television, but apart from a tiny élite
made up largely of professional musicians, who
has heard his latest composition, Répons? Even
Above, Gfrf Reading (1875-1876), by the French painter
Pierre-Auguste Renoir.
Below, By the Waters, watercolour by the French painter
Gustave Moreau (1826-1898).
42
LUC FERRY,
French philosopher, is a
professor at the University of
Caen. His published works
include La pensée 68
(Gallimard, Paris, 1985), which
has been translated Into
several languages, and Homo
Aesthet/cus: l'invention du goût
à l'âge démocratique (Grasset,
Paris, 1990).


in less extreme cases, what Nietzsche predicted
in the nineteenth century has become the rule
in modern democratic societies. Works of art are
no longer portrayals of the world but consum¬
mate expressions of an artist's personalityin
short, highly elaborate visiting-cards. The over¬
whelming majority of avant-garde works of art
in the major museums of New York, London and
Paris are like traces left by strokes of genius, in
which we may detect Duchamp's sense of
humour, Stella's imaginativeness and Hartung's
violencecharacter traits rather than a represen¬
tation of a shared world.
Be that as it may, this revolution in attitudes
to artists contains the seeds of the avant-garde
ideology that was so profoundly to affect con¬
temporary art. Admittedly there were "artists"
in pre-democratic societies, but they were not
"geniuses", if by that we mean creators ex nihilo
capable of finding within themselves all the


sources of their inspiration. The artist of Antiq¬
uity was not so much a true demiurge as an inter¬
mediary between man and the gods.
By reaction it is understandable that the
requirement of radical innovation and originality
that goes with the modern image of an artist
should be inseparable from the tabula rasa
ideology so clearly expressed in the concept of
the avant-garde. The beautiful must not be dis¬
covered as though it already existed in the objec¬
tive world, but invented: and thereafter every
moment of innovation will find a place in a his¬
tory of art (embodied at institutional level in a
museum).
The crisis now affecting the avant-gardes can
be understood only in the context of this history
of subjectivity. It stems in essence from the inner
contradiction inherent in the notion of absolute
innovation. As the Mexican poet and essayist
Octavio Paz has convincingly shown, the act of
breaking with tradition and creating something
new has itself become traditional in the late twen¬
tieth century. The signs of subversion that punc¬
tuated the history of the avant-garde no longer
surprise us. They are by now so banal and com¬
monplace that they have themselves become
museum pieces on a level with the most orthodox
works of art.
The triumph of sensibility
So much for the change on the artist's side. The
corresponding change on the onlooker's side has
to do with the notion of taste. This term was
apparently first used, at any rate in the metaphor¬
ical sense, in the works of the seventeenth-century
Spanish philosopher Baltasar Gracián to denote
man's entirely subjective ability to distinguish the
beautiful from the ugly: i.e. (unlike the situation
in the ancient world) the beautiful no longer
denotes a quality or set of properties belonging
intrinsically to certain objects. As the early trea¬
tises on aesthetics emphasize, beauty is subjective;
it resides essentially in whatever gratifies our taste
or sensibility.
Hence what was to become the central
problem of modern aesthetics, the question of
criteria. If beauty is subjective, if it is (as we say)
a matter of taste or sensibility, how then are we
to explain the consensus that exists about so-called
"great" works of art? How does it come about
that some artists, against all expectation, become
"classics" even beyond their own centuries and
cultures? Once these questions are posed we slide
effortlessly into the orbit of modern aesthetics.
Obviously this account of the origins of aes¬
thetics is primarily valid only for the European
sphere and areas directly conditioned by it.
Nowadays people are searching for a definition
of Europe. It could of course be said to be the
continent of Christian nations, and that is obvi¬
ously not false. I would prefer to define Europe
as the realm of secularity, not because it suppos¬
edly rejects the wearing of this or that item of
clerical attire, but because it put an end to the
/
Self-Portrait in Front
of an Easel (early 1888),
by the Dutch painter
Vincent van Gogh.
43

Composition (1950), oil on
paper mounted on canvas,
by the German-born French
painter Hans Härtung.
44
era of theological politics. The symbols of this
are the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the
Citizen and, more importantly, the institution of
the National Assembly. Secularity means essen¬
tially a new relationship with the law, starting
with the fact that it stems no longer from cosmic
or divine sources but (for better or worse) from
human ones which are, in theory if not in prac¬
tice, within the volition of individuals.



The theme of the ending of theological
politics lies at the heart of all modern political
philosophy. From Hegel to Heidegger and from
de Tocqueville to Weber, David Friedrich Strauss,
Hannah Arendt and Louis Dumont, everything
(or virtually everything) has been said about the¬
ories of the social contract, the birth of humanism
and the decline of religion in democratic socie¬
ties. Less attention has been paid to the ending
of what might be called theological ethics, the
derivation of standards and laws from a realm
external to man.
Art on a human scale
But it is no exaggeration to say that the erosion
of theological culture still largely remains to be
worked out. The debates we have been witnessing
since the demise of Marxism are often between
the "optimists" who regard modernity as a slow
but inescapable process of emancipation from
tradition, and the "pessimists" who are more
inclined to see it as what might be called a logic
of "decline". In many respects these arguments
are symptomatic of a change in the position of
a culture which in modern times has essentially
assumed the shape of aesthetics.
It would be absurd, all the same, to use the
word decline. Value judgements are inappropriate
when it is a matter, first, of understanding some¬
thing that exists. But it would be equally point¬
less to disregard a radical change whose origin
goes back to the invention of modern aesthetics,
with its necessary corollary, the artist's primacy
over the world. In our democratic secular world,
with its ever-growing insistence on autonomy,
exception tends to be taken to any reference to
things external to mankind, and perhaps we
should be glad of this. But in such circumstances
it is only to be expected that art should also have
surrendered to the requirement to be "on a
human scale".
For this it quite simply needed to sever its
traditional ties with the sacred. The avant-gardes
of this century, with their exhibitions without
pictures and their silent concerts, have taken the
break as far as it will go. The only question is
whether or not it will be possible, in the vacuum
left by their demise, to recreate a shared world on
the basis of a radical rejection ofall transcendence.
