Illiteracy,
democracy and
development
.Tor Latin America, the last decade of the
twentieth century is opening against an economic,
social and political background that is complex
and uncertain.
The consequences of this cannot be avoided
in education, where rapid expansion slowed con¬
siderably between 1980 and 1990 and is now
threatening to grind to a halt.
The situation is reflected in the figures for
total illiteracy and for failure at school. The eradi¬
cation of total illiteracy is proving to be exces¬
sively slow. Although Latin America has managed
to reduce the percentage and even the total num¬
ber of illiterate persons, at current rates there will
still be some 38 million of them in the year 2000.
There is clearly a close connection between
illiteracy, poverty, unemployment and under¬
employment, and the fact of living in a rural area
or of belonging to an indigenous ethnic group.
Experience has shown that the struggle against
illiteracy can only pay dividends if it is accompa¬
nied by improvements in health, housing and
employment.
Total illiteracy is also the result of a discri¬
minatory education system. Many South American
children think of their schooldays primarily as a
time of failure. Recent studies indicate that around
30 per cent of pupils repeat a grade in the early

years of primary school. Most of those affected
are rural, indigenous or urban slum children
from the poorest familiesthose whose lives are
furthest removed from the cultural model
dominant in school.
A notable feature of Latin American educa¬
tion systems is the marked polarization of school-
age children. On the one hand there is a sizeable
percentage of children who are totally excluded,
and on the other, a relatively large number of
young people who go on to higher education. If
this polarization continues, it will be impossible
to achieve national integration, to strengthen
democracy and to create the conditions for sus¬
tained economic growth.
Simultaneous action is needed at both ends
of the education system: at the primary level to
put a stop to exclusion, and at the higher level
to train researchers and technicians in order to
build up the stock of indigenous creativity which
will bring back economic growth and lead the way
out of the current stagnation.
JUAN CARLOS TEDESCO
AFRICA

