Uncommon coin
A variety of unusual objects have been
used since ancient times to finance trade
and cement political and social life
BY JEAN-MICHEL SERVET
K
10
I ECKLACES or bracelets of shells, pearls, teeth,
bones or feathers, fragments of stone or metal,
pottery, pieces of cloth, and other unlikely
objects are labelled as "primitive money" in
many museum collections and ethnographical or
archaeological publications.
Other apparently similar objects are
described as ornaments or jewellery, although
there is no evidence to prove that they were used
for display rather than as money. Their degree
of preservation, which suggests that they were
highly valued by their owners, together with
physical characteristics indicating a non-utilitarian
purpose, may have led archaeologists and students
of prehistory to attribute a purely decorative
function to these treasures which in fact were also
used as money.
Money in ancient civilizations
Over 2,000 years ago, Aristotle observed that
before coins were used people gave things that
they possessed in abundance in exchange for
things they lacked. This practice was known as
metadosis. Ethnologists have described how very
ancient yet strongly hierarchical societies used
complex exchange systems such as the kula of the
western Pacific, the hilaba and the malaki of
central Africa and the potlatcb of the northwest
coast of North America.
Money, like relationships involving hierarchy
and domination, is thus not a modern invention.
It was a feature of even more ancient civilizations
than those of the Mediterranean basin, of the
Near or the Far East, or of Central America. The
circulation of precious objects within and

Far left: shaped in the form
of a throwing knife, this iron
object from the Central
African Republic was once
used as money. Left,
wampum, shell beads woven
with strips of hide into
strings or belts which the
North American Indians
used in their dealings with
white traders in the 17th and
18th centuries. Below, objects
used in the Solomon Islands
for making shell money.
11

12
between these communities seems to have been
universal, and in a sense to foreshadow the func¬
tions of money as a medium of exchange and as
a unit of account.
But in such ancient societies these basic func¬
tions had not yet become purely economic. They
were an emanation of kinship systems and polit¬
ical alliances, beliefs and cults, which influenced
the supply of labour, organized production and
justified the distribution of wealth.
Money, or in this case "palaeomoney", was
the active instrument of social life. It was used
at times of birth, marriage and mourning, to
declare war and make peace, as compensation for
physical or moral wrongs, and as a means of
propitiating the gods of fertility and death. On
the other hand, it was not yet used to pay debts
or wages or to buy goods.
The scarcity and lack of intrinsic usefulness
which characterize palaeomoney are typical of
some modern forms of money. Palaeomoney also
anticipated the economic and political nature of
modern currencies, on the one hand by setting
a value on different activities and material goods
and thus foreshadowing today's standardized
methods of payment, on the other by reflecting
and reinforcing the hierarchical power relations
between individuals and groups.
Better than barter
The exchange systems of these ancient commu¬
nities were thus much more complex than that
of a simple barter economy.
From very early times, commodities circu¬
lated over great distances. Specimens of durable
materials such as amber and obsidian have been
found hundreds of kilometres from their place
of origin, distances as great as that from southern
Australia to the northern coasts of New Guinea,
and from the Black Sea to Poland and the
Rhineland. As early as the Upper Palaeolithic
Period (35,000-10,000 years ago), Cro-Magnon
man in the Dordogne area of southern France was
Above, Melanesian feather
money consisting of a fibre
rope decorated with red
feathers and fragments of
shell. Right, a bundle of iron
spikes which was used as
money in the Congo (late
19th century).

using shells brought from the Atlantic ocean, 200
kilometres away.
At a later stage different societies came to
specialize in the production of a particular item
for exchange and as a means of payment for
produce acquired from other groups. Examples
of such commodities are stone axes, bars of salt,
pottery and bark cloaks. Later still, groups
specializing in trade emerged within these socie¬
ties and travelled tens or even hundreds of
kilometres in the course of their activities.
This is far removed from a barter economy,
where goods are exchanged directly, without any
intermediate transaction. However, the develop¬
ment of an objective system for measuring value
was still limited. The price of the goods ex¬
changed was primarily the expression of a social
relationship between individuals and communi¬
ties. The marketplace was not yet the driving
force behind monetary development.
The first coins
The use of money grew rapidly with the develop¬
ment of states, which managed the surplus wealth
created by the exploitation of slaves, serfs or
peasants, by long-distance trade or the despolia¬
tion of neighbouring peoples. Tributes and taxes
began to be evaluated and methods of payment
for trade in markets and ports began to be stan¬
dardized.
Among the wide range of commodities which
served as money in ancient societiesthe pieces
of cloth and cocoa beans of the Maya and Aztec
empires, the cowrie shells and gold of the West
African kingdoms, the bean-shaped ingots of the
Greek cities, the iron bars of the Hittites, the
barley and wheat of Mesopotamia, the wheat and
copper of Egypt, the millet and silks of China-
coins are of particular interest because their use
has continued to the present day.
At first, coins were only one form of metal
currency. Before coins circulated in China, and
even after they were introduced in the late fourth
Pecuniary portraits
From top to bottom: warrior
with two oxen, Macedonian
octadrachm (early 6th
century BC); silver stater
from the Mcnde wine-
producing region of
Macedonia (5th century BC);
horse (obverse) and palm tree
(reverse), silver tetradrachm
from Carthage (4th century
BC); nymph's bead and
dolphins (obverse) and four-
horse chariot (reverse),
decadrachm from Syracuse
(c. 400 BC); rams' heads and
dolphins, silver stater from
the Creek city of Pbocis
(c. 479-470 BC). 13

14
century BC, small-scale replicas of spades and
knives were used as money. The first coins were
struck in the seventh century BC in Asia Minor
and in Greece, where some cities were still using
bean-shaped ingots. Small silver ingots punched
with a variety of motifs were used as currency
in India from the same period until coins were
introduced there in the fourth century BC.
The influence of Greece
The cities of ancient Greece played a crucial role
in the history of coinage. For centuries the Greek
numismatic tradition was widely propagated,
either directly or through a complex network
of influences. In the wake of the conquests of
Alexander the Great, whose troops seized pre¬
cious metal from the treasuries of Near-Eastern
potentates and turned it into coinage, Greek coins
were widely distributed in the Mediterranean
countries.
The Romans, who initially used bronze in¬
gots like those of the Etruscans, minted their first
coins in the third century BC under the influence
of the Greek cities of southern Italy. Roman
colonization led to the use of coinage to an extent
unmatched until the European colonial expansion
of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Beyond the eastern frontiers of the Roman
empire, between Khorasan and Mesopotamia,
the Sasanian dynasty continued a numismatic
Above, gold di-stater
adorned with the head of the
goddess Athena issued during
the reign of Alexander the
Great (336-323 BC).
Right, Roman and Byzantine
gold coins.
Opposite page,
Greek silver stater depicting
the labyrinth of Knossos,
Crete (c. 450 BC).

tradition that displayed a strong Hellenistic
influence and had been transmitted by the
Parthians, whose empire (founded between the
third and the second century BC) stretched at its
height from the Euphrates to Afghanistan. This
Hellenistic tradition also influenced early Islamic
coins, while the Roman tradition was carried on
in Christian Europe.
A similar process occurred in India, which
was subject to waves of Greek influence both
direct and indirect, from the arrival of Alexander's
troops and contact with the Roman empire to
Muslim and European colonization.
The ritual significance
of coins
In all these civilizations, coins were not immedi¬
ately seen as a monetary instrument superior to
other accepted methods of payment, with which
they long coexisted. Metal discs, more or less well-
stamped, could be used in all kinds of ways.
When they changed hands it signified more than
just a commercial transactionit could symbolize
an exchange of gifts or even tribute.
The first coins of the Greek cities were thus
not issued as a direct response to commercial
requirements. Their value was too high to pay
for everyday goods in the marketplace. In long-
EAN-MICHEL SERVET
is a French economist with
a special interest in
"palaeomoney". He is the
author of Nomismata: état
et origines de ¡a monnaie
(1984) and Idées
économiques sous la
Révolution: 1789-1794
(1989), both published by
Presses Universitaires de
Lyon, France.
distance transactions, carried out largely by sea,
the goods themselves were the means of payment.
What then was the original function of these
coins? At first it seems that they were needed in
dealings within and between the Greek cities, and
above all they had a political and religious
function.
This dual role was not however an obstacle
to the use of coins in commerce. The metal of
which they were made had itself been the object
of long-distance transactions since very ancient
times, when trade had important political and
social overtones. The flexibility allowed by
weighed pieces of metal which could be divided
into small units, and their distribution in societies
with widely different customs, gradually estab¬
lished them as the preferred method of trading
and of paying taxes in the ancient world.
Coins stamped with the images of gods and
rulers kept their essentially political function until
the Roman era, when they were issued to com¬
memorate public games or military campaigns.
The sacrificial and ritual significance of coins
persists even today, as when they are buried in
the foundations of buildings and bridges or flung
into fountains and wells as propitiatory offerings,
used symbolically to reinforce marriage contracts,
or placed in the mouths or hands of the dead so
that they can pay their way in the next world.
15
