THE SACRED
BY JUAN PLAZAOLA ARTOLA

A HE two essential characteristics of the sacred
are separation and inviolability. The sacred is
regarded as separate because it is inviolable. When
it is touched, it is profaned.
The sacred is a force which can be beneficial



or malign. By virtue of the superhuman powers
vested in it, it may in some circumstances cause
dire peril, and even resemble a malediction. Essen¬
tially, however, it is a creative, fertile, fortifying
element which has the virtue of consecrating all
that comes near to it. It is not only a value superior
to others: it is invested with plenitude and dig¬
nity. Like everything divine and transcendent, it
can only be apprehended by way of analogy. The
sacred shines with an absolute glory which dims
all other values and shows up their obscurity and
inadequaciesin a word, their profanity.
Direct perception of the sacred is impossible
except in the mystery of faith, but people feel it
as a tangible presence and experience its
manifestations in their lives. To apprehend the
sacred, we must call on the concept of mystery.
In the presence of the sacred, people are emo¬
tionally torn between fascination and panic,
ecstasy and terror, as the German theologian
Rudolf Otto (1860-1937) described in his classic
work The Idea ofthe Holy. The divine is "totally
other", a mystery that simultaneously attracts
and terrifies. Its proximity awakens a feeling of
dread quite unlike the reaction caused by
"natural" dangers, a "terrified stupor" before that
which has nothing in common with what we are.
This dreadful mystery is also fascinating; it exer¬
cises an irresistible attraction. All creatures
tremble before it and feel the need to merge with
it. They are moved by a force of attraction of a
different order from that exercised on us by the
blandishments and beauties of the world. These
Ufen

Opposite, from left to right:
The Leningrad Synagogue (1893), which can
accommodate a congregation of 1,200.
The Great Mosque of Cordoba, Spain, founded
by emir Abd ar-Rahman I in 785-788.
Church of an Eastern Orthodox monastery In the Fruska
Gora region of Yugoslavia (16th century).
Below, from top to bottom:
The Don Isaac Abravanel Synagogue, Paris (1962).
The Mosque of al-Mikhdar at Tarim, Republic of Yemen
(19th century).
Chapel of a monastery at Aosta, Italy (1989).
12
ambivalent feelings, combined with an impres¬
sion of absolute otherness, constitute the sense
of the sacred.
In ancient religions, separation and inviola¬



bility are expressed by prohibitions and taboos
which surround and protect all that is sacred. The
monotheistic religions later superimposed on these
two notions various subtleties of meaning which
have left their mark on art and architecture.
As far as Judaism is concerned, the Old Testa¬
ment nowhere proposes a theory of the sacred.
In the Bible everything related to Yahweh, the
God of Israel, and His worship is sacred. Some
texts emphasize the terrible aspect of the figure
of the Eternal, but the image of a God of love and
mercy gradually takes shape in the Prophets. This
God is still remote and inaccessible, and the
chosen people must be purified to have access to
Him.
Islam also imposes prohibitions, and decrees
that the places consecrated by the presence of
God and His manifestations are haram (inviol¬
able). The Ka'aba, the territory of Mecca and
Medina, the rock of Jerusalem and the tomb of
Abraham in the valley of the Hebron are for¬
bidden to infidels and only accessible to Muslims
purified by the faith and ablutions.
In Christianity, terror in face of the ineffable
is replaced by the mystery of charity: "God is
love". And since the Word was made flesh,
people can no longer believe that God is radically
different from themselves. What the Christian
sense of the sacred isolates it lifts up to God,
ennobles, and invests with a supreme significance.

The sacred in Christianity implies communion
rather than prohibition.
A distinction is usually made between religious
and sacred art. A decorative or iconographie work
of art (a painting or a sculpture) may be called
religious but does not merit the epithet sacred if it
only expresses the personal feelings of the artist.
However, since places of worship usually have a
collective vocation and are dedicated to the
celebration of the mysteries, all or almost all
religious buildings can be classified as sacred
architecture.
The purpose of sacred architecture is to evoke
a mystery and to facilitate the various forms of
community worship which are related to it.
Because the sense of the sacred and the rituals
through which it is celebrated differ from one
religion to another, sacred architecture a syn¬
thesis of expressive and functional formsalso
differs.



The Temple in Jerusalem might be consi¬
dered the only example of truly sacred architec¬
ture in Judaism. In it the worship of Yahweh was
strictly regulated and hierarchized, together with
all the mysteries and prohibitions relating to the
sacred. The synagogue was originally only a place
where believers met to pray, read, and listen to
sermons, but it eventually came to be considered
as sacred, especially after the destruction of the
Temple.
The simplicity of Islamic worship, based on
a belief in the absolute transcendence of Allah,
led to a kind of architecture whose functions can
easily be adapted to pre-existing or traditional
forms. Basically, the mosque is a wall (qibla) with
a mihrab, a niche facing in the direction of Mecca,
around which a wide variety of architectural fea¬
tures can be disposed. This explains the extraor¬
dinary diversity of mosque architecture in the
different Islamic countries.
For the first Christians, the only necessary
expression of the sacred was in the ceremony that
Christ expressly enjoined them to celebrate, the
sacrament of the Eucharist, for which no temple
or specifically defined space were required. The
home of any believer could be used for "the
breaking of bread". Gradually the largest of these
dwellings came to be used for gatherings of the
faithful. Christians rejected the term temple as
too closely associated with pagan cults and gave
the name ekklesia, the Greek word meaning
assembly, to the building that was used for this
kind of meeting.
Although Christian churches are quite
different from pagan temples or the Temple of
the Jews, they have much in common with syn¬
agogues, starting with the original meaning of a
place for assembly. But whereas the God of the
Old Testament had given precise instructions for
the way in which the Temple and the Ark of the
Covenant were to be constructed, Christ's
teaching contains nothing of the kind. Christ
simply said: "where two or three are gathered
together in my name, I am with them", and "Do
this in remembrance of me". Christian worship
is encapsulated in these two phrases: a meeting
is held in commemoration. Everything else is
ancillary.
JUAN PLAZAOLA ARTOLÄ,
of Spain, is a former rector of
the Centre of University .and
Technical Studies at
Guipúzcoa, San Sebastián,
where he is currently professor
of the history of art. His
publications include an
"Introduction to Aesthetics"
(1973), "The Future of Sacred
Art" (1973) and "Models and
Theories of the History of Art"
(1988). 13
