JULES
MICHELET
PROPHET-HISTORIAN
Wh' HETHER judged by his eventful career or by
his writings, Jules Michelet was no ordinary man.
The son of a modest printer who fell on hard
times brought on by professional and political
difficulties under Napoleon, Michelet was a fine
scholar, succeeding brilliantly in his secondary
and higher education and going on to become a
professor at the Ecole Normale Supérieure (1827),
head of the historical section of the Public Record
Office (1830) and, finally, professor at the Collège
de France (1843).
With his eloquence and ardent republican
convictions, he soon turned his chair of history
and moral philosophy into a political forum
which resounded to his diatribes against the
Jesuits (1843) and his declarations of unshakeable
attachment to the achievements of the Revolution.
His courageous fidelity to the Second Repub¬
lic led to the suspension, in 1851, of his lectures
at the Collège de France and he was dismissed
from his post at the Public Record Office for
refusing to swear allegiance to Napoleon III.
Although he stayed in France, in voluntary
"exile" far from Paris, he remained, like Victor
Hugo, an implacable opponent of "Napoléon le
Petit". At his death, in 1874, a crowd of over
10,000 followed the funeral procession of the man
who had spent his life in reviving the past the
better to ensure a future of liberty and fraternity
for the nation and the people.
The vast corpus of his work was not without
defects. Michelet's aim was to be a historian who
was technically unimpeachable. His work was
based on patient and meticulous research in the
archives. At times, however, he was betrayed by
his poetic imaginationhis apocalyptic vision of
the year 1000, for example, is today unanimously
rejected by the experts. He was also guilty of
flagrant partiality and bad faith with regard, first,
to the Roman Catholic Church, which he pur¬
sued with bitter enmity even into the dim recesses
of the past, and, second, to the French monar¬
chy, whose excesses of all kinds he highlighted
while neglecting to make an overall appreciation
of its achievements. In the end, this "high
priest" of an ideology both humanitarian and
patriotic, secular and Jacobinthe unwilling
inspiration of lyrical outpourings at banquets and
prize-giving ceremonies under the Third Republic-
exasperates rather than charms the reader of today.
To stop at these criticisms, however, would
be to miss the essential and to fail to understand
Michelet's enormous contribution. Through the
pages of his monumental Histoire de France (1833-
1869), this prodigious architect of the past por¬
trayed the countenance of France, endowed the
French nation with a living body, and gave a
voice to the French people.
For Michelet, as he himself would have been
the first to admit, France is a "person" whose
moral and material life is conditioned by its geo¬
graphy. It is no accident that Michelet saluted the
birth of France, in about the year 1000, with a
striking descriptive tableau in which the major
provinces are depicted as physiological organs
essential to the proper functioning of the body
social.
Like Augustin Thierry and François Guizot,
Michelet gave a completely new slant to the pur¬
pose of history. In place of the usual dry record
of the deeds and misdeeds of princes and great
men, he offered an epic account of the birth and
development of the French nation. He saw "The
Nation", not as an abstract, rational entity, but
as a living, suffering being, of flesh and blood,
that had to be apprehended with the heart and
the imagination rather than through the intellect.
He had lived through the heady, dangerous
days of the Paris Commune of 1792 and was the
first to bring to life the rage of the populace that
had punctuated the history of France from the
time of Etienne Marcel to that of Danton. No
one before him had managed to capture the spirit
of an era, in particular of the Middle Ages, with
such poetic and intuitive force. While it is true
that he equated the history of the French people
with Christ's Passion, sometimes in grandilo¬
quent terms, he was driven by a desire to capture
and illustrate the interactions between economic,
political, social and religious events, thus an¬
ticipating by a century the work of the historians
known as the "Ecole des Annales" and, in par¬
ticular, Lucien Febvre's "collective mentalities"
formula of history.
Jules Michelet (1798-1874).
La France,
a bronze by Auguste Rodin
(1840-1917).
15

The last thing we should do is to limit our
assessment of Michelet to consideration of the
professor/ historian enveloped in the folds of his
scholar's gown. He was the equal of the giants
of the romantic generation of the 1830s, and with
its vast scope his Histoire de France is close kin to
Balzac's Comédie humaine. Strong in his creative
imagination, Michelet was the first French author
who really set out in search of the"remembrance
of things past". christian amalvi

HINNERK BRUHNS,
German historian, is in
charge of the Franco-
German programme of the
French National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS)
and director of studies at
the Ecole des Hautes Etudes
en Sciences Sociales, Paris.
He is the author of a
number of articles and
books, notably on the cities
of Antiquity and on
Mommsen and Weber.
CHRISTIAN AMALVI,
of France, has been a
librarian at the Bibliothèque
Nationale, Paris, since 1980.
He has published some fifty
articles and books on the
teaching of history,
historiography, and the
history of national myths
in France between
1789 and 1989.

