^7/
*zm
Above, spire of the west
tower, Ulm Cathedral,
Germany (founded 1377).
Completed in 1890, the
161.53-metre-high edifice Is
the highest church tower in
the world.
ALAIN ERLANDE-BRANDENBURG,
French archivist and
palaeographer, is president of
the French Archaeological
Society and assistant to the
director of the French National
Museums. He has written many
books and articles on medieval
art, including La cathédrale
d'Amiens (1982), Chartres
(1986) and L'Europe Gothique
(1987).



A realm of light
JL HROUGH its history, through all it stands for
and through the Christian miracle renewed there
each day, the cathedral church is the sublime
expression of the Catholic faith. Although it has
undergone many changes down the centuries it
remains faithful to its original purpose of
assembling around a bishop the community of
believers who share his faith. At a very early stage
it became known as the ekklesia, from the Greek
word used to designate that assembly. It is there
that the bishop celebrates Mass, during which the
bread and wine are transformed into the body
and blood of Christ, the Son of God, who came
into the world to atone for man's original sin
through His martyrdom on the cross and to form
a new covenant with him. The church expresses
this holy covenant in its architecture and in the
service which is celebrated there.
We know little of early Christian places of
BY ALAIN ERLANDE-BRANDENBURG
worship because they were kept secret to avoid
persecution, a situation that was only changed
when the new religion was recognized by the
Roman state. On 28 October 312, the Roman
emperor Constantine the Great accepted the
Christian faith before he went into battle against
his rival Maxentius. First tolerated then actively
promoted, Christianity soon became the official
religion of the Roman empire.
This decisive event in the history of the
Church was the acknowledgement of a situation
which could no longer be concealed. The new
faith was powerful and was expanding very
rapidly, especially in the towns and cities, among
all classes of society. Provision now had to be
made for the celebration of a religion which no
longer had to keep itself hidden. A new architec¬
tural design was drawn up at the imperial court
and, promoted by the emperor's entourage and 39

, '-* ;'%
especially by his mother, St. Helena, was adopted
throughout the Roman empire.
The design had to take the requirements of
the liturgy into account. As in all initiatory
religions, the Christiansthose who had received
the baptismal sacrament just as Christ had been
baptized in the River Jordan by St. John the
Baptisthad to be separated from the
catechumens, whose initiation into the mysteries
of the religion required an extremely long prepa¬
ration ending, as it did for Christ Himself, at the
age of thirty. Provision thus had to be made for
two adjoining yet separate buildings.
The imperial architects drew up plans for two
types of building, the baptistery and the basilica.
The former was designed on a centralized plan
with a basin sunk into the floor where the
catechumen would be immersed to receive bap¬
tism. It would be surmounted by a dome resting
on a lofty drum which was pierced with window
openings and supported by arcades giving onto
an ambulatory. This very simple, graceful
building would be bathed in light and lavishly
decorated.
Abundant light and magnificent decoration
were also typical of the basilica, but on a much
grander scale in order to accommodate the con¬
gregation assembled around the Lord's Table
upon which the bishop celebrates Mass. Inspired
by the secular basilicas of the ancient world, and
adapted to its new purpose, the building was to
consist of a central nave with three or five divi¬
sions for the congregation. The arms of the tran¬
sept were to be built at right angles to the nave,
forming a cross. The apse would house the
bishop's throne (cathedra), which in time gave
its name to the whole building. The general
layout, as flexible as that of the baptistery, could
be adapted to the needs and customs of different
communities. This explains why it was so suc¬
cessful throughout the Roman empire.



The light of God
Artistic efforts were concentrated on the interior
of the building. The exterior typically consisted
of plain unembellished masses. The powerful
dynamic effect achieved in the interior was based
upon a single principle: the columns supporting
the great arcades and architraves, the ceiling and
the floor decoration should all combine to draw
the eyes of the congregation to the altar. Light
filtering through the many openings high up in
the walls should accentuate this horizontal ten¬
sion. Reflected by the marble or alabaster parti¬
tion walls, it would flood through the entire
building, and reverberate from the marble paving,
the mosaic-covered walls and the colonnades.
This new use of light, far from being purely
aesthetic, was a response to the significance given
to it by Christians, for whom light emanates from
God. The apse was given special treatment to
emphasize its position as the focal point of the
building.

The masterbuilders of the fourth century
achieved a kind of dematerialization of architec¬
ture which must have made a powerful impres¬
sion on their contemporaries, who were
accustomed to heavy, dark, inward-looking
buildings. The Christian basilica is open and
outward-looking. Its columns do not compart¬
mentalize the internal space but punctuate it at
rhythmical intervals. It has so many windows
that the link with the celestial world can be made
without difficulty. As the faithful enter the
building, they enter a world which ceases to be
material and becomes spiritual. Imbued with the
presence of God, they participate in the miracle
of the Eucharist celebrated by the bishop.
The church has remained faithful to this ini¬
tial design, with variations, throughout its his¬
tory. Aesthetic transformations sometimes reflect
social changes, and sometimes new choices. As
Christianity spread to the population at large, the
question of the age of baptism began to be raised
in Western Europe. In Carolingian times it was
decided that baptism would take place in child¬
hood. Separate buildings were no longer needed
for those who had not been baptised.
Also, following a major reform of the epis¬
copal administration initiated in the eighth cen¬
tury, the bishop's entourage of clergy were
obliged to live in a community under a rule.
Those who did so were known as canons or
canonical clerks. In the eleventh century Pope
Gregory VII instigated further ecclesiastical
reforms to regulate relations between the lay and
clerical communities. In towns and cities whose
old walls (for the most part built during Antiq¬
uity as protection from barbarian invaders) had
survived, the episcopal palace and the canons'
cloister became an integral part of the cathedral
complex.
In the second half of the twelfth century, as
the bishops became independent of the secular
power, they took their destiny, and that of their
Church, into their own hands. They had to face
a new challenge, that of a rapidly growing popu¬
lation, especially in the towns and cities. The old
walls were breached to make more space. As the
numbers of the faithful grew, massive buildings
Above, nave of St. Peter's
Cathedral, Exeter, United
Kingdom (begun c. 1275).
Below, the Temppeliaukio
Church at Helsinki, Finland
(1969).
Opposite page, the south portal
of the Cathedral of Notre-Dame
at Chartres, France (1215-
1240). It is known as the
portal of the Last Judgement
and of Mercy. The windows of
the north transept can be seen
through the open doors.
were needed to accommodate them. In many
cases cities had to be reshaped to adapt to the new
situation. In Paris the eastern end of the Ile de
la Cité around the Cathedral of Notre-Dame was
transformed after 1670. Some buildings were
moved to different sites, streets were opened up,
and houses were demolished. Similar changes
took place in other French towns such as Laon,
Reims, Rouen and Beauvais.
The 'Temple of the New Covenant'
Firmly anchored in the historic heart of the city,
the cathedral took on a new significance. Bishops
had to find new solutions for a population whose
ideas were changing. Although the cathedral was
still the "Temple of the New Covenant" between
God and His people, the language expressing this
link had to be brought up to date. Determina¬
tion to transmit a clearer message to the faithful
would be expressed in architecture and
iconography.
The style of a façade facing towards the city,
with three portals and a tower each side, was
adopted in Paris, Laon, Sens, Bourges, Reims and
other French cities. A courtyard, usually quite 41

small, marked the transition between the profane
world of the city and the diocese and the sacred
world of the cathedral. The façade was decorated
with sculptures which bore a powerful message.
The iconography was diversified, and the themes
depicted gradually became more humanized.
Spires, massive stonework and other external
features were also a response to the cathedral's
relationship with the city. A cathedral had to be
visible from a distance, and no other building was
allowed to compete with it. At a time when there
were few stone buildings and houses were no
more than one or two storeys high, the cathedral
towered over its surroundings and gave an iden¬
tity to a community whose members shared the
same faith.
The cathedral became the rallying point for
the members of a diversified community. The
nave had to be capable of accommodating all the
faithful of the diocese, even though in practice
this has never been necessary. The choir, usually
an extension of the nave beyond the transept, was
reserved for the canons and their communal life
of prayer. The sanctuary housed the Holy of
Holies, the high altar at which the bishop alone
could officiate. The arms of the transept led
towards the episcopal palace and the canons'
cloister. Barriers separated the different parts of
the building. A rood screen stood between clergy
and congregation, and there was a movable cur¬
tain between the choir and the body of the
church, but these divisions were not enough to
destroy the unity created by the architectural
style.
The concept of unity inherited from Chris¬
tian Antiquity was given new expression. In the
cathedral Gothic architects sought to fuse
different areas which Romanesque architects had



tended to compartmentalize and juxtapose, and
to achieve this purpose they exploited the
unifying role of light. The difficult problem posed
by the heaviness of stone roofing was eventually
solved by the invention of the ribbed vault which
concentrated the thrust at precise points. It
became possible to reduce the thickness of the
walls between the vertical supports, to build them
higher and pierce them with many windows. The
building was suffused with light which, as it
filtered through stained-glass windows and fell on
curved surfaces, produced elusive patterns of
shade but unified the internal space.
The architects of the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries tried to achieve the same goal as their
predecessors in the fourth century, albeit through
' different aesthetic choices. They sought to create
cathedrals in the image of the heavenly Jerusalem
described at the end of the Book of Revelation.
Descending out of heaven, it is the "tabernacle
of God among men", resplendent with the most
precious stones. B
Vaulting of Cuzco Cathedral, Peru (1582-1654).
