I N T E R V I E W
Andrey Voznesensky
ft
6^'
/w í¿e late 1950s the noted Soviet poet
Andrey Voznesensky emerged as a leader of
the literary revival that followed the death
of Stalin. Thirty years later, in the age of
perestroika, he speaks of the cultural ferment
in the USSR today.
*****
ao»v
*****^^>ç-^^
a6»'.** e*1
c rts?L'
.0*.
"^
*** ft,oivce
**>*
*s<
Tío CyxapeBoii 6auiHe pu^aü, Hbsh BcimkhA!
HaA Mockboh ßejieeT obäobcbuihh CTOain.
You are the chairman of a committee that is organizing
a major celebration in the Soviet Union this year to mark
the centenary of the birth of Boris Pasternak. When it is
remembered that until a few years ago some ofPasternak's
works such as his famous novel Doctor Zhivago were
banned in the USSR and others had a very limited circu¬
lation, this means that there has been a big change in your
country's cultural life. Can you tell us something about the
significance of this anniversary celebration?
It will be a great celebration, not only of Pasternak but
of freedom in literature, of freedom for our intellectuals.
Doctor Zhivago was not only a novel, it was a symbol of
intellectual protest against all forms of pressure and dictator¬
ship. Pasternak was not a politician and Doctor Zhivago is
a supremely anti-political novel but it had a strong political
impact.
A campaign against Pasternak was initiated by the then
Soviet leader, Nikita S. Khruschev. Pasternak was expelled
from the Soviet Writers' Union. I don't think Khruschev
had read any Pasternak, but he was afraid of the intelligentsia
and thought that people like Pasternak represented a threat
to the regime.

Also symbolic, I think, is the fact that Pasternak gave
Doctor Zhivago to an Italian publishing house after it had
been rejected for publication by the Soviet periodical Novy
Mir. He wanted contacts outside our culture and he has
become a symbol of our desire for such contacts.
And so we shall not only be celebrating the birth of
Pasternak, but Pasternak as a symbol of our intelligentsia.
We are creating a Pasternak museum in the writers' village
of Peredelkino, where Pasternak had a cottage. Leading
writers from all over the world have been invited to the
anniversary ceremony which will, I think, be welcomed by
millions of people in my country.
Everything is interwoven: literature, politics, religion.
Leading liberals and Patriarch Pimen, the head of the Russian
Orthodox Church, are members of the anniversary com¬
mittee. Freedom of religion and freedom of publication are
closely connected. I am happy that this anniversary will be
celebrated in the Soviet Union, but only a few years ago
it would not have been possible. I am also very happy that
Unesco has included Pasternak's name on its list of outstand¬
ing persons whose anniversaries will be celebrated this year.
Your own poetry has been influenced by Pasternak. How
far do you identify with him?
When I was fourteen years old I sent some of my poetry
to Pasternak and he telephoned me and invited me to come
and see him. From then until I was twenty-eight I was very
close to him and he was my only master. At that time he
was being harshly attacked by the authorities.
Certainly I was influenced by Pasternak but it was a
tragedy for me because he was a genius. I felt in danger of
becoming his slave, of losing my own identity. One summer,
he showed me some of his recent poems and I discovered
that they contained several lines identical to lines I had
written and shown him some time before. He said to me,
ÏS.
SSta
M3 MajïeHbKoro a&a
^thm « Gom-u10^ aw'
*°*opwft »e »op-"*3'
a caM ___ npouecc pacna*
- Zïa«aHTe P»CBSC"!
Ha Win*» h xy^ee-
nam,TO Ba.nK>T»oM
aer. «C.iy»uaMTe
3BOJIM3UMMÏ»
Tfi BXOHU^».
a oCTaBlU1-
way-
fT03T B
HiicraHB
MyZblKy
°CTa/ii,,
í?e Bb'6poc
C °raPO«fKOM
Left, Andrey Voznesensky during a poetry reading he gave in
Moscow in 1978. This page and facing page above, specimens
of "visual poetry" by Voznesensky from his work "Rhapsody
of Disintegration ".
"Andrey, I loved these poems of yours so much that I
imagined that they were mine and included them in my
volume." At first I felt it was a great honour that Pasternak
liked my poems so much, but when I got home I realized
that it was a great tragedy for me since these poems were
no longer mine but Pasternak's. I stopped writing poetry
and started painting. I painted for a year to forget about
poetry. Then I began to write again, and this time it was
my own work, written in my own way, and this really
marked my beginning as a poet.
How would you define Pasternak's qualities as a poet?
Pasternak's poetic style and technique sprang from the
musical exercises he performed as a young man, from his
technical skills as a pianist. His every line, his every word,
works as a musical note, as if he were pressing the keys of
a piano. There are no empty, redundant lines.
But another, more important music can be discerned
through the fabric of his worksthe music of conscience.
The world today is suffering from a lack of conscience. This
is a problem facing all humanity. The music of conscience
can be heard on every page of Doctor Zhivago, the work
which meant most to Pasternak and which ends with these
prophetic words:
"Although the enlightenment and liberation which had
been expected to come after the war had not come with
victory, a presage of freedom was in the air throughout these
post-war years, and it was their only historical meaning."
Perhaps these lines are relevant to what is happening
today.

A selection ofpoems by Pasternak was recently published
in the Soviet Union in an edition ofa million copies and
sold out overnight...
Some of the world's greatest poetry and novels are
best sellers in the Soviet Union. We may have problems
with food and other commodities and perhaps the quality
of life is not good, but our public is very well educated
in literature.
I hope that living standards in my country can be raised
to the same level as in the West, but I am afraid of one
thingthat my country may lose its spiritual depth and cul¬
ture. I do not want our rich past to die. I think that Unesco
has the same aim of helping cultures to survive, in small
nations as well as large.
Coidd you tell us something about your life as a poet?
I never compose poetry with a pen. I walk in the
streets, or preferably in the forest, and if I keep walking
for two hours I have one poem or two poems or three
poems, but if I walk longer I will have a longer poem.
I try to finish the piece the same day with maybe small
changes made later. Tomorrow I shall not be the same
person. The sky will not be the same colour and I shall
not be in the same mood. I love Mayakovsky but I never
write as he did... he had his notebook, he found a rhyme
and he noted it down. Even my geometric poetry is
composed in my mind. I don't know how it happens.
I like reciting my poetry. But I am not an actor and I
do not like actors reciting my poetry because they make
it too theatrical. Reciting poetry for me is not a theatrical
act but an act of creation. When I recite a poem I remember
the time when it was created and improvise the same creative
process.
I have recited my poems in Moscow stadiums to au¬
diences of up to 10,000 people. My biggest audiences num¬
bered up to 14,000 people, although actually I prefer smaller
audiences of not more than 2,000. But Moscow is not
always the capital of Soviet literature. In Novosibirsk, Omsk
and other cities I encountered the same enormous audiences
of people interested in poetrycomplex poetry, not pop
poetry.
What about the new generation of young poets?
Avant-garde literature is sweeping the Soviet Union
today. There are many groups of young poets, not only in
Moscow but in every provincial town and city.
Young writers in the Soviet Union today face two kinds
of problem. First they are starting from scratch and they
need a new coded language and this may seem primitive and
naive. Secondly, our poetry, whether it is political, mystical
or lyrical in content, tends to seem like formula poetry.
These formulas must be broken.
Can you now have unlimited contacts with the West? Do
you find any echoes in European countries or in the United
States?
I would say that intellectuals of different countries form
a sort of "common nation". Even at the worst periods in
Soviet-American relations I enjoyed very good friendships
with poets like Robert Lowell and Allen Ginsberg, and today
there is, for example, one experimental movement in San
Francisco called "language poetry", which has many contacts
with young Soviet poets who are moving in the same direc¬
tion and work in the same style. Poets of my generation
also had and continue to have good contacts with the Beat
poets, people like Allen Ginsberg, Lawrence Ferlinghetti and
Gregory Corso, but I write in a more complex manner than
theirs. I feel closer to Robert Lowell and W.H. Auden.
In other words you believe that literature is something
universal.
Yes. It is impossible to be isolated. By virtue of writing
in a given language you feel that you belong to a nation.
But besides language and national roots there is something
that all writers have in commoninspiration. Perhaps it
comes from space, perhaps it comes from God, perhaps it
is a human instinct, but one thing is certain, the source of
inspiration is common to all poets.
You were trained as an architect. Do you have a visual
approach to literature?
My poetry is visual poetry because we live in the age
of TV, an age of visual thinking, a world of pictures. In the
past grandmother told tales which began "Once upon a
time...." Today people watch before they start to listen. The
present generation likes pictures more than sounds.

I have painted and sculpted too. As an architect I worked Jerusalem, my first visit to this holy place of the Bible,
with the Georgian artist Zurab Tseretely on a monument Jerusalem represents the Muslim, Jewish and Christian
that was built three years ago in Moscow. It is a language worlds. So many things brought together all in one place!
monument containing only letters, Russian and Georgian. And then my compatriots are very interested in Indian
It is 48 metres high and all the letters are made of metal, philosophy. I think our country is half Asian, half European.
For me this monument is both a poetic and a visual creation. It has something of both and thus brings them together.
I think literature in the next century will be visual and Perhaps our message will have some meaning for Indians
musical. Some time ago I carried out experiments with and other Asians too.
music, reciting poetry on stage and trying to put it into
musical form. Now I am thinking about the integration of Don't you think there is a contradiction here? You talk
music and poetry. I am also trying to bring visual art and about opening up to world culture, but at the same time
poetry together. nationalism is making new frontiers and building barriers
between peoples and nations.
You recently published in Yunost, a youth magazine, a This is a dialectical matter. I want my compatriots to
poem called "Rhapsody ofDisintegration" and you have have food and freedom. We were unable to solve these
said that the word "disintegration" has a very special problems in the nineteenth century, and in the twentieth
meaning at this moment in the history of the USSR. What the possibilities of doing so were blocked by Stalin. We are
did you mean by that? trying to solve these problems now, and while it is true that
I am a poet, not a politician. I sense a process but I do we are facing the problem of disintegration, the ultimate
not want to write about it as a journalist would. As a poet outcome must be a new form of integration. In the past,
I feel that many things are in the process of disintegration integration of the Russian and other nations was imposed
in the USSR and I have written a long poem in which all by force. True integration can only come about through
the words evoke disintegration; it speaks about nationalism, democratic choice, economic co-operation and cultural
political stereotypes and everything which is "disintegrat- development,
ing". The Russian word for "disintegration" is raspad and
the poem's Russian title is very musical: Rapsodia Raspada. Your country is experiencing a period of intensive cultural
For me this is a new step. The Russian public has activity. Why is poetry playing such an important part
become tired of straightforward political news. Last year in this?
the circulation of many literary magazines and newspapers Today there is an explosion of activity in literary circles,
jumped dramatically to millions of copies, but now many in poetry more than in prose. There are many small literary
of them are losing readers because they publish too much groups in all towns and cities and an enormous number of
political material. People are looking for good literature. And them in Moscow. There are some very good poets in rock
so I am writing about these processes not as a journalist but groups. Rock is very important because it is a new thing
as a poet. for us. For years it was forbidden, but now it is everywhere.
Today the Soviet people are trying to overcome the The work of the rock poets is uneven but they are certainly
tradition of slavery in which they have lived for a thousand much freer than our generation. Some groups of young poets
years and find democratic solutions. Changes are on the way. recite their work in the streets, especially in Moscow's first
I am trying to help this process by persistently provoking pedestrian street, the Arbat. They produce what I call "im-
people to free themselves from the stereotypes which have mediate poetry" and sell their poems to the public for three
endured for so long in my country. roubles, sometimes even for one. All this now seems to be
My message is not only for my compatriots. I am trying a part of our life. I want them to experiment more, hoping
to find an international symbolism. I have just been to that it will lead to something really great...
