Greece
Many Greek
temples were
prestige
monuments
rather than
places of
worship
JT-ZX* . ym^
rr-"
«*<3^,
\.
Wc A m
\

A sense of awe BY SOPHIE DESCAMPS-LEQUIME
%HEN the Greeks felt a sense of awe in face
of natural phenomena which they could not
explain, they believed that they were in the
presence of a god. Such phenomena might include
an endlessly bubbling spring, the rustling of the
wind in leaves, an unusually shaped rock, a clap
of thunder, a fleeting shadow, or even a silence.
Places capable of arousing strong and frequent
feelings of respect tinged with fear, which the
Greeks called thambos, were favoured sites for
sanctuaries.
The gods manifested themselves in all kinds
of places. Apollo, for example, selected the gran¬
diose setting of Delphi, which clings to the sheer
cliffs of the Phaedriades, as well as the rocky
island of Delos in the Aegean. The limits of the
territory over which the god held sway were
marked by boundary stones or a surrounding
wall. Entry into the sacred precinct was for¬
bidden. It was sacrilege to be born or to die there
or for anyone with the slightest taint to set foot
in it. This sacred place cut off from the profane
world became the témenos of the god (témenos in
Greek means "cut off").
The most imposing vestiges of these sacred
places are the temples which are among the
best preserved buildings of ancient Greece. But
were temples really an essential feature of the
sanctuaries where the Greeks honoured their
gods?
The sanctuary of Zeus at Olympia provides
some highly revealing clues. For almost 500 years,
its patron god had no temple of his own, even
though, as Hesiod wrote in the seventh century
BC, he had the power to make mortal men
obscure or celebrated, to cast down those who
showed overweening pride and exalt the humble,
to thunder over the heads of the Greeks and to
inhabit the loftiest abodes. The first votive
offerings to Zeus date from the beginnings of the
sanctuary around 1000 BC, but the temple
housing the god's statue was built by the architect
Libon of Elis as late as 468 BC.
Why did the foremost of all the gods of
Olympus have to wait so long before he was
given a dwelling in his own sanctuarylonger
indeed than his wife Hera, whose temple was con¬
secrated around 600 BC? Why was it so long
before it was felt necessary to honour the god by
consecrating a building to him at that Pan-
Hellenic place where spectators and athletes from
all the cities of the Greek world gathered every
four years for the Olympic Games?
The answer is that the temple occupied only
a secondary place in Greek religion. It was not
the original core of the sanctuary. Unlike the
cathedrals of medieval Christendom, the Greek
temple was never the focal point of a city. It was
an altar in the open air that was the focal point
of the ceremonies performed by the Greeks in
accordance with the needs of a ritual which dated
back to the time of the Homeric heroes. What
the gods expected from men were prayers,
offerings and sacrifices, in return for which they
acceded to the requests of the faithful and
bestowed their blessing upon them.
The supreme sacrifice was consummated in
blood. Like the Trojans in the Iliad, the par¬
ticipants assembled on an esplanade and "laid out
Low-relief sculptures of water
carriers, from the frieze
representing the annual
Panathenaic procession
(445-438 BC), the Parthenon,
Athens.
Opposite page, the temple
of Apollo on the island of
Delos in the Aegean
(5th century BC).
the illustrious hecatomb around the resplendent
altar". The throats of the animals were cut at the
foot of the altar, on which burned a fire whose
flames entirely or partly consumed them. The
smoke rising into the sky was food the gods
loved.
An altar was the essentialand might be the
onlyfeature of a sanctuary. It might predate the
temple by several centuries, as was the case at
Olympia. Many altars were made of stone and
some were of imposing sizein the third century
BC, the tyrant Hieron II built an altar 192 metres
long at Syracuse in Sicily. Others were built of
perishable materials. The altar of Apollo at Delos
was made of the horns of goats used in sacrifices,
and the altar of Zeus at Olympia consisted of the
piled-up ashes of the sacrificial victims. The tire¬
less Greek traveller Pausanias described it as a
cone with a circumference measuring 37 metres
at the base and standing almost 7 metres high.
As a rule, the altar was situated in front of 21

Cross-sectional drawing made
In the late 19th century shows
the interior of the Parthenon
as It might have been In
Antiquity with a colossal
statue of Athena Parthenon.
22
SOPHIE DESCAMPS-LEQUIME,
of France, is curator of the
department of Greek, Etruscan
and Roman Antiquities at the
Louvre Museum, Paris.
the main façade of the temple, on the eastern side.
Processions of worshippers wended their way to
it. Access to the temple housing the god's statue
and some of the sacrificial offerings was usually
confined to the priests. The worshippers, who did
not often enter the temple, caught a glimpse of
the god's effigy through the half-open doors. At
Elis, the temple of Hades, god of the underworld,
was opened only once a year and only the priest
was allowed to enter it.
A second barrier
A Greek temple was thus a closed world. The
fence which separated the témenos from the world
of humankind was in its turn surrounded by a
colonnade. The worshippers remained on the
esplanade outside, and the colonnade merely gave
them an opportunity to walk round the building.
The few exceptions to this rule were both temples
and sanctuaries, and not only housed the statues
that were worshipped in them but also
represented an emanation of the deity. The
temple of Apollo at Delphi straddled the cleft in
the rock through which the god imparted his
oracle. Those wishing to consult the oracle under¬
went ritual purification and then entered the
building, but they were not allowed to go as far
as the secret place where, wreathed in shadow and
hidden from their gaze, the priestess or Pythia
sat on a pedestal and handed down the answers
given by the god.
The earliest temples were not very different
from the dwellings of human beings. Although,
as Apollo said in the Iliad, "there will always be
two separate racesthe race of the immortal gods
and the race of humans walking on earth" man
lent his appearance to the gods and acknowledged
that they had the same needs as people. Small
votive shrines were built in those early times
when the abode of a god was made in the image
of that of man. They consisted of a single rectan¬
gular or semi-circular room, with walls made of
rough bricks or clay mixed with pebbles and
straw on a base of stones and rubble, and a roof
supported by wooden pillars.
The Greeks were primarily city-dwellers and
the evolution of the Greek temple followed that
of the Greek city-state. Every civic community
honoured its protective gods by embellishing the
sanctuaries dedicated to them, and ostentation
often took precedence over piety. In the sixth
century BC, the cities were in the hands of rich
tyrants who displayed their power by con¬
structing grandiose monuments in the sacred
places. Temple-building developed rapidly, and
architects strove to impress and outdo their rivals.
The rudimentary early structures gave way
to massive buildings constructed partly or wholly
of limestone and marble. In some cases the tran¬
sition to stone was a gradual process. In the
temple of Hera at Olympia the wooden columns
were gradually replaced until by Roman times
only a single one was left. This was still visible
in the third century AD, when it was regarded
as a curiosity. However, by the beginning of the
sixth century BC, some temples were being built
entirely of stone. The temple of Artemis on the
island of Corfu is one example.
As architects learned to master this noble but
unwieldy material they began to think in terms
of volumes and of the use of space to give promi¬
nence to the effigy of the deity. The main
chamber of the temple, or naos, containing the
statue, was preceded by a vestibule, the pronaos,
which was matched symmetrically by a second
porch, or opisthodomos, at the rear of the building.
The boldest architects were those of the
Greek cities of Asia Minor. They built temples
as big as cathedrals, with double rows of columns
around the main chamber which were probably
inspired by the mighty architectural complexes
of ancient Egypt. The temple and the sanctuary
of Hera on the island of Samos were known as
the labyrinth, on account of their majestic forest
of 104 columns, which was a source of wonder¬
ment to the people of the time. The temple of
Artemis at Ephesus, some parts of the carved
decoration of which were donated by King
Croesus, was one of the Seven Wonders of the
Ancient World. It now survives only in legend,
since it was burnt down by arsonists, reputedly
on the night Alexander the Great was born.
Religious propaganda
The builders of mainland Greece and Sicily were
less adventurous. Their temples were smaller and
more compact. Even so, they distinguished them¬
selves from their counterparts in the Ionian cities
by evolving a completely different architectural
language. Their style, known as Doric, was not
purely decorative. The figurative scenes which
adorned the pediments of the façades and the
metopes, the square spaces alternating with the
vertical fluting on the frieze all round the
building, were intended to convey a message.
Sometimes painted, but more usually carved,
these scenes recounted the great myths with
which the Greeks were familar from childhood.
They depicted episodes from the lives of the
gods and legends from the time when the founder
heroes of the cities had consorted with the gods.
The subjects were chosen for purposes of religious

or political propaganda. The metopes of a temple
at Selinonte in Sicily show Apollo in his four-
horse chariot, Perseus cutting off the head of
the Gorgon Medusa, and Hercules grappling with
the two brigand brothers, the Cercopes. The
twelve sculptured metopes of the temple of Zeus
at Olympia depict the twelve labours of Hercules,
the son of Zeus and founder of the Olympic
Games. The pediment of the main east façade
recalls another hero, Pelops, who gave his name
to the entire region, the Péloponnèse. Pelops is
shown making ready to challenge King
Oenomaus in a chariot race. The worshippers
who saw the pediment would have known that
Pelops would win the race by a ruse and that
thereafter a curse would fall on his descendants.
The iconographie sequence adorning the
Parthenon in Athens, which was built in the
second half of the fifth century BC, was designed
to celebrate the city and its protective goddess
Athena. On the pediment of the western façade,
The Parthenon was built on
the Acropolis in Athens
between 447 and 432 BC.
which is immediately visible from the entrance
to the Acropolis, Athena and Poseidon the sea-god
can be seen disputing the possession of Attica. The
goddess, who was victorious, also appears on the
main eastern façade of the temple, the pediment
of which illustrates her birth in the presence of
the assembled senior gods of Olympus. The
metopes evoke the combat in which she and the
other gods engaged against the Giants at the dawn
of time. On a continuous carved frieze almost 160
metres long, visible only through the rows of
columns, Phidias, the master sculptor, illustrated
the main events of the Great Panathenaic festival
held in honour of Athena every four years, when
the goddess was presented with a sacred tunic, the
peplos, the supreme offering solemnly bestowed
upon her by the Athenians. Phidias portrayed the
entire city in a scene in which the citizens of
Athens mingled with the chief gods of Olympus
and the first legendary rulers of the city.
The Parthenon housed an effigy of Athena,
formed of plaques of gold and ivory and meas¬
uring almost 12 metres high. Yet in spite of its
opulent decoration, this statue was not meant to
be worshipped. It did not have a priestess and was
simply valued as a precious object. The authentic
object of worship on the Acropolis was an old
wooden idol contained within the enclosure of
the Erechtheum which encompassed the city's
holiest places.
A temple such as the Parthenon had every
appearance of a place of worship without actu¬
ally being one. The official cult practised there
was lacking in spiritual substance. When the
citizens gathered to partake of the sacrifice which
they offered to their gods, they were above all
reaffirming the civic ties which bound them
together.
The way to salvation
Traditional religion did not satisfy everyone. To
the just man capable of living by the precepts of
Greek ethics, the "know thyself" and "nothing
in excess" inscribed on the temple of Apollo at
Delphi, it did not hold out any hope of a better
life in the hereafter. The Greeks, who were
familiar with Homeric poetry on the world of
shadows, recalled the lamentations of the hero
Achilles, who would have preferred to "live as
a ploughboy labouring for a poor farmer rather
than reign over the dead, over this entire people
whose lives have been extinguished". This dis¬
satisfaction accounts for the emergence of
redemptionist religions such as the Eleusinian
Mysteries, which guaranteed their initiates a
happy life after death.
But the gods of Olympus continued to be
worshipped in traditional ways, and temples con¬
tinued to be built for several centuries. Few
Greeks seem to have heeded the words of the
Stoic philosopher Zeno who proclaimed at the
beginning of the third century BC that "God is
universal reason that is present in all things	
Such a god does not countenance statues or
temples, for the true sanctuary lies in the star-
studded sky". 23
