INDIA
Sculpted heads of the late Gupta period (5th-6th
century AD), from Akhnur, near Jammu (Kashmir).
.;- '
lUiiiiiui



-'"Hi'l'lniii
iiiítíHiiijíij1
FROM THE EPIC
TO SCIENTIFIC
HISTORY
BY CLAUDE MARKOVITS
D.'OES India have a history? This question has
always troubled historians, especially in relation
to the long period extending from the Aryan in¬
vasions to the arrival of the Muslims in the
twelfth century. There are two kinds of source
for this period, which saw the emergence and
blossoming of Hindu civilization: normative texts
such as the Vedas and epics on the one hand, and
on the other, archaeological documents.
However, correlating the two presents insur¬
mountable difficulties. Some scholars firmly deny
the historical nature of the epics, which they be¬
lieve to recount purely mythical events without
any historical foundation. They point to the ha¬
ziness of the scattered geographical references
which the epics contain and to the great uncer¬
tainty about when they were composed. Another
school of Indian scholars believes that the find¬
ings of certain recent excavations confirm the
historicity of the events related in the epics.
In fact the quarrel is a philosophical one.
Long ago Hegel proclaimed the non-historical
character of Indian civilization. Stressing that the
"time which elapsed before the appearance of
written history. ..was without objective history
because it had left no subjective history or histor¬
ical account", he drew attention to the contrast
between India, "this country so rich in profound
spiritual achievements", and China, which "pos¬
sessed an outstanding history, going back to the
most remote times".
The lack of ancient Indian historical writings
is undeniable. With the exception of the Kashmir
chronicle, there is no text of a historical nature
prior to the Muslim conquest. Starting in the late
twelfth century, historical texts were written to
the glory of the Muslim sovereigns. The most
illustrious representative of this school of writing
was Ferishta, the historian of the Deccan. This,
imported genre, written in Persian, had only a
.limited influence.
Students of
Indian civilization
.....
The birth of would-be scientific historiography
is linked tothé British' conquest of India, which
began in .1757 and was all but over in 1818. But
this form of writing was inherited from elsewhere
and it was practised only by the colonizers, at
least until around 1830.
Sir w/iiliam Jones (1746-1794), who founded
the Asiatic Society of Calcutta in 1784, laid the 23

Scenes from the Ramayana,
the great Sanskrit epic
recounting the heroic deeds
of prince Rama. Malwa
school painting, 17th
century.
J> - Ï- -, £.'
i . -a . Z - O US a.
24
*-i ^3,
^i;;ii.-í^^^'¿^^tfc^iAt¿4.^a_^ii»a;íiy¿
Copper plaque inscribed
with Brahmi characters,
issued by king Salankayana
Nandivarman II (4th
century AD). From Pedda
Vegi (Andhra Pradesh).
A prince pays homage to
Babur (1483-1530), the first
Mughal ruler of India. Late
16th-century miniature.
CLAUDE MARKOVITS,
of France, is director of
research at the National
Centre for Scientific Research
(CNRS), Paris. He is the
author of Indian Business and
Nationalist Policies, 1931-39:
The Indigenous Capitalist
Class and the Rise of the
Congress Party (Cambridge
University Press, 1985).
foundations for a chronology of ancient India.
Most of the members of the Society belonged to
the British ruling elite. Whether judges or ad¬
ministrators, their curiosity about India and
things Indian was not entirely innocent. Getting
to know the country better might help them to
control it more effectively. But they were also
men of the Enlightenment and they wanted to
learn about one of the great civilizations of hu¬
manity. They admired the culture of ancient
India, but considered it inferior to that of classical
Greece, which was a model of perfection for
Europeans at that time.
The most violent attack against the civiliza¬
tion of India was launched by James Mill (1773-
1836), a prominent representative of Utilitarianism
or "philosophical radicalism" and father of the
famous John Stuart Mill. His History of British
India (1817), the earliest attempt to arrive at an
overview of Indian history, attracted wide atten¬
tion and exercised considerable influence.
A senior official of the East India Company
stationed in London, Mill never set foot in India
and worked from secondary sources. Contemp¬
tuous of facts, he regarded history as a branch of
philosophy and poked fun at the gullibility of the
"orientalists". The ancient Hindu writings? Pure
fabrication having no value as a historical
source an attitude still held today by certain In-
dologists. India before the Muslim conquest? A
monotonous succession of despots, each more
barbaric than the last, whose authority was but¬
tressed by the most enormous and most frightful
superstition. The Muslim era? Barely a step away
from the dark ages of Hinduism. The history of
India really began when the Europeans arrived,
especially the British.
Mill did not contribute anything to historical

research on India, but he influenced generations
of historians. His division of Indian history into
three periodsancient (Hindu), medieval (Mus¬
lim) and modern (British)although long su¬
perseded, still survives in textbooks. Through his
attacks on the orientalists, he was also instrumen¬
tal in focusing historical studies on the modern
age. Earlier periods were studied by a small circle
of specialists.
As a result, such important discoveries as the
deciphering of Brahmi script in 1833 by James
Prinsep (1799-1840) aroused little interest. There
was a gulf between the research of the orientalists
and historical works in which British authors
concerned themselves mainly with the history of
their compatriots in India.
Mountstuart Elphinstone (1799-1859), who
knew India at first hand and had an openminded
attitude towards Indian culture, broke new
ground. In his History ofHindu andMuhammedan
India (1841) he provided the first plausible com¬
prehensive chronology for ancient Indiathe
main lines of which still remain valid todayand
for the first time included southern India, which
had until then been neglected.
The awakening of
a national consciousness
The following period marked both the zenith
of the imperialist school of history and the
beginnings of a nationalist Indian historiography.
The first indigenous historians, such as Raja
Sivaprasad, author of the Itihas Timir Nasak
(1866), written in Hindi and used as a school text¬
book in northern India, judged their own society
very harshly.
In the 1870s, however, an anti-Western move¬
ment began to take shape, especially in Ma¬
harashtra. Intellectuals, whether writers or
pamphleteers, who took their cue from the rise
of nationalism in Europe, bewailed the lack of
a national historiographie tradition. The great
Bengali writer Bankimcandra Chatterjee
(1838-1894) used the form of the historical novel
to glorify the Hindu past of Bengal. The ques¬
tion of the relations between Hindus and
a *
B
Vast crowds turned out for
the funeral of Gandhi in
1948.
The great "durbar" (formal
reception) held in Delhi in
1903. Illustration from a
contemporary French
newspaper.
V -
* \.
Muslims was already influencing the writing of
history.
The nationalist school of history began to
come into its own around 1910. A growing num¬
ber of its members belonged to the expanding aca¬
demic community. H.C. Raychaudhuri, K.P.
Jayaswal, R.K. Mookerji and H.C. Ojha were in¬
terested in ancient India. They endeavoured to
combat the Hegelian view of a non-historic India
by studying, in particular, the development of
political institutions. Even though their work
does not always meet the scientific criteria of his¬
tory as it is understood today, their role in the
awakening of an Indian national consciousness
is not negligible.
The greatest Indian historian of India,
Jadunath Sarkar (1870-1958), is known mainly for
his work on the end of the Mughal period and
the Marathas. His writings, which are in a vivid
style and show immense erudition, are still widely
read.
Since the 1960s Indian historiography has
drawn nearer to the other social sciences. Major
controversies are regularly generated by historical
studies. This effervescence attests to the vitality
of historical studies in a country that clearly in¬
tends to make its own distinctive contribution
to the history of humanity. 25
