Georg Wilhelm
Friedrich Hegel
(1770-1831).
- y i va
.»
..
"Man Masters the Universe
with Technology" (1934),
detail from a 56 m2 mural
by Diego Rivera. Palace of
Fine Arts, Mexico City.



FROM HEGEL
TO
MARX
THE SAGA
OF THE DIALECTIC
BY EMMANUEL TERRAY
I
N the closing years of the eighteenth century,
when the German philosopher Georg Wilhelm
Friedrich Hegel appeared on the scene, philosophical
thought bore the profound imprint of the teachings
of Immanuel Kant.
Kant had left philosophy in a state of apparently
irreconcilable schism. There was the split between
subject and object, the resolution of which was then
seen as the central problem facing the philosopher;
there was the split within the subject, between the
observable individual and the transcendental "I",
which alone was capable of constituting knowledge;
there was the split within the object, between the
phenomenon and the inaccessible "thing-in-itself";
there was the conflict, with regard to human con¬
duct, between the necessity imposed by the world
and freedom of the will, and, in the field of ethics,
between the concepts of duty and happiness.
At each of these levels, Kant placed in opposi¬
tion two terms or elements between which no unity
or harmony seemed conceivable. Whereupon, all
those who came after him set about re-establishing
the lost unity and reconciling the adversaries that
Kant had drawn up in opposing ranks.
The method adopted by Hegel to achieve this
objective was to accept the dichotomy and antagonism
as the outward appearance of present reality and to
propound reconciliation as a future necessity. He
therefore introduced the notion of time into the
relationships between subject and object, between
the rational and the real. These relationships were
no longer to be seen as fixed for all time by "the
nature of things"; they had to be seen in the context
of an evolutionary process during which two op¬
posing elements would change each other and be
transformed into each other.
The process described by Hegel has three main
stages. During the first stage, the concept, the original
and fundamental entity, is formed within the frame¬
work or setting of the ideal, of the abstract. This
gives rise to the great categories of philosophical
thoughtbeing, nothingness, becoming, number,
measure, and so on the classification and study of
which make up the science of Logic.
During the second stage, in a spasm of self-
negation, the concept becomes the thing, reality,
nature. Nature, in fact, is nothing more than the
Karl Marx (1818-1883)
by the Mexican painter
David Alfaro Siqueiros
(1896-1974).
37

:j
38
concept become realitywhich is why it is, by defi¬
nition, understandablebut as such, nature is "the
thing in itself", blind, deaf and dumb.
Then comes the third stage, when the concept
re-asserts itself, yet without losing its quality as
object. This is the stage of history, and history itself
could be described as the process whereby reason
gradually gains ascendancy over the real, which it
orders in conformity with its own requirements. At
the end of the process, reconciliation is achieved,
and unity is restored between subject and object,
so that, as Hegel wrote in the preface to his
Philosophy ofRight, "All that is real is rational and
all that is rational is real".
Absolute knowledge, the driving
force of history
Each of the great periods of history is thus seen as
one of the stages in this process, one of the phases
of the movement by which reason takes control of
the world and submits it to its law. Hegel opens our
eyes to the unity of each historical period. This
unity takes the form of the Volksgeist, or national
spirit. A manifestation of the Weltgeist, or world
spirit, at a particular stage of its historical develop¬
ment, the Volksgeist in its turn inspires and moulds
all the institutions and all the great works of the
historical period concerned. Politics, religion, the
economy, the arts, all bear its imprint. Each epoch
can thus be described as "the expression of a totali¬
ty" in which each element mirrors the other ele¬
ments separately and as a whole.
Naturally, the various nations do not make
equal progress. For each stage, one nation acts as
model and guide, providing us with a criterion by
means of which we can judge to what extent the
other nations' achievements match up to the de¬
mands of historical development.
At the same time, however, each of these dis¬
tinct totalities is provisional only and doomed to
disappear and be replaced. This is because, at the
heart of each of them, the Weltgeist is working away
in subterranean fashion. So long as the reconquest
of the real has not been achieved, so long as there
remains anywhere within the world an enclave of
resistance to the empire of reasonan unexplored
realm of nature, a sector of society where disorder
and confusion reignreason remains unsatisfied. It
undermines the edifices it has itself constructed,
since, having fulfilled their purpose, they would
only become obstacles if they claimed the right to
exist for ever.
This thrust by which the spirit is continually
bringing its own creations into question is driven
by the thought and actions of men, who, neverthe¬
less, are unaware of this. This is what Hegel called

"The Coronation of
Napoleon I", by the French
artist Jacques Louis David
(1748-1825).
Right, a deputation from
Silesia pays homage to the
king of Prussia, Frederick II
the Great (1741). Painting
by the German historical
artist Wilhelm Camphausen
(1818-1885).
"reason's trick"using for its own ends agents who
think that they are working for other purposes.
A philosophy of history constructed on these
principles displays some remarkable characteristics.
It is first of all a philosophy of progress. History
has a direction and a purpose and strives towards



the triumph of reason and the spirit, which Hegel
called "absolute knowledge". It is also a dialectical
philosophy. Each period of history is a transitory,
passing stage, marked by contradictions which lead
inevitably to ruin. Finally, it is a philosophy of
necessity. The only objective an actual historical
individualwhether an individual hero or a single
peoplecan aspire to is to fulfil the imperatives of
the world spirit as they appear to be in the historical
period concerned, without attempting to forestall
them, to halt them or, least of all, to reverse them.
The great men of historyAlexander, Caesar,
Napoleonand the great peoples of historythe
Greeks, the Romans and the Prussiansare those
who have succeeded in discerning these imperatives
and have taken them as the watchword of their
actions, thus playing their part in the gradual victory
of the spirit.
The major enigma and difficulty of Hegel's
philosophy of history lies in the notion of absolute
knowledge. The achievement of absolute knowledge
marks the end of history. But was this a distant
prospect, analagous to the Second Coming of Chris¬
tian doctrine, or was it closer at hand and thus
already liable to influence man's actions? Hegel's
stance on this point seems to have varied. He praised
the Napoleonic empire and then the Prussian state
in terms that might seem to suggest that with them
history was coming to an end.
This question was to cause deep divisions among
Hegel's successors. Those who held that reason had
attained its goal became conservative partisans of
the established order. Others had little difficulty in
demonstrating the political and social reality that
disorder and violence were still disputing power
with reason and that, consequently, the march of
history could only be continuing. The latter group
comprised the "Hegelian Left", among whom one
of the most eloquent representatives was the young
Karl Marx.
Marx: from Hegelianism
to the class war
The Marxist edifice is closely dependent on the
Hegelian structure. Marx took from Hegelianism
what is undoubtedly its essential elementthe
dialectical framework. History is seen as a process
having a direction, a beginning and an end. This
process is powered by a force which seeks to con¬
quer and subjugate reality. This conquest passes
through several stages, each stage representing a
partial, limited step towards accomplishment of the
final goal. Although each such achievement is a sign
of progress at the time it occurs, it eventually
becomes an obstacle to further development which
must be destroyed so that the forward movement
can continue until the final goal is reached.
What Marx altered in the Hegelian design was
the nature of the motor that powered the process.
As we have seen, for Hegel, this motor was a kind
of energy inherent in the concept itself, which led
it continually to escape from its own limits and to
absorb whatever it found outside those limits. This
central role accorded to the concept led Marx to
accuse Hegel of idealism. For Marx, the motor of
history was not the abstract dynamism of the
concept, but the needs, the aspirations and desires
of the individuals and the specific groupsfamilies,
nations and classesthat constitute the human race.
These individuals and groups have material
needs. They must feed, clothe and shelter themselves
and they can satisfy these needs only by making use
of the resources of nature. History, then, is first of
all a process whereby people take possession of
nature to make use of it for their own ends. This
process involves both knowledge, through the
advancement of science, and action, through tech¬
nological progress, and can be seen at work in the
development of human productive forces. It is
through this process that people become aware of
the world around them and of their place in that
world. On this basis Marx felt himself justified in
declaring, in contradiction to Hegel, that "it is not
the consciousness of men that determines their
existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence
that determines their consciousness".
Thus Marx put forward his "materialism" in
opposition to Hegelian idealism. In the Marxist
philosophy of history, this materialism is expressed
in the fundamental role given to labour and the
economy. These are described as the "ultimate
determinants" and form the matrix around which
arise the institutions and the characteristic manifesta¬
tions of social life in the fields of politics, law, cul¬
ture and religion.
In their struggle to dominate nature people have
to become organized so that they can, through co¬
operation, obtain the best results through their joint
efforts and also so that they can share the fruits of
their labours. Initially, their work is not very produc¬
tive and provides just enough for the community
to subsist. There is a state of equality in poverty,
which Marx called "primitive communism".
Then comes a stage at which the first increases
in productivity give rise to a small surplus, but this
is too small for all to benefit from it and a struggle
arises as to who shall have it. Thus are sown the
seeds of the class war. A fraction of the society gains
control over the means of production, whatever
form these may takeland, skills, the labour force
and as a result arrogates to itself the monopoly of
the surplus. To ensure this privilege, it also takes
over political power and intellectual leadership.
For each stage in the development of technology
and productive forces there is, of course, a cor¬
responding form of organization of labour and fixed 39

n m\>w mo roo/1
40
Soviet May Day poster, 1920. The caption reads:
"Through the ruins of capitalism, towards a world
brotherhood of workers!"
"production relationships", which in turn support
political "superstructures" and specific cultural
"forms of consciousness".
As progress is made from stage to stage the class
war alters and the protagonists change. Slaves
become serfs and then the proletariat of modern
times. On the other side of the divide, the master
is succeeded by the lord and the lord by the capitalist
entrepreneur. Yet, at each stage, the class struggle
retains- its driving role. This is aptly expressed in
the words of the Communist Manifesto: "All his¬
tory has hitherto been a history of class struggles."
By changing the "motor" Marx also changed
the nature of the necessity that governs the course
of history. Hegelian necessity was an abstract, ideal
necessity and, as such, could not be halted by any
obstacle. From the moment that he considered
human actions as the dynamic of historical develop¬
ment, Marx had to allow for other contingencies.
Collective action implies taking a stand and organiz¬
ing. This in turn implies the possibility of error and
failure. In other words, progress could be slowed
down, halted or side-tracked; its future could not
be detailed in advance.
The Hegelian heritage and the environment
created by the development of evolutionary theory
exercised a powerful joint pressure on Marxist
thought and led to the reinstatement of necessity
to pride of place. Engels, and then the theorists of
the Second and Third International, were the prime
movers in this change of direction, at the end of
which determinism had ousted free will in Marxist
thought. History then appeared as an inevitable suc¬
cession of methods of production leading to com¬
munism and the classless society. That certain
passages from the writings of Marx can be quoted
in support of such an interpretation is undeniable,
but this does not make it any the less a betrayal of
the more original and innovative aspects of his
thinking.
EMMANUEL TERRAY,
of France, is director of
studies at the Ecole des
Hautes Etudes en Sciences
Sociales, Paris. A specialist
on the anthropology of
tropical Africa, he is the
author of Lettres à la
fugitive (Odile Jacob, Paris,
1988) and La politique dans
la caverne (Le Seuil, Paris,
forthcoming).
A NEW MODEL
FOR A UNIVERSAL HISTORY

