N T E R V I E W
Frédéric Rossif
You have travelled the world and met all kinds of y Gasset called moral hemiplegia. Being only a
people. In the light of your own varied experience Westerner means succumbing to poetic hemiplegia.
would you draw any general conclusions about A person who knows Rimbaud but not the Vedas has
human destiny? failed to see three or four of the seven colours of the
I would be inclined to say that man is a nomad rainbow. The Vedas have given me a glimpse of a kind
in search of love.... In the brief struggle which is our of wisdom that has room for dreams. Listen to this
life on Earth, faced with the immensity of time, we image: "In the evening, after the battle, the multi-
are engaged in a search. We go round an assault course coloured butterflies alight on dead heroes and sleeping
looking for oasesnot oases to rest in but oases where conquerors alike." What could be more profound and
we can try to be happy. What is so special about the delicate than this image of passing time? It could also
desert is that it offers us mirages but is indifferent to be understood in the following way. The multi-
our existence. We carry on in pursuit of the mirage, coloured butterflies live for one day, but they have
further and further, and the mirage is still there to been on Earth for 80 million years. It is not the
tantalize us. At the end, the very end, we reach the butterflies that are ephemeral, but human beings,
mirage, which for some is paradise; for others, eternal Butterflies think they are eternal because, for 80
peace; for yet others, death. The path of life is marked million years, whenever a butterfly has died it has al-
by a few moments of love, oases of happiness in this ready, through an act of love, produced the next
heedless desert. The important thing is to ask the generation...
questions, not to know the answers.
In the West people go along with the motto of You speak of life, love and death as if you have
William of Orange: "There is no need for hope to actually faced death yourself...
embark on a task nor for success to persevere." A fine It happened in Iran, while I was making my film
sentiment, but I prefer the motto of the Zulu warriors, Operas sauvages. We were following wolves. There are
which is: "If you advance you die. If you retreat you superb wolves in the mountains on the borders of Iran
die. So why retreat?" I wholeheartedly agree with this, and Iraq. We had sighted a wolf with its mate and cubs
Why should we abase ourselves, submit to humilia- and we were tailing them in a helicopter. The male
tion, obey tyrants, if the same death lies in wait for slowed down to encourage us to keep following him
all of us? and let the she-wolf and the cubs get away. I said:
"Let's play the game and help him." So we followed
You take your bearings from different cultures. Do him and let the she-wolf and the cubs escape. It is
you feel that you belong nowhere in particular? typical of the wolf to sacrifice itself in order to save
My own oases are very different from one others. Wolves are timid and courageous animals,
another. I have always sought other types of wisdom, Then our wolf suddenly turned round. The helicopter
other outlooks. I live in the West, but I do not want turned to follow it and struck the mountainside. The
to be exclusively Western. It's like being exclusively engine misfired. For a few seconds, we were very
left-wing or right-wing, succumbing to what Ortega frightened. Fear must release certain chemicals in the

The noted French film-maker
Frédéric Rossif is best known for
his films about animals such as
La fête sauvage (1973),
but he has also been attracted to
historical themes
(To Die in Madrid, 1962, and the
recent De Nuremberg à Nuremberg)
and to the arts (Picasso, 1982)
and has directed a number of
features including
Aussi loin que l'amour (1971).
Whether they are about people or
the world of animals or plants,
Rossif's films all celebrate the
splendours of life and are notable
for their striking imagery.
brain which, when they merge, have a strange effect....
During those few seconds I saw my whole life unfold
before me with extraordinary slowness and precision.
My perception of time was different.
Death, not to mention multi-coloured butterflies, was
the subject of one ofyour best-known films, To Die
in Madrid.
To Die in Madrid was a long time ago. The film
was strongly criticized when it came out. By the
extreme right, of course, but also by the extreme left.
By all those who see life in black and white terms and
are blind to the fact that in the worst of scoundrels
there may be a glimmer of poetry if only you know
how to grasp it at the right moment. Fortunately, the
truth of life is multi-coloured. The subtlety and
contrasts of historical situations are such that history
never resembles an ideology.
Things aren't only black and white, it's true, but in
some of your films there is certainly a great deal of
black.
We must try to find an explanation for the
blackest of situations. When depicting the rise of
nazism, for example, you have to show the terrifying
rate of inflationa loaf of bread that cost thousands
of millions of marks. The humiliation too.
Dostoyevsky said, "Those who suffer terribly do
terrible things." If you take no notice of accumulated
humiliation, it is impossible to understand the emer¬
gence of nazism or, in our time, the problem of
terrorism. Humiliation is one reason why people
stop caring about their lives. Not only do they agree
to risk their lives, they no longer care. Humiliation
is the impalpable structure that for centuries has
prevented the peoples of East and West from meeting.

This historic photo of Sitting Bull and Buffalo Bill was used in Frédéric Rossif's documentary Pourquoi ¡Amérique? (1970).
A greatfilm could be made about the history ofthat
humiliation. But how would it be received, on either
side of the impalpable frontier?
One never knows what time it is on the invisible
clock of history, one never knows what time it is in
the matter of public taste. On his deathbed at the age
of a hundred, the French scientist and man of letters
Bertrand le Bovier de Fontenelle put it differently. To
someone who asked him if he felt any pain, he replied:
"None, except the pain of being alive. I feel a great
difficulty in existing." It was Fontenelle who observed
that in a theatre 999 persons of average intelligence
are cumulatively more intelligent than a single genius
because they all "pull together" in order to under¬
stand. He had felt the vast increase in the capacity for
feeling and understanding of a group of people assem¬
bled together. He had perceived the mystery of col¬
lective intelligence by virtue of which each individual
has a better grasp of the nuances of a play because one
person's love merges into that of another, because one
person's emotion releases a tumult in another person's
breast. This sense of a collective identity may find
expression in more questionable gatherings. At the
time of the Crusades in France, there was a great
orator by the name of Bernard, Saint Bernard. He
spoke in Latin; people didn't understand what he said.
They set off all the same, for an empty tomb.
In the 1950s, when President Gamel Abdel Nasser
of Egypt spoke for hours before a microphone, people
didn't understand all he said. Yet his metallic voice
gave out a strange vibration, a music which was wafted
by the desert wind, contained all the sonorities of the
Arabic language, and spurred the Arabs to go off and
liberate another empty tomb. This form of collective
understanding may assume mythological and dramatic
proportions.
Coming back to your main field of interest, what
developments are we likely to see in the audiovisual
media in the next few years?
In the coming decade cinema and television will
be concerned with feeling and memory, they will be
looking at civilizations, at stories of people. They will
present inspired actors who will speak of us simply,
from the heart. They will draw on the sensibility of
trees and animals, on a life-oriented culture which, for
centuries, for millennia, has been all around us.
Programmes centred on feeling and memory will in¬
creasingly get higher audience ratings than those based
on an "American model" which is on its way out.
What is this "American model"?
In television, the American model is the kind of
programme that's a mixture of the variety show and
the game show, where the crassest kind of mass appeal
is linked with the prospect of winning prizes, the kind
of show that tries to appeal to a public that is assumed
to be greedy and mindless. Another example is Dallas.
Needy people, in some cases dying of hunger, are
shown the unimaginable adventures of unimaginable
millionaires. But in my opinion this kind of stuff has
no future, even in the United States. The depravities
of the heroes of Dallas no longer interest anyone.
Underlying this model is the idea that "this is
what the public wants, let's give it to them". Since
people aren't interested in dreams, let's keep dreams

out of it, anything to keep them glued to their sets.
But now people have learnt to dream again. And this
famous American model is slowly collapsing. It was
the Americans themselves who were the first to realize
this, for the people who run the media in the United
States are smart. They understood before anyone else
that this model had had its day and that they would
have to come up with something different from the
standard cops and robbers story with a car chase, a
naked woman and a few spectacular stunts. That's all
over now. These images and situations are so familiar
that they no longer hold people's attention.
What are the Americans doing to sort out this
problem?
They are going back to the intellect, to another
kind of consensus. They want to go back to Alexandre
Dumas, Walter Scott, Shakespeare. They are suddenly
realizing that the world has grown older and is
rediscovering its poetry. The heart of the world is
beginning to age, it's like a ripe fruit, it's sweeter and
more poetic...
Did Spielberg and Lucas blaze the trail towards this
new consensus?
Yes, they were the trailblazers. Star Wars is a
film of great beauty containing images worthy of a
surrealist painting. Spielberg and Lucas were the first
film-makers to understand the power of legend and
myth. There must once have been a time when human
beings and animals knew how to communicate with
each other. In all religions, pagan as well as monotheis¬
tic or Buddhist, the ultimate dream, the only myth
they have in common, is that of the earthly paradise,
a place where humans, animals and the elements speak
to each other, the idea of a world of communication
and peace.
7s that what you were lookingfor in yourfilms about
animals?
In my films about animals I was looking for the
meaning of something once said by the French
philosopher of science Gaston Bachelard which made
a profound impression on me and which I have been
repeating since I started making films: "Animals are
our oldest dream companions." Before man stood
upright, before he started thinking, he lived in the
permanent and direct company of animals. Animals
were the earliest models for his cave paintings, his
earliest totemic emblems. They were the source of his
fears, his joys, his dreams; for tens of thousands of
years his only music was the singing of birds.
For you communication seems to be synonymous with
poetry...
It is becoming increasingly necessary to commu¬
nicate dreams, to communicate a sense of immanence.
But it must be said at once that this can only be
achieved in a democracy. Democracy, as Winston
Churchill said, is the worst system there is, with the
exception of all the others. Communication in a
democracy is the worst form of communication, but
there is really no other way. Simply because of the
necessary dialectic of yes and no, of provocation and
response, which allows us to find the golden mean,
the right proportion of light and shade.
Democracy, fortunately, has recently been making
great strides. At the expense of ideology. Communi¬
cation, in the broad sense, will be strengthened. What
about culture?
One might even say that the age of ideologies is
drawing to a close and the age of cultures is begin¬
ning.. .in the sense that through freedom, which is
emerging from its ideological shackles, the deeply
rooted cultures of every country will at last be able
to find expression. Look at what's happening with
democratization in the Soviet Union, for instance. At
last all the buried cultural energies of that huge
country are being released: novels, poetry, music,
religion too. Culture needs this concert of instruments
to create the extraordinary sounds of human memory
and human intelligence.

Aren't you afraid ofcontradictions, tensions, even of
outbursts of aggression?
Creative people always swim against the tide.
They never knuckle under. Why not? Because they
foresee what is going to happen and the people around
them see nothing. A great creator is also a prophet.
A prophet is someone who remembers, who has
total recall of the future because he knows the past.
But once again, for the renaissance of universal
memory there is only one place, only one agora-
democracy.
You mean worldwide?
Of course. In the northern hemisphere it's already
happening. In the South, it is bound to happen before
too long. Everywhere democracy will put an end to
fear, smash inhibitions, give free rein to all kinds of
provocation, all kinds of poetry. It will at last allow
people to dream, and to die, freely.
How do you answer those who think that your head
is in the clouds ofpoetry and dreams, and your feet
are not on the ground, in a world of suffering,
upheaval and drama?
No one is more realistic than the poet. In 1936
Paul Eluard wrote: "The Earth is blue like an orange."
Everyone laughed. When the first American spaceship,
Pioneer, photographed the Earth, people saw that it
did indeed look like a blue orange. Eluard had antici¬
pated Pioneer. Poets are the only realists. They go
straight to the heart of the matter.
That reminds me of an interview I had with Mao
Zedong. The last question I asked him was: "Mr.
Chairman, do you think that communism has a
future in China?" His reply was no. The scene was
the great hall in the Palace of the Emperors, in the
Forbidden City, full of huge armchairs covered with
white drapes. Behind Mao Zedong were Lin Biao and
Zhou Enlai. When Mao gave his answer Lin Biao
looked startled, but Zhou Enlai didn't turn a haira
sign of the difference between the two men.
Then Mao went on: "What are 250 or 300 years
to us here in China? Barely a third of the T'ang
period.... The T'ang ruled China for a thousand
years." Mao's reply was subtle and beautiful. I think
that what he meant was this: for you, a Westerner,
what is the political horizon? The next election? For
us, the political horizon is three centuries...
And I said to myself, what an extraordinary con¬
tribution to world history and culture and to a real
understanding of people and things liberated China
will be able to offer us, finding inspiration simulta¬
neously in the sayings of Confucius, the Tao, the
ancient Chinese poets, Sun Yat Sen and Mao
Zedong.... This major branch of world history, largely
isolated from the rest of humanity for 5,000 years, will
extend its influence in our direction, offering us its
memory like a priceless lost treasure, at last regained...
Perhaps in conclusion you would like to say some¬
thing about the cultural magazine that you are
preparing for television with the Unesco Courier.
Yes. We've been thinking about doing this
programme for years, but so far we haven't been able
to do it, because life's like thatmade up of successful
partnerships, illusory loves and lost opportunities, or
opportunities that we think are lost but which, in
reality, were simply not there because the time was
not ripe. Now the time is ripe.
The programme, whose French version we have
decided to call Le Divan de Scheherazade, after
Shahrazad, the girl in Thousand and One Nights who
miraculously holds the sultan spellbound by telling
him stories, should meet an urgent need. With mul¬
ticultural themes, reports from all over the world,
interviews with creators and scientists, treasures from
the world's libraries and museums all forming part of
a single heritage, all the wonders of the world brought
together and woven into a single tapestry, I hope our
programme will respond to a desire for a combina¬
tion of imagination and information, for an exciting
voyage across the continents of culture and the oceans
of knowledge. This is just the kind of television
programme for tomorrow that should be available
today.
Basically, we're producing this magazine
programme because we feel the time is ripe for it, that
public opinionsomething that no one has ever been
able to define and yet something that defines us all

is ready. We don't know why, but we are convinced
that there is a need for this kind of television. The
signs are everywhere, primarily in the rise of
democratic hopes which are increasingly calling for
a creativity freed from contempt for others and based
on respect for all.
Today bridges are waiting to be built between East
and West, but also between North and South,
between societies ofEuropean culture and all other
societies...
Those are the bridges for which there is the
greatest need. Our programme must help to add to
their number, providing a platform for poets every¬
where, an amplifier for the drums that will beat out
the rhythms of African and Asian music to which
Westerners will respond.... The secret is not to present
the creative act in isolation but to show it in a context,
to link it to what sheds light on it. If for example we
want to present Indonesian culture to a European
audience, we'll start by showing the faces of Indone¬
sians amidst colours they are particularly fond of; then
an aerial view of the Indonesian countryside, divided
into tiny plotsan abstract pattern. Next we'll go into
the temple of Borobudur, an unprecedented example
of a Buddhist sanctuary rescued and restored at great
expense by a Muslim people. Finally, we'll play
Indonesian gamelan music. By this time Europeans
will have no difficulty in following the subtle rhythms
of this music, which is among the most beautiful in
the world. If it is played to a European audience unpre¬
pared, they will be taken aback. Our aim is thus to
restore to cultural phenomena their natural poetic aura
and thereby make them immediately accessible to
everyone.
To take another example: the whirling dervishes,
who live in the mountains between Iran and Iraq. If
you show the dervishes without any form of introduc¬
tion, dancing until they reach a state of trance, the
average viewer will be shocked. But if you start by
showing them as they are, if you go into their tents,
if you show slow motion shots of storks flying in the
sky, if you then take to the mountains and follow a
wolf which finds the path to the sanctuary where the
dervishes have begun to sing, if you explain that the
word dervish means poor, and if finally the viewer
sees, in a succession of static shots, the dervishes
reproduce the movement of the storks, then they'll
be perceived and accepted in another way. We are
presenters, go-betweens. Each culture needs mediation
vis-à-vis others. We must offer the cultures of the
South this mediation vis-à-vis the cultures of the
North. And vice versa.
The miracle of Shahrazad reminds us that language
is made for communicating to the children of human
beings the dreams of others. That's the important
thing and that's what we shall be trying to do
togetherfor viewers all over the world. For them
we shall become the shapers of dreams that will usher
in the third millennium.
