N T E R V I E W
Gro Harlem Brundtland
Gro Harlem Brundtland, former prime
minister of Norway, is internationally
known as a dedicated champion of
environmental quality. In 1983 she
was invited to chair the World
Commission on Environment and
Development set up by the United
Nations. The Commission's report,
Our Common Future, was recognized
as a document of major importance
when it appeared in 1987.
Here Ms. Brundtland talks frankly
about her approach to current
environmental issues.
Your name is linked with the concept of sustainable ation to leave the future to its successors, who when the
development. How would you define this concept? time came would be able to assume their own destiny, find
It is the central idea in the analysis contained in Our their own solutions, use new natural resources, develop
Common Future, the report produced for the United Nations different technologies and skills, enable life to go on, and
by the independent World Commission on Environment perhaps even improve the human condition. But in our cen-
and Development of which I was the chairman. tury massive population growth has led to increased exploi-
We defined sustainable development as a system of tation of natural resources. Furthermore, it has caused
development that meets the needs of the present without pollution on such a scale that the Earth's atmosphere is being
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their affected to the detriment of our common future. It is now
own needs. We then asked what exactly are the needs of that we must take the decisions that will enable people to
the present and gave our answers in different chapters of live through the twenty-first century. The challenge for our
the report. We made an integrated analysis which incor- generation stems from two specific dangers, the nuclear arms
porates all the different aspects of human life and is rooted race and the threat of pollutiontwo bombs: the nuclear
in an awareness of interdependence between nations. bomb and the bomb resulting from our own pollution.
What is fundamentally at stake is the question of human
rightsnot only those of people today but also those of their What can be done about these two dangers?
children and grandchildren. Since our children and grand- The nation state is not an adequate institution for taking
children cannot take care of their own destiny we must do responsible policy decisions in this sphere. We need an inter-
so on their behalf. In the past it was possible for each gener- national framework within which to take decisions on behalf

of ourselves and our children. The nation state has had its
day as the decisive body in world affairs. This is how I see
the situation. Once people lived in separate warring tribal
communities. Then they gradually realized that they needed
a system for assuming common responsibility and taking
political decisions within national borders. The new factor
today is that the nation state is no longer enough. Some tradi¬
tional national authority must be surrendered. This does not
mean undermining our ability as peoples of different nations
to have a considerable influence on our own future; it means
pooling some of that authority so that we can responsibly
take tare of common problems that individual nation states
cannot take care of if they are acting alone.
How can this be done? Some agreements that have
already been made regarding the environment are steps in
this direction. One building block for an international
system of law is that relating to the use of chlorofluoro-
carbons (CFCs), the man-made chemicals that are believed
to be destroying the Earth's ozone layer. Many nations have
agreed on the Montreal protocol, which aims to reduce and
eventually eliminate the use of these chemicals.
But the atmosphere is not only threatened by CFCs;
...there are two specific dangers, the
nuclear arms race and the threat of
pollution. Two bombs: the nuclear
bomb and the bomb resulting from
our own pollution.
it is also threatened by the combustion of fossil fuels and
the intensive use of non-renewable energy sources. At the
same time the developing world will need increasing
amounts of energy to provide for its economic and social
development. This means that energy will have to be saved
in the industrially developed countries. Agreements will have
to be negotiated on the gradual reduction of the energy input
in manufacturing and the service industries. This can be done
by using new technologies and energy-saving techniques.
In many countries 50 per cent of current energy con¬
sumption could be economized, not by reducing economic
growth but by reducing the energy content of that growth.
We must aim for a type of economic growth which uses
less energy and natural resources. And this can only be done
by agreement. There must be sufficient information and
pressure from public opinion so that nations will get together
and take decisions on this issue.
The Brandt Commission imagined processes of this kind
in relation to a new economic equilibrium between North
and South. Its proposals did not lead to important concrete
results. Do you think the world has become more mature
since then?
Yes I do. Not even the most unrealistic optimist today
believes that we can go on polluting the air we have to
breathe. We cannot just turn our backs on the problem of
pollution and hope it will go away. The optimistic indus¬
trialist who once refused to believe that there were any
problems involved in the use of nuclear energy will never
be able to convince people that we can go on using more
and more energy and polluting the atmosphere.

But even if this hypothetical industrialist accepts that the
future ofhumanity should be taken into account, won't he
say "my job is to make profits"?
That's right. That is why the necessary political decisions
have to be made by governments, not private industrialists.
The market needs political direction. And governments are
dependent on public opinion. If the argument for the future
of humanity is convincing enough governments are bound
to listen to it. In a sense there is no real choice; it's a ques¬
tion of how quickly and how broadly we tackle the problem.
I have met no political leader who believes that we can con¬
tinue "business as usual".
In March 1989 twenty-four government leaders attended
a conference on the global atmosphere held at The Hague.
The participants signed a declaration accepting common
responsibility for our common future with regard to the
atmosphere. The declaration said that changes in policies
should be made through international co-operation and
binding agreements, and that the rich countries should be
willing to pay some of the costs of enabling the poorer coun¬
tries to use new, cleaner technology and to avoid going
through a period of using dirty technology such as the rich
countries have known. If the developing countries are to
reach agreement with the rich countries which have been
polluting for fifty years, then the latter must give them some
of the money and technology they need to avoid causing
pollution and to provide for their future economic and social
development.
It's a joint responsibility, and agreements will have to
be made which include financial compensation. On the
environment issue, I believe that pressure from public
opinion in the richer countries today will be much stronger
and more politically effective than it was when the call was
a moral call saying "People are poor in the Third World.
We should reach out and help them". I personally believe
in that message, but it has not persuaded the rich countries
to fulfil what is, actually, an obligation. On the contrary,
in the 1980s most of the rich countries reduced their develop¬
ment aid to the Third World as a percentage of their Gross
National Product. But if you say, looknot even the rich
can escape from the changes in the atmosphere. If you want
to save your lives and your children's future then you will
have to make an effort. If you don't, people in the developing
world will be increasing the use of energy and there will
be increased pollution. There is no alternative but to accept
political interdependence and make agreements.
To what extent did the meeting at The Hague succeed in
this respect?
At The Hague we made it clear that the institution that
will have to be created to assume responsibility for the
Dead fish in the polluted river Seine (1976).

protection of the atmosphere needs to be given wide powers
and that decisions also could be taken on a broad majority
basis. Consensus is sometimes too slow.
Can you really envisage a situation in which an interna¬
tional authority will be able to prevail over a big country?
Yes, I think so. At any rate I hope so. If a big country
tries to go against a broad majority decision about what is
necessary for the health of nations, for basic human values,
then it seems to me clear that there are effective ways in
which the world community can influence that nation. If
there really is a decision that people all over the world seri¬
ously want to take, you cannot get away from it even if
you are strong.
Different countries have different rules, and what one
country considers dangerous another may not.
That is true. And so we need a common authority to
decide. Take the case of toxic wastes. You have to have
someone who can advocate the generally held scientific view
about the degree of danger involved. It's not enough to have
each separate country defining its own position.
But even on critical issues such as the ozone layer we read
authoritative articles which say different things. Some say
that the situation is very dangerous or becoming dangerous,
others that there is no danger at all. Even the scientists do
not always agree.
Yes, that's true. It's a natural result of the pluralism of
scientific communities around the world. But if you bring
together the best institutes and the best scientists from
different parts of the globe and ask them to evaluate a situ¬
ation, then you can find out what is generally accepted at
the highest level. I came across this problem in Norway in
the 1970s when a professor criticized the government for
trying to combat acid rain and to reach agreement on the
question of sulphur dioxide pollution. There was a gener¬
ally held scientific view that acid rain was dangerous and
that the trout and salmon dying in the acidified Norwegian
lakes were only the first signs of a development that would
very soon reach the forests and ruin nature. I was sure that
this view was correct. I went very deeply into the scientific
studies, and as a politician I felt convinced that I was doing
the right thing. But this professor expressed his contrary
viewpoint very clearly and published his views in the press
time and again. It took a lot of time and trouble to fight
him and pollution simultaneously! But ten years later his
criticism subsided because the facts were then so obvious.
Do you think the United Nations system is the institution
through which the necessary changes could come?
think we have built a United Nations system which is
based on the kind of philosophy that I am advocating. The
arguments for it have become stronger over the decades. In

8
the nineties, I believe the case for global co-operation is com¬
pelling. The United Nations has done a good job, but it has
not matched the expectations of those who created it in 1945.
I don't think we should try to build completely new insti¬
tutions. We should remodel those that already exist, make
them more integrated, and endow the United Nations family
with greater authority and potential. But I do think that
the United Nations system is too split up. There is not
enough common thinking, and there is too much fragmen¬
tation into different sectors.
Do you think that in view of the current changes in the
world it will be possible to stop the drivefor industrializa¬
tion regardless of the consequences? The East European
countries, for instance, are not satisfied with their level of
economic development and would like to industrialize
more.
It is perfectly possible to create sustainable development
patterns in Eastern Europe by investing in the right types
of industrial development. Investments can be made in
Eastern Europe with the aim of cleaning up pollution and
improving economic growth by developing new industries.
I think this is what Western Europe should be doing-
channelling investment resources to where they are most
needed. The result would be increased economic growth in
Europe as a whole.
What about thefear that Western Europe, the United States
andJapan will nowfocus their attention on Eastern Europe
and pay no more attention to Africa, Asia and Latin
America?
I understand that fear and it is felt in many parts of the
developing world. First of all I think that Western Europe,
the United States and Japan should step up their investment
in the developing world. We can carry that burden. United
States aid to Europe after the Second World War was many
times higher than the current level of aid to the developing
countries. Why on earth should it not be possible in the
1990s for the rich countries to double or triple the small
fraction of their GNP which they devote to development
aid? I think the environmental argument is the strongest one
we have. And of course we have no time to lose. Invest¬
ment on behalf of the future will boost economic growth
and also improve the quality of life.
In Eastern Europe and the Third World there is a lingering
feeling that "the West had its chance of industrializing
without bothering about pollution, why not us? Let's do
the same as they did, then we'll see what happens". We
know this would be badfor everybody. Shouldn't this fas¬
cination with industrialization be directed towards new
technologies, and probably new forms of development?
That's true. With information and communications tech¬
nology and other new technologies a high degree of decen¬
tralization is possible. You can have smaller firms employing

The rich countries,
which have been polluting
for fifty years,
must give the developing
countries some of the money
and technobgy they need
to avoid causing pollution
and to provide for
their future economic
and social development
Opposite, aerosols containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
are partly responsible for the destruction of the ozone layer.
Below, stockpile of toxic gas in the United States.
\ > x ^ .
fewer people engaged in non-polluting activities, in manufac¬
turing and in the service sector, which do not have the nega¬
tive effects of old-fashioned industrial growth. So by saving
resources and using new technologies you can promote eco¬
nomic and social development with less negative side effects.
These are hopeful trends.
A huge effort on the part of world opinion will be neces¬
sary. Do you think disarmament would liberate resources-
minds, men, moneyto make this transition easier? Are
world decision-makers really thinking about this?
I think they are. Already discussions are going on about
this in almost all the West European countries and in the
United States. They have signed treaties for reducing pollu¬
tion in the coming decade which are going to be enormously
expensive. And the only way to absorb these costs is to
channel resources away from the military sector. This is why
the 90s should be a time of great opportunities.
What pan do you think culture can play in this process?
The words we use are interesting. Once people talked
only about development. Then they started talking about
culture, the environment, human rights... These were words
many countries did not like to hear twenty years ago. Today
nobody can escape them. Sometimes one word comes into
vogue, then another. I remember a time in my country when
a big effort was being made to extend the impact of our cul¬
tural policies. Everyone seemed to be talking about culture.
Culture became a catchword and whatever people were
talking about it always seemed to come back to culture in
the end. Then, when environmental issues came on the
agenda, people started to use the word environment instead
of the word culture. What both words really refer to are
essential human values as defined outside the realm of pure
economics. The two concepts obviously overlap when you
examine them closely. So I think that today the word
environment is one that catches people's attention and
reaches over continents, but obviously culture is part of it
and adds to it. The two concepts are interrelated.
You mean they cover the same thing?
Not exactly, but there is often a tendency to broaden the
definition of words. In Unesco, for example, there is a ten¬
dency to define culture so broadly that it encompasses almost
all human activity. The World Health Organization does
the same thing with the concept of health because when they
look at people's health they find that so many other factors
are connected with it. Education is obviously part of cul¬
ture but without education you cannot take erre of your
own health. And without education and without health,
people have no human rights and there can be no develop¬
ment. All these concepts are interrelated to the extent that
they are rooted in human values and rights.
