Most of
the world's
illiterates are
women. What
can be done to
break down
the barriers to
literacy faced by
women,
especially in the
poorest
countries?



The gender
gap By Agneta Lind
RI OT long ago a group of newly literate women
from the south coast of Kenya were explaining
the advantages of their recently acquired skills in
reading, writing and calculation. Now they could
sign their names they had more control over
money transactions. They could read medical
prescriptions and instructions. "Our eyes have
been opened," said one of them, expressing the
new sense of pride and increased self-reliance they
all felt.
The preliminary findings from a question¬
naire sent out in September 1988 by World
YWCA to its member associations confirm such
liberating effects of literacy. The responses show
that:
Women who receive literacy training are more
respected in the community and at home.
é '
They are better equipped to search for jobs and
can therefore earn more.
They realize that they can do some jobs which
are traditionally considered to be for men only.
They are more able to run small businesses and
keep records on their own.
They become more effective leaders of women's "
groups.
Their political awareness, participation and
organizational skills are enhanced.
They gain better understanding of their rights.
They are much more capable of helping their
children with their schoolwork.
There are many human, social and econom¬
ic reasons why literacy education for women and
girls should be a priority objective. For many
women, achieving literacy could be one of the
first steps in a process enabling them to take con¬
trol over their lives, to participate on a more
equal basis in society, and eventually to free them¬
selves from economic exploitation and patriarchal
oppression. The sole fact that mothers' level of
education has a positive effect on their children's
health and progress in school should be a strong
enough argument.
The figures show that the gap in literacy rates
between men and women is constantly widening.
Moreover, it seems likely that this "gender gap"
will become even wider as economic constraints
lead to increased demands on women's unskilled
work and push literacy lower down the scale of
priorities of people and governments.
Illiteracy among women and men in Third
World countries is linked to poverty, inequalities
and oppression. The education system introduced
by colonial powers sometimes tended to accen¬
tuate various forms of. discrimination, and the
consequent inequities in access to school account
for most adult illiteracy in Third World countries
today. The traditional division of family and
social roles between the sexes also prevented most
girls from achieving literacy through schooling,
and even when girls were enrolled in schools,
Left, overburdened with
domestic tasks, relatively
few illiterate women
manage to achieve literacy.

t&toc*»*k
educational practices often reinforced their subor¬
dination. Although the open discrimination prac¬
tised during colonial days may be less common
today, patriarchal ideologies and social systems
that disfavour women have persisted.
Yet in many Third World countries, many
women do participate in literacy classes, especially
among the rural population. One reason for this
is that they tend to see literacy as a way of helping
them to cope with responsibilities that were
previously monopolized by their menfolk who
have migrated to the towns in search of work. If
they are literate they can also read their husbands'
letters and write back without having to call in
other people.
Obstacles to learning
But although there are many reasons why women
should want to participate in literacy classes, their
traditional and new occupations do not leave
them much time for regular attendance and effi¬
cient learning. They tend to be overburdened
with domestic tasks such as cooking and cleaning,
fetching water and firewood, as well as farming
and earning money. Frequent child-bearing leaves
little time and energy for learning how to read
and write. Even when mothers do attend classes
they often bring their smallest children. Concen¬
tration is obviously difficult when babies and
toddlers have to be looked after during the lessons.
Only rarely are child-care provisions made
for women during class time, although in some
countries they have been offered literacy courses
in boarding centres, away from competing de¬
mands and duties. Nonetheless, other problems
have arisen such as poorly qualified tutors, short¬
ages of food, uncomfortable living conditions,
and insufficient programme time.
Women are, moreover, directly discouraged
by the attitudes of men, often including male
teachers, to their capacities in the classroom. Hus¬
bands and guardians sometimes even forbid them
to attend literacy classes. The men are afraid that
women who learn more than they do may expose
their ignorance and, above all, challenge their
power position within the family.
Even where women and girls do manage to
acquire elementary literacy skills, it is often more
difficult for them than for men to sustain these
Above, a Togolese woman
makes soap during a literacy
class.
25

skills. The reading material at their disposal is
often not designed for their interests and needs,
and in any case they often have less access to it
and less time for reading. The support and mobili¬
zation which take some women and girls through
to literacy tend to dwindle when they become
literate.
One response to these difficulties is to
integrate literacy courses for women into
programmes related to health care, family plan¬
ning, nutrition and income-generation. In prac¬
tice, however, this approach often leads to a
26
neglect of literacy instruction, since the women
are expected to be involved in so many other
activities at the same time.
Women and mass literacy campaigns
The general experience of adult literacy pro¬
grammes, whether organized on a large scale by
the state or on a small scale by non-governmental
organizations, is that without various forms of
mobilizationawakening or creating motivation
the response is weak.
Only national mass literacy campaigns have
successfully managed to mobilize and teach
hundreds of thousands of illiterate women and
men elementary literacy skills. Such campaigns
have taken place in countries where literacy was
part of a national policy for overcoming poverty
and injustice, where both the state and the people
concerned expected literacy to be one of many
factors which would improve social, political and
economic conditions and help develop human
and material resources.
In most of these campaigns the teaching
Peruvian women learning
letters and sounds. This
photo features in a
travelling exhibition
organized by Unesco for
International Literacy Year
(see page 50).
AGNETA LIND
is a staff member of the
education division of the
Swedish International
Development Authority,
Stockholm, and a specialist on
education in Third World
countries. This article has
been adapted from a booklet
which forms part of a series
entitled Literacy Lessons,
produced by the International
Bureau of Education on the
occasion of International
Literacy Year (see page 50).
methods have been traditional, but the contents
have focused on national issues and have includ¬
ed themes stressing equal rights and the need for
women's emancipation and equal participation in
all spheres of society.
In national mass literacy campaigns, as well
as more local campaigns, the degree of women's
participation in particular has depended on com¬
munity attitudes. While a superior and patroniz¬
ing attitude among literacy organizers and
teachers discourages interest, a democratic, open
and involved attitude, treating the learners as
equal adults, and creating an atmosphere of con¬
fidence, has a positive influence on attendance and
results. Local women teachers working with
separate women's literacy groups are often suc¬
cessful in encouraging learning and participation.
The active involvement of local leaders in
favour of literacy activities has often been cru¬
cial for the achievement of high levels of partici¬
pation and learning. In 1971, for example, when
the first drive of the Tanzanian literacy campaign
reached the island of Mafia, the local leaders in¬
sisted that men and women were to participate.
Separate classes for men and women were or¬
ganized. Mobilizing visits by national leaders
were followed up by the appointment of an Area
Commissioner who was a committed adult edu¬
cator himself.
The reason why this support was so impor¬
tant was explained by one woman who was asked
what her husband thought about her participation
in literacy classes. "Yes, he grumbles a bit, as men
do," she said. "Some men are very worried, and
they don't let their wives attend classes. But it's
too late, I think. When the Area Commissioner
held a meeting here both men and women were
asked to come. We didn't dare, in the beginning.
But the cell leader had brought his wife, and she
came back to fetch us. The Area Commissioner
had complained that so few women were present
and said that he would not start the meeting until
everyone had met up. These classes have meant
a lot to us."
Illiterate women often want to become liter¬
ate, but relatively few manage to satisfy this wish.
The constraintstime-consuming duties, short¬
comings in the design of the literacy programmes
^offered, and men's resistanceare often over¬
whelming. It is important not to overload the
learning programmes or to expect women to be
involved in too many programme activities at the
same time. Mass literacy campaigns, genuine
political priority and community support for
literacy have been the most successful factors in
mobilizing women to participate in and complete
literacy programmes. In these campaigns men
have been pressurized to accept women's partici¬
pation in literacy and in other social, economic
and political activities. It is important to promote
awareness of women's rights within literacy
programmes designed for them, and, indeed, this
contributes to the success of such programmes.
