PULLING TOGETHER
THE STRANDS
OF TIME
Y DENYS LOMBARD
I
26
N the Indonesian Archipelago, it was not until
the spread of Islam in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries that the idea of time as Promethean,
linear, directional and evenly distributed (in
Malay waktu, from the Arabic wakt) gradually
began to win at least partial acceptance.
Today two different and parallel concepts of
time exist in this region. On the one hand there
is historical time, references to which can be
found as early as the seventeenth century in cer¬
tain Malay treatises which mention dated events
and, above all, the collective destiny of the
Muslim community. This homogeneous, neutral
time is punctuated solely by the major festivals
of Islam. On the other hand there is a non-
historical, immobile time in which the days are
distributed according to a traditional system of
classification, still greatly in evidence in Java and
Bali. Each moment, far from being neutral, is con¬
sidered to have a particular density or "key sig-
Temple at Besakih, Bali. nature" which can be discovered only by com¬
plicated calculations and which a person must
know before undertaking any important action.
This duality is essential for understanding the
way in which the idea of history (sejarah) has
developed. For simplicity's sake, it can be said
that the first conception of time gave rise to the
hikayat or Malay stories and that from the second
derived the babad or Javanese chronicles.
The Dutch settlers made two positive con¬
tributions to the civilization of the region. They
brought with them, first, the idea of directional
time, which could not but reinforce the concept
of time in evidence in the hikayat, and, secondly,
a partiality for the systematic study of texts.
However, their outlook was inevitably tainted by
Eurocentrism. Oud en Nieuw Oostindien, written
at the beginning of the eighteenth century by a
pastor, François Valentyn, recounted the history
of the Archipelago and Asia on the basis of

Batavian chronicles and the fortunes of the Dutch
East India Company. This dual approach, rooted
in both scientific respect for documents and the
unconscious cynicism of the European settler,
became ever more marked in the following
centuries.
A passion for philological enquiry underlay
the search for Malay, Javanese, Balinese, Buginese
and other manuscripts, the study of inscriptions
on stone and copper, and interest in the monu¬
ments of the Indo-Javanese past generally.
However, Eurocentrism lay at the heart of
most of the synoptic studies that came out at
around the same time and which focused on the
periods of Indianization and of the Batavian con¬
quest. Two major themes emerged which were
to complement one another. The first was the im¬
portance of Indian influence, which was confined
to Java and Bali but was essentially beneficial and
led to the creation of great kingdoms, such as
Majapahit in Java, in the thirteenth to fifteenth
centuries and to the development of a fascinating
classical art. The second major theme was the cen¬
tral role of the Dutch East India Company, which



achieved single-handed the feat of bringing
together the scattered islands of the Archipelago
into one large political unit.
The role of the coastal sultanates in the
fifteenth to the seventeenth centuries was syste¬
matically ignored and if Islam was mentioned it
was in order to denounce its baneful effects.
The reaction of the first
nationalists
The early nationalists tried to turn European
intellectual weapons against the Europeans. They
soon realized how useful it would be to recover
the glorious past which the philologists had
restored to them. However, they had a great deal
to do before shaping the national history which
they needed and founding the independent state
of their dreams. The idea of a common historical
destiny was far from being universally accepted.
Nor did the material they found in Dutch text¬
books always make their task easier.
The first signs of the new climate of opinion
appeared at the end of the nineteenth century,
particularly in Java. This awareness of the cul¬
tural heritage was expressed even more clearly by
the members of the Budi Utomo, an association
founded in 1908 by a small group of Javanese
wishing to revive their traditions. In 1911 Doctor
Radjiman, a native of Yogya who had played an
active part in the launching of this movement,
declared before a Dutch audience that there could
be no question of Westernizing the Javanese: "If
the indigenous people are torn from their past
they will become rootless misfits, lost between
two civilizations."
The issues were spelt out in 1935 in a debate
triggered by Sutan Takdir Alisjahbana, who
rejected all nostalgia for the past and thought that
the first priority was to try to imitate the West
in order to catch up. Professor Purbatjaraka, a
native of Surakarta, who had been one of the first
to take over the philological method introduced
by the Dutch, insisted more than anyone else on
the importance of the past: "Only when we are
familiar with the course of our history from the
earliest times shall we be able to organize our
future properly."
Sanusi Pane went even further. Born in
Sumatra but strongly attracted to Javanese cul¬
ture, the man who was to write the first history
of Indonesia (1943-1945) criticized Sutan Takdir's
craving for novelty and praised the sage Arjuna,
the hero of the Mahabharata whose preference
was for spiritual values, unlike the Westerners'
Faust, who did not flinch from selling his soul
for material gain.
A thinker who became acutely aware of the
problem was the Javanese Suwardi Surjaningrat,
better known by the name of Ki Hadjar Dewan-
tara (1889-1959). "We live," he wrote in 1929,
"like the clients of a hotel belonging to others,
who seek neither to improve nor to equip the
house in which they live, because they do not feel
that it is theirs." Dismayed by this passivity, he
wished first to restore to his contemporaries their
dignity and their identity. He was not automati¬
cally hostile to the West but thought that no
association was possible unless the Indonesians
could define their cultural identity.
History during
the Sukarno period
In view of the importance that these nationalists
attached to cultural identity (kepribadian), it may
seem surprising that the Sukarno period did not
produce a truly national history. Sukarno
(Indonesian president from 1949 to 1966) was
fond of repeating that "history must not be
forgotten under any pretext", but the efforts
made at the time to write a general history foun¬
dered on account of numerous differences of
opinion.
The Dutch East India
Company fleet in the bay of
Batavia (now Jakarta),
capital of the Dutch East
Indies. In foreground, a
merchant and his wife.
Painting by Aelbert Cuyp
(1620-1691).
DENYS LOMBARD,
French historian, is director
of studies at the Ecole des
Hautes Etudes en Sciences
Sociales, Paris. A specialist
on the Indian Archipelago
and co-editor of the
interdisciplinary review
Archipel, he is the author of
studies on the sultanate of
Aceh in Sumatra (1967) and
on the history of Java (3
volumes, forthcoming). 27

Detail from a bas-relief in
the vast temple complex at
Prambanan, one of the
finest examples of central
Javanese art (late 9th-early
10th century).
28
Fascination with Javanese history is the most
striking feature of Muhammad Yamin's
voluminous works, which sometimes give the im¬
pression of having been written by an official
historian. As early as 1945 Yamin wrote an essay
about Gajah Mada, who was chief minister of the
fourteenth-century King Hayam Wuruk and
reunited Indonesian lands around Java and its
then centre, Majapahit. Above all, he sought to
use the findings of epigraphy or philology to
stimulate the pride of his compatriots and justify
the political demands of his government.
Meanwhile, recent victims of arbitrary Dutch
rule and those who had stood up against the East
India Company were granted the status of local
or national heroes (pahlawan). Many streets were
named after them. This was a widespread
phenomenon. In Java and elsewhere each region
honoured its heroes. Their biographies were
written, they were depicted in imagery, the real
or assumed graves of some of them were restored
and became places of pilgrimage. In 1959 the
authorities drew up an official list of national
heroes.
In addition to this vast hagiographie under¬
taking, ideologists considered to be progressive
were recreating history. A more searching histor¬
ical analysis, the first outlines of a social history,
might have been expected from these intellectuals
who purported to be Marxists. The Madilog
(acronym of Materialisme-Dialektika-Logika),
written by Tan Malaka in 1942-1943, shortly after
his return from exile, and representing the first
dialectical approach to Indonesian history, with
its simple not to say simplistic division into
periods, has more in common with utopianism
than with Marxist analysis.
Less poetic but historically more reliable in
the sense that it contains precise references to
epigraphy and Javanese chronicles is D.N. Aidit's
"Indonesian Society and Indonesian Revolution",
a textbook written in 1957 for the schools of the
Communist Party. It none the less appears to be
no more than window-dressing for ideas imported
from the West. The Marxist tool, instead of
prompting a profound analysis of society and
inspiring an original approach to periodization
highlighting for instance the expansion of trade
in the sultanates in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, or the development of the economy of
the plantations in the nineteenth centuryloses
its fine edge when applied to colonial chronology
and merely serves to rename the different stages.
History and the New Order:
from 1966 to the present
President Suharto's New Order made an effort
to learn from the historical methods developed
in the West. The old idea of a national history
was revived and the groundwork was carefully
laid through numerous seminars for the prepa¬
ration of the six-volume textbook which even¬
tually appeared in 1975. The following
breakdown into periods was adopted and an¬
nounced at a seminar held in Yogyakarta in
August 1970: prehistory, the Indianization period,
the sixteenth-eighteenth centuries, the nineteenth
century, 1900-1942, post-1942. One virtue of such



a time-division, debatable though it may be in
other respects, is that it integrates into the history
of the nation prehistory and protohistory, which
are regarded as essential formative periods before
Indianization. It also recognizes the importance
of the period from the sixteenth to the eighteenth
century, which is no longer considered to be
purely colonial but to have been strongly marked
by Islam and the formation of the sultanates.
Indonesian historiography then underwent a
distinct change. Regional history was taken into
account, and a series of local seminars were or¬
ganized in order to secure the collaboration of
scholars in the provinces and to bring them into
contact with historians. The latter also became
more open to archaeology, although archaeology
and history were still taught separately at the
university. The hagiographical tone was some¬
what tempered by exposure to the facts. A com¬
parative history of South Asia slowly emerged
which held out promise in so far as it allowed
nationalistic prejudices to be overcome.
Institutions which had previously taken little
interest in their history have now adopted a
historical perspective. Among them are the army,
which now has its own history department and
museums, the Protestant and Catholic Churches,
and the state Islamic Institutes, which have begun
preparing a history of Indonesia from the Muslim
point of view. The old practice of hagiography
still looms large, but these recent developments
are leading to consciousness of a linear history
and form part of a slow progression towards what
I have called historical time.
