WÊF
1
7
r
al
i
I
Ta*'
* » .f
the sun BY GALINA KAPTUKE-VARLAMOVA
I
JuONG ago, the Evenk people of northern
Siberia believed that the sun, the moon and the
sky were their cosmic parents, founders of the
universe and the source of all life on earth. They
inhabited a vast upper world, Ugu Buga, which
had its own taiga, rivers and oceans. Beneath Ugu
Buga stretched the boundless sea of Lam Buldyar,
ruled over by Savaki, son of the sky.
The chief figure in this ancient Evenk cos¬
mogony is the sun, Dylachankur, master of light
and warmth. Each morning Dylachankur rises
and orders his youngest son, Garpani, to take a
torch made of birch-bark to the hole in the upper
world in order to bring light to mankind. As
Garpani approaches the hole the earth grows
lighter, and when he puts his torch to the hole,
day breaks.
Dylachankur himself works all day long
gathering warmth for the people. But when he
pulls down the curtain-door of his tent and stokes
the fire in his hearth, autumn comes to the earth.
And winter comes when all the warmth is
gathered into his huge leather sack inside the tent
and the door is tightly closed. When Dylachankur



-ajAtaiv. In-, sons carr) the sack to the hole in the
^upper world and shake out the warmth, the snow
thaws, the rivers flow again and the warm days
of spring return.
waking from his long winter sleep, the
er Agdy strikes fire from a flint to stoke
Thunder roars and lightning flashes.
At this time of year the call of the cuckoo, the
shaman bird, can also be heard. She is sent to the
earth to sing praises for the returning warmth and
light and to awaken spring. With the first peals
of thunder and the first cries of the cuckoo, the
Evenk celebrate the coming of spring. For eight
days, the feast of Ikechik, they sing and dance and
give thanks to Dylachankur, the sun, for the
warmth that has come to the earth.
Legend has it that long ago Dylachankur had
a wife, Bega, the moon. They lived together and
had childrenthe sun-rays. But once, when they
were travelling across the sky, Bega left behind
their ollon, a hook for hanging up a cauldron.
Although this was such an important household
utensil, Dylachankur told her: "Don't go back,
or you'll fall behind for ever." "No, I won't,"
the moon answered, and she went back to fetch
the ollon. Alas, she never caught up with
Dylachankur and their sons, and she is still trying
to do so. When the sun rises the moon is nowhere
to be seen, because she has gone back to fetch the
hook, and when the sun sets the moon immedi¬
ately appears in vain pursuit.
Evenk hunters referred to a fixed point of
brightness in the night sky (the Pole Star) for
orientation. They named it Buga Sanari ("the
hole in the sky"). Through this hole they believed
it was possible to reach the upper world. They
marked the passing of time by the nightly appear¬
ance of the Great Bear constellation, which they
named Havlan, the she-elk of the sky.
The hunters used to say that during the day¬
time the she-elk and her calf (the Little Bear) hide
in the forests of the sky. When darkness falls, they
come out to graze on the high peaks of the moun¬
tains and then they can be seen. But the bogatyr
a cosmic forefather of the Evenk. hunts the

Soothsayer and healer, the
shaman was the central
figure in traditional Evenk
religion. Below, 18th-
century illustration of a
shaman.
she-elk each night. His wide skis leave a trail
the Milky Way. Mani overtakes the she-elk and
kills her, but the calf escapes. By the next night,



the calf has grown up and takes her place in the
night sky with a new calf. Again Mani puts on
his skis and continues his hunt.
According to another version of this myth,
Hoglen the elk steals the sun, thus taking day¬
light away from the earth. He hides the sun
beneath his belly and runs with him across the
sky. Night falls on earth. Mani comes down to
see how the Evenk live, but it is dark on earth
because Hoglen has taken away the sun. People
cannot live without light and warmth, so Mani
decides to help them. He puts on his skis and sets
off in pursuit of Hoglen, armed with a bow and
two arrows. He skis with all his might, overtakes
the elk and shoots his first arrow, but in the dark¬
ness he misses the target.
Hoglen the elk runs across the sky, with
Mani the bogatyr in hot pursuit. They run for a
long time, and all the while the earth remains in
darkness. At last Mani overtakes the elk once
more and, running by his side, draws back the
bow-string to its limit. This time the arrow finds
its mark. Mani takes the sun from Hoglen and
28
brings light back to the earth. And so it has been
ever since, which is why night always follows day
and day follows night.
The earth-diver myth
The Evenk believed that the earth was created
by Savaki, son of the sky, who lived in the upper
world of Ugu Buga with his elder brother Khargi.
Savaki asked the golden-eye duck and the diver
bird to help him create a "middle world" by
bringing sand and clay from the sea-bed. The
golden-eye dived three times but it could not
reach the bottom. Then the diver plunged into
the sea but at first had no success either. It dived
again and this time it just touched the bottom
with its beak. Then it rested for a while and tried
again, diving so deep that it caught up a beakful
of earth. When the diver came up it spat out the
earth and an islet was formed, which gradually
grew larger and larger. Khargi was envious
because his brother had created the land, while
it had never occurred to him to do anything like
that himself.
Savaki, meanwhile, looked at the bare land
and was not pleased with it. Nothing grew on
it, nobody lived there. So he made up his mind
to create plants, mountains, rivers and lakes.
Every day he came down from the upper world
to the earth to work. Khargi also came down to
spy on him. The land was growing wider but it
was not solid enough, so Savaki set fire to it. The
fire raged for a long time, and when it was extin¬
guished lakes and rivers appeared in the burned
places. Next Savaki asked for the help of the
water dragon, Dyabdar, who had the enormous
horns of an elk. Dyabdar dived under the earth
and as he swam the twisting of his body raised
hills and mountains.
Savaki then began to create trees and grasses,
intending to make only plants that would be
useful to man, but the envious Khargi was
watching him and imitated everything he did.
When Savaki created a larch, Khargi made a pine.
The Evenk never use pine as firewood because
its smoke hurts the eyes. Savaki created a birch,
and in trying to copy him Khargi produced an
alder, a tree which is virtually useless to the
Evenk apart from the dye that can be extracted
from its bark. The furious Khargi finally cried:
"From now on I'll only create that which is
useless or harmful to man."
Thus man can eat all the animals and birds
created by Savaki, while Khargi's creations are
inedible. When Savaki created a grouse, Khargi
created.. .a woodpecker. In the end, Savaki
proscribed the eating of meat from his brother's
creations.
Finally Savaki began to create men and
women. He wished them to be immortal. The
dog, which resembled man in that it could speak
and had no fur, was helping him. Its duty was
to guard Savaki's creations so that Khargi could
not spoil them. One day when Savaki had gone

in search of clay and iron (which he needed to
make man's heart), Khargi came to the hut in
which the finished figures were kept and where
the dog was on guard.
"Open the door and let me see what my
brother has created," he said. "No," answered



the dog, "Savaki forbade me to open the door
for you." Khargi found a crack in the wall and
blew through it with all his might. It grew very
cold and the naked dog was freezing. Khargi
noted this and repeated: "Open the door, I'll just
look at my brother's creations and then I'll give
you warm clothes for good. You will never be
cold again." So the dog opened the door.
Khargi licked the clay figures all over, spat
on them, and said: "My brother wanted to make
people immortal, but I'll spoil his creations. They
will no longer be immortal but will be subject
to diseases that will make them die before their
When Savaki returned he was very angry
with the dog and said: "Now you will become
a real dog, you will grow fur and forget human
speech. You will understand everything, but
instead of answering you will just wag your tail.
You will always walk with a leash round your
neck and look at man's back." He drove the dog-
out, and that was the end of their friendship.
Savaki breathed warmth from his fire into the
clay figures and they came to life. Then he
returned to the upper world and named the earth
Dulin Buga, which means "middle world". On
taking his leave, he gave the people their tradi¬
tions and the rules that govern their life and con¬
duct. As for Khargi, he left for the place that he
had created for himself, the lower world that is
the source of everything harmful to man.
time.
Evenk figurine of a
protective spirit.
Left, Evenk hunters of
northern Siberia use
reindeer as pack animals
and mounts.
GALINA
KAPTUKE-VARLAMOVA
was born in Soviet Siberia
into a family of Evenk
hunters and reindeer
breeders. She is a philologist
and writer with a special
interest in the folklore of
the peoples of the far north. 29
