UNESCO
AND
INTERNATIONAL
LITERACY YEAR
HOW YOU CAN HELP
If you wish to assist literacy efforts
in developing countries, Unesco
provides two channels: its Special
Account for World Literacy and its
Co-Action Programme.
The Special Account supports a
wide variety of literacy-related activi¬
ties in all parts of the world. Volun¬
tary contributions finance operations
such as the purchase of paper and
printing material, reading books, text¬
books, pencils, blackboards and other
supplies. They also finance research,
media programmes, the training of
specialists, and the organization of
seminars and study courses. Dona¬
tions to the "Special Account for
World Literacy", may be addressed
to the Education Sector, Unesco, 7
place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris.
If you would like to contribute to
the Unesco Co-Action Programme,
which enables donations to be chan¬
nelled to specific projects in some 20
countries', a catalogue of literacy'and
post-literacy projects aided by the
Programme can be obtained from
The Unesco Co-Action Programme,
BAO/CSF, Unesco (address as above).
RURAL WOMEN
AGAINST ILLITERACY
For some 500 million women who
live in rural areas of the Third World,
life is an unending struggle for sur¬
vival. From morning to night they
work in the fields, transport water
and fuelwood, prepare meals and
take care of their families. The lives
of these women and their attempts
to achieve literacy skills and escape
from poverty, exclusion and silence
are portrayed in a forthcoming book
entitled Inside the Third World: Rural
Women Against Illiteracy, which
will be published by Unesco in Sep¬
tember 1990. The author, Krystyna
Chlebowska, is a Unesco specialist in
the education of women and girls.
English and French versions of the
book can be ordered from the
Unesco Press Sales Division, 7 place
de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. A Spanish
translation will be published later.
HISTORY OF WRITING
EXHIBITION FOR ILY
To mark International Literacy Year,
the European Centre of Educational
Alliances has organized a chronolog¬
ical exhibition on the history of writ¬
ing, from the cryptogram to the
computer. It will be shown at the
International Bureau of Education in
Geneva from 3 to 9 September 1990,
and at Unesco headquarters in Paris
from 24 September to 5 October.
A wide range of ancient bas-
reliefs, both originals and reproduc¬
tions, parchments, books, sculptures,
photographs, prints and paintings will
be displayed. Puppets from all over the
world, each symbolizing a letter of the
alphabet, will illustrate what writing
means to each of the cultures repre¬
sented"freedom" for some, "light"
or "communication" for others.
Painters, sculptors, writers and
musicians wishing to contribute on the
theme "Writing and the artist today"
are invited to contact the European
Centre of Educational Alliances, 34
rue Marius Aufan, 92300 Levallols-
Perret, France; Tel: 47 58 07 45.
Acknowledgements
Cover, page 3 (left): © Zabelle Côté,
Montreal. Back cover, page 14
(right): © Christophe Kuhn, Paris.
Page 2: © Simone, Éelgium. Pages 3
(right), 5 (left): A. Kourbatov
© APN, Moscow. Page 5 (right):
© A. Goryainov, Moscow. Page 6
(left): illustration by Jean Alessandrini
© Gallimard, Paris; (right):
illustration by Michel Simeon © Livre
de Poche, Paris. Page 7: © Reunion
des Musées Nationaux, Pans. Musée
des Beaux-Arts, Dijon/ADAGP 1990,
Paris. Page 8: © Isabelle Simon, Paris.
Page 10: Chrismar ©Fotogram-Stone
International, Paris. Page 11 (above):
©Jörgen Schytte, Copenhagen;
(below left): © Edimedia, Paris;
(below right): Michel
Claude/Unesco. Page 12 (above):
© Literacy Section, Social Welfare
Commission, Jamaica; (below):
© Asian Cultural Centre for Unesco
(ACCU), Tokyo. Page 13: © Charles
Carné, Paris. Pages 14 (left), 18, 19:
All Rights Reserved. Page 15 (left):
G. Boutin © Explorer, Paris. Pages
15 (right), 28-29 (centre), 34, 45
(below): © Ron Giling, Arnhem,
Netherlands. Pages 16-17: ©Roger
Carressa (AFIAP), Toulon, France.
Page 20 (above): Giry © Réa, Paris;
(below): © Anne Périé, La Garenne-
Colombes, France. Page 21: ©Carlos
Freiré, Paris. Page 22 (below left):
© Traditions for Tomorrow. Page 24:
illustration by Mikki Rain/UNFPA,
New York. Pages 25, 38: © Krystyna
Chlebowska, Paris. Page 26:
Herzog/Unesco. Page 27: Henri
Cartier-Bresson © Magnum, Paris.
Page 28 (left): © Monique Piétri,
Paris. Page 29 (right): Patrick
Broquet © Explorer, Paris. Page 30:
© Lumière, Paris. Page 31: Michael
Barnett/Science Photo Library
© Cosmos, Paris. Page 32 (left): F.
Jalain © Explorer, Paris; (above &
below right): © 1977 Carol Morris Si
Ruth Lesirge, Macmillan Education
Ltd., London and Basingstoke. Page
33: Lawrence Manning © Cosmos,
Paris. Page 35: Gaillard © Jerrican,
Paris. Page 36 (above): © Explorer
Archives/Newberry Library, Chicago;
(centre & below): © Explorer
Archives. Page 37: E. David
Robinson/Unesco. Page 39: J.P.
Daudier ©Jerrican, Paris. Page 40: V.
Clement ©Jerrican, Paris. Pages 42,
44, 45 (above): ©J.L. Charmet, Paris.
Private Collection. Page 43: ©J.L.
Charmet, Paris. Bibliothèque des Arts
Décoratifs, Paris. Page 46: University
of Utah, Salt Lake City © Picture-
Group Réa, Paris. Page 48: C. Weiss
© Réa, Paris. CIRAD/CNUSC. Page
50 (above): Dominique
Roger/Unesco; (below): Eric
Schwab/Unesco.
