hospitality - a dying tradition?
BY BABACAR FALL
t
SOLIDARITY is a salient characteristic of tradi¬
tional African societies even though they are
organized into hierarchies in which everyone's
place is determined by social status. Solidarity
unites families linked by ties of blood, as well as
groups living in the same area, belonging to the
same village community, and sharing the same
system of values.
But this solidarity may also be extended to
persons outside the group or community. It
fosters mobility and offers an opportunity to
develop sociability. This is why, throughout
Africa, strangers are treated with respect and
courtesy. The old folk say that the true griot*
is the stranger who later praises his host's family
to the skies.
A hearty welcome beneath
the palaver tree
Among the Baulé of Côte d'Ivoire strangers are
warmly welcomed without any questions being
asked about the purpose of their visit. Hospitality
is discreet, salutations courteous: "Welcome, here
you are at home". A seat is offered, and water
in a coconut shell. After the visitor has had time
to relax and recover from the strain of the jour¬
ney, the head of the family invites him to eat.
Seated in the open air or on the veranda, the guest
is asked to dip his hand into a dish of yams and
okra sauce. More dishes follow: chicken, walnut
sauce and other specialities.
The meal is followed by a rest in the court¬
yard or in the main room of the dwelling. Palm
wine is served, conversation starts up and be¬
comes animated, words flow spontaneously. Para¬
bles, tales, proverbs and legends enliven the
conversation in a cheerful atmosphere which
helps the guest to feel really at home.
The visitor is then taken for a stroll through
the village where he is welcomed by the chief or
one of the notables with mock solemnity,
Musicians prepare to welcome visitors outside the
sultan's palace at Agadez (Niger). 21

beneath the palaver tree. He is offered another
jar of palm wine, a sign of the high esteem in
which he is held. The jar is handed around so that
everyone can be associated with the welcome
extended to the guest.
In the Sahel, hospitality is
a family affair
The hospitality of the Sahelians is even more
effusive. Because of the inadequacy or absence of
communication facilities in the Sahel, visitors
always arrive unannounced. But as soon as they
are sighted, people go to meet them. After a
joyful and spontaneous exchange of greetings and
hugs, they are relieved of their bags. Children are
the first to honour this tradition.
This lengthy exchange of greetings is charac¬
teristic of Sahelian cultures. For some Tukulor
or Wolof peoples the act of salutation is the first
and most noble form of courtesy, giving immedi¬
ate cheer and inspiring the greatest friendship. Ac¬
cording to one saying, it is even compulsory to
greet an enemy, since greeting others properly
is an indication of one's own self-esteem.
In the early 1940s, a Dakar student wrote the
following description of the welcome extended
to a visitor by the people of Baol, in central
Senegal: "The guest is received in the hut of his
closest kin. He is given the place of honour,
which is in the middle of the bed. Friends and
relatives have to be introduced and, sitting on
mats, they engage the newcomer in conversation.
One of the daughters of the house offers him cool
water and, if the guest has arrived on horseback,
a young man takes care of his animal. During this
time a slave brings water in a jar, which is placed
within the enclosure where shortly afterwards the
visitor goes and washes himself." When a guest
was fully rested, he was offered two kola nuts,
one red and the other white, so that he could
choose according to his preference.
In fact, hospitality is nearly always a family
affair in the broad sense. The guest is welcomed
by everyone. He is then looked after by people
of his own age. As soon as his arrival is an¬
nounced, members of his age-group make con¬
tact with him at his host's dwelling. As words
of greeting lead on to conversation, the chain of
friendship grows longer. At mealtime dishes are
sent to him and he is invited in turn to visit each
of his new friends. He is expected to show that
he has eaten well, failing which he is liable to be
severely reproached for behaving "like a
stranger". These receptions give rise to some com¬
petition between families. Every effort is made
to please the guest, who responds courteously to
all these attentions. In addition he distributes pro¬
visions of his own, usually produce from home.
At whatever time the visitor arrives, he is
always offered something to eat so that he can
restore his strength after the journey. If the head
of the family is rich he shows his guest how
happy he is to receive him by offering him an
animal (a sheep or a goat) which will be sacrificed
and prepared in his honour.
'On the third day,
give him a tool'
Among the Tukulor, a hospitable people who
live in the Senegal river basin, guests are sheltered
and fed as well as possible, provided that they do
not outstay their welcome. The Tukolor put into
practice a dictum set forth by former Tanzanian
president Julius Nyerere: "When a stranger ar¬
rives, feed him for two days; on the third day,
give him a tool." This rule being generally un¬
derstood and accepted, abuses are rare.
The length of the stay usually depends on the
age of the guest and the nature of his visit, and
varies from a week to a month. Preparations are
then made for the return journey. The day of
departure is set after lengthy negotiations.
Portrait of a Wolof griot by
the Senegalese painter Gora
M'Bengue
Below left, preparing rice for
a festive occasion
Below, villagers of the Côte
d'lvoire's Yakuba people
watch a ritual dance.

"4 !*.*-.- /
^ÄJK.-
a4 palaver at Bardai, an
oasis in the Tibesti region of
northern Chad
BABACAR FALL,
of Senegal, teaches at the
Cheik Anta Diop
University, Dakar.
Provisions are collected together along with gifts
and messages for the traveller and for relatives
living in his village. The departure is marked by
ceremonial. The marabout is consultedsome
days are auspicious, others are not. Wednesdays
and Fridays are often avoided.
Dying traditions
But traditions of hospitality are dying out as a
result of growing urbanization. Neighbourliness
is less common, and outside their home area
strangers encounter greater difficulties.
Modernization is playing havoc with the pat¬
terns of community life. African cities are ex¬
panding considerably as a result of population
growth, but also because of a nonstop exodus
from the rural areas. Individualism is prevailing
over community spirit.
For a number of reasons, the extended family
is gradually breaking up and giving way to the
nuclear family. This loosening of the bonds of
kinship tends to lead to "me first" attitudes and,
with the economic crisis also playing a part,
generosity and open-handedness are dying out.
Africans living outside their own countries
are often the hardest hit. Foreigners are increas¬
ingly accused of responsibility for the problems
besetting some countries that are labouring under
economic difficulties. Sometimes people from
neighbouring countries are subjected to mass
expulsions.
Yet hospitality, which was once universally
respected, was one of the founding ideals of
African unity in the wake of independence. On
the basis of these traditions of hospitality, the
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
provides for the protection of the nationals of
other countries. Article 12 thus stipulates that "A
non-national legally admitted in a territory of a
state party to the present Charter may only be
expelled from it by virtue of a decision taken in
accordance with the law". Paragraph 5 of that
article declares that: "The mass expulsion of non-
nationals shall be prohibited."
Unfortunately, these provisions have on
occasion been violated. Nationalism in the
narrow sense militates against the values of toler¬
ance, openness and self-respect that have since
time immemorial characterized relations with
those who came from afar in the hope of being
given a welcome such as they might find in their
own homes. Is this waning of the traditions of
hospitality symptomatic of a crisis in society?
*In the Sudano-Sahelian area, the griot is both a troubadour,
a bringer of news and a witness to the present and to the past. 23
