V
nwff



w
Dinars
club
The first caliphs created an international
monetary system in the seventh century
using coinage that was surprisingly
modern in conception and design
BY GÉRARD KREBS
IN the time of Muhammad, in the early seventh
century, the Arabs did not use money. Perhaps
they had no need of it. Among the nomadic tribes
for which the camel was the main yardstick of
wealth, barter was the most widespread form of
exchange, while in centres of trade such as Mecca
and Medina foreign money such as Byzantine
gold or Persian silver coins had to be used for
large transactions.
Between 636 and 655 AD, the first Arab
invasions which wrenched Syria, Palestine and
Egypt from the Byzantine empire in the West,
and destroyed the Persian Sasanian empire in the
East, brought in vast quantities of precious
metals. The booty included gold and silver plate
as well as coins. But the creation of a new currency
26

28
was of no urgency to Islam in comparison with
its paramount goal of waging a holy war.
The new Muslim masters adapted themselves
very easily to the existing monetary systems in
the conquered regions, and took them over prac¬
tically unchanged. In the East silver drachms con¬
tinued to be minted bearing the effigy of the late
Sasanian king Khosrow II, although they now
carried the additional inscription "In the name
of Allah" in Arabic. On the Mediterranean sea¬
board the gold solidus and the bronze follis were
retained in their original forms, bearing the bust
or standing figure of the Byzantine emperor
Heraclius and his son, or of Constans II. Some¬
times an Arabic inscription was added and the
Christian symbol of the cross, widely found on
Byzantine coinage, was dropped.
The accession of the Umayyad dynasty in 661
AD marked the beginning of strong administra¬
tive control within the Islamic empire. In the field
of coinage the first steps were taken in Syria and
Palestine towards true Muslim themes, almost
exclusively on copper coins, on the instigation
of caliph 'Abd al-Malik (reigned 685-705). In
Damascus, Edessa and Jerusalem coins were
issued showing the standing figure of the caliph
with hands on a sheathed sword and encircled by
an Arabic legend.
Birth of the dinar
In 696 AD 'Abd al-Malik introduced a coherent
monetary system throughout the empire which
responded to both national and international eco¬
nomic requirements.
For major transactions and trade on a large
scale, the gold dinar of 4.3 grams began to be used.
For the payment of wages and taxes the silver
dirhem of 2.8 grams was introduced, and the
copper fais for everyday use. The relative value
of these coins was not fixed but changed accord¬
ing to the price of the three metals. At first the
dinar was worth 10 dirhems, but its value ap¬
preciated to 14 and even to 20 dirhems at different
periods. The dirhem itself fluctuated between 16
and 24 fais because its weight varied from region
to region.
Top left and right, silver
dirhem issued under the
caliph al-Muqtader (4th
century AH/10th century
AD). Above, silver drachm
of the Sasanian monarch
Bahram II (276-293 AD)
with busts of the king, his
queen and the crown prince.
OPPOSITE PAGE
Above, gold dinar (1st
century AH/7th century
AD). Below, clockwise from
top left: Arab Sasanian
drachm (c. 650 AD) bearing
the inscription "In the name
of Allah"; Arab Byzantine
follis (c. 650 AD); Umayyad
dirhem (122 AH/740 AD);
altun bearing the name of
the Ottoman sultan
Süleyman I the Magnificent
(926 AH/1520 AD);
'Abbasid dirhem (307
AH/919 AD); follis (c. 690
AD) showing the standing
figure of the caliph 'Abd
al-Malik.
PRECEDING PAGE
Camel market, Cairo.
A camel features on the coin,
left, issued during
the 'Abbasid dynasty
(3rd century AH/9th
century AD).
These new coins closely paralleled the foreign
coins which had previously been in circulation.
The dinar, heir (and competitor) of the Byzan¬
tine solidus, took its name from the Roman
denarius. The dirhem was similar in size and value
to the Persian drachm and the fais (plural fulous)
was a direct descendant of the Roman and Byzan¬
tine follis.
On the other hand, the design of the new
coinage was revolutionary. There were no more
allegories, no more titles reflecting the glory of
the ruler, no more portraits. These coins were
Islamic and therefore their exclusive role was to
praise God. Even the caliph's name did not
appear on them, and because the Prophet had
disapproved of the representation of human or
animal forms, the sole inscriptions were profes¬
sions of faith in elegant Kufic script.
This coinage represented a departure from the
Middle Eastern and North African tradition
which was both figurative and personalized, with
portraits of rulers or emblems of cities. Its lon¬
gevity was to be extraordinarythe last coins to
be struck in this tradition were issued in the
Yemen around 1960. The system was remarkably
modern in the sense that no sovereign state had
defined its currency so explicity before. The
Arabs were the first to mark coins with their
name, place of minting and year of issue, dated
from the Hegira in accordance with the Muslim
calendar. In the West, the practice of dating coins
only began to spread widely in the fifteenth
century.
While dinars were minted exclusively in the
Umayyad capital of Damascus, dirhems were
issued in many of the empire's leading cities. The
busiest mints were at Damascus and at Wasit, a
city founded in 703 in the Tigris valley (north¬
west of Basra, Iraq). The decentralization of the
mints, from Spain (Córdoba) to Tunisia, from
Azerbaijan to Afghanistan (Balkh) and Pakistan
(Sind region), gives an idea of the vast size of the
Islamic empire.
The 'Abbasid dynasty overthrew the Umay-
yads in 750 AD, and the development of com¬
merce in the eighth and ninth centuries carried
the use of coinage even further. Baghdad, the new

Bargaining with buttons
During Bonaparte's Egyptian expedition of
1798 the polished buttons on the French
soldiers' uniforms are said to have been
highly prized in the souks of Alexandria. The
merchants, who were used to seeing nomads
carry their worldly wealth stitched onto their
garments so that they wouldn't lose it in the
desertthis is why so many North African
coins have a hole pierced in themwanted
to be paid with the beautiful shiny pieces of
metal which adorned the foreigners'
uniforms. Delighted at not having to dip into
their wages, the soldiers hacked off their
buttons to pay for their purchases.
Bonaparte's reaction on seeing his men return
from the souk in such a slovenly fashion can
easily be imagined.
Trade and religion
In the twelfth century the gold dinars of the
Fatimid caliphs of Egypt were so highly
valued throughout the Middle East,
especially by Syrian merchants, that the
Christian kingdoms founded in Palestine by
the Crusaders began to issue imitations of
them. These imitations, the so-called
"Saracenic besants", were clumsily produced
at first, but their design was gradually
improved until they were such faithful copies
of the dinar that the horrified papal legate
who accompanied King Louis IX of France
(Saint Louis) on the Crusades in 1250
threatened those responsible with
excommunication for daring to issue coins to
the glory of Allah for commercial profit. A
compromise was reached. The Saracenic
besant was replaced by another issue which
was almost identical to its predecessor but
bore a cross and Arabic inscriptions to the
glory of the Holy Trinity and the Lord
Jesus Christ.
29

30
capital founded in 762, drained off much of the
empire's wealth and rapidly grew into a leading
economic centre with a large gold and silver mint.
Coins continued to be struck in the style of the
earlier dynasties but now they began to carry the
name of the caliph, and later the names of provin¬
cial governors were added. The calligraphy and
design of the coins varied according to the region
of issue, however, as local dynasties in the Span¬
ish, North African and eastern Iranian provinces
asserted their independence.
The splintering
of the empire
In 945, the rebellion of Iranian Buyids marked
the end of 'Abbasid central power. From then
on the Muslim world had no common
currency, and although the terms dinar and
dirhem still referred to gold and silver coins, the
wide range in their weight and purity and the
arrangement of their inscriptions reflected the
ambitions and financial situation of each dynasty.
The sole exception in these politically and eco¬
nomically troubled times was Egypt under the
Fatimids (969-1171). A prosperous country which
controlled the outflow of Sudanese gold and
occupied a strategic position on the main sea
trading routes, it long continued to mint "good"
dinars.
In the thirteenth century, the Mongol inva-
Above, coins worn as
ornaments at the festival of
Marrakesh (Morocco).
Opposite page, The
Moneychanger by the
Austrian artist Rudolf Ernst
(1854-1920).
GÉRARD KREBS,
a French numismatist who
specializes in Oriental
coinage, contributed the ''
historical and numismatic
commentaries to Les
monnaies de l'Islam et du
Proche-Orient (1988), the
catalogue of the Paris
Mint's holdings of Islamic
and Near Eastern
currencies.
sions which ravaged the entire Muslim East-
Baghdad was sacked in 1258 and the 'Abbasid
caliph executedswept away the last vestiges of
the currency system conceived by 'Abd al-Malik.
Soon each country had its own monetary policy
and would issue its own coinage. Not until the
establishment of the Ottoman empire was a com¬
mon currency again in wide circulation. Initially
the Turkish coinage consisted of a silver akce (of
1.2 grams then of 0.8 grams), complemented in
1478 by a gold altun. These coins were in circu¬
lation from Algeria to Turkey and as far as the
Balkans.
Yet this system was not as stable as the earlier
one. Adversely affected from the late sixteenth
century by the massive influx of silver from
Spanish mines in South America, it was modi¬
fied several times and reformed in 1688, but was
never really able to hold its own against Western
currencies. The design of the coins recalled
the ancient tradition of personalized money, '
as although they were non-figurative they
were all dedicated to the glory of the sultan
and often depicted his seal (tughra), his names
and his titles.
Today the countries of the Islamic world
have their own strictly national currencies. The
time when money existed solely for the glorifi¬
cation of God, performing a role which tran¬
scended its economic function and crossed
political boundaries, is over.
