
The Goddess BY ROLAND BARTHES
Extract from Mythologies (1957), translated by Annette Lovers © Jonathan Cape Ltd., 1972.
I
24
think that cars today are almost the exact equiva¬
lent of the great Gothic cathedrals: I mean the
supreme creation of an era, conceived with pas¬
sion by unknown artists, and consumed in ¡mage if
not in usage by a whole population which appropri¬
ates them as a purely magical object.
It is obvious that the new Citroen has fallen
from the sky inasmuch as it appears at first sight
as a superlative object. We must not forget that
an object is the best messenger of a world above
that of nature: one can easily see in an object at
once a perfection and an absence of origin, a
closure and a brilliance, a transformation of life
into matter (matter is much more magical than life),
and in a word a silence which belongs to the realm
of fairytales. The DSthe Déesse or "Goddess"
has all the features (or at least the public is unani¬
mous in attributing them to it at first sight) of one
of those objects from another universe which have
supplied fuel for the neomania of the eighteenth
century and that of our own science fiction: the
Déesse is first and foremost a new Nautilus.
This is why it excites interest less by its sub¬
stance than by the junction of its components. It is
well known that smoothness is always an attribute
of perfection because its opposite reveals a tech¬
nical and typically human operation of assembling:
Christ's robe was seamless, just as the airships
of science fiction are made of unbroken metal. The
DS 19 has no pretensions about being as smooth
as cake-icing, although its general shape is very
rounded; yet it is the dovetailing of its sections
which interests the public most: one keenly fingers
the edges of the windows, one feels along the wide
rubber grooves which link the back window to its
metal surround. There are in the DS the beginnings
of a new phenomenology of assembling, as if one
progressed from a world where elements are
welded to a world where they are juxtaposed and
hold together by sole virtue of their wondrous
shape, which of course is meant to prepare one
for the idea of a more benign Nature....
It is possible that the Déesse marks a change
in the mythology of cars. Until now, the ultimate
in cars belonged rather to the bestiary of power;
here it becomes at once more spiritual and more
object-like, and despite some concessions to
neomania (such as the empty steering wheel), it
is now more homely, more attuned to this subli¬
mation of the utensil which one also finds in the
design of contemporary household equipment.
The dashboard looks more like the working sur¬
face of a modern kitchen than the control-room
of a factory: the slim panes of matt fluted metal,
the small levers topped by a white ball, the very
simple dials, the very discreteness of the nickel-
work, all this signifies a kind of control exercised
over motion, which is henceforth conceived as
comfort rather than performance. One is obviously
turned from an alchemy of speed to a relish in
driving.
The public, it seems, has admirably divined the
novelty of the themes which are suggested to it.
Responding at first to the neologism (a whole pub¬
licity campaign had kept it on the alert for years),
it tries very quickly to fall back on a behaviour
which indicates adjustment and a readiness to use
("You've got to get used to it"). In the exhibition
halls, the car on show is explored with an intense,
amorous studiousness: it is the great tactile phase
of discovery, the moment when visual wonder is
about to receive the reasoned assault of touch (for
touch is the most demystifying of all senses, unlike
sight, which is the most magical). The bodywork,
the lines of union are touched, the upholstery pal¬
pated, the seats tried, the doors caressed, the
cushions fondled; before the wheel, one pretends
to drive with one's whole body. The object here
is totally prostituted, appropriated: originating from
the heaven of Metropolis, the Goddess is in a
quarter of an hour mediatized, actualizing through
this exorcism the very essence of petit-bourgeois
advancement.
ROLAND BARTHES, French essayist and critic (1915-1980).
His works translated into English include Writing Degree Zero
(1953), On Racine (1963), Critica/ Essays (1964), Elements of
Semiology (1965), S/Z (1970) and A Lover's Discourse (1977).
