BY OCTAVIO PAZ 


IRONY AND
26

COMPASSION
The celebrated Mexican
writer urges vigilance in the
face of growing
bureaucratization and
despotic and intolerant
doctrines of all kinds
%E are living at a particularly difficult time,
a time when there is an intellectual vacuum in
the world of political philosophy. The collapse
of the great systems constructed in the last cen¬
tury is coinciding with the appearance through¬
out the world of political and economic
institutions which constitute a new social group,
a class which, for want of a more accurate term,
we call a "bureaucracy".
In some countries, this bureaucracy is iden¬
tified with an ideology or a state. Elsewhere, if
the political and technocratic bureaucracy plays
a decisive role, as it does in Mexico for example,
its power is far from being absolute. This new
class is universal: it has invested and invaded the
great capitalist enterprises of the West and Japan,
and the political regimes of Eastern Europe, not
to mention powerful institutions such as the CIA,
and the governments of some developing
countries.
The vacuum in political and social ideas is a
result of twentieth-century history. It is an aspect
of the great crisis of modern post-industrial civili¬
zation. Until the 1930s many people, including
myself, thought that only the socialist revolution
could resolve the contradictions in our societies.
But since then we have seen the failure of the ex¬
periment which began with the Bolshevik Revo¬
lution of 1917. It has been a social failure, because
it has been unable to provide freedom and equal¬
ity; it has been an economic failure because the
wealth that was supposed to be created did not
materialize. The only triumph was political or,
rather, military.
The end of ideology
The idea of revolution, however, has received a
serious blow and has lost almost all its appeal,
notably in the developed countries. Even in
Mexico, where the intellectualsthe heirs of the
clerics and courtiers of the seventeenth and eight¬
eenth centuriesare singularly impervious to
criticism, the left has begun a process of ideolog¬
ical detoxification. But the disappearance of Uto¬
pian ideology which is noticeable even in the
Revolution, oil on canvas by the contemporary Cuban
artist Gilberto Frometa Fernandez. 27

28
OCTAVIO PAZ,
Mexican poet and essayist, is one
of the most outstanding writers in
the Spanish language today. He
served as his country's ambassador
to India during the 1960s, and
now lives in Mexico City where he
is director of the monthly review
Vuelta. Many of his volumes of
poetry have been published in En¬
glish translation, including a bilin¬
gual edition of The Collected
Poems, 1957-1987 (New Directions
Publishing Corporation, USA,
1987). English translations of his
essays include The Labyrinth of
Solitude (Grove Press, New York,
1985) and One Earth, Four or Five
Worlds: Reflections on Contem¬
porary History (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, New York, 1985). A
longer version of this article has
appeared in the Japanese magazine
Ichiko (Tokyo).
l âtA- dp p
a U- i ¿
!C< c3
AAAh
m
Above right, Air de Paris
(1919) by Marcel Duchamp
Right, bronze head of
Buddha. Ayuthia school,
Thailand, (14th century).
Opposite page above,
mushroom cloud after an
atomic test explosion.
Opposite page below, a
tract of tropical forest
devastated by fire.
USSR, through the constructive reforms of
Mikhail Gorbachev, does not mean the birth of
a new political philosophy. As far as social ideals
and collective morality are concerned, there is a
gaping void. Peoples and states are drifting.
The moral criticism of capitalism by Marx
and the anarchists is still largely valid. Similarly,
the liberal critique of despotism and state social¬
ism, what Engels called "cartel socialism", is as
relevant as ever. The same could be said of the
critique of the iniquities of the modern world
made by Christianity and other religions. But the
foundations of the political ideologies which have
motivated twentieth-century mansocialism,
liberalism and othershave been relegated to the
sidelines since the Second World War.
Today we are confronted with the perils of
nuclear holocaust and environmental degrada¬
tion, which threaten world peace and the very
survival of the human race. Neither of these two
scourges can be imputed to the injustices of
capitalism or the evils of socialism: they both
result from the very nature of modern societies.
The bomb and the pollution of the planet are the
result of technological progress and not of a par¬
ticular ideology. Reality has reduced ideology to
rubble.
Without wishing to make prophecies, we can
say that in this great historical vacuum democra¬
cy is the only regime which is still showing signs
of life. But democracy is not a panacea. It is a

form of conviviality, a system for preventing
people from killing each other, for ensuring that
the reins of government change hands peacefully,
and for enabling heads of state to come to power
via the ballot-box. Democracy teaches us to live
together and nothing else. I hope that one day,
a day that I shall perhaps never see since I am
seventy-five years old, a new form of political
thought will emerge and reconcile the liberal and
the socialist traditions.
In the Mexican intellectual microcosm, all
that can be done at present is blow away the dust
and the cobwebs, open the windows and let in



some light, maintain a critical approach and a
healthy scepticism of easy solutions. Irony is one
ingredient in criticism, but it is also born of dis¬
enchantment. We belong to a disenchanted gener¬
ation. And we also lack something of imagination
and compassion.
I have used the word irony in the sense in
which it was used by the French artist Marcel
Duchampan irony which goes beyond irony
and cancels itself out by mocking itself. Irony is
subjective, the reaction of the self to the stupid
or criminal seriousness of the objective world.
The ironical man laughs at others but also at him¬
self: "meta-irony" consists in going further than
the dialogue with the self, in mocking the self
which mocks the world. If irony is cruel, meta-
irony dissolves the cruelty.
Transposing these aesthetic ideas to morality
and politics, I believe that the political writer
should show a little irony in his dealings with
himself and othershe should be less sure of him¬
self, know that he does not possess infallible
recipes, and recognize that there are no absolute
truths. And through the practice of meta-irony,
keep a hold on compassion and pity.
The vile dictatorships which we have endured
in the twentieth century have been rooted in mer¬
ciless ideologies. I can accept that many of them,
as in the case of Stalin, were perversions of altruis¬
tic doctrines, but it must also be admitted that
these doctrines contained the seeds of despotism
and intolerance.
In their profound wisdom, the theologians
of old considered pride to be the sin of Satan.
Among mankind, this sin is born of the claim to
possess absolute truth. It is an evil which has poi¬
soned the twentieth century in the guise of
science and philosophy.
Criticism is the only antidote to this moral
poison. When people understand that they do not
possess the absolute truth and that all truths, es¬
pecially political truths, are relative, then there
is room for irony and pitytowards others and
towards themselves. This is what our century
lacksa resurrection of pity. One of the most
beautiful features of Buddhism is that Buddhist
sages are always smiling. And their smile express¬
es irony and pity.... The smile of the Buddhist
sages should be introduced into politics.
29
