Restrictions
on the
freedom of
information
have been
lifted
progressively
in Poland,
but media
pluralism still
lies in
the future
Turning
mW J
Golgotha (1966), a poster
34 by Piotr Bednarskl, Poland.

a new page by Karol Jakubowicz
Detail from a frieze of
paintings In the Gdansk hall
where the first clandestine
congress of Solidarity was
held in 1981.
KAROL JAKUBOWICZ, of
Poland, is editor of Messages
and Opinions, a quarterly
journal of broadcasting
research, and chairman of his
country's Broadcasting Reform
Commission.
IJLs the American sociologist Jeffrey C. Goldfarb
has pointed out, totalitarianism is best understood
as the cultural form necessary for modern
tyranny. The Stalinist power structure sought to
subsume the totality of culture in order to impose
what Orwell called "thought control". When
that proved unattainable, at least in Poland, the
goal of "cognitive control" was pursued instead.
It was assumed that if people had access only to
officially sanctioned news and views, a sufficient
degree of control over their thinking could be
exercised, at least in public. The private sphere
did not matter so much, as long as it was kept
private.
One way of achieving this was by "semantic
control". As Adam Michnik, a leading opposi¬
tion thinker, has put it: "The communists who
arrived at the end of the Second World War suc¬
ceeded in imposing false solutions because they
succeeded in imposing their language." It was a
political language, constructed to automatically
reproduce and perpetuate Communist Party
domination. Inability or unwillingness to use that
language created a "silence barrier" which
precluded successful participation in political life.
Of course, only hermits could avoid func¬
tioning in both public and private spheres and
using both languages, at least to some extent. The
kind of individual and collective schizophrenia
that this produced has to be experienced to be
believed.
Yet, except in the early 1950s, official
thinking was never completely imposed. Firstly,
Polish media always provided extensive informa¬
tion on developments in the Western world, and
Polish television has for two decades now offered
just about every Western programme, series or
film it could afford to buy and which was not
blatantly anti-communist. Secondly, magazines
and newspapers (including one daily) published
by the Roman Catholic Church or by Catholic
organizations, as well as other Churches and
denominations, have always provided a channel
for the expression of dissident views on all
matters of importance to the Polish people.
Finally, since 1976 Poland has had a rich profu¬
sion of underground publishers of magazines and
books which openly questioned the legitimacy
of the country's political system.
Thus the unofficial private sphere obstinately
refused to stay private. It kept intruding into the
official oneand now it has taken over.
Dismantling the monopoly
"Observance of the constitutional principles of
freedom of speech and publication" featured
prominently in third place on the list of twenty-
one demands addressed to the government by
Gdansk shipyard workers in August 1980 during
the strike which provided the impetus for the
birth of the Solidarity movement. A policy docu¬
ment adopted at Solidarity's first congress in 1981
came out in favour of the "socialization of the
media": "The media of social communication are
the property of society and must serve the entire
society and operate under its control." Other
concepts put forward by Solidarity, such as
"access to the media" and "communication as
empowerment", combine respect for the right to
communicate as a basic human right and a means
of satisfying a fundamental social need.
When liberalization of the media system
finally began in 1988, it was prompted by the
desire of a weakening communist system to com¬
promise without giving up control of the major
means of communication. These reforms con¬
sisted mainly of:
1) changing the law to make possible the
emergence of a licensed and supervised private
and/or commercial sector in such areas as book
and newspaper publishing and film production;
2) lifting the many politically-motivated
restrictions on what could be said in the official
media;
3) accepting and creating legal and technical
conditions for the flow of foreign media content
into the country (from satellite television, or from
foreign radio stations whose jamming had already
been stopped by then).
This was hardly enough, however, and so
when the round table conference between the
government and the opposition took place in
spring 1989, Solidarity went back to its original
demands for a radical reform of the media system.
The government adopted a dual policy: more
liberal with regard to the print media, and much
tougher with regard to broadcasting. As a result, 35

publishers no longer needed a licence from the
censorship office to launch a newspaper or
periodicalregistration of its existence was
enough. Censorship was liberalized and many
publications were exempted (especially scholarly
journals and those published by organizations).
Newsprint allocation was to end in 1990, as
indeed it has.
As regards the broadcasting media, however,
the government insisted on retaining both its
monopoly and the institutional controls over
them. Solidarity gained access to air time, but
only in the form of weekly 45-minute
programmes on national radio and television.
Later, the Roman Catholic Church signed an
agreement with Polish Radio and TV which gave
it more extensive access to both national and
regional stations.
When the Solidarity-led government was
formed in autumn 1989, the media monopoly
was thus still intact, as was the apparatus of.
censorshipto say nothing of the legal underpin¬
nings of the system. If freedom of speech and of
information were to prevail, all that had to be
eliminated.
As far as the print media were concerned, the
Communist Party's main tool for maintaining
control was a huge publishing and media con¬
glomerate, RSW Prasa-Ksiazka-Ruch, nominally
a co-operative but in fact run by the Party itself
and serving as its main source of finance. In its
heyday it published 47 per cent of press titles in
Poland, including 70 per cent of the total circu¬
lation of daily and weekly newspapers. It also
monopolized press distribution, ran all the news¬
stands, operated a number of publishing houses,
press agencies, printing plants and so on. The con¬
glomerate has now been dissolved by act of parlia¬
ment, and a special commission is developing a
plan on the disposal of its extensive holdings. All
the newspapers and periodicals once published by
the conglomerate are now free to go their own
way. They can transform themselves into co¬
operatives of their own staff, join with others into
larger entities, seek publishersand stand or fall
on their own merits.
Another act of parliament has abolished cen¬
sorship. If a newspaper or other publication
breaks the law under the penal code, it can of
course be hauled before a court, but otherwise
there are no formal or institutional limitations
on freedom of speech.
The final vestige of the old system of cogni¬
tive control, state monopoly of broadcasting, is
doomed to extinction very soon. Monopoly is to
be abolished and licences will be granted to as
many broadcasters as there are frequencies
available.
A new challenge
The rapid social and economic changes in post-
communist countries have created an unusually
36 high level of need for opportunities for active
communication, especially in the field of politics. .
On the one hand, the many emerging political
parties and groups are seeking support among the
population at large. On the other, individuals are
becoming politically active as they try to affect
the reshaping of the political and social system.
Also, a profusion of publishing and broadcasting
ventures, not necessarily political, have sprung
up as many individuals and groups seek to exer¬
cise the freedom of expression long denied them.
Their financial viability remains to be tested,
however, now that there are no subsidies or cross-
subsidies within larger media organizations.
Recognition of freedom of speech and infor¬
mation, and removal of restrictions on them,
amounts only to what might be called a negative
means of creating the conditions to satisfy the
need to communicate. The traditional Western
concept of freedom of speech, now espoused also
in post-communist countries, allows that freedom
to be realized within the means at the disposal
of each individual or group, making it the
freedom of the well-to-dofreedom of the press
for those who own it.
Thus excessive deregulation, sometimes con¬
ducted in the name of removing all restrictions
on freedom of speech, may be counterproductive.
In addition to promoting the birth and possible
dominance of commercial media, it also lays the
media system open to yet another threat: infiltra¬
tion and takeover or control by foreign capital.
The truly democratic society should recog¬
nize its obligation to provide all its members with
the ways and means of exercising the right to
communicate. Therefore, the challenge before
Poland and other post-communist countries is to
develop a positive, active policy of promoting
democratic and pluralistic media policies and
systems. This requires a commitment to support
or subsidize the founding or running of press and
broadcasting media by minorities and groups
with insufficient resources. Also needed is a new
definition of a public information service, no
longer as one-way communication from the top
down, but as pluralistic and constructive dialogue.
If these policies are adopted, the media system
of post-communist countries will encompass
three sectors:
a financially secure system of public service
broadcasting, fully capable of discharging its obli¬
gations towards society;
socially-motivated privately or collectively
owned media speaking for, on behalf of, or to
various groups, parties, organizations, minorities,
and regional communities, assisted where neces¬
sary out of public funds in line with policies pub¬
licly defined and open to review;
commercial media.
All three sectors are necessary in a fully deve¬
loped media system. If Poland and other post-
communist countries can find a way to ensure
their existence, they will be blazing a trail for
other countries to follow.
by Morten Giersing
fS&sY_~.
Symbol of freedom on a
Belgian wall.
MORTEN GIERSING
is chief of the section of free
flow of Information and
communications research in
Unesco's Communication
Development and Free Flow of
Information Division.
