Making words dance:
a calligrapher's testimony
BY HASSAN MASSOUDY
K
Above, details of calligraphic
sculpture on the walls of the
Alhambra, Granada (Spain),
14th century.
Right, Hymn to Joy (1987),
painting on paper by the
Moroccan artist Mehdi Qotbi.
JJFIC, one of the great traditional styles of
Arabic script, is formal, angular and dignified. But
when it is traced on vellum in translucent sepia
ink, it acquires a mysterious sensuousness, while
losing none of its majesty.
Over the ages, Arab-Muslim calligraphy
gained in subtlety and beauty from its encounters
with many different cultures. Although the under¬
lying geometry did not disappear, curved script
finally prevailed and the letters became distended,
arched or rounded. Some letters branched out so
much that they transformed the walls on which
they were inscribed into gardens of delight through
which the eye was led along a voluptuous path
between downstrokes and upstrokes. Other letters
were adorned with decorative motifs which coun¬
terbalanced empty surfaces. Where strict geometry
prevailed, colours such as the warm blue or tur¬
quoise of ancient ceramics that still enchant us
today were used to soften excessive rigour. The
quest for beauty was centred entirely on the
word, because figurative imagery was disallowed.
38
Working on wood, leather and bone, and
later on parchment, stone, glazed brick and
other surfaces, generations of calligraphers
enriched their art and transmitted their skills
orally to apprentices who respected the old
traditions.
How do things stand today? Aesthetic values
are not immutable. Just as attitudes to time and
distance have changed beyond measurethink of
the abyss that separates the cities and caravans
of Antiquity from our age of interplanetary
explorationso the scope of creativity has
expanded. Sign and image have been reunited, but
in an anarchic proliferation which must be
mastered, just as techniques for using the new,
synthetic colours must be learned.
In these conditions, how can modern cal¬
ligraphers express themselves and remain faithful
to the lights of inner truth and profound
experience that guide them, and without forget¬
ting the tradition they have inherited? How can
they renew their art without betraying it? It
seems to me that they must do two things. The
first concerns the content of the phrases they
wish to transcribe. The second concerns their
choice of instruments. Content and form are
inseparable.
Traditionally the Arab calligrapher has
always worked with a calamus, a trimmed reed
pen no thicker than a finger. For large-scale
inscriptions such as those intended for the deco¬
ration of panels or walls, the outline of the letters
must first be traced and then filled in with colour,
using a brush. If broader instruments are used,
either on their own or with the calamus, the
ancient signs can be given a new lease of life.
I make my own calligrapher's tools from
wood, cardboard and other materials. I also use
brushes. The signs I trace with these instruments
are still recognizable for what they are, but their
appearance is profoundly modified. As a Chinese
calligrapher once put it: "When the idea is at the
tip of the brush, there's no need to look any
further."
Calligraphy is an art form governed by strict
rules, and the time it takes to transcribe a line

"Beauty and goodness unite
men, evil and ugliness divide
them" (Tolstoy).
Calligraphic design by
Hassan Massoudy, 1990.
fffo 1
onto an empty page is no exception. Tradition¬
ally calligraphers had neither the freedom nor the
technical means to dawdle or to hurry. Today I
write ten times faster than I once did. My hand
moves rapidly across the page, tracing simultane¬
ously the outline of the words and the shape of
the composition. Not only my hand but my
whole body is engaged in this act that unlocks
a treasure-house of patiently acquired skills. To
write quickly a calligrapher must have absolute
control over movement and breathing alike.
Colours are prepared just before one starts
to write. Pigments and binding agents are blended
with varying degrees of thickness. Colour should
be elegant, flow with perfect ease and illuminate
the act of writing. Its translucence reflects a
smooth, sensual world that radiates calm and
serenity. To achieve such control, the substances
from which the colour is made must be tamed.
When the relation between form and colour
is harmonious, calligraphy is a joy to behold. As
for the act of composition, it is a mirror of my
feelings as I write. Form, whether extroverted or
introverted, is always linked to a moment of
HASSAN MASSOUDY
is an Iraqi-born calligrapher who
has since 1969 been based in
France, where he has organized
a number of exhibitions,
courses and workshops on
both Roman and Arabic
calligraphy. His publications
include "Living Arabic
Calligraphy" (Flammarion,
Paris, 1981 & 1986), "The
Poet of the Antara Desert"
(Syros, Paris, 1989), and
"Calligraphy for Beginners"
(EDIFRA/IMA, Paris, 1990). 39

40
experience from which it derives intensity. I
believe that beauty can originate from this match
between what I write and what I am.
At the heart of the composition throbs an
autonomous world, a field of energy subjected
to the rhythm that I impose on the movement
of the letters. Sometimes the strokes are traced
upward, as if they are about to take flight; at other
moments they settle demurely, as if at rest.
If the form is as it should be, if the strokes
flow confidently, then the artist is content. Cal¬
ligraphy becomes a language of the body,
explaining what surges inexplicably from deep
within the writerchildhood memories or more
recent experiences. These dream-images are mar¬
shalled into shape, they unfold as the leaves unfurl
when the seed becomes a tree. The calligrapher
must guide and direct these sparks of life. The
image of sap rising from branch to branch comes
to mind, and that of a group of dancers obeying
a choreographer's command. I should like to be
the choreographer of my letters and make them
dance across the white page. I translate what I feel
into gestures, and suddenly my reverie is visible.
But how much patient groundwork has to be
done! How much concentration is needed to cap¬
ture this impulse in full flight!
I elongate some letters and compress others;
I soften verticals and flatten curves. When my
letters take flight, I fly with them too. When they
come back to earth, so do I. Sometimes chance
lends a hand, helping me delve more deeply into
my intuitions. In calligraphy, beauty is not always
necessarily triumphant or voluptuous. It can also
result from conflict or drama. For balance to be
restored, the calligrapher must work with great
precision. Then beauty becomes a help in trou¬
bled times. In creative moments, everything is
illuminated, everything becomes calligraphy:
nature, humanity, even the industrial world.
Form derives its energy from the place
accorded to it in space. Words, in Arabic, are
written horizontallybut I give them verticality
and, at the summit of the constructions which
result, I draw the letters together to enhance the
monumental quality of the composition.
In the past calligraphers wished only to reveal
the sublime, and even the slightest hint of inner
conflict was excluded from their work. Today I
can express whatever I wish, but with a liberty
that is mature, a desire that is tempered by a grain
of wisdom. The apprenticeship is long, and the
exercise is perilous. But in the end calligraphy
always rewards the patient and devoted practi¬
tioner.
The artist to whom calligraphy yields its
secrets experiences a sense of exaltation com¬
parable to that felt by dancers who whirl until
they are exhausted. All the storms that trouble
the heart are transformed into simple and pure
gestures. Vaster than the language in which it is
written, the calligrapher's work resembles the
natural sculptures that stand out against the desert
sky and lead the eye towards infinity.
IN
MODERN TIMES
THERE
HAS BEEN
A REVOLUTION
IN DEAS
ABOUT BEAUTY,
ART AND
ARTISTS
