by Jean Lacouture
The conscience
12

of the journalist
0,'THER occupations may have suffered more
from the vitriolic pens of satirists, but, although
media professionals seem to arouse less vengeful
feelings of hostility among the general public than
medical charlatans, vacuous military men or over¬
bearing bankers, they nevertheless seem to be
viewed with a mixture of disdain and suspicion.
Long before Guy de Maupassant's Bel-Ami,
with its portrayal of the world of cynical jour¬
nalists, the general public had scant esteem for
this sorry crew which were accused, somewhat
contradictorily, both of undue meddling in the
affairs of their contemporaries and of more or less
consciously, and with varying degrees of disin¬
terest, conniving with the authorities. Recent
opinion polls confirm that little has changed.
Can this be because, with each day that
passes, journalists are more and more closely iden¬
tified with the technology by means of which
their voices are heard, to the extent that they end
up by losing, in the eyes of the public, their
human image? Or is it that the images, the tempo,
the desire for instant reporting reduce everything
to statistics and spectacle, to stop-watch timing
and presentation? Of course not. Communicators
were seen as the instruments of the society in
which they operate long before the days of the
tie-pin microphone or the portable camera. Few
other occupations so fully absorb their practi¬
tioners as does journalismto the point that
André Malraux once wrote to a journalist whose
autobiography he had just read: "How is it that
you can have so little interest in yourself?"
Before becoming established as reporter on
"Channel X" or leader writer for "The Hogs-
norton Gazette", the journalist is the product of
a specific social background, personal history and
educationdetails of which will have been for¬
gotten or discarded along the way. The journalist
is a creature with a conscience that no press
baron, no dominant ideology, no group com¬
plicity can ever completely suppress.
This creature is also prey to twin anxieties
that of the actor on the stage and that of the
author whose words, thrown to the masses each
Shadow and Flight (1987), a collage
by the Japanese artist Yamada. 13

14
day, change their perceptions. It is difficult
enough to live constantly in the public eye; it is
even more difficult to live under the scrutiny of
those whose perceptions one has changed, and in
a way that is no longer evident either to oneself
or to them.
It is against this "opaque transparency" that
the journalist operates, a background which is just
as likely to stimulate as to act as a cold douche
on the ego and which creates a perverse and heady
relationship between writer and reader that amaz¬
ingly enough can last a lifetime, through war and
peace, revelations and denials, sensation and
derision.
That Sarah Bernhardt was able to continue
acting in Phèdre or in L'Aiglon for half a century
may come as a surprise, but not as a shock.
However, that a famous commentator or
newshound can address the same readership about
events ranging from the battlefields of the Marne
to the French generals' putsch in Algeria, without
changing either outlook, opinions or even pen-
name, gives some idea how thick-skinned some
members of the writing profession can be.
The Hiroshima holocaust
The journalist and the journalistic conscience are
engaged in a bitter struggle on many fronts, the
more so since the profession is ill-defined, sub¬
ject to few rules and endowed with less precise
ethical codes than many others.
It is true that, with the advance of science and
the evolution of the law, the medical profession
has been faced with ethical dilemmas and uncer¬
tainties, as borne out by scores of inquiries, tes¬
timonies and debates. Neither lawyers, nor
research scientists with their biological
engineering and their "ultimate weapons", nor
the military men who use their weapons, have
been spared such self-questioning. Nevertheless,
they have their Hippocratic oath, their Bar
Councils and the Geneva Conventions to fall
back on. Journalists have no equivalent.
We might reasonably compare their situation
to that of a guided missile, unaware both of the
nature of its mission and of the purpose of the
hand that guides it, and programmed in such a
way that it is aimed neither at the earth, so as
to avoid accidents, nor at the ocean, so as to avoid
pollution. Given these restraints, journalists are
free, responsible human beings who have only
to do their best to enlighten their contemporaries
about world events without triggering a second
Hiroshima holocaust.
On the face of it, the objective is clearlike
the witness in the box, to tell the truth, the whole
truth and nothing but the truth. In a court of law,
however, the jury demands only the truth as the
witness, as a human being, saw and understood
it, at a particular time, in a particular place and
as it related to certain people. The truth required
of a journalist is a wider, more complex, multi-
faceted truth.
1 t> V
a*..** ,.,_, i Mù- ^
. .. , Vin n
J». M.1 .^n. .
*r^ II J- t *° .#
.«« m f
'-.I a, -,
a.." a- ^1^ '1*11 Jit'
nia 1. fa wu' U Urw **.
... r *sif- « «H erf» - ' rurtt*'
.. -fir«. »a1| " »or
p¡'. -'«' * ",*.iéi; ¡.tí
BJ -vil* % I»**.
*7 mZ'F
"7* liLFiu-ni. 3.-'.*m»
. M' Ï*" »»
r«JI ' '!>* Tu .. _ ., , >.
>< > Ti. > Sût».*..
JEAN LACOUTURE,
French writer and journalist,
was foreign correspondent for
the French daily Le Monde
from 1957 to 1975. He is the
author of major biographies of
Léon Blum (1982), Pierre
Mendès-France (1984), and
Jean-François Champollion
(1988; see the Unesco Courier,
October 1989). Volume I of his
3-volume life of Charles de
Gaulle has been published in
English as Charles de Gaulle:
The Rebel (Holmes and Meier,
New York, 1988).
Returning from wartime deportation, Léon
Blum, who was a journalist for many years, told
his press colleagues that he had learned that the
golden rule for the profession was not "just to
tell the truth, which is an easy thing to do, but
to tell the whole truth, which is much more
difficult". This is all very well, but what is "the
whole truth", and is it possible to define "nothing
but the truth"?
The December 1989 revolution in Romania
brought this question to the forefront again in
a vivid, violent fashion. We all know the extent
to which "the truth", in its simplest, statistical
form, was distorted. The heady excitement that
misled almost all the international media was later
subject to very close analysisin particular by
French writer Jean-Claude Guillebaud who
praised the admirable restraint of the Belgian jour¬
nalist Colette Braekman for her courage in
writing the apparently self-condemnatory words,
"I saw nothing happen at Timisoara".
"I saw nothing happen" does not, of course,
mean "nothing happened". Yet this observation,
which is anathema to any professional commu¬



nicator, should be taught as a model in every
school of journalism. For it is by this formula
that the journalistic conscience must be guided
by the relationship between the truth and what
has been seen, between what can be and what has
been verified. This is both the antithesis of and
synonymous with Blum's "the whole truth"
all that part of the truth that the individual jour¬
nalist can discern.
The journalist's self-questioning is, however,
not concerned only with the accessible part of
the truth, but also with the means employed to
acquire it and the use that can be made of it.
"Investigative journalism" is on the agenda,
and it is now accepted that all methods of inves¬
tigation are permitted. The handling of the
Watergate affair by two outstanding journalists
of the Washington Post seems to have justified a

Above left, Le Palais
(1983); above, Palace
(1983), two photomontages
by the French artist Patrick
Tosanl.
Below, a scene from All the
President's Men (1976),
Alan Pakula's film on
Watergate in which Dustin
Hoffman (centre) plays one
of the investigative
journalists who worked on
the story.
form of inquiry comparable to that used by the
police and special services in their dealings with
terrorists and drug traffickers.
To question, to revolt against this model may
seem to be the reaction of a dyspeptic old soldier,
of a journalist trained in a "holier-than-thou" tra¬
dition. Yet the vision I have of the journalistic
profession makes me reject certain kinds of
method and various forms of crypto¬
interrogations. I am one of those who feel that
journalism must abide by rules other than those
of the police and of the counter-espionage
services. Perhaps I am wrong.
However, the greatest challenge to the profes¬
sional communicator's conscience concerns the
withholding of information. For having done so
(and admitting it) in the context of the wars in
Algeria and Viet Nam, for having considered
myself capable of drawing a line between what
could be communicated and what should not be
said, for holding myself to be the guardian of the
"just" cause and of "higher interests" than that
of informing the public, I have been subjected to
severe remonstrations. No doubt they were
deserved, particularly when they came from
people who had never, for other ends, been guilty
of systematic and carefully disguised manipu¬
lations.
The rule is clear, it must be "the whole truth
and nothing but the truth". But this must be com¬
plemented by the words of the motto the New
York Times carries beneath its logo"All the
news that's fit to print". This excludes all that is
unworthythat is to say, not only whole
categories of baser journalism, but, from its nobler
forms, the divulgation of information that unduly
affects the life and honour of human beings
whose unworthiness has not been established.
With these guidelines in mind, journalists will
conclude that the major problem they have to
face lies not in the acquisition but in the dissemi¬
nation of their portion of the truth, in estab¬
lishing a balance between what has been ingested
in good faith, in a world in which dross and
deception abound, and what has been regurgi¬
tated. The line between the two is elusive and
constantly moving. The only filter available is the
journalistic conscience.
15
