Northern lights
BY MARIA NASHTSHOKINA AND BORIS KIRIKOV
.A.
32
Lrt Nouveau in Russian architecture was accom¬
panied by a profound interest in old traditions. At the
turn of the century, the enchantments of Nordic art,
with its powerful streak of archaism, were rediscovered,
and Russian artists dreamed of combining modern art
techniques with images from the folklore and wild
natural beauty of the north.
They were captivated not only by the medieval and
vernacular architecture of northern Russia, but also by
the culture of Finland and the Scandinavian countries.
For as well as being neighbours, or, in the case of the
Principality of Finland, linked to the Russian empire,
these countries were seen as being spiritually united.
This was the beginning of what Sergei Diaghilev called
a "Nordic Renaissance", in which curiosity about the
past and the Nordic identity rooted in it combined with
a strong desire to explore all the possibilities of new
forms of expression.
There were two major trends. The first was the
neo-Russian style, which drew inspiration from the
architecture of Novgorod, Pskov and northern Russia,
and flourished in Moscow. The second, with which
this article is concerned, was modern Nordic art, a
branch of Art Nouveau that flourished mainly in the
then capital of Russia, St. Petersburg (today Leningrad).
Its rise was closely linked to Finnish and, to a lesser
extent, Swedish "national Romanticism".
The affinities between the Finnish and the St.
Petersburg schools of architecture, nurtured by geo¬
graphical proximity, were further accentuated by the
presence in St. Petersburg of practising Finnish ar¬
chitects and by joint participation in national and
international exhibitions. The versatile painter Akseli
W. Gallén-Kallela (1865-1931), well-known for his
paintings inspired by the Finnish national epic, the
Kalevala, was one of the fathers of Finnish national
Romanticism. He took part in the Russian national
exhibition held at Nizhni-Novgorod in 1896 and in
others held in St. Petersburg, and produced many
architectural projects for St. Petersburg, Moscow and
Revel (now Tallinn).
Russian and Finnish architects harmoniously com¬
bined technical innovation and extreme stylization of
Scandinavian, Russian and Karelo-Finnish art motifs-
solar symbols, animal and plant imagesand skilfully
combined natural materials such as wood and stone.
The favoured setting for this style, St. Petersburg,
was a city with two faces. On the one hand it was a
bourgeois, mercantile, European city looking out over
the Baltic, a monumental, rapidly-growing Rome of
the north. On the other it was the result of an extraor¬
dinary encounter between the force of its natural set¬
ting and the force of the human will, an ephemeral
Babylon in danger of being swallowed up by the marsh¬
lands on which it had been built.
Nostalgia for the beauty of the natural world found
full expression in modern Nordic art. In the architec¬
ture of many St. Petersburg buildings this love of
Nature, so extreme that Diaghilev described it as
"pagan adoration", burst forth on façades teeming with
stylized animals, birds, fish, trees and flowers. Under
Finnish prompting, the expressive potential of rough,
grainy surfaces such as that of granite, and the evoca¬
tive power of combinations of natural and man-made
materials, were revealed. The rough masonry of the
walls recalled old Celtic legends of "evil stones".
Beneath the surface of daily life were strong romantic
undercurrents.
At that time there were Swedish and Finnish colo¬
nies in St. Petersburg. Born in St. Petersburg, but of
Swedish nationality, the brilliant architect F. Lidval
was the father of Nordic Modernism in the city. His
first major work (1899-1904), a forerunner of the
masterpieces he later created in Sweden, was an apart¬
ment house at 1-3 Kamenoostrovsky Avenue (now
Kirovskiy Avenue) which displays all the characteristics
of the new stylefree interplay of volumes, diversity
of window-design, subtle harmonization of materials,
and, from the mysterious world of the forest, ornamen¬
tation whose profusion in no way detracts from the
building's rational functionalism.
Perhaps the finest jewel in the crown of St. Peters¬
burg Nordic architecture is an apartment building at
11 Stremiannai'a Street (1906-1907) by N. Vasiliev
and A. Bubir. The highly stylized symbolism of the
ornamentation blends with the architectural structure
to form an organic whole. The elegant simplification
of form to which Nordic Modernism aspired here
achieves perfection.
It was in such buildings that the Nordic Renais¬
sance subtly reaffirmed the Baltic character of St. Peters¬
burg, while leaving its European aspects untouched.
Staircase window (detail),
apartment building in
St. Petersburg (now
Leningrad), by A. Gimpel and
V. Iliashev, 1905-1907.
MARIA NASHTSHOKINA, of
the USSR, is a researcher with
the National Institute of the
Theory of Architecture and
Town Planning, Moscow.
BORIS KIRIKOV, of the USSR,
is a researcher with the Institute
of the Theory of Architecture
and Town Planning, Leningrad.
