REPORTS FROM AROUND THE WORLD
The industrialized countries:
questions and answers
By Leslie Limage
1. What does "literacy" mean?
The search for a precise definition of "literacy"
V¿~^ is especially troubling to those who seek a quick
solution to the problem of illiteracy in industri¬
alized countries. Unfortunately, no simple defi¬
nition will do. The meaning of literacy can only
be defined in a specific context and will evolve
as societal and individual needs change. Unesco's
literacy statistics are based on official census data
provided by governments whose national defini¬
tions vary. As such, they must be used with
caution. They are adequate to indicate broad
trends, but a dangerous basis for making precise
comparisons.
"Illiteracy" is also a relative term. The ability
to sign one's name and read simple messages once
constituted all the skills an adult required to be
considered literate. Today, "illiteracy" is variously
defined to range from a total inability to use the
written word to an insufficient mastery of a set
of sophisticated skills. In some industrialized
countries, the terms "computer literacy" and
"cultural literacy" have even come to be used.
In short, literacy skills which are considered satis¬
factory in one context may be seriously insuffi¬
cient in another.
2. What do we know about the extent of
illiteracy?
Since there is a whole range of definitions of
what constitutes literacy in industrialized coun¬
tries, it is not surprising that estimates of the
extent of illiteracy in individual countries vary
and indeed are often contradictory. Figures in the
United States range from 5 per cent to 25 per cent
of the total population. A recent Canadian study
shows some 25 per cent of the adult population
has seriously inadequate literacy skills. In France,
estimates have varied from 2 million to 8 million
illiterates.
3. Illiterate? After 100 years of universal
primary education?
Schools usually work in the dominant lan¬
guages of a society, but many of their students
may speak minority languages at home or come ^
from diverse cultural backgrounds. Thus, equal ¡J
treatment will produce very unequal outcomes.
One child is ready to master a particular learning
task, but another needs remedial work before
doing so. Yet, in some countries, the only form
of remediation is grade repetition: another dose
of what failed the first time.
In recent years, as social expenditures have
been reduced in many industrialized countries,
education budgets have been hard hit. The first
cuts occur in school provisions which are con¬
sidered marginal: compensatory programmes and
remedial tuition. Reduction in educational spend¬
ing also leads to larger classes, fewer materials and
lower teacher morale. A child from a home
which cannot compensate for what is lacking in
school will inevitably fall behind. These young
people do not "relapse" into illiteracy. They
never possessed self-sustaining skills.
4. How did industrialized countries "redis- ¡L
cover" illiteracy?
The economic crisis which began in the early
1970s is largely responsible for the "rediscovery"
of illiteracy in industrialized countries. As tradi¬
tional and low-skill employment was progress¬
ively reduced, it became necessary to retrain large
numbers of young people for employment in
emerging industries. Job training programmes
were established for this purpose, but it was soon
discovered that lack of basic skills, literacy and
numeracy, greatly complicated such training. The
illiterate who previously had been gainfully em¬
ployed suddenly was made visible and defined as
a problem by the dislocations of the economy.
5. What is being done to prevent underachieve-
ment and failure in schools?
In many countries, the measures essential to
prevent underachievement and failure in schools
are under attack. Many countries, facing severe
budget cuts, are turning to the private and volun¬
tary sectors for help. Small-scale projects which
receive much publicity are often taking the place

i
Xf
; '
of a long-term public commitment. Literacy is
everybody's business, but private efforts can only ti
complement, not replace, public provision.
6. What is being done to provide adults with
basic skills in literacy and numeracy?
Adult basic skill provision takes place in a wide JÇf
variety of settings. Community colleges and adult
education institutes provide the bulk of tuition
in certain countries. A much smaller but increas¬
ingly important level of provision is offered
by voluntary bodies and charities in a growing
number of states. Slowly, work-place literacy
classes are being developed, especially in commer¬
cial and industrial firms. Community groups are
defining their own needs and setting up appropri¬
ate tuition. Yet with all the various types of pro¬
vision available, not more than 10 per cent of
adults with literacy needs are receiving some form
of tuition.
7. Who is responsible?
A fully literate society is everyone's responsi¬
bility. Community efforts to help pre-school chil¬
dren to enjoy reading are important. Schools
should be endowed with sufficient public
resources to ensure that each child is able
to achieve a minimum proficiency in the use of
the written word. Efforts in schools should be
flexible and varied so that all children, regardless
of home background, find learning enjoyable.
Once a firm commitment from the public sector
is guaranteed, coalitions with business, the volun¬
tary sector, community groups, libraries and the
media should be encouraged. Industrialized coun¬
tries can afford to ensure literacy and numeracy
for all. Indeed, they cannot afford to do otherwise.
8. What can people do to help?
Everyone has a role to play in bringing about
a literate society. Senior citizens are needed to
help the very young, especially when parents are
disadvantaged or heavily burdened with earning
a living for the family unit. Intergenerational liter¬
acy efforts, teaching mothers and children
together, are also important.
...
