National languages and
mother tongues
By Adama Ouane
"
JA '"'a, V 'i^j X lÍ
iXj
IN any literacy teaching project, the choice of
the language to be taught is of paramount impor¬
tance. Highly complex human and cultural fac¬
tors are involved in this learning process, whether
for the child, the continuity of whose affective,
cognitive and psycho-motor development it is the
guarantee, or for the adult, for whom literacy
training will only be motivating if it leads on to
greater participation in the political, economic
and social life of the community to which he or
she belongs.
Literacy teaching in the mother tongue has
a head start, since the pupil begins with an already
acquired knowledge of the language. Literacy
teaching in a foreign language makes learning the
mechanisms of reading and writing considerably
more complicated, since it introduces difficulties
inherent in the acquisition of new vocabulary and
of new ways of thinking.
What is a mother tongue? The "mother" in
the term has no "genetic" or "biological" con¬
notations, but relates to the linguistic community
in which a person is born and brought up. A
mother tongue is the prime means of expression
of an ethnic group and is the instrument of the
socialization of the individual within the basic
social unit, usually the family.
The problems
of access to
literacy in
multilingual
societies
Above, open-air literacy
class in India, where there
are some 1,600 mother
tongues for a population of
almost 800 million people.
According to their status or their function,
mother tongues become community or vehicular
languages when they are also used for inter-ethnic
or inter-community communication. They are
called "national languages" when they constitute
the language of the entire nation or of its main
ethnic components. From this point of view, the
linguistic situation on our planet is extremely
complex, since, including dialects, there are
thought to be between 3,500 and 9,000 languages
in the world, distributed over some 200 sovereign
states.
Mother tongues
and national unity
Very few countries are strictly monolingual.
The situation of multilingual countries varies
according to their history, their social and eco¬
nomic context, and the ethnic composition of
their populations. The relationships between
local languages, the functions they fulfil, the status
it is desired to give them and the educational aims
of the society all influence the definition and
implementation of language policies.
The adoption of a common language can, ob¬
viously, promote national unity. Many decision- 27

28
makers are convinced that the encouragement of
several languages militates against such unity, and
the risk of accentuating cleavages between com¬
munities and the danger of being left outside the
main currents of knowledge and information
flow are often invoked to justify the choice of
one or a restricted number of national languages,
even, perhaps, a foreign language, as official
languages.
Monolingualism continues to be perceived as
a major element in the founding of a nation. Yet
what heightens dissension is not so much the
plurality of languages as the conflicts of interest
that they express. A plurality of languages should
be seen as an enrichment and as the reflection of
a plurality of cultures.
The substitution of interdependent relation¬
ships for ties based on domination contributes
greatly to national integration. Apart from en¬
suring the development of widely used languages,
the coexistence of several mother tongues guaran¬
tees better mutual understanding between
cultures.
For sociological and sometimes psychological
reasons relating to history, and in particular to
the colonial past of some countries, certain lan¬
guages have become devalued because they are
considered unsuited to express the complexities
of the modern world. Still hovering between the
oral and written forms, they may indeed find it
difficult to cover the vast and changing field of
contemporary science.
The coexistence of several languages necessar¬
ily raises the question of their "parity" or "equal¬
ity". Theoretically, all languages are of equal
value and are intrinsically capable of expressing
the same realities and of developingit is in being
used that they develop and become refined. In
practice, however, their true position depends
upon the status accorded to them as well as the
functions they fulfil and the fields in which they
are used. In this respect, true equality between
languages is impossible. But is it even necessary?
In a plurilingual context the aim should rather
be to achieve complementarity of roles and
functions.
Those who decry the use of mother tongues
in literacy work invoke economic and technical
arguments, pointing out that, in a society with
no basic infrastructure, it is difficult to bear the
cost of the operations necessary to integrate these
languages into the educational system.
It is true that to publish textbooks and primers
in languages that are in the course of becoming
established raises a number of material and tech¬
nical problems. The phonetic and grammatical
structure of languages that have only recently ac¬
quired a written form involves the use of graphic
signs and printing characters that demand a tech¬
nical competence rarely available in the countries
concerned. These, however, are difficulties that
can be reduced by the use of informal teaching
methods and simplified printing techniques.
Between these two extremesmaking use of
all a country's languages, which is practically and
financially impossible, or adopting a single lan¬
guage (often a foreign language), which is cultur¬
ally and politically unacceptablethere lies a
third way: that of a graduated multilingualism,
in which the emphasis is placed on certain lan¬
guages, yet without neglecting the development
of the others.
Within a given national unit, at least two lin¬
guistic levels can always be distinguished, that of
the individual's mother tongue and that of the
main, official language of the state. Sometimes
there may be three, four or even five levels, cor¬
responding to an equivalent number of languages
which it is desirable to know. However, mastery
of the first language, the mother tongue, or of
the variant that replaces it, remains the decisive
step in the individual's linguistic development.

The teaching of the mother tongue leads to
an uncomfortable dilemma: attaching too much
importance to local languages can be a handicap
with regard to economic and scientific matters,
but to ignore them is to condemn them to regres¬
sion. The dilemma resolves itself, however, if the
primary objective is to encourage the emotional
development, the self-discovery and concern for
the future of the community of the person learn¬
ing to read, rather than to ensure the acquisition
of a socially and functionally dominant language.
Different approaches
The mother tongue may be used as the vehicle of
education at all levels of the educational system.
It may enjoy exclusive status, but in some cases
it is used up to a certain level and then replaced
by another language. In other cases, it is used for
the teaching of certain subjects only.
Sometimes the mother tongue is the subject,
but not the medium, of teaching. Literacy work
with adults is often carried out with a partial use
of the mother tongue.
Some national languages are not equipped to
perform effectively all the functions required in a
complete education. In these cases, enrichment of
the language becomes part of the task of literacy
and post-literacy work.
In most of the multilingual countries of
Africa and Asia, in which the language spoken
in the family circle is often not that used by
the authorities or in schools, literacy work is
usually conducted in the local languages. When
these languages have only a recent written tradi¬
tion, literacy work marks the transition from
the oral to the written, with all that that implies
for specific modes of perception and reflection.
Clearly, these countries are attempting to
create and maintain a social, economic and cul¬
tural climate favourable to the written word,
including the greatest possible stimulation and
incitation to written expression.
One of the essential functions of those en¬
gaged in literacy work is to produce, acquire
and manage teaching materials in the national
languages and mother tongues. Some of this
material is printed, some is produced for the
modern media (radio, television, audio-visual
display) and some for the traditional media
(theatre, folklore, various types of games).
Libraries, fairs, exhibitions, listening groups,
study circles and action groups are set up to
make these materials available and to encourage
the largest possible number of people to use
them.
The newly-literate must be placed in an
environment in which they are constantly faced
with the challenge of the written word. Printed
material alone is not enough. The newly-literate
must be involved in activities which are too com¬
plex for them to rely on memory and oblige them
to use written communication. Most of the
French-speaking countries of Africa are thus
trying to familiarize their civil servants and
development personnel with the written forms
of languages used in literacy work. They are
encouraging the use of these written forms in
technical and administrative documents, road
signs, advertisements and the labelling of goods,
as well as the diffusion of books, brochures and
newspapers written in these languages.
The purpose of these measures is to overcome
reservations about, if not disdain for, the lan¬
guages used in literacy work on the pan of officials
most of whom are the product of a different
educational system and who normally use another
form of communication such as a European lan¬
guage (in this case French). They also help to de-
marginalize the newly-literate by offering them a
written environment in which they feel secure.
"Including dialects, there
are thought to be between
3,500 and 9,000 languages in
the world.... Very few
countries are strictly
monolingual." Above left, a
store in Jaipur (India);
centre, a Hong Kong street;
above, shops in Abu Dhabi
(United Arab Emirates).
ADAMA OUANE,
of Mali, is engaged on
research at the Unesco
Institute for Education,
Hamburg (Fed. Rep. of
Germany). Formerly assistant
director-general of the
national directorate for
functional literacy and
linguistics at Bamako, he is
the author of several studies
on the use of national
languages in literacy
campaigns.
29
