The Vedas ffo quest for
an inner Universe
BY RAO CHELIKANI
AND ROSELINE DE LAVAL
I
10
N the beginning were the Vedas. Several cen¬
turies before the Christian era, these sacred
hymns written in archaic Sanskrit held sway over
Indian religious thought. We know very little
about their origins, other than that they were
introduced by Indo-European clans known as the
Aryas or Aryans, nomadic herdsmen who gradu¬
ally began to spread through north-west India in
the second millennium BC.
One thing is certain: during their obscure his¬
tory the Aryans had amassed a huge quantity of
religious writings, a "Revelation" of gigantic
proportions. This is thought nevertheless to
represent no more than a quarter of the complete
Vedas, the gods having decided, at the end of the
Golden Age, to keep the remainder outside the
reach of human beings. It is perhaps for this
reason that, while each of the four parts of this
vast compilation is devoted to a particular aspect
of religious life rituals, mythologies, wisdom
and hymnsnone proposes a comprehensive cos¬
mogonie myth. To the origins of the world, it
contains only indirect allusions and scattered,
incomplete and contradictory references.
The Creator is not the same from one hymn
to another. Sometimes we are told that Indra the
Great, after slaying the dragon, created the
oceans, the sun and the web of days and nights,
sometimes it is related that Varuna, by sheer
force, separated the two vast cosmic masses from
the primordial egg, pushing back the celestial
vault to a great height and unwinding the earth.
Tradition has it that the Vedas contain the
Truth, but this Truth assumes a myriad of dis¬
concerting forms, like the tree that symbolizes
India, the banyan, whose foliage is so dense that
it blots out the sun.
For example, in many of the Vedic hymns
the origin of the world is traced back to a terrible
battle in which each of a succession of gods is
described as having the leading role. The dragon
slain by Indra is sometimes said to be a gigantic
serpent coiled around the mountain that holds
back the primordial waters. After defeating the
serpent, Indra shatters the mountain in order to
release the waters. More than an act of creation,
this battle is a deliverance. Until that moment,
order and harmony are held in check by such
powerful forces that the hero-god wears himself
out against them. He has to avail himself of
supernatural means, the beverage soma, prepared
by the other gods, which plunges him into a state
of warlike intoxication. Indra, the god of light¬
ning, who usually takes the leading role in the
battle, combines the qualities of all the other gods,
who created him for this encounter, entrusting
to him part of their power. So it is these amalga¬
mated forces that triumph over darkness and
formlessness, bringing into being a world that is
not subject to chance but ruled by necessity,
where each being and thing has its place.
Should these cosmogonie myths be seen as
a way of asserting the value of the warlike ideal
and of justifying a caste, a people of invaders? Is
it the function of the Aryans, "twice born"
through the grace of Revelation, to establish
order and to promote the worship of the revealed
gods by combating the forces of chaos and dark¬
ness embodied in the unenlightened peoples?
In the heat
of the primordial waters
In other myths the origin of the world is linked
to an act of cosmic union. Agni (the fire, the life-
force, the devourer) and Soma (the offering, the
sacrifice, the devoured), the two pillars of Vedic
reality, fertilize the waters with their virile power
and give birth to the primordial egg, the Golden
Embryo. When the egg bursts, there emerges
from it the structure of the world: from the silver
half, the earth, from the golden half, the sky.
They are held in place by a central pillar, an axis,
around which the forces of life are organized in
such a way that the light can spring forth. Then
"time commences, space unfurls and the gods
start to play their role".*
Other cosmogonie myths feature a god who
existed before all others, Prajapati, the Progenitor,
Lord of his own lineage. Prajapati splits himself
in two, coupling with his female emanation, who
is also regarded as his daughter. From this
incestuous union (considered to be extremely
reprehensible) issue all the gods and all dualities.
Creation is thus rooted in the very substance of
Prajapati.
' Jean Varenne, Cosmologies védiques.
The Wheel of Existence
or of the Law,
supported by Yama,
the lord of death
in Indian mythology.

CVO
**

12
Seen from another angle, Prajapati causes the
gods to come into being by turning the primal
fervour upon himself. The gods then complain
that there are not enough offerings to feed them.
In order to prevent his creation from vanishing,
Prajapati sacrifices himself. Once they have
received succour, the gods restore Prajapati by
giving up a part of their own substance. Hence
Prajapati is at once the Father and the Son.
In what is perhaps the most famous hymn
in the oldest document, the Rigveda, which all
Brahmans are required to recite every day, we are
told how the activity of Prajapati led to the emer¬
gence, along with the gods, of a primeval cosmic
man, Purusa. He it is whom the ravenous gods
demand be sacrificed to them, and Prajapati has
to allow them to dismember him. This dismem¬
berment gives rise to the four main social divi¬
sions (priests, warriors, craftsmen and farmers),
but also to the heavenly lamps, the directions of
space, the sky and the earth, rain, wind and fire.
Once they have eaten, the gods can give a part
of their strength to recreate a new man. A micro¬
cosm of the universe, composed of the very
forces by which he is governed, this new man is
inhabited by the gods, embodying the ultimate
message of Indian philosophy, which is that the
individual soul forms part of the universal
Essence. Self-discovery, self-understanding and
self-control enable one to discover, understand
and control the universe.
The cosmogonie myths do not seek to unravel
the mystery of origins or to resolve an existen¬
tial question. They represent rather an invitation
to contemplate the manifold forces present in the
universe, to understand their logic and to trace
them back to their source in order to celebrate
their action and weave the web of their cor¬
respondences, revealing the same energy, the
same beauty, manifest in all things. Recognizing
these forces in himself, man can transcend them
in their scattered multiplicity in order to partici¬
pate in the universal process. To do this, he must
adopt a particular mode of life and comply
with certain social practices: each daily gesture
expresses and as it were embodies these forces.
Each act ritualized by means of offerings and
sacred utterances is part of a never-ending process
of creation. And each person in his place, in his
caste, in his station, is his own priest, being
part of the whole, a fragment of a single reality.
The churning
of the Sea of Milk
After coming into contact with vast urban civili¬
zations and their very ancient religions, and once
it had been removed from the context from
which it had sprung, the Vedic religion withdrew
into itself. Ritual, growing more and more com¬
plex, assumed an importance that divested it of
all meaning. It was then that Jainism and Budd¬
hism appeared, each with its own ideas about the
origins of the world and its evolution. As the

Left, the churning of the
Sea of Milk.
Kashmir school miniature,
18th century.
Below left, 18th-century
miniature depicting the
supreme god Vishnu
reposing on Ananta, the
serpent of eternity, with
Lakshmi at his feet. Behind
them, Brahma emerges
from a lotus flower.
The Hindu pantheon.
Jodhpur school miniature,
18th century.
number of tendencies increased and as one school
of thought gave way to another, a huge body of
literature grew up, giving rise to new cosmogonies.
One of the most frequently illustrated themes
in Indian religious art is the churning of the Sea
of Milk. In the beginning there was an ocean of
milk from which emerged Mount Mandara, the
axis of the world. This mountain rests on the shell
of a tortoise, an avatar of the god Vishnu. Around
the mountain, which is fought over by gods and
demons, a huge serpent is coiled. Each of the con¬
tending parties pulls on one end of the serpent,
thereby causing the mountain to swivel round.
The axis turns, the milk is whipped up and from
it all kinds of blessing spring: the nectar of
immortality, beauty, happiness, mystic rapture
and sweetness. This concrete image, based on
such an everyday act as the making of butter,
conveys an essential message, which is that an
indistinct entity exists, containing a virtual
RAO CHELIKANI,
Indian historian and
political scientist, is
president of the
Coordinating Committee of
the International Voluntary
Service. He has published
three books on political
science and local
administration written in
Telugu, a Dravidian
language of south-eastern
India, and a collection of
poems in English entitled
Anonyma.
ROSELINE DE LAVAL
is a French historian.
power, an axis. For it to be stirred into motion,
a battle is necessary, which reveals the possibili¬
ties harboured by the indistinct entity.
Other hymns describe an eternal divine prin¬
ciple, Narayana (one of the many names by
which Vishnu is known), resting between the des¬
truction of the previous world and the creation of
the next. Narayana floats upon the ocean of milk,
supported by the great serpent Ananta (eternity),
coiled beneath him, with, at his side, Lakshmi, his
female manifestation. When the world is created,
a lotus emerges from his navel. When the flower
opens, Brahma comes forth and recites the four
Vedas. As these eternal laws are uttered, the
world and all things in it are formed.
The origin of the visible world can be neither
a god nor the concentration or dispersion of a
primary element. It results from the attainment
of equilibrium among the primary elements,
which are in opposition to one another. The
thought of Brahma is the pure energy that makes
up all the forms of the universe. It radiates out
in accordance with a strict logic, giving rise in
turn to all the manifestations of reality, all levels
of consciousnessfrom pure consciousness of the
self, mind and intelligence, to the senses and the
object of the senses, matter, the visible and in¬
finitely divided translation of the unique energy.
Man seeks by various paths to regain the
original unity. The quest for knowledge is noth¬
ing but a way of approaching this goal: "all
efforts to understand the nature of the universe
are a search for the indestructible Person. The
mere observation of changing forms cannot con¬
stitute true science." From this quest, engaged in
by every human being since the dawn of time,
it emerges that "the impressions of the senses are
discontinuous and deceptive. Only our inner
universe is accessible to us.... Our perception of
the outer world is but the projection of our in¬
ner world. For this reason, the entire 'Hindu'
pantheon is but a picture of man's inner life."*
With the passing of the centuries, the differ¬
ent versions have not merged into a single version
but have, on the contrary, grown more numer¬
ous. The incredible diversity of life had to be
matched by an extremely subtle symbolic lan¬
guage. The thirty-three primary gods of the Vedas
became 330,000, corresponding to ever more
finely drawn distinctions between the forces
manifested in the manifold spheres of existence.
There has never been any question, in Indian
thought, of reaching a consensus as to origins or
of establishing a theology. The object is rather,
through the multiplicity of experience, to pin¬
point a reality which is known to underlie all
things but which can never be grasped. Tran¬
scending schools of thought, religious sectarian¬
ism and ethnic intolerance, Hinduism affirms that
all points of view, resulting from different levels
of observation, complement and enrich one
another, weaving an increasingly dense fabric of
knowledge which is laid upon the Unknowable.
Is not science too just one more point of
view? Tradition has it that each Vedic hymn has
thirty-two different meanings, each of which is
applicable to one of the thirty-two sciences. Many
learned treatises have been written on the basis
of each of these interpretations. Ascetics have
imputed the origin of creation to water, fire,
wind, ether or the rhythmical oscillations of the
cosmos. Other scholars have expressed scepticism
with regard to the sacred texts of the Upanishads
(speculative teachings), denying the existence of
the gods and attributing the origin of the world
to a principle which they have called fatality,
time, nature, the void or chance, suggesting that
creation was the result not of divine intervention
but of a process of internal evolution or ripening.
Another school of thought claims that the world
is composed of atoms.
All this has scant importance in the eyes of
the wise, who see here no more than subsidiary
verifications of the changing forms of matter, in
the long quest leading to the indestructible laws.
13
