The proud tower wit
BY DOMINIQUE BEYER
'A.
18
LND the whole earth was of one language,
and of one speech. And it came to pass, as they
journeyed from the east, that they found a plain
in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there. And
they said one to another, Go to, let us make
brick, and burn them throughly. And they had
brick for stone, and slime had they for mortar.
And they said, Go to, let us build us a city, and
a tower whose top may reach unto heaven; and
let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad
upon the face of the whole earth. And the Lord
came down to see the city and the tower, which
the children of men builded. And the Lord said,
Behold, the people is one, and they have all one
language; and this they begin to do: and now
nothing will be restrained from them, which they
have imagined to do. Go to, let us go down, and
there confound their language, that they may not
understand one another's speech. So the Lord
scattered them abroad from thence upon the face
of all the earth: and they left off to build the city.
Therefore is the name of it called Babel..."
This is how the Bible (Genesis XI) evokes the
Tower of Babel. Symbol of human excess and
arrogance, this monument has always held a
powerful appeal to the imagination. But the little
that remains of the stepped temple tower (zig-
gurat) at the site of Babylon, which down the cen¬
turies has been plundered for building materials,
flooded, and overgrown with reeds from the banks
of the Euphrates, seems to bear little relation to
the various recreations of it made by creative
artists and scholars. Yet it is this monument to
which the Bible refers.
In his Histories, the ancient Greek historian
Herodotus gives the following description: "In
the middle [of the sanctuary] is a massive tower,
one stadium square, on top of which is another
tower which supports a third, and so on up to
eight towers. An external ramp rises in a spiral
to the last tower; about halfway up is a balcony
and some seats so that one can sit down and rest
on the way. The last tower contains a large sanc¬
tuary in which there is a richly decorated bed,
and beside it is a golden table. But there is no
statue, and only one person may sleep there: a
native woman whom the god has chosen before
all others, say the Chaldeans, who are priests of
this divinity."
The gist of this account by Herodotus is
borne out by cuneiform inscriptions on a Babylo¬
nian tablet dating from the Seleucid epoch (third
century BC). The inscriptions are based on an
older text which describes the great Temple of
Marduk, patron god of Babylon, restored by the
Chaldean kings Nabopolassar and his son
Nebuchadrezzar II towards the beginning of the
sixth century BC. This temple bore the name of
Esagila, "temple which uplifts the head". Its
accompanying ziggurat, the biblical Tower of
Babel, was called Etemenanki, "house of the foun¬
dation of the universe". With a base of 91 metres
square and rising to a similar height, the tower
consisted of seven stepped storeys with a temple
at the top.
Erosion has removed all trace of the temple,
and it is hard to say with certainty what function
was performed by the ziggurat, the centrepiece
of a vast religious ensemble. In the religious
beliefs of the ancient Sumerian and Semitic
inhabitants of the land of the two rivers (the
Tigris and the Euphrates), the stepped tower must
surely have been invested with many meanings,
and with its temple must have represented a
mythical vision of the universe.
The names given to different ziggurats, such
as "house of the mountain of the universe",
"house of the mountain that reaches to the sky",
provide valuable clues. Some texts designate the
ziggurat as the house of god and it is possible that
the marriage rites of deities took place there. The
Babylonian creation epic also evokes this resting-
place, where the way of heaven meets that of the
earth, where after the creation of the two parts
of the world the deities of the heavens and of the
earth gathered together around the great god
Anu, and where the deities of Apsu, the primor¬
dial waters beneath the earth, rejoin Ea, the
benefactor of humanity.
The Mesopotamian ziggurat seems to have
been considered as the centre of the universe and
a mythical link between heaven and earth. In the
words of King Nabopolassar himself: "The god
Marduk has commanded me to lay down solidly
the foundations of Etemenanki as far as the sub¬
terranean world and to cause its summit to reach
the heavens."
I-
.V
k\\>m Et, X
DOMINIQUE BEYER,
of France, is professor of the
archaeology and ancient
history of the Near East at the
University of Strasbourg II.
Until October 1990 he was
curator of the department of
Oriental Antiquities at the
Louvre Museum, Pans. He has
directed a number of
archaeological missions in
Turkey, Cyprus, Syria and Iraq.

Above, The Tower of Babel,
anonymous watercolour (late
18th century).
Right, the ziggurat of Ur, Iraq
(21st century BC).
