Sex drive BY STEPHEN BAYLEY
Extract from an article in the International Herald Tribune
Centennial Magazine, 1987. All Rights Reserved.
30
nu alluring car always reflects the culture that
created it. A Jaguar, Britain's most desired automo¬
bile, was modelled on the interior of the English
country house; perhaps only in a Jaguar and a
house in the Thames Valley will you find leather
and wood used so confidently.
The Germans' passion is for what they call
research, a concept perhaps best articulated by
the Porsche designer who said his cars should
have "the winning look that weapons have". Hitler
chose Ferdinand Porsche to design his "people's
car", the Volkswagen, to enable families to savour
the German forest from the Reich's toll-free
autobahns. Porsche, jailed by the French for his
wartime activities, spent his internment designing
a sports car.
Porsche became the most notorious and
desirable of sports cars when movie star James
Dean, 24, died at the wheel of his Spyder in 1955
and left behind a cult of mourners. (Some women
are haunted by another traumatically unforgettable
image of death by car: Isadora Duncan snapping
her neck when her long red stage scarf caught in
the wire spokes of a low-slung Bugatti.)
The eros of the engine is not always morbid.
Remember the Beach Boys singing "She's so fine,
my 409"? Equating cars and sex is not just a pop
cliché. It also is probably the marketing coup of
the century. Curvaceous cars recall other svelte,
sculpted forms, and engine power is an easy
metaphor for active sex. The Corvette, for
example, was 1950s teenage libido cast in plastic,
chrome and Naugahyde. It was supposed to be
America's version of the European sports car. But,
with its bulbous tyres and delivery-truck handling,
it was a car for drive-ins, not for driving. Ads often
showed a two-seater Corvette as a love seat for
a premarital couple sublimating their mating
games.
Design, so often touted by manufacturers, is
never innocent. Memorable cars embody cultural
temperaments. Ferraris have to be red; the
Mercedes-Benz fias to be the colour of hard metal,
not of crushed soft fruit. The London taxi, a func¬
tional box on wheels, has been called the perfect
industrial car design but has never really caught
on elsewhere.
National personalities are so strong that It is
possible to recognize a car's origin from the
merest fin. France's Citroën unveiled its modern
sedan without Its wheels to enhance the sculpted
shape. Called the DS (a variant of its factory code),
it quickly became the déesse, French for goddess
a veneration prolonged in French drivers' velour
seats, foam-filled dollops offering ectomorphic
embrace.
In Germany, Porsche's successor generation
demilitarized their cars' look in keeping with the
te -T
Mercedes-Bem FormeM-Rennwagen
W 196 R Stromlinie, 1954,
acrylic on canvas by Andy Warhol.
The work was commissioned In 1986
by the car manufacturers.
times. In a BMW glowing with red dials, the most
prominent instrument is often the clock. Punctu¬
ality symbolizes the reliability Germans expect in
their machinesso different from the ostentatious
rationality offered, say, in a Volvo, which appeals
to the taste for sensible technology and environ¬
mental consciousness.
The car of the future seems likely to come
from Japan. Japanese industrial power makes inno¬
vation easy and the goal is the zero-defect vehicle.
That would be something new. Cars, like people,
have to be flawed to be interesting. My advice is,
get it while you can.
