From rhetoric
to reality
By John Ryan
W,HAT can an International Year achieve?
Does it give an impetus to action or provide an
excuse for inaction, bestowing a conscience-
calming benediction upon a global problem
which perplexes or overwhelms us? The answer
probably depends not so much upon the theme of
the Year, per se, as upon what we are prepared
to do with it. The International Year of Disabled
Persons, which was observed in 1981, for example,
was instrumental in transforming attitudes and
redesigning facilities. Kerbs which had obstructed
wheel-chairs disappeared, traffic signals no longer
10
merely flashed, but also buzzed, and increasingly
ramps and elevators were installed to give the
disabled access to public places. Many of these
changes may have eventually occurred in any
case, but the Year gave fresh impetus to efforts
by and on behalf of the disabled, and armed those
who wanted to act with a reason and occasion
for doing so.
The Year also mobilized the disabled into ef¬
fective interest groups, making them keenly
aware of their numbers and needs. It would be
an exaggeration to say that history was trans¬
formed or the future redesigned by the Year, but,
for the disabled, history was moved into the fast
lane. The Year succeededor succeeded in many
placesbecause it was wanted and needed. The
disabled and their advocates were ready with
practical proposals for converting public aware¬
ness and support into tangible results. Alas, not
all International Years are equally successful.
Some remain almost clandestine events, entered
and exited without perturbation or visible
progress. Only a few cognoscenti seem to know
much about them; others may be vaguely aware;
and most, if asked, would venture that it was the
year of the snake or the pig or whatever.
How will International Literacy Year (ILY)
be remembered? As an event that helped to push
the vision of education for all from rhetoric
towards reality, as 365 days that made a differ¬
ence or at least a beginning, or as a non-event
hardly worth remembering at all? It is evidently
too early to judge. What is certain is that millions
of women and men around the world are engaged
in activities related to ILY, teaching and learn¬
ing in schools and literacy groups, in libraries and
learning centres, and working to promote edu¬
cation and literacy through governmental and
non-governmental organizations, the media and
in countless other places and ways. There are na¬
tional committees or structures for ILY in 109
Unesco member states; hundreds of non¬
governmental organizations have established spe¬
cial committees or programmes for the Year;
United Nations organizations are involved in a
variety of ways, and the mass mediaprint and
electronic alikeare increasing their coverage of
and involvement in literacy during 1990. Thus,
much is happening. How much and with what
effect we will only know when an assessment is
made in 1991.
There can be no doubt that the timing of the
Year is auspicious. 1 he easing of East-West ten¬
sions and the pending end of the "cold war" were
neither envisaged nor imagined in the autumn of
ft
Above, adult literacy class
in Bangladesh.
Left, 80 per cent of the
world's 50 million blind
persons live in developing
countries, where lack of
resources prevents many of
them from achieving
literacy.
JOHN RYAN
is coordinator of Unesco's
International Literacy Year
Secretariat. The author of
numerous studies and articles
on literacy, he was for some
years director of the
International Institute for
Adult Literacy Methods,
Teheran, Iran.

v ' \/ v * / r x / ir*/ v
1985 when the General Conference of Unesco ap¬
pealed to the General Assembly of the United
Nations to proclaim an International Literacy
Year, nor even in December 1987 when the
General Assembly acted upon that request,
proclaiming 1990 as ILY. These profound changes
in the climate of international relations give spe¬
cial meaning and importance to ILY, for there
is now reason to hope that priorities will change
and attention and resources dedicated to the
preparation for war will be reallocated to the pur¬
suits of peace: to meeting the basic and urgent
needs of humanity.


Education, a victim
of economic crisis
ILY arrives not only at a moment of opportunity,
but also at a time of urgent need. The situation
regarding education is difficult, even dramatic, in
many developing countries, especially in the
poorest among them. The last decade has been
a period of economic crisis and social tensions.
Indeed, contrary to all logic and expectations,
during the last years of the decade, the net capital
flow has been from the poor countries to the rich
ones, from the "have-nots" to the "haves" of the
world. Education has been especially hard hit.
Many countries have seen the goal of universal
t i i .i . .Ull.ll El tllMin/VN*
primary education, a prerequisite for creating a
literate society, slip further from their grasp.
In this International Literacy Year, there are
an estimated 963 million illiterate adults (fifteen
years +) and over 125 million children between
the ages of six and eleven years, who are not en¬
rolled in school and are hence at risk of becom¬
ing the adult illiterates of the twenty-first century.
The situation regarding the education of women
is especially serious: one woman in three is illiter¬
ate, as compared to one man in five. Action is
imperative to check and reverse the decline of
education, the stagnation in growth and the ero¬
sion of quality. Even in the industrialized coun¬
tries, the situation is disquieting. In many such
Above, batik wall hanging
produced in Togo as part of
a women's literacy project
organized by Unesco and
financed by Norway. The
text commemorates
International Literacy Day,
celebrated each year on 8
September.
Above left, poster from the
national literacy campaign
in Nicaragua, 1984.
11

societies, one fifth or more of the adult popula¬
tion is unable to cope adequately with the litera¬
cy demands of increasingly complex living and
working environments. It has been calculated that
the economic cost of this situation is enormous.
The human suffering it entails is inestimable.
Conscience and common sense alike demand that
we act vigorously to confront this global
problem, which is so wasteful of human poten¬
tial, so unjust and so unnecessary.
A fundamental
human right
The central message of ILY is, quite simply, that
education matters; it is a vital and pervasive force
in all aspects of life. Education shapes us as in¬
dividuals and as societies. It determines, in very
large measure, what we are and what we aspire
to become. Illiteracy does not preclude
knowledge or wisdom. There is genius in the oral
traditions of all nations and peoples. Yet, in the
modern world, education is the most essential
condition and powerful agent of progress. And
literacy is the vehicle of educationthe means
through which ideas, information, knowledge
and wisdom are expressed and exchanged. Thus,
in a larger sense, ILY is not only about educa¬
tion, but also about progress, development,
justice, equality and opportunity. The right to
education is instrumental to the enjoyment and
responsible exercise of other rights. It is essen¬
tial to effective participation in modern society.
Education is, in brief, the very measure, means
and meaning of development.
Cover of a reader produced
by the Jamaican Movement
for the Advancement of
Literacy (JAMAL). In 1989
JAMAL was awarded the
Nadezhda K. Krupskaya
Prize, presented annually by
Unesco in recognition of
notable contributions to the
struggle against illiteracy.
Children's United Nations,
by Aliki Brandenberg, an
illustration from a picture
book for children produced
by the Asian Cultural
Centre for Unesco (Tokyo)
for International Literacy
Year.
The role of lead organization for ILY, which
the United Nations General Assembly entrust¬
ed to Unesco, is paradoxically that of serving as
a humble and modest animator and facilitator.
If the Year is to have meaning, what will matter
is not what Unesco does, but what happens
around the world. Hence, Unesco's activities have
been selected as a means for setting in motion ac¬
tion in member states, within the United Nations
system, among non-governmental organizations
and through the media. The ultimate measure of
the success of ILY will be the extent to which
it facilitates teaching and learning among children
in schools and adults in literacy groups, in vil¬
lages and in cities, in the "North" and above all
in the "South", where the need is greatest.
For those of us engaged in the activities of
ILY at all levelslocal, national or international
the pages of the calendar are turning with startling
rapidity. Over half of the year is already gone.
We realize that what matters is not so much what
happens in 1990, but what will happen in the
years that follow as a consequence of ILY. We
want ILY to be a summons to action. The world
cannot be made literate in only 365 days, but a
year is a sufficient period of time to make a com¬
mitment and a beginning. That is our goal. We
hope that ILY will be remembered as a sort of
"year of the ox", a year that, perhaps in awkward
and plodding ways, got things moving. A year
which demonstrated that vanquishing illiteracy
is an enormous task, but no longer an impossible
dream. A year that will be looked back upon as
a season of promising beginnings and renewed
commitments.
> rv h>nn'rl nn
12
