The birth and death
cOSMOLOGISTS today stand on the edge of
being able to answer the age-old question of the
philosopherswhere do we come from, and
where are we going? Even many non-scientists
are familiar with the term "Big Bang" to describe
the birth of the universe in a ball of fire some
15 billion years ago. But even some scientists are
not aware of new ideas in cosmology which link
this birth of the universe to its ultimate death,
in a self-contained description that owes much
to a marriage between the two great achievements
of twentieth-century physics, general relativity
and quantum theory. Researchers such as Jayant
Narlikar, in India, and Jim Hartle, in California,
as well as several Soviet experts, have been closely
involved in this work. But the man whose name
is most intimately linked with this breakthrough
is Stephen Hawking, of the University of Cam¬
bridge in England.
Hawking is well-known today as the author
of a best-selling book about the nature of time,*
and as the victim of a crippling disease that leaves
him confined to a wheelchair and able to com¬
municate only by laboriously spelling out words
and phrases using movements of one hand to
direct the output of a small computer. But long
before he achieved such popular fame Hawking
was recognized by his scientific peers as one of
the most original, and able, thinkers of his gener¬
ation. For twenty years, his studies have concen¬
trated on the puzzle of what happens to matter
at a singularitythe point of infinite density and
zero volume that lies, according to relativity the¬
ory, at the heart of a black hole, or at the begin¬
ning of the universe.
The universe itself is, in fact, described by the
same equations that describe a black hole. A black
hole is a region where there is such a concentra¬
tion of matter that the gravitational pull it
produces is so strong that not even light can
escape from its surface. Nothing from inside a
black hole can affect the outside world, although
objects from outside may fall in. Such a black hole
may be produced when a star rather more massive
than our own sun comes to the end of its life,
and shrinks inward. The equations of general rela¬
tivity show that any star that shrinks inside a
black hole must, indeed, collapse all the way to
a singularity.
Scientists are suspicious of singularities, and
* A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang to Black
Holes, by Stephen W. Hawking. Bantam Press, Transworld
Publishers, London and New York, 1988.

BY JOHN GRIBBIN
of equations that contain infinities; they usually
regard any indication that they exist as a sign that
something is wrong with the equations. But
general relativity passes every other test with fly¬
ing colours; and since the singularities predicted
by the equations lie only in the hearts of black
holes, where they can never be seen, the idea was,
reluctantly, accepted. Hawking put the cat among
the pigeons by showing, just over twenty years
ago, that the same equations that require collaps¬
ing stars to form singularities also require that the
expanding universe was born from a singularity.
Reversing
the direction of time
We know that the universe is expanding because
distant galaxies are observed to be moving away
from us, with velocities proportional to their dis¬
tance. This does not mean that our Milky Way
Galaxy is at the centre of the universe, since such
a pattern of recession, with velocity proportional
to distance, is exactly what you would see from
any point within a uniformly expanding universe.
This discovery, dating back to the 1920s, is one
of the key ingredients in the concept of the Big
Bang, that the universe used to be in a superdense,
superhot state, from which it has been expand¬
ing for about 15 billion years.
Just by imagining the expansion reversed, it
is clear that long ago the galaxies were closer
together, and that even longer ago all the stars
in all the galaxies must have been merged in one
hot lump. But nobody seriously suggested that
the expansion could be "wound back" all the way
to a singularity, until Hawking proved that by
reversing the direction of time in the equations
which require collapsing stars to form singulari¬
ties you obtain equations which require that the
expanding universe started from a singularity.
Unlike the singularity in a black hole, the sin¬
gularity at the birth of the universe is, in a sense,
open to view. But since it is 15 billion years away
from us in time, physicists were still not too wor¬
ried about this flaw in their equations. Worse,
though, was to come.
Black holes
In the 1970s, Hawking turned his attention to the
behaviour of black holes themselves. He realized
that there is a profound connection between the
description of a black hole in terms of general
relativity and both thermodynamics and quantum

PRECEDING PAGES
Nebulae are huge clouds of
gas and dust that swirl
through interstellar space.
Left-hand page: the Crab
Nebula in the constellation
Taurus.
Right-hand page: the Orion
Nebula.
"Interstellar Portal", oil on
canvas, by the
contemporary Italian
painter Luigi Crippa.
theory. In so doing, he linked the greatest de¬
velopments of twentieth-century physics with the
greatest achievement of nineteenth-century phys¬
ics. But at the cost of exposing the singularities
inside black holes to the outside world.
It works like this. There is a sharp "edge"
to a black hole, called an event horizon. Anything
inside the event horizon is trapped, and can never
escape. Anything outside can, if it has enough
speed, escape from the gravitational clutches of
the hole. The area of this surface around the black
hole, the area of the event horizon, represents its
size, and is, of course, related to how much mass
is inside.
Quantum theory comes into the story because
of a property known as uncertainty, which is at
the heart of the quantum world. In that world,
"uncertainty" has a very precise meaning. Quan¬
tum physics describes the behaviour of particles
like electrons, on scales smaller than atoms. At
this level, nothing is certain. A quantum particle,
for example, does not have both a precisely defined
position and a precisely defined momentum at the
38
same time. In everyday language, the particle
either knows where it is going or where it is now,
but not both at once. Unfortunately, there is no
space here to go into all the fascinating implica¬
tions of this.
A similar uncertainty applies, at the quantum
level, to energy. In a tiny volume of empty space,
where there ought to be nothing at all, a little
bubble of energy is allowed to pop up, out of the
vacuum, provided that it vanishes again within
a very short time, a time specified by the quan¬
tum equations. Such a short-lived energy bubble
is called a "vacuum fluctuation". Since Einstein
taught us that energy is equivalent to mass, this
uncertainty energy can even be turned into a pair
of particles, provided that they promptly vanish
again (it has to be at least a pair of particles, be¬
cause of other quantum rules, which I won't go
into here).
Bizarre though it may seem, this description



of the vacuum of space as a seething maelstrom
of particles popping into and out of existence
every tiny fraction of a second is a cornerstone
of modern physics. But what happens to such
"virtual" particles when they are created along¬
side a black hole?
Hawking's stroke of inspiration was to
imagine a virtual pair being produced right on
the edge of a black hole, a miniscule distance
above the event horizon. It is possible, just by
chance, for one particle in the pair to be moving
into the hole while the other moves outward. Just
as particles can only be created in pairs, so they
can only be destroyed in pairs. But in less time
than it takes for the pair to annihilate, one particle
has vanished forever into the black hole, and the
other has escaped. The uncertainty rules seem to
have been broken, since a particle appears to have
been created out of nothing at all. But Hawking
showed that the mass-energy needed to make the
particle has come from the gravity of the black
hole. As a result, the hole has actually lost mass
and shrunk by a tiny amount.
With this processHawking evaporation-
going on all over the event horizon, a black hole
must slowly shrink away, turning its mass into
a flood of elementary particles. Every black hole
has a characteristic temperature as a result (the
link with thermodynamics), and may eventually
shrink to the point where the event horizon dis¬
appears and the singularity inside is exposed to
view.
The 'edge' of the universe
Hard though it is for physicists to accept, as yet
they have found no way to avoid this possibility.
But having exposed the singularities inside black
holes, in recent years Hawking has done his best
to hide the singularity at the birth of the universe.
Just as quantum physics removes the bound¬
ary around a black hole, so, Hawking believes,
it may remove the singularity at the beginning
of the universe. A moment of creation, he says,
provides an "edge" to the universe, a boundary
in time. But:
"When quantum mechanics is taken into
account, there is the possibility that the singular¬
ity may be smeared out and that space and time
together may form a closed four-dimensional sur¬
face without a boundary or edge, like the surface
of the earth but with two extra dimensions. This
would mean that the universe was completely
self-contained and did not require any boundary
conditions. ..there would not be any singularities
at which the laws of physics would break down."
The quote is from Hawking's essay "The
Edge of Spacetime", in William Kaufmann's
book Universe (Freeman, New York, 1985). It
can be translated into everyday language quite
simply.
Hawking suggests that we think of the four
dimensions of the universe (three of space and one
of time) as being like the two dimensional sur¬
face of the earth. The surface of the earth is

"closed", in the sense that it has no edge which
you can fall offthat is, it is unbounded, although
finite in size. In order to make the analogy work,
you have to think of all three dimensions of space
as represented by a single line of latitude, a circle
around the earth from east to west and back to
its starting point. The direction of time is
represented by lines of longitude, running from
one pole to the other.
The North Pole represents "time zero", in



this picturethe birth of the universe in the Big
Bang. The "line of latitude" at the pole has zero
dimensions. As the universe expands away from
the Big Bang, imagine successive lines of latitude
drawn closer to the equator. As time passes (the
distance from the North Pole increases), the lines
are longerthat is, the universe expands. But
there is no "edge" in time at the North Pole, any
more than there is an "edge of the world" there.
It is just a place from which all time directions
happen to be "forward", just as on the surface
of the earth all spatial directions from the North
Pole are "south".
So far, so good. But what happens when we
reach the equator? Now, as we continue draw¬
ing successive lines of latitude they get smaller,
the "universe" shrinks, until it disappears at the
South Pole, in a mirror image of the Big Bang
in which it was born.
How could this happen in the real universe,
if we translate back from Hawking's picture? One
possibility being entertained seriously today is
that the entire universe may be no more, and no
less, than a vacuum fluctuation on the grand scale.
For most of us, imagining the creation, if only
for a fleeting instant, of a pair of particles out of
nothing at all is far from easy. But cosmologists,
to paraphrase Lewis Carroll, have no trouble
believing three impossible things before break¬
fast. It was an American physicist, Ed Tryon,
who pointed out that although the lifetime of a
virtual pair of particles is limited by the amount
"Cosmic Composition"
(1919), oil on board on
wooden base, by the Swiss
artist Paul Klee (1879-1940).
39

^"S»
1?
n '
a|T! '
.-	
40
of mass-energy they contain, it is possible for a
whole universe to be created, out of nothing at
all, with zero net energy. If so, there is no con¬
straint on its lifetime, since the quantum equa¬
tions are always in balance.



'A complete description of
where our universe comes from
and where it is going'
This neat trick rests upon the way energy is
stored in a gravitational field. This is always nega¬
tive, in the sense that the mass-energy of a particle
is always positive. So our 'universe might have
been born as a tiny bubble in spacetime, contain¬
ing the entire mass of the universe, but with this
mass-energy balanced by the gravitational energy
associated with that mass. The trick only works
if there is enough mass to ensure that the universe
itself is a kind of black hole, closed off by gravity
from anything outside. Af first, cosmologists
thought that such a new-born "universe" would
collapse rather suddenly, and disappear. More
recently, however, a theory which goes by the
appropriate name of inflation has been developed
and shows how such a tiny, superdense seed of
matter would be "blown up" to produce the
familiar Big Bang.
And so cosmologists have their complete
description of where our universe comes from,
and where it is going. We do, indeed, live inside
a gigantic black hole, containing the entire cos¬
mos. Born out of nothing at all, as a quantum
fluctuation of the vacuum, it has been expanding
for 15 billion years, but at an ever-decreasing rate.
Some time in the distant future (not for many
more tens of billions of years) the tug of gravity
will inevitably halt that expansion, and then put
it into reverse. For many more tens of billions
of years, this will have little effect on stars,
planets, and any life forms around to puzzle over
such matters. But eventually galaxies will merge
together, stars will collide and be squeezed into
an amorphous mass, and ultimately the universe
will be snuffed out of existence, gone like any
other fluctuation of the vacuum. The consolation,
for anyone distressed to learn of the ephemeral
nature of the universe, is that other universes
must also exist in the infinity of spacetime, some
before us, some after us, and some, in a sense,
alongside us. Sic transit gloria mundi.
Tracks of the stars
around the South Pole.
Long-exposure photo taken
in New South Wales,
Australia.
JOHN GRIBBIN,
British astrophysicist and
writer, is the author of many
popular science books
including The Omega Point
(Corgi, London, 1988) which
discusses the ultimate fate of
the universe, and (with
Professor Martin Rees) Cosmic
Coincidences (Bantam, New
York, 1989), which looks at
mankind's place in the
universe. He is currently
completing, with Kate
Charlesworth, The Cartoon
History of Time, which will be
published later this year by
Cardinal, London.
