I H E
A village in the hills By Edouard Bailby
I he road wound its way through
wooded hills or between copses, with
now and then a glimpse of a few
sleepy cows. I was driving in northern
Hungary, looking for a village. Tucked
away at the end of a road, it rarely
appears on maps and the signposts
along the road are somewhat erratic.
At each fork I hesitated: left or right?
Yet Holloko is no ordinary place.
Since 1987 it has been the only
village in the world inscribed on
Unesco's World Heritage List. Situ¬
ated in the Cserhát mountains, some
hundred kilometres north-west of
Budapest, it is still a backwater as far
as large-scale tourism is concerned.
Suddenly, through the foliage of
the trees lining the road, I caught
sight of a green sign and on it, in
white lettering, there at long last was
the name of the village. A few
hundred metres further on, at the
crest of a slope, I came across the first
houses and was beset by doubt.
These were sturdy modern buildings,
surrounded by gardens, of the kind
which has been springing up in the
Hungarian countryside over the past
few years. Could Holloko be a tourist
trap, with a pile of stones passed off
as a historic ruin?
Before long I came across a sign
bearing the World Heritage emblem.
Then, all at once, the look of the
place changed. The real village
sprang into view. As though in a fairy
tale, cottages as white as wedding
gowns, each with a wooden balcony,
appeared along the main street. This
street of uneven cobblestones is
named after Sándor Petöfi, the great
Hungarian revolutionary poet who
died in 1849. With rare exceptions,
cars are not permitted here.
Unlike other Hungarian villages,
which are centred on a church, this
ancient village in the Cserhát moun¬
tains leads to a tiny and charming
whitewashed chapel dating from the
fifteenth century. With its pointed,
slate-covered steeple, it is the last
vestige of the Middle Ages. Inside,
there is no baroque ornamentation,
just plain whitewashed walls and a
wooden ceiling. To the right of the
entrance hangs a crucifix by Ferenc
Kelemen, a local sculptor. On feast
days, old villagers still attend mass in
traditional costume.
No more than a hundred people
live in the old village. Dressed in
typical Hungarian peasant fashion in
black trousers or gaily coloured skirts,
they go about their business, some
bearing pitchforks, others carrying
baskets of vegetables. On the nearby
hills are a few vines, vegetable
gardens, fields of maize and sun¬
flowers. Sheep graze in the
meadows. The farmland is divided
into small plots. I did not see a tractor.
The bucolic landscape adds to the
charm of the village.
The neat rows of immaculate
houses, façades embellished with
finely carved wooden balustrades,
surmounted by tiled roofs with tiny
square windows set in them, are built
in a uniform style characteristic of the
architecture of northern Hungary.
Their patches of garden, filled with
summer flowers, are enclosed by low
fences. Often, above the front door,
there hangs a horseshoe, a garland
of red paprikas, a cob of maize or a
holy picture.
The village museum, situated in
an old house converted for the pur¬
pose, is a perfect reconstruction of a
traditional interior. The front door
leads straight into the main living
room, furnished with a dining table
and benches decked out in embroi¬
dered covers. The kitchen is at the
back and to the left is the bedroom
in which parents and children all
slept. A pair of boots is suspended
from the ceiling to stop mice from
nesting in them during the night. An
adjoining room houses the loom on
which the women embroidered
tablecloths, head-dresses and
cushions. To the right of the living
room is a more spacious room,
reserved for the grandparents, where
farm implements, firewood and pro¬
visions for the harsh winter months
are stacked up in a corner. Porcelain
or pewter plates, generally hanging
from the walls, gaily coloured
blankets, red and green cushions,
and hand-decorated earthenware
vases brighten the place up.
All the houses in Holloko date
from the beginning of the century.
Unfortunately, nothing remains from
earlier periods. The wooden houses
have been reduced to ashes in suc¬
cessive fires. Mongol hordes laid
waste this area in the mid-thirteenth
century, and in the sixteenth the vil¬
lage was sacked by Turkish troops,
who left a garrison of sixty men in a
fortress which towers over the neigh¬
bourhood. The ruins, accessible by a
steep path, are in such a state of dis¬
repair that they have been closed to
visitors for the past seventeen years.
But the fortress, which is indissociable
from the history of Holloko, is now
being restored and will soon regain
its former splendour.
"Now that we are part of the
Unesco heritage," a village woman
told me, "we are no longer anxious
about our future." The entire village
is the focus of attention from both
local and regional authorities. Since
last year it has even had its own post
office, and it also boasts a grocery
store, a primary school, an old
people's home and three small café-
restaurants, which are open until late
in the evening.
To lovers of the past, the local
tourist office rents out at a modest
price a few charming cottages
equipped with modern amenities.
The number of these dwellings is
limited so as not to alter the life of
the village. In the summer season,
romantics can hold weddings and
country dances here, for which the
village women will deck themselves
out in all their finery.
"I was born to make people
happy," says Ferenc Kelemen. Born
at Holloko in 1927, he has worked
with wood since his childhood and
carves allegorical figures, birds, forest
animals and groups of young peasant
girls. There are piles of his sculptures
in the pretty little cottage where he
lives. He was eager to show us a pho¬
tograph of one of his masterpieces,
purchased, as he proudly explained,
by the wife of a French prime
minister.
Ferenc Kelemen is a voluble man
who likes to repeat without any false
modesty that he "has no regrets
about having been born with talent".
His fame has long ago travelled
beyond the wooden fences of his
native village.
EDOUARD BAILBY,
French journalist and former
correspondent with the Paris weekly
magazine L'Express, served for a number
of years as press officer with Unesco's
Office of Public Information.
49
