Pampa-ed
guests
BY GREGORIO MAN2UR
a«."SaVätf*!ifcisir?
jTJL region devoted mainly to stock-breeding and
farming, the vast Argentine Pampa (a Quechua
Indian word meaning "flat surface") is a land of
welcome where the practice of hospitality in¬
troduced by the Spanish is rooted in Graeco-
Roman, Arab and Christian traditions.
There are few towns in this vast 600-square-
kilometre plain, which is larger than France and,
for the traveller wishing to cross it, roughly
equivalent to a journey between Amsterdam and
Vienna. It is a land of hamlets and isolated farms,
and the hospitality offered there is special, if not
unique.
For the gauchos, the cowboys of the Pampa
whose nearest neighbours are sometimes several
hundred kilometres away, the arrival of a rela¬
tive, a friend or a stranger used to be regarded
as an event. In our time, trains, aircraft and high¬
ways have partly put an end to this isolation, but
customs have not changed for all that and the
people of the Pampa continue to offer a hospi¬
tality that has ceased to exist in the towns.
Crossing an ocean of land
The traveller who sets out from Buenos Aires or
Montevideo finds himself almost immediately in
an ocean of land before an ever-receding horizon.
Awed by a feeling of immense space and solitude,
he advances along an unending road as straight
as an arrow. If he crosses the dry Pampa in the
west he will be accompanied only by the "bad
lights"the phosphorescent glow from the skele¬
tons of animals that have succumbed to thirst,
hunger or the fury of a puma. In the humid
Pampa of the east he will see, on either side of
the road, behind barbed wire, hundreds of peace¬
fully grazing animals or huge water tanks beside
which horses patiently wait their turn to drink.
The traveller accustomed to short distances
is sure to have forgotten something: spare parts
for the car, food, a map, matches or a torch. More
alarmingly, he may run out of petrol. Vehicles
abandoned by the roadside are a common sight.
Their owners will have had to walk for hours or
perhaps days before reaching an inhabited area.
It is in such situations that, weary, thirsty and
alone, a traveller really appreciates the generous
hospitality of the Pampa.
Seeing him arrive, the gaucho, isolated on his
ranch, will raise his arms and greet him with these
words: "I hail thee Mary most pure." To these
traditional words of welcome the seasoned visitor
will reply: "Conceived without sin."
The Argentine Pampa
Inset, left, a group of travellers stop to rest at a ranch
near Montevideo. Right, gauchos in Argentina's
Corrientes province. 35

36
The master of the house, after inviting him
in, will then serve him drink and food and start
an animated conversation about the weather and
the difficulty and fatigue of travelling. The visitor
is never asked who he is, where he comes from
or what he is looking for in the region. Wherever
he is from, near or far, he is the messenger of
God. Nothing is too good for him. If the host
does not take a liking to the visitor or is not in
a cordial mood, he nevertheless does his best to
offer what he can. In a rich estancia and a poor
cottage alike, a visitor will find a room, a bed with
clean sheets, a pitcher of water and a bucket or,
if there is one, a bath. The peons or the owner's
sons will go off to tow his car with a tractor or
horses. They will look after the repairs and fill
the car with petrol without a thought of pay¬
ment. A farmer would be extremely offended if
he were offered money in exchange for such a
service.
Asado
gaucho-style
When siesta time is over, at the end of the day,
the national dish is prepared. This is known as
asado and consists of a chunk of meat roasted on
a spit or on a grill by an irreplaceable and much-
respected figure called the asador. Whether he is
a labourer or the owner of the farm, only the
asador is permitted to light the fire and to lay out,
turn over and take off the meat, reputed to be
the best in the world. In the meantime the
woman of the house will attend to the empanadas
(meat pasties) and the desserts.
The asado is more than a traditional form of
hospitality; it is a kind of pagan communion.
Around the roasting meat friendships are formed
as the fruits of the earth, the benefits of work,
are shared. If the sky is overcast the meat will be
cooked in the kitchen fireplace; if the weather
is fine, it will be cooked in the open air. In the
presence of women, propriety demands that the
food be eaten sitting down. But in a gaucho-style
asado, the men use the knives they carry on their
belts to cut off a piece of meat which they place
on a slab of bread and eat standing, sauntering
around the grill, avoiding the curls of smoke and
from time to time helping themselves from the
table laden with salads, wine and pickles.
At the end of the meal, after the dessert, the
evening's entertainment can begin. The fireplace
Preparing asado, the
traditional Argentine
speciality of barbecued meat.
Below, illustration by
Eleodoro Ergasto Marenco for
an edition o/The Gaucho
Martín Fierro, the famous
epic poem by the Argentine
writer José Hernández
(1834-1886).

becomes a focus of conviviality. Fresh logs are
put on the fire, larger ones now as they have to
last, for the festivities may go on into the early
hours. And if the fingers of the master of the
house or of some peon are not too numb to play
the guitar or if luck has it that the local payador
(strolling singer) is present, then it won't be long
before the first sounds of music are heard.
As the evening progresses, maté, a brew of
leaves from the plant of the same name, prepared
by the woman of the house, is passed around
among the guests. And as he clears his throat by
drinking an excellent cimarrón (bitter maté), the
payador will perhaps sing of the gaucho Martín
Fierro and his friend Cruz, who fled from the
Christian villages seeking refuge among the
Puelche Indians in the south of Argentina. In
colonial times and during the early period of
independence, many "deserters" took refuge
among the Indians, who also thought that
travellers were to be treated with deference. They
believed that an Indian who died fighting along¬
side such men assumed the form of a thunder¬
bolt or lightning and continued to battle with the
usurper in the afterworld. The ties they formed
with those who sought sanctuary with them and
who shared their fate thus continued to exist even
after death.
As the music subsides and glasses of juniper
wine start being passed around, the host generally
GREGORIO MANZUR,
Argentine writer and
journalist, is a writer and
producer with the French
radio station France-
Culture. His latest work of
fiction, Sangre en el ojo
("Blood in the Eye", 1989),
was awarded a Spanish
literary prize.
offers the visitor a calabash or some other wooden
drinking vessel inlaid with silver to be used for
maté, a powder horn, bolas (braided leather straps
with stone balls at their ends used for capturing
running animals by entangling their legs), or a
cross-patterned poncho. If the visitor is on foot,
it is not unusual for him to receive a horse and
saddle as a gift. "You'll give it back to me some
day," the host will say, "next time you're in the
area."
When the evening draws to an end it is cus¬
tomary for the guest to stand up and thank his
hosts for all the kindness that has been shown
to him. Even if his Spanish is not fluent, it will
still be enough for him to convey his feelings to
these people who are always unstinting in their
generosity, even when they have little for them¬
selves.
In the Pampa, visitors have been known to
receive hospitality for months and indeed years.
Some have taken advantage of this to discover the
region, obtain work and found a home after
sending for their family from abroad, often from
Europe. In this old farm building or that luxuri¬
ous estancia there will be a room reserved for the
guest who lived in it for years and promised to
return. No one will move into it permanently
for at any time the friend of yesteryear may come
back. The man of the Pampa is still waiting for
him with open arms. 37
