Land of a thousand and one
courtesies
ALn Islamic tradition handed down by the
Persian poets tells how Abraham, not wishing to
eat alone, once sought to share his meal with an
old man he met in the desert. When the time
came to pray, he realized that his guest was a
Zoroastrian and wanted to send him away. But
an angel restrained Abraham, saying, "God has
fed this man for a hundred years, how could you
refuse him a meal?"
Strangers are invariably surprised by the
ceremonial that unfolds before them on a visit
to an Iranian household. Whatever the time of
day or night, whatever the reason for the visit
or the social status of the visitor, a drink will be
offered first of all. To enter someone's house is
like coming to the end of a journey through the
dust of the desert and slaking one's thirst in a
garden.
Usually the tea is prepared in the Russian
manner, left to brew for a long time in a teapot
standing on a samovar and served with added
water in small glasses. Sugar is not added to
the tea but placed on the tongue. Sweetmeats
are always provided to accompany the golden
liquid. Each town has its own speciality, such
as tamarisk jellies, sugared almonds flavoured
with the essence of Egyptian willow, assorted
baklavas (nut and honey pastries) from Yazd,
all kinds of biscuits, some flavoured with jasmine,
others stuffed with walnuts, pistachios or
almonds...
In summer, to alleviate the torrid heat of the
road, cool syrups made from melon or waterme¬
lon juice are served on arrival. The accomplished
hostess can blend the colours and flavours of
different fruits in the most unexpected ways.
Don't think that you can drop in on someone
and then quietly slip away as soon as your busi¬
ness is concluded. In face of the sometimes ex¬
cessively polite formulas used by the master of
the house when he insists that you stay to eat (in
the case of an unexpected visit it is good manners
not to accept too quickly), you must decide for
yourself what common courtesy requires. Even
if there is little to talk about, a visit should not
last less than an hour, otherwise your friends will
be offended by the implication that they have
failed to entertain you properly.
Conversation follows a ritual course, begin-
30 ning with mutual inquiries about matters of
BY
YANN RICHARD
YANN RICHARD,
of France, is a researcher at
the French National Centre
for Scientific Research
(CNRS). He lived for
several years in Iran, where
he worked with the French
Institute of Iranology,
Tehran. He has published
several studies on Iranian
culture, and is co-author
(with B. Hourcade) of
Téhéran au-dessous du
volcan ("Tehran under the
Volcano", Autrement
publishers, Paris, 1987) and
editor of a collection of
articles on Iran and the
West published by the
Maison des Sciences de
l'Homme, Paris, in 1989.
health. At first bad news is avoided, and it is only
broached after a decent interval in order to spare
people's feelings. Depending on the closeness of
the friendship between them, people either dis¬
cuss general topics or more personal matters.
What is so-and-so up to these days? When the
conversation flags, such basic questions as "How
are you getting on?" are used to get it started
again. It would be a mistake to lose patience with
these conventions, which simply exist to fill gaps
in the conversation and to create a companion¬
able atmosphere.
When your thirst has been quenched you will
be brought dishes of dried fruit, cakes, fresh
fruit.... It has been decided that you will stay and
any pretext will be used to keep you. You can't
leave without tasting our fruit! How can you
refuse, faced with such a tempting array of grapes,
figs, peaches and cucumbers?
Pause between mouthfuls and you will no¬
tice that the room where you are being enter¬
tained does not seem to be in regular use. It is
certainly not the place where the family watches
television or reads the papers. Even poor fami¬
lies have a place where guests can be entertained,
although in modern apartments space is limited.
Wealthier families used to Western-style comfort
keep a guest-room furnished with armchairs and
a sofa, while in more modest rural homes
cushions are arranged around the central carpet.
Guests who have travelled far sleep in the same
room, for which carefully folded sheets, blankets
and a mattress are always at hand and will be laid
on the carpet for the night.
The urbanization of the last thirty years, the
wear and tear of city life, cramped apartments...
all these factors make it increasingly difficult to
offer hospitality. Moreover, travelling has become
commonplace and the arrival of a relative from
the airport after a flight lasting an hour or two
bears little resemblance to that of the exhausted
dust-caked traveller of not so very long ago, who
had suffered extremes of heat and cold and had
not slept for several nights. Such hardships are
only a memory today, when proliferating hotels
and restaurants cater for the growing number of
people who wish to travel anonymously, without
imposing on the hospitality of a relative or friend
and incidentally sparing themselves the duty to
reciprocate.

Detail of a 14th<entury Persian miniature
31

32
Most large family get-togethers, which are less
common today than they used to be, tend to take
place during the major festivals of the religious
or civic calendar. On these occasions succulent
dishes are laid out on cloths spread over the
carpet, and twenty or thirty people gather to eat.
But in contrast to the welcome ceremonies
described above, people talk as little as possible
during these meals, and eat hurriedly, which is
I
;>j
a pity since people would often be happy to take
a second helping and savour the meal at their
leisure.
Enormous quantities of food are prepared for
thçse family reunions, and if supplies were to run
out, the master of the house would give the
shameful impression that he is ungenerous. When
you have finished, don't forget to say that you are
full. Extra guests commonly turn up at the last
minute, when someone brings along an unexpect¬
ed visitor, a relative or a friend. There are never
any seating problems as everyone squeezes up
around the cloth, and if the meal is served on a
table it is often in the form of a buffet since there
are rarely enough chairs to go round.
Once the meal is over, more tea is served and
the ceremony quickly comes to an end. The
master of the house will beg you to excuse the
frugality of his hospitality and the poor quality
of his food, but of course you will protest by in¬
sisting that your hosts have done everything they
could, that is to say a great deal, and that you
are very grateful to them.
Although the master and mistress of the
house always stay in the background, try to
satisfy your every need and give you the place
of honour, do not think that a guest's role is
simply to relax. First of all you must humbly
The guest-room in a house <
Shiraz (Iran)
Preparing tea
at Yazd (Iran)

accept the honours bestowed on you, respond
to the polite remarks addressed to you, and help
yourself to the dishes offered to you even if
you don't want them. All these signs of good
manners will show the host that his attempts at
hospitality have not been in vain. The guest
loses his independence and becomes, as a Persian
saying ironically puts it, "the master's donkey"!
The guest's paramount duty, however, is to
return the courtesy. At New Year (Now Rouz)
a return visit is practically taken for granted, as
anyone who has received guests has been placed
under an obligation to them. It may seem sur¬
prising that people you have just entertained in
your home insist on receiving you the following
day, but to refuse would be embarrassing as it
would put them at a disadvantage and leave them
in your debt. The uninitiated who accept the
lavish hospitality of Iranians often forget this
duty to reciprocate and earn themselves a black
mark socially. One way to make up for not
being able to return the invitation is to bring a
present.
But compensation for generosity may come
much later. Someone from the provinces living
in Tehran or another big city will feel particu¬
larly honoured to receive people from his village,
even if they stay for several days. Such a visit is
a tribute to his social success and raises his stand¬
ing in the neighbourhood. Guests of this kind are
therefore a blessing, because although they may
cost their host something in food and effort, their
visit enhances his prestige.
One benefit of hospitality, and not the least,
is that it puts paid to disagreement and conflict.
While "bread and salt" are being shared there is
no question of perpetuating grievances or of
picking quarrels. A tacit truce by both parties,
host and guest, creates a feeling of solidarity that
nothing can destroy. The same principle, when
institutionalized, guarantees the traditional right
of asylum in places held to be sacred: mosques,
the homes of great ulemas (religious leaders), the
stables or kitchens of the shah or, more recently,
embassies and consulates.
When the time has come to take your leave,
the host will see you out. This is another way
of placing you under an obligation. Among the
formalities of leave-taking, you will often hear
the same words you heard when you arrived. No
irony is intended: this is not a polite way of
showing you the door but a way of assuring you
in all sincerity that the visit has been beneficial
for the household and that you will always be
just as welcome in the future. 33
