Different conceptions of time have
prevailed in different cultures, and
although history and memory are
indissociable their relations have
not always been straightforward
Memory

and time A,
BY FRANÇOIS HARTOG
Construction of the Tower of
Babel. (16th-century Flemish
painting).
Lccording to the French anthropologist
Louis Dumont, "when we talk about history we
do not think only of an absolute or relative
chronology but also of a chain of causality, or
rather a series of significant changes. We live in
history in the sense that we perceive how people,
societies and civilizations develop in time. We
almost go so far as to believe, contrary to most
societies, that only change has a meaning, and not
permanence."1
This conception of time as a vector and factor
of progress dates back to the age of the European
Enlightenment. It is a transposition into secular
terms of a Christian concept in which the key
events are the Creation, the Incarnation and the
End of Time. Its fullest expression may be found
in Hegel's philosophy of history and in Marx's
historical materialism. It maintains that truth is
not enshrined in a holy book but in history, the
true story of what the eighteenth-century'
German philosopher Johann Gottfried von
Herder called "the human soul through the'
ages and among the nations". In history the (at
least potential) immortality of humanity is
revealed.
In the practice of history, time is an instru¬
ment and chronology is the supreme principle of
classification. Anachronism is the worst of sins.
There are however other forms of relation¬
ship with time, other versions of time, governed
not by the law of chronological succession but
by principles of accumulation, superimposition,
imitation, coexistence and reabsorption.
Memorizing the Vedas
In Brahmanic India, for example, memory is not
concerned with a chain of recollections organized
chronologically, and, as the French Sanskrit
scholar Charles Malamoud has pointed out, the
idea of a "world of memory" does not exist. "Far
from giving shape to a biography," Malamoud
has written, "memories cause the outline of a
person to become blurred and open-ended," to
the point that he or she may say, "if I master the
right techniques, and especially if I gain the neces¬
sary merits, I shall be able to recall my former
lives".
Alongside this "ordinary" memory, given
over to recollection, there is another kind of
memory, consciously trained, tightly controlled
and wholly dedicated to memorization. This kind
of memory is used to learn by heart the sacred
text of the Vedas, which, even though they were
committed to writing by the third century BC
at the latest, are primarily transmitted orally. Em¬
ploying a series of sophisticated techniques which
result in the "disarticulation" of the text, the
Brahmans gradually "incorporate" it into the
person of the pupil. The text must be recited
faultlessly. It is both sinful and ritually disastrous
to make a mistake. By the end of this rigorous
preparation, the text has become separated from
its context and has acquired a timeless quality. 13

A Vishnuite Brahman, his
forehead adorned with
sacred texts. Right,
Brahmans at prayer in the
Siva temple at
Chidambaram, southern
India.
14
FRANÇOIS HARTOG,
French historian, is director
of studies at the Ecole des
hautes études en sciences
sociales in Paris. Among his
published works on ancient
and modern historiography
are Le miroir d'Hérodote
(Gallimard, Paris, 1980; "The
Mirror of Herodotus") and Le
19e siècle et l'histoire: le cas
Fustel de Coulanges (PUF,
Paris, 1988; "The 19th
Century and History: the
Case of Fustel de
Coulanges").
This way of cultivating memory is poles apart
from the Western approach to history; it reflects
a different conception of time, memory and
historicity.
The keys
to immortality
Herodotus, the father of Western history, opens
his Histories with an assertion of his desire to
preserve the traces of human activity from obli¬
vion. Faced with the immutability of nature and
the immortality of the gods, the historian
describes these highly ephemeral traces orally
and preserves them in writing. The successor
of the epic poet, he claims to hold the keys to
immortality.
Although history and memory are indissoci¬
able, the relations between them have been
complex, changing and marked by conflict.
Thucydides was convinced that only the history
of the present can be "scientific" and believed
that the historical record is established largely in
spite of memory, which is always unreliable. His
nineteenth-century counterparts were also anx¬
ious to separate history and memory, but on the
grounds that ideally history is the past and only
the past: history ends where memory begins.

Recently, however, memory has invaded the
realm of history, and both concepts must now
be reconsidered. How, in the case of the exter¬
mination of the Jews by the nazisthe Shoah
can the imperatives of memory be reconciled
with the demands of historiography? Formerly
considered to be impure, memory is becoming
part of the stuff of history: there is now a history
of memory.
The memory
of a people
The injunction to "remember"in Hebrew
Zakhoroften occurs in the Bible and in Judaism.
Israel is continually ordered not to forget, not to
submit to oblivion. Zakhor is also the title of a
book by Yosef Yerushalmi, which takes this im¬
perative of remembrance as the starting-point of
a study of the Jews' relationship with their past.
It is true that the Bible is a sacred, written text,
but it is first and foremost a revealed text, like
the Vedas. And like the Vedas, the Torah2 must
be studied, learnt, memorized.
But the relationship of the Jews to their holy
Book is quite different from that of the Brahmans
to the Vedas. There is no attempt to disarticu¬
late the written text and remove it from its con¬
text. For the Jews the important thing is what
happened and how it happened, starting with di¬
vine revelation. Revelation is history and, since
the banishment from Paradise, primeval time has
become transformed into historical time. The
Bible story, which is historical in its basic struc¬
ture, is bound to be the record of the march of
time and of humanity: the memory of history and
the memory of human beings.
But in this case the obligation to remember
does not give rise to any curiosity about the past
as such, nor to the idea expressed by Herodotus
that it is important to save from oblivion the erga,
the noteworthy traces of human activity. The
only past that matters consists of God's interven¬
tions in history and the human reactions they
provoked.
Although the Jews never ceased to heed the
injunction to remember, there came a time when
they stopped writing history. Perhaps it was then
that the need to remember became even more im¬
portant than before. Memory and history, which
until then had been joined together, seemed to
part company. Rabbinic literature, after the Bible,
has no historiographie dimension.
It has been said that the watershed was the
synod at Jamnia (c. 100 AD), which fixed the
Jewish canon of the Bible. The figure of the con¬
temporary Jewish priest and historian Flavius
Josephus may appear as the exception that proves
the rule for it was not until centuries later that
another Jew declared himself to be a historian.
And yet, Yerushalmi believes, it would be wrong
to think that the rabbis were uninterested in his¬
tory. On the contrary, he believes that it is easier
to understand their attitude if we accept that they
were totally immersed in history. Besides relating
history as it had come to pass, the Bible also
presents the fabric of all present and future
history. Its meaning is clear; everything else is of
no more than incidental interest, not really worth
bothering about.
Only this purpose of history, or at least of
the writing of history, is important here. It raises
a number of difficult questions, including the fol¬
lowing. What is the link between history and
place, in this case the Temple in Jerusalem? Once
the Second Temple had been destroyed, was it
(still) possible for the Jews to write history?
Flavius Josephus, for example, stressed the link
between the writing of history and the Temple,
which alone gave countenance and authority to
the historian.
The rabbinic academy founded by Yochanan
ben Zakkai at Jamnia after the destruction of the
Temple was "a place of memory" but not a
workshop for historians. The point was admira¬
bly made by Freud in 1938 when he wrote, "The
political woes of the Jewish people taught them
to appreciate the value of the only property left
to them, their Scriptures. Immediately after the
destruction of the Jerusalem Temple by Titus,
Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai sought permission
to open the first school for the teaching of the
Torah, at Jamnia. From that time onwards, Holy
Scripture and spiritual interest kept the Diaspora
together."
1. La civilisation indienne et nous, Armand Colin publishers,
Paris, 1964.
2. The first five books of the Hebrew Bible. Editor
A copy of the Torah
preserved in the synagogue
of old Cairo.
15
