Veteran
roadsters
prized as
collectors'
items and
museum



pieces
Driving into
BY ALVARO CASAL TATLOCK
36
ALVARO CASAL TATLOCK,
Uruguayan journalist, is a
member of the Society of
Automotive Historians of the
USA and director of the
Uruguay Automobile Club
museum. He has published
many articles in specialist
journals and was co-author
of The Complete Encyclopedia
of Commercial Vehicles (USA)
and The Complete Encyclopedia
of Motorcars (Ebury Press. UK).
IT is hard to evoke the passion aroused by old
cars without talking about money. Some models
are now worth millions of dollars, and whenever
there is a vintage car sale record-breaking prices are
paid for such and such a make or model, or even
for such prized accessories as a Lauque radiator
cap. What was in the early 1980s the secret vice of
a handful of enthusiasts has become a field in
which rich speculators are ready to pay out sums
of the order of £5,500,000 for a Bugatti Royale.
To realize how things have changed, it is
enough to compare old car sale catalogues with
those compiled for major auctions today. The
catalogue for Sotheby's London sale of 4
December 1989 weighed more than one kilo and
provided connoisseurs with descriptions of the
sixty-nine vehicles to be sold that day, together
with some 650 accessories and fittings described

i
^^^^^ 1
N^hiV
* *
i ^u
fa
history
The Mille Mlglla ("Thousand Miles")
event In northern Italy, 1987.
This pencil drawing (c. 1950), by the
German artist Carlo Demand, shows
Marcel Renault cornering at speed during
the 1902 Paris-Vienna race.
as automobilia. One 1912 Rolls Royceand a not
particularly attractive one at thatmade £915,000
and eight other cars topped the £100,000 mark.
In 1950, no motorists in their right mind would
have entertained the idea of buying such mon¬
sters for which today's collectors are ready to
fork out immense sums.
What makes one vintage car more or less
expensive than another? The layman may think
that the main factor would be age or rarity, but
this is not so. Veterans of the heroic age of
motoring cost less than more recent models.
Unwieldy and not very roadworthy, they are of
more interest to museums than to private owners.
However, pre-1905 vehicles are valued because
they are eligible to take part in the celebrated
London to Brighton Run. The rarest models only
fetch high prices if they have other desirable

Bugatti Royale Napoléon coupé of 1930, the personal car of Ettore Bugatti, Is preserved at the National Automobile Museum, Mulhouse, France.


features. The Bugatti Royale, for instance, is an
extremely rare model, but it is worth millions of
dollars because many people regard it as a master¬
piece of automobile design.
The automobile as objet d'art
The fact is that old cars are worth the price that
collectors are prepared to pay for them. What
other explanation can there be for the fact that
the market price of a 1957 Chevrolet convertible
is higher than that of earlier or later models of
the same make? Perhaps people who are prepared
to pay more than $30,000 for an old car in per¬
fect condition either could not afford such a car
in its heyday or did own one and are trying to
recapture their lost youth.
Financial speculation in old cars has given rise
to a thriving international trade. In South
American countries like Argentina, Uruguay and
Brazil, where many 1920s and 1930s models are
still in everyday use, agents in search of rare
specimens for rich foreign customers had a won¬
derful time in the 1970s. The authorities in these
countries eventuallyalbeit rather late in the day
concerned about what was happening
and, following the example set by India, which
imposed a complete ban many years ago, placed
restrictions on the export of cars of historical
interest.
Original models are worth so much today
that their owners are often reluctant to expose
them to the hazards of road traffic. Full-scale
reproductions of the most prestigious makes are
now available. In Uruguay, for example, it is pos¬
sible to obtain for about $20,000 a copy of a 1920s
Mercedes SSK complete with a modern Mercedes-
Benz engine. The price is not high given that an
original is worth at least ten times as much.
Perhaps international counterfeiters will be
tempted to move into the vintage car market, as
they have done with paintings, furniture and
objets d'art.
All this is bound to upset people who really
love old cars. However, some have responded to
the craze by founding vintage-car clubs and
organizing races, parades and rallies. Scarcely a
month goes by without at least one such event
being held somewhere in the world, and the
membership of the International Federation of
Vintage Automobiles is constantly increasing.
Automobile museums are proliferating. What
Only cars manufactured
before 1905 are eligible to
take part In the annual
London to Brighton Run.
The first self-propelled vehicle
was a tricycle-mounted
steam-driven carriage built by
the French engineer Nicolas
Joseph Cugnot In 1770.
krtjfeí&wjfr^ y if
*««»?
4* - 1
j^^^
^^^
wÊm
makes an old car a museum piece? Kenneth
Behring is one person who has answered this
question to his own satisfaction. In 1988, he con¬
ferred the title of Art Museum on the establish¬
ment bearing his name in Danville, California,
in which he keeps his collection of 150 cars. He
regards cars as the most beautiful form of sculp¬
ture he has ever seen. Giancarlo Amari, the
curator of the Carlo Biscaretti di Ruffia automo¬
bile museum in Turin, regards automobiles as
products of human genius and as the results of
an authentic creative endeavour which have also
been useful to society. The automobile could be
regarded as the supreme form of kinetic art.
Recent history
These are relatively recent notions. They were
certainly not current at the beginning of the cen¬
tury. The automobile only became a historical
phenomenon in the 1920s, when a group of
English gentlemen had the idea of holding a vin¬
tage car Run between London and Brighton to
commemorate the day in 1896 when the decision
to increase the speed limit for motor cars to 12
miles (20 kilometres) an hour at last made it pos¬
sible for horsepower to compete with the horse.
This annual Run, which is only open to cars built
before 1905, could be said to be the Ascot of the
horseless carriage. 39

40
The Veteran Car Club of Great Britain,
whose members own cars more than twenty-five
years old, was founded in the United Kingdom
in 1930. The first automobile museums were not
created until the 1950s. When Lord Montagu of
Beaulieu decided to open his stately home to the
public in 1952 and put the five vintage cars in its
garage on display, he probably did not imagine
that he was laying the foundations for Britain's
National Motor Museum, which now houses
more than 200 old cars. Today there must be
more than 300 automobile museums all over the
world, as well as hundreds of other museums that
have cars in their collections, including the
Museum of Modern Art in New York, which has
a superb Cisitalia.
Clubs, books and magazines
The first nostalgic articles and specialized maga¬
zines about old cars also began to appear in the
1950s. Fanauto in France, The Automobile in the
United Kingdom and Motor Klassik in Germany
are just three of the host of periodicals devoted
to veteran vehicles which are published today in
many languages.
In addition, more and more books are being
published about old jalopies, their history and
technical specifications. Each year the American
publishing firm Motorbooks International issues
a catalogue of more than a hundred pages con¬
taining references to specialized books, makes,
prices, gadgets, addresses of repair shops, and
other information of interest to veteran car
The National Motor Museum,
United Kingdom, founded
by Lord Montagu of Beaulieu
In 1952.
enthusiasts. The latest catalogues also list selec¬
tions of video-cassettes for enthusiasts who want
to see their favourite models being put through
their paces or to watch old films advertising them.
All this may suggest that lovers of old cars
have never been happier than they are today.
Their passion is now acknowledged all over the
world. There are hundreds of clubs where owners
of the same makes or even the same models can
meet250 such clubs exist in the United
Kingdom aloneand there are skilful craftsmen
who can make spare parts for obsolete models.
The number of specialized publications is
increasing, as are the competitions, rallies and
other events where owners can display their
treasures, swop experiences and gather invaluable
information. Yet many vintage car owners feel
some misgivings as, for environmental and safety
reasons, the law is increasingly hard on the pol¬
luting engines and rough and ready braking
systems of their beloved vehicles, and regret that
prices rise to stratospheric levels as a result of
speculation.
The historian of the automobile is inclined
to wonder whether any of today's vehicles will
be capable of igniting as much passion in fifty
years' time as venerable Duesenbergs, Bugattis,
Bentleys, Mercedes and Rolls Royces do today.
Will people be prepared to pay millions of dollars
for a 1990 vehicle, spend hundreds of hours
repairing it and hand-crafting parts that were
originally mass-produced? Will any 1990 vehicles
still be in running order in half a century? Only
time will tell.
