F,REEDOM of expression is not an op¬
tion but a fundamental human right.
It is affirmed in Article 19 of the
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and also set forth in the Pre¬
amble to the Declaration in these
terms: "...the advent of a world in
which human beings shall enjoy free¬
dom of speech and belief and free¬
dom from fear and want has been
proclaimed as the highest aspiration
of the common people...".
Freedom of expression goes
hand in hand with freedom of infor¬
mation. Without access to news and
knowledge, it is a limited concept.
This is why press and media freedom
is organically linked to these basic
freedoms.
Certain traditions of press free¬
dom undoubtedly reflect historic de¬
velopments in specific countries. The
subsidies given to newspapers in
some northern European countries
ostensibly to secure press diversity-
would be seen in other parts of the
world, for example in the United
States, as questionable governmen¬
tal interference.
However, across all the differ¬
ences, the concept of press freedom
does have a core meaning, which
commits all societies. Article 1 9 of the
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights states that: "Everyone has the
right to freedom of opinion and ex¬
pression; this right includes freedom
to hold opinions without interference
and to seek, receive and impart in¬
formation and ideas through any
media and regardless of frontiers."
Unesco's Constitution reflects
this universal commitment in its first
article, which stipulates that to real¬
ize its purpose the Organization will
"Collaborate in the work of advanc¬
ing the mutual knowledge and un¬
derstanding of peoples, through all
means of mass communication and
to that end recommend such inter¬
national agreements as may be
necessary to promote the free flow
of ideas by word and image."
The principle of "free flow of in¬
formation" presupposes the ability of
all parties to produce information.
This has been reflected in Unesco's
communication programme by the
unquestioned priority given to the im¬
provement of communication capac¬
ities in the developing countries. The
major elements of this programme
are assistance to national and region¬
al news agencies, notably through
the Southern and Eastern Africa
News Agencies Development project
(SEANAD), and its sister projects in
West Africa (WANAD) and the Carib¬
bean (CANAD); the development of
broadcasting, from the community
level to regional and international ex¬
changes; the setting up of rural
newspapers; and professional train¬
ing schemes.
But should the "free flow" be ac¬
companied by initiatives to ensure a
"balance"of different viewpoints
or of different information sources?
This question has given rise to much
controversy.
Throughout the 1980s, Unesco
spoke of "a free flow and wider and
better balanced dissemination of in¬
formation". But fears were expressed
that the Organization's initiatives to
"better balance" information flows
could impinge on press freedom.
In its new Medium-Term Plan,
covering the years 1990-1995, a for¬
mulation was agreed on which Unesco
hoped would dispel all misunder¬
standings. It underlined Unesco's at¬
tachment to an uncompromising
"free flow of information" and took
great care that every reference to in¬
itiatives to "balance" flows was im¬
mediately followed by an assurance
that this should occur "without any
obstacle to freedom of expression".
A key paragraph in Unesco's Com¬
munication in the Service of Human¬
ity Programme expresses the position
in this way:
"...the concern of the Organiza¬
tion is to ensure a free flow of infor¬
mation at international as well as
national levels, and its wider and bet¬
ter balanced dissemination, without
any obstacle to the freedom of ex¬
pression, and to strengthen commu¬
nication capacities in the developing
countries, so that they may partici¬
pate more actively in the communi¬
cation process."
Recent activities in this area in¬
clude the publication of a collection
of case studies on The Vigilant Press
and a global survey on The Protection
of Sources. A third international study
on the impact of new communication
technologies on information plural¬
ism is forthcoming, and a worldwide
survey of journalists' access to infor¬
mation will be launched in 1991.
While studies and reporting are
important tools in bringing press free¬
dom questions to the forefront of the
international media debate, real ad¬
vances can be measured only in the
actual progress of independent me¬
dia worldwide. The recent emergence
of an independent press in Eastern
Europe was promptly met by an in¬
formal East-West meeting of editors
and journalists convened by Unesco
early in 1990. The meeting has since
led to several practical initiatives, es¬
pecially in the area of journalism and
management training, and a parallel
event on independent media in Africa
is scheduled for late 1990.
Unesco's commitment to free¬
dom of expression, reconfirmed and
revitalized in recent months, is a fun¬
damental part of its mandate. The
defence of press freedom requires
constant alertness. The situation is
not new; it was realized two hundred
years ago at the dawn of modern
democracy, when the distinguished
Irish statesman John Philpot Curran
made his renowned observation:
"The condition upon which God hath
given liberty to man is eternal
vigilance." 37
