The road to reading
* i
i. ~T
///i«!
Ji
By Ralph C. Staiger
WaE enjoy doing the things we do well. A good
football player enjoys outwitting the opposition
as the ball moves towards the goal. A graceful
dancer enjoys the movement, rhythm and music
of the dance. A good reader is more likely to
reach for a newspaper or a book than someone
who stumbles over every word.
A child who is a slow, halting reader will
avoid reading even the most beautifully illustrated
storybook. He or she may try to understand the
gist of a story from the pictures, but will be
unable to enjoy it fully.
Many people believe that the first steps
How adults
can introduce
children
to a lifelong
pleasure
towards reading take place in a school, and that
the teacher has the primary responsibility in guid¬
ing them. This is not wholly true. School read¬
ing books provide some reading experience, but
they are meant to teach children how to read, and
cannot be expected also to ensure that the learn¬
er will derive lifelong pleasure from reading. The
responsibility for creating lifetime readers is a
broad one, shared by family, school, libraries,
bookstores and the mass media.
Even before school starts, a child experiences
much within the family circle which can lead to
reading. Mother, father, brothers, sisters, uncles, 37

aunts, grandparents and friends of the family pro¬
vide the most important early experiences on
which it is possible to build concepts and attitudes
which create a successful reader. The disposition
of the family towards ideas, towards books and
reading, establishes important values which may
stir even the youngest baby.
It is never too early to start. The infant in
its mother's lap who is read toeven if the stories
are not understoodlearns that reading is a com¬
fortable experience and that words and pictures
must be good. Later, when the stories become
pleasurable on a different level, this attitude will
continue. Most children also enjoy the comfort
of hearing the same familiar stories over and over.
Sometimes they gleefully finish sentences. This
does not mean that it is no longer necessary to
read that story. The child is showing apprecia¬
tion and learning has taken place from the story.
Playing games with words
Exposure to languagejust talking to a babyis
important. As children grow, they usually enjoy
word play and word games which help them
show their mastery over words. The whole fa¬
mily can join in the fun of playing games with
words. Active teaching of basic concepts and at¬
titudes is also the responsibility of a parent.
Learning to recognize, name and differentiate be¬
tween colours may seem rudimentary, but it is
an important building block, as are many other
concepts and experiences about which a child will
be expected to know and eventually read.
A mother or father who reads a story to a
child may entice the child to enjoy more difficult
tales. By listening to their parents reading aloud
from books too difficult for them to read them¬
selves, young learners find out how complex
stories take shape and how words are used. Their
understanding of what books can be is enhanced,
and when they later encounter these stories in
their own reading, they are meeting old friends.
Reading to children should continue long after
they have begun to read for themselves.
There is evidence that even in the most
depressed economic conditions, whether a child
becomes a reader or not depends upon a role
model in the family ro provide an example. Par¬
ents who read themselves are likely to have chil¬
dren who read. Parents who discuss what they
have read and invite their children's contributions
to the conversation are directly influencing their
children's reading development. The role model's
enjoyment helps make a reader for the future.
All of this takes time. But it is well worth
the investment. A daily period for family reading
may take several forms. Instead of the parent doing
all the reading, several children may read from
their books and talk about them. An older child
or a parent may start a sentence or a paragraph



and have a younger child try to finish it appropri¬
ately. The resulting discussion (or argument) is
a useful way of developing vocabulary and social
skills and learning about language structure.
After setting the stage for reading and other
intellectual activity, perhaps the most important
contribution a parent can make to readers in the
family is to make sure that books and other
materials are available for them. This does not
RALPH C. STAIGER,
of the United States, is
chairman of the International
Book Committee, an advisory
committee of non¬
governmental 'organizations
with consultative status at
Unesco. He served as
executive director of the
International Reading
Association for 22 years
before his retirement in 1984
and is the author of over 50
publications about reading.
This article has been adapted
from a booklet which forms
part of a series entitled
Literacy Lessons, produced by
the International Bureau of
Education on the occasion of
International Literacy Year
(see page 50).
You can take a book
JO almost anywhere.

necessarily mean buying books or journals, but
may involve going to the library, borrowing
books from friends and neighbours or making
available books from other sources.
The electronic media play an important role,
too, for films, radio and television can help build
the world of ideas which a reader needs. Televi¬
sion and radio can often be useful instruments
for discussing plots and the use of language, and
for evaluating the worth of a specific programme
collectively. The media can stimulate children to
read more about a subject. If children spend an
inordinate amount of time mindlessly watching
television, it is sometimes necessary to limit the
amount of viewing time and to help them decide
which programmes to watch. Television is a
source of learning about many things. It should
be used with co-operative judgement.
Schools are responsible for sharpening the
reading abilities of young people, but they cannot
The children's corner of a
bookshop.
39

be expected to perform the entire task of shaping
perceptual skills, providing experiences and
motivating each pupil for a lifetime of reading.
Teachers can do much to create an atmosphere
in which learning will not be a dreaded memory.
If a sharp-tongued teacher ridicules a poor reader,
the other pupils soon join in. This is inexcusable.
It may teach the victim to avoid reading for life.
Like a parent, a teacher who reads to the class
from a book which he or she has enjoyedeven
though it may be above the class's reading level-
plants seeds for future adult reading. Not only
is an example being set, but the teacher's en¬
thusiasm may be infectious, and the student's
curiosity aroused. Poetry particularly lends itself
to being read aloud.
Encouraging children
to create
Just as there are many kinds of reading materials,



so there are many ways to read. Reading a recipe
is different from reading a news item in the paper.
For most children, stories are the commonest and
most enjoyable kind of reading. Even here,
however, different reading approaches are the
norm. Some children will race through a story
to find out what happened. Others may use the
plot as a launching pad for imaginative thinking
and acting. Such children may become creative
artists.
All children should be encouraged to create.
Their early attempts to write should be en¬
couraged, for a writer is likely to become a read¬
er. Adults should remember that spelling words
is an acquired skill. More literal-minded young-
"The responsibility for
creating lifetime readers is a
broad one..."
sters use reading primarily to gather and deal with
information, although they may also enjoy an im¬
aginative story. Helping to build vocabulary and
suggesting how information can be located and
used may be the most profitable ways of helping
such children. Librarians know how to use refer¬
ence works and can almost always show the
information-gatherer where to look.
Children's interests and attention spans vary;
some maintain regard for what is read, even if
the story is from adult materials which the par¬
ent enjoys and would like to share. When it be¬
comes obvious that the child is no longer paying
attention, it is time to move to books which are
closer to the child's level of interest. The parent's
obvious interest and enjoyment are eloquent,
however, whether the materials are easy or
difficult.
Setting aside a time for family readingan
hour during which parents and children read
something of interest to themis especially use¬
ful in families which discuss their reading as a
matter of course. If the reading hour is perceived
as a form of punishment, it can backfire.
Parents should avoid closing doors to books
and ideas through unwitting ridicule, verbal or
subconscious. "What, nose in a book again!" even
if said in jest, can quench a child's interest quick¬
ly. They should also avoid making discussion
about books and ideas a testing situation, with
penalties for answers which do not agree with a
parent's preconceptions of the subject. Nor
should they force a child to read a book without
previous discussion about it. When reading is a
voluntary activity, it is much more likely to be
relished and continued for life.
40
