N W
Sembène Ousmane
Poet of the African cinema
Sembène Ousmane is one of Africa's
most notable writers and film-makers.
His Borom Saret (1963) was the first
film made by an African on a fictional
subject to be distributed outside Africa.
His films and novels examine the many
faces of a continent emerging from the
colonial era, at grips with the tensions
of independence and modernization.
What does it mean to be a film-maker in Africa these days?
What are the hopes, difficulties and challenges?
Whether they are making films for the cinema or for
television, African film-makers work with images and they
are heirs to the very old but still living tradition of oral story¬
telling. Images can be considered as a development of the
oral tradition insofar as they are addressed to a vast number
of people who, in the Third World in general and especially
in Africa, are unable or in some cases do not even have the
time to read. The image is really a short cut.
Let me give you an example. I like to organize travel¬
ling picture shows. I go to a village and show a film, and
then we have a discussion about it. As a result of what the
audience has seen, heard and remembered, I find out how
useful I am as the creator of the film. Once the lights go
on again, people start to discuss the film. In spite of political
differences and religious divisions, everyone's point of view
is represented, and that's important.
Then I ask them why they need artists. I have put this
question to university teachers and to students in their final
year of secondary school. The answer seems to be that some
of our intellectuals, especially those who are politically com¬
mitted, expect artists to make proposals, to offer solutions
and even, I might add, speaking ironically, to make a revo¬
lution for them by proxy. To hear them, you would think
that art was meant to provide an answer to all their worries.
Art rather than politics?
But art does play a role in politics. Not politics in the
sense of scoring cheap political points, obviously. People
are immersed in art and culture from the cradle to the grave.
In the African tradition, cinema is something which relates
to human beings in their entirety.
Has African cinema developed only recently, with the
emergence ofAfrican film-makers, or does it date back to
colonial times?
In colonial times, the cinema was a form of entertain¬
ment for foreigners. The black African world was only seen
as part of a banana plantation or a coconut grove, or through
stock characters of loyal houseboys and servants. Now,
however, African film-makers are raising real issues.
They may not always raise them successfully, but they are
raising them nevertheless. People are thus slowly starting
to identify with their history and the cinema is becoming
something real.
Would you go so far as to say that the cinema is now the
most powerful form of artistic expression in Africa?
Absolutely! African cinema is a form of self-communion.
There are many things that we have not been taught and
are in danger of losing: with the cinema, we can safeguard
them and people can see them.
Would you say the same of television programmes, which
may have been produced in another African country or
even on another continent?
If a football match is being televised, then people watch
television. Otherwise, they go to the cinema! Some serials
have been relatively successful, but the constant cliff-hanging
becomes boring in the long run. In the ten years since we
have had television in Senegal, we have seen Dallas, Dynasty,
Shaka....
Do serials like Dallas appeal to the general public?
Of course! They represent success and the "American way
of life". They are full of beautiful women in beautiful
settings, full of everything we hate yet dream about. It is
difficult to analyse their attraction in logical terms. They
have an immoral side, but morality no longer comes before
individual success. In colonial times, the land was occupied,


but people's minds were free. Even though my relatives
my uncles, for examplemay have been civil servants and
may have worn topees or ties, they returned to their own
culture and their own world when they came home to their
families. They still had something to say to their wives and
children and their neighbours. But television takes possession
of people's minds. Another culture, a completely different
view of things, is brought into the home. The model
of society handed down by our ancestors is smashed
and is replaced by another. That is where the danger of
television lies.



Do you think it is completely destructive?
Yes, completely, because African society is not bringing
forth a fresh culture to contend with this challenge. We are
more familiar with European fairy tales than with our own
traditional stories. There are no traditional story-tellers left
in the towns. Our children go to school and are taught in
a foreign language. When they come out of school, they go
off and watch foreign stories with their parents.
But a society cannot turn backwards. So what should
be done?
The audiences at my travelling picture shows ask me the
same labyrinthine question. In the first place, we must all
know what we want. Naturally, we are all in favour of
individual freedom, but where do we want to go with that
freedom and what do we want to do with it? What do you
do with freedom when you have countries that cannot
educate three-quarters of their children, where unemploy¬
ment is rife, where there is no work, and calamities pour
down on you? Birth is always attended by pain. I was not
present at the Creation, but when Allah created the world,
there must surely have been what we now call a "Big Bang".
There must have been an explosion, because nothing can
be accomplished without an explosion. Life is reborn of
death. You sow seeds and they decompose; a crack opens
up in the earth and they sprout. There is no alternative.
For the people, being free means having the right to work
and to speak out. We all have to wage our own struggle and
to pay for it accordingly.
And what do the people say?
They expect somebody to speak out on their behalf. You
know, black Africa's heritage is a heavy burden. No sooner
had we started to form embryonic states, which were far
from perfect, than we had to contend with the slave trade
in which, incidentally, some Africans took part. For four
or five centuries, some African chiefs were accessories to
this monstrous trade. After that came colonization, which
is perhaps the worst thing that ever happened to us. The
colonialists trained some people, but only to occupy subor¬
dinate positions, not to govern themselves. The colonial
master's presence had become necessary. In the end we
fought for independence, but we did not know what it was
or even who we were. We had a common territory but

different cultures. Within each geographical boundary a host
of cultures existed side by side. We are now creating a fresh
culture, but it is based on a language which is not our own.
That is even more serious.
Is this when artists should make their voices heard?
Yes. This is where they come into their own. People listen
to them and expect them to speak out. Historically, no other
creative artists have ever carried as much responsibility as
novelists and film-makers. This takes us to the ancient



African tradition of the "griot". Everybody knows that
griots are crazy. Every village has its "simpleton" who dares
to say out loud what other people only whisper in the
solitude of their huts. We laugh at him, but we acknowledge
that he is right.
There used to be griots; now there are artists, film-makers.
Could this handing down of symbols not be a reason for
hope? After all, perfect democracy can hardly be expected
to emerge from chaos at a single stroke....
In democracy it is up to the people, not the artist, to speak
out. In the past, power was wielded by the elders and by
wise men. Nowadays the pattern has been reversed. The
elders are no longer the fount of knowledge and no one
listens to them any more. What radio, television and the
newspapers say does not originate with them. Society is
being torn apart and people are going crazy as a result. What
I say is that the only way to be happy here is to go crazy.
The countries of the Third World face many challenges.
Are you one ofthose who consider that these challenges come
primarily from outside, or do you think that they emanate
from within the society itself?
Outside the continent we have adversaries and we have
allies. I would say that Africa's real enemiesits long¬
standing enemiesare within. If we are to move forward,
therefore, we must sort out our own problems and rely prin¬
cipally on ourselves. Basically, we have three priorities: we
have to apply our own remedies, however limited, to our
own problems; we have to develop education; and we have
to provide work for the people.
What about freedom of speech?
Speech is a duty in Africa. Every head of a family is
expected to attend village meetings"palavers"to represent
his clan or his household. Moreover, he has to speak, if he
does not want to be thought of as a coward. But he also
has to listen. There is a very fine tradition in the "palaver":
when a man has finished speaking, the oldest member
of the group says "We have heard what you have said and
understood what you have not said". Naturally, nowadays,
in a democracy the scale is different. Every citizen has
to express his or her views. The issues are no longer the
same, but the tradition of the "palaver" could perhaps
open up paths and suggest new ways in which people could
organize themselves.
