FERNAND
BRAUDEL
NAVIGATOR IN TIME AND SPACE
BY a strange coincidence, Fernand Braudel, like
Victor Hugo a hundred years before him, was
born when "this century was two years old" and
died at the age of eighty-three. He might have
been remembered only as the author of a dry aca¬
demic treatise on "Philip II, Spain and the
Mediterranean", had he not taken advice offered
in 1927 by Lucien Febvre, the highly original
scholar who was to be a co-founder of the influen¬
tial historical journal Annales, and met the great
Belgian historian Henri Pirenne in 1931. The in¬
fluence of Febvre and the Annales persuaded
Braudel to centre his work on the Mediterranean
world rather than the caprices of Philip II and
to study the empire of the Venetian merchants
and Genoan bankers instead of the Spanish em¬
pire during Spain's Golden Century.
Braudel sought to grasp the original charac¬
teristics, terrestrial and maritime, of the Mediter¬
ranean as a physical and geological entity
transcending national, religious and linguistic
frontiers and to record the fluctuating patterns
of human activity in the areathe unchanging
physical realities of life, mercantile trade, the
meandering course of what he called "battle-
history". To accomplish his project, he evolved
a global method of investigation which could be
applied throughout the region.
He made a famous dissection of history into
three different planes: a history which is virtually
unchanging, silent, mineral, the story of man's
contact with the natural environment; social his¬
tory which relates the life of economic groups,
peasant and urban societies, territorial states; and
the clamour of short-lived events that furrow the
surface of things.
Revolutionary by virtue of its geohistorical
conception of space and time, Braudel's thesis was
published in 1949 as La Méditerranée et le monde
méditerranéen a l'époque de Philippe II (The
Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the
Age ofPhilip II), a title in which the sea, not Philip
II, holds precedence. For its author, it opened the
doors of the Collège de France, where Braudel
succeeded Lucien Febvre in the chair of the His¬
tory of Modern Civilization.
Braudel's famous conception of "historical
time", magisterially expounded on 1 December
1950 at his inaugural lecture at the Collège de
France, found its ultimate expression in his major
trilogy Les structures du quotidien, Les jeux de
l'échange, and Le temps du monde (1979). In these
works Braudel constructs a three-storey edifice
as he did in The Mediterranean (although one with
infinitely vaster proportions since he is evoking
virtually all the continents): "at the base, a many-
sided, self-sufficient, routine material life; above,

Fernand Braudel
(1902-1985).
Below, a 15th-century
portolan (navigational
chart) showing two of the
great maritime cities of the
Mediterranean, Genoa and
Venice. Marciana Library,
Venice.
a more clearly delineated economic life which
tended to merge into the economy of market
competition; on the third storey, capitalist
action."
To make this remarkable global assessment
of the world between the end of the Middle Ages
and the beginning of the industrial revolution,
Braudel invented a new perception of time: the
long term (longue durée). He added to the histori¬
an's equipment highly sophisticated research tech¬
niques borrowed from the human sciences.
"History itself," he admitted, "excites me less
than this associated panoply of the human
sciences... History itself, to be valid, must be in¬
corporated... into the other human sciences and
for their part the human sciences should take into
consideration the historical dimension." Thus
armed, Braudel resembled one of those bold
Renaissance navigators who abandoned the
coastal trade practised by their ancestors and
deliberately set sail for the high seas. For him the
high seas were the total history which Henri
Pirenne, Henri Häuser, Lucien Febvre, Marc
Bloch and Ernest Labrousse had explored before
him and whose first scientific maps he drew.
Braudel was also a peerless organizer who
protected his pioneering experiments and those
of his pupils within a flexible institutional frame¬
work. In 1948 he participated in the foundation
of the 6th Section of the Ecole Pratique des
Hautes Etudes in Paris, which became under his
leadership between 1956 and 1972 an international
centre for the study of the "new history". In 1962
he created and administered until his death
another leading institution for the study of the
social sciences, the Maison des Sciences de
l'Homme. Between 1946 and 1956 he directed
with Lucien Febvre and thereafter alone, the
review Annales, which was instrumental in im¬
planting social and economic history in the
French university system between 1955 and 1965.
Paradoxically, this great scholar who was also
no mean writer, was better known outside
Francein the Mediterranean basin, naturally,
but also in Poland and the United Statesthan
in his own country. The wider French public
only discovered the master of the Annales school
in 1979 when he appeared on the television liter¬
ary programme Apostrophes and talked about his
work Civilisation matérielle, économie et
capitalisme (Civilization and Capitalism, 15th-18th
Century). With Claude Lévi-Strauss and Georges
Dumézil, Braudel was one of the last great French
intellectuals who became a legend in their life¬
time. He was elected to the French Academy in
1984. CHRISTIAN AMALVI 17
