u N
A cultural battle
By Mario Vargas Llosa
Wf ITH the fantastic technological
progress made over recent decades
in the audio-visual media, information
has come within the reach of
everyone. And this prodigious revo¬
lution is one of the fruits of liberty,
for it was the free countriesthe
"open societies", to use Karl Popper's
term, that have adopted and
encouraged the democratic way of
life, tolerance, the rule of law and
peaceful coexistence amidst diversity
were the seed-beds of that
individual initiative and industrial
competition that gave rise to the
extraordinary technological advances
thanks to which information is now
part of the universal heritage.
Just as a climate of liberty made
technological development possible,
this development, ¡n turn, has enabled
liberty to take root and spread
throughout the world. With their
ability to illuminate reality, honestly
and objectively, the audio-visual
44
© AIR, Montevideo, 1989
MARIO VARGAS LLOSA,
of Peru, is widely regarded as one of
Latin America's most outstanding
novelists. Among his recent works
translated into English are The War of
the End of the World (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, New York, 1984/Faber &
Faber, London, 1986), and Who Killed
Palomino Motero? (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, 1987/Faber & Faber, 1988).
This article has been extracted from a
lecture given at an International
Association of Broadcasting conference
held in Rio de Janeiro in December
1988.
media will have a greater contribu¬
tion to make to the advance of
liberty, of the democratic way of life,
than any other public power or cul¬
tural force.
Ensuring the free flow of infor¬
mation and the right to critical judge¬
ment is the first problem a country
has to solve before it can provide a
satisfactory solution to any of its
other problems. This is no exaggera¬
tion; it is a lesson that has been
learned from historical experience.
Freedom of information and the right
to dissent are more than essential
principles; they are a practical neces¬
sity for societies that really want to
move ahead and are constantly
attempting to overcome their weak¬
nesses.
The only way in which a society
can avoid, not making mistakes, but
persisting in error is by subjecting its
actions constantly to the test of the
free circulation of information and of
critical assessment. For a Latin
American this is a self-evident fact.
The history of Latin American coun¬
tries ¡s rich in examples of the way
in which the best of intentions can
have the most catastrophic results
and of how proposed solutions based
on sentimental attitudes, ideological
principles or abstract concepts,
entirely divorced from practical
experience, can give rise to measures
that are counter-productive in both
economic and social terms.
The 'litmus test'
of critical appraisal
We have seen how populist regimes,
regimes with strong social motivation
and regimes bent on reform have
aggravated poverty and increased
unemployment and even fanned the
flames of violence and social conflict
simply because the models they
attempted to apply had not, as they
were being drawn up, been sub¬
jected to the "litmus test" of critical
appraisal, to the yardstick of reality,
to direct examination by those who
stood to benefit or suffer from them
rather than by their instigators.
Respect for freedom of informa¬
tion and the right to critical appraisal
should, therefore, head the list of
reforms of any government that
desires effectively to improve and
modernize society and remedy ¡ts
defects.
Practically speaking, however,
what is meant by freedom of expres¬
sion and the right to make critical
judgements?
We all know insti ictively when
this freedom exists, wl en it has dis¬
appeared or when it skives only in
a symbolic or pervi rted form.
Nevertheless, I shall offe a definition
which, I feel, sums up what we all
know and feel on this subject.
It might be said that a society
enjoys freedom of expression when,

through the various means of com¬
munication, its citizens are able to
criticize the powers-that-be-not only
the political powers, but also the eco¬
nomic, military and ecclesiastical
powers, as well as the representatives
of various social institutions such as
trade unions and, of course, the infor¬
mation media themselves.
The free flow of information and
the right to critical judgement, exer¬
cised through the media, are the
most effective way of blocking the
predisposition to grow and to persist
unimpeded that is inherent in all
power blocs.
This being so, the view is often
expressed, in all good faith, that if the
media are in private hands, they will
necessarily defend the interests and
express the opinions only of those
powerful enough to acquire them.
And there is indeed an element of
danger of this happening, which
must be countered. But if to avoid
this danger the media are placed
under the control of the state, this is
like treating an illness with a cure that
kills the patient.
While it is true that nothing can
be done to counter the rigid censor¬
ship that results from state control,
there are a number of measures that
can be taken to avoid the risks and
perils involved in private ownership
of the media. Therein lies all the
difference.
The conquest of the market
The system of a free press based on
private enterprise is the only one so
far that has been able to guarantee
true freedom of information and a
real right to criticize, but we cannot
ignore the fact that this system too
involves a number of dangers. The
first of these is that the choice of
programmes and their content (for
radio and television) and of articles
(for newspapers) is based solely on
such practical considerations as max¬
imizing profit and market share.
If the purely commercial criterion
of market domination is uppermost,
the inevitable result will be a lowering
of the quality of the media and a
cheapened, popular presentation of
news that can be taken to extremes
that threaten culture. The mediocrity
to which the press, radio or television
can descend, when motivated solely
by a desire to dominate the market
and to displace commercial rivals,
may well have tragic consequences
¡n the long term for both the cultural
and democratic bases of a society.
This is a well-known phenome¬
non, but it is not, as some have
claimed, confined to poor countries
or to countries in which culture is a
privilege reserved for an élite. Cheap¬
ened, popular presentation of infor¬
mation is also to be found in the most
economically and democratically
advanced countries.
With their solid cultural back¬
ground, however, the developed
countries are able to face up to this
danger. France and the United
Kingdom, for example, have suffi¬
cient safeguards to ensure that the
press and the audio-visual media that
serve their readers, listeners and
viewers a daily diet of scandal, do not
destroy the fabric of society or under¬
mine its democratic foundations. In
countries such as those of Latin
America, however, the cultural land¬
scape is still fragile and is characterized
by great disparities and inequalities.
If the media, in particular the audio¬
visual media (which today may provide
90 per cent, even at times 100 per
cent of a society's cultural nourish¬
ment), do not pursue responsible
policies, and if they do not place cer¬
tain criteria, certain minimum cultural
and ethical standards above their
short-term commercial interests,
democracy will indeed be put at very
grave risk.
Nothing is so destabilizing for a
society as the systematic distortion of
reality that is the hallmark of the sen¬
sationalist media. It is vital that those
in charge of radio and television sta
tions and of newspapers recognize
that the products and services they
provide are not in any way com¬
parable to those offered by other
commercial and industrial under¬
takings.
The products and services they
offer are of much greater conse¬
quence and importance than mere
"consumer goods". They influence
behaviour and have an effect on all
the consumer's other activities. They
may sharpen or blunt certain sensi¬
bilities, stimulate or completely inhibit
the imagination and the critical facul¬
ties. They may draw attention to real
problems, but they may also turn the
spotlight on false or non-existent
problems and thus distract attention
from really crucial questions. .
It is essential, therefore, that the
heads of media undertakings, upon
whom rests responsibility for main¬
taining freedom of information,
should fulfil their functions with
ethical and political considerations in
mind, rather than in an exclusively
commercial spirit. This is the only way
to ensure the development of a
democratic culture.
Public opinion
and information
Another danger to be faced is that
of the media being used to serve a
single centre of power, such as, for
example, an economic power bloc.
A democratic society can defend itself
against this danger by eliminating
monopolies, tied payments and
privileges and maintaining an open,
competitive system. If this system
remains open to the forces of com¬
petition, the danger of the media
becoming totally subordinate to an
economic power bloc is virtually
eliminated.
This, however, depends largely
upon the determination with which
the authorities in an open society
ensure the existence of a truly open
and competitive market. It also, of
course, depends greatly upon the
power of public opinion.
The opinion of a democratic,
aware and critical public is the best
defence and protection available to
the media in a free society against the
danger of becoming the creatures of
a single centre of power and in par¬
ticular of the economic power bloc.
In Latin America, however, societies
are not strong enough to overcome
the risk of reality being distorted or
of opinion becoming confused with
news.
It is essential, therefore, for these
societies not only to ensure the tech¬
nical and economic success of their
media enterprises, but also to make
certain that their democratic and cul¬
tural balance-sheets are healthy.
At a time when the countries of
Latin America are struggling to nur¬
ture culture and liberty, the media,
themselves a product of that culture,
must play their part in ensuring that
culture and liberty, having made a
timid appearance on the scene, do not,
as has so often happened before in the
history of the continent, disappear
once more.
A great weight of responsibility
lies with those who form the driving
force behind the media. All those
among us who are the direct
beneficiaries of culture and liberty
and who, thanks to that liberty, are
able freely to express their opinions
in the newspapers, on radio and
television, as well as those who are
in a position to make decisions about
telecommunications, must become
fully aware of what a great privilege
freedom iseconomic freedom,
political freedom and freedom of the
press.
This is a vital battle that we must
not lose. If we lose it, we shall also
have lost a future of civilization and
freedom. If we emerge victorious, we
shall have turned our backs on a past
of decadence, impoverishment, social
injustice and violence, none of which,
objectively speaking, has any reason
to exist in Latin America. 45
