REFLECT! N
THE RETURN OF THE INCA
BY PERLA PETRICH
\J EEPLY rooted in the experiences
of the peoples of the continent, the
vivid, dynamic epics of Latin America
predate the Spanish conquest by
centuries.
The ancient inhabitants of Mex¬
ico, for whom the epic was of fun¬
damental importance, recorded
countless tales, legends and myths in
Codices, locally produced books con¬
sisting of pictographs combined with
ideograms and phonetic hieroglyphs.
They had centres at which young
people were taught the contents of
these books and the precise wording
in which they should be expressed.
The objective of the teachers at these
centres was to get their pupils to
learn by heart the epic poems, say¬
ings and myths that went with the
illustrations ¡n the Codices.
Most of these Codices, which the
missionaries described as "pagan"
and "works of the devil", were des¬
troyed during the Spanish conquest.
Nevertheless, the evangelizers could
not eradicate the memory nor pre¬
vent the oral transmission of the
great themes of these epics which
have persisted in many cultures. Fur¬
thermore, some of the descendants
of the ancient nobility (such as
Chimalpain and Ixtlilxóchitl) were
quick to adopt the Latin alphabet for
making transcriptions of tales in their
own language. This was how the
Anales de Tlatelolco ("Annals of
Tlatelolco") originated among the
Nahua. This manuscript, now
preserved in the Bibliothèque Nation-
ale in Paris, contains the genealogies
of the ancient rulers and an account
of the Spanish conquest.
Hundreds of poems have sur¬
vived in the same way, such as those
contained in La colección de cantares
mexicanos ("The Anthology of Mex¬
ican Epic Poems"), now in the Nation¬
al Library of Mexico, and in the
42 so-called Manuscrito de los romances
ßWMOOB.ERHO
ATOPM/IARM
[a miyhlftl WM4 aal fdp tA îaa CAI^\l : hi f 'i Wa«. ' fjaca*CCf
miSm
The decapitation of the Inca.
Illustration from a 16th-century Peruvian codex.
de los señores de la Nueva España
("Manuscript of the Romances of the
Gentlemen of New Spain"), now in
the University of Texas library.
The most important Maya
manuscripts are by anonymous
authorsthe Libros del Chilam Balam
("Books of Chilam Balam"), written
in Yucatecan Maya, and the Popol
Vuh, written in Quiche Maya. Both
manuscripts contain historical and
prophetic narratives.
A number of mestizo writers
such as Fernando Alvarado
Tezozómoc, and several Spanish
missionaries, also collated the tradi¬
tions of these peoples and recorded
them in written form. Among the
missionaries who undertook this task
were the monks Andrés de Olmos,
Benavente Motolinía and, most
important of all, Bernardino de
Sahagún who, between 1565 and
1569, wrote, in Spanish, the famous
Historia general de las cosas de la
Nueva España ("General History of
the Things of New Spain"). In this
way many of these epics have come
down to us in the form of written
documents.
Both the Nahua and the Maya
epics contain heroic tales of the peo¬
ples' wanderings in search of a fixed
abode, of the founding of cities and
of the exploits of the heroes associat¬
ed with them.
Among the Nahua, for example,
the epic of Quetzalcóatlwho
was both a divinity and a heroic
founding fatheris a model of its
kind. His story can be pieced together
from texts to be found in a variety
of documents: Los anales de
Cuauhtitlán ("The Annals of
Cuauhtitlán"), La historia Tolteca-
Chichimeca ("The History of the
Toltecs and the Chichimecs") and
La leyenda de los Soles ("The Legend
of the Suns"), all of which are anthol¬
ogies of poems and historico-mythical
texts recorded by indigenous writers
in the middle of the sixteenth
century. They relate how, after long
and bloody struggles against enemies
who sought to introduce the
practice of human sacrifice, the
priest-king of Tula, the repository of
the cultural heritage and guarantor
of the purity of the religion, was
obliged to give up his functions and
disappeared into the sea leaving with
his people a promise that some day
he would return.
The better known Maya epics
are to be found in the Popol Vuh,
written in the sixteenth century
but only discovered at the beginning
of the eighteenth century by Father
Francisco Ximénez, the parish priest
of Chichicastenango, in Guatemala.
In addition to cosmogonie myths
and legends concerning man's
many unsuccessful works, this
book relates the wanderings
of the first four Quiche chiefs in
search of fire and their struggles
to consolidate their power and
dominion.
The Inca epic relates the wander¬
ings of the four tribes which founded

Quetzalcóatl and 3 other Aztec divinities are shown competing in a ritual game
of pelota in this illustration from the Codex Borbonicus (1325-1521).
Cuzco. According to the versions
collated by the Peruvian ethnologist
J. Ossio, four brothers set out from
four caves accompanied by their
wives. Only one couple, Ayar Manco
and Mama Ocllo, reached the valley
of the Cuzco river. There, on the spot
where Ayar Manco buried his golden
staff deep in the earth, the imperial
capital was built.
Son of the Sun
The Inca epic also provides a typical
example of the vitality and persis¬
tence of mythical narratives among
the indigenous communities of Latin
America. It tells the story of Inkarri,
a god said to be the son of the Sun.
In many accounts this divinity is por¬
trayed as a victim of the Spanish by
whom he was tortured and then be¬
headed. It is believed, nevertheless,
that although separated from the
body, the head is still alive and hid¬
den in a secret place (either in Cuzco
or in the jungle, according to some
of the versions compiled by Ossio).
The head is growing a new body and
when this body is fully grown the son
of the Sun will return as the god who
will pronounce the final judgement
and the restoration of the empire.
This belief still persists today and
each year, in many indigenous com¬
munities in Peru, Ecuador and Bolivia,
during ceremonies in honour of the
local patron saint, representations of
the death of the Inca are organized
and performed. Like Inkarri, the Inca
was worshipped as the son of the
Sun, a fact which allows for the iden¬
tification of the god with the ruler.
During these performances, the ac¬
tors, all of whom are indigenous,
dressed ¡n contemporary costumes,
act out a series of mythical and histor¬
ical events which the folk epic juxta¬
poses within a timeless setting. In this
way an amalgam is made of pre-
hispanic beliefs, interpretations of the
conquest from the standpoint of the
vanquished, and historical happen¬
ings from the execution of Atahual-
pa at Cajamarca in 1 533, by order of
Pizarra, right up to recent events.
The death of the Inca entailed
the defeat of the empire, the end of
an epoch and the beginning of Span¬
ish domination. In all these perfor¬
mances Pizarra appears and beheads
the Inca. In fact, however, Atahual-
pa was garrotted (strangled in a sit¬
ting position). The fact that in the
collective memory strangulation has
been replaced by decapitation shows
that the people associate the death
of the Inca not with that of Atahual-
pa but with that of Sayri Tupac, who
was indeed beheaded and who is
considered by them to have been the
last of the Inca rulers since he resist¬
ed the conquistadors in Vilcabamba
until 1572. This also reinforces the
identification of the Inca with the god
Inkarri, the son of the Sun. This
scenario, as it is still performed, con¬
jures up images which signify that at
some indeterminate time in the fu¬
ture (when the body of the god/lnca
is fully regrown) the ancient civiliza¬
tion will recover all its splendour, will
re-establish its own laws and redistrib¬
ute the land among the descendants
of its rightful owners.
This epic tale and many others
have endured until our day, modified
and recreated by the interplay of in¬
fluences from the indigenous, Euro¬
pean and African cultures that have
coexisted in Latin America since the
end of the fifteenth century. One
consequence of these transforma¬
tions has been a greater similarity be¬
tween themes from the different
cultural regions. However, another
possible explanation of this increas¬
ing similarity is that the history of the
Aztec pictogram showing
the eternal cycle of life and death.
Codex Borgianus (1200-1500).
people of Latin America since the ar¬
rival of the Europeans has developed
within a single contextcolonial
domination and underdevelopment.
Perhaps the similarity of social and
political conditions is tending to unify
the collective imagination.
PERLA PETRICH,
of Argentina, is professor of Latin
American literature at the University
of Paris VIII and a member of the
French National Centre for Scientific
Research's Laboratory of Languages
and Civilizations with an Oral
Tradition (LACITO).
T ' N
43
