Fragments for a private
by Edouard /. Maunick
JL RAGMENTS and not extracts. Identifiable bits and pieces, not
necessarily regular. Spaces of the imagination rather than tidy
parcellings. Here the sea broke against the land of the living
and the dead in accordance with the unchanging law of the tides.
But it receded and did not carry off all that it had brought. In
the live salt and the dead seaweed, it left fragments, odds and
ends, flotsam and jetsam, over which the tides no longer have
any power or rights. On the rocks and along the shorelines they
came to rest; and there, wishing to use them in various ways,
maybe for the purposes of some mysterious spell, coasters and
inlanders out on a stroll picked them up, these remnants afloat
in the stream of time, these shreds like impalpable scrolls.
Iconography and not album. Images on the loose and not
portraits confined to a page. A tale told by the sea, but not
in writing. The other side of the ephemeral. No longer the fas¬
cinating yet oh so fleeting calligraphy of foam, but instead the
indelible imprints of the memorable: events, mere circum¬
stances, occurrences. All that the sea utters, all that it murmurs
and mouths in its unending ebb and flow.
A private iconography, like a private collection. It belongs
to J.M.D. Solitude, sixty years old, hailing from an island in
the Indian Ocean, in love with words. It was in his house with
its back turned to the sea, open on the dirt tracks and wounded
grasses, that I found, the morning after a terrible cyclone, a
handsome notebook with stitched, clothbound pages of the kind
that can be bought in stationers' shops in London, Melbourne
EDOUARD J. MAUNICK, Mauritian poet and writer, is the author of a number
of books including Ensoleillé vif (Apollinaire Prize, 1976), Anthologies
* _ personnelles (1984) and Paroles pour solder la mer (1989). He is currently
1 a¿ director of the UNESCO Collection of Representative Works.
j<^
Jg*
íH^r
and Vancouver; a thing of such beauty it seemed that wind and
rain had not dared damage it. For years I refrained from opening
it, from cutting the thick paper band around it, girding it like
a precious wad, frightened that I might be betraying a friend¬
ship so close that it had made us alike, J.M.D. Solitude and
myself, and so much so that we might have issued from the
same womb.

iconography of the sea An islander dreams
of distant shores
When I told my friend, who like myself was always travel¬
ling, that I had only just managed to rescue his diary from the
storm, he answered that I should keep it, "as one more secret
between us". But recently a letter from him was forwarded to
me in which he mysteriously announced that he was "going
away for ever". "Not dead", he explained, "just somewhere
else". Further on he added: "I am counting on you and on all
that lies between us not to let anyone try to find out where
I am. Let's say that my exile is now total. . . . I'm no longer
the same man. ... It has gone on too long. . . . Leave me to
my wanderings. ..." A postscript mentioned the rescued note¬
book, giving me leave to do whatever I liked with it.
I opened it with the feeling that I was going to find in it
things I already knew. I repeat, J.M.D. Solitude and I have 13

the same past and the same present. What I found in the note¬
book resembled my own memory: a leitmotiv of the sea as set
down in a private iconography. From it I reproduce three
fragments at random.
14
III. Looking at the sea . . .
When one is seventeen years old and comes from the Masca-
rene Islands, strewn like pieces of rock or lava off the southeast
coast of Africa, one fast feels all but cursed, as though doomed
to go round in circles for ever. Distances are not distances but
a number of spans. After closing books and magazines, and espe¬
cially the big illustrated encyclopaedia with reproductions,
maps, names of countries and words never seen beforeat ship
alone: binnacle and bobstay, crossjack and garboard, jibboom
and sheer strake, spanker gaff, stanchion on coming out of
the cinema, after seeing Gerónimo, Mutiny on the Bounty, Pepe
leMoko and The Count ofMonte-Cristo and a ragbag of westerns,
both silents and talkies, Indian films and Egyptian films, which
carry you off to worlds and lands and great ports open to every
fantasy, where you are attacked by the most malignant form
of inanition there isthat hungering after departure which
pounds in your head, in your heart, in your gutsyou end up
inventing "solitudes crowded with loneliness", to quote the
poignant title of a book by the Black American beat poet, Bob
Kaufman.
And so, to ward off ill fortune, you go down to the sea.
You choose twilight because of the sun dipping behind the
horizon to drink, leaving behind it long minutes of a light so
special that, in describing it, one is unsure whether to compare
it with flames or ambers. Then, when evening rises from the
calm waters of the harbour, the merchant ships and the occa¬
sional ocean liners, berthed or anchored off shore, light up one
after the other. The world catches fire. Fascination increases.
Imagination runs wild. Dreams become a kind of madness. You
go on board; you embark for Genoa, Marseilles, Lisbon,
Southampton, Amsterdam. ... At last you're going to know
the big ports. You'll be Christopher Columbus, Magellan,
Vasco da Gama, Amerigo Vespucci, Diego Cao	 On deck,
you look back to give a last wave to your friends left behind
on the pier. Once in your cabin, you touch the bulkheads with
the flat of your hands and the iron rivets with your fingers to
make sure that you're really on your way and you take one
last look through the porthole: how small the island is! You
tell yourself that you're no longer cursed because you're going
to see what's on the other side of the water. . . . You repeat
it to yourself in creóle: lote koté dilo. . . .
But this is how it is: at each twilight, the other side of the
water is a sheer sky wall against which the ship runs aground.
Now is still not time to leave. You'll have to come back
tomorrow . . . and come back again . . . and yet again.
One day I, J.M.D. Solitude, will no longer go back to look
at the sea; the boot will be on the other foot. The curse will
no longer spring from the cramped feeling of the island but
from the gigantism of metropolises visited all too many times,
from an immensity in which something vital will be lacking:
a patch of land, a garden at the end of the ocean. . . .
VII. Golgotha amid the waves
I see the Sacred Hill as the crest of an Atlantic wave. The cross
carried by a man crowned with thorns is a slave ship advancing
beneath the exertions of men chained naked to their oars. The
cries of the crowd are beats struck on a huge bilge drum to
set the stroke. Flagellation is matched by whipping. That one
was sold for thirty pieces of silver, this one for thirty pennies,
perhaps less. One was crucified, the other flayed or burned alive.

Christ was called Jesus, the slave was called nobody. One was
denied, the other was negation in person. And more than one
Pontius Pilate still washes his hands today before other Passions.
Whenever I think of this, my mind goes back to those lines
by René-Guy Cadou, dead at the age of thirty and buried in
the humble cemetery of Louisfert, in Brittany:
"If they could do that to the King of the Jews
What wouldn't they do to a poor nigger. . . ."
and it occurs to me that those who most desecrated the seaways
were not pirates and that Gorée isn't so far from Gethsemane.
IX. The bird from the sea
At noon, on the Senegalese coast, at Cayar, near Dakar, I walk
side by side with Jacques Howlett. We have deserted a talking
shop on négritude, organized on the occasion of the First World
Festival of Negro Arts. Wrongly or rightly, we thought it more
profitable to come and listen to the sea than to have our minds
plugged with critical comment. He tells me about the latest
manuscripts received at Présence Africaine of which he has long
been a pillar. But very soon we realize how beside the point
it is to be talking about literature when the sea is there in all
its splendour beneath the raw sun.
Silence! . . .



We walk, dazzled by the glare from the white sand. Only
the sight of the worm-eaten wood of a few abandoned boats,
too old to be any use, their colours high and dry, offers some
relief to our eyes. It'll be a long time yet before the return of
those that went out at first light to cast their nets offshore.
They'll be back at the end of the day. To our great regret, we
shan't be witnessing their noisy, turbulent ritual as they come
through the channel. A fight with the waves just a few yards
away from the shore. Each time, the blessed insolence of the
boatmen, cocking a snook at the swell. No, we shan't be seeing
any of that.
But a strange voice interrupts the silence. A sort of muted
chanting. Jacques and I start searching between the skeletons
of the boats and discover an old man sitting on a stone, a chisel
in his hand, working away at a piece of wood clamped between
his knobbly knees. He accompanies each of his movements,
each incision in the wood, with a guttural threnody, mournful,
slow or animated according to how gently or violently the tool
penetrates the heart of the wood.
He goes on working for a few moments as though not
aware that we are watching him. Then, slowly, he lifts his head
and with a movement of the chin acknowledges our presence.
He then goes back to his sculpture. Our attention is focused
mainly on his chant, trying to understand its meaning. It grows
in intensity as, beneath his carvings, a bird's head emerges from
the block of wood. We no longer care about time slipping by,
transported as we are by the rite unfolding before our eyes.
Now the hornbill's features can clearly be seen. The old
man puts down his tool in order to take a closer look at his
work. His eyes dwell on every angle. Then with his skinny
fingers he strokes every detail, staring straight ahead now at
the sea. He seems elsewhere. ... He gets up, about to leave.
I can no longer restrain myself. I call him:
"Tell me, grandad, what were those words you were
chanting just now?"
"I was just calling to the bird hidden in the piece of wood.
Without words, son, you can dig away as much as you like
with the chisel. Nothing will come if you don't call, especially
when you're working before the sea. . . ."
Saying this, he went off, carrying with him at arm's length
the bird's head, surely destined to become the first piece of a
weather vane fixed on the prow of a boat to indicate the direc¬
tion of the wind.
I didn't like to ask him why "especially before the sea".
15
