Smile, smile, smile
by Marsi Paribatra
In the Far East people always look on the bright side, even when life's no joke
SERENITY is one of the salient qualities of the
arts, religions and philosophies of the Far East.
Far more significantly, it is also characteristic of
the behaviour of people of all ages and social
classes as they face the trials and tribulations of
everyday life.
Visitors to Thailand often remark on the
smiling faces they see all around them. Air
hostesses, children in the streets, market traders,
wealthy businessmen everyone seems to be
smiling.
26
It can be irritating. How many European
visitors to Thailand feel exasperated when they
are smilingly informed that their car has broken
down, their flight has been cancelled or the hotel
where they are due to stay is booked up. They
think people are making fun of them, whereas
what the Thais are really trying to do is soften
the blow and get them to look on the bright side.
There is a large measure of conventional
courtesy in this smile. It is a mask. Yet how could
the Thai people keep smiling if the smile did not
reflect their true attitude to life? A visitor who
learns a few words of Thai is bound to notice that
a certain expression turns up over and over again
in conversation: maïpen araï... ("never mind").
This formula covers all life's minor troubles.
There's no need to get annoyed or fret over small
inconveniences, there's no point in turning life
into a drama. Maïpen araï. If people smile when
they announce the death of a loved one, it is not
through lack of feeling, but as if to say that what
has happened was inevitable, to spare others from
grieving and to avoid spoiling their enjoyment
of life. There's no need to make a fuss. Basically,
life is just a game.
This attitude, so characteristic of Thailand (in
the early twentieth century Siam was known as
the "land of smiles"), is found throughout the
Far East, from Sri Lanka to Laos and from Bali
to Japan. At the beginning of this century Laf¬
cadio Hearn, the writer who introduced Japanese
culture to the West, took Japanese nationality,
even wrote a short book about the Japanese smile.
Everything passes: youth, beauty, love, life,
happiness and unhappiness. Impermanence is the
backcloth to human existence and the great game
of the universe.
"In Far Eastern cultures the
art of living, and art itself, are
based on the subtle effects of
impermanence".
Above, cherry blossom time In
Okayama, Japan.
Left, a Japanese bonze
composes an Ikebana, a
flower arrangement with a
precise symbolic meaning.

'.
ï " '
if *ß
'^'" ti? -
Xa
rm
wm
In Far Eastern cultures the art of living, and
art itself, are based on the subtle effects of imper¬
manence. Moments of happiness and beauty
should be enjoyed precisely because they are
fleeting, but people should not become too
attached to them. As a Japanese haiku poem says:
"The wave comes and goes/I wish to touch the
water/My sleeve is damp" (with tears, it is
implied). The poet thus suggests that those who
play with love may get hurt. The risk of suffering
a little or a lot is also part of the game.
Perhaps all aesthetic feelings are based on the
impermanence of things and lead to the
"desperate joyfulness" so typical, for example, of
Mozart's music. But this sense of impermanence
is nowhere so apparent and so systematic as in
the aesthetics of Zen Buddhism, whose influence
began to permeate Chinese and Japanese art in
the seventh century.
The cult of the passing impression was deeply
rooted among the wider population as well as
courtiers and intellectuals. Even today, at cherry
blossom time, thousands of young Japanese spend
the night in Tokyo and Kyoto parks watching
the first flowers unfold.
True play is only possible when too much
importance is not attached to the game. The
ability to achieve detachment, to divert one's
attention from oneself, is a source of wisdom and
a source of delight in play.
Detachment and play
If the East is compared with the West, in spite
of all the risks inherent in such sweeping gener¬
alizations, the stereotype of the Easterner as
someone who is less self-absorbed than the
Westerner is perhaps not entirely false. Outside
intellectual and cosmopolitan circles, it is quite
rare in the Far East to hear young people say that
they are trying to "fulfil themselves". The Budd¬
hist, for whom the self is an illusion, would not
dream of doing such a thing.
Of course the people of the Far East, like
people everywhere, assume all kinds of social
roles, but they never forget that they are only
roles. They probably act their parts with greater
aplomb because they know that they are artifi¬
cial. The less importance we attach to the reality
of the roles we impersonate, the readier we are 27

to accept the masks that etiquette prescribes
us to wear according to our sex, age or social
status.
Less self-centered than Europeans, the people
of the Far East do not draw a sharp distinction
between man and the rest of the world, particu¬
larly between man and animals. We consider that
we are different from other animals, but not to
the point of being separate from them. We are
not necessarily kinder to animals than Europeans,
in fact sometimes we may be even more cruel
than they are, but we are less distant, less haughty
and more "polite" to our fellow-creatures. To

Feeding time
in a Japanese park.
MARSI PARIBATRA
of Thailand has taught the
history of European art at
Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, and Far Eastern
culture at Complutense
University, Madrid. She has
published several books on
Western and Eastern art, in
Thai, French and Spanish, and
since 1961 has worked
exclusively as a painter.
realize this, one need only see how a child in a
Japanese park makes a little bow when feeding
bread to a deer.
Strict observance of the rituals of politeness
is the great parlour game of the Far East. The dis¬
tinguished anthropologist Gregory Bateson said
that play is the best form of communication
between different species such as dog and
monkey, man and dolphin, as well as the best
form of communication between people of
different generations, social classes and cultures.
When a child and a cat play together, the unity
of the universe, fragmented by human pride, is
renewed.
Thai people are by no means ascetic, but they
have in general assimilated the notion that life and
death, freedom and constraint, sadness and joy,
happiness and misfortune, go together and are
indissociable from each other. And so they take
life as it comes and enjoy the passing moment.
The Thai expression sanuk dee ("it's very
pleasant") is heard as frequently as maïpen araï
("never mind"), mentioned above. When some¬
thing pleasant happens, Thais will say sanuk dee
("that goes down nicely"); in adversity, maïpen
araï ("it's not so bad"). Aren't these the very prin¬
ciples of life as a game?
