Hi
The rock-hewn churches of Cappadocia
by Antony Brock
48
I he setting for the rock-hewn
churches of Cappadocia in Turkey is,
literally, like nothing on earth. At its
bleakest, it could be a moonscape.
At its most fantastic, it could be a sur¬
realist scene imagined by Salvador
Dali.
Its origin was dramatic: a volcan¬
ic eruption millions of years ago that
covered the terrain with lava. But its
most bizarre features are due to a
centuries-long process of erosion
that has etched the volcanic rock and
ash into steep-sided valleys, some¬
times white, sometimes yellow,
sometimes slashed with horizontal
bars of different colours.
Here and there, where isolated lay¬
ers or fragments of volcanic rock
proved more resistant to erosion
than the surrounding ash, nature has
produced shapes stranger than any
human sculpture. Singly and in
groups, there rise from the valley
floors rock cones, needles and what
the local people call "fairy chim¬
neys", slim pillars topped by horizon¬
tal slabs that sit on them like hats.
Yet what is visible in the valleys of
Göreme and Zelve is less strange
than what is hidden: Byzantine
churches with frescoes, flat ceilings,
domes or vaulting, tunnelled into the
ciiff faces or hollowed out of rock
cones by men who used the friable
"tuff" as material to reverse the nor¬
mal sequence of architecture, taking
away rather than adding on, carving
out rather than building up.
Christianity came early to Cap¬
padocia, long before the Emperor
Constantine made Byzantium into
"New Rome" in 330 AD. For centu¬
ries it flourished, and Asia Minor
abounded in Christian bishoprics.
When Constantinople became Istan¬
bul, the capital of the Ottoman Em¬
pire, in the fifteenth century, the
most recent churches in the Göreme
valley were already 300 years old.
The oldest churches probably date
from the seventh century, but when
the first Christian inhabitants arrived
can only be guessed at. Possibly,
they were hermits who hollowed their
cells from the soft rocks. It is possi¬
ble, too, that the mushroom shapes
of the "fairy chimneys" attracted the
"stylites", those early Christian pole-
squatters who spent their days on
the top of pillars, to prayer on their
insecure summits.
However, the variety of styles In
the rock-hewn churches indicates
that they were constructed at differ¬
ent dates by different waves of
migrants. Most of the churches ap¬
parently belong to the later Byzantine
period, when the new faith of Con¬
stantine had become the old religion,
when the Church he made respecta¬
ble had become in many instances
a persecuted sect.
The wild regions of Cappadocia
offered natural refuges for monks
who wanted to live in peace in self-
supporting communities. Where
these developed, they attracted
peasants to live around them, some
in cave dwellings like those in Gö¬
reme, which riddle the cliffs like holes
in some gigantic Gruyère cheese.
Should armies come to their remote
havens, monks and peasants had a
second line of retreatunderground.
The "tuff" could be excavated down¬
wards as well as laterally, and there
are some twenty underground
refuges In the Göreme area extend¬
ing to seven or eight levels below the
surface. Small entrances and narrow
connecting passages which allow
only one crouching invader to pass
at a time have made those who used
these pre-atomic age fall-out shelters
secure from all except starvation
through long siege.
In one of these underground vil¬
lages Is a Christian chapel with a
stone altar and carved cross, but
Detail of a wall painting
in the Elmali church.

scholars cannot agree whether reli¬
gious settlers created them or sim¬
ply took over the refuges of earlier
communities. Whatever the case, it
takes no imaginative leap to see the
church architects as not only moti¬
vated by the easily workable nature
of the rock but also by the opportu¬
nity it gave to keep the mysteries of
their religion away from hostile eyes.
Perhaps they saw in the rock-hewn
churches a link to the catacombs of
Rome and the reputation of the Ear¬
ly Christians as "gens lucifugera"
the people who flee the light.
They left behind a veritable muse¬
um of Byzantine styles. For example,
in the Elmali or Apple church, one of
seven in Göreme and the Zelve val¬
ley selected for priority restoration
work, two layers of decoration can be
seen. The first, painted directly on to
the rock, is made up of crosses and
geometrical patterns and probably
dates from the iconoclastic (literally
"image-breaking") period before
about 850 AD when the representa¬
tion of living forms was forbidden.
The second, painted on to plaster,
shows a Pantocrator, or Christ the
Almighty, on the central cupola, with
other frescoes depicting scenes from
the life of Christ in the style of the
eleventh century.
Cross-domed like the Elmali church
is the eleventh-century Karanlik, or
Dark church, which gets its name
from the deep blue-grey of its fres¬
coes, still well-preserved and illustrat¬
ing the sophisticated style of
Constantinople. In other churches of
the valley, like the church of the Vir¬
gin Mary, the style is more provincial,
showing the hand of local artists.
The barrel-vaulted El Nazar church
is an example of a cruciform struc¬
ture in which the main apse joins
directly on to a central square
without an intervening east cross-
arm. Unlike the Dark church, which
Includes a refectory and a dormito¬
ry, and many of the others, it is not
connected with a monastery but set
apart in an isolated tent-shaped rock
cone.
Over the centuries, the Christians
left their settlements and the
churches were neglected until the
1920s and 1930s, when the writings
of a French priest, Fr. Guillaume de
Jerphanion, drew the attention of
scholars and tourists. What had been
religious communities became farm¬
ing communities. Peasant families
made their homes in the caves, many
of them continuing to live there un¬
til recent years. In at least one case,
this secularization had an advantage:
the frescoes of the Dovecote church
in Cavusin were well preserved be¬
cause the church was sealed-up un¬
til 1964 so that pigeons, valued in
the area for their guano, could be
kept in it. But the Dovecote church,
like the Carikli, or Sandal church of
Göreme, has been brutally exposed
to the elements. In both cases the
narthex, where once congregations
stood in worship, has crumbled away
and the modern tourist climbs a me¬
tal staircase to enter.
For the delicate rock which made
the churches possible and the ero¬
sion which gave them their unique
shapes are today the chief threats to
their continued existence. Rain has
soaked into the decorated surfaces,
fading colours and flaking paintwork.
More dangerously, it has seeped into
cracks, then frozen and fissured the
structures. Göreme is in a seismic
zone and it was thanks to an earth-
slip that the church of St. John the
Baptist was discovered as late as
1957. But tremors have destabilized
more churches than they have rev¬
ealed. Some churches have been to¬
tally destroyed, leaving only traces
behind.
These threats explain why Unesco
has not only put the rock-hewn
churches onto its list of monuments
belonging to the cultural heritage of
all mankind, but has launched an in¬
ternational appeal to save them for
future generations. The perils to body
or soul which drove the Christian
communities of Cappadocia into
these bleak valleys have long since
faded. The men who conceived the
churches, hewed them from the liv¬
ing rock and lovingly decorated them
have been forgotten for centuries.
But their faith and their artistry creat¬
ed something unique, that still hush¬
es a group of modern visitors into
silent wonder.
ANTONY BROCK is a Paris-based British
writer and journalist who specializes in
educational and cultural topics. 49
