Zheng He's sailing chart
by Mei-Ling Hsu
A nautical guide
which retraces the
last epic voyage
of a Chinese
Admiral in the
fifteenth century
Above right, detail of the
chart portraying Chinese
Admiral Zheng He's last
voyage (1431-1433) shows
the coast of India (above left),
Africa (below) and Sri Lanka
(right). It Is taken from Wu
Bel Zhl ("Treatise on
Armament Technology",
1628).
MEI-LING HSU
is professor of geography at
the University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis (USA). Of Chinese
origin, she is a specialist in the
geography of China, computer-
assisted cartography,
cartographic design and
communication, and the
history of cartography. She
has published a number of
studies and articles in
specialized journals.
X HE earliest surviving Chinese sea map is the
celebrated sailing chart of Admiral Zheng He,
which was made in the mid-fifteenth century. A
script map measuring 20.5 cm by 560 cm, it por¬
trays the voyage between the Chinese city of
Nanking and Jazireh ye Hormuz, in the Strait
of Hormuz, and ports on the east African coasts.
At the request of emperor Yongle, Zheng He
(1371-1435), undertook seven expeditions between
1405 and 1433 and travelled as far as the Strait of
Hormuz and the coasts of east Africa. The expe¬
ditions were on a grand scale. The first comprised
a fleet of 317 ships, including 62 large "treasure
ships", the largest of which was about 100 m long
and 50 m broad, and displaced 3,100 tons.
The sailing chart mainly portrays Zheng He's
last voyage in 1431-1433, but it also includes infor¬
mation accumulated on his earlier voyages and
from voyages by other sailors in and prior to the
fifteenth century. Originally a strip map that
could be rolled up, it was later divided to fit into
forty pages to be printed in a book, Wu Bei Zhi
("Treatise on Armament Technology", published
in 1628).
From right to left, the chart portrays the
12,000-km voyage between China and ports along
the Arabian and African coasts. It reaches the
western extremities at Khorramshahr and Jiddah
in Asia and Kilwa Kisiwani Island in Africa. It
is most detailed along the coasts of China and
southeast Asia.
Using diagrammatic and side-view symbols,
the chart shows, besides sea routes, several other
types of features, including shore lines, bays, estu¬
aries, capes and islands; ports and mountains
along the coasts; important landmarks such as
pagodas, temples, official buildings, flagpoles and
bridges; and other information useful to sailors
such as havens, shoals and half-tide rocks. Many
other features and places are not symbolized but
are named at their respective locations on the
chart. Enclosed in rectangles are the names of
many places such as provincial capitals, defence
sites, and foreign countries along the coastline.
In sum, the chart contains over 500 place names
and over 40 names of landmarks. About 300 of
the named places are outside China.
/ f§k Mít*MtraJÖhV.% US ] 'U im
L
n
^11 /*k*\L Jg$5Ê^\ Ils
The most valuable contents of the chart are
the sea routes, which are shown by dotted lines.
Sailing instructions are also given. From the
mouth of the Yangzi river to Sri Lanka where
ships sailed mostly near the intricate coastlines
and in shallow waters around islands and reefs,
detailed sailing instructions are noted along the
sea routes. These instructions are given in a con¬
cise form: "from A, steer X degrees, after Y
time/distance, the ship reaches B." Sometimes
depth soundings are also provided.
The steering instructions are mostly accurate,
and expressed in terms of the Chinese zhen lu
(compass direction) system. They are the
products of a wealth of knowledge of navigation
and the use of the magnetic compass. The
compass rose consists of 24 divisions of 15-degree
increments, and a supplement of 24 subdivisions.
Thus one can read 48 directions with 7.5-degree
increments.
The final section of the chart covers a large
area, which extends from the tip of India to the
Arabian and African coasts, where ships sailed on
the open seas. Instead of information on land fea- >
tures and on compass directions between short
distances, fifty notes on stellar altitudes are given
along the sea routes from which the latitude loca¬
tion and orientation of the ship can be calculated.
Like other pre-modern charts, Zheng He's
chart is less detailed in depicting areas far away
from China but is remarkable for the accuracy
with which it depicts the coasts of China and
nearby regions of Asia. 27
