Braß: a kaleidoscope of sound
by Mario de Aratanha
THE mixing of races and cultures in Brazilian
music reflects the history of this continent-sized
nation, where the Portuguese arrived in 1500 and
the Africans half a century later; where white
people married Indians, Indians married Africans,
and Africans married whites. This racial mixing
has produced one of the richest and most original
of the planet's musical heritages.
Exporting its styles and stars worldwide,
Brazilian music reflects a multi-faceted cultural
framework that currently includes at least half
a dozen fundamentally different traditions. Brazil
itself provides a huge market for recorded music.
About 80 million discs are sold there each year,
almost 70 per cent of which are of the country's
own musicthis in spite of the almost total con¬
trol of distribution by big, foreign-owned mul¬
tinationals.
Combing the country from north to south,
musicologists have already identified 365 different
basic rhythms in Brazilian music. The Jesuits
started putting together this musical kaleidoscope
when they incorporated Indian dances into their
ceremonies. The mix was later enriched by the
African cultures that came over on the slave ships.
It was then refined with the arrival of the Por¬
tuguese court in Brazil in 1808; spread by the
coffee boom of the mid-nineteenth century;
professionalized by the coming of the radio; and
carried across the seas by the cinema, record and
video industries.
The process is still continuing, and in so
doing is becoming more technologically and cul¬
turally aware. On the one hand, computers have
invaded the recording studios, the "electric trios"
of Salvador de Bahia use special effects worthy
of a Spielberg movie, and the urban young dance
to the sounds of Brazilian rock. But on the other,
Rio's pagodes and the afoxés of Bahia are cons¬
ciously returning to their African roots.
At the same time, a cultural interchange is
under way. While the lambada is fashionable with
European dancers, the young blacks of Bahia do
the samba-reggae. Tom Jobim has moved to New
A country the
size of a
continent,
where racial
and cultural
intermixture
has given birth
to rich and
original forms
of music
Left,
Gilberto Gil.
Below,
Maria Bethania.
Below left,
Gal Costa.

York, and Gilberto Gil and Milton Nascimento
continue to conquer foreign markets. Media
superstars like David Byrne and Paul Simon
record with Brazilian musicians, following in a
tradition of cross-fertilization that earlier included
Hollywood's discovery of Carmen Miranda, Walt
Disney's Pepe Carioca cartoons, and Fred Astaire
and Ginger Rogers flying down to Rio to dance
the maxixe.
Indians and whites
Brazil's first cultural marriage was that of the
white settlers with the indigenous population.
The Jesuits introduced into their ceremonies the
catarete, a dance of the Tupi Indians, who were
the first to compose Brazilian songs in Por¬
tuguese. The limited penetration of black music
into the Northeast hinterland has helped the
ancient blending of local wind instruments with
Arab strings, as imported by the Portuguese, to
survive there. In this arid region, you can still see
characters recalling the troubadours and minstrels
of medieval Europe, guitarists and poets of the
people who travel from fair to fair singing songs
drawn from history, present-day reality, or the
dream world. In their improvised solos and duets,
Indian and Iberian sounds blend.
Closer to the coast, the music becomes more
rhythmic, percussive and African. In the urban
zone around Recife and in the neighbouring Per-
nambuco sugar-cane district, the massive black
presence makes itself felt musically in the
maracatú, the dance of the carnival parades. This
music of the Northeast coast, stretching from
Bahia to Recife and on up to Maranhâo, is of all
Brazil's styles the one that best balances Indian,
16
white and black elements in its traditions. A
similar sort of popular aesthetic also makes its
presence felt further north, as far as the Amazon
estuary, where Caribbean echoes can be heard.
The rural areas of the states of Sao Paulo and
Paraná are now among the wealthiest parts of
Latin America. Helped by this prosperity, the
dupla caipira popular, country-style music
reflecting the songs of Paraguay's Guaraní
Indianshas become one of the most saleable
musical commodities in the country, particularly
since its influence reached the city of Sào Paulo,
an industrial megalopolis with 10 million
inhabitants.
Farther south, on the vast pampas grazing-
lands, new musical horizons come into view:
those. of the Rio de la Plata, whose native music
shows the influence of the milongas, rancheras and
chamantes of Argentina and of Uruguay.
Rio, cultural capital
The two richest musical regions of Brazil are
those surrounding Bahia, in which the black
influence predominates, and around Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil's cultural capital, where most of
the nation's styles meet. All the different regional
currents, whether from Africa, Bahia, the North¬
east or anywhere else, come together in Rio.
Brazilian radio got under way there; and it is in
Rio that television is at its most creative, that
most of the recording studios and music busi¬
nesses are based, and that the labour market is
most welcoming. As a result, Rio draws musicians
from all corners of the nation.
Since the end of the last century, Rio has been
an ethnic melting pot. Nonetheless, it has its own
musical traditions, the samba and the choro,1
which began to develop after the abolition of
slavery in 1888. But even earlier, from the time
of the arrival of the Portuguese royal family
eighty years before, African lundus were already
combining with European songs. On the whole,
however, black music was confined to the slave
quarters, while the élite danced first the gavotte
and the minuet, and later the polka and the waltz.
After their emancipation, former slaves who
had a profession set themselves up in the Cidade
Nova, near the centre of the city. The rest ended
up in the least favoured districts, beside the
railway lines and on the heights of the morros.
The different economic and cultural levels of the
two groups were reflected in the development of
two distinct musical traditions. On the one hand
there was the sophisticated sound of the maxixe
and the choro; on the other the samba of the hill-
shanties, more percussive and well-suited to street
parades at carnival time. From this tradition the
samba schools were to develop. It was around this
time, at the turn of the century, that Rio had its
first professional musicians, in the sense in which
we use the term today.
The first foreign influences on Brazilian
music came in by way of the cinema in the 1930s.
Left, samba musician
Martinho da Vila in 1985.
Above, a scene at the Bahia
carnival.
MARIO DE ARATANHA
is a Brazilian journalist, record
producer and organizer of
cultural events.

But it was in the following decade, the time of
President Roosevelt's "good neighbours" policy,
that the cultural interchange between Brazil and
the United States really gathered momentum.
Carmen Miranda left for Hollywood, and
American music flooded onto the Brazilian
market.
Good neighbours
The 1940s and 1950s were the years of dance
music par excellence, and Brazil's traditional
rhythms competed with Caribbean boleros and
American blues and foxtrots. It was the start of
the consumer era that has continued to the
present day. The top stars drew their inspiration
from the romantic songs popularized by cinema
and the record industry. The fashion was for
things foreign; inspired by cool jazz and by
bebop, Rio's music was getting ready for the
bossa nova.2
When Joào Gilberto arrived in Rio from
Bahia with the batida, his own particular guitar
rhythm, he found the ground ripe for the bossa
nova, which conquered first Brazil and then the
United States. The 1960s therefore reversed the
tendency to cultural importation that marked the
previous decade and saw the beginning of a new
cross-fertilization, one that was not simply ethnic
but cultural. Aided by radio, the record industry,
show business and television, the Rio music bus¬
iness took off. Elis Regina, Caetano Veloso, Gil¬
berto Gil, Gal Costa, Maria Bethania, Milton
Nascimento, Chico Buarque, Tom Jobim: around
the big names different musical trends coalesced,
all linked under the general label of Brazilian pop.
These urban sounds remain among the most
important musical influences in the nation to
this day.
This was the era of the great pop festivals,
with Beatlemania serving as a backdrop. But the
rock guitar of Brazilian pop soon gave way to
Tropicalism, a cri de coeur for moral and aesthetic
liberty launched by Caetano Veloso and Gilberto
Gil. Political dissent invaded the realm of music,
growing into full-blooded revolt against the mili¬
tary dictatorship set up in 1964. Under the new
rulers, harsh artistic censorship joined up with
police violence to silence a generation.
Yet the movement was strong enough to 17

18
survive censorship by seeking refuge in exile
or in metaphor. Poetry slipped in between the
lines of the texts the censors scanned. Neverthe¬
less, the general tendency of the 1970s was
towards a less political music. The samba returned
to popularity with Paulinho da Viola, Beth
Carvalho and Martinho da Vila.
Eclectic and electric
The devastating effects of twenty years of mili¬
tary dictatorship hit the intelligentsia of Brazil's
cultural capital hard. The great names of the 1960s
survived, but successors were hard to find. In the
1980s the greatest opportunities were for the most
commercial kind of rock music, whose artistic
triumph was assured by media coverage. Rita Lee
became a superstar, Alceu Valença created his
own hybrid, forrock,3 funk invaded the black
suburbs of the big cities, and all-Brazilian rock
groups made their appearance: Paralamas do
Sucesso, Cazuza and the Barâo Vermelho, Ultraje
a Rigor, Titas and Legiào Urbana.
Yet in reaction to the growing homogeniza-
tion of the FM radio hits, a new trend in favour
of cultural conservation and a return to roots also
developed. Over the past few years, black music
has found new life in the pagodes, gatherings of
samba musicians in suburban Rio backyards that
have produced such names as Zeca Pagodinho,
Almir Guineto, Fundo de Quintal and Jovelina
Pérola Negra.
The return to sources is most pronounced,
though, in Bahia, where so much of Brazilian
music has had its origins. Bahia has been the
home of black culture ever since the arrival of
the first Bantu slaves; and even though its racial
background and customs are not dissimilar to
Rio's, its atmosphere remains more authentic
as does its music, which retains close ties to the
religious cults originating in Angola, Nigeria,
Senegal or Guinea-Bissau. Preserved for centuries
in the rites of the candomblé, it finally freed itself
from them at the end of the last century, win¬
ning popularity early in the present one.
In the 1930s, the first Bahia carnivals were
dominated by the afoxés, groups of musicians with
a religious bent that paraded in the streets like
the samba schools of Rio, but to a slow, almost
funereal beat known as the ijexa. The tradition
was broken in the following decade by two
revolutionaries, Dodo (who was black) and
Osmar (who was white). They joined to form the
Trio Elétrico, the group that was to alter com¬
pletely the nature of the Bahia carnival. They
made their debut on an old Ford truck with an
amplified guitar and cavaquinho (a small, four-
stringed instrument). Six or seven percussionists
paraded behind them on foot. The new style soon
caught on, and the size of the bands playing it
grew, along with the volume of sound they
produced and the musical influences they exerted.
In their treatment of radio hits, Rio march
tunes znàfrevos4 from Recife, the three or four
"electric trios" of the early days soon adopted
a fast beat. Whenever one of them crossed the
path of an afoxé band, it tended to throw the
slower ensemble out of time, to such an extent
that the afoxé musicians in their turn had, in self
defence, to speed up the tempo. This competi¬
tive spirit gave a hallucinatory quality to the
Bahia carnival that was one of the elements in
its success: starting out as a four-day event, it was
soon running not far short of three months. And
the three or four trios of the 1940s grew to
number eighty or more.
The trios vastly improved their equipment
in the 1970s. Mounted on lorries fitted with loud¬
speakers, they could make themselves heard over
much greater distances, drawing ever-bigger
crowds. Gradually these motorized stages became
more imposing even than Rio's allegorical car¬
nival floats. The trio called Coca-Cola, for
example, advertised their presence with a gigantic
mobile bottle, while Caetanave travelled in a
spaceship complete with special effects. Some of
the lorries were even equipped with lifts.
Amplification, the use of electronic instru¬
ments and the influence of urban rhythms linked
Folk engravings from
Northeast Brazil and
the cover of a compact
disc featuring the Trío
Elétrico Dodo & Osmar.
A P
PB*- ..[I«10"

to rock have modernized the music of the trios,
which has now moved onto the radio and records
thanks to Osmar's son, Armandinho, and espe¬
cially to the Novos Bahianos, successors to the
Tropicalism of Gilberto Gil and Caetano Veloso.
Bahian music is coming to terms with modern
technology; in future its customary vitality will
take different forms, some traditional, others
progressive.
Effervescent Bahia
In the competitive atmosphere of the 1980s, when
Brazilian pop vied for audiences with rock and
with romantic ballads, it was Bahia that walked
away with the prizes. Luis Caldas came on the
scene, as did the lambada, which originated in the
Caribbean but was soon integrated into Bahia
swing. One of the characteristics of the city's
musical tradition is that wherever it takes its
influences from, be it California, Rio de Janeiro,
Jamaica or Dahomey, they quickly become
Bahian.
Practically all the city's music-making centres
on the annual carnival. Even new, professional
bands like Chiclete com Banana, Mel, Reflexus
and Cheiro de Amor retain links with the
politically-aware street bands in the afoxé tradi¬
tion, including Olodum, Ara-Ketu, the Filhos de
Gandhi and many others, among them the same
groups that speeded up the ijexa beat to protect
themselves from the "electric trios".
The musicians work all the year round,
flooding the now self-sufficient Bahia market
with their records. The crowds live their music
in an atmosphere of effervescence. The influence
of Jamaica, and the political force of the
Rastafarian movement are strong; they have com¬
bined to make a demi-god of Bob Marley, and
the samba-reggae has become a classic example
of cultural cross-fertilization.
The aesthetic of the back-to-Africa movement
does not follow any established model. At the last
carnival, for instance, Ara-Ketu featured wind
instruments, guitars and synthesizers alongside
traditional African drums; while the authenticity
of Olodum's traditional drumming caught the ear
of Paul Simon. In the Africanization process, new
and old, local and foreign, come together; and the
people, who only want to dance, love it all.
A samba school.
1. The choroliterally, "lament"
is a mixture of European styles,
notably the schottische, waltz,
tango, polka and habanera.
2. Bossa nova means "new wave" in
Portuguese.
3. A contraction of forró dance
originating in the Northeastand
rock.
4. The frevo is a dance with Iberian
and Brazilian roots and a frenzied
rhythm. Editor 19
