A wealth of legends, fables,
poems and allegorical writings
illustrate the fascination that
the sea has exercised on
the creative imagination ever
since ancient times. For modern
seafarers who observe age-old
superstitions and taboos the
symbolism associated with the sea
is still as potent as ever.
However, with increasing
pollution and uncontrolled
tapping of its riches, the sea
may be losing its sacred aura.
A ' ' ¡I » ; v-
,*:?»'
Extracted from Romans et contes
égyptiens, translated into French with
an introduction and commentary by
Gustave Lefebure © Adrien Maisonneuve,
Paris 1976.
IN this story from ancient Egypt, an
Egyptian describes the extraordinary
adventures that befell him when he
sailedfrom a Red Sea port to the mines of
Sinai. He tells how he was shipwrecked
and then landed on a marvellous island
whose master, a serpent, made him welcome
and sent him home laden with gifts. Back in
Egypt he was received by the king, who
bestowed on him the honour ofCompanion.
The island on whose shores the sailor
was cast by a wave of the "Very Green"
(the Red Sea) is called "the island o/ka."
The ka was originally regarded as an
invisible power which is born with man,
accompanies him during his life and,

mMÍMm
. Tí
sah's story
leaving him at his death, continues
nevertheless to represent the personality of
the being with which it coexisted on Earth.
It corresponds approximately to the
Western concept of the soul. The ka is also
the life force, the principle oflife, and then
all that keeps a person alive, from food to
royal favour.
The island o/ka would thus be a place
where there is an abundance ofall the good
things which help to keep life going. Given
the early meaning o/ka, it might also be
thought of as the island of the spirit, the
island of the ghostthe enchanted island.
It lay in the "land of Punt", a place-
name which seems to have designated
primarily the western coast ofthe Red Sea
and later came to include the coast of
Arabia opposite and notably the Yemen
(where the land of the famous Queen of
Sheba was located).
As early as the old empire, the Egyp¬
tians sent expeditions to the land of Punt
in search ofaromatic essences and incense.
Sometimes accidents happened, for the
coast is dotted with many reefs and islands.
These voyages were laborious and often
dangerous, and those who returned embroi¬
dered the stories of their adventures with
extraordinary details to charm and astonish
their listeners. This must have been the
origin ofthe story ofthe shipwrecked sailor.
An ancient Egyptian vessel
is shown In this detail from the burial
vault of Nefer, a dignitary of
the fifth dynasty (c. 2500-2400 BC),
at Sakkara.
I am going to tell you something . . .
that happened . . . while I was going
to the mines of the sovereign and had
gone down on the Very Green aboard a
ship 120 cubits long and forty cubits
wide.1 Aboard were 120 sailors, the
flower of Egypt. Whether they kept
watch on the sky or the land, their hearts
were more steadfast than that of a lion.
They could announce a storm before it
happened.
THE STORM AND THE SHIPWRECK
A storm had broken when we were on
the Very Green and before we had
reached land. We carried on sailing, but
the storm redoubled its violence, raising
a wave of eight cubits. . . . Then the ship
sank without any survivors. And I was
cast away on an island by a wave of the
Very Green. I spent three days alone,
with only my heart for companionship.
Lying inert beneath the shelter of a tree
(?), I embraced the tree. Then I stretched
my legs and went in search of something
to eat. I found figs and grapes, magnifi¬
cent vegetables of all kinds, the fruits of
the sycamore . . . and cucumbers as if they
had been cultivated. There too were fish
and birds. Everything imaginable was
there. I took a grip of myself and threw
down on to the ground (some of these
foodstuffs), for I had too much to carry.
Then, when I had taken a fire-stick I
made a fire and a burnt offering to the
gods.
A BEARDED SERPENT APPEARS
Then I heard the sound of thunder. I sup¬
posed that it was a wave of the Very
Green. The trees cracked and the earth
trembled. When I uncovered my face, I
saw that a serpent was coming: he meas¬
ured thirty cubits and his beard exceeded
two cubits; his limbs were plated with
gold, his eyebrows (?) were in real lapis
lazuli. He came forward cautiously (?).
He opened his mouth to me while I
was on my belly before him, saying:
"Who has brought you [here], who has
brought you, little one? Who has brought
you? If you tarry before telling me who
has brought you to this island, I shall
make sure that you see that, after being
reduced to cinders, you have become 41

something that is no longer visible." [I
replied:] "You speak to me and I do not
grasp [what you say]: I am before you and
I have lost my senses."
Then he put me in his mouth, car¬
ried me to his lair and put me down
gently so that I was safe and sound,
without anything having been taken
from me. He opened his mouth to me
while I was on my belly before him, and
then said to me: "Who has brought you
[here], who has brought you, little one?
Who has brought you onto this island of
the Very Green whose two shores are in
the waves?"
[The Egyptian tells the story of the
shipwreck]
THE SERPENT
MAKES A PROMISE
Then he said to me: "Fear not, little one;
don't look so tormented now that you
have come to me. God has certainly
allowed you to live, since he has brought
you to this island of ka where everything
can be found and which is filled with all
kinds of good things. Here you will pass
month after month until you have spent
four months on this island. Then a boat
will come from the country, manned by
sailors whom you know. You will return
with them to your country and you will
die in your city.2 Happy are they who
can tell what they have experienced, once
the painful moments have passed!
"I shall tell you a similar story, which
happened on this island where I was with
my fellows, among whom there were
children. There were seventy-five of us
serpents in all, including my children and
my fellows. Not to mention a very young
girl whom I had obtained by prayer. A
star fell, and set them ablaze. This hap¬
pened when I was not with [them]; they
burned while I was not in their midst. I
nearly died because of them when I found
them in a single heap of bodies.
"If you are strong, master your heart:
you will clasp your children to your
breast, you will embrace your wife, you
will see your house again, and that will
be worth more than anything. You will
return to the country where you lived in
the midst of your brothers."
THE PRINCE
OF THE LAND OF PUNT
Then, prostrate on my belly, I touched
the earth before the Serpent with my
forehead and said: "I shall tell the Sover¬
eign of your power and will see that he
42 is informed of your greatness. I shall have
[perfumes] brought to youibi, hekenou,
iudeneb, khesayt, and the temple incense
in which each god rejoices. I shall thus
tell what has happened [on this island],
mindful of what I have seen by virtue of
[your] power. You will be thanked in the
city, before the notables of all the
country. I shall sacrifice bulls for you as
a burnt offering, I shall twist the necks
of game birds for you. I shall have ships
laden with all the precious products of
Egypt brought to you, as is meet for a god
who loves men, in a distant country that
men do not know."

Then he laughed at me,3 [or rather]
at what I had said and which he thought
crazy, and said: "You do not have much
frankincense, while you were born pos¬
sessing resin of the turpentine tree. But
frankincense belongs to me, the prince of
[the land] of Punt. As for this hekenou
perfume which you thought of bringing,
it is the main product of this island. It will
come to pass, when you have left this
place, that you will never again see this
island, which will be transformed into
waves."
THE RETURN HOME
This ship came as the Serpent had
predicted. I went and perched high in a
tree and recognized the people who were
aboard. Then I went to announce this
piece of news [to the Serpent], but I found
that he [already] knew. And he said to
me: "[Go back] healthy, healthy, little
one, to your homemay you see your
children again! Make sure that my repu¬
tation is good in your city. That is all I
ask of you." Then I prostrated myself on
my belly, arms outstretched before the
Serpent. And he gave me a cargo of
frankincense, hekenou, iudeneb, khesayt,
tichepes, chaasekh perfumes, black eye
wash, giraffes' tails, much resin of the tur¬
pentine tree, ivory tusks, hunting dogs,
monkeys, baboons, and all kinds of pre¬
cious goods.4 1 loaded it all on the ship.
Then, when I prostrated myself to thank
him, he said to me: "You will reach your
country in two months, you will clasp
your children to your breast, you will
become young again, you will be buried
there." Thereupon I went down to the
shore to the ship and hailed the crew. I
gave thanks, on the shore, to the master
of this island and also [to] those who were
on board.
Then we set sail northwards, towards
the court of the Sovereign and we reached
our country two months later, exactly as
the Serpent had said. I was taken to the
Sovereign and I gave him the presents I
had brought back from the island. He
thanked me in the presence of notables
from the whole country, then I was raised
to the rank of Companion and rewarded
with serfs belonging to him.
1. Around sixty metres by twenty metres. It was a
large ship.
2. The greater misfortune that could befall an
Egyptian was to die far from Egypt.
3. The Serpent laughs because he has no need to
receive from Egypt the very things that Egyptians
came to his country to procure.
4. This list includes everything that the Egyptians
found in the land of Punt.
