The mMg K-nc o  -ctMry c M/
D
BEFORE the foundation of the Umayyad
caliphate by'Abd al-Rahman III at Cordoba in
929, the cultural and scientific development of
Muslim Spain had been that of a modest offshoot
of a simple provincial Arab Muslim culture that
was highly dependent on Oriental Islam.
Under the caliphate a cultural flowering came
about, largely because Cordoba became increas-
ingly important politically. The city was the
centre of a strong and respected power which
sought, consciously or unconsciously, to equal
the prestige of the'Abbasid caliphate of Baghdad
at the height of its splendour and to create in al-
Andalus the conditions for similar achievements.
The Andalusians did not aspire to create a new
civilization but to imitate or outstrip Baghdad in
every field.
We must beware of the chronological errors
that are often made by those who attribute en
bloc to the Cordoban caliphate all the cultural
achievements of the Andalusian civilization. To
take one example, the oldest and not least original
parts of the Great Mosque of Cordoba were
The interior of the Great
Mosque ofthe Umayyads in
Damascus (Syria), founded
in 705.
completed under the emirate, not during the
caliphate. It was only after the caliphate, at the
time of the taifas (principalities governed by petty
kings) that Andalusian poetry attained its greatest
refinement. Some of the best-known monuments
of Muslim Andalusian art, such as the Giralda
(the minaret of the Almoravid mosque in Seville)
and the Alhambra palace, built by the sultans of
Granada from the late thirteenth century
onwards, date from long after the time of the
caliphs.
All the same, the most remarkable achieve-
ments of Arab Andalusian culture do bear the
imprint of the relatively short-lived caliphate,
which only lasted around a century.
An influential
capital
In the tenth century Cordoba became one of the
leading political and cultural centres of the
Muslim world, a city comparable in importance
to Baghdad and Cairo. The geographer Ibn
Hawqal, who visited Cordoba In the second half
of the century, judged It to be equal to " half of
Baghdad", and wrote that it " has no equivalent
In the whole of the Maghrib, nor in Upper
Mesopotamia, Syria or Egypt with regard to the
size of Its population, Its extent, the spaciousness
of its markets, Its cleanliness, the architecture of
its mosques and its large number of baths and
caravanserais ".
At a time when the greatest cities of Western
Europe had no more than a few thousand inhabi-
tants, Cordoba had a population of at least a
hundred thousand and extended over several
hundred hectares (tenth-century Barcelona
occupied less than ten hectares !).
The first caiiph,'Abd aI-Rahman III, who
reigned until 961, built the vast palatine city of
Madinat aI-Zahra'on the lower slopes of the hills
along the northern bank of the Guadalquivir, a
28

few kilometres downstream from Cordoba. In
contrast to the paucity of our information about
Cordoba itself, we know the precise area of this
Versailles of the Andalusian caiiphs thanks to
archaeological and written evidence. Madinat al-
Zahra'was almost completely abandoned at the
end of the caliphate, to whose wealth and power
Its ruins bear eloquent witness.
The walls enclosed about a hundred hectares,
with room for several tens of thousands of Inhabi-
tants. The city was dominated by palaces and
gardens on several evels, which have been exca-
vated and partially restored. Spanish archaeolo-
gists and architects have done notable work in
reconstituting the salon rico, a lavishly decorated
building which gave onto a wide esplanade In the
centre of which was an enormous pool. We know
from written evidence that this edifice was used
for official audiences.
The apotheosis
of the mosque
Equally sumptuous was the extension of the Cor-
doban mosque carried out by the son and suc-
cessor of'Abd al-Rahman III, aI-Hakam II, who
reigned from 961 to 976. The finest part of the
building, around the mihrab, the niche in the wall
which shows believers the direction of Mecca
towards which they must turn to pray, was
adorned with magnificent arches In a new style,
a highly complex design of interwoven, multifoil
horseshoe arches, decorated with interlaced
marble and other sculpted stonework enriched
with white or red polychrome patterns.
The polychrome decoration recalls the con-
trast between red and white In the alternating
stone and brick archstones'which were an original
feature of the oldest parts of the mosque, built
during the emirate. However, the similarity
between the two phases of construction Is limited
to a few discreet echoes of this kind. The simple
elegance of the eighth-and ninth-century arches
contrasts strongly with the exuberant ornamen-
tation of those built under aI-Hakam II, which
are a brilliant testimony to the wealth of the
caliphate at the height of Its power, and to the
inventiveness and virtuosity of the artists who
worked for it.
The most outstanding features of the part of
the Great Mosque built during the caliphate are
undoubtedly the magnificent domes In the
antechamber to the mihrab and above the cen-
tral nave leading to it. They were built using a
technique of interlaced stone arches or ribbing
which was quite new in Andalusian art, and had
a strong influence on later " Hispano-Moorish "
art from the twelfth to the fourteenth centuries.
Some art historians even believe that these original
forms of Andalusian art may have influenced the
development of ogival art in Christian Europe.
The prayer hall of the Great
Mosque, Cordoba.
29

Opposite page, the mfhrah of
the Great Mosque in Cordoba.
Above, deta)) of mosaic ! n the
mthrab.
Although these forms were intrinsically
decorative, and their effect was enhanced by the
polychrome work described above, the architects
and decorators of Cordoba went even further by
using mosaic. Craftsmen had to be brought from
distant lands to execute this technique, which was
rarely employed in medieval Islam. For this the
caliphate mobilized its financial resources, the
technical skills of Its craftsmen, and also its diplo-
matic relations, soliciting the help of the emperor
at Constantinople, who sent a cargo of coloured
glass cubes to Cordoba as well as a master mosal-
cist to get the work underway and instruct local
craftsmen in the intricacies of the new technique.
A cultural
crossroads
The Great Mosque reveals more strikingly than
anything else that Cordoba during the caliphate

was a cultural crossroads. A more detailed look
at the building will help to show why this is so.
The old columns and capitals that were re-
used in the Great Mosque were brought from
Roman buildings elsewhere in Spain or even from
much farther afield, in particular from what is
today Tunisia where there were many ancient
ruins.
The origin of the horseshoe-shaped arches so
characteristic of Hispano-Muslim art is a vexed
question. The form is found occasionally in the
Middle East at the time of the Umayyads and the
possibility cannot be excluded that it was deliber-
ately imported from Syria by the emirs.
However, it is generally considered to be a bor-
rowing from Visigothic art, that is from the
indigenous architecture that existed In Spain
before the Muslim conquest.
Another original feature of the parts of the
Mosque built during the emirate is the superpo-
sition of two rows of arches, enabling the ceiling
to be raised to a greater height. This practice had
already been followed, though less elegantly and
less skilfully, in the great Umayyad mosque in
Damascus which may have inspired the first
builders of Cordoba. But it is more widely
believed that the idea was suggested by Roman
aqueducts, whose superimposed arcatures curi-
ously recall those in the Great Mosque. The use
of alternating archstones of white stone and red
brick may originate in local building methods
used during the later Roman Empire, or be
modelled on Oriental Umayyad buildings, them-
selves Byzantine in inspiration, such as the Dome
of the Rock in Jerusalem.
The caliphate adopted most of the styles
which had been used earlier during the emirate,
but enriched them considerably and added to
their complexity by intersecting arches,
introducing original features into their interfoil
decoration, and importing, probably from the
Orient, new techniques for constructing domes.
Underlying all this was a desire to exalt the gran-
deur of the Umayyads, without abandoning the
link with an earlier Syrian tradition.
The hand
of the ruling dynasty
However, we must not misunderstand the multi-
cultural character of the Cordoban caliphate. The
brilliant civilization that developed in Muslim
Spain, mainly from this period onwards, was cer-
tainly In part the result of spontaneous contact
between the cultures and traditions of the three
monotheistic religions that then coexisted on the
Iberian peninsula. But the exchanges that sprang
from the relations between Islam, Christianity and
30

Judaism were not on a basis of equality. The hand
of the ruling dynasty is everywhere evident. The
influences that contributed to the formation of
Andalusian civilization were primarily Oriental-
'Abbasid and Byzantine. And the Umayyad State
was strictly Muslim and Arab.
It would doubtless be an exaggeration to deny
the existence of local Hispanic influences in the
development of Andalusian civilization. Even if
they had wished to do so, the eighth-century
Arab-Berber conquerors could hardly have made
a clean sweep of the peninsula's pre-Islamic past.
Many elements, even If only the materials avail-
able, remained and mingled in varying propor-
tions with those brought from the east and from
North Africa. However, these elements were re-
used in a totally different context and helped in
the creation of original structures in which many
other elements taken from the Orient played a
part.
In some cases the caliphate seems to have used
the material and human resources it concentrated
In Cordoba to create works whose originality is
startling. The carved ivory caskets which are
among the most refined achievements of tenth-
century Andalusian craftsmanship are a case In
point (see photo page 27). They have few antece-
dents, although perhaps here too we should see
a certain influence from Byzantium, where ivory
carving had reached a very high standard.
But there is no doubt about the novelty of the
style nor the source of its Inspiration, since all
these objects were made in palatine workshops.
The caliphate seems to have been to some extent a
pre-condition for the creation of these ivories,
which rank among the most beautiful achieve-
ments In the history of world art. Their manufac-
ture virtually came to an end with the disappear-
ance of the caliphate.
t
PIERRE GUICHARD,
professor f medieval history
at the Universite Lumiere Lyon
2. is a French istorian who
specializes in the relations
between Muslims and
Christians i  the Iberian
peninsula during the Middle
Ages. Notable among his
published works are studies on
Muslim Spain and Sicily in the
llth and 12th centuries
(Presses Universitaires d
Lyon, 1990) and on the
Muslims ofValencia and the
Reconquest from the 11t to
the 13th century (published by
the French Institute,
Damascus, 1991).
31
