The mutilation of Bucharest
by Matei Lykiardopol
MATEI LYKIARDOPOL,
Romanian architect, teaches at
the Bucharest Institute of
Architecture. He has published
a number of articles and
papers on urban settlements.
B
26
UCHAREST, a city of contrasts at the cross¬
roads of Byzantine and Western European civili¬
zation, is no stranger to destruction. It has seen
invasions by the Ottoman empire, by Russians and
by Germans, as well as natural disasters such as
earthquake and fire. A small number of churches,
monasteries, aristocratic residences and other
monuments survived these perils. A network of
streets in the centre of the old city, lined with
buildings dating from the seventeenth and eight¬
eenth centuries, also lasted until 1977.
These monuments, whose historic and cul¬
tural value was enhanced by their rarity, were
concentrated in the Uranus and Vacáresti districts
of Bucharest. They bore the brunt of the cam
paign of destruction unleashed by the dictator¬
ship in order to make room for a monstrous
"House of the People" which would be the new
seat of government. This vast edifice was to
dominate a new triumphal way symbolically
dubbed "The Victory of Socialism", although to
the horrified citizens it signified a victory over
Bucharest.
Why should this district have been chosen
rather than a vacant site? The Romanian historian
Nicolae Iorga (1871-1940) answered this question
when he wrote that "The first thing that every
conqueror of a city does is to annihilate the
ancient symbolic centre and to replace it with
another, in a different style."

In deciding to destroy this part of Bucharest,
Nicolae Ceausescu was probably driven by the
natural propensity of dictators to appropriate
their country's history and rewrite it to their own
advantage, to sweep away all traces of a glorious
past in order to vaunt their own power and
encourage a personality cult.
First of all over 40,000 people were evacu¬
ated by the armed forces, sometimes within
twenty-four hours and with no compensation
(the very small sums they were given later barely
covered their removal expenses). They were
rehoused in unfinished apartment blocks on the
fringes of the city. Many deaths and suicides
ensued.
The construction of Bucharest's new "civic
centre" also entailed the demolition of the
Ypsilanti palace, built in 1776, and the eighteenth-
century Brincovenesc hospital. Eighteen churches
and monasteries were destroyed. Eight others,
including the Mihai-Voda church dating from the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, were disman¬
tled and moved to restricted areas behind rows
of tenements.
Similar operations were carried out elsewhere
in Bucharest as part of grandiose construction
schemes. Much of the Stirbey-Vodä district was
sacrificed to make way for a history museum on
a highway intended for parades and ceremonies,
and a new law court and a congress hall (to
accommodate 30,000!) were erected or. che site
of the Väcäresti monastery, an ensemble of
seventeenth-century architecture that was unique
in southeast Europe.
Under the pretext of solving tram, subway
and automobile circulation problems, wide
swathes of central Bucharest were razed to the
ground, creating worse traffic jams and diverting
vehicles into streets that lead nowhere and inter¬
sections that it is impossible to cross.
The construction of the "civic centre" finally
confirmed the bankruptcy of the new city
project. Launched forty years ago, this project has
spawned acres of barrack-like blocks in dormi¬
tory suburbs where the public transport system
is hopelessly inadequate and there is a woeful lack
of health, cultural and sporting facilities. To cap
it all, the development of the new city led to the
process known as "systematization"a euphe¬
mism employed to describe the destruction of
nearby villages.
What can be done to remedy so many errors?
Where should we begin? Who can help us?
Unfortunately, equally serious mistakesall
fraught with human and material consequences-
have been made in the economic, social, cultural
and political fields. The task that lies ahead is
immense.
One thing is beyond question. Any tempta¬
tions towards totalitarianism must be resisted and
everything possible must be done to strengthen
democratic institutions.
Opposite page, the "House of
the People" towers over the
ruins of old Bucharest.
Below, the Domnlta Balasa
church, surrounded by
apartment blocks, Is one of
the few historic buildings still
standing in the city centre. .
5\3S'S''X' ^ü¡
il iPnr ;
^^H
