A musical blend
which takes its
harmonic
concepts and
instrumentation



from jazz, and
its themes,
rhythms and
beat from Afro-
Latin cultures
Latin
BY the time jazz got under way in New
Orleans in about 1920, the African drum, banned
in America during the slavery era, had completely
disappeared. So practitioners of the new music
borrowed the big bass drum of the military
bands, topped with a cymbal, which provided the
rhythm for the famous black parades that wended
their way through the city's streets at carnival
time or was used to accompany funerals. The
drum served essentially as a metronome; it simply
kept time, with almost no attempt at improvisa¬
tion. Eventually the military drum gave way to
the familiar jazz drum-kit, but even so American
percussionists kept to fairly rudimentary
rhythmic patterns right up to the bebop era of
the 1940s.
In Cuba, however, where the African
inheritance was still very much alive, the popular
musicians of the day used a whole range of tradi¬
tional percussion instrumentscongas, bongos,
timbáis, kettledrums, claves (rhythmsticks),
maracas, güiras (grooved calabashes)that
allowed them to build up rhythms in splendid
confusion. Jazz musicians began to borrow these
Afro-Cuban instruments in the 1940s.
As early as the end of the nineteenth century,
however, black ragtime pianists in America had
begun to use a bass line derived from the
habanera, which the Creole pianist and composer
Louis Moreau Gottschalk had brought back with
him from Cuba some decades earlier. This motif,
marked by a time-lag between the two hands, was
taken up by the father of the blues himself, W.C.
Handy, who travelled to Cuba in 1910 with the
American army, and it was later adopted by such
other pianists as "Professor Longhair", himself
a native of New Orleans. Jelly Roll Morton, the
self-styled inventor of jazz, had it in mind when
he talked of the "Latin tinge" in his music.
When -New Orleans's famous red-light dis¬
trict, Storyville, was closed down for good in the
late 1920s, many musicians found themselves out
of work and decided to travel north. New York
became the new capital of jazz, and Fletcher Hen¬
derson, Duke Ellington and a host of other
pianists helped light up the nights of Harlem,
then in the midst of its famous renaissance.
Several Cuban musicians, notably the flautist
Alberto Socarras, were attracted by the efferves¬
cent musical climate.
Puerto Ricans, who had gained American
nationality in 1917, were also moving into town.
They settled first in Brooklyn, then in East
Harlem, a former Jewish and Italian district that
quickly won the name of "El Barrio". Together
with the Cubans, they opened theatres and clubs
that provided a market for Latin rhythms. But
the outlets remained limited, so many Latin musi¬
cians were also forced to learn to play American
music.

JAZZ
Jazz meets Cuban music
Socarras started by playing the Cotton Club and
in black revues, recording the first flute solos in
jazz with Clarence Williams, Sidney Bechet's and
Louis Armstrong's producer. Once he had built
up a reputation, he founded a big band that mixed
classical music, Cuban rhythms and jazz. His
music was a total novelty at the time, and one
contemporary American critic wrote of the
"savage intensity" of the band's rhythm section.
Although Socarras was black, he overcame racial
barriers in many clubs that had previously been
closed to coloured bands, taking his tropical
drums as far afield as Illinois and Nebraska.
The Puerto Rican trombonist Juan Tizol also
embarked on an American jazz career, joining the
Duke Ellington orchestra in the late 1920s. For
Ellington he composed the first Latin jazz
numbers, Caravan and Perdido. He also introduced
Above, the Cuban
percussionist Mongo
Santamaría.
Right, the Cuban singer and
bandleader Machito in Paris
(1975).
23

Ill ILL!!
his boss to the structure of Cuban music which,
unlike jazz which allows its soloists complete
freedom of invention, is based on a very precise
superposition of rhythms, each of which has its
own particular part to play in an acoustic tapestry
that is constantly changing. The conga follows
one predetermined line, the bongo another. Bass
and piano both also make their own contribu¬
tion to the polyphonic rhythms. Whatever notes
they may be playing, Cuban musicians must
respect a particular style of phrasing that neo¬
phytes (and even experienced jazzmen) often find
hard to pick up.
Other American bandleaders, among them
Chick Webb and Cab Calloway, fell for the
charms of the bolero, guaracha and rumbaall
three of them Cuban imports. In turn, jazz made
its first tentative incursions into Cuba. Duke
Ellington went to Havana in 1933, and American-
style big bands began to be formed there. But
New York in the early 1940s was the real home
of the fusion of jazz and Cuban music that
became known first as "cubop" (from Cuba and
bebop) then as Latin jazz once other rhythms
were added to it.
In the late 1930s Mario Bauza, a one-time
trumpeter with Cab Calloway who had grown
tired of the watered-down Cuban music then to
be heard from Xavier Cugat's orchestra and other
dance bands, decided to form an ensemble that
would blend real Cuban rhythms with jazz. He
named his new band the Afro-Cubans, brought
his brother-in-law, the singer Machito (his real
name was Frank Grillo), over to join it, and won
the backing of Calloway's arranger. At first the
music was rough-edged; the band brought
together Cubans, Puerto Ricans and an American
trumpet-player, all of whom would riff wildly
together at the end of the choruses. The trumpet-
player sometimes stumbled on the Cuban
rhythms, and the Latin members at first had
difficulties with the complex harmonies of jazz.
But Bauza gradually succeeded in blending the
two musical languages, and the ensemble soldered
itself into a cohesive whole. The Afro-Cubans
made their public debut at an East Harlem club
in 1940, and their daring new music soon won
over the dancers. American drummers were par¬
ticularly struck by the bongos, never having seen
bare-handed drumming before.
Some Americans criticized the new music for
The early days of the Cotton
Club in New York (1927), with
Duke Ellington at the piano
(left).
Three famous American jazz
musicians: saxophonist
Charlie Parker with bassist
Tommy Potter and trumpeter
Miles Davis (1947).
24

evoking the caricature of a "primitive" Africa as
fostered by Hollywood films. Gradually, though,
jazzmen lent an ear. Attracted by the band's sig¬
nature tune Tanga, Stan Kenton in 1947 hired the
percussionists to record his big hit The Peanut
Vendor. But his grandiloquent style of jazz did
little justice to true Cuban music. On the other
hand Charlie Parker, who cut some tracks with
the Afro-Cubans in 1950, at once caught the spirit
of the music. His alto saxophone flies high on
Mango Mangué, Okidoke, Canción and Jazz,
weaving a web of melody over a background of
torrid rhythm.
A stunning conga player
from Havana
The other great catalyzer of Latin jazz was Dizzy
Gillespie. From the moment of his arrival in New
York he fell in love with Cuban music, whose
verve reminded him of the black rhythms of his
native South Carolina. He first played with
Socarras, who taught him Cuban rhythms, then
became friendly with Bauza, who brought him
into the Calloway band. It was Bauza who, in
1946, recommended to Gillespie the extraordi¬
nary percussionist Chano Pozo, recently arrived
from Cuba. Vain and a brawler, Pozo had built
up a solid reputation in Havana as a conga player
and composer. He belonged to a secret mutual
aid society, the nanigo, that had originated in
Nigeria and whose membership was limited to
men who had proved their courage and virility.
He was therefore well-placed to understand Afro-
Cuban ritual chants and the more arcane features
of the rumba.
Impressed by his drumming, singing and
dancing, Gillespie hired Pozo to play in his big
band. But the Cuban's rhythms clashed with
those of the band's existing drummer, Kenny
Clarke, since the downbeat of traditional jazz
differed from that of Cuban music. Gillespie set
about explaining jazz phrasing to Pozo, and the
results were the classics of Latin jazz Manteca and
Tin Tin Deo.
Latin jazz was also gathering momentum in
Cuba, where some excellent bands were formed.
But the Havana clubs, catering for the foreign
tourist trade, generally preferred to hire bland
cosmopolitan showbands rather than feature the
invigorating local music. Nonetheless, the instru¬
ments and harmonies of jazz fused with Cuban
percussion and rhythms in the remarkable big
bands led by Bebo Valdés and Benny Moré.
Back in New York, Chano Pozo was shot
dead in a Harlem bar in December 1948 at the
age of thirty-three. But he had paved the way for
a stream of other Latin percussionists to record
with jazz musicians.
Cuban jazz moved out of the limelight in the
late 1950s. It was Dizzy Gillespie who reanimated
the Latin sound in the ensuing decade by bringing
in fresh, Brazilian blood. On a trip to Rio he
heard the popular samba and bossa nova, and
brought the new sounds back with him to New
York. In fact bossa nova, which had been created
by the guitarist Joào Gilberto and popularized
by the composers Carlos Jobim and Vinicius de
Moraes and the guitarist Baden Powell, already
reflected a jazz influence. Unlike samba, which
was carnival music, bossa nova was calm and
sophisticated, full of refined and unexpected har¬
monies. Its principal charm, though, lay in its dis¬
tinctive driving rhythm, the batida, born of a
slight asynchronization between the melody and
its accompaniment that created a climate of
ambiguity, as though the music were floating, sus¬
pended between beats.
Stan Getz made the new rhythm his own, and
even while he was still coming to grips with its
complexities made the album Bossa Nova that was
to be one of his greatest successes. Cannonball
The American trumpeter,
singer and bandleader Dizzy
Gillespie in Paris in 1990.
25

26
Adderley, Charlie Byrd and the musicians of
the Modern Jazz Quartet (which played with the
Brazilian guitarist Laurindo Almeida) also showed
an interest in the subtle, swaying rhythms of
bossa nova and in the samba's irrepressible
energy.
In the early 1950s, Latin jazz combos gradu¬
ally supplanted the big bands, made obsolete by
the rise of rock 'n' roll. In 1953 the English pianist
George Shearing formed a group in California
that included several Cuban percussionists, one
of whom was Mongo Santamaría. Shearing
brought discs by local pianists back from Havana;
he was particularly struck by their rhythmic
understatement and their habit of playing
melodic lines with both hands at once.
New York combos
and Havana big bands
The other great combo of the 1950s was formed
by Santamaría himself in New York, for as well
as being an outstanding percussionist in the Afro-
Cuban tradition he was also a formidable talent
scout. First he hired the still-unknown Brazilian
pianist Joâo Donato, then Chick Corea, Hubert
Laws and other future jazz stars. In the 1960s
Santamaría spent some time in Brazil, fascinated
by Afro-American music as well as Latin rhythms
(Watermelon Man was his first big hit). He
managed to integrate these different influences
in a cohesive style that reflected his own strong
personality.
In the 1970s, the young Colombian Justo
Almario, a magisterially talented flautist, sax¬
ophonist, arranger and composer, collaborated

Above, the Cuban trumpeter
Arturo Sandoval during a
concert in Cuba (1989).
Above left, Carlos Jobim (left)
and Vinicius de Moraes, two
great Brazilian exponents of
bossa nova.
Left, the Brazilian musician
Milton Nascimento in 1986.
with Santamaría, bringing fresh dynamism to the
line-up. Witness the superb The Promised Land,
in which a richly harmonic passage for flute and
saxophone follows a prelude reflecting the
influence of John Coltrane; while Almario's
improvisation with Al Williams on Songfor You
is one of the most exquisite and rigorously con¬
structed flute solos to be heard in either the
jazz or Latin traditions. On his Ubane album,
Santamaría introduced the cumbia, a traditional
Colombian rhythm played on the hand drum,
while on Red Hot he featured a richly melodic
little samba of Almario's.
Politics cut Cuba off from America after
1960, but young Cuban musicians nonetheless
continued eagerly to soak up the jazz influence.
It came as a surprise to Dizzy Gillespie, when he
visited Havana in 1977, to find just how high a
standard the local musicians had maintained. His
present big band includes three Cubans: the trum¬
peter Arturo Sandoval, whom he met in Havana;
the drummer Ignacio Berroa; and the saxophonist
Paquito D'Rivera. Gillespie, a long-time connois¬
seur of tropical rhythms, also hired, alongside his
American sidemen, a Puerto Rican percussionist,
a Panamanian pianist, a Dominican saxophonist,
three Brazilians and a trombone player of Mex¬
ican descent.
Two years after Gillespie's Cuban trip, the
Havana-based band Irakere, mixing African
drums, electric guitars and synthesizers, swept
into the United States like a musical whirlwind,
carrying off a Grammy awardthe nation's
highest music-industry honour.
The present generation of Cuban musicians
remains open to outside ideas, but combines the
search for a determinedly new sound with the
desire to remain within the island's musical
heritage. Among the best of them is the young
pianist Gonzalo Rubalcaba, a scion of one of the
island's most distinguished musical dynasties
whose group has performed successfully at several
international festivals.
Brazil, like Cuba traditionally a musical
melting pot, also has an active Latin-jazz scene.
To create original sounds, the Zimbo Trio,
guitarists Egberto Sigmondi and Toninho Horta,
the saxophonist Paolo Moura, the pianist Wagner
Tiso and the multi-instrumentalist Hermeto
Pascoal all draw on a variety of sources: samba,
bossa nova, the folk traditions of the Northeast
coast, and the music of the African-inspired cults,
batucada, candomblé and afoxé.
Hailing from Belo Horizonte, Milton Nas¬
cimento draws inspiration from his native Minas
Gerais for his moving and dream-like music, full
of unfamiliar harmonies, whose rhythms are
unlike those of the samba and the bossa nova. The
poignant beauty of his compositions has attracted
the attention of such American jazz musicians as
Stanley Turrentine, Sarah Vaughan and Herbie
Hancock, all of whom have provided loving
cover versions.
On the whole, however, the Brazilian music
industry has not proved very welcoming to Latin
jazz, so many of the best practitioners such as
Airto Moreira, Tania Maria, Eliane Elias and
Dom Salvador have found larger audiences for
their music abroad, particularly in the United
States. In American clubs and recording studios,
the jazz and Latin traditions continue to enrich
each other as happily as in the past, and Brazilian
music still offers jazz its subtle harmonic palette.
In New York, a magnet for people of many
cultures, Latin jazz is currently engaged in a
process of intense cross-fertilization. Besides the
Brazilians, there are Argentine musicians drawing
on the lyrical inspiration of the tango, Colom¬
bians with the warm rhythms of the cumbia,
Dominicans with the turbulent merengue, as well
as musicians brought up to the rhythms of the
languid Jamaican calypso, the cadenced tambor-
cito of Panama and the fiery bomba and plena
of Puerto Rico. New York Puerto Ricans like
Tito Puente, growing up at the meeting place of
all these divergent styles, integrate many different
influences in their music, including jazz, soul,
salsa and Afro-Cuban and Puerto Rican folklore.
The Cubans who arrived after 1980, among them
Paquito D'Rivera and Ignacio Berroa as well as
the master-drummers Daniel Ponce and Puntilla,
also spice their music with the rhythm of the
songo, invented in Havana in the 1970s, as well
as with elements of the black traditional music
of their homeland.
Today Latin jazz is enjoyed around the world
by a growing number of enthusiasts. Bands from
Africa, Japan and Europe happily try their hand
at it, showing that while it is sometimes difficult
for the different nations to reach political accord,
musical unity is already a reality.
KL« 27
