ATTEMPTING THE IMPOSSIBLE
BY FEDERICO MAYOR
'I
imagination is more important than But what kind of utopia? And on what terms?
knowledge," said Albert Einstein, and his Utopia is by definition transcendent, a child
remark seems more relevant than ever of excess which nevertheless remains within the
today. The world is changing so rapidly that bounds of reason. Such "reasonable immoder-
our complacency and established ways of think- ation" can make an impact on the real world
ing are continually being challenged. The more by raising its aspirations, without for a moment
the technocrat's certainties and the planner's losing sight of respect for mankind. Did not
pride are confounded by hard facts, the more this kind of ambition and utopianism inspire
the individual capacity for inventiveness is at Martin Luther King, Mahatma Gandhi, and
a premium. "All is flux," said Heraclitus over Nelson Mandela? Such "open" utopias are quite
2,000 years ago. Have we forgotten that change different from those which confine the corn-
is inherent in the human condition? We are munity within a logic that denies individual
living at a time when the pace of historical expression and tends to crush it.
change is such that there is an unparalleled need This sense of vision in utopianism should be
for new thinking. regarded as a liberating, dynamic force for
And what do we see? At the very moment immediate, universal action, an encouragement
when we ought to be guided and impelled by to bold thinking. In the words of Bernard
the creative spirit, people are asserting that Lown, president of International Physicians for
utopia is dead. What justification is there, in the Prevention of Nuclear War, which was
fact, for rejecting the idea of utopia as a beacon awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1985, "Only
of inspiration and a guide to action? Many those who can see the invisible can do the
researchers today see a propensity to look impossible". To increase in this way the
beyond existing reality as the hallmark of the power of the imagination and strengthen the
Utopian impulse, of the intense desire for human desire to go ever further, is to equip
change that re-emerges whenever pragmatism mankind to face reality and respond to the
sinks into arid, sterile routine. Most of them unexpected.
believe that any great human adventure, Can utopia be a guarantee of freedom? No
whether in science, religion or politics, is an final answer has yet been given to this
offshoot of some form of Utopian thought, question. But it is a question that is worth
pairting0^ the Perhaps utopia can sketch a profile of the asking.
future. 11
Venezuelan artist
Pancho Quilici
