Child labour in the world today
G/HILD labour in today's world is over¬
whelmingly concentrated in three eco¬
nomic sectorsagriculture, the so-called
"urban informal" sector, and domestic
service. In each of these sectors children
are badly exploited, and none of the three
has been effectively penetrated by
mechanisms for containing child labour
and the abuses associated with it.
The agricultural trap
Today as in the past most of the world's
working children are employed in
agriculture. It is tempting to imagine
them working at traditional tasks under
the benevolent eye of parents who want
to provide them with the skills they
will need in adult life. Their environment
is often assumed to be physically and psy¬
chologically healthier than that of city
children. This bucolic vision reflects the
romantic notions of city-dwellers who
have little direct experience of rural
poverty and does not correspond to the
facts.
All over the world, the industrializa-
Difficulty, by Jeeranat Madee, age 13 (Thailand).
tion of agriculture is changing the struc¬
ture of production, and with it the way
rural families earn their living. More and
more country dwellers are working for
other people, because they have either no
land of their own or not enough to sup¬
port themselves.
Agricultural work is often organized
in such a way that children work as long
and hard as their parents in order to en¬
sure family survival. In some places adults
are only employed on condition that
their children help as well. This is one

reason why rural working children are es¬
pecially likely to be unschooled and il¬
literate. The protection their families can
provide is strictly limited.
With the modernization of agricul¬
tural technology, even children working
on family farms are now exposed to dan¬
gerous machinery and chemicals
unknown only a few years ago. Controls
on hazardous insecticides and herbicides
are generally weak, and as a rule neither
children nor their families are taught how
to handle safely even the most widely-
used machinery and products. In many
countries there is growing concern about
the accident rate among child agricultur¬
al workers.
It is worth noting that rates of child
mortality, illness, malnutrition, disabili¬
ty and illiteracy are almost everywhere
substantially higher in rural than in ur¬
ban areas. Many of the exploited children
found in the cities have fled there from
the countryside or been sent there be¬
cause the situation was desperate at home.
In the coming years rural children
will come under greater pressure because
of the rapid restructuring of world
agriculture. Many will end up vulnerable
to exploitation, whether in impoverished
rural communities or in the overbur¬
dened cities to which they migrate. The
pawns of social forces that they cannot
control and do not understand, these chil¬
dren have few options. They constitute
a young and vulnerable workforce for the
two other problem areas.
The informal sector
The term "informal sector" is generally
used to designate relatively small un¬
registered enterprises which typically are
exempted from, or not covered by, regu¬
lations governing larger businesses.
Although it exists everywhere, the infor¬
mal sector is particularly large and
vigorous in urban areas. Its vitality has
only recently been recognized, and in
many countries today it is expanding
rapidly, sometimes with government en¬
couragement. In some industrialized
countries and in most developing nations
the informal sector is a major engine of
growth and accounts for as much as a
third or more of all economic activity.
Fed by migration from the country¬
side and the increasing decentralization of
38 production, it is already the fastest-
growing area of child labour employ¬
ment. By the beginning of the next cen¬
tury it could well overtake agriculture as
the principal area of child labour. In most
cities it already encompasses the vast
majority of children who work outside
the home to earn a little money or their
keep.
Children often participate in the in¬
formal sector as employees of enterprises
such as brickmaking, construction, han¬
dicrafts and food services. Some of these
occupations are among the most danger¬
ous in which children are engaged, and
many of the cruellest child labour abuses
that have been documented are in this
sector.
Children working in brickyards car¬
ry heavy loads that can leave them
weakened, injured or deformed. In carpet-
weaving workshops they can ruin their
eyesight and damage their limbs and
backs. Young pencil-makers, who
manufacture pencils other children use at
school, breathe in hazardous slate dust
that can condemn them to early disabili¬
ty and death from lung disease. Many
similar examples could be cited, all of
which have long been recognized and
condemned.
These situations still persist, for one
thing because many countries exempt
small and family-run businesses from the
provisions of their child-labour laws,
despite the fact that most employed chil¬
dren work in businesses of this kind.
Another problem is that labour enforce¬
ment systems are overstretched and can
barely even meet their commitments in
the formal sector.
Some city children work on their
own account. Most of them practice
street trades such as hawking, shining
shoes, washing cars, even prostitution.
Numerous countries and cities have laws
prohibiting their activities, but they have
proved difficult to enforce, and their wis¬
dom is in any case doubtful. Labour in¬
spection is an impractical approach to this
sort of work, and other means are re¬
quired to protect these children from the
violence, exploitation and abuse they fre¬
quently encounter.
Domestic servitude
Youngsters working as domestic servants
may be the most exploited of all, and the
most difficult to protect, particularly if
they live in the homes of their employ¬
ers. Their numbers are thought to be
huge, particularly in Africa, Asia and La¬
tin America, but it has proved virtually
impossible to count them. The vast
majority are girls, frequently pré¬
adolescents, who live with and are utter¬
ly dependent on their employers. Inves¬
tigators believe that the number of
children in domestic service is growing
in some regions, in response to increas¬
ingly desperate poverty and the unwill¬
ingness of adult women to do this work
in such bad conditions.
Sometimes children are placed by im¬
poverished parents with relatives or ac¬
quaintances on the understanding that the
latter will support and educate the child
in return for its labour. In other cases the
child is hired out for wages, typically paid
largely or even entirely to the parents.
Some parents simply sell their children
into bondage for cash.
"When such a sale is to an agent rather
than directly to the final employer, par¬
ents and child may lose contact perma¬
nently. Some children are unwittingly
sold in this way into forced prostitution.
It is possible that many child domes¬
tic workers are reasonably well treated by
their employers. Even so, they are utterly
at the latters' mercy, and therefore high¬
ly vulnerable to abuse. Typically they are
expected to work long hours, often with
no regular days off. Even though most
work in relatively well-to-do homes,
many are malnourished. They are not al¬
lowed to eat the family food even when
they cook it, and are provided with
neither room nor bed, commonly sleep¬
ing on the kitchen floor.
Sexual abuse by members of the
household is said to be common, and var¬
ious investigators also suspect a high in¬
cidence of physical abuse. It is doubtful
whether many of these children of school
age are permitted to attend educational
institutions on a regular basis.
Domestic servants are vulnerable in
many ways. They are open to abuse be¬
cause of their age, their sex, their confine¬
ment, their invisibility to the outside
world, their total dependence on their
employers, and often their lack of
familiarity with the world beyond the
doorstep.
Source: Still so far to go: Child labour in the world
today. International Labour Organisation, Geneva,
1989.
