Soné of India
by Romain Maitra
From Messiaen
to the Beatles,
the vogue
for Indian music
in the West
Above, the Indian ensemble
Shakti, which was formed by
British musician John
McLaughlin.
ROMAIN MAITRA
Is an Indian journalist, writer
and cultural anthropologist.
He is currently working at the
Maison des Sciences de
l'Homme, Paris, on a study of
the ¡mage of the Indian world
presented by French
film-makers.
IN any cross-cultural transfer, complete idea-
systems never travel easily. Only fragments tend
to be transmitted. In the case of the influence of
Indian classical music on the music of the West,
technical elements such as raga (colour or mood),
scales and timbre have sometimes been adopted
by Western composers and integrated into their
individual styles and conceptions.
Aleksandr Scriabin and Gustav Holst were
among the European composers who have been
influenced by Indian culture and music. Both
were interested in theosophy, a nineteenth-
century synthetic religion that brought Indolo-
gists, philosophers, quacks and generous society
ladies together beneath the all-embracing canopy
of Hinduism. Scriabin's ideas about emotion and
colour perhaps owe something to the concept of
raga, and Hoist incorporated some of the hymns
of the Rig Veda in his Planets. The French com¬
poser Olivier Messiaen admired the melodic con¬
tours and ornamentations of Indian music, and
developed a rhythmic theory which seems to be
inspired by Indian tala or pattern of beats. In his
piece Oiseaux exotiques, the percussive passages
execute tala as a counterpoint to the music of
string and wind instruments.
The modern American composers Henry
Cowell and Alan Hovhaness used elements of
Indian music in their Madras Symphony and
Madras Sonata respectively. Lou Harrison and
John Cage also had deep and perceptive Indian
musical connections. In his Construction in Metal
Cage was inspired by shrutis or microtonalities,
and in his Sonatas and Interludes for piano he
attempted to express in music the sthai bhavas,
the abiding states of emotion which help conjure
up the aesthetic response of rasa or flavour.
More recently, La Monte Young and Terry
Riley have had a strong connection with India
through their guru Pandit Pran Nath, who taught
them Hindustani vocal music. In his The Well-
Timed Piano, Young used raga scales moving
in and out of the texture against the continuous
drone of the piano. It is also possible to detect
in the works of Philip Glass and Steve Reich
the hidden fibres of oriental inspiration. John
Barham is a Western composer who has used
the piano as if it were a santur, or Persian
dulcimer.
Indian music and
Western jazz and pop
A notable surge of interest in Indian classical
music began in the West and especially in the
United States in the 1950s, at a time when
American society was waking from the conser¬
vatism of the post-war era. The atmosphere of
experimentation and change was symbolized by
concern for Civil Rights, by the creation of the
Peace Corps, and by the growth of a number of
protest movements. With the spread of the 35

.
Beatles Paul McCartney and George Harrison
during a trip to India in 1968.
The Indian sitarist and composer
Ravi Shankar (left)
with the American composer Philip Glass.
36
alternative culture of the young and its penchant
for holy gurus and the magical, mythical image
of India and its religion, Indian music became an
important part of the new scene.
By the 1960s, Indian music was attracting
large audiences in London, Paris, New York,
Chicago, Los Angeles and other big European
and American cities. It seemed fresh and exciting,
with deep spiritual qualities and tranquillity.
Many jazz-lovers thought that it resembled jazz
because of its potential for improvisation, the
scope it offered for the artist and the resources
of the Indian scalar or modal system.
Its great popularity was due to individuals
such as Ravi Shankar, Ali Akbar Khan, Yehudi
Menuhin and George Harrison, rather than to
groups or movements. Ravi Shankar played a par¬
ticularly important role. In order to make Indian
music more accessible to Western audiences, he
departed from Hindustani tradition by starting
his concerts with a short piece which was fol¬
lowed by increasingly longer items. As he said
in the introduction to his recording of Concerto
for Sitar and Orchestra: "the listener will not find
much harmony, counterpoint or sound patterns
he is used to, and which form the basis of Western
classical music. I have consciously avoided these,
only using them minimally, because they arc
elements which, if emphasized, can spoil or even
destroy the raga-bhava (the mood and spirit of
the raga)."
George Harrison successfully endorsed this
effort to introduce unfamiliar Indian music to
audiences used to Western pop by removing some
of the difficulties. The exotic tone of the sitar can
be heard in the song "Norwegian Wood" on the
Beatles' album Rubber Soul (1965) and in "Within
You Without You" on Revolver (1966).
Another approach to Indian music was
adopted by the jazz trumpeter Don Cherry in his
piece Humus, which is based on a series of simple
themes, sounds, rhythms and two ragas, although
the trumpet is not exactly an ideal instrument for
producing the characteristic microtonal glides of
Indian music.
Meanwhile, in India the violin and clarinet
have long been conspicuous in classical, semi-
classical and even some folk music. Although
Western classical music has not made any notice¬
able impact on Indian music, pop and rock have
had a strong influence on film music, most of
which lacks any authentic identity or organic link
with the classical mode.
Although Indian music has assimilated many
influences in the past, the mixing process has been
gradual, an attempt to find the new without
losing the essential characteristics of the old.
However, the last two decades have been a heady
time for successful Indian performers, who have
earned big money and popularity abroad. Wel¬
come though it is that Indian music has borne
such a variety of fruits in the West, great care
must be taken to maintain an environment in
which it can flourish at home.
The Caribbean group
Kassav'
in concert,
Paris, 1986.
