LOTFALLAH SOLIMAN,
Egyptian journalist and writer, is the author of
A <5 Pour une nist0're Profane de 'a Palestine (La
4b découverte publishers, Paris, 1989).
N the 1950s, word went round that a rich
American had offered to buy the city of
Sana'a, minus its inhabitants, from the Imam
Ahmed for $40 million, an enormous sum at



that time. The plan provided for Sana'a's
population to be rehoused in a new city which
was to be specially built for them in the
vicinity.
When this anecdote is told today, the
people of Sana'a smile with a certain com¬
placency. Sana'a is now the capital of all
Yemen, and the renovation of its old city,
which is inscribed on UNESCO's World
Heritage List, is well under way.
Fact and fiction
Located at an altitude of 2,200 metres, too high
for mosquitoes to survive, Sana'a is worth
seeing for its site alone. It is not a city that
wears its heart on its sleeve. Like that of fairy
tales, its magic only works on those who have
not lost a capacity for wonder. It does not
reveal its charm to the visitor who summarily
orders it to "Open Sesame". The Italian poet
and film-maker Pier Paolo Pasolini was right
to use Sana'a as the setting for his film The
Thousand and One Nights.
Until they began to retreat into them¬
selves under the Zaydi imams, Sana'a and the
Yemen were places of meetings, confronta¬
tions and ancient loyalties.
Sana'a is a meeting place of fact and fan¬
tasy. Consider some of the stories told about
it. That it was founded by Shem, the son of
Noah. A legend. That the kingdom of Saba,
over which it ruled, was one of the richest and
most ancient civilizations of Antiquity. Fact.
That a great queen ruled over it, the "Queen

of Sheba" whose existence is recorded only
in sacred literature, not in any secular text or
archaeological inscription. Probably a legend.
That the largest Christian edifice south of the
Mediterranean was built at Sana'a. Fact



although the story that it was built to com¬
memorate a visit by Jesus of Nazareth is fic¬
tional. That the city's Great Mosque was built
during the Prophet's lifetime. Partly fact,
partly fiction. That its library is only rivalled
by those of Cairo and Kairouan. Fact. Doubt¬
less more archaeological research will be neces¬
sary to help us distinguish the authentic from
the spurious, truth from legend.
More literally, Sana'a was a meeting place
of caravans bearing gold and silver from the
Orient. The kingdoms of Saba (950-1 15 B.C.)
and Himyar (until c. 525) became wealthy
through the myrrh and frankincense coveted
by Ptolemaic Egypt, and later through moka
(the original name for coffee), the trade in
which would be disputed for many years by
the Portuguese, the Ottoman Turks and the
British.
It was also a meeting place between poly¬
theism and monotheism, a scene of confron¬
tation between Judaism and Christianity, until
Islam cut the quarrel short. The Yemen and
its capital Sana'a gave themselves totally to the
new faith. They provided Islam with soldiers
and technicians who left traces as far away as
Andalusia, where even today strongholds and
palaces have Yemeni names.
Finally it was a place where old and new
met, sometimes in confrontation. Until the
revolution which brought the imamate to an
end in 1962, the outward appearance of the
Yemen remained unchanged for centuries.
An outstanding architectural
heritage
For over a thousand years mosques, palaces,
madrasahs (Qur'anic schools), caravanserais,
hammams (public baths) and multi-storey
houses were built at Sana'a in an unvarying
style. In the 183 hectares of the old walled city,
these buildings of from four to seven storeys,
their façades adorned with whitewashed
friezes and beautiful carved windows, formed
a strange and extraordinary architectural
ensemble. Each storey had its own specific
material, decoration, use, plan, alabaster
plasterwork or stained glass windows. Each
house had its own well and sanitary facilities-
liquid wastes were recycled to water gardens
and solid matter was dried and burned to heat
water in the hammams. The winding streets
were narrow, but they were quite adequate
when the traffic was limited to people and
animals.
In 1962 the fall of the monarchy which
had preserved the medieval tranquility of
Sana'a profoundly disturbed the traditional
structure of society. Within a few years, the
city's population had risen from 55,000 to
420,000. Around the old city a new one was
built with modern facilities such as running
water, electricity, the telephone, schools,
universities, clinics, hospitals, restaurants,
cinemas and public buildings. The young,
soon followed by their elders, deserted their
traditional family houses and went to live in
more comfortable quarters in the new town.
The old city of Sana'a, once famed as "the
pearl of Arabia", went inexorably into decline.
Its population fell from 55,000 to 35,000, and
its composition changed. Both those who
remained and the newcomers who moved in
lacked the means to maintain the old
dwellings, which deteriorated and fell into
ruin. Since the inhabitants of the Old City also
wished to enjoy the benefits of modern house¬
hold amenities, electric wires and cables were
strung above the roofs of the houses, which
began to bristle with television aerials. Cheap
plastic piping laid under the roads to bring
running water burst beneath the weight of
uncontrolled traffic. Waste water infiltrated
into the ground, making the buildings even
more fragile.
Saving
the old city
At the end of the civil war in 1972, the Yemeni
government passed a law to protect its
architectural and archaeological heritage, with
particular reference to the old city of Sana'a.
But the government's resources were very
limited. UNESCO also wished to help to
preserve what could still be saved of Sana'a,
and in 1980 its General Conference adopted
Left: A general view of the old city of Sana'a,
looking towards the west.
Right: A plasterer restores a building
in Sana'a. 47

a resolution authorizing the Director-General
to collaborate with the Yemeni government
in drawing up a plan of action for the preser¬
vation and restoration of the old city. In 1981
and 1982, architects, historians, sociologists
and engineers were mobilized to study the
problems posed by the safeguard of a site
which, it was felt, should not be mummified
but given new life in accordance with its old
traditions.



By 1983 the plan had been approved by
the Yemeni government and UNESCO, and
its implementation began. In December 1984,
before the city's inclusion on the World
Heritage List (which did not take place until
1987), the restoration and safeguard of Sana'a
were placed by presidential decree under the
authority of a High Committee chaired by the
Prime Minister. The Director-General of
UNESCO launched an appeal to the interna
tional community to help the Yemeni govern¬
ment carry out a rescue operation with an esti¬
mated cost of $300 million.
Several countries responded to
UNESCO's appeal. Italy played an active part
in pluridisciplinary studies connected with the
rescue operation and became the first country
to take part in the rehabilitation of an entire
district of the old city. Its example was fol¬
lowed by the Netherlands, Norway, Ger¬
many, France, the Republic of Korea, Swit¬
zerland and Japan, and by the United Nations
Development Programme, whose contribu¬
tion notably sought to revive traditions of
craftsmanship.
In June 1988, the Director-General of
UNESCO, Mr. Federico Mayor, visited Sana'a
to get a first-hand impression of the extent and
complexity of the task. It will take fifteen
years of constant effort and much devotion
to save Sana'a.
Above: A craftsman at work on
a stained-glass window.
Below: Houses in the old city.
1 (."'
I X '
mm x<¿BÉft"¿
irr-f'ri
"in
48
