PARADISE IN 4338? BY VSEVOLOD REVICH
u,
30
'TOPIAN writers have often presented their
message in the form of semi-political, semi-fantastic
stories, and today the frontier between "pure"
Utopian writing and science fiction is very hard to
define. Although Russian Utopian literature has
produced no world-famous books such as More's
Utopia and Campanella's City ofthe Sun, it never¬
theless provides instances of remarkable insight.
In the mid-eighteenth century, Russian fic¬
tion consisted almost entirely of Utopian writings,
which showed traces of the influence of the
French Enlightenment. Whether the setting was
an imaginary island or a real place like ancient
Rome, utopianism was a form ideally suited to
philosophical moralizing.
When describing his novel Numa, or
Flourishing Rome, Mikhail Matveevich Kheraskov
wrote as follows: "This story is not absolutely
true historically. It is embellished with many fan¬
tasies which make it more beautiful without
depreciating Numa's deeds." Numa's wise rule
prompts the author to give a piece of sagacious
if somewhat cautious advice to sovereigns which
still seems relevant today. The true glory of a
sovereign, he says, "is not always won with
weapons. ..for the triumphant cries of the victors

are often accompanied by the lamentations of
widows and orphans". Kheraskov sadly notes
that his story will have hardly any impact, but
"if there is no happy society on Earth let it at
least exist in books and afford us the consolation
that we too can be happy one day".
A pretext
for political confrontation
Many novels of this kind were written in late
eighteenth-century Russia. The best-known was
Alexander Radischev''s Journeyfrom St. Petersburg
to Moscow, a denunciation of serfdom which con¬
tains a Utopian account of how prosperous free
farmers could be. At the other end of the polit¬
ical spectrum, Prince Mikhail Scherbatov's A
Journey to the Ofirian Land vigorously opposed
Peter the Great's reforms, described cities as a
source of moral degradation and their buildings
Above, the covers of. French
editions of two works by Ivan
Efremov (1907-1972), a
master of Soviet science
fiction.
as "heaps of stones", and advocated a return to
the patriarchal way of life.
The 1825 Decembrist uprising against Tsarist
autocracy left a mark on nineteenth-century Rus¬
sian history and on philosophical dreams of
Russia's destiny. The Decembrist Wilhelm
Küchelbecker wrote The Land of the Headless, a
satirical sketch in which the narrator lands on the
Moon where he finds a social system which
embodies the worst aspects of Russian life.
Küchelbecker had discovered that utopias may
have undesirable features, a new slant which gave
rise to a flood of "anti-utopias" a century later.
The major Russian Utopian work of the first
half of the nineteenth century was an unfinished
story by Vladimir Odoyevsky, The Year 4338. In
4338, according to Odoyevsky's calculations, the
Earth should cross the path of a massive comet
and possibly even collide with it. The plot centres
on human efforts to avoid this disaster. In
Odoyevsky's utopia, the Moon is uninhabited
and serves as a source of supplies for the Earth,
which is threatened by overpopulation. Electric
vehicles are driven along underground tunnels.
Siberia is heated by energy from volcanoes. Per¬
sonal aircraft are used. Clothes are made of glass
fibre. St. Petersburg has merged with Moscow,
forming an immense megalopolis.
Odoyevsky makes the same mistake as many
other writers about utopia. He talks about the
general improvement of conditions, but devotes
no attention whatever to the spiritual life of the
people who live in these flourishing societies.
Nikolai Chernyshevsky tried to avoid this error
in "The Fourth Dream of Vera Pavlovna", a Uto¬
pian chapter of his novel What is to be Done? In
this socialist Song of Solomon, Chernyshevsky
depicts the future as a Kingdom of Lovenot
puritan, abstract love, but earthly love which
brings people the joy of life. Unlike Odoyevsky,
with his preference for the city, Chernyshevsky
believed that a healthy and happy life is only pos¬
sible in a natural environment.
In contrast to these writers, Feodor
Dostoyevsky in his A Dream ofa Funny Man has
no good word to say for socialismor for what he
calls socialism. Alas, it appears that Dostoyevsky
was right on many points.
Perfect worlds,
soulless worlds
Around the 1890s, Russian Utopian thought
started to become more diversified and original.
One notable example of a new cosmic trend is
Nikolai Fyodorov's Philosophy of the Common
Cause (1906, 1913), a remarkable book in which
Fyodorov imagines the resurrection of all the
people who ever lived on Earth. 31

At the Machine Tool, by the
Soviet painter, designer and
sculptor Alexandre Deineka
(1899-1969).
32
VSEVOLOD REVICH,
of the Soviet Union, is a
literary critic and essayist. A
student of utopia and fantasia
in fiction, he has written over
200 works including essays
entitled "Neither Truth nor
Invention", "Tragedy and
Fairytale" and "Realism in
Fantasy".
Reactionary writers afraid of the changes that
were impending in Russia laced their views with
sober warnings which unfortunately were not
heeded. The radical young were unable to find
a rational message in treatises permeated with
great-power chauvinism.
The characters in Nikolai Shelonsky's novel
The World ofthe Future (1892) find themselves in
the thirtieth century faced with a map on which
Germany and Italy no longer exist. England and
America have survived but in an "uncivilized
state"they are capitalist countries characterized
by the pursuit of profit, extremes of wealth and
poverty, and militarism. On the other hand, the
alliance between Russia and Francebased on the
Orthodox faithhas enabled these countries to
attain an extraordinarily high level of spiritual
and social development. The book also contains
many inklings of future developments-
television, synthetic fabrics, the Channel Tunnel,
and even anti-matter.
At the other political extreme, the most
notable socialist fantasy of these years was Red
Star by Alexander Bogdanov, an associate of
Lenin until ideological differences drove them
apart. The Red Star is Mars, which is inhabited
by humanoids who are practically indistinguish¬
able from human beings. The communist prin¬
ciple reigns supreme: from each according to his
abilities, to each according to his needs. The Mar¬
tians' basic need is to work, and they often change
jobs to enjoy the pleasures of diversity. Economic
stability is maintained by information-computing
machines. Just imagine, computers in 1908!
Here again spiritual life leaves much to be
desired. The Martians are polite and considerate,
but incapable of emotion. The logic of expe¬
diency takes the place of inner motivation. In this
atmosphere Sterney, a mathematician, works out
a project to annihilate humankind and colonize
the Earth. Whether intentionally or not, Bog¬
danov makes the prophetic statement that mons¬
trous, inhuman projects can be generated by a
rationally organized society if it does not rest on
firm moral principles.
The end of an illusion
Andrei Platonov, artistic genius and prophet, re¬
alized much earlier and more clearly than his con¬
temporaries that attempts to build a new society
on servility or by decree were immoral and
doomed to failure. Such enterprises can lead only
to a common grave in which the builders of the
society either lie down of their own free will (The
Foundation Pit), or are dispatched there by other
means (Chevengur). And if Mikhail Bulgakov
went wrong in his grotesque play Adam and Eve,
it was only in his supposition that a few people
would survive the use of weapons of mass des¬
truction.
The hero of Sigiezmund Krzhizhanovsky's
story Recollections of the Future, written in the
late 1920s, invents a time machine and travels
several years into the future, but what he sees is
so horrible that he hurries back and tells nobody
about it.
In the same alarmist vein is Yevgeny
Zamyatin's famous futurist novel We (1924),
one of the key books of the twentieth century.
To the indignation of the Soviet press, it was first
published abroad. The critic Alexander Voronsky
denounced it as a hostile caricature of com¬
munism. He could not have known of the sinister

-*rnk i ; i .i . i h i la n£ . i n i i.ax i,.y
Right, The Burial of the Cat
(1858), a lithograph in the
Russian folk art tradition
known as lubok. It is
thought by some to be a
representation of the burial of
Tsar Peter the Great by the
peasants.
Below, Multicephalic Machine
(1989), wood engraving by
Paul Kichilov.
HjrßfcMUUA II» AM
\l '.' 1 ii
A; AAHAUI
umrxy i-iiu.« h< rAt in in tait'.
!"l «'Uta ILh I IIIIIANA .MIKI'IUTA ¡l'A 'lUHUAÍ tí MWIIA-V.'. MHA» ¡MU tt/WM i-Vil' I i' 1, íl
Ai'TI'AKAHirA .VnAAMA KA.IANRA IWTÍi HAH;*. .MllMIM «ATA llf I I ».fcAAM fliAIIO HIJUVTA lll'Alh'JHAlM i: N>
' > rAi)*ii'ii :t . iatta limn Ki\|ii.h'ii »tu iha'iam mjMM niiau» ki'ohihh h llAVHlue
* llUA ' 1 HU« A.IIUA . ' lA-lA 1> UATI, HI A.I.ATI I, > I V li 1A||.H'IA l/.UAT|. AR1 HUM MNEATATA H NB
ka fwm« IMUHU IIWMH I* iciTi. m ry.h it imvnirii lin.lncTkli ftiucA.«;. HII"Iiaih.ma MPAFitAPAAlft wiLIKTiurr. Chopa .huiiiij
r'AKPA-MKA H-1AJULJJ0 ulwlfl'III.A n.llJI ia r ,i m VVKAIIA t'l rxil* ftAITI III I.Al'll.lll KftTA'fMtM'IA XIIA.IH.lll K.IMMIIW ,1/illMKA.IH IftAM« IIKJB"TA flan
HAJU lín* Mrm HAi.mnKA Himiiu uiuuuluvun ajviuh JIiijMIH.ma.iii ai ivlmuir :i>, iajw lim aA»I» HnT.vtjmKA rnrijiA It.lAn.MA 11.1,1.a IA
HiiBH'inTki m>lMíTA.lA mUHmrTM HnTAiptM'IA ¿hfma.ia TAHn mjilli.1 HUTA in.MHHA.IH «rnrprHHI. JnnHliA.III
I..., **j, »*;* BBTUfi ktfi »Jí i :i-i4i r" (* I;a,i t ¿
developments that would transform Zamyatin's
fiction into reality only ten or fifteen years later,
that Zamyatin would manage to emigrate, and
that he, Voronsky, would end his days in a prison
camp set up by Stalin's secret police, which bore
an astonishing resemblance to the Guardians
described in the novel.
Such a pessimistic view of man reduced to a
number is a grotesque exaggerationor is it? The
twentieth century, so rich in invention, has
brought several similar surprises. Signs of
Zamyatin's world can be seen wherever indepen¬
dent thought is suppressed, the individual is en¬
slaved, and people are trained like animals to
respond to a ringing bell. Have we not seen entire
nations seized by a paroxysm of admiration for
their "Benefactor", as Zamyatin calls him?
A wild hope
The Utopian writers of the 1920s were the chil¬
dren of their age. Their novels invariably begin
with the triumph of world revolution. Thus, in
one of the first Soviet Utopian novels, The Coming
World by Yakov Okunev (1923), two men wake
up 200 years into the future. What do they see?
"There are hardly any open spaces left on the
globe. As far as the eye can see there are streets,
gardens, squares, more streets.. .a boundless world
city." Okunev, like Odoyevsky, seems to view
nature as an enemy that should be conquered and 33

34
tamed. Today hardly anyone would be delighted
to see such a concrete jungle.
A similar picture emerges in V. Nikolsky's
A Thousand Years After (1926), which describes
the world of the thirtieth century as brighter,
cleaner and richer than ours, but containing
hardly anything that had not been imagined sixty
years before, except that in Nikolsky's world
everything is bigger, stronger, and faster. The
author extrapolates from the world he knows:
machines are as big as railway carriages or weigh
100 tons, a mine is 2,000 kilometres deep, and
an artificial satellite orbits the Earth.
In the early 1930s, when Stalin was fashioning
ideology with his callous hands, forecasts of the
future ceased to appear. From then on, those who
wrote about the future had to base their work
not on the study of real life or on their own fan¬
tasies but on prevailing ideological dogma, which
meant armed confrontation between socialism
and imperialism, with the former winning a quick
and easy victory.
A painful awakening
The appearance of Ivan Efremov's novel
Andromeda in 1957 is closely associated with the
reawakening of social consciousness that took
place after Stalin's death in 1953. Today it is
difficult to share Efremov's unflagging optimism
about the future of humanity, but his novel is
the most complete picture of communist society
in the history of Utopian thought. In fact Efremov
depicts a depoliticized society which has rid itself
of all kinds of oppression.
Perhaps the most attractive feature of the
society he describes is that it provides all its
members with an opportunity to fulfil them¬
selves, rather than providing guarantees of wel¬
fare or longevity.
Efremov depicts the world with more
warmth than his predecessors, and it is really pos¬
sible to conceive of living in it, which is more
than can be said for the sterile barracks described
by some of his predecessors. This is not to imply
that everything is perfecttoday's reader is sure
to note Efremov's indifference to ecological
problems. The threat to the environment escaped
the attention of most science fiction writers.
The utopia imagined by Efremov will prob¬
ably be the last to evoke a society of absolute har¬
mony and tranquillity. Efremov's euphoria soon
evaporated. His next novel about a distant future,
The Hour of Taurus, written only ten years later,
is filled with dark foreboding.
The highroad of history seems to have taken
an unexpected turning. But where is it leading?
The next generation of Utopian writers will have
plenty to think about.

