The spoiled child
Are some children loved too much?
by Anne Rose
%
To sit in a small chair,
by Mike Batty, age 17
(Canada).
HEN people talk of ill-loved children, they
usually mean those who are loved too little or
not at all, rarely those who are loved too much.
It may be good news that, in some social classes
at least, adults now take an active interest in their
children, but even so the kind of relationship that
is developing still deserves some attention. Obser¬
vation of contemporary society suggests that in
many cases children have become a new kind of
god, sacred and untouchable beings so precious
that they must be preserved at all costs from life's
ups and downs.
32
In this context, "taking the child into
account" comes to mean making him or her the
centre of the parents' lives. Many couples say,
with the best will in the world, that their child
means everything to them, when the situation
should be the other way round: it is their job to
serve as guides and mentors to the child.
Children at least those who are wanted
often end up serving as alter egos for their
parents. They fill a gap. They are the couple's
greatest success. Who can say no to a little god?
Nothing can be refused to a child that has been
granted divine status. The parents will make
sacrifices rather than see their child's whims frus¬
trated. Some will change jobs, move house or
even divorce, all supposedly for the good of their
child. In return, of course, the infant is expected
to repay in the course of time the great expecta¬
tions invested in it.
Such a relationship, in which the parents are
at the child's beck and call, can be parasitical, con¬
cealing the parents' own neuroses. The
camouflage is all the better in that doting of this
kind is encouraged both by social consensus and
by commercial pressures.
You can see the childhood cult in operation
in the heart of our cities, near schools or on buses,
in public gardens or in restaurants. Its leitmotif
never varies. It goes under the name of "pro¬
tecting the child", but it might just as well be
called stifling the child's initiative and
encouraging laziness.
The parents' behaviour rests on two
presumptions whose consequences are question¬
able at best. One is that human beings should
suffer the least possible discomfort if they are to
grow up harmoniously, "harmony" being
defined as an absence of conflict rather than as
a balance of complementary forces. The other is
that a child's real needs correspond to its
expressed wishes, at least in so far as these accord
with the parents' own view of things. This of
course presupposes that children have no sooner
come into the world than they instinctively know
what is good for them. This extraordinarily low
view of human consciousness as a mere acting out
of instinct makes a fitting pendant to the con¬
trasting excesses of Victorian morality in the
nineteenth century.
Though this strange new morality purports
to be influenced by psychoanalysis, it in practice
contradicts its findings that children need a mix¬
ture of success and failure in getting what they
want. Occasionally frustrating children's wishes

moil'1 5/r/¿S/A|i55£ .'
Divorce,
by a 12-year-old (Norway).
ANNE ROSE
is a French psychotherapist
and anthropologist who is
engaged on a study of the
myth of woman and child in
the West today. This article is
inspired by an address given at
a seminar held at UNESCO
headquarters in January 1990.
can help them to develop by forcing them to con¬
front limitations, thereby enabling them to
handle similar setbacks better in future. The
ability to overcome disappointments is one way
in which youngsters can cultivate their own
individuality. Yet it is almost impossible to
encourage this dynamic process when the con¬
sensus is that the child must always get what it
wants.
The adult's role should be to help children
become adult. This is best done by teaching them
to confront reality, not to escape from it. When
well-meaning parents try to screen their children
from the outside world, they prevent them from
experiencing real life and so rob them of the
chance to map its ways.
Although it is necessary to talk to children,
the infinite patience some parents show in
providing endless explanations and humouring
even the most puerile utterances can actually
harm their offspring. It takes away their ability
to see reality in all its dimensions, leading them
to believe that life will always treat them with
kid gloves even when they are in the wrong.
Overprotectiveness can also deprive children
of a knowledge of the feel of things, giving them
instead a purely cerebral understanding of life. It
is one thing to know that certain things sting, but
quite another to have actually touched them and
been stung. Children of their own accord search
-p. ««'v-'- ;' ** \
for barriers and limits, which teach them just how
far they can go. If they do not find them, the dis¬
satisfaction caused by their absence will ulti¬
mately provoke a reaction.
Because our children no longer learn to come
to terms with the world, the sloughing off of
childhood that accompanies adolescence often
comes as an intolerable agony. The symptoms are
typically a deep depression mingled with cyni¬
cism and nihilism. It is as though adolescents were
exhibiting the hollowness of their own experience
of life for all the world to see. Having never been
touched by anything, they want to show that
nothing can touch them.
Adolescents of this type see the least sign of
opposition as violence against them. The raw
vitality of life is altogether too much for them.
Aware of an unfulfilled need, they thirst for a
love that will give a structure to their lives rather
than merely enveloping them, while also instinc¬
tively recoiling from any situation that might
expose them to the shock of the real. Caught
between aggression and melancholy, they no
longer have the strength to meet life head-on.
So social workers, doctors, psychologists and
psychoanalysts increasingly find themselves
dealing with a new kind of despair. Only this time
the young person's problems spring not from an
unhappy childhood but from a spoilt one.
33
