THE AMERICAN LABORATORY
BY RONALD CREAGH
26
A HE dream of a paradise on Earth is a persis¬
tent feature of the history of humanity. It has
inspired countless Utopian experiments in com¬
munity living in different parts of the world.
These attempts to create an ideal society have
aroused widespread scepticism and still do. Is
there not a contradiction inherent in trying to
bring to life the notion of a place which is by
definition located "nowhere"?
The function of utopia has been to incite
people to escape from history, to reject conven¬
tions and break away from the established order
of things. Subversive by nature, the idea of utopia
stretches the collective imagination beyond its
limits. This subversiveness distinguishes Utopian
communities from those modelled on the
dominant ideology of the society around them.
Perhaps more than any other country in the
world, the United States has been the setting for
a wide variety of experiments in community

Left, a village of the Amana
society or Community of True
Inspiration founded in Iowa
(USA) in the mid-19th century.
Above, a "Time Note", worth
five hours' labour. This form
of payment was introduced by
the Welsh social reformer
Robert Owen (1771-1858) for
trade in the National Equitable
Labour Exchanges which he
set up in several English
towns in 1832.
living. Both recent immigrants and long-time
Americans have participated in these Utopian
associations, most often in rural areas but some¬
times in towns and cities.
Utopianism and reality have been intertwined
in America ever since colonial times. In the seven¬
teenth century, William Penn founded a refuge
from religious intolerance in "Pennsylvania",
where he established a democratic form of
government. Penn represents a kind of transition
between English revolutionary thought and
American religious communitarianism. Visions
of an earthly paradise mingled with more prosaic
motivations in the conquest of new frontiers.
Two main trends, one religious and one
secular, can be distinguished in the rich history
of communal movements that has been a marked
feature of American history. The religious
impulse led to the quest for a heavenly Jerusalem.
Such groups as the Shakers (who have since dis¬
appeared), the Rappites and the Amish turned
their backs on the exploitation of the masses by
industry and rejected the worship of technology
and its amenities. The quest for a perfect life here
and now and the hope of establishing a Kingdom
of God on Earth characterized the thinking of
these groups in which myth and utopia were
mingled.
The pathway
to a new harmony
The second, parallel trend is not centred on the
supernatural, although its adherents have some¬
times used a religious vocabulary. These experi¬
ments in community living have been
rationalistic, and specifically designed to bring
about a political and economic regeneration.
A first crop of associations appeared during
the period of westwards expansion and lasted
until around 1860. Most of them had European
leaders who, like the prophets of old, hoped to
create a new people. The Welsh philanthropist,
socialist and former factory-owner Robert Owen
designed his New Harmony community in
Indiana as a prototype for future humanity and a
model for general application. Equally optimistic
intentions were expressed by the German tailor



Wilhelm Weitling and by the French and
American disciples of Charles Fourier and
Etienne Cabet.
A second flowering began almost a century
later, in the late 1950s. For the most part these
new associations claimed more modest aspirations
than their predecessors. They sought to escape
the constraints of city life, technocracy and the
state, and to combat psychological, economic and
political insecurity. These communities came in
so many shapes, sizes and styles and were often
so short-lived as to defy attempts at classification, 27

Above, the closing procession
at a meeting of the Shakers,
an American religious
community which reached its
peak In the mid- 19th century.
Left, Amish boys on their way
to school on homemade
scooters. Austerity and
opposition to modern
civilization are characteristics
of the Amish, a religious
group most of whose
members live in Pennsylvania
(USA).
. but they included urban collectives, co-operatives,
and communes.
Many of these projects were based on a redis¬
covery of subjectivity, of the individual's relation¬
ship with society, and of ecology. They were a
breeding ground for activism against the Viet
Nam war, the consumer society, environmental
pollution, and the marginalization of women and
homosexuals.
Between these two major explosions of
vitality there was an intermediary phase in which
socialist co-operatives and communities were
created by immigrants and anarchists fleeing
persecution in other countries. In these zones of
freedom a radical tradition was upheld, and all
forms of authoritarianism were rejected.
Modern Times
One of the most remarkable experiments of the
anarchist and libertarian movement was "Modern
Times", a community founded by Josiah Warren,
the father of American anarchist individualism.
An eccentric community that was the source of
28 some scandal in its time,- Modern Times was
RONALD CREAGH
is professor of American
civilization at the Université
Paul Valéry, Montpellier,
France. He is engaged on
research into utopias with
international groups, notably
with members of the
philosophy department of the
University of Rome. His
publications include
Laboratoires de l'utopie: les
communautés libertaires aux
Etats-Unis (Payot, Paris, 1983),
and a work in English on the
history of American anarchism
(Columbia University Press,
USA, forthcoming).
created in 1850, when Josiah Warren and his
Fourierist disciple Stephen Paul Andrews bought
a piece of land on Long Island, east of New York
City on the site of what is now the town of Brent¬
wood. Warren wanted to create a community
close enough to a big city for it to survive eco¬
nomically until it reached the ideal population
of 1,000 persons which would enable it to be self-
sufficient.
The sandy soil, covered with tough, dense
brushwood, was difficult to clear and required
expensive fertilizer to cultivate. Sparks from the
locomotive of the Long Island Railroad had
caused more than one forest fire, and hardly any
trees were left to provide protection from the
wind. Only wild animals lived on this desolate
tract of land.
Two years later, a community of neat little
cottages had been built. The site was divided into
forty-nine blocks by seven streets running from
north to south and seven avenues running from
east to west. The streets and avenues were wide
enough to give all the dwellings good access to
air and light. Land was sold at a fixed price to
anyone who wished to buy. No one was allowed
to purchase more than three plots.
Overlooking the private dwellings was a
square two-storey building which housed a forge,
a carpentry shop and a general store as well as
apartments. The hard-working and strictly
vegetarian inhabitants of Modern Times cleared
the brush to create vegetable gardens, and planted
pines to protect the town from the wind. In spite
of disappointments and setbacks, they were soon
producing enough fruit and vegetables to
exchange among themselves and feed the commu¬
nity. Apple and cherry trees were planted along
the main thoroughfares so that travellers passing

through could eat the fruit rather than having to
beg for food.
Newcomers to the community had to be able
to provide for themselves and to follow a trade
producing marketable goods, and so tailors, cob¬
blers, smiths, carpenters and other craftsmen were
invited to join. The community had its own
currencynotes which engaged the bearer to pay
others in hours of work. Bonuses were added for
the harder types of work. These "Time Notes"
were accepted in nearby villages, were unaffected
by the 1857 currency devaluation and were even
used to pay taxes. Due to all these factors, many
people who joined the community with modest
resources were soon able to purchase their own
homes.
The right to be different
Individualism was the rule, but the group was
interested in communal solutions to cost-cutting
and labour-saving as long as they respected
individual tastes and interests. Members of the
community enjoyed complete freedom of
opinion. Each woman was free to choose the
father of her children, and a ribbon on a girl's
finger indicated that she was "taken". Thus mar¬
riage was rarely legalized. This doctrine, which
was based on Fourier's theory of the affinities of
love, was responsible for the undeservedly scan-
' dalous reputation of Modern Times.
This original experiment encouraged
creativity and innovation among the commu¬
nity's members. Two of them introduced stenog¬
raphy into the United States. One family
developed safety belts to secure children in chairs
and carriages. Clark Orvis, who later perfected
the bicycle, invented an early form of self-service
restaurant.
The community's fame spread as far as
Russia, and the London-based leaders of the Inter¬
national Workers Association, including Karl
Marx, took an interest in its activities. Cabet,
Owen, Weitling, Auguste Comte and other well-
known social reformers studied Warren's theories,
as did the leaders of the American labour
movement.
The story goes that during the Civil War the
people of Modern Times sailed away to South
America in a little ship with white wings, but this
romantic story is only symbolically true. The
increasing population in the area around Modern
Times hastened the end of the experiment. Josiah
Warren went to live in Boston. For him the time
for experimentation was over. From then on he
devoted himself to expounding his theories.
The Modern Times experiment is striking for
its complete absence of dogmatism. The right to
be different made it possible for people to live as
they pleased and find fulfilment in their own
inventiveness and intellectual and spiritual pur¬
suits. It was an "open" utopia which through its
image of serenity and love of life gave new impetus
to the quest for freedom.
The futuristic city of Arcosanti
in the Arizona desert (USA) is
the brainchild of visionary
architect Paolo Soleri.
Construction began 20 years
ago.
29
