world heritage
The Jesuit missions to the Guarani
by Caroline Haardt
42
In the seventeenth century the
Jesuits organized a remarkable ex¬
periment in community living in the
homeland of the Guarani Indians, on
the borders of what are today Argen¬
tina, Brazil and Paraguay. The experi¬
ment, which was compared at the
time to Thomas More's Utopia, to the
design for a Utopian commonwealth
set forth by the Italian philosopher
Tommaso Campanella in his book
The City of the Sun, and even to
Plato's Republic, lasted for over a
century. It provoked admiration in
some quarters and indignation in
others, but no one who knew any¬
thing about the matter was in¬
different to it.
Attempts had been made to con¬
vert the Guarani to Christianity during
the sixteenth century, when the area
was being colonized by the Spaniards
and the Portuguese. The Society of
Jesus and other religious orders had
sent itinerant missionaries into the
Indian villages, where they preached
the Gospel before hastily retreating
back to the relative comfort of their
colleges. These attempts to convert
the Indians were a failure. Collective
baptisms and other sacramental rites
made no lasting change in their reli¬
gious beliefs. Idolatry continued to
be practised. The missions eventu¬
ally led to disguised forms of slavery
and encouraged abuses by European
colonists and rich creóles who ex¬
ploited the captive labour force.
The exploitation of the Indians,
combined with the weakness of the
religious orders, led to a crisis which
Francisco de Toledo, the Spanish
Viceroy of Peru, and the Jesuit
fathers determined to resolve.
In 1602, the Jesuits began to
replace the Itinerant missions by
founding villages in which the Indians
could be concentrated and taught
CAROLINE HAARDT,
French journalist, was a member of
Unesco's Division of Cultural Heritage
from 1983 to 1987. She is currently
preparing an exhibition as part of the
Unesco Silk Roads project on the
Croisière Jaune, a motor rally from
Beirut to Tibet held in 1931-1932.
Christian doctrine in a stable environ¬
ment. These villages became known
as reduccionesreductionssince
in them ad ecclesiam et vitam civilem
esse reducti ("people were to be led
to the church and to civic life"). The
first of them were established by the
Jesuits of the province of Paraguay.
It was no easy task to persuade the
Indians, who were strongly attached
to their homelands, to settle In the
reductions. The Jesuits realized that
they would have to create an environ¬
ment in which Guarani tribes from
different places could feel a sense of
ethnic and cultural unity. They chose
sites which could be easily defended,
with forests, streams and land that
could be farmed.
To the Indians, the missions
The Jesuit missions of San Ignacio Mini, Argentina (below);
Trinidad, Paraguay (opposite page above);
and Säo Miguel, Brazil (opposite page below).
offered a number of attractions-
dwellings, the opportunity to practise
trades and crafts, plenty of food
(above all the beef they loved) and
the beverage known as "Jesuit tea",
which was made from the maté plant
and which also served as currency.
Dances, theatre, music, processions
and military manoeuvres were other
blandishments that contributed to
the success of the Jesuit missions.
Each reduction was self-governing,
under the spiritual supervision of a
priest. The Jesuit fathers maintained
the powers of the traditional chiefs
or caciques, and each village also
had a calbido or council of notables.
Agricultural produce and objects
produced by craftsmen belonged to
the community. Each family received
the necessities of life. Any surplus
went to widows, to the sick, to the
church, or as taxes to the Spanish
Crown.
Each reduction specialized in a
particular activity, which was deter¬
mined by the resources available to
it. Some practised animal husbandry,
others cultivated maté or cotton, or
devoted themselves to carpentry or
working in precious metals.
"Right from the start, the Guarani
missions provoked envy. They were
violently attacked by bándeirantes,
adventurers and gold prospectors
from the Säo Paulo region of Brazil.
The most severe attacks took place
between 1628 and 1630, when
groups of Indians were captured and
taken into slavery. Eventually the in¬
cursions became so numerous that
the Jesuits moved the reductions
and established them between the
Uruguay and Paraná rivers (in what
is now Paraguay).
Furious to see the Indians slip out
of their grasp, the Spanish colonists,
and above all the encomenderos* of
Asunción, were also extremely
hostile to the missionary villages. In
the mid-seventeenth century, the
Jesuits asked the King of Spain for
permission to arm the reductions so
that they could defend themselves
against attack. Thus armed, they es¬
tablished thirty missions definitively:

WORK IN PROGRESS
In Argentina, to save the missions of Mártires, San Javier, Corpus,
San José and Candelaria, encroaching vegetation must be cleared,
stonework must be cleaned, and an infrastructure must be estab¬
lished to protect the ruins and prevent looting.
The other missions in Argentina are in a better condition, but
restoration and consolidation work is still necessary. The most
extensive work has been done at San Ignacio Mini, which has been
a major tourist attraction for the past 25 years, and is particularly
representative of the architecture of the missions (ornately deco¬
rated church walls and portals, high-walled Indian houses, a col¬
lege with ceramic flooring). Between 1978 and 1980, museums were
created in most of the missionary villages.
In Brazil excavation and restoration work is under way at the
three main sites: Sào Miguel, Sào Nicolau and Sào Lourenço. The
Brazilian government is trying to persuade the Sào Lourenço
authorities to close the road that runs through the mission and to
clear the vegetation that infests it. Excavations have led to impor¬
tant discoveries. At Säo Nicolau a remarkable wooden capital has
been unearthed.
Since the creation of a Historic, Artistic and National Heritage
Service, new impetus has been given to operations at Säo Miguel,
where there is an unusual church notable for its baroque façade
and porch, and its dressed stone structure supported by masonry
pillars. Only its timber roof is typical of the traditional architec¬
ture of the missions. The collapse of the porch led to subsidence
which has affected the façade and the tower. The latter has been
dismantled and rebuilt. Urgent measures are necessary to prevent
the rest of the church from collapsing.
In Paraguay, work began in 1976. The college of the San Ignacio
Guazú mission, which is still inhabited by Jesuit fathers, houses
a museum of sacred art. The magnificent collections of wood
carvings and engravings at San Ignacio and Santa Maria de Fe have
been meticulously restored. The chapel at Santa Rosa, with its
murals, carved doors and panels, is unique in Guarani missionary
art. The murals are currently being repaired.
At San Cosme y San Damián, which includes the only group
of buildings among the mission villages which has been continu¬
ously inhabited since the seventeenth century, the original wooden
structure of the chapel has been restored.
At Trinidad, major efforts have been made to clean the stone¬
work of the presbytery, repair the roof of the sacristy and consoli¬
date the structure of the college and the church. With its three naves,
tower, cupola covered with varnished tiles, and frieze of angelic
musicians which adorns the crossing of the transept and the choir,
the Trinidad church is doubtless the architectural masterwork of
the Jesuit missions. .
fifteen in Argentina, seven in Brazil,
and eight in what is now Paraguay.
They flourished, and some of them
comprised more than 6,000 Indians.
Architecturally speaking, the mis¬
sions differed from the Hispano-
American towns whose forms had
been defined by the Laws of the In¬
dies. They were designed for com¬
munity life. At the heart of the village
was a large square dominated by the
church, which was big enough to ac¬
commodate the entire population.
The priests' house, the college and
other ecclesiastical buildings stood
on one side of the square. On the
other was the cemetery. The Indians'
houses were built in rows around the
square.
The experiment came to a sudden
end in the second half of the eight¬
eenth century, partly as a result of
the new frontiers drawn by colonial
treaties between Spain and Portugal,
but above all because of the expul¬
sion of the Jesuits from the Spanish
and Portuguese dominions. The po¬
litical and religious autonomy of the
missions was seen as a threat to
Spanish imperial power, and the
Jesuits were replaced by lay adminis¬
trators and priests belonging to other
religious orders. The Indians were
dispersed. The reductions were
abandoned and fell into ruin.
* The encomienda was a colonial institution
whereby the Indians were divided into groups
and enlisted into the service of an encomen¬
dero, to whom they paid a tax and who was
obliged to protect them and convert them to
'Christianity. Editor
SAFEGUARDING SITES
IN 3 COUNTRIES
There are 15 missions in Argentina, 7 in Brazil, and 8 in Paraguay.
In recognition of the common origin of this cultural heritage, the
3 countries have decided to combine their efforts to restore it. The
missions were already partially protected by law in each country,
and the first task was to improve and extend this legislation.
Since 1972, Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay have been engaged,
in collaboration with Unesco, in a joint effort to establish a cul¬
tural tourist circuit and to restore the architecture of the missions.
In 1977, the Inter-American Development Bank financed a tourist
plan for the Iguaçu Falls region and the Jesuit missions. Thanks
to support from private bodies and international organizations such
as Unesco and the Organization of American States, restoration
and conservation work began in the 3 countries.
In 1978, in response to a request from the Argentine government,
supported by Brazil and Paraguay, a plan of action was drawjn up
for an international campaign to safeguard the missions.
In 1983, the Brazilian mission of Säo Miguel and the Argentine
missions of San Ignacio Mini, Santa Ana, Santa Maria la Mayor
and Nuestra Señora de Loreto were inscribed on Unesco's World
Heritage List.
On 3 November 1988, the Director-General of Unesco launched
an appeal to the international community on behalf of the Jesuit
missions to the Guarani. 43
