AND TIDE
The wonirws deep
The sea has always inspired a sense
of awe. Some peoples have
responded eagerly to its call, while
others have remained firmly attached
to the land. For desert peoples like
the Arabs it was a source of fear and
wonder; the Chinese, for all the
glorious chapters in their maritime
history, pursued their destiny
essentially on land. Many of the
world's cultures have risen from the
waves: Polynesian civilization was
propagated by some of the most
intrepid and skilful seafarers ever
known. The Greek sailors who ply
the seven seas today continue a
tradition which can be traced back to
Homeric times.
In classical times the seas of Islam represented
another world and, for the Arabs, who were the
sons of nomads and had lived on the land since
time immemorial, it was a dual world. At once
close and familiar when seen from the shore, it
became an object of terror when on all sides there
was nothing but water extending to the horizon.
Subject to laws beyond good and evil, the marine
world was considered to be situated at the very
edge of the habitable universe. There members
of the same species and indeed of the same family
tore one another to pieces and pursued each other
mercilessly. The Dadjal (the Antichrist) beat his
drums in the suffocating heat of bewitched
islands. Satan was not far. Perhaps, when all was
said and done, it was he who ruled beneath the
waters.
The earliest references to the sea in Arab
poetry reflect this hostile world, beyond the
compass of the human mind. The poet Al
Muhalhil issued a warning which was to become
the leitmotiv of relations between the Arab imagi¬
nation and the sea: "Setting sail on the sea
without taking care/Is a sure way of courting
disaster."
For the early Arab poets the sea was also the
supreme symbol of strength and power. The pre-
Islamic poet Malik Ibn Nuweyra describes an
attack made by his tribe against an enemy camp
in the following terms: "They saw us arrive with
the first dawn rays/More ruinous yet than the
foaming seas". And Antara Ibn Shaddad
recounting a battle enjoins: "Question them as
to my valour/When the tribes of Kalb, of Ghaniy
and Amir/Came crashing down like waves. . . ."
The advent of Islam hardly affected the Arab
image of the sea. It is often described in the
Qur'an as an emblem of divine power or benevo¬
lence and the sea in fury is seen as denoting the
Apocalypse: "When heaven is split open, when
the stars are scattered, when the seas swarm
over. . . ." (Surat 82, verses 1 to 3); "When the
sun shall be darkened, when the stars shall be
thrown down . . . when the seas shall be set
boiling. . . ." (Surat 81, verses 1, 2 and 5).
The waves (Mawdj, Amwadj) are an image
of extreme danger. The Arabic root "M.W.DJ."
covers a semantic field dominated by ideas of
imbalance, upheaval, agitation, turmoil and
storm. The term crops up many times in the
Qur'an: "And when waves cover them like
shadows, they call upon God . . ." (Surat 31, verse
32); "And waves come on them from every side,

by Rachid kbbaghi
Detail from a map by the
Persian scholar al-lstakhrl.
and they think they are encompassed; they call
upon God ... : 'If Thou deliverest us from these,
surely we shall be among the thankful' " (Surat
10, verse 22).
The Hadith (the words of the Prophet) sound
the same note: "He who takes to the sea in
stormy weather has only himself to blame".
TRAVELLERS AND
STORYTELLERS
The Arabs were not seafarers, even though their
early traditions reveal some familiarity with the
world of the sea and the Qur'an evokes the
dangers and riches of the ocean to illustrate the
power and bounteousness of God. The Prophet's
tribe, the Quraysh, no doubt already had sea links
with Abyssinia via the Red Sea. But, as scholars
such as W. Barthold and G. Hourani have shown,
there appears to be little doubt that they did not
have any ships of their own. They were, for
example, incapable of going after fugitives who
took to the sea. When the Empire was founded,
the Arabs had to rely on the knowledge of the
Egyptian Copts to establish their first naval fleet
in the Mediterranean.
However, until the Ottomans came to power
the Mediterranean was considered to be of only
marginal interest and held by the Caliphate to
be not directly relevant to its ambitions. The
Arabs had their first real experience of the sea
in the Great Eastern Sea (AI Bahr Sharqui Al
Kabir), that part of the Indian Ocean which
extends from the coast of India to East Africa,
including its two branches formed by the Gulf
and the Red Sea. The most notable contribution
made by Arab navigators and geographers related
to knowledge of this sea.
The Arabs had from very early times acted
as middlemen in the far-flung trade between the
East (India, China, Ceylon, Java) and the West
(Egypt, Syria, Rome). However, after Baghdad
had been founded (762 AD) and the ports of Basra
and Siraf had been developed, they started to
trade on their own account, from Hang-chou in
the Far East to Sofala on the east coast of Africa.
Those who first taught the Arabs seamanship
were doubtless the Persians who under the
Sasanids had formed a true maritime aristocracy
all around the western part of that same Great
Eastern Sea.
By the ninth century, when the Abbasids
were at the height of their power, the Arabs had
fully mastered and perhaps progressed beyond the
available stock of knowledge about the sea. Their
navigators had by then acquired a fairly rigorous
understanding of monsoons and winds. They no
longer made do with plying up and down the
coast but sailed directly from the Arabian coast
to the confines of the Indian peninsula; the straits
lying between the Gulf and the China Sea were
well known to them. Similarly, black Africa was
no longer altogether a terra incognita; their ships
sailed from Aden in East Africa all the way to
Sofala (or Sofalat al Zindj as it was known to
Arab geographers). They also plied the Red Sea,
the Mediterranean, the Caspian Sea, the Black Sea
and a number of navigable rivers like the Nile
and the Indus. 17

The Roc bird saves a
shipwrecked sailor.
Illustration from a
16th-century manuscript of
the Booh of Wonders, by the
great 13th-century Islamic
scholar al-Tusl.
18
The widespread use of nautical charts (Rah-
manis) and manuals (Dafatirs) dates from this



period. In his The Meadows ofGold and Mines of
Gems, Mas'udi, the great tenth-century ency¬
clopaedist and traveller, gives the names of a large
number of Nakhuda (ship captains) and specialists
on the Indian Ocean with whom he was per¬
sonally acquainted. It was also a golden age for
sea literature, travellers' tales and descriptions of
wondrous things ("Mirabilia") in which the sea
had a central part. Few have survived. One of the
earliest travellers' tales is that attributed to the
merchant Suleyman, who made several journeys
to India and China and described his impressions
of the countries he visited and the peoples he
encountered in his Akhbar Al-Sin wa Al Hind
(Account of China and India).
Another interesting author of that period is
Buzurg ibn Shahriyar. Himself a ship captain, in
around 953 AD he compiled an anthology of tales
of the sea entitled Kitab Adja'ib Al Hind which
contains several curious stories about the adven¬
tures of sailors in the East Indies and other parts
of the Indian Ocean. Intended for the common
reader, mingling actual experience and fiction,
Buzurg's tales largely belong to the genre known
as "Adj'aib" ("Mirabilia") which was much in
vogue at the time.
The Thousand and One Nights, the first com¬
pilations of which, according to the specialists,
date from the ninth century, contain a number
of tales centring on the sea, including the famous
"Adventures of Sindbad the Sailor". The Egyp¬
tian oceanographer and man of letters Hussein
Fawzi has shown, in a splendidly erudite book
(Le discours de Sindbad l'ancien, 1942), the distinc¬
tively Arab qualities of this story and its inter-
textual references to contemporary Arab mari¬
time literature, making it a kind of bible of nau¬
tical knowledge for that period.
THE WAY OF WONDERS
What were Muslim Arab navigators and traders
looking for in such far-off lands as Japan and
Madagascar? The "wondrous" merchandise with
which, according to travellers and geographers,
those countries abounded, ranging from silk in
China to ebony in the Wak-Wak islands (Borneo, .
the Philippines), from topazes and rubies in
Sirandib (Ceylon) to tin in the peninsula of
Malacca. As commonplace as such goods may
seem today, for travellers at that time they were
fabulous treasures, full of enchantment and magic.
Many passages in the Thousand and One
Nights bear witness to this. But Sindbad also
travels in quest of knowledge, roused by the call
of distant lands, the lure of the unknown, the
mystery of otherness.
The Indian Ocean which was the doorway
to these lands of plenty was also swarming with
Bawaridj, the pirate ships that plied its waters,
and its islands were inhabited by cannibals. We
are told by the author of the Summary of Wonders
that "To the right of the island of Kalah lies the
island of Balus. Its inhabitants eat human flesh",
while in the words of al-Idrisi, "The denizens of
this island (Bakus) are black and go naked. . . .
Should a foreigner chance upon them, they hang
him up by the feet, cut him into pieces and eat
him. . . . Their speech is incomprehensible".
The skies above this sea are sometimes dar¬
kened by the open wings of huge birds known
as Rukh or Anka (Pheng to the Chinese and
Simorg to the Persians). According to al-Kazwini,
"The Anka is the largest bird there is. It hunts
elephants, whales and dragons. When it flies, its
wings make a noise like a torrent. When it spreads
its wings, the sun is hidden and the sky is
darkened".
Travellers of the period tell us of other sea
monsters that infested the depths of the Great
Eastern Sea. Some were so big that "from head
to tail is a four-month voyage". From afar the

giant turtles resembled islands. A merchant left
the following eye-witness account: "We found in
the middle of the sea an island on which grass
grew protruding from the water. We landed and
prepared to eat. The island started to move. The
sailors shouted 'Back to the ship! Back to the ship!
It's a turtle, awakened by the fire for the meal.
. . . Back to the ship before it plunges beneath
the water!'
On the Wak-Wak islands strange trees were
said to grow whose fruit took the form of women
which died a few hours after being picked but
not before providing the famished traveller with
intense and mysterious pleasures: "On these
islands there are trees which bear as their fruit
The talking tree on the
enchanted Island. Miniature
from a manuscript of the
Shah-Nama ("Book of Kings"),
a masterpiece of Persian
literature.
women hanging by the hair. . . . Some travellers
have seen very beautiful ones. If they are picked
by cutting properly the roots of their hair
attaching them to the tree, they can live for
several days. The travellers experienced in their
arms a happiness that can be compared with no
other". Such is the description given of the Wak-
Wak islands by Ibn al Wardi in his Book of
Wonders. Other strange phenomena were reported
by travellers and geographers of the period:
dwarfs that would come out of the sea, climb on
board ships, spend the night there and then go
off without saying or doing anything, which for
sailors at the time meant that the most terrible
of the sea winds, the Khub, was impending: the
RACHID SABBAGHI,
Moroccan writer and journalist,
is the author of an essay on
20th-century French
philosophy which will shortly
be published in Arabic. He is
also preparing a study on
French travellers in Morocco,
which will appear (in French) in
1992.
19

famous white cloud which, on coming into con¬
tact with the waves, caused them to boil and roar
like a tornado; the hole in the sea, known as
Durdur, which carried ships away into the abyss;
and magnetic mountains that drew boats towards'
them and broke them to pieces. . . .
A source of profit and of fear, able to pro¬
vide man with fabulous riches and to inspire in
him unspeakable terror, dispensing life and death,
the sea is unfathomable. Man barely scratches its
immeasurable surface. But, like everything that
exists, it is subject to divine lawthe ultimate
guarantee that the world has a meaning, and it
was this law that travellers, geographers and cos-
mographers always thought they were obeying
when they embarked on their journeys. In so
doing, they were bringing their intelligence to
bear on the visible signs of creation, trusting in
the benevolence of God to take care of everything
that exceeded the bounds set by Him upon that
intelligence.
