No room in the M by Bernd von Droste
The destruction of natural ecosystems and the extinction of plant and animal species
is becoming one of the crucial factors limiting economic growth'
'TAh
36
Lhe scale of the human economy has grown
so large that there is no longer sufficient room
for all species in the Ark." These recent words
from a World Bank official are a striking warning
that the world is becoming so full of human
beings and their socio-economic systems that
other, often priceless, irreplaceable species and
their natural systems are being displaced and des¬
troyed at a rate never before experienced. The
human population of the world is now projected
to double within thirty-nine years, from five bil¬
lion to ten billion, but the issue is not just
numbers, but how those numbers relate to avail¬
able resources. The destruction of natural
ecosystems and the resulting extinction of plant
and animal species is becoming one of the cru¬
cial factors limiting economic growth. Indeed, the
diversity of life on Earth is being rapidly
diminished as uniform production systems
replace cultural and natural diversity.
The diversity of species, however, is essen¬
tial to the normal functioning of ecosystems and
therefore to the biosphere as a whole. Apart from
the moral, cultural, aesthetic and purely scientific
reasons for conserving wild species, the genetic
material they supply already makes a huge con¬
tribution to the world economy in the form of
improved crop species, new drugs and medicines
and raw materials for industry. It also promises
to become even more important in the future as
our understanding of genetic processes is steadily
increasing.
Economic logic tells us that we ought to max¬
imize the productivity of the scarcest factors and
try to increase their supply. Economic policy
should be directed towards the conservation of
remaining natural stocks, increasing their sus¬
tainable use and, where still possible, restoring
lost natural assets. In other words, we need to
undertake a huge programme of investment in
biological diversity.
Three kinds of investment are needed: first,
scientific investment for enlarging our knowledge
base; second, investment in the sound manage¬
ment and restoration of our often degraded
natural heritage; and third, investment in inter¬
national instruments for world conservation of
biodiversity.
INVESTMENT IN
THE KNOWLEDGE BASE
Lack of knowledge is a major obstacle to the con¬
servation of biological diversity. What better illus¬
tration of our lack of knowledge than the widely
different estimates of the present number of living
speciesthey range from three million to one
hundred millionto be found in scientific litera¬
ture? Even less is known about the interaction
of species, the precise role of species diversity, or
how to achieve sustainable development in sen¬
sitive, species-rich areas.
It is often assumed that the establishment of
a system of protected areas will fulfil conserva¬
tion needs. The fact is, however, that we do not
have species inventories for most protected areas
Right, Noah's Ark
(1978), a photomontage
by the Japanese artist
Tsunehisa Kimura.
Elephants in Kenya's Amboseli
National Park.

and even less so outside them. We therefore do
not even know what we are aiming to conserve
or which areas to concentrate on. Under¬
investment over past decades in taxonomic
training and research, as well as in surveys of bio¬
logical diversity, means that we simply cannot
complete a world inventory of biota within the
foreseeable future. At the very best, it is estimated
that only some 10 to 15 per cent of all species
have been identified so far.
A start has been made. The International
Union of Biological Sciences (IUBS) and the
Scientific Committee on Problems of the
Environment (SCOPE), in conjunction with
UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere (MAB)
Programme, are preparing a large research
programme on biological diversity. A series of
meetings is being arranged to lay down a basis
for international comparative research relating to
the three main levels of biodiversityat the
molecular and cellular level, at the organism and
population level and at the ecosystem and land¬
scape level. MAB has also launched a co-operative
research and training programme with the Smith¬
sonian Institution to help train taxonomists and
to undertake biological surveys in the tropics.
It is in the tropics, and in particular the
world's remaining tropical forests, that the big¬
gest effort to achieve sustainable development is
needed. Already 55 per cent of the world's trop¬
ical forests, the planet's richest species habitat,
have been destroyed, yet hardly any studies have
been carried out on the relationship between
forest destruction and species loss.
Given their crucial role in the conservation
of biological diversity, it is essential to establish
a scientific basis for the sustainable development
of tropical forests. With this in mind, MAB has
joined in international efforts to develop sus¬
tainable tropical forest management regimes. To
achieve this, MAB is applying the "critical mass
strategy".
The "critical mass strategy" offers a way of
convincing developers that the sum of sustainable
activities can exceed the profits obtainable from
the sum of non-sustainable activities. It is a
strategy which requires making full use of the
range of products and resources that tropical
forests can provide. Major components of this
strategy include:
new logging and extraction techniques, such as
the use of newly-designed airships for timber
hauling;
expansion in the use of non-timber products,
including the introduction of food species such
as gaur cattle, mouse deer and chestnuts;
the development of nature tourism.
INVESTMENT
IN THE NATURAL
HERITAGE
The problem of protecting the natural heritage,
and thus of maintaining biodiversity, is particu¬
larly difficult in developing countries. How can
;1JIuHp»í*_£_^ji
- ,.
.'gv-reforat
t
A Tunisian poster urging
farmers to plough along
contour lines in order to
prevent soil and water loss.
37

in situ conservation of genetic resources be
achieved in the interest of mankind as a whole
and of future generations when the rural poor
have few means of satisfying their basic needs
other than to exploit the last intact wild lands?
In 1987, the report of the World Commis¬
sion on Environment and Development, often
referred to as the Brundtland Commission, urged
the establishment of more non-conventional pro¬
tected areas, along the lines of the international
network of Biosphere Reserves established by
MAB over the past fifteen years and consisting
of 300 protected areas in seventy-five countries.
Biosphere Reserves consist of a central "core"
area set aside for strict genetic resource conser¬
vation and monitoring, and an outer "buffer"
zone in which only restricted exploitation is
38
permitted. In most developing countries, interna¬
tional assistance in achieving sustainable develop¬
ment in a buffer zone or other mechanisms for
transfer of material benefits have to be mobilized
as a compensation for non-use of core areas. This
often involves considerable investment of human
and other resources to enhance productivity and
to improve local services such as health care and
education.
Environmental awareness and education
programmes are essential if the Biosphere Reserve
concept is to obtain the full participation and sup¬
port of the local population.
INVESTING
IN INSTITUTIONAL
INNOVATION
There is an urgent need for institutional innova¬
tion, that is, for the adoption of effective inter¬
national legal instruments for the protection of
the global commonsthose features of the planet
that are of universal interest, such as the
atmosphere, the oceans and the diversity of spe¬
cies. These innovative instruments should lead to
responsible world governance and greater
solidarity and equity. Among innovative concepts
and instruments to emerge during recent years
are the World Heritage Convention, debt-for-
Above: the extinct crater of
Ngorongoro (United Republic
of Tanzania) is one of the
world's vastest reserves of
animal life.
Left: crops are grown on
reclaimed desert land in
Egypt.
BERND VON DROSTE
is director of UNESCO's
Division of Ecological Sciences,
secretary of the Programme
on Man and the Biosphere
(MAB), and secretary for the
natural heritage component of
the World Heritage Convention.
He is publishing director of
UNESCO's quarterly Nature
and Resources and the author
of more than 80 scientific
articles.
.-
nature swaps and the Global Environment
Facility.
In 1972, faced with the increasing threat to
humanity's cultural and natural heritage, UNESCO
led the way to the establishment of the World
Heritage Convention. The Convention is innova¬
tive in several respects. First, it links what were
traditionally regarded as two quite different fields
protection of both the cultural and the
natural heritage. Second, it achieved a conceptual
breakthrough by recognizing that there are cul¬
tural and natural properties of such outstanding
or unique value that they are truly part of the
heritage not only of individual nations but of all
mankind. Third, it has established a World
Heritage Fund made up of contributions by States
Parties to the Convention to be used for the pro¬
tection of the world heritage. Today, having been
adopted by 115 States, the World Heritage Con¬
vention is the world's most universal international
legal instrument for conservation, with 337
properties inscribed on the World Heritage List.
Debt-for-nature exchanges (or swaps) are
another way of investing in conservation and sus¬
tainable development. The roots of the
mechanism lie in Third World debts that can be
bought at a discount on the international debt
market. The first swap was made by Conserva¬
tion International to help develop the Beni
Biosphere Reserve in Bolivia.
By mid-1991, some $16 million had been
invested by industrialized nations and conserva¬
tion groups in purchases of Third World debts
with a face value of almost $100 million. These
have subsequently been exchanged for sustainable
development funds and bonds to the value of

The first Earth Summit
about $60 million to support various conserva¬
tion and development programmes in a dozen
countries.
Established by the World Bank, the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and
the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), with funding of $1.5 billion, the Global
Environment Facility is the latest innovative con¬
servation initiative. Its funds are to be used for
the reduction of greenhouse gas emission, con¬
servation of biological diversity, protection of
international water resources and protection of
the ozone layer.
MEETING FUTURE NEEDS
The international conventions and funding
mechanisms mentioned above constitute an
important advance in the financing of biological
diversity conservation; but far more funds and
innovative instruments are needed. The capital
for conservation investment could be mobilized
through new forms of international solidarity,
such as the replacement of military expenditure
by investment in environmental safeguards.
Global taxes on the production and consumption
of environment-damaging goods could also be
introduced.
A major breakthrough would be the estab¬
lishment of a global fund under a convention for
the protection of the atmosphere, based on taxes
on carbon release or the emission of greenhouse
gases. With the help of such a fund more sus¬
tainable patterns of energy use could be achieved
and the costs of environmental protection and
repair, including the protection of biological
diversity, could be more equitably shared.
