The Arabized Christians of Spain
tn)  t'0 CM/tMnM   ?
intermediaries between two worlds
w
WHO were the Mozarabs and what contribu-
tion did they make to Andalusian civilization ?
In its strict sense the term Mozarab, which only
appeared in the eleventh century, designates an
Arabized Christian, but it is more widely used
to designate the Christians of the Iberian penin-
sula who lived under Islamic domination.
The result of a complex process of rejection
of and assimilation with the dominant society and
culture, the Mozarabic community was far from
homogeneous. The " real " Mozarabs were people
who were more or less profoundly assimilated.
The status of the Christians of aI-AndaIus
depended on their initial attitudes to the Invader.
Many of them came to terms with the latter and
carved out Christian enclaves in the newly
Muslim lands. The people of cities such as
Coimbra and Santarem, which did not offer
resistance to the Invader, were spared and kept
their prerogatives. Those which did resist some-
times paid a heavy price.
Once the lands were divided among the
different groups of conquerors, the Christians
were allowed to enjoy their land and liberty In
exchange for tribute in the form of a land-tax,
the jarach, and a poll-tax, the djizia. These tributes
became more onerous as time went by and other
exceptional forms of taxation were added to
them, provoking violent outbreaks of social dis-
content.
Like the Jews, the other people of the Book,
the Christians were allowed to keep their laws,
to retain and when the case arose to choose their
civic and religious leaders, and to practise their
religion freely. At first new monasteries were
built In Cordoba as guardians of the Christian
tradition and centres of culture where Latin
remained alive. It was only later that discrimina-
Moses bars the Egyptians
from crossing the Red Sea.
Miniature froma 10th-century
Mozarabic Bible pr served in
Leon (Spain).
tory measures appeared, such as the duty of
wearing distinctive garments and the refusal of
permission to build new places of worship.
Assimilation
and martyrdom
No statistics are available with which to trace the
course of the Islamization of the peninsula.
Doubtless this came about in stages, starting with
the rural areas where Christianization was not
deeply rooted. The practice of mixed marriages
and the close neighbourly links which were estab-
lished between peasant communities led in the
long run to a natural erosion of Christianity.
32

Where Christianity did survive, It sometimes
took unorthodox forms. The Mozarabs were
attracted by certain heresies uch as adoptianism
which, by denying the divinity of Christ, seemed
to bear some resemblance to Islam. Christianity,
even in its dogmatic version, eventually assimilated
certain Islamic practices such as circumcision,
food taboos and even, surreptitiously, bigamy.
Assimilation also took place in the other
direction. The Muslims, while remaining faithful
to their religion, came to take part in the main
Christian festivals. Language played a decisive
role in this process of intermingling. While
Mozarabic, a Romance language, was widely
spoken (it was even used at court and in the
administration), and used in folk literature,
Arabic was adopted by the Christians as the lan-
guage of culture.
In the Arab-Andalusian melting-pot, Arabi-
zation was thus a factor of integration, the course
of which was not, however, entirely smooth. In
the ninth century, a group of Mozarabs who were
partly Arabized but remained profoundly
attached to their Christian and Visigothic roots,
were willing to sacrifice their lives in order to
preserve their identity. Most of these candidates
for voluntary martyrdom were the offspring of
mixed unions, and were thus in the eyes of society
Muslims. By making the supreme sacrifice, they
wished to denounce the attitudes of other Chris-
tians whom they considered to be too lukewarm
and assimilated. Because they feared reprisals,
many Mozarabs then preferred to convert to
Islam whilst others, wishing to keep their Chris-
tian faith, chose to take the path of exile towards
the Christian lands in the north of the peninsula.
In the tenth century, when the Cordoba
caliphate was at the height of Its splendour, a
period of peace opened for the Mozarabs. To turn
their talents to full account, some of them drew
on their dual cultural affiliations. The Calendar
of Cordoba by Recemundo (Ibn Zaid), a man of
a great culture, as versed in Latin as he was In
Arabic, and a skilful diplomat at the court of Otto
I (953), founder of the Holy Germanic Roman
Empire, bears witness to this juxtaposition of the
two Andalusian cultures, Latin-Christian and
Arab-Muslim.
This almanach, incorporating meteorological
and agronomic information and a calendar of the
festivals of Christian saints which even notes the
places where they were celebrated, is written both
in Arabic (but in Hebrew characters) and In
Latin.
Translators and commentators
The trilingualism of the Mozarabs qualified them
as translators who could build a bridge between a
Western, European culture and an Oriental cul-
ture. Among the sumptuous gifts offered to
Caliph'Abd aI-Rahman HI by the Byzantine
emperor was a manuscript of the. Historiarum
<A'M<Mg<M Z. ! n W7by the Christian writer
Orosius, a contemporary of St. Augustine. Trans-
lated into Arabic by a Mozarab, this work became
immensely popular. It enabled the Arabs to learn 33

A miniature from the Cantlgas
de Santa Mana, an anthology
of pious ongs in honour of
the Virgin, made by Alfonso X
the Wise (1221-1284).
Be) ow, acast nd engraved
bronze wer in the form of a
peacock (12th century). A
bilingual Inscription preceded
by a cross is engraved on the
bird's crop. it reads (in
Arabic) work of the servant of
the ChftsNan Mng and (in
Latin) work of Salomon (a
Latin form of Suiayman).
ROSA 6UERRE) RO
is a medievalist of joint
Brazilian d Swiss nationality.
A former assistant lecturer at
the history department of he
University of Geneva, she is
currently preparing a doctoral
thesis t the University of Paris
IV-Sorbonne. She has written a
number of papers on cultural
and spiritual life in the Iberian
peninsula during the early
Middle Ages.
about the Greco-Roman past and inspired some
of them to see in Arab-Andalusian history the
natural prolongation of Hispano-Christian and
Visigothic history.
The Mozarabs were not only translators but
also brilliant commentators in Arabic who con-
tributed to the transmission of Visigothic culture.
The Etymologiae, a summary of all the sacred and
profane knowledge of his time by Isidore of
Seville (sixth-seventh century), the last Father of
the Western Church, circulated with extensive
commentaries in Arabic, into which some parts
of it were even translated.
Among the Mozarabs in fact Latin seems to
have lost its traditional role as the vehicle of
knowledge and the liturgical language. Parts of
the Bible were translated early on into Arabic,
as were the canonical texts, accompanied by com-
mentaries in Arabic to guide the thoughts of
Christians, who were increasingly attracted by
Arabic literature.
The scriptures in Arabic were not only read
by Arabized Christians. Arab-Andalusian writers
of such stature as the eleventh-century theologian,
historian and poet Ibn Hazm, reveal a profound
knowledge of the Bible in works which were
written, admittedly, in order to refute the prin-
ciples of Christianity.
To sum up, it might be said that, over and
above the movements of attraction and rejection
which punctuated the coexistence between the
two communities, in the tenth century the Arab-
Andalusians assumed their Hispanic identity and
the Mozarabs their Arab identity, while con-
tinuing to respect their respective religions. This
was no small achievement in a world and at a time
when the tendency was for different peoples and
confessions to be locked in mutual ignorance and
attracted to mutual destruction, t
34
