The Blue Plan for the Mediterranean
by Michel Bâtisse
X or us human beings the ocean is an alien
environment where there are no familiar fea¬
tures to help us get our bearings, a place of
which we still know little. Sometimes we over¬
estimate its wealth, sometimes we neglect its
importance. We behave as if the oceans can
absorb anything, and do not suspect that they
play a crucial role in the regulation of climate.
We think that there are unlimited stocks of
fish, whereas in reality world fishing has
already reached saturation point. Where the
sea is concerned, we seem to find it hard to
distinguish myth from reality. . . .
These contradictions between what we
believe and what is true, between what we
want and what is possible, are nowhere more
apparent than in the Mediterranean, that "sea
in the midst of land", the cradle and crossroads
of ancient civilizations, which is today pointed
to as an example of pollution and degradation.
What are the facts, and what does the future
hold for these shores "where the orange tree
blossoms"?
Since 1976, political and economic differ¬
ences notwithstanding, all the Mediterranean
countries have been co-operating within the
framework of the Barcelona Convention to
protect their common sea from pollution. The
Mediterranean is a closed sea, without big
tides, and accidents like those involving the
Amoco Cadiz off Brittany in 1978 or the Exxon
Valdez off Alaska in 1989 could have disas¬
trous consequences for the historic cities on
its shores, for its beaches, for its tourist and
port facilities, and for the fragile economy of
its coastal regions. A small oil slick which
recently appeared off Genoa caused conster¬
nation on the Italian and French rivieras.
"Integrated coastal management comes up against
administrative compartmentalizatlon."
72
Naturally enough, co-operation between
the Mediterranean countries focused initially
on risks of oil spills and the discharge of toxic
wastes and other pollutants. However it soon
became clear that the harm being done to the
sea originated mainly from the landfrom the
coast, from rivers, and from the atmosphere.
Contrary to what is often said, the main
sources of offshore pollution in the Mediter¬
ranean are plastic bags, lumps of tar and occa¬
sional algae blooms produced by nutrient-rich
agricultural fertilizer. On the coast, however,
the situation varies widely. On the one hand
there are sparsely populated areas which are
still very clean; on the other there are zones
where considerable chemical and bacteriolog¬
ical pollution is caused by urban, industrial
and agricultural wastes. It is on the coastal
regions of the Mediterranean countries that
human activities are focused and where all
kinds of pressures are created.
The Mediterranean basin, whether consi¬
dered in its totality or in terms of individual
countries, provinces and sites, behaves as a
"system" whose components act and react
together. Any attempt to understand the
present and possible future situation of the
Mediterranean has to be based on an analysis
of the system and its possible futures. Any
action which affects only one or another of
the components of the system and ignores the
overt or covert links between them runs the
risk of failure. It may, for instance, be futile
to try to attract more tourists to a stretch of
coast where the necessary water resources are
not available, or if a polluting industry is
created nearby.
The Mediterranean countries decided to
produce a system-based and future-oriented
study which would help them to understand
the nature and extent of current developments

and to make sound policy decisions. This tool
is the Blue Plan. In it population is regarded
as the primary component in the Mediterra¬
nean system, for it is people who, by their
number, age, needs, aspirations and move¬
ments, are the dominant factor of change since
they act directly, both quantitatively and
qualitatively, on all the other components of
the systemagriculture, industry, energy,
tourism, transport, soils, forests, continental
waters, the coastal areas and the sea itself.
Scenarios for the future
In the Blue Plan, a number of scenarios have
been constructed for the Mediterranean
system until the year 2025. They are based on
coherent sets of hypotheses relating to demo¬
graphic change, to types of development and
the growth rates that result from them, to
environmental policies, and to levels of co¬
operation between the northern and southern
Mediterranean countries.
Of course these scenarios do not claim to
predict the future, which will doubtless emerge
from the course of history as erratically as it
always has. But they aim to show what may
happen in the logic of things, depending on
Fishermen are depicted
on this mosaic from the ancient city of Utica,
Tunisia (4th century AD).
whether or not certain conditions exist. Two
types of scenario have been constructed: so-
called "trend" scenarios which, to a greater
or lesser degree, prolong observable current
developments in different parts of the system;
and "alternative" scenarios which depart con¬
siderably from current developments, pay
more attention to the environment, and are
based on far more effective economic and tech¬
nical co-operation between the countries of
the northern shores of the Mediterranean and
those of the south and east. The latter coun¬
tries are and will be in a far more difficult posi¬
tion than those of the north. The population
of their Mediterranean coastal regions may rise
from 60 million today to somewhere between
100 and 130 million in the year 2025, whereas
population in the northern countries may
only rise from 80 to 90 million at most. Popu¬
lation growth alone would create a parallel
growth in needs, with major socio-economic
and environmental consequences.
The results of the different scenarios of the
Blue Plan are too complex to be summarized
in a few lines. It is clear however that the trend
scenarios describe situations which it is hard
to accept from either an ecological or an eco¬
nomic point of view. They suggest the whole¬
sale destruction of coastal landscapes by ram¬
pant urbanization, increased pollution,
damage to the terrestrial and marine environ¬
ment, and a marked deterioration in living
conditions in the countries of the south. The
figures are alarming. To take but one example,
between now and 2025, an average of one
power station would have to be built every
twenty kilometres from the coast of Morocco
to that of Turkey.
The alternative scenarios are of course
more acceptable, even if they are based on the
supposition that major difficulties will have
been overcome. The most obvious of these
difficulties concerns the radical change in poli¬
cies implicit in the channelling of massive aid
from north to south. At the same time there
would have to be a real change in attitudes,
both in the north and in the south, towards
the environment and the consumption of
resources. Perhaps the rarest of these resources
is fresh water, whose scarcity imposes con¬
siderable limitations on development in many
Mediterranean countries, and which will have
to be economically and rigorously managed. 73

74
The most threatened resource, however,
is the coastline itself. It is there that the most
serious conflicts arise about land use. I would
cite one example to illustrate the importance
of the choices which will have to be made. By
the beginning of the next century, almost all
the Mediterranean countries will have to
import much of their food. To obtain the
necessary foreign currency, their most pre¬
cious capital will in many cases be a natural
and cultural heritage which is concentrated on
the coast. Depending on the scenario, these
areas may be visited by between 125 and 190
million foreign tourists each year from Europe
or elsewhere. But the coast will not attract
tourists if it is blighted by anarchic building
and infrastructure development and by all
kinds of pollution on land, on the beaches and
at sea. There are other places where tourists
can go.



Priority to the coast
If the idea of "saving" the Mediterranean is
to make any sense at all, it is essential that the
coastline be properly managed. All the com¬
ponents of the "coastal system" must be taken
into account, both on land (controlled urban
development, wastewater treatment, agricul¬
ture without excessive discharge of fertilizers
and pesticides, respect for productive land,
appropriately sited industries and clean tech¬
nologies, the control of air and water-polluting
emissions at source, the development of
highways and airports in the hinterland, the
conservation of forests and humid zones) and
at sea (the development of ports with debal-
lasting facilities for ships, control of dredging
and waste disposal, the disposal of wastewater
offshore, limitations on marina development,
the protection of aquatic plant life and the
seabed, regulation of fishing).
Unfortunately, there is no tradition of
integrated coastal management of this kind.
In most countries matters concerning the land
and those concerning the sea are handled by
different parts of the administrative system.
MICHEL BATISSE,
French engineer and physicist, is internationally
known for his work on the environment and
natural resources. Currently a consultant with
UNESCO and the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), he has headed the Blue Plan
Regional Activity Centre for the Mediterranean at
Sophia Antipolis, France, since it was created
in 1985.
Integrated management conflicts with cor¬
poratism, private interests and administrative
compartmentalization. However, there is
reason to react, and all those of us who are
interested in the sea or go to the seaside can
do something to help.
The Blue Plan for the Mediterranean
shows both the limits and the possibilities of
protecting the shoreline. It also shows that
other blue plans could be useful for the future
of other regions. By the very nature of the
problems that exist therebetween north and
south, between the environment and develop¬
ment, between land and seathe Mediterra¬
nean basin is a truly representative microcosm
of the planet as a whole.
This region has seen a succession of rich
and varied civilizations: Egyptians and Phoe¬
nicians, Greeks and Hittites, Romans and Car¬
thaginians, Arabs and Franks, the Italian
Renaissance, the rise of the modern world. It
was doubtless right and proper that it should
break new ground in reflecting on the future.
But now it must vigorously continue the
action it has begun so that its future will be
worthy of its past. Time is running out if we
are to modify or reverse the degradation of
the coastline. If Venus, goddess of beauty,
daughter of the Mediterranean, ever rises from
the waves again, let us make sure that she is
not covered with red algae, plastic and tar.
^«**.
*
*"<**,
*«<£«
The Blue Plan has been
published in English under
the title Futures for the
Mediterranean Basin {Oxford
University Press, 1990).
