Iwenty years after the first World Conference on the Environment, held
in Stockholm In 1972, the international community is faced with a serious
dilemma. On the one hand it is more necessary than ever to increase eco¬
nomic activity in order to meet basic needs and ensure the well-being of a
rapidly growing human family. On the other, human activities are making an
unprecedented impact on the natural environment and on the global systems
which sustain life on Earth, as is demonstrated by air and water pollution, the
massive degradation of land resources, the destruction of landscapes, cli¬
mate changes induced by the wasteful use of energy, the rapid disappear¬
ance of animal and plant species, and the depletion of the ozone layer.
In face of problems of such magnitude, inaction is out of the question.
The General Assembly of the United Nations has thus decided to convene
a new United Nations Conference, this time on Environment and Development
(UNCED), which will be held in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) from 1 to 12 June 1992.
Many Heads of State and Government are expected to attend this first "Earth
Summit".
WHAT IS AT STAKE
The problem facing the Rio Conference is how to maintain the quality of the
environment and to achieve environmentally sound, sustainable development
in all countries. The following questions will be among those addressed:
protection of the atmosphere (climate change, depletion of the ozone layer,
transboundary air pollution);
protection of land resources (combating deforestation, soil loss, desertifi¬
cation and drought);
conservation of biological diversity;
protection of freshwater resources;
protection of oceans, seas and coastal areas, and the rational use and
development of their living resources;
environmentally sound management of biotechnology and hazardous wastes
(including toxic chemicals);
prevention of illegal traffic in toxic products and wastes;
improvement in the quality of life and human health;
improvement in living and working conditions of the poor by eradicating
poverty and stopping environmental degradation.
The developing countries stress the vital importance of the problems
associated with poverty, inappropriate patterns of growth and development,
the external debt crisis and the deterioration of terms of trade.
POSSIBLE RESULTS
The results of the Conference may include:
1. The adoption of an "Earth Charter" or declaration of basic principles
for the conduct of nations and peoples in relation to the environment and

40
development, to ensure that the Earth is a hospitable home for human and
other forms of life;
2. Agreements on specific legal measures, notably conventions for the
protection of the atmosphere and biological diversity, both currently being
negotiated;
3. An agenda for action, "Agenda 21", establishing an agreed work pro¬
gramme of the international community for the period from 1992 into the
21st century, setting priorities, targets, cost estimates and modalities, and
assigning responsibilities.
UNESCO'S ROLE
At the crossroads of education, science, culture and communication,
UNESCO offers a unique institutional framework for dealing with envi¬
ronmental and natural resource management problems that are so com¬
plex that only integrated and interdisciplinary approaches are appro¬
priate for tackling them.
Most of the principal environmental issues identified for UNCED
are central to three of UNESCO's major and longstanding international
scientific programmes:
The Man and the Biosphere (MAB) programme for the protection and
management of land resources and ecosystems, and the conserva¬
tion of biological diversity. In this field MAB is a particularly valuable
tool because of its international network of biosphere reserves;
The International Hydrological Programme (IHP) for the study of fresh¬
water resources and their rational use;
Programmes of the Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission
(IOC) and related activities in the marine sciences, for the protection
of coastal areas, the rational use of marine resources, and the study
of the relationship between the oceans and climate.
UNESCO is also directly concerned with environmental problems
through another of its main areas of competence, education. It has
played an active role in encouraging the incorporation of environmental
education into national education policies and curricula. The UNESCO-
UNEP International Environmental Education Programme (IEEP),
launched in 1975, is preparing new materials for teachers and schools
in the form of teaching modules and other materials relating to envi¬
ronmental education and is participating in the training of teachers
in this field.
UNESCO's Social and Human Sciences Sector is also contributing
to environmental programmes through study of the interrelationships
between population, environment, natural resources and development,
and of the decision-making process related to environment and deve¬
lopment.
Finally. UNESCO is closely involved with the protection of the cul¬
tural as well as the natural heritage, notably within the framework of
the World Heritage Convention. It is also concerned with analysis of
the cultural dimension of development, without which environment and
development would be difficult to reconcile.
From left to right, logos of the International Océanographie
Commission, the International Hydrological Programme, the
International Environmental Education Programme, the Coastal Marine
Sciences Programme, and the Programme on Man and the Biosphere.
w
MB
Above, luxuriant tropical vegetation in Sri Lanka.
Below, the remains of spruce trees devastated by acid rain in
the Karkonosze National Park in Poland.
