TOWARDS
A DEMOCRATIC CULTURE
THE MONTEVIDEO DECLARATION
A conference entitled "Democratic Culture and Development: Towards
the Third Millennium In Latin America" was held in Montevideo
(Uruguay) from 27 to 30 November 1990. Organized under the
auspices of the government of Uruguay by UNESCO and the PAX Insti¬
tute, the conference was attended by leading politicians and scientists
from Latin America and other world regions.
The conference drew up a Declaration which refers to UNESCO's
mandate for the promotion of human rights and peace and calls on the
Organization to give priority to action which would encourage a
democratic society and cultural life. At the opening session, the
Director-General of UNESCO, Mr. Federico Mayor, pointed out that
this was the first time the Organization had taken action on an inter¬
national scale to promote democracy.
The Montevideo conference will be followed up by meetings which
will be held later this year in Prague (Czechoslovakia) and Gorée
(Senegal). We publish below salient extracts from the Montevideo
Declaration, whose title, "Democratic Culture and Governance",
emphasizes its guiding principles.
PREAMBLE
In almost every region of the world. ..the foundations are being laid in
public life for the difficult transition to political and economic structures
that restore responsibility, initiative and decision-making authority to
all members of society. Authoritarian or centralized forms of organi¬
zation, which give a hegemonic state the exclusive right to determine
political, social and economic options, are giving way to an increas¬
ingly general desire for a new legitimacy based on the popular will and
on the recognition of political life as subject to the rule of law....
Democracy and sustainable development will depend in large
measure on the ability of individual societies to modernize from within,
especially through changes and adjustments that enhance the state's
efficiency and legitimacy in the arbitration of conflicts and the adminis¬
tration of justice and in providing encouragement and guidance in the
economic and cultural fields. It is only in this way that existing dis¬
parities can be overcome and a new national consensus promoted
around the common goal of a more just and more effectively pluralist
civil society....
PRINCIPLES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The conference. ..unanimously reaffirms the vital importance of
democracy for the future of mankind in that it is:
(a) the only political system and practice based on the sovereignty of
the people, open to the active participation in public life of all sectors
of society and all shades of opinion, without any discrimination;
(b) the only system and practice for public life capable of bringing
about a society based on the iule of law and on the recognition of
human rights and of civil and individual freedoms as the ethical basis
for a civil society of free and equal individuals, and where the state
is supreme defender of those rights and freedoms;
(c) the only system and practice for social life which is geared to the
peaceful and concerted pursuit of social justice, equity and individual
and community well being under the law....
The conference recommends in particular that UNESCO, which has
a specific responsibility within the United Nations system with regard
to human rights and peace, should give priority In its biennial
programmes and medium-term plans to activities aimed at promoting
democracy In social and cultural life. Specifically, it should, in co¬
operation with interested member states and with relevant public and
private institutional networks:
(a) promote and organize forums for reflection and exchange of ideas
among the intellectual and political communities;
(b) develop for subsequent inclusion in general human rights and peace
education programmes material on democracy and democratic values;
(c) carry out comparative studies concerning existing mechanisms
for (i) negotiation and peaceful settlement of conflicts of interest,
(ii) interaction between civil society and the state, (iii) horizontal social
participation and communication.
