T
1 His year we celebrate the 750th anniver-
sary of the birth of Yunus Emre, who was
probably the most significant foik poet in the
history of Islamic literature, besides being the
most important Turkish poet up to the twen-
tieth century. His poetry embodies the quin-
tessence of Turkish-Anatolian Islamic
humanism and has been a source of inspira-
tion in Turkish intellectual life through the
ages. His verses include eloquent specimens of
tolerance and universalism :
Mystic is what they call me,
Hate is my only enemy.
I harbour a grudge against none.
To me the whole wide world is one.
Many of Yunus Emre's fundamental con-
cepts are rooted in the Sufi tradition, particu-
larly as exemplified by the thirteenth-century
mystic and poet Rumi, who lived in Anatolia
but wrote in Persian. In this Rumi resembled
the writers and thinkers of medieval Europe
who used Latin in preference to their national
languages. But Yunus Emre, like Dante,
adopted the vernacular of his own people.
Because he spoke their language and brought
a message of divine love, he became a legen-
dary figure and came to be regarded as a saint.
For seven centuries his verses have been
memorized, recited and celebrated in the
heartland of Anatolia. Even today most Turks
can read and appreciate him without too much
recourse to the dictionary, while they find
many classical poets of the fourteenth to
nineteenth centuries quite unintelligible.
But it is not for reasons of language alone
that Yunus Emre appeals to us today. His
themes and concerns are both timeless and
universal, relevant to not only to Turkey but
to the whole world, and as much now as ever
before. For we live in an age that sees war as
evil and the supreme crime against humanity.
Love is the celebration of life, an idea which
is forcefully expressed in the catchword from
the 1960s and 1970s : " Make love, not war ".
Translated into mystical terms, this means that
it has both a human and a divine dimension,
and it is here that we catch an echo from the
poetry of Yunus Emre :
Portrait of Yunus Emre
by the contemporary Turkish artist
Siiheyl Unver.
1am not here on earth for strife.
Love is the mission of my life.
It is a poetry that speaks to us through the
centuries, expressing the ecstasy of com-
munion with nature and union with God.
This theme of union with God frequently
appears in his writing as an ideal which is
about to be realized, while his humanism
includes, in Hegel's words, the " urging of the
spirit outward-that desire on the part of man
to become acquainted with his world".
Yunus Emre spurned book learning if it
did not have a humanistic relevance, because
he believed in man's godliness. In this sense
he had affinities with Petrarch, also writing
in the fourteenth century, and with Erasmus,
a century later, who, as part of their classical
or Renaissance humanism, shunned the dog-
matism imposed on man by scholasticism.
Like them, he sought to instil in ordinary
people a renewed sense of the importance of
life on Earth, but like Dante, he explored the
ethical dimension of mortal life while
depicting the higher values of immortal being.
Yunus Emre's lines are memorable :
Whoever has one drop of love
Possesses God's existence.
About Yunus Emre's life we know very
little, and what we do know tends to be a
matter of legend rather than ascertainable fact.
He is said to have been illiterate for most if
not all of his life, yet the poems display an eru-
dition and a richness of allusion that could
hardly be expected from an illiterate. In any
case, it is the poems themselves that count, and
some of them are magnificent.
Yunus Emre's poetry is dominated by a
unitary vision of man and nature. Through his
humanism he seeks to enrich human existence
and to ennoble it by liberating man from
dogma nd by placing him in a relationship of
love with God. His view of love is creative and
non-exciusive : " In God's world there are a
hundred thousand kinds of love ", and " When
love arrives, all needs and flaws are gone. " He
was concerned about all people, particularly the
deprived, and this is what gives his poetry its
intensely moving quality. He was the first poet
in Turkish history to create an " aesthetics of
ethics ", and in this he has never been surpassed.
He stressed the ecumenical ideal :
We regard no one's religion as contrary to ours.
True love isborn when all faiths are united.
Much of his work is a testament to the
equality of all human beings. In an age marked
by conflict and destruction, Yunus Emre gave
voice to an aft-embracing love, proclaiming a
belief in a universal fellowship that transcends
all schisms and sects :
The world is my true ration
Its people are my nation.
He was a man of the people and for the
people-a spokesman for social justice who
spoke out courageously against the oppression
of the underprivileged by rulers, landowners,
officials and religious leaders. He thus stood
in the mainstream of a humanist tradition that
has always claimed the moral right to criticize
the Establishment and the powers that be.
And, in what could be seen as an anticipation
of the spirit of the United Nations and
UNESCO, he made a poetic plea for world
peace and fellowship which is still supremely
relevant in today's world, convulsed as it is
by violence and war :
Come let us all be friends for once
Let us make life easy on us
Let us love and let us be loved ones
The world shall be left to no one. N
TALAT SA) T HALMAN,
of Turkey, was formerly his country's Minister of
Culture and is currently a professor fNear-
Eastern languages and literatures at New York
University. He has published more than 40 books
in Turkish and English, including 3 on Yunus Emre.
49
Yunus Emre
j 
[MM) LMfC
 Sf f M
_____
