In the wak of Ulysses
by André ledros
The ship of the Argonauts.
Detail from the Ficoronl urn, a
richly engraved cylindrical
container from Praeneste
(4th-3rd century BC), Italy.
I HERE are some 2,000 Greek islands. Most of
them are barren rocks. Some lack fresh water and
are uninhabited. But ever since the earliest times
Greeks have lived in the largest and most beau¬
tiful of them and Greek civilization has flourished
there. A people with so many islands is bound
to have special links with the sea.
The Greeks were bold seafarers long before
the Phoenicians came on the scene. Like the wan¬
derings of Ulysses, the mythical expedition of
Jason and the Argonauts, the heroes who sailed
aboard the Argo to recover the Golden Fleece,
is inspired by early Greek exploration of the
Mediterranean. We owe a late account of this
expedition to Apollonius of Rhodes, who was
born around 295 BC. We can be sure that Homer,
who is thought to have lived five centuries before,
knew an earlier version of the exploits of the
Argonauts. The sorceress Circe living on the
island of Aeaea, the dangerous strait of Scylla and
Charybdis, and the Sirens, all feature in the
Odyssey but also appear in the voyage of the
Argonauts, which was recorded long before.
24
The small sailboats of Antiquity and rowing
vessels like the longship Argo were sturdily built.
Greek sailors trusted them implicitly. They knew
all about the dominant winds and currents, but
Poseidon the sea-god was given to sudden terrible
rages. As they plied the seas far from their
homeland, Jason, Ulysses and their companions
faced terrible dangers. It took far more courage
to set out on a long voyage without maps or
compass and brave violent storms than it did to
fight against the King of Colchis or the Trojans.
These journeys were plagued by hunger, thirst,
fatigue and stress. . . . How else can we explain
the fact that Ulysses weeps so often?
When storms blew up, the Greeks depended
on skilful seamanship to save them. Without a
steady hand on the tiller all was lost. The Greeks
have never been good swimmers and shipwreck
would almost invariably be fatal. Ulysses himself
barely escapes drowning on two occasions.
Ulysses has angered Zeus. The god hurls a
thunderbolt at his ship, which is shattered to
pieces. Billowing waves sweep the crew into the
sea. Ulysses, the only survivor, clings to a piece
of wreckage. A gust of wind blows him towards
the strait guarded by Scylla and the whirlpool
Charybdis, who swallows up the debris of the
ship. Ulysses just manages to grasp a fig-tree
growing on the rocks above the waves. Then
Charybdis spits back the mast and the keel, and
Ulysses continues his adventurous wanderings.
But before long the son of Laertes falls victim
to the anger of another god, Poseidon, who has
long been persecuting him.
Aboard the raft which the nymph Calypso has
unwillingly allowed him to build, Ulysses comes
in sight of the land of the Phaeacians. Suddenly
a violent gust of wind breaks up his fragile craft.
Ulysses manages to haul himself on to a plank but
he is battered by the waves and is soon overcome
by exhaustion. Leucothea, the white goddess,
saves him in the nick of time. She gives him her
veil to tie around his waist, and he manages to
swim through the stormy sea to Phaeacia.

Ulysses and the sirens,
detail from a Sth-century-BC
Greek vase.
Many Greek sailors over the centuries in
similar perilous situations to those described in
the Odyssey have lost their lives because they did
not know how to swim. This failing, which I
have often noticed among fishermen and sailors
serving in one of the world's biggest fleets of mer¬
chant ships, is particularly surprising since the
Greeks are outstanding divers.
SPONGE DIVERS
In ancient times, sponge diving was practised in
Greece more widely than it is today. Sponges
were used for various, and sometimes unusual,
purposes. Soldiers drank from them when they
had no goblets and made them into protective
cushions which they wore beneath their armour.
Today synthetic sponges compete with natural
sponges. Nevertheless, beautiful women still
prefer real sponges, as do painters, craftsmen,
polishers, cabinet-makers and surgeons.
Sponge divers can still be found on some
Greek islands such as Kalymnos and Skyros,
where their marvellous but arduous skills are
handed down from father to son. The only differ¬
ence is that they have to sail further and further
away, near to the coast of Cyprus or Libya. And
they must dive deeper and deeper. The old men
remember the time when they used to skin-dive
to find sponges 30 metres underwater. Today
their successors have to dive more than 60 metres,
wearing diving suits and other equipment. Their
outfits are often the worse for wear, and accidents
are frequent. The men's health suffers. On the
quayside of the port of Kalymnos, old men of
forty can often be seen.
THE ANGER
OF POSEIDON
Thousands of Greek sailors serve in the merchant
navy. Many of them accept low wages to work in
old tubs which often sail under flags of con¬
venience and which they describe among them¬
selves as floating coffins.
When one of these decrepit hulks runs into
a storm the crew need all the courage they can
find. Heavy seas pound the deck murderously. 25

Neptune's Horses (1892) by
the English painter and
illustrator Walter Crane.

In the dark night stars topple into the waves like
a shower of meteorites, then rush back heaven¬
wards in a cosmic firework display. Roiling
breakers race from the distant horizon and crash
over the ship, which pitches and rolls. Their
white foam rushes to the top of the mainmast,
making whirlpools of spray. The wallowing old
tub is buffeted hither and thither.
The crewmen race around, complaining but
putting their backs into their work, stemming the
inflow of water with packing and cement, stowing
away overturned sacks and boxes before the ship
begins to list, keeping the ship's electrical system
working. They never let up, driven by their sense
of danger and their matchless experience of the
sea, rather than by their officers. This is why their
reputation for seamanship is second to none.
PIRATES AND SHIPOWNERS
Greek sailors are not superstitious. Children of
the Sun and the Mediterranean, they have never
been obsessed by the appearance of the dreaded
m
Ŵ
M
m
- aaàaV

Flying Dutchman which haunts the imagination
of northern seamen. It's not ghost captains that
they fear but real ones who let themselves be cor¬
rupted by cynical shipowners and deliberately
sink their ships on desert island reefs. Barratry,
the fraudulent breach of duty by the master of
a ship, which often endangers the life of the crew,
is still relatively frequent. The older the ship, the
greater the temptation to barratry. The sailors
know this and are secretly afraid.
Of course not all shipowners are so
unscrupulous. Many of them have combined
their maritime instinct with a genius for business
and have become very rich without infringing the
laws of trade.
A VISION OF THE SEA
Greek shipowners, sailors and fishermen make
their living from the sea. But the Greek people
as a whole also lives from the sea, albeit indirectly.
Greece has profited from the tourist boom
more than most countries. Hundreds of thou¬
sands of foreigners spend their holidays there each
year. What are they looking for? Archaeological
sites such as Delphi, Mycenae and Delos are still
a magnet for visitors. The beautiful marble of
ancient temples, theatres and statues bears wit¬



ness to the cult of beauty in a distant past and
glows in the soft light of the present. But more
and more tourists are flocking to Greece to realize
an ideal vision of the sea. They head for the Greek
islands to escape from oil-polluted beaches and
the dirt of the big city, hoping to bathe in trans¬
parent waters and make friends with the Greeks
who live in close contact with the sea. (Even if
they do not bathe in it, for the good reason that
they cannot swim).
One myth that symbolizes perhaps more
than any other the extraordinary symbiosis of the
Greeks with the sea, as well as their inadequacy
as swimmers, it is that of Orion, son of Hyrieus
king of Boeotia. Orion was a giant who walked
across the sea from island to island without ever
getting out of his depth. One day when Apollo
was engaged in an archery contest on the beach
with his sister Artemis, the goddess and huntress
whose arrows never missed their target, he
pointed to an object floating far out to sea.
"I bet you can't reach it," he said.
Artemis strung her bow and her arrow sped
unerringly to its distant target, which was, alas,
the head of Orion who was walking as usual in
the water far from the shore.
When she saw that she had killed the good
giant by mistake, Artemis was so distressed that
she bore Orion to heaven and transformed him
into a constellation.
-P-x^.-jtV.
"Shellfishing". Painting on
silk by the Japanese painter
and printmaker Hokusai
(1760-1849).
ANDRE KEDROS,
a Greek author who writes in
French, is the author of 13
novels which have been widely
translated. He has also
published several historical
essays including a History of
the Greek Resistance
1940-1944 (Robert Laffont
publishers, Paris).
