54
A rouná-np of nautical
supentitions and rituals
Vn the bridge of yachts bobbing at berth in
their harbours a common sight is a no entry sign
with the picture of a shoe placed over it. The mes¬
sage is clear and is always heeded by those who
are lucky enough to board one of these graceful
craft: first remove your shoes. If you are so
curious as to ask questions about this form of
courtesy, you tend to receive vague replies to the
effect that the high heels worn by women would
damage the deck or that the dust picked up from
the quay would make the boat dirty.
But apart from the fact that the decks of these
noble vessels are made of teak, which is one of
the hardest woods there is, we can be sure that
their owners would not take the same precautions
to protect the sitting-room floors of their houses.
Even stranger, this prohibition does not concern
working shoes but only town shoes. One's
Sunday best in fact.
One of my friends, a Sicilian fisherman, was
talking to me one day about an uncle of his, who
was a great believer in traditions. "It was a cold
February morning", he said, "and we had gone
off to fish. It was still dark. In the first glow of
dawn my uncle saw that I had kept my shoes on
my feet. Furious, he ordered me to take them off
and, after attaching them to a rope, threw them
into the water where they remained in tow". He
was a kind man and, knowing that his thought¬
less nephew possessed only one pair, this was his
compromise solution'.
This prohibition is widespread in the North
Sea, among the deep-sea fishermen of England and
Scotlandbut the Malay fishermen of Penang
take the same curious precaution. Where yachting
circles are concerned, it may have originated in
England along with the practice of sailing as a
sport, assuming along the Mediterranean coast
and probably elsewhere this pseudo-rational
veneer that we have seen.
What is the link between shoes and boats?
To understand, we perhaps need to refer to
another superstition, associated this time with a
particular accident of birth.
Some babies are born with the amnion or
inner membrane which enclosed the foetus before
birthknown as a caulcovering their heads. All

A symbolic sheepskin
on the prow of a Portuguese
fishing boat.
over the world numerous beliefs have been
attached to this. Generally, the caul is thought
to possess extraordinary qualities and it is not by
chance that, in northern Europe and Sicily alike,
it is reputed to be a preservative against drowning.
Being born with a caul on one's head is a sign
of good luck.
"Good" births are traditionally thought to
be those where the child passes through the
amniotic waters head first. "Bad" ones are those
known as breech births, where the feet appear
first, making for a difficult delivery which, in
former times, was likely to result in the death of
the mother or the child.
While birth is a voyage through the salt
waters of the maternal womb, death is thought
of in mythological and religious belief as a
journey to the, beyond. In both cases, there are
certain rules. It is the custom for the dead to leave
"feet first" and, in keeping with the solemnity
of the occasion, they depart from from the world
of the living in their best clothesand in their
best shoes.
This then is the explanation. He who,
wearing such shoes, undertakes a sea voyage in
a boat will be accompanied by the spectre of
death, in a world where danger looms on every
side.
THE NECESSARY SACRILEGE
Since earliest times in many civilizations, water
and the sea have been linked to the nether world
of death, the abyss and the primal chaos to which
all creatures return before being reborn to other
lives.
Crossing the water by means of a man-made
device (a bridge or boat) involves a direct con¬
tact with the element that separates life from
death, which also serves as a bridge into the
beyond. This journey into the next life is depicted
in many myths, from that of the Greeks' ferryman
Charon to the Mesopotamian, Egyptian or Scan¬
dinavian legends. In order to commit the
sacrilegealbeit a necessary oneof crossing the
water, one is required to take a number of sym¬
bolic precautions.
For the Romans, the pontifex maximus, the
"bridgemaker", represented the supreme religious
authority, vested in Julius Caesar when he com¬
manded a bridge to be built over the Rhine. The
annual ceremony of casting a doll into the Tiber
from the Sublicius bridge, the oldest bridge in
Rome, served to remind the ancients of the
human sacrifices needed to build it.
In more recent times, the cross thrown by
the Greek Orthodox bishop into the sea on 55

Above, boat in Syracuse
(Italy).
Top, fishing boats In Bangkok
(Thailand).
56
Twelfth Night in order to bless it and the act per¬
formed by the Doge of Venice in marrying the
sea with his city and casting a ring into the waters
may be understood as a ritualized means of
obtaining redemption.
This sheds an interesting light on Christ's
walking on the water and on the feat accom¬
plished by Moses, for whom the Red Sea divided,
enabling him and his people to cross it on foot.
Many are the heroes and saints who have thus
shown sacrilege to be necessary and reparation
possible.
THE BAPTISM OF BLOOD
The ritual often involves a blood sacrifice,
whether real or symbolicthat of Iphigenia, who
in Greek mythology has to be sacrificed by her
father Agamemnon so that the Greek fleet can
sail to Troy, or that of the young Persian who
has his throat cut in the bows of the Greek flag¬
ship before the battle of Salamis.
From the the Anatolian coast all the way to
Alexandria in Egypt, a sheep is always sacrificed
in the bows of a boat, thus perpetuating the
ancient Mediterranean ritual and the symbolic
substitution, dating back to Abraham, of a lamb
for a human being. This is indirectly testified to
by Homer's crimson-cheeked ships and the sheep¬
skins hanging from the stems of fishermen's
boats, from the eastern Mediterranean to
Portugal.
Even today, ships are "baptised", from the
smallest boat to the giant oil tanker. Why is this?
A Sicilian fisherman told me one day: "Do you
not baptise your son and give him a name? It's
the same for boats. They are Christian creatures"
(In Sicily, "Christian" and "man" are syn¬
onymous).
There are many practices connected with the
building and launching of boats. All reflect sym¬
bolically the idea that a ceremony is necessary
to give life to and purify the inert matter, and
to protect the seafarer and the members of his
family. Greek and Italian shipowners often call
their ships after one of their nearest and dearest
or after a saint or a hero, thereby suggesting that
the vessel is part of a larger spiritual family.
BOATS WITH EYES
Whether blood is shed or is replaced by wine-
champagne at modern launching ceremonies
the sacrificial rite is always performed in order
to give life to the ship.
In Laos, "eyes" are given to boats in a
ceremony which involves the feigned sacrifice of
a maiden and the fixing of her eyes on the prow.
The prows of dugout canoes in Bali depict the
head of Makara, the mythical elephant-fish.
Viking drakkars displayed a dragon's head and
Greek and Roman ships looked at the waves
through the eyes of boars or dolphins. The figure¬
heads of the great Western sailing ships fixed their
hieratic gaze on the waters, and even today junks
on the China Sea have eyes.
Considering then that ships are living, almost
human things, it is natural that they should be
threatened by the same dangers as members of
the crew. They have to be protected from mis¬
fortune by means of various symbolic signs which
might appear to be fulfilling no more than a
decorative function.
In the archipelagoes of Melanesia, as in the
Trobriand Islands for instance, the pirogues that
participate in gift exchange ceremonies (kula) bear
elaborate sculptures on their prows representing
the mythical hero Manikiniki in the form of the
life-giving Serpent. The serpent-hero and the-
pirogue become a single creature. In order to
acquire the powers needed to achieve this union,
the sculptor has to serve an apprenticeship that
may last for more than twenty years.
On the Mediterranean shore, when the boats
belonging to a particular village are painted in
green or red monochrome, one can be sure that
the effigy of that village's patron saint in the
church will be dressed in the same colour. In
another village, where blue predominates, the

Above, the head of the
mythical elephant-fish Makara
adorns the prow of a Balinese
canoe.
Left above, a boat In
mourning; below, prow of a
boat In Ghana.
PIER GIOVANNI D'AYALA,
a staff member of UNESCO's
Division of Ecological Sciences
and a former researcher at the
Ecole des Hautes Etudes en
Sciences Sociales in Paris has
long been interested in the
lore and symbolic beliefs of
Mediterranean fishermen.
Among his recent publications
are Carnavals et Mascarades
(with Martine Boiteux. 1988
Paris).
local boats will be placed under the protection
of the Virgin who is venerated here and who
wears a blue wrap. A boat may also be painted
in honour of a more personal and familiar saint.
If someone has made a vow to St. Francesco di
Paola, his boat will have a brown stripe added
to it, the same colour as the cowl worn by the
hermit saint, who according to legend crossed the
Strait of Messina on his coat. St. Francesco,
incidentally, is the patron saint of the Italian mer¬
chant navy.
IN SEARCH OF SALVATION
The sailor who at the risk of his life has embarked
upon the sacrilegious voyage is required to give
thanks when he again sets foot on dry land. All
Greek schoolchildren are familiar with the story
of the prophet Elijah, whom seafarers, both
Christian and Muslim, hold in undying devotion.
Legend has it that the holy prophet was a sailor.
"One day, tired of confronting the danger of the
waves, he took an oar on his shoulder and walked
so far up into the mountains, so far away from
the sea, that a peasant who knew nothing of boats
mistook the oar for a flail. There the holy
prophet planted his oar, on which the green
leaves of an oak tree grew, and made his abode."
A white chapel graces many of the Greek
islands, built on the highest point and dedicated
to the prophet Elijah by some sailor grateful for
having survived the perils of the sea. Even if this
custom seems to bear Homeric echoes, it is a fact
that holy shrines dedicated to the sea are very fre¬
quently situated on a hill inland. Notre-Dame de
la Garde in Marseilles and Genoa, Our Lady of
Montserrat in Barcelona, Our Lady of Guadalupe
in Mexico City and other ancient or recent sanc¬
tuaries thus bear witness to the seafarer's secret
need to remove himself from the source of
danger, the sea. He accordingly sets out, often
barefoot, on a pilgrimage to the place of salva¬
tion, the landmore precisely to the moun¬
tainous heartland.
There the salt water becomes the fresh water
of a well or of a miraculous fountain where the
survivor of a shipwreck washes off the bitter
danger, as is the custom in the Sicilian sanctuary
of the Black Virgin of Tindari, which overlooks
the blue expanse of the Tyrrhenian Sea. There
the votive offeringpicture, model, candle, part
of the riggingis laid at the foot of the holy
effigy. Here lies salvation, in this place away from
the dangers of the everyday world. Here time is
eternal; the time of horror and the night of the
storm are no more.
This journey into the symbolic universe of
humankind must perforce remain incomplete. But
it is only by not rejecting all these beliefs out of
hand on the grounds that they are childish
leftovers from a benighted past that we shall get
any closer to understanding the secret world of
seafarers and to recognizing how much courage
and dignity they need to ply their hard trade.
