Tomorrow,
another peace
On 25 January 1991, during the Gulf war, an article in which the
Director-General of UNESCO set forth his ideas on ways of
achieving world peace was published in the Paris daily Le Monde.
On this page we reproduce the article in its entirety. Its arguments
have lost none of their force or relevance.
BY FEDERICO MAYOR
DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF UNESCO
IN 1945, THE SURVIVORS OF A WAR IN WHICH THE
whole world had gradually become embroiled were convinced that
reason could only prevail over self-interest if a collective organization
were to take responsibility for universal security, which would be based
on intergovernmental co-operation, shared development and dialogue
between cultures. Peace would result from the emergence of a con¬
cerned and responsible world citizenship, transcending individual affili¬
ations to local, regional and national groups.
Human beings were to acquire this sense of citizenship by learning
tolerance, by learning to respect the dignity of individuals and the differ¬
ences between them. Between 1945 and 1990 every effort was made,
notwithstanding the persistence of wars, famines and acts of aggres¬
sion, to address the causes and consequences of those antagonisms
which were still causing people to rise against people, nation against
nation, state against state.
As a result of these individual and collective efforts, and the sacrifice
of many lives, for the first time since the collapse of a wall which had
become symbolic, a ray of hope appeared, accompanied by fears and
hesitations, calculations and ambitions, feelings of reluctance and resig¬
nation. The idea that all men and women share the same world, the
same earth, and the same humanity, gained ground, distilling a spirit of
joyfulness that was sometimes naive but brought with it a new
potential for peace.
However, within a few months, all kinds of economic, financial,
military and geopolitical interests, combined with personal ambitions,
had toppled a still fragile edifice. Yesterday's hopes are now beset with
uncertainty. Peace has again appeared to be slipping from our grasp.
Following this setback, and after the vain expenditure of so much effort,
would courage and clearsightedness inevitably succumb to lassitude
and resignation? Not at all. The obligation to work for peace is not
one that can be shrugged aside. This invasion, like those before it, this
war, like those that preceded it in other parts of the world, will not
make us abandon our efforts. We must start again. We must rebuild.
We must strive anew for peace, another peace. For if we are convinced
that it is through respect for international law and the resolutions
whereby it is given effect that the international community can
legitimaly express itself, then that international community must
wholeheartedly commit itself to the struggle against ignorance, poverty,
discrimination, oppression, and all forms of violence and humiliation
which erode freedom and compromise human dignity.
The new international order which could be glimpsed a few months
ago was based on undeniable achievementsthe emergence of new
democracies, the disappearance of the legacy of a tormented past, the
acceleration of the disarmament process, negotiated solutions to
local conflicts. It must be enriched with new prospects for human
development. For if it is to be just and lasting, the peace to which
we aspire must be global, andthrough dialogue," understanding, and
knowledge of the identities and specificities of othersmust take into
account those whom history has spurned, those who stand by help¬
lessly and see another world being builta world to which they
nevertheless fully belong.
The permanent peace which we hoped to build has turned out
to be unable to withstand the logic of war because it was not envisaged
in global terms. To achieve such a peace we must, in the short term,
patiently restore discussion, common sense, intelligence, sensitivity and
tolerance to their rightful place. These virtues and these values must
be the keynote of the post-war future. It also seems to me essential
that we should all learn to pay more attention to the psychology of
peoples, whose roots plunge deep into history and are not governed
by political rigidities.
In the longer term, we must insist on a change of direction in the
ways of thinking and practice of those responsible for world peace.
The standardization of lifestyles, values, mentalities and patterns of
behaviour has been too widely presented as the touchstone of moder¬
nity. By minimizing the importance of specific cultural, national, ethnic
and religious characteristics, this standardization has removed our
familiar landmarks. It has now gone far enough. The rediscovery of
our own identity should provide the most effective impulse towards
tolerance of others.
The spread of scientific knowledge and technological progress has
contributed to a fairer, albeit still inadequate, distribution of the benefits
of development. But quantitative growth must be guided by renewed
respect for the environment, limited natural resources and balanced
demographic development.
In all societies, ethical, philosophical and religious ideas should cir¬
culate freely. As much attention should be paid to the spiritual dimen¬
sion of development as to its sustainability.
If we again give precedence to these considerations, then perhaps
one day war will be eradicated from the human mind. This was the
hope of the founders of UNESCO, men and women who had wit¬
nessed and survived a war which was so close to them that its wounds
had still not healed.
War and peace are human, all too human. To discourage one and
encourage the other, we must first reinstate with tenacity and com¬
mitment that which is best in humanity, that which makes us human,
for therein lies the source of life, of work and creativity.
