The strange èstiny of Urdiim Taro
F.ROM the deep waters of my childhood rose a
fantastic edifice called the Ryugu, the palace of
the Dragon. Contrary to what this rather fright¬
ening name might suggest, a soft, feminine
atmosphere prevailed there. The dragon was
rarely to be seen and a very beautiful young
woman, Otohime, lived in this underwater palace
whose walls were decorated with enamels and
corals. She wore an exotic dress. Was she the
daughter of the dragon king or some other animal
which had undergone metamorphosis? My pic¬
ture book did not say.
A man named Urashima Taro lived with her
as her guest. These two charming figures spent
days and months together in an atmosphere of
continual joy. They lacked for nothing. Count¬
less multicoloured fishessea bream, sole and
thousands of othersdanced a fantastic ballet to
the sound of exquisite music. Their table was
laden with delicious dishes. Do they eat fish and
shellfish even at the bottom of the sea, I often
wondered naively. But as to the nature of the link
that bound this extraordinary couple, I never gave
it a thought. Were they lovers, or were they mar¬
ried? My old book of stories said only that the
young man was happy. That was enough for me.
I knew why Urashima Taro lived at the
bottom of the sea. The young fisherman had gone
to the help of a giant turtle who was being
attacked by some naughty children on the beach.
Grateful for his aid, the sea creature transported
its saviour to this wonderful place.
Being such a bookworm as a child, I also
knew the end of the story. After a few years had
gone by, the hero tired of an existence given over
to games and amusements. Nostalgia took him
back to his home country, where he found to his
amazement no trace of either his home or his
mother. Nobody recognized him. . . . That was
why I was in no hurry to turn the page and leave
behind the pictures of the dragon's palace.
The last illustration to the story was dis¬
tressing for a child. On a deserted beach a piti¬
fully thin old man with a long white beard could
be seen. He seemed overwhelmed by his strange
destiny. Beside him was a small, precious-looking
box from which a plume of white smoke spiralled
upwards. Though forbidden to do so, the
fisherman had opened the present Otohime had
given him as a souvenir of their life together. The
j^HHl
by Uinomiya Masayuh
Urashima returns to his
village. Illustration from a
17th-century manuscript.
three years he thought he had spent with her were
the equivalent of 700 years on Earth! The
fisherman's death, which was clearly imminent,
seemed to me enigmatic. What offence had he
committed to deserve such a terrible punishment?
LATER on, I learnt that the legendary figure
of Urashima Taro had lived for centuries in the
collective memory of my fellow-countrymen,
symbolizing for them the sea that surrounds their
small islands.
This figure appears for the first time in
written form in the Nihon-shoki (the "Written
Chronicles of Japan", compiled in 720) which
describe mythical and historical events from the 43

beginning of the world to the seventh century.
The Chronicles describe the physical nature of
the love between Urashima and Otohime, unlike
the story I read when I was a child.
Subsequently the legend reappears in many
works belonging to different genres. The
Manyoshu (759?), the oldest anthology of Japanese
poetry, contains several poems which tell the
story of Urashima. A folk tale dating from
medieval times (otogi-zoshi) gives a particularly
detailed version which reflects a Buddhist desire
to edify and, through the theme of the quest for
immortality, the influence of Chinese literature.



After aging in the twinkling of an eye, Urashima
is transformed into a crane by a feather in one
of the three boxes given to him by Otohime, who
returns to him in the form of a turtle. Thus the
story ends with the uniting of two creatures that
symbolize longevitya thousand years of life for
the crane, ten thousand for the tortoise. A no play
tells the same story. The legend also crops up in
several tales from oral folklore. Several modern
Japanese writers have also produced variants of it.
I HE story I read in my storybook as a child
was a simplified, perhaps over-simplified, version.
But even today I love it, with its pitiless ending,
more than any other. Urashima's mysterious

adventure is still deeply rooted in my memory
where, paradoxically, it is inseparable from the
sound of a military march. Like all Japanese chil¬
dren who grew up during the Second World War,
I often sang in those days a song called "Urashima
Taro" which was put out by the Ministry of Edu¬
cation. Its words gave an even simpler version of
the fisherman's story. Its rhythmical music is by
no means exceptional. This tune linked to a
specific moment in history has often come back
to me when in my imagination I have plunged
to the bottom of the sea.
M,luST I today explain, as an adult, why I prefer
the version of the story that I do? Would this not
be an act as fatal as the opening of the little box?
By way of explanation, I shall describe another
legendary image of the underwater world which
is also engraved in the memory of the Japanese
people.
In an episode of the Kojiki ("Records of
ancient matters"), a seminal text of Japanese liter¬
ature compiled in AD 712, two mythical figures
find themselves in a similar situation to that of
Urashima and Otohime, but their lives are quite
different. Toyotamabime no mikoto, the
daughter of the sea god, welcomes to the palace
of her father Watatshumi an earth divinity,
Yamasachibiko. She marries her guest and, unlike
Otohime, becomes pregnant. Thus, for the
individual, the cycle of time is renewed by procre¬
ation. As far as I know, Urashima Taro and Oto¬
hime did not have any children, although they
lived together for three yearsor 700 according
to our earthly measurement. To my mind, this
universe under the sea can only exist outside
human time.
Now we can understand that what breaks the
spell is affection, linked to a personal concept of
time. Urashima's first mistake is to wish to return
to his mother and his village. Then, by clinging
to the memory of the underwater palace which
perhaps still lingers on in the box, he irrevocably
breaks the rules of the game. Then, inevitably,
everything goes up in smoke. The bewitched
fisherman will return to human time to face his
destiny. In my children's picture book the story
ended there. When Pandora opened the box she
did at least find Hope inside it, unlike Urashima
Taro. This children's version of the story is more
cruel but it is also more authentic. If the sea of
Eternal Life exists, so do the life and death of
individual human beings. The imagination must
accept the reality of human life.
With this smoke, which is in the end far too
explanatory, it only remains for me to disappear
in my turn.
Urashima arrives in the
Dragon's palace. Illustration
from a 17th-century scroll.
NINOMIYA MASAYUKI,
Japanese university teacher
and essayist, is a lecturer at
the Institut des Langues et
Civilisations Orientales in Paris
and executive secretary
general of the association for
the construction of the
Japanese Cultural Centre in
Paris. His Watashi no naka no
Sharutoru ("Chartres in the
heart of memory", Tokyo
1990) was awarded the prize
of the essayists' club of Japan. 45
