Contact between the three cultures OM/M ? 0 yMTMS : K-MrM, MC f, M/-
lingualism, and shared customs and festivities
\/NE of the most striking features of thé
Muslim presence in Spain is the enduring
influence it exerted over Iberian Christianity. Ii
times of peace, the relationship between thé
Christian and Muslim kingdoms on the penin
sula was marked by what the French historiar
Henri Terrasse has called " a sometimes cordia
symbiosis ". There were Christian and Jewisl
communities within Islamic Spain, just as Jew :
and Muslims were later to live In the crown land :
of Castile and Aragon.
In cultural matters contacts never ceased
there was no clear-cut line of division betweer
Chess players.
An illustration from the 13th-
century Libro del Ajedrez
( " Book f Chess ").
the Islamic and Christian worlds. From the
earliest days of the Arab-Berber conquest, an
extraordinary ethnic mixing took place In al-
Andalus. In the Islamic melting-pot, Arabs,
Berbers brought up In the Arab culture and
Christians, whether share-croppers or high-born
landed proprietors. intermarried with one
another and with the urban middle classes to
form a fairly homogeneous whole. Sustained con-
tact between Muslims and Spaniards obliged the
conquerors to learn Romance, a derivative of the
Iberian Latin that was the language of the
country, and one which the Mozarabs or
15

Arabized Christians also used as a common
dialect. Meanwhile, some young Christians In the
ninth century began to turn away from Latin cul-
ture and their traditional religious education.
Some of them could read and write in Arabic,
knew pre-Islamic poetry and took up the study
of Arabic literature.
Andalusian Jews spoke Romance and Arabic
in addition to Hebrew. Installed In Spain since
Roman times, Jewish communities gave proof of
their loyalty to the Umayyad dynasty and were
not persecuted. Eight generations of Jews In al-
Andalus were to benefit from the tolerance and
protection of the Umayyad rulers.
An intellectual
and linguistic ferment
A substantial proportion of Spain's Islamic popu-
lation was bilingual. The Muslims of al-Andalus
used Romance colloquially and even In their
palaces.'Abd al-Rahman III, caliph of Cordoba
from 912 until 961 and himself the son of a Chris-
tian captive, switched easily between Arabic and
Romance when talking to his courtiers. Imperme-
able to fanaticism, he displayed exceptional toler-
ance and open-mindedness.
Two examples of his magnanimity are par-
ticularly striking. Rabi b. Zayd, baptised as
Recemundo, was a cultured Christian of Cordoba
who worked as a secretary in the offices of the
Umayyad chancellery and spoke Arabic as well
as Latin. The caliph sent him as a legate to the
Above, a pa) nt ! ng featuring
ladles and horsemen adorns
the vaulted roof of the
Sata de tos Reyes (Ha)) of the
Kings) n the Alhambra
palace, Granada
() ate 14th century).
Left, a page from a
13th-century Spanish version
of KaMa) wa Dlmna, a
collection ofanimal fables.
German Empire and to the court of Constan-
tinople, tasks he performed so zealously that his
employer obtained for him the bishopric of the
small Andalusian town of Elvira.
Among the dignitaries of the Cordoban court
was a Jew from Jaen named Hasday ben Shaprut,
a man of great culture. The director of a finan-
cial department, he knew Arabic, Hebrew, Latin
and Greek as well as the Romance dialects. He
acted as interpreter into Arabic when Christian
envoys arrived In the capital, and also translated
into Arabic Discorides'medical treatise, sent to
'Abd al-Rahman III by the Byzantine Emperor
Constantine VII.
A distinguished doctor as well as a capable
diplomat, he successfully carried out a difficult
mission to the Christian territories, In the course
of which he helped cure King Sancho I of Leon
of obesity and also obtained ten strongholds from
the king's grandmother, old Queen Toda of
Navarre, in return for a Cordoban alliance.
Thanks to the caliph's protection, Hasday was
able to act as a patron for the Jewish writers of
Islamic Spain, and the symbiosis of Jewish and
16

Arabic culture was evident in the work that
resulted. The Judaeo-Spanish poet Dunash ben
Labrat even persuaded his Jewish compeers to
adopt Arabic metres for their Hebrew verses,
while the brilliant philologist Hayyudj rivalled
the Arab grammarians.
In the Spain of three religions, the Jews were
notable for their multilingualism. Spanish Jews
acted as interpreters between Christians and
Muslims. The degree to which the Jewish com-
munity in the emirate of Granada was accultu-
rated has been frequently remarked upon.
Boabdil, the last sultan of Granada, had two
Jewish Interpreters, Isaac Perdoniel and his son-
in-law Yehuda. Reviving a tradition set in the
twelfth century by the famous theologian and
doctor Ibn Maymun (Moses Maimonides), several
of whose works were composed In Arabic, the
last Jewish poet of Granada, Se'adiyah ibn Danan,
wrote his grammatical works in Arabic. When
Malaga fell to the Catholic Kings In 1487, it was
noted that several Jewish women emerged from
the town speaking Arabic and wearing Muslim
dress.
The Castilian language borrowed much from
Arabic. There were elaborate linguistic contacts,
and many Arabic words entered the Iberian lan-
guages In the Middle Ages. The influence still sur-
vives in modern Spanish, particularly In the
specialized vocabularies of irrigation, fortifica-
tion, civics, urban life, commerce, botany and
food.
The transmission
of knowledge
In terms of cultural exchange, Islamic Spain was
a link In the transmission of Hellenistic science
and Greek philosophy to the Christian West. In
Toledo throughout the twelfth century, scholars
brought together on the initiative of the arch-
bishop, Don Raimundo, translated the most
influential works of Arab culture into Latin,
notably treatises on astronomy, medicine, physics,
natural history and philosophy. The translators
of Toledo spread through medieval Europe the
works of Aristotle, Galen and Hippocrates, with
commentaries by thinkers as distinguished as
Avicenna and Averroes. 17

Left. a page from Samuel ben
Ttbbon's 14th-century Hebrew
translation ofthe Guide of the
Perplexed by Moses
Maimonides.
Right, a page from an Arabic
version (12th-13th century) of
De Materia Medica,  treatise
on pharmacology by the
Greek nhvsician DiMcoridM
18
A century later, in 1251, the Infante Alfonso
of Castile, the son of Ferdinand III the Holy, had
the famous collection of fables known as the
Kalila wa-Dimna translated from Arabic into
Castilian. In the following centuries this was to
have a pronounced influence on Western litera-
ture, notably on the. Roman de Renart, on Boc-
caccio's Decameron, and on the 7/M of La
Fontaine.
When he became king In 1252, Alfonso sur-
rounded himself with jurists and men of science,
with historians and troubadours. He set in
motion the work of translating and adapting into
Castilian the heritage of Arabic culture. Muslims,
Christians and Arabic-speaking Jews all collabo-
rated in the task, among them Fernando of
Toledo, Juan of Aspa, Rabi Zag, Moses ha
Cohen, Abraham Alfaquin of Toledo and Master
Bernaldo el Arabigo.
In Murcia, Alfonso X founded the first college
in which adepts of the three religions could follow
the courses of the Arab scholar Muhammad al-
Riquti, originally from the district of Ricote, who
had stayed in the town after the entry of the
Castilian forces in 1266.
A model
of civilization
The pattern of life In Christian Spain was strongly
influenced by Arab civilization. From the early
Middle Ages onwards, the refined customs of the
Muslim towns penetrated the little Christian
courts of the north of the Iberian peninsula. They
brought the aristocracy a taste for luxury and a
sense of comfort.
Later, Muslim ways were adopted by the
Christian elites of Castile and Aragon. The
enthusiasm for things Arabic and Jewish shown by
Pedro I of Castile (1350-69) is often quoted by way
of example. In 1418, King Alfonso V of Aragon

wore a silk-bordered toque and gold-embroidered
vestments sent to him, along with other gifts, by
the Sultan of Granada, Muhammad VIII.
A European traveller, Leon of Rosmithal,
Baron of Bohemia, was astonished at the welcome
he received at Burgos in the palace of a powerful
lord when he visited Spain in 1466. Among the
Castilian count's entourage were several women
dressed in Muslim fashion, and he was offered
Arab-style food. In Segovia, King Henry IV of
Castile surrounded himself with Muslims and
Jews. Rosmithal recorded that he ate, drank and
dressed in the Muslim manner.
Shared games
and festivals
Some games were popular in both communities.
Chess, known in Arabic as skitrandj, was
introduced to Cordoba in the ninth century by
the musician ZIryab. It won great popularity in
al-Andalus, and was soon introduced to the
kingdom of Leon under the name of ajedrez. In
King Alfonso X's reign, it was the favourite
pastime of Castilians. The king and his wife,
Queen Violante of Aragon, shared their passion
for the game with knights and ladies of the court,
soldiers and monks, nobles and peasants, Muslims
and Jews.
Muslims and Christians also both staged
jousting tournaments. Lists were set up in the
main squares and gardens of Granada, and even
in the Alhambra itself. In the Jaen region on the
Feast of St. John, the Andalusian nobility fer-
vently competed in the juego de MM, a sport at
which the Muslims also excelled. A delegation of
the King of Granada achieved great success at the
court of John II of Castile by practising this form
of jousting before the monarch.
Besides the specifically Muslim festivals, two
seasonal festivals fixed by the Julian calendar
which indicated the different periods of the fiscal
and agricultural year, were celebrated In
Andalusia. They were known by their Persian
names : Nayruz was the Iranian New Year, while
Mahradjan fell on 24 June. In the towns and the
countryside of al-Andalus, people of all social
classes commemorated these days with entertain-
ments and merry-making.
There were carnival disguises and celebrations
in the Andalusian towns just as there were in
Christian Spain. In Andalusian poetry of the
eleventh and twelfth centuries there are frequent
references to Christian religious festivals, espe-
cially Easter, known as/M&.
As early as the twelfth century, the Muslims
of al-Andalus bought pastries to celebrate the
Christian New Year and Maundy Thursday. In
the second half of the thirteenth century, Andalu-
sians began to celebrate Christmas and New Year
in imitation of their Christian neighbours. On
1 January by the Julian calendar, the day they
called Yannayr, Andalusians gave each other
presents and cooked raised pastries shaped like
towns, called mada'in, thereby anticipating the
later Christian custom of making Twelfth-cakes
for Twelfth Night, though without small gifts
hidden within the pastry casing, t
RACHEL AR) E,
French istorian and Arabist.
doctor honoris causa of the
University of Granada. is
research director at the French
National Centre of Scientific
Research (CNRS) in Paris.
Among her publications are a
study on " Muslim Spain at the
time of the Nasrids
(1232-1492)" (De Boccard
publishers, Paris. 1990) and a
volume of studies on the
civilization f Muslim Spain
(E. J. Brill publishers. Leyden.
1990).
