A planner's dream
by Roger Aujame
30
ROGER AUJAME,
of France, is a former
colleague of Le Corbusier. In
1948 he worked on the United
Nations Secretariat building
project in New York, before
joining the UN as an expert in
the Housing, Building and
Planning Section. He later
became a Unesco staff
member in his capacity as a
specialist in educational
buildings.
IN November 1950, the government of the new
Indian state of the Punjab sent a mission to
Europe to choose a team of leading architects and
urban planners which could design a state capital.
As a result of their efforts, the Swiss-born French
architect Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, known as
Le Corbusier, was commissioned to draw up a
master plan and design the official buildings.
The site of the city was a vast plateau

The university auditorium,
Chandigarh (India).
extending over 500 hectares (half the area of cen¬
tral Paris). It was bounded to the north by the
foothills of the Himalayas, and to the east and
south by the beds of two rivers, the Sukhna and
the Patiali, which swelled to a torrent during the
monsoon. At the centre of the site, a band of
greenery ran from north to south. The land
sloped gently downwards towards the south to
large clusters of mango trees which formed
natural landmarks and to the village of Chandi,
from which the city would take its name.
The new city was destined to be the «eat of
the government and parliament of the Punjab and
also a university centre. In the first phase of con¬
struction, official buildings, dwellings and facili¬
ties for 150,000 inhabitants (including 10,000 civil
servants and their families) would be built. In
addition to the services sector, an industrial
development area with road and rail facilities
would be created. During the second phase the
population was to rise to 500,000.
The apostle of mechanization
Le Corbusier, who was known as the "apostle
of mechanization", applied his ideas about
modern city planning to a historic region which
had been" inhabited for thousands of years and
where people still travelled by donkey or camel,
or in carts drawn by horses or oxen. He proposed
an urban highway network linked at certain
points to a secondary network for motor traffic
which would move more slowly. The Punjabi
authorities accepted this approach although it
called for substantial investment at a time when
motor traffic was still virtually non-existent. The
capital of a developing state needed an infrastruc¬
ture which could underpin the country's spec¬
tacular development. Chandigarh would be able
to face this challenge since its planned road net¬
work would keep traffic flowing smoothly.
To define the character of Chandigarh, Le
Corbusier grouped together all the government
buildings in one vast area, the Capitol, at the
highest point of the city, with a marvellous view
towards the mountains. Between 1951 and 1963,
he designed and built most of these buildings
the High Court, the Secretariat, and the Legisla¬
tive Assemblywhich are today considered the
keystone of his work as an architect. At the foot
of the Capitol, the city slopes gently between the
two rivers, its plan defined by a simple, logical
network of arterial roads which meet at right
angles, like the streets and avenues of New York.
But similarities with New York end there.
Instead of New York's dense fabric of residen¬
tial blocks Chandigarh has neighbourhood units
where the housing is no more than five storeys
high, and where there are as many green spaces
as residential zones. There is also a much more
extensive network of roads, divided into categories
with different capacities and speed limits. None
of the main arterial roads is directly linked to
housing.
The neighbourhood units, each of which has
a specific purpose according to its location, are
mainly residential, with population densities 31

varying from 80 to 280 inhabitants per hectare.
Villages within the city, they have their own
shopping centres, schools and health centres.
They are served by an east-west transversal road,
a shopping street where the speed of traffic is
limited. This road provides a sense of continuity
and community between the different neighbour¬
hoods. It takes no more than a quarter of an hour
to walk through each one.
In addition to the Master Plan, Le Corbusier
drew up a tree planting scheme designed to create
micro-climates in particularly exposed areas, to
prevent drivers from being dazzled by headlights
on the main roads, and to provide shady areas
for car parks, cycle tracks and pedestrian paths
as well as wind-protection screens.
Le Corbusier and his team did not want to
impose Western ethics and aesthetics on the
Indian people but, through buildings rationally
designed to provide optimal conditions of com¬
fort, to respond to the aspirations of a people
living through a period of rapid change.
Chandigarh today
What is Chandigarh like today, a quarter of a cen¬
tury after Le Corbusier's death?
The city has developed slowly and not
entirely smoothly. It was clear right from the
start that demand for water would far exceed
available reserves, especially during the dry
season, and as a result a four-kilometre-long dam
was built across the Sukhna in record time to
store the monsoon rains and to provide irriga¬
tion for market gardens within the city limits.
This reservoir, now known as Lake Sukhna, has
also become the centre of a park and a leisure
complex.
The construction of the residential zones,
offices and business premises as part of the first
phase was slow and sporadic. Isolated groups of
buildings stood out in a kind of no-man's-land
without community facilities. Mobile market
stalls proliferated at the junctions of the access
roads until they were gradually pushed out by
the construction of shopping centres, as Le Cor¬
busier had planned.
Chandigarh today is changing rapidly. As a
result of the development on its boundaries of
the capital of the new state of Hariana, created
by the division of the Punjab, the population of
the conurbation as a whole is now a million.
The city has also become a major university
centre, which takes substantial numbers of stu¬
dents from the region and from neighbouring
countries. In 1976 it hosted a Unesco symposium
on urban problems and the education of town
planners. It is regarded by its inhabitants as an
ordered city, unlike the eastern suburb which is
developing chaotically with large numbers of
poor squatters in insanitary areas exposed to pol¬
luting industries and lacking community facilities.
Thirty years after the foundation of Chan¬
digarh, motor traffic still flows easily through the
city. The number of vehicles is increasing very
slowly, and the main form of transport is the
bicycle. Unfortunately, the proliferation of
motor scooters, motor cycles and above all of
motorized rickshaws, is gradually transforming
the almost rural calm of Chandigarh into a
deafening roar.
The slowest district to come to life was the
civic centre. Planned to house official bodies and
cultural and commercial institutions, it long
remained a building site. With the opening of
shops and the big cinemas loved by young Indians,
the heartbeat of the city became more lively.
The second phase is under way, and the
development of the Capitol according to Le Cor¬
busier's designs has continued with the construc¬
tion of a "Pit of Consideration", a "Tower of
Shadows", and traditional "tanks" in front of the
Legislative Assembly, and the erection of the
"Open Hand" monument, a symbol dear to Le
Corbusier which was inaugurated in 1987 on the
centenary of his birth.
Sketch of Chandigarh
by Le Corbusier.
