Tenth anniversary 
of the UNESCO Prize 
for Peace Education 
The UNESCO Prize for Peace Education was awarded for the first 
time ten years ago. The $60,000 prize, endowed by a gift from 
the Japan Shipbuilding Industry Foundation, rewards outstanding 
activities designed “to construct the defences of peace in the minds 
of men" and is awarded annually at a ceremony at UNESCO head- 
quarters in Paris. The laureates are designated by the Director- 
General on the basis of a recommendation by an international jury 
of scholars and statespersons, which reviews the many nomina- 
tions which are sent from all over the world to UNESCO. 
In the past, education to “alert public opinion and mobilize the 
conscience of mankind in the cause of peace’ has not generally 
had the support and recognition it deserves and urgently requires. 
The prize has made and is making a notable change in that direc: 
tion. It is bringing to ever wider attention a message articulated 
as early as 1911 by one of the first two laureates, honoured in 
1981, The World Organization of the Scout Movement, “Peace 
cannot be secured . . . unless the spirit for peace is there in the 
minds and wills of the peoples. This is a matter of education.” 
Over the years the jury has selected a diverse group of 
laureates representing a very broad range of activities in peace edu- 
cation. We recently carried out a survey of the laureates which 
revealed that the prize has spurred greater efforts for peace. Helena 
Kekkonen of Finland (1981) reflected that “The reputation brought 
by the UNESCO prize did a lot towards increasing the interest of 
Finnish educators and people in general in peace education. . . . 
In 1985-1987, laws obliging ‘children and young people to be 
brought up with a will for peace’ came into effect in Finland." 
Several prize-winners reported becoming more active within 
UNESCO and the United Nations system. The International Peace 
Research Association, for example, has undertaken a project on 
“Cultural Symbiosis in al-Andalus” (see page 31). 
The funds awarded to the laureates have helped them to carry 
further their service to the advancement of peace education. Among 
the endeavours supported by the prize money have been: financing 
the travel of peace researchers from developing countries to par- 
ticipate in the 1990 biennial meeting of the International Peace 
Research Association; the funding of a work on peacekeeping that 
is used as a basic text for the professional preparation of military 
officers and diplomats; the promotion of a book on the struggles 
for peace of Egyptian and Israeli women; research on a just world 
order; a series of films on development and peace. 
BETTY REARDON AND UNGKU ABDUL Aziz 
This article is based on a longer study by Betty Reardon (United States) 
and Ungku Abdul Aziz (Malaysia), both members of the International Jury 
of the UNESCO Prize for Peace Education. 
