The music of
Texas-Mexicans
expresses
the tensions of
a community
that remains
deeply
attached to its
cultural roots
while aspiring
to be part of
American



society
Tex-Mex music by Manuel Peña
THE American southwestthe states of Texas,
New Mexico, Arizona and Californiawas once
a part of Mexico. And, despite the lapse of almost
150 years since the United States annexed the ter¬
ritory, the Mexican-Americans of the southwest
still maintain a staunch allegiance to Mexican cul¬
ture, notably where music is concerned. This is
particularly marked among the people of New
Mexico, while the Mexican-Americans of Los
Angeles lay claim to a more recent but vigorous
musical tradition. Yet among Americans of Mex¬
ican descent, only in Texas do we find such deep
and robust folk traditions as those embodied in
música tejana, or "Tex-Mex" music. In fact, the
Texas-Mexicans have developed two distinctive
musical traditions, each with its preferred instru¬
ments and style, whose influence extends far
beyond the Texas borders: the conjunto (also
known as música norteña) and the orquesta tejana,
or simply orquesta.
Although only the conjunto is truly
indigenous to the Texas-Mexicans, both forms of
music possess vigorous and original features. And
if popular success can be taken as a criterion of
quality, then the wide diffusion of both the
conjunto and the orquesta throughout the
American southwest and beyond testifies to the
musical genius of the Texas-Mexicans.
Why have the Texas musicians been the
leading innovators among Mexican-Americans of
the southwest, and what are the factors that con¬
tribute to the cultural significance enjoyed by the
"Tex-Mex" tradition? The answer lies in the
nature of the contact between Anglo-Americans
(Anglos) and Mexican-Americans. In short, the
cultural and innovative vigour of the conjunto
and the orquesta derives from the special role each
has fulfilled in defining and mediating the inter-
cultural conflict that has existed between these
two communities in Texas.
There is no doubt that the Texas-Mexicans
bore the brunt of the Anglos' arrival, but they
did not yield easily to Anglo domination. In the
ensuing climate of intercultural resistance and ani¬
mosity, forms of expression that defined and con¬
trasted the two groups flourishedfor example,
the various stereotypes that each continues to
hold about the other.
The development of the conjunto and the
orquesta cannot be explained without reference
20

Left, the Conjunto Bernai
(around 1965) and (far left)
Narciso Martínez and Santiago
Almedia, two leading figures
in conjunto music (1938).
Above, Beto Villa and his
orquesta (around 1948).
Top, an orquesta of working
men (around 1915).
MANUEL PENA,
an American anthropologist
specializing in the music and
folklore of the Mexican-
Americans, is a professor of
humanities at California State
University, Fresno. He is the
author of The Texas-Mexican
Conjunto: History of a Working-
Class Music.
to this culturally charged atmosphere, but it
would be an oversimplification to ascribe their
vigour solely to that conflict. Since the beginning
of the century another factor has complicated the
issuethe opposition in Texas-Mexican society
between two distinct socio-economic groups, the
working class and an upwardly-mobile group
striving for middle-class status.
The conjunto,
soul of popular culture
The rapid evolution of the conjunto into a
mature, standardized style between 1935 and 1960
can be linked to the cultural strategies of the
téjanosthe mass of working-class people
employed in unskilled and semi-skilled jobs in
ranching, agribusiness, and retail services. A
musical style forged by a class which faced dis¬
crimination not only from an oppressive Anglo
community, but from an unsympathetic (if small)
Texas-Mexican middle class, the conjunto is
historically rooted in the working-class conscious¬
ness. In their preference for a unique folk style
which they themselves created, the tejano
workers have voiced their most profound cultural
and aesthetic identity, embodied in their choice
of instruments, genres and styles (all of them of
Mexican character), and the appropriate context
for their performance.
Of course, long before the modern conjunto
ensemble of diatonic button accordion, twelve-
string guitar, electric bass and drums had become
standardized, the accordion had become a
favourite instrument among the workers on both
sides of the Texas-Mexico border. Cheap German
models, with their single row of melody buttons,
were easily obtainable for the dances of the
téjanos and norteños (the people of northern
Mexico).
But the popularity of the accordion did not
go unchallenged. The Anglos, and later the
upwardly-mobile Texas-Mexicans, were quick to
condemn conjunto music. For example, in 1880
the San Antonio Express commented disparagingly
on the fandangos where the téjanos danced,
usually to accordion music: "These fandangos are
becoming so frequent they are a great curse to
the country. The respectable class of Mexicans
do not attend them."
Despite such condemnations, by both Anglos
and the "respectable class of Mexicans", the
accordion and its dances flourished, acquiring a
powerful presence that has endured to this day.
Particularly during the generally prosperous post¬
war years (1946-1960), the modern conjunto
experienced a rapid maturation and wide dispersal
in Texas and beyond. In the hands of such notable
talents as Narciso Martínez, Valerio Longoria,
Tony de la Rosa, Paulino Bernai, Ramón Ayala,
Flaco Jiménez and Estaban Jordán, the conjunto
has maintained an unchallenged supremacy
among working-class Texas-Mexicans.
The social strategy
of the orquesta
In contrast to the conjunto, the orquesta style of
music has tended, since the 1920s at least, to be
more "respectable" in that it has rpaintained a
strong association with the genteel elfcments of
Texas-Mexican society. Although orquestas
existed among the working class since the late
nineteenth century, they were poorly equipped
groups with a collection of makeshift instru¬
ments. This was especially true of rural areas,
where the lack of social and economic resources
made it difficult to maintain a well-organized
ensemble.
In the late 1920s, a new kind of dance
orquesta patterned on the American swing bands
began to gain currency, particularly in the larger
cities with their sizeable middle class. With a line¬
up of a least one trumpet, one saxophone, and
a rhythm section of guitar, bass, drums and (occa¬
sionally) piano, the new orquestas soon acquired 21

22
a unique Texas-Mexican character and had gained
a solid foothold by the late 1930s.
These ensembles clearly articulated the strate¬
gies of the small but growing middle class, which
became particularly influential after the Great
Depression of the 1930s. This group attempted
to distance itself from the Mexican workers and
sought to imitate the lifestyles of middle-class
Anglo-America. Hence its demand for American
music, which was generously represented in
orquesta repertoires by foxtrots, boogie-woogie
and swing music.
But the orquestas did not by any means res¬
trict themselves to American music. In fact the
hallmark of the Texas-Mexican orquesta soon
became its extreme stylistic diversity. It had far
more faces than any of the musical styles that
influenced it (including the conjunto). Even a cur¬
sory listening to the commercial recordings made
since the 1940s reveals the eclectic repertoire,
ranging from American swing to conjunto folk¬
songs, through Latin American dances such as the
danzón and the bolero. The orquesta has a charac¬
teristic tendency to transform the Mexican bolero
into the Tex-Mex polka, a unique genre that oscil¬
lates between an American and a Mexican pulse
by frequently interrupting the Latin American
beat with several bars of swing.
The stars of the Tex-Mex orquesta are Beto
Villa, who is considered the originator of the
style, and Little Joe Hernández, whose innova¬
tions revolutionized its development. Villa, who
became immensely popular throughout the
southwest after the release of his first recordings
in 1946, was most acclaimed for his folksy, "ran¬
chero" polkas, although he successfully blended
these homegrown polkas with the more cos¬
mopolitan rhythms of the American foxtrot and
the Latin American bolero and danzón.
Little Joe introduced a fresh wave of innova¬
tions in the early 1970s by infusing the Tex-Mex
polkas of Beto Villa with a strong dose of
American jazz and rock. This new sound, which
took the Mexican-American community by
storm, soon came to be known as la onda chicana
("the Chicano wave"). Such was Little Joe's
success that his orquesta became virtually synony¬
mous with Chicano music during the 1970s.
Throughout the southwest, amateur orquestas
were all striving to duplicate his original style.
The cultural significance of the orquesta is
inextricably linked both to the working-class
roots of the upwardly-mobile Texas-Mexicans and
to their desire to become more Americanized.
The orquesta, aware of this bicultural exis¬
tence, vacillated between Mexican and American
styles and genres, between its folk roots and its
newfound urban modernity, and between its
working-class origins and its increasing affluence.
The historical importance of the orquesta thus
may be said to lie in the desire of the Mexican
middle class to overcome the contradiction
between attempts at assimilation and a persistent
ethnic allegiance.

