From left to right:
Ellen Wilkinson;
Jaime Torres Bodet;
Jacques Maritain;
Léon Blum;
Eleanor Roosevelt with
René Cassin;
Julian Huxley with
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan.
mim
THE EARLY DAYS
16 November 1942.
London.
First meeting of the Conference of Allied
Ministers of Education (CAME) held on the
initiative of R.A. Butler, President of the Board
of Education of England and Wales. CAME,
which soon expands to include other countries,
notably the United States, holds many sessions
until the end of 1945. From its meetings the idea
gradually emerges of creating an organization
which will primarily be concerned with
promoting co-operation between the wartime
allies in the field of education.
1944 .
The poet Archibald MacLeish, Librarian of
Congress, is a member of the U.S delegation to
CAME and plays an important role in drafting
UNESCO's Constitution. The extension of
the future organization's field of competence,
especially to science, is discussed: should it be
UNEO, UNECO or UNESCO? The campaign
to put the S (for science) in UNESCO is led by
the British biochemist and historian of science
Joseph Needham and by his colleague Julian
Huxley, who will be UNESCO's first Director-
General.
9 October 1944
At Dumbarton Oaks (Washington, D.C), the
final preparations are made for the conference
at San Francisco, the following year, which will
create the United Nations Organization.
April-June 1945
The United Nations Conference on International
Organization (UNCIO) is held at San Francisco.
Acting on a motion by France and certain
Chinese and Latin American proposals, the Con¬
ference, on the sidelines of its discussions on the
organization of postwar security, recommends
that a conference be convened to establish an
international organization on "intellectual co¬
operation". The terms of the motion indicate the
French preference for a new organization built
around a revived and reorganized International
Institute of Intellectual Co-operation (IIIC).
(Founded in Paris in 1925 as the executive body
of the International Commission for Intellectual
Co-operation of the League of Nations, the IIIC
was in a sense the League's UNESCO.) There
is unanimous agreement on the basic principle
defined by Georges Bidault, the French Minister
of Foreign Affairs and head of the French dele¬
gation: "In addition to the economic and social
cornerstones, the international edifice needs a
third mainstay".
24 October 1945
The United Nations Charter adopted at San
Francisco comes into effect. Article 57 provides
for the creation of a specialized agency in the
fields of education and culture.
1-16 November 1945
A Conference to establish an Educational and
Cultural Organization of the United Nations
meets in London, at the invitation of the British
and French governments. In his welcoming
address, British Prime Minister Clement Attlee
says that "Today the peoples of the world are
islands shouting at each other over seas of mis¬
understanding. . . . 'Know thyself, said the old
proverb. 'Know your neighbour', we say today.
And the whole world is our neighbour." On 16
November, the Constitution of UNESCO is
signed by 37 States and the Final Act by 41. A
Preparatory Commission is created.
16 November 1945
The first meeting of the Preparatory Commis¬
sion is held in London. The Commission's first
secretary, the sociologist and historian Sir Alfred
Zimmern, is soon replaced for health reasons by
Julian Huxley.
im
General policy
16 September: The Preparatory Commission
for UNESCO moves from London to Paris
(Hotel Majestic, Avenue Kleber).
4 November: UNESCO's Constitution comes
into force with its ratification by the 20th signa¬
tory State, Greece.
November/December: The first session of the
General Conference opens at the Sorbonne under
the presidency of Léon Blum (France). There is
an enthusiastic atmosphere but also a debate
between those for whom "the action of
UNESCO presupposes a philosophy. . . , a
coherent general doctrine which enables it to see
things from a unique angle" (Julian Huxley) and
those who believe that it can and should do
without such a doctrine, in view of the practical
nature of its aims.
At the first session of UNESCO's Executive
Board, Julian Huxley (United Kingdom) is
elected Director-General.
UNESCO's first annual budget is set at
US$6,250,000.
31 December: The International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation ceases its activities,
which it had continued after the war. On 19
December it signs an agreement with UNESCO
"to ensure the continuity, under the responsi¬
bility of UNESCO, of the work accomplished
since 1924" by the Institute. The agreement pro¬
vides for the transfer to the United Nations from
the League of Nations, of the assets of the IIIC,
especially its library, its archives, stocks of pub¬
lications and the copyrights and publication
rights pertaining thereto. This transfer will be
effective in 1947.

Exact and natural sciences
An agreement between UNESCO and the
International Council of Scientific Unions
(ICSU) inaugurates UNESCO's policy of co¬
operation with the major international non¬
governmental organizations (NGOs). Created in
1931, ICSU today consists of 20 international
scientific unions (organized by discipline), 74
national members (academies of sciences) and 29
scientific associates.1 UNESCO/ICSU co¬
operation will constantly develop over the years
in the form of joint programmes in such fields
as geological correlation, climate change, scien¬
tific and technological information, and training
in biology in developing countries.
Culture
The International Council of Museums
(ICOM) is founded in Paris. Its documentation
centre, which becomes the UNESCO/ICOM
Documentation Centre, is a unique repository
of information on all aspects of museum manage¬
ment. ICOM's first director is the distinguished
French museologist Georges-Henri Rivière. Its
members include over 8,000 individuals and insti¬
tutions in 120 countries.
Communication
A section concerned with communications is
created in the UNESCO Secretariat.
Events
The French writer André Gide notes in his
Journal: "I send to Huxley, as epigraph to
UNESCO's programme, the last line of the
second book of the Aeneid, endowing it with a
symbolic meaning: '. . . and assuming the full
charge of my heritage, I shall strive towards the
heights'. Isn't this what UNESCO is trying to
do?"
mi
General policy
At the second session of the General Confer¬
ence, held in Mexico City, the ideological debate
which had marked the first session continues
with important contributions from Sarvepalli
Radhakrishnan (India) and Mgr Maroun
(Lebanon). In a notable address, Jacques Mari-
tain, head of the French delegation, distances
himself from Huxley's "evolutionary
humanism" and from his desire to provide
UNESCO with a specific doctrine. In the
"babel" of contemporary thought, he notes,
"Dig as we may, there are no common founda¬
tions for speculative thought. . . . Because the
goal of UNESCO is a practical goal, agreement
between minds can be reached spontaneously,
not on the basis of common speculative ideas,
but on common practical ideas, not on the affir¬
mation of one and the same conception of the
world, . . . but upon the affirmation of a single
body of beliefs for guidance in action. No doubt
this is little enough. ... It is, nevertheless, enough
to enable a great task to be undertaken."
At its second session the Executive Board
adopts for 1947 a programme whose main thrust
is the reconstruction and rehabilitation of educa¬
tional, scientific and cultural life in war-
devastated countries, principally in Europe, with
the accent on libraries, museums and the free
flow of information.
The first UNESCO Associations are founded
in Japan and the United States. This spontaneous
movement of support for UNESCO and the
propagation of its ideals spreads quickly. In 1991
there are almost 3,800 UNESCO Associations
and Clubs in 104 States in all the continents.
Exact and natural sciences
The first "Field Science Co-operation Offices"
(later to become Regional Offices for Science and
Technology) are founded in Cairo, Rio de
Janeiro, Nankin and New Delhi.
Communication
UNESCO carries out a survey in 12 war-
devastated countries on technical needs in press,
radio and films.
1
General policy
1. Statistics in this chronology not relating to the year
under which they are given are valid for the first half of
1991.
Jaime Torres Bodet (Mexico) is elected
Director-General on the expiry of Julian
Huxley's 2-year mandate.
UNESCO's General Conference meets in
Beirut and adopts by acclamation a resolution
instructing the Director-General "to stimulate
the dissemination of information about the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights"
adopted a few hours earlier by the United
Nations.
UNESCO's fellowship and study grant
programme is inaugurated. Awards are made
largely by the Education Sector (709 for
1984-1985), and by the Science Sector (355 for
the same period), for an average length of 6
months. The main beneficiary regions are Africa,
Asia and the Pacific, and the Arab States.
Launch of a Book Coupon Programme to
make it easier for people in soft currency coun¬
tries to buy books, and subsequently other cul¬
tural and scientific material, from hard currency
"" ,
'"'>, ill
I
O JEUNE HOMME
TOUfIC l>»»ir-N
The covers of three early
UNESCO publications.
countries. Almost $300 million worth of
UNESCO Gift Coupons sold by 1986.
UNESCO's trilingual quarterly Copyright
Bulletin is launched.
The first issue of the UNESCO Courier is pub¬
lished.
Education
At Utrecht, an international conference
organized by UNESCO and the Netherlands
government paves the way for the creation of
the International Association of Universities
(IAU), a centre for world-wide co-operation in
higher education (official foundation date: 1950).
Exact and natural sciences
The International Union for the Protection
of Nature (IUPN) is founded at Fontainebleau
at a conference convened by UNESCO and the
French government. Now named the Interna¬
tional Union for Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources, it has its headquarters at
Gland (Switzerland).
At Beirut, the General Conference adopts a
resolution proposed by India instructing
UNESCO to examine the possibility of estab¬
lishing an International Institute for the Arid
Zone. The idea will be taken up three years later
in the form of a UNESCO programme.
Culture
A programme for the translation of classic and
contemporary literary works in the "UNESCO
Collection of Representative Works" is inaugu¬
rated. This programme, with which Roger
Caillois, Etiemble and Jean Thomas are closely
associated, was partly due to an "arts and letters"
unit of which the Greek novelist Nikos Kazant-
zakis was a member.

The first issue of Museum, a quarterly maga¬
zine devoted to significant new developments in
museography, is produced in association with
ICOM. Museum is published in French, English,
Spanish, Russian and Arabic (plus special issues
in other languages).
The International Council on Archives (ICA)
is established.
On the initiative of Julian Huxley, the Inter¬
national Theatre Institute (ITI) is set up to pro¬
mote international exchange of knowledge and
practice in theatre arts and to stimulate creativity
in this field. Members and activities include 9
international organizations, 69 national or
associated centres; in co-operation with
UNESCO, the itinerant "University of the
Theatre of Nations". The ITI is currently
preparing a World Encyclopaedia of Theatre.
Communication
The "Beirut Agreement" for facilitating the
international circulation of visual and auditory
materials of an educational, scientific and cultural
character is signed. (It will come into force in
1954).
IW
General policy
A decision of the Economic and Social
Council of the United Nations (ECOSOC) sets
up an extended programme of technical assistance
to underdeveloped countries, leading to opera¬
tional action by UNESCO, where a department
of technical assistance headed by Malcolm
Adiseshiah (India) is established.
Education
A fundamental education pilot project is
launched in the Marbial valley (Haiti).
The first international conference on adult
education is held at Elsinore (Denmark): 3 similar
conferences will be held in 1960 (Montreal), 1972
(Tokyo) and 1985 (UNESCO HQ, Paris).
The first volume of Study Abroad, an inter¬
national handbook providing details of oppor¬
tunities for international study in UNESCO's
Member States, is published.
Social sciences
At the instigation of the United Nations,
UNESCO launches an information campaign,
based on meetings of anthropologists and biolo¬
gists, to expose the fallacies of racism. The Swiss
anthropologist Alfred Métraux plays an impor¬
tant role.
The International Social Science Bulletin, (later
the International Social Science Journal), a mul-
D tidisciplinary quarterly designed to foster com
munication and the exchange of knowledge
between professionals in the social sciences, is
published in English and French. Later, Spanish,
Arabic, Chinese and Russian editions are added.
Selections of articles occasionally appear in other
languages.
An exhibition is organized at the Musée Gal-
liera in Paris by UNESCO and the French
government as part of efforts to publicize the
Declaration of Human Rights. Texts and illus¬
trations are published in book form the following
year. This initiative comes from an "Ideas
Group" created the previous year in the Depart¬
ment of Mass Communication.
Culture
The first Catalogue of Reproductions of
Paintings, a listing of high-quality colour
reproductions, is published. UNESCO's
programme of travelling exhibitions of reproduc¬
tions will develop from this.
The International Council for Philosophy and
Humanistic Studies (ICPHS) is created on
UNESCO's initiative.
The ICPHS groups 13 international non¬
governmental organizations representing all the
disciplines of the human sciences (philosophy,
history, linguistics, anthropology, "classical"
studies, African and Asiatic studies, etc.). Its net¬
work of individual members and scientific bodies
are drawn from 145 countries. Publications con¬
nected with UNESCO's programme include:
Sources for the General History ofAfrica, Sources
for the History ofAsia, Corpus ofpre-Columbian
Archaeological Material, language atlases (China,
the Pacific), Concordance and Indexes ofMoslem
Tradition, an edition of the Mahabharata. The
ICPHS advises UNESCO on the choice of
authors for the literature translation programme
(later joined by International PEN for contem¬
porary authors).
At UNESCO's initiative, the International
Music Council (IMC) is set up. Today it groups
27 international professional organizations and
is represented in 68 countries. Its programme
includes the International Rostrum of Com¬
posers, the International Rostrum of Young
Composers, and the Music Rostra of Africa,
Below left, young members of the UNESCO
Club at Mangalore in India; right, a
performance by the itinerant University
of the Theatre of Nations, which works
with the International Theatre Institute.
Latin America and the Caribbean, and the Arab
world. The IMC is preparing a world history of
music written for the first time in a fully inter-
cultural perspective. The first volumes, devoted
to the Americas, will be published in English in
1992 by the Smithsonian Institution
(Washington, D.C), under the title The Universe
ofMusic: a History.
The first volume is published of the new series
of the Index Translationum, an annual multilin¬
gual guide to translations of books published in
UNESCO Member States. UNESCO thus con¬
tinues, after an interruption of 10 years, the work
of the International Institute of Intellectual Co¬
operation, which had created the guide and pub¬
lished it between 1932 and 1940.
For 1948 the Index lists 8,570 translations pub¬
lished in 26 countries. Volume 38 (published 1991
and covering the year 1985) lists 57,374 for 59
countries.
The most translated works and authors in the
last decade: the Bible, Lenin, Marx, Agatha
Christie, Jules Verne, Barbara Cartland, Leo Tol¬
stoy. Main trends: the rise in popular literature
and children's literature.
Since volume 32 (1979), this reference work
prepared mainly for publishers, translators,
writers, teachers and students has been com¬
puterized.
Collaboration begins between UNESCO and
the International Commission for Translation,
Lebanon (translation from and into Arabic.)
Communication
A first study on the professional training of
journalists is undertaken.
UNESCO sends the Canadian film-maker
Norman McLaren to China to train village edu¬
cators in animation techniques for the prepara¬
tion of cartoon films.
UNESCO creates a small radio recording
studio and broadcasts a weekly 15-minute
programme on-education, science and culture.
The programme, "UNESCO World Review",
is soon being broadcast in 18 languages by radio
stations in 47 countries.
