by Catherine Delano-Smith
The maps of yesteryear
often recorded myths
and legends as well as
hard facts. How far have
things changed today?
I
16
MAGINATION has played a key role in the his¬
tory of cartography. Long before the fifth cen¬
tury BC, when Greek scholars found the Earth
to be a globe, and in far corners of the Earth never
touched by their learning, people imagined the
shape of the Earth they lived on. The Aztecs saw
their world as five squares; ancient Peruvians as
a box; ancient Egyptians as egg-shaped. Some
early Chinese also believed the Earth to be like
an egg or like a ball, and derided those who
thought of it as flat and square within circular
heavens. In Japan, before Christian missionaries
arrived at the turn of the seventeenth century
bringing with them the notion that the world is
round, there seems to have been at least one
theory of the Earth as a cube.
Such ideas have been expressed in map form
from prehistoric times onwards all over the
world. In rock art, circles and squares, thought
to represent the world, are common motifs in
cave paintings or on carved rocks from Scan¬
dinavia to India and from Asia to the Americas.
The Korean Ch'iian Chin's image of a cubic



Earth is found in a manuscript of 1547. The five
squares of the Aztec "world" were painted on
the opening page of the Fejérváry Screenfold, a
ritual book of the pre-conquest period.
To some early societies, symmetry was
important. In pre-classical Greece, at the time of
Homer, the circle of the world was divided by
an equator, roughly along the line of the Mediter¬
ranean Sea. The ancient philosopher-geographers
of classical Greece drew lines around the sphere
dividing the Earth into parallel zones or climata,
all places within one zone having roughly the
same length of day. Some of the global symmetry
was lost when Pliny divided the part of the Earth
best known to the Greeks and Romans into seven
zones, all north of the equator, in order to allow
three for the "wilderness" of the far north.
In Hindu India, some authorities depicted the
world with four continents, corresponding to the
four cardinal points, although they had as yet no
"knowledge" of the Americas. Geographers in
the Roman period illustrated their textbooks with
diagrams of a spherical Earth subdivided into the
three continents they knew about (Asia, Africa,
Europe). Some, like Strabo in the first century
AD, suspected the existence of other land masses,
perhaps even a fourth continent, and a few early
historic maps from Europe seem to suggest this.
It was not, however, until after the last decade
of the fifteenth century that Europeans could
start to put the Americas onto their maps of the
world because some of them had seen the "new
lands" for themselves. Even so, it was not always
easy to know just what to draw. One map of 1502
(the Camino map) shows the two Americas
widely separated; another (1528, by P. Coppo)
shows North America as a group of small islands;
yet another (1548, by G. Gastaldi) depicts North
America as a continuation of Asia.
Several sixteenth-century maps showed a
Mare Indicum or Sea of Verrazano, almost
bisecting the northern continent. This was the
result of one voyager's too-hasty identification of
a stretch of inland water along the eastern sea¬
board of North America with the Pacific. Yet
other geographical myths concerned the penin¬
sulas of Florida and Yucatan, discovered by Euro¬
peans in 1513 and 1518-1519 respectively but first
charted as islands. Then there was the problem
of California, first correctly charted as a penin¬
sula after a Spanish fleet sent by Cortes had suc¬
cessfully navigated to the head of the Gulf in
1540, but nevertheless shown as an island on

-
I r
i'^-n
S*
y
! ¡J
t Jtigiii
I, '
p RAt%
Ixdilirici no1;
l'illi Tl' nil'll
î
»iliV.tVirfoli \
%
; I
j(! I SA' i
y k . - --
"p»rc>uwuiw«jgi" , ',
]
î
'
î
M TAA^
! ufe J I
[j.Vlv.rCJTCPnpiv.iiott>fiiilO>> i , -r J" K PT»/v n ^ ' «I» * U '
toniniioqiUivn-Ui.l.lhWo f LKKTÄlO ,
hoorn.\ro^coiccluiicriot«f /t = 5*,,,.-,J;,i, . .
Icqiulricvmnfllulcri-iiucV -7 . «& -ja
£lnc!>o crccllcnflmio c
Votvtifl'mio ijw.itor cl qn-ilf; . lUIlflU
*
»
many seventeenth- and eighteenth-century maps.
A similar misconception was a belief in a con¬
tinuous northwestern sea passage across North
America, providing a northern route to China.
Ortelius showed it clearly on a map of 1564. In
1592 a Greek sailor reported he had reached its
western end. Thereafter, for three centuries,
Europeans vied with each other to find this
mythical passage, driven by the hope of gain
through the trading advantage the way through
to the Pacific was thought to bring them.
The location of legends
Many maps depict famous events. These events
may be historically testifiable ones such as the
sites of recent battles. Others show where a
historic event was thought to have taken place.
Some Indian maps from the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries show not only Vraj (the
birthplace of Krishna) but also a host of places
sacred to Hindus as part of the Krishna legend.
Still others showwithout any annotation or
stylistic differentiationthe location of wholly
imagined events. Atlantis and a host of other
legendary islands were shown on maps of the
Atlantic in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries
especially.
Long-lived legends about famous personages
such as Alexander of Macedonia are other
examples of the historical imagination which
were depicted on maps. The "Alexander myth"
is seen on Ptolemy's maps of Asia in the Columns
of Alexander (representing the Caspian Gates
through which Alexander was said to have
passed). It is found too on a late eighteenth-
century Indian map of the world on which Alex¬
ander is seen with the men who allegedly asked
for his help against the mythical giants Gog and
Magog and with the wall he was said to have built
to imprison the accursed ones. A Christian map-
pamundi of the thirteenth century depicts just
such a Wall of Gog and Magog in northeast Asia,
probably an echo of the real Great Wall of China.
- ' öUiuiciratrrc
Detail of the Fra Mauro world
map of 1459. The map Is a
compendium of geographical
sources, Including Portuguese
expeditions to Africa,
Ptolemy's Geography, the
Marco Polo narratives, and
portulan charts.
17

18
Asia was also supposed to be the home of the
priest-king Préster John, an early medieval Euro¬
pean legendary hero who would, it was said, help
the Christian world against the Muslims in the
Holy Land. By the mid-fifteenth century, though,
Préster John's kingdom was believed to be in
Ethiopia, part of an India which extended over
much of Africa as well as Asia. After 1488, by
which time the Portuguese had opened a new
seaway to India round the southern tip of Africa
and past Abyssinia, maps of Africa showed an
enthroned Préster John, his palace, or the royal
mountain, Mount Amaro, in which his sons were
supposed to have been incarcerated until the
order of succession called each to the throne in
turn.
Fictional as well as philosophical literature
has spawned a different category of imagined
historical places, where the entire country or
region depicted on the map is mythical. An early
example is the woodcut map produced by Hans
Holbein in 1518 for the second edition of Thomas
More's Utopia. The tradition continues today.
Imagination and power
Maps have also carried graphic messages about
the imagined political supremacy of nations or
societies. They may have been drawn to back ter¬
ritorial claims or support chauvinistic notions
about status (such as maps drawn by Nazi
archaeologists to show the distribution of
Neolithic "Germans" in Greece and Bronze Age
"Germans" in Scandinavia).
One traditional conception of China placed
the heartland of the royal domains in the centre
of four concentric zones, the outermost of which
represented the zones of "allied barbarians" and,
most distant of all, of "cultureless savagery". The
Chinese were thus less than impressed when the
Jesuit missionary Matteo Ricci arrived and



showed them maps of the world in which Europe
and the Atlantic occupied the central positions.
Tactfully, Ricci drew another map centred on the
Pacific Ocean.
Maps may reflect the economic competition
that so often underlies political concerns. Maps
from the period of European discovery
represented the often fabulous mineral wealth of
the "new" lands to justify the discoverers'
exploits and to encourage further investment in
their voyages.
From the Americas came the legend of the
alluring Kingdom of Gold and the even more
attractive El Dorado. The latter was the legen¬
dary city of the king of "Manoa", situated on the
shores of an equally mythical "Lake Parima",
which the Spaniards heard about in 1530 and
which they supposed to lie in the basin of the
Orinoco river. The legend gave rise to numerous
expeditions to the highlands of Guiana, one of
which was dispatched from England by Sir
Walter Raleigh. Part of Raleigh's manuscript map
(1595) survives, showing "that mighty, rich and
beautiful Empire of Guinea, and. ..that great and
golden city which the Spaniards call El Dorado
keep out the "barbarians".
Detail from the 13th-century and the naturals [call] Manoa". The Frenchman
^:rshMoawp;Partthoefrsh t- ^7 -s^ * «weg** map -m ^
legendary wall built by on which the elusive Lake Parima was promi-
Aiexander the Great around nently shown, with equally fabulous creatures
the kingdom of Magog to n£arby) such as headless men and fears0mely
armed womenthe Amazonians of another
ancient myth.
A new world
seen in terms of the old
Similar reasons of self-interest led European map-
makers to represent the landscapes of what was
to them a new world in terms of the old. To
avoid alarming prospective colonists, maps por¬
trayed the landscape as gentle: open parkland,
dotted with round trees like the familiar oaks and
elms of the undulating plains of southern England
or lowland France. Colonial settlements were
ranked in terms of the European social order;
native settlements were discreetly marked. In fact,
the existence of natives was altogether better
ignored, according to this view. The myth of a
European, not an Indian, country was thus early
perpetrated by maps. It is still there, in the Euro¬
pean place-names which dispossessed the Indian
ones.
Even in their own countries, European map-
makers could be equally selective in what they
put on or (just as significant) omitted from their
maps. In the seventeenth century, the neat, ord¬
erly and wholly bland appearance of the early
atlases portrayed an imaginary landscape that
pushed the social and economic contrasts and
political disorders of real life out of mind. By the
late eighteenth century, standardized shading had
CATHERINE DELANO-SMITH,
of the United Kingdom, has
taught historical geography at
a number of British universities
and is currently Visiting Reader
in London University's
Department of Mediterranean
Studies. Her special interests
in the history of cartography
include prehistoric maps, the
history of map signs before
1800, and maps in bibles.

reduced the entire urban scene, with the houses
and workplaces of the great and the poor, to a
mythical uniformity, another landscape of the
mind.
In search of an earthly Paradise
Finally, but fundamentally, maps have been used
from the beginning to portray the imagined
worlds of religious man. Like the question of the



shape of the geographical world, the structure of
the cosmos has varied according to the sacred
myths and the teaching of the gods in each
society.
Cosmological maps tend to be schematic in
style and often symmetrical. Common to many
cosmologies, especially in Asia, dominated by the
heights of the Himalayas, is the concept of a cen¬
tral mountain, the vertical axis of the cosmos, like
the Mount Sumeru of the Buddhists and the
Mount Meru of the Hindus. Muslim cosmolog¬
ical maps placed Mecca at the centre of the Earth
because of its position opposite the centre of the
sky.
Of vital concern to every believer is the
journey from this world to the next. Maps have
been made to guide the newly dead. In the New
Hebrides early in the twentieth century, the
labyrinth design was still being sketched out in
the sand to teach initiates The Way. The route
had to be memorized. From Australia to Siberia,
complex designs painted on shamans' drums
served as aide-mémoires. In ancient Egypt, maps
were painted on the outside of coffins together
with relevant extracts from The Book of the
Dead. Here word and image were inscribed
together to ensure the individual's safe journey
through the underworld.
Maps of the geographical world have also
been richly, sometimes excessively, invested with
religious myth and symbolism. Christians came
to identify each of the three continents of the Old
World with one of Noah's sons (Shem for Asia,
Ham for Africa, and Japheth for Europe). From
the eighth century AD onwards, their figures or
names were sometimes included in diagrams
drawn to illustrate, in the Roman tradition, new
copies of older written geographical descriptions
of the world (the so-called T-O maps).
Another feature imposed on European
regional and world maps by the Christian theo¬
logical imagination has been the terrestrial para¬
dise or Garden of Eden. In the fifth century AD
an Irish monk, St. Brendan, sailed westwards to
find what he believed were the Isles of Paradise.
St. Brendan's islands remained on maps for many
centuries, even when, as on the Hereford map-
pamundi, Eden was marked in the east. St.
Brendan's islands (sometimes marked as the For¬
tunate Isles) were often confused with real
Atlantic islands. Usually, though, in accordance
with the description in Genesis chapter 2, Eden
was placed in the east. On medieval maps it was
placed prominently at the edge of the map.
With the emergence of Protestantism in the
sixteenth century, and especially John Calvin's
insistence on a literal interpretation of the bib¬
lical text, Eden had to be shown close by the Tigris
and Euphrates, two of the four rivers said to water
it. The religious drive to find an earthly Eden
could be strong. Despite increasingly detailed
knowledge of real world geography, the search
continued to recent times. In 1666, M. Carver
published a map in his book showing Paradise
in Armenia, and in 1882 General Gordon put for¬
ward his idea that, before the Flood (yet another
of the world's "great myths") Paradise had been
situated on Praslin in the Seychelles.
Perhaps we should not dismiss the topic of
imagined worlds too lightly, as if it illustrated
merely some of the quainter sides of human
nature or human history. We still often prefer to
imagine the world or to lead others to see it in
a preferred way. National maps may present a
"scientific" face but it is not difficult to deduce
omissions, such as military installations, airfields,
or politically sensitive targets such as biological
research centres. Nor is it difficult to discern the
way modern geographical "myths" are created
through, for example, the removal from the map
of settlements after rumours of certain types of
man-made disaster, or the translation of sea or
city names on the map as a cartographic substi¬
tute for political aggression less easily achieved
overtly. In modern as in ancient maps, myth and
legend remain ingrained.
Above, a map of the world
embellishes an Initial capital
letter In a 1417 manuscript
of the De Chorographia,
a treatise by the Latin
geographer Pomponius Mela
(1st century AD).
Detail from an atlas by the
French sailor and
cartographer Guillaume Le
Testu (1556).
19
