c
SULTAN, seraglio, harem : such words long
epitomized Ottoman civilization in the
dreams of Westerners. The master of an
immense empire stretching from Egypt to
Persia and from Baghdad to Belgrade, the
sultan seemed to be a fabulous character who
enjoyed limitless power and endless pleasure.
It was easy to imagine him living in his harem
as if in a garden of earthly delights.
The reality was very different. The harem
was a restricted enclave governed by punc-
tilious protocol and strict rules, subject to the
authority of the / :  </f, the ruling
suttan's mother. In it love was codified, if not
ritualized. And if some sultans abused its
pleasures, others only went there for the sake
of custom ; and the majority only visited it in
moderation.
In the middle of the sixteenth century the
women of the sultan's eraslio moved into the
: AROUNE HAARDT,
rench journa ! ! St. was a staff member of
JNESCO's D ! V ! s ! on of Cu ! tura ! Herbage from1983
o 1987. She is currently preparing an exh ! b ! t ! on.
! S part of the UNESCO Silk Roads project, on the
roere Jaune. a motor ally from Beirut to Tibet
e ! d ! n 1931. 1932.
harem of the Topkapi. a new palace which was
to be the imperial residence until the
nineteenth century. Marvenousty situated on
a hi ! ! overtooking the Sea of Marmara, the
Bosphorus and the Golden Horn, the
immense complex covers 700, 000 square
metres, with its vast gardens, its murmuring
waters and its terraces overlooking the sea. At
its heart was the harem, where only the sultan
had the right to enter and move around freely.
This forbidden domain adjoined the bar-
racks of the haiberdiers-with-tresses, tough
mountain troops from Anatolia who cut the
wood that fue ! ted the palace fires. To avoid
temptation, these soldiers wore high collars
that made it impossible for them to turn their
heads, and their long, braided locks served as
blinkers.
As time passed, the harem grew, spreading
Ot] tW3rn', in) n\rtnttnnctnr) nfrt) tn) r' :
46
 Topkapi &  
 c Mf

Cupolas and minarets of the harem.
Right, the sultan's baths.
central core. There are more than 400 rooms
in its three precincts : the living quarters of the
black eunuchs ; the women's quarters, where
the apartments of the suttan's mother,
daughters and odalisques were situated ; and
the men's apartments, where the sultan and
the princes of the b) ood hved.
One enters the harem through a gate
leading into the Domed Hall with Cabinets,
where merchants deposited jewellery, furs and
clothing for the concubines. The living quarters
of the black eunuchs, which have a courtyard
decorated with btue, green and turquoise cer-
amic tiles, are three storeys high. The size and
decoration of the apartments and the baths
varied according to the eunuchs'rank.
At the entrance to the women's quarters,
an inscription on the bronze door recalls the
suttan's overeignty. This is a world where the
play of tight, the splendour of the ancient
tiling and the refinement of the decoration
combine to produce an impression of paradise
on earth. In these apartments with their rich
hangings, luxurious carpets and deep divans,
it is easy to imagine the beautiful kadins (the
sultan's principal consorts, officially recog-
nized as such though not married to him)
waiting bejewelled for their master.
The way to the apartments of the valide
sultan ties through a courtyard, decorated with
twenty-five marble columns. From a small
wooden belvedere situated nearby, it was pos-
sible to survey all the activities of the harem.
These palatial quarters comprise a series
of rooms in the Western style, with
monumental chimneypieces, mirrors and areas
of wait decorated with paintings. In the
bedroom are panels painted with imaginary
landscapes, a baldaquin of gilded wood, and
divans with shimmering fabric. An arched
doorway leads to the queen mother's private
prayer room.
The queen mother's baths are arranged in
the same way as those of her son. The first
room was for undressing, white sipping drinks
or sherbets ; in the second cold water was
provided ; hot water in the third. The basins
and tubs were of alabaster.
The suttan's private apartments consist of
four great rooms, the most beautiful and the
best preserved of the harem. In the Imperial
Halt, a dais with marble columns and a balus-
trade of gilded wood encrusted with mother-
of-peart was used by mate musicians and
singing girls. The sultan's throne, surmounted
by a baldaquin, stood on a peart carpet which
had been embroidered in the harem. On his
visits to the harem this was where he gave the
receptions that no one from the city or even
the palace could attend, where the women
danced, played music and recited poems.
The vast Privy Chamber of Murad III,
which was built by the great architect Sinan,
displays all the splendour and nobility of tate-
sixteenth-century Ottoman art. Its beautifully
worked dome is supported by four arches. The
decoration ofthe walls is handled in such a way
as to present a subtle gradation of colours and
tight, from lower panels coated with a unique
red varnish (the secret of their manufacture
perished with the Iznik craftsman who made
them) to stained-glass windows above. A foun-
tain decorated with stone flowers and a huge
gilded hearth are set opposite one another.
" Water is the source of life, " the Qur'an
proclaims. There are many fountains In the
47

Harem, and the incessant murmur of water,
it is said, served to muffle the voice of the
prince during his secret conversations....
Beneath the Privy Chamber, the women
disported themselves in a marble swimming-
pool, opening on one side onto a second, out-
door pool.
Other rooms still wait to be visited : the
apartment of the crown prince, where gold,
mother-of-pear ! and ivory are fabulously min-
gled ; the so-cailed Meeting Place of the Jinns,
a narrow corridor that was nonetheless an
important artery of the harem In which many
a conspiracy was hatched ; the Golden Way,
the passage the sultan used to go to religious
cetebrations. It is said that when a new sultan
ascended the throne, he would throw golden
coins at all the women of the harem lined up
along these walls.
Leaving the harem by the Aviary Gate is
like waking from a dream. The harem is
unlike any other palace. It is an unreal resi-
dence, a paradise that enchants by its refine-
ment but chills by its prisonlike aspect.
Iron rules
The harem has been the theatre of many dra-
matic events, but Its inflexible laws remained
the same for four centuries.
All the women of the harem were bought
and became slaves of the sultan. They were
magnificent girls, recruited from among the
captives of conquered lands. The age of entry
ranged from five to sixteen. In the intrigue-
filled chambers of the court, it was beauty, not
The feadin mom of Ahmad
birth, that could win advancement by
attracting the sultan's eye. Most of the girls
were destined to remain servants, but those
picked out by the harem superintendent, a
woman known as the kaya kadin, received a
thorough education, so they might please the
ruler.
Life in the harem was punctuated by the
festivities held to celebrate births and mar-
riages. Normally girls who failed to attract the
sultan were freed at the age of twenty-five,
when they received a pension for life and were
given in marriage to a member of the court
or the clergy.
It is hard to say exactly how many women
lived in the harem. Ottoman sources ay 700,
which would seem to be a maximum in view
of the space alloted them. A document dating
from the beginning of the seventeenth century
puts the figure at 456.
In the harem, the word of the valide sultan
was law. Through weakness or incapacity,
some sultans even allowed their mother to
govern in their place. She alone possessed
sumptuously decorated apartments and a civil
and a military household. Even more signifi-
cantly, her apartments were the only ones that
had access to the sultan's private chambers.
The custom of employing eunuchs to
guard the palace women was a very ancient
one. Orieinatine in Mesopotamia, it spread
around the world, from China to Rome. The
Ottoman harem was no exception to the rule.
The black eunuchs who had charge of it from
the end of the sixteenth century retained their
power and influence until the end of the
imperial period.
The eunuchs, who came from Africa,
especially Ethiopia, were subjected to an iron
discipline. Their most important tasks
included preventing outsiders from entering
the harem and stopping the women from
absconding. They received a training com-
parable to that given to the royal pages ; they
lost their own names, being given those of
flowers instead, and were taught music and cal-
ligraphy. Their commander was the third
highest officer of the empire.
A fragile jewel
In order to draw the attention of the interna-
tional community to the wonders of the Tur-
kish patrimony, the Director-General of
UNESCO launched an appea) in 1983 for the
protection of the historic quarter of Istanbul
and other sites. One of the priorities was the
restoration and rehabilitation of the Topkapi
Palace.
In the nineteenth century, the sultan
moved to the palace of Dolmabahce and Top-
kapi was abandoned to the surveillance of a
few guards. The building suffered substantial
damage : there was a fire in 1863 and an earth-
quake in 1894, white in 1871 some buildings
were demolished to make way for a railway
line. After the proclamation of the republic,
the palace was transformed into a museum,
but only part of the complex was placed under
the control of the its directors.
The harem is, naturally, one of the ; ewets
of the palace ; its architecture is an exceptional
memorial to the richness and diversity of
Ottoman civilization. Its reputation has con-
tinued to grow. Projects, excavations and
investigations have multiplied ; more than 400
studies of it have been published.
Built as it is of wood, it is particularly vut-
nerable to the risk of fire, and the first pri-
ority is an efficient system of alarms and extin-
guishers. Restoring the building is no easy
task, for, as with any monument, its architec-
tural features need to be respected, both inside
and out. That means using the original
materials, including ivory, ebony, teak and
go) d) eaf, ai ! hard to come by these days. In
spite of the precautions taken to protect it
from unfavourable weather conditions, the
edifice is rapidly ageing and considerable main-
tenance and repair work is needed. N
48
