Celestial cartography
Astronomical map-making from the star
catalogues of Antiquity to the electronic
images of today
X ROM very early times, the stars in the firma¬
ment have held a strong fascination for man. In
the movements of the stars the Ancients saw the
operation of supernatural forces which could
influence human destiny. Believing that there
were portents to be read in the stars, our distant
ancestors began to observe and make precise
descriptions of the heavens.
Thus astronomy has a very long history. Ves¬
tiges of astronomical observatories and instru¬
ments dating back to 3000 BC have been found
in Sumer, Babylon, China, Egypt, Mexico, Peru
and the United Kingdom.
The earliest known star catalogues were the
work of Babylonian astronomers and date back
to about 1700 BC, during the reign of the great
Babylonian monarch Hammurabi. Calculations
concerning the movements of the Moon and of
the planets, especially of Venus, were almost cer¬
tainly made for astrological purposes. For the
Egyptians, Sirius, the Dog star, to which they
accorded divine attributes as "Sothis", or the
"Star of Isis", was "the bringer of the new year
and of the floodwaters of the Nile". In fact, the
day of the year on which Sirius was first visible
on the horizon, just before sunrise, usually coin¬
cided more or less with the rising of the Nile
waters, on which subsequent sowing and then
harvesting of crops depended.
It was not long before the Ancients became
aware of the slow progression of the Sun, the
Moon and the five great planets of the solar
system (Venus, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter and
Saturn) along a regular path across the heavens.
This belt around the sky, first observed by the
Babylonians and later by the Greeks, is divided
into twelve segments, or astrological signs, which
correspond to the constellations which occupied
these segments some 2,000 years ago (Taurus the
bull, Cancer the crab, Leo the lion, etc.). The
Zodiacal belt corresponds to what modern
astronomers call the "ecliptic", the apparent
annual path followed by the Sun.
The Greek astronomer Hipparchus (161 to
127 BC) was the first to draw up a star catalogue
worthy of the name. He indicated the position
of about a thousand stars, attributing to each of
them a magnitude based on its luminosity, or
brightness.
Star catalogues
An accurate listing of the stars was essential for
navigation on the open sea and for making large-
scale land measurements. Until the end of the
Middle Ages the Almagest, an astronomical and
mathematical encyclopaedia compiled by
Ptolemy around 160 AD, remained the authorita¬
tive reference book for astronomers. The
Almagest, which survived in an Arabic transla¬
tion, is a digest of the mathematical knowledge
of Antiquity. It contains a catalogue of forty-eight
constellations and 1,022 stars with their ecliptic
co-ordinates and magnitudes.
The first really usable astronomical atlas,
however, was the German astronomer Johann
Bayer's Uranometria, which was drawn up in
1603. It consisted of fifty-one maps and listed
1,277 stars, with the stars in each constellation
being designated in decreasing order of brightness
by the letters of the Greek alphabet. When fur¬
ther letters were needed, the Latin alphabet was
used.
With the aid of the telescope at the Green¬
wich Royal Observatory, the English astronomer
John Flamsteed added considerably to the
number of stars listed. His Historia Coelestis
In this Illuminated design from
the psalter of Blanche of
Castile (1230), an astronomer
makes observations with an
astrolabe. He Is assisted by a
clerk and a computlst.
WERNER MERKLI,
Swiss printer and publisher, is
editor of the German-language
edition of the UNESCO Couner.
He has produced astronomical
maps of the stars, the planets
and the Moon. 41

42
Britannica, published in 1725, designated some
3,000 stars by number and exceeded all earlier
catalogues both in accuracy and in the number
of stars listed.
For a long time observation was limited to
the northern skies. The explorers and navigators
of the sixteenth century were the first Europeans
to see the southern skies and constellations in
their totality. The first catalogue of the stars of
the southern skies, complete with the positions
of 341 of them, determined by telescope, was
drawn up in 1676 by the English astronomer
Edmond Halley from the south Atlantic island
of St. Helena.
During an expedition (1750 to 1754) to the
Cape of Good Hope, the French astronomer
Nicolas Louis de la Caille listed some 10,000 stars
grouped in fourteen constellations, as well as
several new nebulae. His star catalogue was pub¬
lished in 1756.
The Bonner Durchmusterung, established in
the middle of the nineteenth century under the
direction of the German astronomer Friedrich
Argelander, is still today a basic reference work
for the stellar astronomy of the northern skies.
Based on observations made at the Bonn obser¬
vatory, it gives the position and characteristics
of some 350,000 stars. After Argelander's death,
the "BD" catalogue was extended to cover the
southern hemisphere, with a listing of some
500,000 stars being added by observatories in Cor¬
doba (Argentina) and Cape Town.
During the last century visual observation of
the stars was largely replaced by the use of pho¬
tographic plates. Objects whose luminosity is too
faint to be registered by the human eye can be
photographed, and the introduction of this form
of observation led to the discovery of millions
of previously unknown stars. For practical pur¬
poses, rather than referring to star maps
astronomers tend to make use of star catalogues
and listings of stellar co-ordinates, whether these
be exhaustive catalogues or what are called fun¬
damental catalogues which furnish extremely
accurate details of the positions and motions of
a reduced number of selected stars well dis¬
tributed over the sky.
Flattening the sky
It is impossible to produce a projectiona sys¬
tematic representation on a flat surface of the
features of a curved surface, such as that of the
Earth which is both complete and wholly
accurate. Even using Mercator's famous cylin¬
drical projection, which presents the globe as
though it were an unrolled cylinder, there is
inevitably a degree of distortion of angles, dis¬
tances and surfaces. Similar problems arise in
mapping the sky.
Above, the world-system
devised by the Portuguese
cosmographer Bartolomeu
Velho In 1568 reflects the
close links between
cosmography and cartography
at the Renaissance.
Above right, detail of one of
the "Original drawings of the
patches of the Moon" made
after observations by Giovanni
Domenico Cassini between
1675 and 1677. The date and
hour are Indicated by
annotations In Cassinl's own
hand.
Right, component of an
astrolabe made at Louvain In
1565 In the workshops of
Gauthier Arsenius, geographer
of the emperor Charles V.

ï' ' -
TSR ? ' jÄ
fei
r l
L
. Hj
S
The planets, air, fire, sky
and water are disposed
around the Earth In
concentric circles In an
Illuminated design from a
manuscript (1245) of
L'Image du Monde
("The Mirror of the
World"), a treatise
about the universe by
Gossuin de Metz.
ipiiauous
fmctnöic o»^j«. cftot
'if.quctcuouàûtMr
que Uuu fair lautn
To draw up a map of the celestial sphere, the
positions of the stars are established in relation
to two arcs which are perpendicular to each other
and which are analagous to terrestrial longitude
and latitude. Individual heavenly bodies, such as
the Sun, the Moon or the planets, are usually
represented in the form of a sphere in perspec¬
tive, as though the observer were situated some¬
where in space, like a camera aboard a spaceship.
The hidden or the visible face of the star is shown,
as, for example, in the case of the Moon, or else
the sphere is shown cut up into three segments,
with two additional segments for the poles. Points
or surfaces at the eastern and western extremi¬
ties, or at the top and bottom of the sphere, will
be seen in extremely foreshortened perspective.
For scientific purposes a Mercator projection is
used with the addition of separate representations
of the poles.
The inconceivably huge distances that are
involved in stellar systems, like those that separate
the planets of our solar system, with their rings
and moons, cannot be reproduced without great
distortions. However, mathematically calculated
reduction scales enable us to have some idea of
the positions, trajectories and revolution phases
of these bodies.
Movement in the Universe
Though we speak of "fixed" stars which rise each
night above the horizon, the universe is in per¬
petual movement. The Sun, the Moon and the
planets, comets and shooting stars soar through
space but leave no trace of their passing. How
can such movement be mapped? In ancient times
astronomers constructed armillary spheres, com¬
plex assemblages of moving rings which
represented the movement of the planets, and
astrolabes, which furnished a picture of the sky
at a given moment. These instruments remained
in use until the seventeenth century.
For centuries the Earth was depicted as a flat
disc, situated in the centre of the universe, above
which moved the majestic span of the celestial
vault with its fixed stars. Yet, in ancient times,
Greek sages such as the Pythagoreans Hipparchus
and Erastosthenes had observed the curvature of 43

the Earth's surface and had deduced from this that
it was probable that the Earth was spherical in
shape and moved like a planet round the Sun.
Anaxagoras found himself accused of atheism
and banished for maintaining that the Sun was
a ball of fire bigger than the Péloponnèse. Some
1,500 years later the Italian mathematician and
astronomer Galileo (1564-1642), in his turn, was
forced to foreswear his discovery that the world
was a sphere. The heliocentric model of the
universe had failed to gain acceptance in Antiq¬
uity and the geocentric vision of the universe held
undisputed sway from the days of Ptolemy to the
Middle Ages, being defended by the Church with
increasing vigour. It was only after the publica¬
tion of the works of such famous astronomers
as Copernicus, Galileo and Kepler, who estab¬
lished the laws of gravity that rule the movements
of the planets, that the heliocentric model finally
triumphed.
Signs and images
Exploration of our solar system by spacecraft,
both manned and unmanned, and by the Hubble
space telescope, has given fresh impetus to the
mapping of the Sun, the planets and their moons.
Electronic video cameras send a constant stream
of high-definition images back to the Earth,
where they are juxtaposed and mounted, usually
in the form of spherical projections or as Mer¬
cator projections.
The Chinese used to represent the stars as
circles or dots, the Arabs depicted them as small
coloured discs and the Egyptians and the Greeks
as radiant star shapes. Until the modern age,
European cartographers followed the Egyp¬
tian/Greek example, but since the introduction
of stellar photography, the stars have been shown
as dots proportional in size to their luminosity.
It is more difficult to depict the nebulae,
galaxies, binary stars, star clusters and comets, and
harder still those heavenly bodies such as pulsars,
quasars and black holes, that are beyond the
reach of optical astronomy and whose existence is
revealed to us by the radio waves they emit.
Special charts are used to portray magnetic fields
and solar winds, which are depicted as curves.
The US National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) has also published
colour maps showing mineral formations on the
surface of the Moon.
The nomenclature used to designate the relief
features of stars in the solar system is governed
by the Paris-based International Astronomical
Union (IAU), the highest authority in the field
of astronomy. One of IAU's achievements has
been to establish a common nomenclature for the
main relief features of the Moon. To facilitate
international understanding of sky maps all the
names on them are usually written in Latin. With
the same objective in mind, each star listed in
the star catalogues has its own identification
number.
Preliminary topographic map
of Venus drawn from data
transmitted by the US space
probe Pioneer in 1980.
^¡r 'jmsssi
£*>¿L
44
