Mozart as a man of the Enlightenment
by Jean Lacouture
The philosophy of the Enlightenment is at the heart ofMozart's work.
A convinced Christian and Freemason, Mozart was also a rebel who proclaimed
a message of love and fellowship.
M<Lozart, idol of Versailles, London, Prague
and the Vienna court, did not seek disgrace, iso¬
lation and grinding poverty: he was too fond of
the good life. But he braved them and endured
them. He went boldly forward over open ground
on routes where the forces of the Ancien Régime,
daunted but still well-armed, lay in wait for the
enemyfreedom.
He went his own way, this young Wolfgang
son of Leopold, born in prudish Salzburg and
pampered by the great: at the age of thirty he
chose to set to musicand without toning it
Osmin, one of the
characters in Mozart's
opera Die Entführung aus
dem Serail (1782), as
staged by Giorgio Strehler
at the Paris Opera House
in 1984.
down!Beaumarchais's explosive Marriage of
Figaro, already censured by the imperial police.
This play, by an adventurer who busied himself
supplying arms to the American revolution (fore¬
runner of the French one), was nothing less than
an egalitarian, libertarian manifestoa tract
directed against all the privileges of the nobility,
starting with the droit du seigneur. It fore¬
shadowed the night of 4 August 1789, when the
last privileges of feudalism were abolished in
France.
The rebel
Anybody unfamiliar with Figaro's aria Se vuol
bellare, signor Contino can have no idea of the
social bravado and temerity needed to use such
language and such a tone of voice to a powdered
and bewigged Viennese audience. The message is
plain: the era of high-handedness, when wearing
knee-breeches and a sword was all that was
needed to be always in the right, is over, my lords.
Other human relationships are on the way.
Figaro proclaims as much, and so in her own way
does Suzanna to Figaro the manbarely freed
from the tyranny of the nobility and already
impatient to assert the authority of a husband.
In the following year Wolfgang was to go still
further, putting into the mouth of Masetto a
challenge to the wife-stealing Don Giovanni
which according to the great French poet Pierre
Jean Jouve "heralded the subversive movements
of the French Revolution. . . . The little aria .
. . seems related to the Ça ira of the coming days.
... A revolution is on the way, and it will settle
human difficulties by more drastic and more
impersonal methods."
Let us not, however, make Mozart out to be
a revolutionary militant, a sans-culotte, a Jacobin,
a Carbonaro or a forerunner of Sturm und Drang.
He would have loathed the "more drastic and

* V
more impersonal methods" that the 1793 revo¬
lution saw fit to adopt, just as Pamina loathes the
dagger handed to her by her mother, the Queen
of the Night, for the purpose of killing Sarastro,
who is the voice of wisdom and light.
More light
The key word is out. It was not revolution but
light that Mozart the rebel was after. His whole
life was a search for the light, more light, the
"mehr Licht" of Goethe on his death-bed. Others
saw it as a direction, a stage on the road, a means
to an end: for him it was an end in itself, and a
tremendous one.
The reason why this search accelerated and
intensified during his last ten years, which took
him from II Seraglio to The Magic Flute, was
because that was when he really entered his
"enlightened" Masonic period under the aegis of
that greatest of German initiates, Ignaz von Born,
regarded by Jean and Brigitte Massin as the model
for the wise Sarastro.
Whether von Born's influence was direct or
indirect, Mozart's support for freemasonry was
reflected in his membership of the Vienna lodge
known as "Hope Crowned". There he was to get
to know Schikaneder, later librettist and producer
of, as well as a performer in, The Magic Flute, in
which the Age of the Enlightenment came to
flower in 1791. This was the very moment when
in Paris the Constituent Assembly broke up
proclaiming that thenceforth "in France every
man is free", enfranchising the Jews, and
abolishing the "imaginary offences" of lese-
majesty and heresy.
Ten years before The Magic Flute, however,
Meeting of the Viennese
Masonic lodge Zur gekrönten
Hoffnung (Hope Crowned)
showing Prince Miklós
Esterházy officiating as
master of ceremonies. Mozart
can be seen in right
foreground talking to his
neighbour.

at the start of his life as a freemason, Wolfgang
Mozart had rebelled against the hegemony of the
Prince-Archbishop of Salzburg, Colloredo; and
he had fired the opening shots in his campaign
of enlightenment in // Seraglio, the highly
"philosophical" extravaganza in which the
wisdom of the East shines out through a mêlée
of turbans, fans and Turkish slippers.
Fraternal reason
Here it is no Westerner, guided by Christianity,
who lays down the precepts of reason: it is Sultan
Selim who transcends passions and intrigues to
enunciate the liberating judgement to a gaggle of
feather-brained Europeans. This must have been
embarrassing to the Viennese, still quaking from
the incursions of Turkish troops in the Danube
basin.
Lo and behold, Europe now begins to break
free from Manichaeism, distributing good and evil
on both sides of an imaginary linethe cross on
one side and the crescent on the other. The
Enlightenment informs each of Selim's utter¬
ances, an Enlightenment which is shown to be
be in no way the exclusive preserve of the West.
Nine years later, Sarastro grandly echoes
Selim's even-handedness. It is no longer a matter
of merely restoring physical liberty to a few
scatty Westerners who have gone astray in
Muslim lands, but of propounding to humankind
rules of conduct based on fraternal reason: a
reason which under the patronage of Isis and
Osiris poses no threat to religious observance.
Though his genius drew sustenance from
Christianity, Mozart had no links with the
Catholic Church. In a century in which Free¬
masonry came into being under the wing of
Christianity, intending not to destroy it but to
guide it and free it of clericalism, he appears as
the harbinger par excellence of this creative
enlightenment.
To return to Jouve: Mozart, "that religious,
almost irreligious genius . . . , cannot be fitted
into any ideal category. Like Shakespeare, he is
atheist and believer, man of religion and sorcerer
at one and the same time". He adds: "We no
longer have yardsticks to measure the stature of
such men: our beings have become too small."
Design for an 1879
production of The Magic Flute
(1791), Mozart's last opera,
at the théâtre de l'Opéra-
Comique in Paris.
Costume for Sarastro, a
character in The Magic Flute,
designed by the French
painter Roger Chapelain-Midy.
JEAN LACOUTURE,
French journalist and writer, is
the author of several major
biographies, including the
recent Champollion, une vie de
lumières (1988, Grasset,
Paris). Volume I of his
3-volume life of Charles de
Gaulle was published In English
in 1988 as Charles de Gaulle:
The Rebel by Holmes & Meier,
New York, who have also
published his biographies of
Léon Blum (1982) and Pierre
Mendès-France (1984).
