The Amazon
symphony
How music can remove
the barriers between peoples
JLn 1950 the explorer Alain Gheerbrant set off
on an expedition into the forests of the Orinoco
and Amazon Basins. He carried with him a few
records of music, among which was a Mozart
symphony, which he intended to play to the
Indian tribes he was hoping to discover there. In
his book recounting the expedition1 he describes
the meeting between Mozart and the Makiritares:
"Diego having reached the end of his song,
we put on our precious Mozart symphony. This
record really exercises a magical power over all
Indians. Despite all their hesitations, even the
young women cannnot resist: they come out of
the hut one after the other and sit down to listen.
. . . The music of Mozart possesses an indefinable
charm, in the truest sense, acting like a mysterious
potion to which no Indian is immune. On them
as on us this record has a soothing effect: one's
body relaxes and one's very soul seems to breathe.
. . . This is not the kind of music that forces
people to sit stock-still with a frozen look on their
faces. It unlocks all the most secret recesses of
one's being, it is a balm. ...
"I don't know whether music is really the
universal language it is said to be, but never will
I forget that it was thanks to a Mozart symphony
that we were able, on rare occasions, to bridge
almost entirely the gulf created between the
Indians and ourselves by centuries of 'civiliza¬
tion'	"
Mozart was by far the Indians' favourite,
much preferred to Rameau or to military music.
Alain Gheerbrant later informed the musicolo¬
gist Jean-Victor Hocquard2 that the Mozart
symphony in question was the symphony in F
major, K. 184 (composed in Salzburg in 1774).
He al~o told him how a tribal chieftain, after
hearing Mozart, suddenly said to him out of the
blue: "Since you too possess a sacred music, I can
reveal secrets to you. . . ." The explorer was thus
able to hear a story recounting the origin and des¬
cent of the gods which would not otherwise have
been divulged to him. Brigitte Massin
1. L'expédition Orénoque-
Amazone by Alain
Gheerbrant, collection
"Folio", Gallimard, Paris
1980.
2. Mozart, l'amour, la mort
by Jean-Victor Hocquard,
Librairie
Séguier/Archimbaud, Paris.
