An ecological Eldorado: Peru's Manu
National
Park
by José Serra-Vega
ELanu National Park in south-east Peru
rises from the sweltering fastnesses of the
Amazonian forest up through a labyrinth of
giddying scarps to an altitude of 4,000 metres
on the eastern slopes of the Andes. The two
great rivers that flow through the region, the
Manu and the Madre de Dios, rush down from
the high plateaux to the plain where, slack¬
ening their course, they meander along
through a succession of different ecosystems
and climates, joining up to flow together into
the Amazon.
In the west, flocks of vicunas, the occa¬
sional guemal (a small American deer) and
fearsome mountain lions roam across the
frozen peaks and the cold, wind-swept
plateaux dotted with black lakes where all that
grows is a coarse yellow grass known as ichu.
From time to time a spectacled bear can be
seen, a species found nowhere else in South
America. The mountain forest stretches out
further down between altitudes of 3,800 and
2,500 metres, shrouded in thick mist. Lower
down the temperature rises and rainfall
increases, making for a proliferation of plant
and animal life. Manu National Park consists
mainly of tropical rainforest whose tangle of
giant trees, creepers, plant parasites and
orchids, climbing plants and epiphytes, pro¬
vides a habitat for a huge variety of wildlife.
In the vast Amazonian plain down below, the
river Manu winds its way through a valley
UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
The ai or
three-toed sloth,
a tree-dwelling
vegetarian.
made well-nigh impenetrable by the density
of the vegetation, forming in places oxbow
lakescochaswhich teem with aquatic life.
The lure of the unknown
For centuries people have been drawn to the
Amazon by the lure of the unknown, a thirst
for adventure and the prospect of fortune. The
Incas of Cuzco sought to expand their empire
in this region and found themselves with no
choice but to trade with the warlike tribes of
the region in order to obtain the colourful
feathers with which they decorated their
ceremonial costumes and the hallucinogenic
and medicinal plants on which they relied.
Legend has it that Paititi, the lost city
where the Incas are believed to have hidden
enormous quantities of gold and silver after
learning of the murder of their ruler Atahu-
alpa at the hands of the Spanish conqueror
Francisco Pizarro, was located in the Manu
region. The Spanish armies, in their search for
this Eldorado and its fabulous treasures,
penetrated deep into the jungle where they
were decimated by disease and hostile Indians.
They too ended up by abandoning all attempts
to settle there.
For three more centuries it was not
known whether the rivers in the Madre de
Dios basin flowed northwards or westwards.
Some geographers of the time, who embel¬
lished their maps with mythical creatures and
monstrous caimans, thought that the
Amazon's source lay somewhere within it.
The rubber boom in the late nineteenth
century attracted thousands of adventurers to
the area. For twenty-odd years the tapping of
trees for latex was a thriving industry and
Amazonia edged its way into the world
market, but competition from the British
plantations in Asia brought this activity to a
sudden end.
Lethargy again descended on the region, 75


only to be shaken off in the 1960s with the
development of the trade in fursocelot,
jaguar, otter, black lizardand exotic wood-
manly mahogany and cedar. Around the same
time people started taking an interest in the
exceptional biological resources to be found
there. In 1968 the Peruvian authorities


organized an expedition into the basin of the
river Manu and its tributary the Sotileja. On
the basis of the information collected, they
declared Manu a national park in June 1973.
In 1977 UNESCO recognized it as a biosphere
reserve and since 1987 it has been on the
World Heritage List.
The core of the biosphere reserve is Manu
National Park, which has an area of 15,328
km2 from which all economic or touristic
activities are barred. It is bounded in the east
by a buffer zone measuring some 2,500 km2
where the aim is to preserve the forest while
allowing limited tourism and scientific
research. Further south is a transitional zone
covering 900 km2 inhabited by a few settlers
and by Indian communities which continue
to practise their traditional activities, within
set bounds.
The Cocha Cashu biological observatory
was established in 1969 beside a cutoff of the
river Manu. Its laboratories and research facil¬
ities can accommodate about twenty
researchers. The work done there has helped
to provide a fuller picture of the forms of life
present in the reserve and of tropical forest
ecosystems in general. Another observatory
is being built outside the national park so that
certain studies can be carried out which are
not allowed in the park itself. But there is a
huge amount to be done. The forest harbours
countless mysteries. We know little about its
aquatic forms of life and virtually nothing
about the tropical montane rainforest or the
grasslands of the high plateaux or punas.
In a sense, then, the legendary treasures
of Eldorado do exist in the form of the sixteen
ecosystems present within the 18,800 km2 of
the reserve, which have remained practically
intact since the dawn of time.
Parrots, monkeys, and turtles
The most characteristic feature of the tropical
rainforest is doubtless its fabulous diversity.
It would be impossible here to list even the
main forest species in the reserve. To give
some idea of its biological resources,
researchers have identified 1,200 vascular
plants within an area of 4 km2 around the
76 Cocha Cashu observatory. One tenth of the
Macaws, members of
the parrot family which often
live in groups.
plants in the reserve have not yet been identi¬
fied and may belong to species hitherto
unknown to scientists. When an inventory
was made of canopy insects within one hec¬
tare of rainforest, 41,000 species of inver¬
tebrates were found, including 12,000 kinds
of beetle. In one single tree there were 43 types
of ant belonging to 26 different genera, prac¬
tically as many as in the whole of the British
Isles.
No less than fifteen per cent of the world's
bird species are found in Manu park, whose
denizens include majestic condors, tiny hum¬
mingbirds, and noisy black and yellow
icteridae whose hanging nests look like great
purses made of straw. There are twenty-eight
species of macaws and parrots, including the
very rare blue-headed parrot.
From beneath the trees these birds are
easier to hear than to see, but they can some¬
times be glimpsed in the open spaces along the
river. At sunrise a squawking, multicoloured
flight of parrots can sometimes be seen
swooping down on the furrowed banks of the
Manu to gobble up the clay which is rich in
mineral salts. Herons, wild geese and ducks,
delicate spoonbills and other gangling waders
mingle on the shores with sleepy caimans that
can move into action with devastating speed.
Kingfishers, large-billed toucans and stiletto-
billed snakebirds also live by the river, feeding
on its plentiful supply of aquatic animals.
Perhaps the strangest bird of all is the hoatzin,
which nests at the riverside. Its young have
claws on their wings which they use to
clamber about in the trees before they learn
to fly. Its digestive system resembles that of
ruminants.
The forest is also the habitat of monkeys,
thirteen species of which have so far been
identified, including the tiny pygmy marmoset,
the smallest in the world, which weighs barely
120 grams, the restless emperor tamarin,
which owes its name to its superb white
moustaches, worthy of emperor Franz-Josef
of Austria, the spider monkey and the howling
monkey whose roars, imitating those of the
jaguar, have curdled the blood of more than
one tourist.
The jaguar itself, like the puma and the
ocelot, is mainly nocturnal but can be seen
prowling along the river bank at the time of
the year when turtles come there to lay their
eggs. Tapirs, peccaries and wild dogs come to
the water during the daytime to drink. There
are also many other mammalssmall bats
which sleep head downwards, hanging from
the branches over the cochas, vampire bats
which live exclusively on blood, giant
anteaters and armadillos, some of which weigh
as much as fifty kilograms.
There are also large numbers of giant
otters. Much sought after for their valuable
furs, these carnivorous mammals once came
near to extinction in the Amazon basin.
Insatiably curious and extremely fast-moving
in the water, otters hunt and fish in groups.
Endowed with powerful teeth, they do not
hesitate to attack one-and-a-half-metre-long
caimans in order to defend their young or
obtain food.
Many dangers lurk in this spellbindingly
beautiful world, vibrant with sounds and
colours. In the forests and swamps there are

poisonous snakes and other dangerous crea¬
tures. The most fearsome and aggressive of the
snakes is the deadly bushmaster [Lachesis
muta), which can be more than three metres
long and is reputed to pursue people who are
foolhardy enough to cross its path. The most
common reptiles are pit vipers of the genus
Bothrops, which are capable of detecting
sources of heat from a distance and can thus
hunt in the dark, and the brightly-coloured
coral snakes of the genus Micrurus, which are
distant cousins of the Asian and African
cobras. The rivers and lakes are the home of
the anaconda and the gigantic aquatic boa
which can be as much as nine metres long. By
the riverside or on drifting trunks it is not
uncommon to see river turtles basking in the
sun in the company of black lizards. The largest
reptile in the reserve, which has been observed
at Cocha Cashu, is a black female lizard nearly
five metres long and over 500 kilos in weight.
The forest hunters
The most mysterious area in the reserve is the
Pusharo gorge, a colossal gateway through
which the river Palotoa finds its way out of
the mountains. On one side of the gorge, con¬
cealed by the vegetation, is a thirty-metre-long
frieze of rock carvings which display solar
symbols, snakes, women's heads, spirals and
crisscross patterns. Behind, a ramp, which is
probably artificial, leads to a stone terrace.
Like many other examples of rock art scat¬
tered through Amazonia, they have been
neither studied nor interpreted. They are the
remains of a forgotten Amazonian culture
probably dating back to the earliest settlers in
America.
Today very few people live in this com¬
plex and wonderful setting. A few Amahuaca
and Yaminahua Indians live in the valleys of
the Panahua and Pinquén rivers and in the
northeastern part of the reserve. In the rainy
season, the Neolithic Amahuaca hunters,
fishermen and farmers return to the sources
of the two rivers to tend their crops. During
the dry season, from July to December, they
go back to the banks of the Manu where they
harvest the river turtle eggs which are the main
source of protein in their diet. The indigenous
peoples have permission to live on the
resources of the reserve, and care is taken not
to disturb their traditional way of life, which
is the result of thousands of years of adapta¬
tion to the harsh forest environment.
Even more mysterious are the Kugapákori,
who lead a nomadic existence between the
basins of the Madre de Dios and the Uru-
bamba. They jealously defend their territory
and shoot arrows at anyone who crosses the
invisible frontier that runs around it.
The Machiguenga people are very
different. Converted to the ways of the
modern world, some have settled in the vil¬
lage of Tayakome, a distance of five hours by
canoe upstream from Cocha Cashu, where
missionaries brought them from their home
territory in the upper reaches of the Uru-
bamba valley. The rest live in small scattered
groups consisting of a few households,
provided by the government with rudimen¬
tary schools and with teachers, many of whom
speak their language.
Few people come from the high plateaux
The jaguar is the largest species
of the cat family in the western hémisphère.
and settle on the edge of the park and hence
they present no threat to the forest. The poor
state of the road from Cuzco makes transport
expensive, and this discourages people from
settling in the area.
A threatened world
But the park is being increasingly exposed to
danger. There is a risk that certain industri¬
alization projects may jeopardize the integrity
of the reserve and the survival of its inhabi¬
tants. If these schemes come to fruition, the



extraordinary natural heritage of Manu will
soon be no more than a memory.
In the region of Madre de Dios, which is
one of the last unspoiled areas of Peru, and
especially near the Brazilian border, linked to
Sao Paulo by a tarmacked road, the forest is
being burnt away, sometimes illegally, to
make space for big stock-raising farms.
A multinational oil company has disco¬
vered an enormous deposit of natural gas at
the north-east edge of the Manu Park, which
is believed to extend beneath the actual
reserve. A camp set up for the prospectors has
already caused incalculable harm. Wild
animals have been exterminated, rivers have
been polluted with oil and chemical products
and indigenous groups have been driven from
their traditional hunting grounds.
But this is nothing in comparison with the
ecological and human disaster that would be
triggered by the installation of a pipeline to
transport gas to Cuzco, along with a power
station which would produce electricity
exported to Brazil via a 350-km-long high-
voltage cable, 120 km of which would pass
though the reserve. Almost 300 km of a road
planned to run from Puerto Bermúdez, in the
centre of Peru, to the frontier of Bolivia would
cross the northern part of the reserve.
If these projects are carried out, the forests
of Manu will cease to be.
JOSÉ SERRA-VEGA,
of Peru, is a former staff member of the United
Nations Environment Programme in Nairobi
(Kenya). He helped to set up a new scientific
research station in the Manu biosphere reserve
and contributed to a plan for a biosphere reserve
at Beni in Bolivia. 77
