Poverty and economic crisis, hunger and homelessness, epidemics, illiteracy
and environmental degradation are taking a terrible toll of the continent's youth
In November 1990 a seminar was held
under the auspices of UNICEF and
UNESCO at Cotonou (Benin) to discuss
the problems of children in difficult
circumstances. It was attended by
representatives of twenty African
countries and delegates of non¬
governmental and international
organizations who exchanged views and
experiences. The picture that emerged
from the discussions was distressing. Some
of its main features are sketched in this
extract from the final report.
TJLh
22
.HE vast majority of the street children are
boys. This does not mean that girls are not also
at risk, but their situation is different. Some turn
to prostitution at an early age. Others are single
mothers and face many material, emotional and
social problems. Others take jobs in domestic
service, or are sold into it, and are frequently
exploited or mistreated. So while girls may be less
visible than boys in the danger areas, their
problems are as great.
It is difficult to find out the exact ages of the
children concerned. Since they are illiterate and
have no family connections or identity papers,
the ages they give must be regarded as approxi¬
mate. Nevertheless, various sources of informa¬
tion suggest that their ages range from seven to
twenty-five years. In several countries, more than
half are aged between thirteen and eighteen.
Their backgrounds vary from country to
country and according to the category to which
they belong (young workers, street children,
unoccupied children from poor districts). Many
of them come from rural areas. This is the case
of the talibés, street beggars who complain that
they live far from their families. These children
can go for five to ten years without seeing their
home village.
Children who have never gone to school rub
shoulders in the streets with others who have
dropped out. The latter constitute the majority
in most of the countries represented at the
Cotonou seminar. Most of these children never
finished primary schooling, though some have a
few years of secondary education behind them.
Poverty is the usual reason for dropping out of
school, though sometimes poor grades are also
a factor.
To survive and feed their families, the chil¬
dren turn their hands to a whole range of activi¬
ties whose economic significance is usually under¬
valued. But the little money they make is not
enough to meet their needs, especially since much
of it often goes to their families, or else to their
guardians or a gang-leader.
BASIC NEEDS
Street children, like the children of the poorer
districts generally, are almost always ill-fed. Some
survive on barely one meal a day; others get by
on scraps from restaurants or by scavenging from
dustbins. In one group studied, the children used
drugs to suppress their hunger. Generally
speaking, drug use is quite widespread on the
streets, and it is thought that hard drugs are
becoming more popular.
The lack of hygiene in their liveswhich in
the case of those who beg may be deliberate, to
inspire pityincreases the chances that cuts and
scrapes picked up in the streets, where accidents
and assaults are all too common, will become
infected. It is hard for street children to go to dis¬
pensaries, partly because of the cost but also as
a result of their own embarrassment and the
reception they are likely to get. The young are
particularly vulnerable to sexually-transmitted
diseases, especially AIDS, about which they know
very little.
As far as education is concerned, "the chil¬
dren and young people on the streets are exposed
to a whole host of different and sometimes con¬
tradictory influences," said one participant in the
seminar. "This predisposes them to a disturbed
adult life, marked by personal and social
problems they never leave behind them,"
Children who have never been to school
generally want to go, and often go to great lengths
to achieve their wish. Most of those who have,
however, have grown tired of schooling. Like the
youth of the poorer quarters generally, many of.
the street children express a wish for some sort
of occupational training that would enable them
to work as drivers, welders, tailors and in similar
occupations.

Giriama children pounding
millet, by Suril P. Patel,
age 11 (Kenya).
As for games, sports and leisure activities,
their needs are very poorly provided for. Many
seek refuge in the cinema, and what they see there
usually does little to help them come to terms
with the difficult world they live in. The lack of
leisure and sports facilities is yet another problem
confronting the children of the streets and slums.
THE POVERTY TRAP
"The causes of the tragedy," according to another
participant in the Cotonou seminar, "are many
and various. They include the economic recession
and the steady fall in the price of the raw materials
that form the mainstay of our economies, at a
time when the cost of the manufactured products
we need to import from the industrialized world
at our present stage of development has soared.
Reduced amounts of money are reaching us, and
as a result of high interest rates, merely servicing
our large external debts absorbs up to a third or
more of our export earnings. ... In short, we
have lower revenues and less to live on; we are
experiencing an accelerating downward spiral
into poverty."
Recent studies have shown that the
programmes of structural adjustment that various
African countries have agreed to undertake have
made things worse for the most vulnerable sec¬
tions of the population, whose purchasing power
is constantly falling.
Increasing poverty has forced some parents 23

Carnival,
by Tolulope Adeyeuri,
age 13 (Nigeria).
24
to use their children as subsistence earners. There
is evidence that the number of street children
increases where there is high unemployment.
Child labour reinforces the vicious circle of
poverty, for most working children come from
impecunious families, whether in the towns or
the countryside.
Yet economic problems do not explain every¬
thing. The break-up of traditional patterns of
social and community life also lies at the heart
of the problem.
Many observers refer to the crisis in the
family, the reason most often given by the street
children themselves to explain their decision to
leave home. The growing number of divorces, the
increase in single-parent households and the des¬
truction of the old family structures are all
familiar themes in any analysis of the problem.
Another factor is the erosiondisappearance
might not be too strong a wordof traditional
African values, which in many cases has left a gap
that has not been filled.
The perception of the child's place in society
has changed radically. From being at the hub of
life in traditional societies, children have now
become for many families a means of survival,
their labour something to be farmed out and
exploited. As the bonds linking families, commu¬
nities and regions have been loosened, children
and adolescents have increasingly turned to street
gangs to find the love and friendship otherwise
missing from their lives. One young man made
the point eloquently when he said, "There was
only one place where I felt any solidarity, and
that was the street".
Some surviving customs that once formed
part of social and economic life only make things
worse today. Forced marriage at an early age now
contributes to the spread of divorce. The so-called
"geographical polygamy" practiced in African
towns creates tensions and often results in a lack
of paternal authority, creating insecurities in chil¬
dren for whom school does not provide the
framework of discipline they so badly need.
THE NEED FOR POSITIVE
THINKING
On top of everything else, these children have
an image problem. The disturbing idea that
people have of them makes it harder to reinte¬
grate them into their families and society as a
whole. So it is important to stress another aspect
of their lives: the range of skills they display daily.
They show great ingenuity in exploiting the
opportunities and resources of the street to earn
a living, and in so doing demonstrate much more
initiative than many adults locked into a daily
routine. In addition, they often possess manual
skills that would be the envy of apprentices in
any trade, and establish dynamic networks of
relationships that provide both solidarity and
mutual aid.
One underprivileged child employed in a
workshop making toys for day-care centres spoke
for all his peers when he told an interviewer: "I
don't know very much, it's true, but I can still
show someone else what I do. Then he could
show a third person if he wanted. That way,
you'd end up with no one left to say, T don't
know anything'."
Whether handicapped, abandoned or
orphaned, holding down a job or living in the
streets, these children seek the respect due to
people who count upon themselves and can in
turn be counted upon. They need to be able to
make some practical contribution to their family,
their gang, their village, their communityand
themselves. They want to have friends and families
and a normal love life, to be treated like anyone
else. In short, they want their place in the social
contract, along with the rest of humankind.
