The right to be heard
by Michel Manciaux
The child's right to self-expression is now recognized by the international community.
How do things stand in practice?
'The child shall have the
right to freedom of
expression; this right
shall include freedom to
seek, receive and impart
information and ideas of
all kinds, regardless of
frontiers. . . .'
(Article 13 of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child).
IT may seem paradoxical to affirm the child's
right to speak and be given a hearing, for surely
a child is someone who does not know, cannot
speak and therefore has no say in matters. Etymo-
logically, the word infantfrom the Latin
infansimplies speechlessness. And even when
children do start to talk, adults often reduce them
to silence by telling them to be quiet.
The child's right to be heard is also to some
extent controversial. Many cultures forbid young
people to speak in the presence of their elders for
fear of showing lack of respect. The Nigerian psy¬
chiatrist Michael Durojaye has drawn attention
to the conflict between the rule of silence
imposed by family and clan and the encourage¬
ment of speech at school.
Nor is the right, in many cases, easy to exer¬
cise. The British sociologist Raymond Illsley
claims that children from underprivileged back¬
grounds often come into regular contact with a
vocabulary of no more than 300 words, many of
which have become distorted through use and
have lost much of their original meaning. This
language is quite different from that which the
school tries to inculcate.
So this is a limited right. There is, after all,
not much point in talking if nobody is prepared
to listen, and that is the lot of many children,
even in cultures that do not challenge their
freedom of speech. Adults preoccupied with so-
called serious matters simply may not pay atten¬
tion to the remarks or questions of the young.
"Be quiet!" "Later!" "Not now!", they say. But
as the Chilean poetess Gabriela Mistral eloquently
put it, children cannot wait, their name is
"Today".
"In the beginning was the word"
(St. John's Gospel, 1-1)
The biblical assertion that "In the beginning was
the word" may not literally hold true for children,
who do not have the power of speech in early
infancy. Yet even before the first vocalizations,
babies express themselves non-verbally. For
several decades now, child psychologists and
paediatricians have been detailing in their works
the ability of young babies to communicate with
parents and other adult carers through gestures,
glances, mimicry, smiles or tears, all of which can
convey a wealth of meaning.
If the baby, receives even a minimal response,
a real process of interaction gets under way, and
the ensuing exchanges can be an important factor
in the child's development, especially if they take
place in a climate of affection. France Straus has
shown that a baby only a few days old can
vocalize in response to the sounds its mother
makes, on condition that there is eye contact and
emotional bonding. Once the infant is making
baby noises, the first syllables are not far away.
Whatever the language may be, the noises are
usually taken to represent "Mama" or "Dada", to
the delight of parents who are thereby reassured
in their family roles.
The days when infants were regarded as glori¬
fied digestive tracts, requiring nothing more than
feeding, are long gone. But there is still much to
be done if they are to be recognized as people
in their own right and provided with the best pos¬
sible conditions for embracing the gift of
language.
"The development of language in childhood
remains an insoluble mystery", wrote the
Flemish poet Stijn Streuvels at the beginning of
the century. Although much still remains mys¬
terious about the gift of speech, his statement is
no longer entirely true. We now appreciate the
crucial importance of the child's linguistic
environment. Teaching children to speak involves
talking to them, answering their questions and
treating them with gentleness, patience and
affection.
Many children are slow to learn linguistically.
Sometimes the problem is undiagnosed deafness,
and a child's hearing capacity should always be
checked if there is any unexplained delay. More 13

When my world Is angry,
by Ari Sindu Prawlta, age 15
(Indonesia).
often, though, their linguistic development is
retarded because people are not talking to them.
Many parents fail to understand their children's
need for speech, and converse with them too little
or not at all. Others stick too long to baby talk,
which does not provide their children with the
vocabulary necessary for successful socialization.
The right to speech necessarily includes the right
to be considered worthy to be spoken to, and the
family's part in this basic process of education is
fundamental and difficult to replace. And this
second right subsequently entails another one-
being taught to read and write.
A good word is like a tree with solid
roots whose branches reach up to heaven.
It gives forth fruit in all seasons.
(The Qur'an, Surat XIV, 29-30)
What children say should always be listened to
with respect, if not necessarily followed. Their
constant questions and requests for information
deserve an answer, for that is how children
acquire new knowledge.
It is even more important to show consider¬
ation when the interests of the children compete
or conflict with those of the adults responsible
for them, for example in cases of marital break¬
down or divorce. Similarly, children should be
consulted on questions concerning their health
as soon as their age permitsand that can be
earlier than many adults imagine. The American
philosopher Dan W. Brock has rightly stressed
the competence even of young children to make
sensible decisions in this field, so long as they are
adequately informed and consulted.
Children, then, are often capable of finding
the good word of which the Qur'an speaks. It
is up to adults to listen to them if they want to
talk, to take what they say seriously and to accept
their right to express disagreement.
It is good to speak, and better to be silent
(La Fontaine)
The fabulist's maxim is sometimes valid, for chil¬
dren also have the right to be silent. For instance,
it is unfair to expect children to act as judges in
parental disputes that are painful to them.
However well-intentioned they may be, attempts
to get them to say which parent is right, or which
parent they prefer, may have a traumatizing
effect. Real respect for children and their rights
entails not overwhelming them with questions
and knowing which questions they should not
be asked.
Who will speak for children?
In certain cases children who are too young or
too involved in a situation whose ramifications
they cannot fully understand will need someone
to speak for them. The aim is not for this sur¬
rogate to replace them as individuals, which no
one can do, but to act on their behalf.
Who should speak for children? "A represen¬
tative or an apppropriate body", says article 12-2
of the International Convention on the Rights
of the Child, a vague formula which has the
advantage of leaving a great deal of latitude to the
signatory States. Some countries provide some¬
thing like an advocate in the legal sense of the
term. Others favour a mediator who acts as a kind
of children's ombudsman. Elsewhere the job may
be done by a parent, a relative or some other
14

adult, possibly a professional, whom the child
trusts. The main thing is to ensure that the child



has "the opportunity to be heard in any judicial
and administrative proceedings affecting the
child".
Nevertheless, the learning process must begin
earlier than that. The business of learning to
speak, without which the right to education does
not exist, must get under way in the first months
of life.
Mother says No, No, No.',
by a Norwegian girl, age 13.
"An extraordinary hope for human rights"
(Hélène Dorlhac, France's Secretary
of State with responsibility for the Family)
The United Nations Convention on the Rights
of the Child is a victory for all the world's chil¬
dren. It recognizes for every child "who is capable
of forming his or her own views" the "right to
express those views freely in all matters affecting
the child" (article 12 - 1), "the right to freedom
of expression" (article 13 -1), and "to freedom of
thought, conscience and religion" (article 14 - 1).
Article 17 underlines the importance of giving
children access, through the mass media, "to
information and material of social and cultural
benefit" to theman essential condition if they
are to express themselves in a manner that is well-
informed and free.
Education provides the tools of knowledge
and the child's right to education is solemnly
affirmed by articles 28-31 of the Convention. But
according to the details spelled out in article 28,
education only seems to begin with "primary
education compulsory and available free to all".
Schooling from an early age is obviously essen¬
tial, even though it is far from being achieved in
a world where, according to the preamble to the
World Declaration on Education for All which
was adopted at the World Conference on Educa¬
tion for All held at Jomtien (Thailand) in March
1990, more than 100 million children, most of
them girls, have no access to primary schooling,
and where almost one billion adults, two-thirds
of whom are women, are illiterate.
"Education for all, a priority for the planet"
(Federico Mayor,
Director-General of UNESCO)
The right to speak will remain a dead letter until
education from an early age becomes a fact.
UNESCO made this point forcefully at the
World Conference on Education for All. Article
5 of of the World Declaration states that
"Learning begins at birth" and that the "initial
education" can be provided "through arrange¬
ments involving families, communities or institu¬
tional programmes, according to need". It is a
good thing to highlight the all-important role of
the family. A child cannot have any real right to
speak unless this right is established and recog¬
nized early on. As well as being the first people
to speak for the child, the parents are also those
who can and must help it to learn to find and
freely use its own voice.
Parents are the prime movers in their chil¬
dren's education. Their power is very real, but
sometimes they may not be up to the job, either
because no one has helped them to develop their
capacities to help their children, because there is
no opportunity for them to use their skills or,
most seriously of all, because their power is
undermined by professional child-care experts or
by the society in which they live.
Failure to develop and use parental capabili¬
ties is a terrible waste. Helping parents to dis¬
cover, develop and apply their skills is undoubt¬
edly the best way of establishing their children's
right to speak.
MICHEL MANCIAUX
¡s a leading French specialist
in paediatrics and public
health, A member of the World
Health Organization's expert
committee on maternal and
child health, he is the author
of many scientific publications
including L'enfant et sa santé
(Paris, 1987) and Les
accidents chez les jeunes:
place de la recherche (1989). 15
