TAH AR
BEN JELLOUN
Tahar Ben Jelloun is a Moroccan poet and
novelist who spans two cultures, Arab and
French. In 1987 he became the first Arab
writer to win France's most prestigious
literary prize when his novel La Nuit sacrée
was awarded the Prix Goncourt.
An English translation of La Nuit sacrée
appeared in 1989 under the title The
Sacred Night, and several of his other
works have been published in English,
including The Sand Child (1987) and Silent
Day in Tangier (1991).
Alert to the hopes and sufferings of Arab
men and women and to the stirrings of
freedom in the world at large, Tahar Ben
Jelloun here talks about his work and the
commitment to truth and justice from
which it springs.
Let's start at the beginning. You are an
Arab writer who writes in French. Why?
I belong to a specific category of writers,
those who speak and write in a language
different from that of their parents. I am a
Moroccan, an Arab. My culture is Arab,
Islamic, but it was in French, the language of
the former colonial power, that I spontane¬
ously expressed myself when I began to write.
This is a paradox which stems from a histor¬
ical situation. Morocco, which was a French
Protectorate from 1912 to 1956, managed to
be receptive to French culture without losing
any part of its identity. I don't feel guilty
about expressing myself in French; nor do I
feel that I am continuing the work of the
colonizers. Actually, what I express in French
could very well be expressed in any other
language.
All the same, the fact that I do not use the
language of my people perhaps means that I
can take liberties with certain themes which
the Arabic language, the language of the
Qur'anwhich naturally intimidates me
would not allow me to take. On the one hand
there are taboos and prohibitions; on the other
there is my own sense of propriety. It is
difficult for us to ill-treat the Arabic language.

For me poetry is a situationa state of being,
a way offacing life and facing history.
Do you mean that the language of tradi¬
tion, of unchanging values, is your mother
tongue, whereas to break new ground and
explore other directions, you need to express
yourself in a foreign language?
Yes, it helps and liberates the imagination.
For many people, poetry is working with
words, with language. It is hard to imagine a
poet who expresses himself in a language other
than that of his people. But there is another
conception of poetry, which is, for me, a
broader and more accommodating one. For
me poetry is a situationa state of being, a
way of facing life and facing history. Poetry
is not only a set of words which are chosen
to relate to each other, it is something which
goes much further than that to provide a
glimpse of our vision of the world. It does this
through images, through a musical universe.
And this universe can very well be expressed
in words and syllables which are not those of
one's mother tongue.
I am a guest of the French language. My
poems in French are born of my interaction
with the French language, which is not the
same as that of a French poet.
Precisely. What kind of adaptation has
there been between the French language and
your universe and between your universe and
the French language?
There has been no adaptation, but rather
a marriage, a kind of cohabitation that I have
entered into with French and which means
that I give this rather Cartesian language
another feel, another memory. I introduce it
into a world to which it could never other¬
wise have been admitted. If you send a French
sociologist, researcher or journalist to
Morocco, he will not see the kind of things
that I see as a result of my deep involvement
as an Arab and a Moroccan. The French
investigator will not see these things or be able
to express them.
In a sense, we Arab writers who write in
French are the ones who offer hospitality to
the French language! Not only do we adopt
it, we invite it home, we transform it, we take
it to places where it is not accustomed to go.
Sometimes it gets lost, but so much the better
since it's a language which is somewhat too
rigid except when it is taken in hand by great
poets like Mallarmé, Baudelaire or Rimbaud.
Jean Genet transformed Freneh4nto a beau¬
tiful rebel princess. But few French poets have
done with the language what poets like Kateb
Yacine or Aimé Césaire, two great franco¬
phone poets, have done. These are writers
who have gone very far creatively, experimen¬
tally, and as craftsmen of the language.
Different images? Different sounds?
Above all a different manner. Poetry is a
form of mathematics, a highly rigorous rela¬
tionship with words. The genius of an Aimé
Césaire is to know how to choose words with
fantastic precision and to marry them in such
a way that they produce unexpected images.
By doing this he creates new insights into
meaning which are surprising and sublime.
This is beauty, something that cannot be
explained away technically. Beauty is first and
foremost an emotion. When I read Aimé
Césaire's Cahiers d'un retour au pays natal for
the first time, I was spellbound. The same
thing when I discovered Kateb Yacine's
Nedjma. Perhaps my sensibility steers me
towards these writers who are out on their
own.
For writers like you and them, has writing
in French madefor a bigger or smaller reader¬
ship in the countries where you were born?
It may seem odd, but writing and pub
lishing in France has enabled me to commu¬
nicate with a pretty wide public, even in the
Maghreb. And this public reads me just as well
in French as in Arabic. Those who read me
in French are more numerous, perhaps
because they want to go to the original. But
I must say that Arab publishing is in such a
mess today that so far I haven't found my
public in the Arab world. Piracy or unautho¬
rized reproduction is doing terrible harm. The
pirates not only steal translations, they tamper
with them so that your work is distorted and
your relationship with the public is perverted.
Not to mention countries where books are
purely and simply banned because of an occa¬
sional erotic or political allusion, for example.
I think that on the whole publishing in
the Arab world is in a bad way. What is pub¬
lished there is not always subjected to serious
standards of criticism. Vast quantities of stuff
get into print. Some of it is good, but much
of it is bad. There is a confusion which reflects
a general situation.
In what sense?
The Arab world as a whole has been in the
grip of a serious crisis for forty-odd years. I
say "grip" because the crisis has become a state
of being which takes hold of people and steri¬
lizes them, paralyzing their creative impulse.
As if the Arab world had not experienced
sufficient pain to produce great writers such
as Dostoevsky or Kafka, who were born of
suffering and humiliation. Perhaps we have
not yet reached the bottom of the pit.
We do not have many intellectuals who
can speak out for us internationally. We have
no writers who are recognized, respected and
loved outside the Arab world. The rest of the
world only seems to have become aware of
the existence of Naguib Mahfouz since he won
the Nobel Prize two years ago. Basically

people are only interested in the Arab world I
when there is trouble. Who in Europe knows I
the work of Yusuf Idris, Edouard Kharrat and I
Chaker Essayab? Mahmoud Darwish is only I
known in Europe to supporters of the Pales- ]
tinian cause, and not even to all of them.
You are not sticking to the point. . . .
If we have no Arab intellectuals of interna- 1
tional stature, it is because, on the one hand, j
we live in a state of generalized mediocrity, I
we are suspended in the pit without touching '
the bottom, as I said just now, and on the
other because the world does not look to us
out of a healthy desire for knowledge. The
two reasons are complementary, I think.
Let's examine the first reason a little more
closely. What stands in the way of creative
thinking? The position occupied by the
intellectual?
For me the intellectual, the man of thought,
doubt and analysis, should by definition give
the best of himself. He may find himself in
one of two distinct situations: he lives either
in a country where freedom prevailsreal
freedom not sham freedomor in a country
where repression provokes him to make some
kind of an outburst because he can no longer
endure humiliation, fear and silence. In each
of these two cases, he can create.
But the intellectual may also find himself
in a nebulous, ill-defined, equivocal situation.
This is often our case. What have we achieved
since the end of the Second World War? We
have established, or more exactly we have
allowed to be established, petty bourgeois
regimes in which everything is average, medi¬
ocre. In this situation of "averageness", which
I would prefer to call mediocrity, intellectuals
try to keep going. But their situation is very
difficult. Those who have had the courage to
voice their opposition have often paid a very
high price. We should pay tribute to them.
Is there not also a habit of "thinking
together", a fear ofbeing noticed, ofstanding
out from the community at large? People feel
safer, finally, in this average situation.
There is a constant, something which you
find everywhere. The individual, as a unique
entity, as a singular human being, is not really,
fully recognized. What is recognized, even
today, and whatever people may say, is what
lies behind the individual: the clan, the family,
the tribe, the district or the village, but not
the expression of the individual's uniqueness.
However, a modern civilization is only pos¬
sible when it is accepted that singular beings
exist and express themselves freely.
In our societies, when a person expresses
disagreement with the general consensus,
when he or she is no longer at one with the
rest of the tribe, then that person is rejected.
An individual voice can be heard in a choir
that otherwise sings in unison. This is some¬
thing that is not excused.
Of course, there are also degrees, nuances,
and steps forward. Egypt, for instance, seems
to me to be in process of breaking up this pat¬
tern, perhaps because it is a country steeped
in history and because its experience of
modern democracy goes back to 1923. . . .
Egypt has a head start, historically speaking,
it has had the time to train minds for the exer¬
cise of citizenship. It is the country which has
suffered more ordeals than the others to get
where it is. . . .
To be fair, we should cite particular break¬
throughs in other Arab countries. But what
is certain is that a long road lies ahead. Sub¬
jectivity is still generally frowned on. People
do not understand that a writer or a film¬
maker explores his subjectivity and expresses
it in public.
Take the great Egyptian singer Urn
Kalsum. When she sang she tugged at the
heartstrings of tens of millions of Arabs. . .
Is that subjectivity or not?
It is somewhere between subjectivity and
widely shared values. She played on a key¬
board of emotions, but these emotions were
attuned to archetypes, rather conventional sty¬
lized sentiments. We are rarely shown any¬
thing of a private world. Her songs are rooted
much more in what you might call a "collec¬
tive subjectivity".
You naturally compare Western societies
with Arab societies. If intellectuals aren't
often portrayed in a good light in the Arab

world, why is this so and what can be done
about it? Intellectuals and writers have
played a big part in bringing change to the
West.
For the moment I don't see change coming
about through the intellectuals, for the simple,
terrible reason that there is a gulf between the
Arab peoples and Arab intellectuals.
Were the ties all that close between Voltaire
and the French peasantry in the eighteenth
century?
There has always been, everywhere, a
polemical, sometimes even violent relationship
between intellectuals and the people. But the
important thing is that there should be a rela¬
tionship of some kind. In the Arab world,
since the cultural disruptions caused by coloni¬
zation, there is no longer a link between the
cultural habits of peoples and the ways of
thinking and creating of modern intellectuals.
They are two separate worlds. The only
example which comes to mind, in recent years,
of a marked congruence between the people
and the intellectuals, is the case of the musi¬
cian Sheikh Imam and the performer-poet
Fuad Nagm in Egypt. And even then, their
message was transmitted through the medium
of popular song on cassettes. If they had been
writers in an ivory tower that symbiosis
would not have existed.
I would add that although they were very
popular, it was popularity within an intellec¬
tual, militant stream of opinion. They got
through not to the peasant masses but to the
intelligentsia in the broadest sense of the term.
Not only the intellectuals, the thinkers, but
the hundreds of thousands of people who can
read a newspaper, who watch the television,
who live in the cities, who travel perhaps . . .
who are, in any case, influenced by the cinema,
the radio, and television.
There has always
been, everywhere, a
polemical, sometimes
even violent
relationship between
intellectuals and the
people. But the
important thing is that
there should be a
relationship of some
kind.
If the circumstances are propitious,
writers, painters, sculptors and poets can make
an impact on those groups. But they cannot
reach the masses, above all the peasants.
Perhaps they could do so gradually, if the
media tried to make them known and helped
them to get their message across to the greatest
number. But as a rule the media are open to
those whose material is undemanding,
inoffensiveactors and singers.
All day long they broadcast soap operas
which propagate a lowbrow ideology. Today
people watch only this kind of stuff. As a
result, most intellectuals worth their salt have
no option but to get quietly on with their
work, far from the limelight. Myself, I don't
think there's anything wrong in taking that
decision, hoping that future generations will
discover one's work and like it.
Ifyou think that little can be expected of
the intellectuals for the moment, where will
change come from?
Let's take the example of Europe. Until
very recently there were three powerful dic¬
tatorships in Europe: Spain, Portugal and
Greece. The future for these countries seemed
totally blocked, it was impossible to see what
they could do. And yet they have been reborn,
initially because of a new-found political
legitimacy. Finally they accepted the very
simple idea that to lead a country, you must
periodically hold a national consultation in
which people representing different
programmes can make a bid for power.
It all starts when power is desacralized and
politicians become vested with it, not because
they have bought the best machine-guns or
chosen the best moment to overthrow their
comrades, but because they have a vision of
the future, a programme for which they have
obtained a majority which trusts them.

But aren't you putting the cart before the
horse?
Yes of course. That's what intellectuals do.
It's a long hard job, and it's not by producing
committed, ideological literature that you can
get the message across. There are two levels:
specifically political work and creative work.
In general the two are quite distinct, otherwise
you have art or literature which is disem¬
bodied, sterile.
How can intellectuals prepare the ground
for progress?
They must get people used to the existence
of doubt, of criticism, of disagreement, praise
the courage involved in opposition, insist on
the right to say no, to be alone, to stand out
from the herd. Creative artists can say all this
in their own way and in their own field, by
hard, rigorous work.
Two attitudes are possible. Creative artists
can do their own thing, try to satisfy them¬
selves without bothering whether their coun¬
trymen understand them or not. Or else
they can try to invest the strongholds of mass
culture. Unfortunately it is impossible to
disregard such an important medium as
television, for example. We should know
how to use it, learn to work in it and express
new values in it. And of course we must
fight for that. New ideas should confront
old ideas, as they do everywhere. We must
refer again to the example of Europe. People
have fought to make Europe what it is today.
Freedom is not something that is served up
on a plate, like breakfast. It has to be earned.
Be vigilant, for nothing one achieves lasts
for ever.
But how should an intellectual approach
this task?
Freedom is not
something that is
served up on a plate,
like breakfast.
It has to be earned.
Be vigilant, for
nothing one achieves
lasts forever.
First and foremost through self-expression.
But what is happening today? There seems to
be a kind of sound-proof barrier. The intellec¬
tuals cannot be heard. Are they expressing
themselves but we can't hear them? Perhaps.
Perhaps they are shouting their heads off and
we can't hear them.
Isn't one big problem that of being able
to communicate freely with the rest of the
world? Keeping abreast of what's going on
elsewhere, ofwhat otherpeople are thinking?
Yes, there isn't enough information and no
attempt is made to encourage people to know
what's going on. But there is always rumour,
the weapon of the poor. Rumour, humour,
ironythey can be very effective but of course
they're not enough.
Who in your opinion, in the novel, art or
literature, have prepared or are preparing a
way to the future? You mentioned Naguib
Mahfouz.
Yes, Mahfouz is our national monument.
But don't forget Taha Hussein before him. Or
the Iraqi writer Al Sayyab, who died in
Kuweit in 1962. To my mind he is a very great
poet. Modern, ahead of his time, he broke new
ground in Arab poetry. He had a vision of the
world that was universalist and at the same
time deeply rooted in his native country. And
great rigour in the use of Arabic.
Adonis has brought new life to Arabic,
but in a way which does not seem to me
entirely successful. His poetry is highly tech¬
nical, highly cerebral. Mahmoud Darwish is
quite the opposite. He is a poet of verbal
generosity, who has a sense of imagery, a
broad perception, and writes for a mass
audience. The ideal would be a mixture of
Adonis and Darwish. A poet like that would
8

be the greatest poet of the Arab world. . . .
But we don't have such a poet. . . . There are
very few great poets in the world anyway.
What about short story writers?
Some of them have produced very good
work. First of all there is Yusuf Idris, a very
fine writer whom I would rank with William
Faulkner. In a few pages he can express the
preoccupations of a whole society. By
describing a seemingly trivial incident or
character, he leaves traces which endure. Idris
is a great writer.
Painters?
The painters I like are abstract painters. For
me the greatest of them is the Moroccan
painter Ahmed Charkawi, who died in 1967
at the age of thirty-six. He is a painter who
inspires strong feelings. He uses the basic
colours and signs of our conscious or uncons¬
cious universe, our universe as Arabs and
Africans.
Working in depth with language, signs and
images is one way ofpreparing the ground
for modernity, preparing peoplefor detached
thinking, for freedom. Does it lead to disin¬
tegration or to synthesis? Is it a search for com¬
promise between what is inside and what is
outside, between old and new, or is it a source
of great tension which destroys all sense of
continuity?
Initially, to my mind, we have to talk in
terms of making a clean break. We must do
this to shock people and make them think.
Later we must try to look for common
ground. Above all we must stop posing as
victims of the West and behaving negatively
towards the West. We must participate with
the West on an equal footing in the reconstruc-
^
/
tion of the world. We must have our say, not
through violence, aggression or fear. We must
speak out calmly and forcefully. We shall only
be able to enter the new world era if we agree
to engage in dialogue with the other side. It
is through accepting other people in our own
countries that we shall come to respect our
neighbours and be respected in our turn. Then
we shall be able to imagine our common
future together. If we want the state to respect
and guarantee human rights, we must respect
one another first. The newborn child must see
men showing respect for women, for example,
and vice versa.
Is your own work an attempt to break
things apart or to see things whole?
I came to poetry through the urgent need
to denounce injustice, exploitation, humilia¬
tion. I know that's not enough to change the
world. But to remain silent would have been
a kind of intolerable complicity.
The break is there: a break with the litany
of silences. Uttering in poetry the desire for
a more human world, while recognizing the
limits of literature. And yet one must write,
even and above all if human beings are not
particularly good or decent.
Which characters and which themes in
your work are most representative of your
attitude?
My characters are often driven by a pas¬
sionate desire for justice. They are rebellious
and incorruptible. I would cite two of them,
a woman, Harrouda, and a man, Moha. Each
of them, in different books, bears witness to
the wounds of the peoples of the Maghreb.
Perhaps they are marginal, but they forcefully
express a passion for truth and dignity. When
I think about my work with a certain detach¬
ment, I realize that I have written about the
dispossessed, the condition of immigrants, the
condition of women who do not enjoy the
same legal rights as men, the Palestinians who
are deprived of their land and condemned to
exile and despair. Even in the short book I
wrote about the sculptor Giacometti I deve¬
loped these main themes, themes of solitude
and anguish.
I who love life in spite of all that mars it,
I who love friendship, jokes and laughter, actu¬
ally write about wounds, the eternal treasons
of life. It's not very funny but it's sincere. My
commitment is to sincerity.
