The opening of the first General Conference of UNESCO at the Sorbonne. Parts, on 20 November 1946.

UNESCO's ftst 45 yean
~ NY chronicle of the achievements and events that have marked the
four and a half decades of existence of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization is bound to be selective. It is also
bound to highlight the three major aspects of UNESCO's activities: their
range in space and time, since they extend to all the continents and most
of them are long-term; their diversity of type and content; and the spirit
of perseverance which inspires them in pursuit of the common goal of
helping to bring humankind together and to promote international under¬
standing. These qualities characterize both the most spectacular of
UNESCO's activities, such as its international campaigns for the preser¬
vation of great monuments, and thosefar more numerousthat may
long go unnoticed before their results finally take tangible form.
Raising awareness and stimulating action; formulating experimental
models and pilot projects; providing technical assistance, consultation
with specialists; acting as a source of documentation and information;
traininga fundamental activity whose effects multiply over the years;
standard-setting activities; drawing up intellectual guidelines for action
this is the substance of UNESCO's work. By these means UNESCO accom¬
plishes its mission of breaking down geographical barriers to the spread .
of knowledge and encouraging dialogue between cultures. In this way
UNESCO seeks to carry out the mandate assigned to it by its Constitution,
of "advancing, through the educational and scientific and cultural rela¬
tions of the peoples of the world, the objectives of international peace".
This is a long-term effort which it is difficult to present in calendar form.
We hope however that it will appear in the background of this chronology.
The chronology is divided under seven headings. The firstGeneral
Policysubsumes the major decisions of UNESCO's General Conference,
the evolution of the Organization's governing bodies, UNESCO's rela¬
tions with its Member States, and activities which extend over several
fields of its programme. Five other headings correspond to UNESCO's
five sectors: Education; Exact and Natural Sciences; Social Sciences;
Culture; Communication. The seventh heading (Events) covers all the
exhibitions, visits, seminars and celebrations that in a sense constitute
the social life of UNESCO while contributing to its cultural influence.
Considerable space has been given to the collaboration which began
at a very early stage between UNESCO and international non¬
governmental organizations (NGOs), some of which have a very close
working relationship with the Organization. The NGOs are partners of
great importance for UNESCO, since their members are internationally
known specialists in UNESCO's fields of competence. Some of them were
created before UNESCO, most subsequently, and several at UNESCO's
initiative. In the chronology their activities are briefly referred to, and
special attention is given to those which co-operate technically with the
Organization.
The chronology naturally stresses UNESCO's programme activities
under the five main headings. These programmes and projects appear
either under the date when they were first decided upon, or when they
were inaugurated, or when they entered one of their most significant
stages.
MICHEL CONIL LACOSTE M
