The rich and little-



known cartographic
heritage of the Aztecs
and Maya of Mexico
The treasures of Montezuma
24
MIGUEL LEÓN-PORTILLA
of Mexico, is currently serving
as his country's ambassador
and permanent delegate to
UNESCO. Professor emeritus at
the Autonomous National
University of Mexico, he is the
author of a number of books,
articles and papers on pre-
Columbian cultures, which
have been translated into
several languages.
¿AMONG the gifts that Hernán Cortés, the
Spanish conqueror of Mexico, sent to the
emperor Charles V in 1522 were two maps of the
lands he was then engaged in conquering in the
name of Spain. The maps had been painted by
Indians on cotton fabric.
These maps, so different from those to which
Europeans were accustomed, were much admired
at the court of Valladolid. One of the first people
to see them, the Italian humanist Piero Mártir de
Anglería, noted in his "Decades of the New
World", "We have examined one of the maps of
these lands, thirty feet long and almost as many
wide, on which all the territory is traced in great
detail on a piece of white cotton, with the
friendly and hostile peoples of Montezuma. Also
shown are the great mountains which surround
the plain, and the southern coastline.... We have
also seen another, smaller map, which is no less
interesting and shows the same city of Tenustitán
(Mexico City-Tenochtitlán), with its temples, its
bridges and its lakes, all hand-painted by
natives...."
Cortés describes in his detailed letters to
Charles V how, two years before, he had received
another map from Montezuma, the last Aztec
emperor of Mexico: "I asked the said Montezuma
if there was anywhere on the coast an estuary or
a creek through which vessels could come and
go, and he told me that he did not know but that
he would provide me with a painting of the coast
with its rivers and bays.... The next day, a

^p^fsÄ
;--)
j-	
K
T^V-
©!
representation of the whole coast was brought
to me on a piece of material, showing the estuary
of a river which seemed much wider than the
others."
The speed with which Montezuma produced
this map for Cortés shows that the Aztecs kept
original manuscripts in accessible places in which
they could quickly be copied. Perhaps the storage
place in this case was the "house of books" {amox-
colli in Aztec) which contained what Bernai Díaz
del Castillo described in his Historia verdadera de
la conquista de la Nueva España ("True History
of the Conquest of New Spain", 1568) as "the
many collections of paper folded like Castilian
linen".
Equally striking is the copyist's scrupulous
attention to detail, which was remarked on by
Bernai Díaz del Castillo who wrote of this map
that "All the estuaries and creeks of the northern
coast could be seen painted and indicated natur¬
ally, from the río Panuco to Tabasco, a distance
of 140 leagues" (some 600 km).
What has become of the painted manuscripts
and maps which the Indians preserved in their
archives? Only fifteen or so survived the con¬
quest. Two of them, the Fejérváry-Mayer and Tro-
Cortesianus codices, seem to be symbolic



representations of the world as it was envisioned
by the peoples of pre-Columbian Mexico.
At the centre of these maps which show in
symbolic form the cemanáhuac (the land mass sur¬
rounded by water), the gods preside over the
cosmic division of the world into regions directed
towards the four cardinal points of the compass.
Each region has its own specific attributes,
colours, flora and fauna. Glyphs designating the
north, east, west and south show that the Maya,
the Aztecs and other Mexican indigenous peoples
used signs to indicate the cardinal points.
Manuscripts of great historical and genealog¬
ical interest produced by the Mixtee people of
Oaxaca have also survived. Two of them, the Nut-
tall and Vindobonensis codices, contain many
symbolic depictions of places where important
events took place, while towns, villages, moun¬
tains, rivers, lakes, roads and coastlines are named
and their location shown by patches of colour.
An aerial view
of the valley of Mexico
The colonized Indians of Mexico continued to
produce documents which were to some extent
cartographical in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. Some were made at the instigation of
the Spanish authorities and of missionaries.
Others were drawn to define the boundaries of
estates.
Some maps showed entire regions, complete
1 2
5
3 4
5 6
7 8
Detail of the Codex
Vindobonensis, a historic
manuscript of the Mixtee
people (1200-1500). Above,
symbols designating towns
(1), small settlements (2, 3,
4), and the cardinal points (5,
6, 7 and 8).
25

Fragment of a painting on
vegetable fibre shows part of
the city of Mexico-
Tenochtitlán. The manuscript
Is probably pre-Hispanic, with
post-conquest additions.
with towns, forests, roads and rivers. Others, such
as that which the lords of Xicalango provided for
Cortés before he set out on his expedition to
Honduras, as he describes in his "Letters", were
route-maps. Yet others were cadastral maps
which were also valid as title deeds for pieces of
land. When these maps are compared with their
pre-Columbian models, a definite European
influence can often be seen.
One particularly interesting document is the
Xólotl codex, an early copy of a pre-Columbian
manuscript. Named for an indigenous chief men¬
tioned in it, this document preserved in the Bib¬
liothèque Nationale in Paris consists of eight full
pages and two fragments, each of which consti¬
tutes a kind of aerial view, as if taken from a satel¬
lite, of the valley of Mexico at various moments
in its history.
Equally interesting is the Teozacualco Map,
which represents a part of the Mixtee country of
Oaxaca and was sent as part of a report to Philip
II of Spain. It includes genealogies which are
depicted in the form of figures associated with
their respective villages or fiefs. It is accompanied
by a Spanish text which is the key to the hiero¬
glyphics denoting the names of members of the
different lineages. The Teozacualco Map is thus the
Rosetta Stone of the pre-Hispanic manuscripts
from this region.
The notion of scale seems absent from the
maps mentioned so far. In them exaggeration is
used to show the importance of features such as
rugged terrain or settlements.
However, some chroniclers claim to have
seen maps or plans in which scale was used to
show the limits of seigneurial jurisdiction or
estate boundaries, with signs indicating the
perimeter of each plot. All settlements of a cer¬
tain size had archives in which these plans were
deposited for consultation or modification as the
need arose.
In the National Anthropological Museum of
Mexico there is a fragment of a large map (2.38
m x 1.68 m) on locally produced paper. It is a



scale representation of Mexico city before the
arrival of the Spaniards, with its system of canals,
street layout and property boundaries. Although
the notes scribbled in the margin date from after
the conquest, the style and appearance of the
document show that it is of indigenous origin.
In the archives, libraries and museums of
Mexico and elsewhere an abundance of still
unstudied documents testify to the cartographical
activity of the Amerindians of Mexico. Even if
most of them date from the sixteenth century,
and thus from the colonial period, they are
largely inspired by pre-Columbian concepts and
representational techniques.
Study of these documents would shed more
light on an ancient cartographic tradition which
was independent of that of Europe. It would be
an opportunity to analyse the form of cultural
intermingling between Hispanic and Indian tra¬
ditions which took place in cartography as a
specific example of the encounter between two
worlds.
26
