Ambassaèrs,
and empires
V/N the thirty-first public festivities were
held at Junthia or Siam to celebrate the acces¬
sion of the King of Portugal to the throne. The
foreign vessels fired a number of rounds of
cannon and let off fireworks. The following
day, the first of November, Monsieur Con¬
stance invited me to a great feast to celebrate
the event. All the Europeans in the town
attended and cannon were fired continually
all day long. After the meal there was acting,
beginning with the Chinese, then there were
some Siamese whose posturing I found
ridiculous and not nearly so good as our Euro¬
pean players..." The tourist who penned these
lines was a French nobleman, the Chevalier
de Chaumont, who in 1685 led a mission to
Siamnow Thailandin response to a dele¬
gation sent the previous year by the Siamese
king to the court of Louis XIV at Versailles.
The "Monsieur Constance" mentioned by
the Chevalier de Chaumont was a remarkable
person. A Greek from Cephalonia, he was also
The arrival of French ambassadors
in Siam (now Thailand)
c. 1686. Contemporary watercolour.
adventurers
UNESCO
IN ACTION
THE SILK ROADS
by François-Bernard Huyghe
known as Constantine Hierarchy, and
adopted the name of Constantine Phaulkon
on his arrival in Asia. Born into a Catholic
family, he was converted to Anglicanism and
then reverted to Catholicism before his mar¬
riage to a Japanese Christian. He started out
in life as a cabin boy on an English merchant
ship, sailed to Thailand, and became inter¬
preter to the mandarin in charge of the
Treasury. Later he became Superintendent of
Foreign Trade. He was ennobled and became
acting minister of finance and foreign affairs
in Thailand.
Plotters and adventurers
at the Thai court
The English doubtless instructed Constantine
to favour the English East India Company's
interests at the expense of the Dutch, who had
forcibly acquired a virtual monopoly of Thai
trade with China. Instead, he schemed to
establish French power in Thailand. There fol¬
lowed some rather murky episodes involving
Jesuits and Roman Catholic missionaries (who
were in competition with the large numbers
of "Moors" who were spreading the Islamic
faith). French garrisons were established at
Mergui on the Indian Ocean and at Bangkok.
The francophile party triumphed, but not for
long. King Narai fell victim to a suspicious ill¬
ness to which he eventually succumbed, and
a general named Petraja took the throne. He
had his rivals executed, along with Constan¬
tine and a number of missionaries, and closed
the country to outside influences. Thus came
to an end the reign of Pra Narai, a sovereign
who loved literature so much that he spoke
in verse and only took pleasure in the com¬
pany of poets.
The history of the Thai court at Ayuthaya
in the seventeenth century abounds in perso¬
nalities like Constantine. Another prominent
figure was the Japanese Yamada Nagamara,
who was head of the Royal Guard and the epi¬
tome of Japanese influence in Thailand. These
foreigners who intervened in Thai political life
illustrate the cosmopolitan nature of the
society in which they played such a promi¬
nent role. Their emergence was to some extent
due to the existence of the Silk Roads. No less
>*;>
**+
m*f ** t
!.] S*
47

48
The observation of a solar eclipse
In Siam (now Thailand), c. 1688.
French contemporary engraving.
than forty foreign communities lived at
Ayuthaya.
For the members of UNESCO's Maritime
Silk Roads expedition, the ambiguous and
picaresque careers of these men are a spec¬
tacular reminder of how the great trade routes
could influence the processes of history. This
idea took root when the expedition's ship, the
Fulk al-Salamah, first arrived in Thailand at
Phuket, from whence it sailed on to Malaysia
and Indonesia before returning to Bangkok.
Between the Indian
Ocean and the South China Sea,
the barrier of Indochina
The Indochinese peninsula marks an impor¬
tant frontier on the Silk Roads. Early on, fear
of Malaysian pirates, or perhaps a wish to
make use of the monsoon winds and avoid a
long detour southwards, attracted traffic
between the Indian Ocean and the South
China Sea. Our expedition visited the beach
on the west coast of Thailand where Arab
ships dropped anchor, perhaps as early as the
ninth century. On the east coast, on the shores
of the South China Sea, we searched for frag¬
ments of Chinese ceramics which can be
picked up there as easily as seashells.
How did merchandise cross the peninsula?
According to a theory put forward a few years
ago, it was carried in boats which were hauled
over logs by elephants. When a television com¬
pany carried out an experiment to see if this
was feasible so many planks (and so much por¬
celain) were broken that doubt was cast on
the theory.
Our next port of call, Melaka, formerly
Malacca, again confirmed the influence that
trade has exercised on people's lives. Much has
been written about the different cultures and
peoples of Malaysia, but how many people
know that at the beginning of the sixteenth
century no less than eighty-four languages
were spoken in Malacca, including three
different types of Malay, each the language of
a specific social class? And that the Indian,
Arab, Persian and Chinese communities each
had their own district and played an impor¬
tant part in the life of the community?
Between the foundation of the city at the
end of the fourteenth century by Paramesvara,
an exiled prince from Sumatra, and the Por¬
tuguese colonization of 1511, a state developed
whose destiny was dominated by its maritime
vocation. The Chinese Ming emperor Yonglo
immediately realized the importance of this
port strategically situated on the Strait of
Malacca.
As early as 1403 the Chinese began to send
missions to Malacca and established diplomatic
relations with the city. One imperial envoy
was the Muslim admiral Zheng He who led
several naval expeditions which were typical
examples of the Ming emperors' policy of
maintaining prestige and promoting commer¬
cial expansion. Throughout our journey we
w-s-sry
came upon traces of his fleet, which was one
of the largest in history both in the number
and size of its ships.
The spectacular development of Malacca
was a justification of Chinese diplomacy. A
halfway point on the Silk Road between India
and China, the city overflowed with cloves
from the Moluccas, wood from Timor,
Chinese and Japanese objects, goods from
India, spices, perfumes, medicinal herbs, rubies
from Sri Lanka, gold and silver. Merchants
from every nation bartered their cargoes or
waited there for a favourable wind.
These riches reached Europe via Hormuz
and Basra or Suez and Cairo. Malay became
the lingua franca of the region. Malacca, which
lived entirely from trade, prospered and soon
came to control the peninsula and eastern
Sumatra. It conducted an intelligent fiscal
policy which enriched the state without dis¬
couraging foreign merchants.
Islamization also brought benefits to
Malacca. This was the result of a mission sent
by the king of Pasai (North Sumatra) after the
ground had been prepared by Muslim traders
and possibly by the Sufi mystics who accom¬
panied them. First Paramesvara was con¬
verted, then his nobles, and finally the people
at large. Islam soon became the official
religion, facilitating relations with the Arab
and Persian merchants who dominated trade
in the Indian Ocean.
The structure of the state reflected the
importance of commerce. The sultan and his
chief ministers (including the Shahbandar or
"harbour master") were, in the words of a
Malaysian specialist, "simultaneously the
holders of authority and the principal mer¬
chants of Malacca". Their fortune was con¬
siderable. Every merchant whose ship
anchored in Malacca knew he would have to
hand over to them a proportion of his profits.
;>
mm
Many nations and religions met in this thalas-
socracy in which a Portuguese chronicler of
400 years ago declared that he had seen "the
greatest number of merchants and ships that
can possibly be found in the whole world".
The Indonesian maritime empire
If there is one country that embodies the idea
of diversity and openness to the world it is
surely Indonesia, with its 13,700 islands, 250
ethnic groups and even greater number of lan¬
guages. Our visit to Indonesia gave us the
opportunity to attend a seminar where we
learned something about the kingdom of
Srivijaya, which is so little known that some
people wonder whether it ever existed. And
yet, between the seventh and the fourteenth
century, this kingdom called by the Chinese
San Fu Qi emerged in Sumatra from among
the numerous ports of the Indonesian
archipelago that were struggling for maritime
and commercial supremacy. Both Hinduism
and Buddhism flourished there, and Chinese
monks visited Palembang, the capital of
Srivijaya, to study sacred texts.
In the thirteenth century this kingdom
probably held sway over fifteen other realms,
including Sri Lanka. Its hegemony extended
over a large part of Southeast Asia, from
Thailand to Sumatra. This warrior state was
slowly transformed into a trading kingdom
and became the centre of a complex network
of sea and river ports which were conduits for
international and local trade and enjoyed a cer¬
tain degree of autonomy.
Once again the Silk Roads had made and
brought down empires.
FRANÇOIS-BERNARD HUYGHE, French writer and
journalist, is a former member of UNESCO's
Division of Cultural Heritage.
