
Can Leningrad be saved?
by Olga Nosareva
IN 1703, Peter the Great founded the city of St.
Petersburg at the mouth of the Neva river. In
1914, the city was renamed Petrograd, and since
1924 it has been known as Leningrad.
The Tsar wanted his city to be an ideal cap¬
ital, a Venice of the North. For two centuries,
successive generations of architects worked to
translate his dream into reality. They built a city
of extraordinary beauty and fantasy, rich in
architectural detail, palaces and museums. Its
layout is clear and logical, its streets and squares
are elegant. Majestic waterfront quays were con¬
structed, and the streams and canals were bor¬
dered with whimsically designed ornamental
railings. The city centre, where half the houses
are listed as historic monuments, covers 46 square
kilometres.
But today Leningrad is dying. Within ten or
fifteen years its historic centre will have entirely
disappeared. Over 30 per cent of the public
buildings and private residences built by both
European and Russian architects are or soon will
be in ruins.
This once glittering capital is today a
wretched sight. Houses are on the point of col¬
lapse. Pavements are full of potholes and strewn
with debris from broken cornices and railings.
There is a general air of dereliction. Scaffolding
and wire netting protect passers-by from falling
bricks and masonry. Some deserted streets look
sinister even in broad daylight, with their doors
boarded up and their windows broken. No one
lives in them any more.
There are many reasons for this decline. In
the 1917 Revolution the city's palaces were
besieged. Hundreds of buildings of outstanding
value were converted into communal apartments.
In 1918 the civil war took its toll, and in the 1930s
Stalin ordered the demolition of many religious
buildings. Then came the Second World War, the
blockade of the city and the destruction of entire
streets which the occupants took decades to
rebuild. In the 1960s a campaign against "architec¬
tural superfluity" disfigured many original
buildings and transformed them into square
boxes.
The years of the Soviet regime ended with
the destruction of half the habitable surface area
and the disappearance of hundreds of historic and
religious buildings. In addition, current restora¬
tion work is not managing to curtail the natural
ageing process.
Unfortunately many old buildings were given
over to administrative use, which rapidly led to
their deterioration. Thus the splendid cathedral
of St. Vladimir until recently housed a research
department, the church of the Assumption was
turned into a skating rink, and the Armenian
church was used as a warehouse.
The construction of the Leningrad subway
system in the 1940s and 1950s did not help
matters. For each stationand in Leningrad they
are palatiala row of houses had to be
demolished or a green space sacrificed. Several sta¬
tions were built on sites where churches had
simply been dynamited. An obsolete technique
which involved freezing the ground was used to
build the tunnels. During the work the layers of
subsoil expanded and the subsequent irregular
subsidence affected the buildings above.
One of the characteristics of Leningrad is that
70 per cent of the buildings of some architectural,
cultural or artistic value are. inhabited. How can
the integrity of their often lavishly-decorated
interiors be preserved when they are divided up
into the tiny rooms of communal apartments?
Most of these conversions are now in an appalling
state.
Rather than demolish a building, restoration
teams usually prefer to sacrifice the interior by
knocking down partition walls and converting
the space into small modern apartments. Twenty
years of this kind of "restoration" has meant the
loss of 150 private residences, of which only the
. façades remain.
The city also has a major ecological problem.
The concentration of pollutant gases pumped out
by industry and transport is very much higher
than average. Untreated effluent from hundreds
of factories pours into the Neva, which provides
water for the whole of Leningrad, as well as into
the other urban waterways. Not only is the river
water undrinkable as a result, but swimming in
it has been banned for some time. Controls on
the toxic emissions into the atmosphere and the
water are virtually non-existent.
Leningrad is perhaps the only city in Europe
not to have been provided with a ring road' or
a bypass. An enormous volume of heavy goods
traffic passes through the centre, causing consider¬
able damage. It would be difficult to say which
is the worst problem, the traffic vibrations and
exhaust fumes, or the indifference of the popula¬
tion to them.
It is not just the city of St. Petersburg (there
is some talk of reverting to the original name)
which is disappearing before our eyes, but an
architectural, cultural and historical witness to the
splendour of Russia. Is there still time to save it?
29
