Fon vodun cult dance in
honour of Hebioso, divinity of
celestial phenomena and
germination (Nigeria).
24
HONORAT AGUESSY,
Beninese specialist in
sociology and literature, is a
former researcher at the
French National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS) and
dean of the faculty of letters,
arts and human sciences at
the University of Benin. He is
currently a staff member of
UNESCO's Regional Office in
Dakar (Senegal). His many
published works include
Histoire de la pensée africaine
and L'Afrique et le monde.
Visions et perceptions
traditionnelles.

by Honorât Aguessy
New social and economic forces are disrupting the traditional African awareness of time
Af
This 30-day calendar
of the Fon people of Benin
consists of cowries, fruit
stones, pebbles and other
objects stitched onto a strip
of cloth. Each object
corresponds to a specific day.
The calendar was hung
lengthwise on the wall and a
marker was fixed to the cloth
to indicate the day.
LfricA is so vast a continent and englobes so
many societies that it is impossible to give a single
all-embracing definition of what time means to the
people who live there. There is time as it is
experienced by individuals, but there is also what
might be called "social time" which varies
according to whether the context is political, eco¬
nomic or religious.
In the economic context, time seems to go
by at dizzying speed. New consumer goods
appear on the market at a rhythm which conflicts
with that of the deeply-felt needs of indigenous
African society. In politics, the time of the domi-
nators is out of phase with that of those they
dominate. The former seek permanence and
the latter seek change. In religious life, the rapid
pace of modern life is tending to strengthen
attachment to the unchanging cycles of sacred
time.
Time in African society is thus complex,
dense and opaque. People live in a shifting
kaleidoscope, feeling that everything is in a cons¬
tant state of flux but that fundamentally nothing
ever changes. The Fon people of Benin have a
proverb which says that "Life is like a leaf tossed
about on the surface of the water". Time in the
individual conscience is not isolated from collec¬
tive time. It overlaps with the different forms of
collective time and is modified by them.
Exposed to the frantic rhythm of the con¬
sumer society, people find that their attention is
captured and diverted by an endless torrent of
new products. To parody Descartes, one might
sum up this form of subjection to time with the
formula "I consume, therefore I am". In spite of
themselves, people are caught up in a social time
scale which is alien to that of local modes of
production.
It is just as difficult for the individual to
master the processes of time in politics. People
find it hard to grasp the ins and outs of political
situations which are full of surprising conspira¬
cies and futile clashes, and are not even intelligible
to those immediately involved. They simply get
the impression that politics is a complex pattern
whose strands are woven and unravelled more
slowly than those of the economic fabric.
In contrast to these fluctuating temporalities
there are the permanence and the recurrence of
religious life. Whether the dominant context is
that of Christianity, Islam or traditional religions,
the religious year is cyclical and its course is punc¬
tuated by the recurrent events that mark its
eternal return. It has not been much affected by
the changes that have occurred elsewhere in
society. Although there are signs that traditional
religions have adapted to the demands of the
modern world, their spiritual foundationsthe
true memorial of the history of African
societiesremain intact.
In the traditional calendar, which is based on
well-omened days and ill-omened days, the
organization of time has not changed. In the Fon
calendar, which governed the actions of the reli¬
gious authorities (although other people also took
an interest in it), symbols on a piece of cloth indi¬
cate the significance of different lunar days which
correspond to certain events in people's lives. The
day on which everything you undertake will be
successful is symbolized by a kind of smooth,
shining, grey-green bean, the ajikwin. A small
bone indicates a day on which it is best not to
attempt anything. This calendar was constantly
consulted by people who wanted to be sure of
not swimming against the tide. The underlying
idea is that every important undertaking has its
time and its rhythm.
This social stratification of time sheds some
light on the nature of underdevelopment in
Africa. Underdevelopment is not a lack of
development but development of a dual, distorted
kind. Endogenous development is disturbed and
thwarted by exogenous development, just as time
perceived as communion with the memory of .
society and the cosmos is disturbed by time which
is associated with the repeated appearance of
new gadgets and the pressure of economic
precariousness.
The time of renewal, for Africa, is that which
respects the values of this memory and perpetuates
it in such a way that society can be receptive to
modernity. African society bends before blind and
ephemeral forces from outside, but it does not
break. Its time is only just beginning. 25
