Moby Dick, monster
oftheforbiäen
seas

IN 1839 eighteen-year-old Herman Melville, the
son of a prominent but impoverished American
family, sailed as a deckhand from New York to
Liverpool and back aboard the packet ship Si.
Lawrence. This was his first taste of the sea. Less
than two years later, after a short and unsuccessful
spell as a teacher, he returned. Signing on this
time as a lowly whalerman, despite his genteel
origins, he embarked upon the Acushnet, which
took him from Fairhaven, Massachusetts, round
Cape Horn, to the Pacific. There, after deserting
the Acushnet and becoming involved in a mutiny
on another whaling ship, he became variously a
harpooner and beachcomber on islands from the
Galápagoswhere just a few years earlier Charles
Darwin had preceded him on board the Beagle-
to Tahiti. In 1844 he returned to Boston from
Honolulu as an enlisted seaman aboard the man-
of-war United States.
It was then that his writing career truly
began, informed by his first-hand experience of
the sea, its calms and tempests, its exhilarations
and tribulations. For Melville, the sea was both
massively actual, alive with observable creation,
yet at the same time a kind of cosmic key or
cipher. Within its ebbs and flows, its moving sur¬
faces and mysterious depths, its plenitude of life-
forms from plankton to leviathans, was to be
found the very riddle of existence. "You must
have plenty of sea-room to tell the truth in", he
proclaimed.
He could hardly have better indicated the
ocean dimensions of the epic tale then taking
shape in his imagination, one which would take
its hero, Captain Ahab and his ship-of-all-nations,
the Pequod, backwards and forwards across the
great Atlantic and Pacific fishing lanes in pursuit
of that most sumptuous of aquatic creatures, the
white whale, Moby Dick, which would give its
name to his novel.
A LONGSTANDING TRADITION
Yet in speaking of "sea-room" Melville was also
aligning himself with a very longstanding tradition
in Western culture. The Book of Jonah, to take
one starting-point, explicitly alluded to in Chapter
9 of Moby Dick, relates a parable of would-be
flight and guilt in which the sea is portrayed as
the tempestuous domicile of a "great fish" that
swallows and later spews forth the recalcitrant
prophet. Then there is Homer who, with the
Iliad and the Odyssey, composed epics that became
founding stories in the Graeco-Roman legacy. In
the latter, especially, which recounts Odysseus's
journey homeward to his faithful wife Penelope
after the Trojan war, we have one of the classic
expressions of the sea as both actual and figurative
domain.
Other landmarks in Western literature, the
anonymous Beowulf znà the Nordic sea sagas,
delineate the sea as a place of northern dark and
cold. Sebastian Brant's Narrenschiff, a fifteenth-
by A. Robert Lee
century German satiric masterpiece, bequeaths us
the image of a Ship of Fools afloat on a sea of
illusion and false hopes. The European Renais¬
sance, an age of boundless discovery, yields
images of the sea as at once a site for battles and
piracy, for the unknown, and for possible routes
to Utopia, reflected in Shakespeare's The Tempest
or Camöes's Os Lusíadas (The Lusiads), the
national epic of Portugal. Camôes, not inciden¬
tally, was favourite reading for Melville. Other
poetry of the sea ranges from Coleridge's ghostly
The Ancient Mariner to Rimbaud's intensely
imagined Le bateau ivre, with the lyrics of a Fer¬
nando Pessoa, a Hart Crane or a Rafael Alberti
there to enrich the list.
But it has perhaps been in the modern novel
that the sea has found its most striking literary
expression. Who has not relished the voyaging
and the shipwrecks of Defoe's Robinson Crusoe,
Swift's Gulliver's Travels or Stevenson's Treasure
Island? Do not Antarctic fantasias like Poe's The
Narrative ofArthur Gordon Pym or Jules Verne's
underwater empire of Captain Nemo in Twenty
Thousand Leagues Under The Sea weave a spell
which extends well beyond childhood? Nor has
the sea lost any of its fascination for our century,
though it does have a growing rival in the immen¬
sities of outer space. In Joseph Conrad, Polish-
born and also an ex-mariner, one can turn to a
tale of the Malaysian Straits like Lord Jim or of
ocean journeying from the Thames to the River
Congo in Heart ofDarkness. English fiction also
Opposite page, Captain Ahab
struggles with the great white
whale in John Huston's film
Moby Dick (1956).
Below, Jonah and the whale.
Mosaic from the Basilica
Teodoriana (4th century),
Aquileia, Italy.
47

The Ship of Fools.
16th-century German
engraving.
supplies Virginia Woolf's The Waves, a "moder¬
nist" classic in which the sea acts as a metaphor
of human consciousness, and, as recently as the
1980s, William Golding's Rites ofPassage, the fic¬
tionalized log of a late-eighteenth-century crossing
to Australia. In these too, the sea goes beyond
mere theme: its rhythms and cadences get drawn
into the very story-telling itself.
Herman Melville thus joins distinguished
company, and not only on account oí Moby Dick.
The sea marks much of his other fiction. Still,
it is Melville's "whale-book", as he liked to call it,
which remains central. Perhaps this is because
Moby Dick so dazzlingly combines high adven¬
ture with philosophy, authentic sea lore with a
taste for metaphysics. "I have written a wicked
book", Melville told his fellow writer, Nathaniel
Hawthorne, "and feel as spotless as the lamb".
How, then, does Melville's epic picture the sea?
Firstly, there is the sea as a physical power,
Melville's ability to render the smack of wind and
current. Nowhere more dramatically does he do
so than when Ahab and his men confront the
breaching of the white whale:
"Moby Dick bodily burst into view! For not
by any calm and indolent spoutings; not by the
peaceable gush of that mystic fountain in his head,
did the White Whale now reveal his vicinity;
but by the far more wondrous phenomenon of
48
breaching. Rising with his utmost velocity from
the furthest depths, the Sperm Whale thus booms
his entire bulk into the pure element of air, and
piling up a mountain of dazzling foam, shows his
pace to the distance of seven miles or more. In
those moments, the torn, enraged waves he
shakes off, seem his mane. . . ."
Here, sea and whale become one, the ocean
as a kingdom with leviathan as one of its ruling
presences. Few of Nature's dramas, for Melville,
ever matched the sight of a Sperm Whale rising
from out of the sea's very depths.
But Melville knew the sea to have a myriad
of quite other incarnations. It could also be a place
of rapacity, of warring and predatory species and
none more so than the shark. With just the right
touch of gallows humour, he describes how
sharks will rip into the flesh of a captured whale:
". . . thousands of sharks, swarming around
the dead leviathan, smackingly feasted on its fat¬
ness. The few sleepers below in their bunks were
often startled by the sharp slapping of their tails
against the hull, within a few inches of the
sleepers' hearts. Peering over the side you could
just see them (as before you heard them) wal¬
lowing in the sullen, black waters, and turning
over on their backs as they scooped out huge
globular pieces of the whale of the bigness of a
human head. . . ."
In contrast, in a chapter appropriately called
"The Grand Armada", Melville depicts the sea
as wonderfully feminine and maternal, an arena
for birth as much as death. He describes a whale-
boat which inadvertently has steered into a school
of newly born whales and their mothers:
"But far between this wondrous world upon
the surface, another and still stranger world met
our eyes as we gazed over the side. For, suspended
in those watery vaults, floated the forms of the
nursing mothers of the whales, and those that by
their enormous girth seemed shortly to become
mothers. The lake, as I have hinted, was to a con¬
siderable depth exceedingly transparent; and as
human infants while suckling will calmly and fix¬
edly gaze away from the breast, as if leading two
different lives at the time . . . even so did the
young of these whales seem looking up towards
us, but not at us. . . ."
At the heart of the engaging peace and beauty
of this scene is Melville's recognition that
however we may view the sea, it always retains
its own way of being. Hence the infant whales
look towards, but not at, their human observers.
FORBIDDEN SEAS
As, too, the Pequod travels ever closer towards
destruction, Melville undertakes an extensive
survey of every aspect of whale life. He takes a
positive pleasure in playing the self-appointed role
of cetologist, supplying lists, systems of categori¬
zation, quotations and fables from a multitude
of sourcesand not least from legendary explorers '
like Thomas Cook and Charles Darwin. He
proves just as alert in describing dolphins, por¬
poises, walruses, brit, crustácea, seabirds, and the
huge floating colonies of algae and seaweed. It is
almost as if he wants to drive home the vital,
incalculable abundance of the seas and their func¬
tion as repositories, places of rebirth and con¬
tinuity. What is more, if ever a book cautioned
against ecological arrogance, it is Moby Dick. In
our own nuclear age, in which global warming

and pollution have become everyday facts,
Melville's story of Ahab's monomania and of a
technology which seeks to maim or even destroy
one of creation's supreme creatures could not
offer a timelier warning.
Yet rooted in fact as they are, Melville's
accounts of the sea and its creatures are also inter¬
spersed with flights of speculation and
philosophy. From the outset, Ishmael, the nar¬
rator, makes no secret of the matter. Contem¬
plating his own going to sea, he declares "Yes,
as every one knows, meditation and water are
wedded for ever". He speaks of the great seas as
"watery prairies" which arouse nothing less than
"mystical vibrations". "Noah's flood", he muses
at a later point, "is not yet subsided; two thirds
of the world it still covers". And with an eye to
the sea as a source of endlessly proliferating myth
and ritual, he invokes two of the most ancient
of world cultures:
"Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy?
Why did the Greeks give it a separate deity, and
make him the own brother of Jove? Surely all
this is not without meaning. And still deeper the
meaning of that story of Narcissus, who because
he could not grasp the tormenting, mild image
he saw in the fountain, plunged into it and was
drowned. But that same image, we ourselves see
in all rivers and oceans. It is the image of the
ungraspable phantom of life; and this is the key
to it all."
In passages like this, Moby Dick confirms how
Melville writes both a sea-story, one of the
greatest, yet also something infinitely more ambi¬
tious. The Pequod's "voyage-out", in another of
his phrases, may well take us literally, exhilarat-
ingly, into an Atlantic or Pacific. But it also takes
us into matching other seas, "forbidden seas" as
Ishmael calls them. These are the seas which exist
within us and where the very first and last of all
meanings might be encountered.
The Wreck of the Minotaur,
by the English painter J.M.W.
Turner (1775-1851).

A. ROBERT LEE,
of the United Kingdom,
teaches American Literature at
the University of Kent at
Canterbury. He is editor of an
edition of Moby Dick
(Everyman Library, 1975) and
of 12 volumes in a "Critical
Studies" series published by
Vision Press (London), the
most recent of which are
devoted to Herman Melville
(1984), Edgar Allan Poe (1986)
and William Faulkner (1990). 49
