A great Argentine
nr K) M/
attempt to recreate 
atmosphere of
intellectual life in
al Andalus
i. HE medica ! doctor, philosopher and jurist Ibn
Rushd or Averroes (1126-1198), the greatest Arab
commentator on Aristotle, is at home in Cor-
doba. He is busy writing a philosophical work,
the TM/Mt-/'TM/Kt (Destruction of Destruc-
tion) " in which it is maintained, contrary to the
Persian ascetic al-Ghazali, author of the TM/Kf-
M/-/M/fM/ (Destruction of Philosophers), that the
divinity knows only the general laws of the
universe, those pertaining to the species, not to
the individual.
" He wrote with slow sureness, from right to
left ; the effort of forming syllogisms and linking
vast paragraphs did not keep him from feeting,
like a state of well-being, the coot and deep house
surrounding him.
" In the depths of the siesta amorous doves
called huskily ; from some unseen patio arose the
murmur of a fountain ; something in Averroes,
whose ancestors came from the Arabian deserts,
was thankful for the constancy of the water.
" Down below were the gardens, the orchard ;
down below, the busy Guadalquivir and then the
beloved city of Cordoba, no less eminent than
Baghdad or Cairo, like a complex and delicate
instrument, and all around (this Averroes fett
also) stretched out to the limits of the earth the
Spanish land, where there are few things, but
where each seems to exist in a substantive and
eternal way."
The above passage is taken from Z, busca de
Averroes ("Averroes's Search", 1947), by the great
Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges (1899-1986).
Themes and figures of Arab-Islamic culture are
recurrent features of the work of Borges, who
once proclaimed that the Thousand and One
Mg/7h was the Book of Books. Of all the writings
he devoted to Arab-Islamic culture,"Averroes's
Search " best represents his special relationship
with that culture and, more particularly, with one
of its unique facets : the world of al-Andalus.
At-Andatus as depicted by Borges Is the scene
of an extraordinary spiritual adventure. It is a
place where commentaries are written on
Aristotle, " this Greek, fountainhead of at)
philosophy ". Where people " exhaust the pages
42

Left. Jorge Luis Borges
Below, water channel and
fountains in the gardens of
the Generatife, the summer
palace of the Nasrid rulers in
Granada (14th century).
of Alexander of Aphrodisia ". Where scholars
proudly examine rare manuscripts collected by
princes who are passionate bibliophiles. Where
questions of poetry and rhetoric are discussed
with fervour. Where an examination of the
authenticity of " marvels " can turn into a discus-
sion of the created or uncreated character of the
Qur'an.
Great intellectual receptivity, rich and con-
trasting characters, a profound respect for other
people's freedom of opinion, conversation and
the exchange of ideas raised to an art : these are
the characteristics of the Andalusian elite as
described by Borges. Averroes takes issue with
another character in the story, Farach the the-
ologian, by refusing to accept that " an excellent
variety of the perpetual rose... is found in the
gardens of Hindustan "-a Borgesian theme par
exce//eHcc-"whose petals, of a blood red, exhibit
characters which read :'There is no god but the
God, Muhammad is the Apostle of God.' " But
this disagreement does not provoke a polemic.
The viewpoint of the orthodox theologian, for
whom a miracle is the very sign of divinity, can
coexist with that of the rationalist.
In the person of Abulcasim the traveller
Borges mischievously presents a kind of antithesis
to the three other characters in the story-Farach
the theologian, Abdalmalik the poet and
Averroes himself. A down-to-earth, practical
man, Abulcasim, whose " memory was a mirror
of intimate cowardices, " has a very different
experience of the world from that of the men of
ideas and convictions. When asked to relate a
marvel, he reflects that " the moon of Bengal is
not the same as the moon of Yemen, but it may
be described in the same words. " A prudent man,
he never answers directly, but takes the pulse of
his audience and softens the asperities of the ques-
tions put to him by means of dialectical agility.
Could it be the memory of other, less tolerant
lands far from al-Andalus that explain this wari-
ness ? Was al-Andalus really the idyllic land Borges
describes ? Did it not, like any other country, have
its share of stupidity and horror as well as its
exemplary splendours ? The life of Averroes him-
self seems to confirm that this was so, if any proof
were needed. He knew opprobrium as well as
glory, suffered repression at the hands of obtuse
authorities, was present at the burning of books
that had cost him dear in hard work and self-
denial, and came to know not just the loyal sup-
port of true friends but also the stubborn hatred
of mediocrities.
But Borges's al-Andalus is not that of history,
nor that of a literary realism that would seek to
reconstitute objectively a life, a place, a time. He
does not set himself that goal, still less allow him-
self that illusion. The point of Borges's fiction is
quite different. The Spanish title of the story, La
busca <4fe'OM, can be read In two ways, as the
quest undertaken by Averroes himself, or as the
quest for Averroes-Borges's own attempt to
recreate the philosopher and his destiny in the
truest manner possible.
In the first paragraphs of the story, Averroes
is depicted hard at work in his library. He is grap-
pling with a problem that causes him great con-
cern. At the beginning of Aristotle's Poetics, on
which he is writing a commentary, he has stum-
bled over two words, tragedy and comedy. " No
one in the world of Islam could conjecture what
they meant. " He consults all the sources, pores
over the versions of the Nestorian Hunain ibn-
Ishaq and of Abu Bashar Mata. But in vain. And
yet " it was impossible to elude... these two
arcane words " from the great philosopher's
Poetics.
Borges twice puts Averroes in the presence
of the answer that he is seeking. The first occa-
sion is a scene in which he is distracted from his
work " by a kind of melody ", looks down from
his balcony and sees " below, in the narrow ear-
then patio, some half-naked children were
43

Awtffett, tb « w<) <ft, wtth
Pythent*. A det8l1 of Ttt*
Sehoe<efA<h<m*, <fnMce
px) <tt « ht 150<-mo by th<
) t<))) tttp<))) <tf) <tp) MH) ntht
StM) Md<) hS<t<MtMn)) nt) x
Wtttean.
RACHtD MMMH),
Moroccan writer and jouma ! ist,
is the author of an essay on
20th-century French
philosophy which will shortly
be published in Arabic. He is
also preparing a study on
French travellers inMorocco,
which will appear (in French) in
1992.
Extracts from"Averroes's
Search " by Jorge Luis borgne ;
translated by James E. Irby.
Copyright @New Directions
Ptthtiahinc fnmnratinn
playing. One, standing on another's shoulders,
was obviously playing the part of a muezzin ; with
his eyes tightly closed, he chanted'There is no
god but the God.'The one who held him motion-
lessly played the part of the minaret ; another,
abject in the dust and on his knees, the part of
the faithful worshippers. The game did not last
long ; all wanted to be the muezzin.... "
The second time is through a story told by
the traveller Abulcasim about a strange thing he
had seen in China : " One afternoon, the Muslim
merchants of Sin Kalan took me to a house of
painted wood where many people lived. It is
impossible to describe the house, which was
rather a single room with rows of cabinets or bal-
conies on top of each other. In these cavities there
were people who were eating and drinking, and
also on the floor, and also on a terrace. The
persons on this terrace were playing the drum and
the lute, save for some fifteen or twenty (with
crimson-coloured masks) who were praying,
singing and conversing. They suffered prison, but
no one could see the jail ; they travelled on horse-
back, but no one could see the horse ; they fought,
but the swords were of reed ; they died and then
stood up again.
"'The acts of madmen,'said Farach,'exceed
the previsions of the sane.'
"'These were no madmen,'Abulcasim had
to explain.'They were representing a story, a
merchant told me.'
" No one understood, no one seemed to want
to understand....
"'Did these people speak ?' asked Farach.
"'Of course they spoke,'said Abulcasim..
..'They spoke and sang and perorated.'
"'In that case,'said Farach,'twenty persons
are unnecessary. One single speaker can teil any-
thing, no matter how complicated it might be.
, "
The words tragedy and comedy presuppose a
knowledge of theatre, an art unknown to Arab
culture In Averroes's day. The philosopher, a.
prisoner of his own culture, cannot imagine what
these words can mean unless he has some idea
of theatrical representation itself. This Is why,
when he has an example of it before his eyes-
the children playing at being muezzin-he cannot
see it. One can only see something of which one
already has a concept ; everything else remains
" invisible ". Since theatre does not exist as a cul-
tural category, another category that is familiar,
that of the story-teller, takes its place.
Averroes returns home at dawn and goes to
his library. Under the impression that he has
finally found the meaning of the two obscure
words, he adds these lines to his manuscript :
" Aristu (Aristotle) gives the name of tragedy to
panegyrics and that of comedy to satires and
anathemas. Admirable tragedies and comedies
abound In the pages of the Qur'an and in the
mohalacas of the sanctuary.... "
Borges then adds a postscript in which he
explains that in the story he has " tried to nar-
rate the process of a defeat ", the failure of a quest
blocked by Its own cultural frontiers, adding,
however, that his own quest for Averroes fails
for the same reason : " I felt that Averroes,
wanting to imagine what a drama is without ever
having suspected what a theatre is, was no more
absurd than I, wanting to imagine Averroes with
no other sources than a few fragments from
Renan, Lane and Asm Palacios. "
Can one ever really know another culture
than one's own ? Putting the bleakest possible
interpretation on Borges's words, it might be said
that cultures are closed to one another. If this is
the case, the quest for what al-Andalus was
becomes impossible, and attempts to recreate at-
Andalus are bound to give a distorted impression.
But such a quest also provides an ethical lesson :
to know is to be aware of otherness, of the " com-
pletely other", and to respect it-a very different
thing from the disastrous pretensions of the
" panoptic overview ".
" Few things more beautiful and more
pathetic are recorded In history than this Arab
physician's dedication to the thoughts of a man
separated from him by fourteen centuries,"
Borges says of Averroes.
Borges's story is a fine contemporary tribute
to the exceptional moment in intellectual life that
was al-Andalus. *
44
