A UTOPIA
OUR TIMES?
NON-STOP LEARNING
BY GILBERT LECLERC
A radical approach
to education as a
means to the
complete fulfilment
of the individual
I
Socrates Teaching Children,
oil on canvas by the Italian
artist Pier Francesco Mola
(1612-1666).
S the idea of lifelong education Utopian? Partly
it is a matter of definition. Strictly speaking, the
only projects that qualify to be called Utopian are
those that envisage a new world radically different
from our own, based on aims and values entirely
different from those of the established order and
drawing on a common will for change. Absolute
otherness is the hallmark of -utopia.
So to answer the question we must find out
whether or not the concept of an educational
experience stretching from the cradle to the grave
implies the complete transformation of present-
day education and whether or not it presupposes
a new model of society.
The fact is that lifelong education involves
a great deal more than a learning experience
lasting from infancy into old age. It also embraces
the idea that education should no longer be exclu¬
sively confined to schools. Instead it should
embrace all of lifework, leisure, the environ¬
ment, family, job, society, international relations.
It requires that people should become their own
teachers so as to realize their full intellectual, emo¬
tional and artistic potential. And it demands that
in this quest everyone should have an equal
chance of success.
In this new view of education, every aspect
of a person's life has some educational sig¬
nificance. The whole panoply of educational
resources must be available to all, so every
individual can attain his or her full potential.
This last objective is of central importance
for all the pioneers of the new philosophy, and
particularly those who have worked with Unesco
in this field. Lifelong education seeks nothing less
than the complete transformation of the
experience of learning, which it attempts to
expand to its uttermost limits in time, space,
and the social arena. It aims to replace a part-time
and compartmentalized system with one that is
both continuous and integrated. Under its aegis,
every aspect of peoples' existence would be
open to the lessons of a world in which educa¬
tion is omnipresent. The theory demands a
completely new perspective. Opened up in all
directions, the horizons of education become
almost limitless.
The idea, then, is certainly revolutionary in
its educational implications, but does it presup¬
pose a social transformation of similar scope?
Once again its proponents would answer "yes".
A society genuinely dedicated to education in its
widest sense requires both new structures and
altered ways of thinking. Such a commitment
would not be compatible with a profit-oriented
consumer society. Nor would it sit easily with
a technocratic world in which knowledge is the
restricted property of specialists, or with a
bureaucratic society that tends to obfuscate the
ways in which it is run.
So by its very nature the concept of lifelong
education would seem to be Utopian. The old
ideal of an education fulfilling all aspirations and
developing every potential has doubtless never
before been pushed so far. It is hardly surprising, 39

Above, mature students at a
Paris university.
Below, "At School", a plate
from a set of colour
lithographs entitled fn the
Year 2000 (French, early
20th century).
GILBERT LECLERC,
of Canada, is head of the
research and development of
lifelong education at the
University of Sherbrooke,
Quebec. The author of a
number of articles on Utopian
thinking, he has also
published, with Guy Bouchard
and Laurent Giroux, a book
entitled L'utopie aujourd'hui
(Presses Universitaires de
Montréal, 1985).
then, that it has induced thousands of men and
women to try to construct a new world.
Although it is only thirty years since it was first
formulated, this dream has already inspired
countless projects and experiments in many parts
of the world, and in so doing has played an
important role in the development of contem¬
porary education.
It is the fate of utopias, though, never to be
realized in full. Whenever enthusiasts have tried
to transplant their vision from the written page
to the real world, whether by democratic or by
revolutionary means, they have either been mar¬
ginalized or forced to compromise to some degree
with the existing systemalways assuming that
they have not simply had to give up. In one sense,
then, the history of utopia is an unbroken
sequence of failures, for the dreamed-of perfect
society has never been brought to fruition.
From another point of view, though, its pages
are studded with success, if one considers the
untold number of genuine, practical achievements
that the Utopian vision has inspired. Viewed in
this light, utopia appears less as a blueprint for
action than as a motive force that, by creating
new horizons for social progress, has the power
to get history under way. And if human destiny
is so rich in potential, it is because the deepest
truths about mankind and society cry out for an
imagined world that cannot be found in a
revamped version of the existing one.
Human activity only takes on its full sig¬
nificance if it can be conceived of as an incessant
search for totalization. People have always held
before them as a beacon a vision of some state
or condition that would lead them away from the
particular and towards the totality of experience.
Inevitably they have drawn inspiration from the
imaginary, since the condition they seek does not
yet exist; insofar as it is not simply a variant on
existing conditions, it is necessarily Utopian,
which is to say radically other. No genuinely
innovatory change is possible without this
visionary dimension.
As education is particularly concerned with
the totalization of experience and with the ful¬
filment of human potential, it is bound to feed
on utopias. Without them it would be caught in
a vicious circle of repetition and stereotypes.
Need one add, then, that a Utopian approach to
education is just as essential as a scientific
approach? Imagination and reason both have a
part to play in shaping tomorrow's education.
The role of the imagination is to come up with
new models, better adapted than existing ones to
the individual's changing needs. Reason must test
these visions and put into action those that are
viable. The road to reality must pass through the
creative imagination.
