The United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea
The adoption in 1982 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea was
a milestone in the history of international relations. The Convention contains the first
comprehensive, binding, enforceable international environmental law. It is the first legal
instrument effectively to integrate environment and development within the concept
of sustainable development. It is also the first instrument to provide for a system of
mandatory, binding settlement of disputes arising not only from environmental issues
but from all other issues relating to the uses of seas and oceans.
The Convention is based on two fundamental concepts: the concept of the Common
Heritage of Mankind and the idea that the problems of ocean space are closely
interelated and need to be considered as a whole.
The concept of the Common Heritage of Mankind, applicable to areas (such as
the deep seabed or outer space), to resources (such as minerals and metals), and to
abstractions (such as science and technology) subsumes four other fundamental
concepts:
Development: The Common Heritage of Mankind must be developed for the benefit
of mankind as a whole.
Equity: In the distribution of benefits, particular consideration must be given to
the poor and disadvantaged.
Environment: The Common Heritage of Mankind must be developed with due
consideration for the conservation of the environment and its resources. Mankind
includes present and future generations, which have an equal right to share in the
common heritage.
Security: The Common Heritage of Mankind is reserved for exclusively peaceful
purposes.
The incorporation of the Common Heritage concept in the UN Convention is of
such far-reaching cultural importance that we have not even begun to fathom all its
implications.
The Common Heritage of Mankind implies a new economic theory, based on a
new concept of ownership, or rather non-ownership, which may provide a point of
convergence in a common effort to meet the environmental challenge.
The economics and philosophy of the common heritage provide a logical basis
for common and comprehensive security. Common, since in the contemporary world
the security of one can no longer be founded on the insecurity of the other and the
security of each must be the security of all. Comprehensive, since in the contemporary
world, security comprises economic and environmental security as well as military
security.
The idea that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and should
be considered as a whole has important consequences. For while the problems arising
from the different uses of the oceans interact, the uses of the sea in turn interact
with terrestrial activities. Much of the world's food comes from the sea; seabed metals
and minerals are bought and sold on the world commodity market; offshore oil is used
for the same purposes as onshore oil; the marine environment is part of the biosphere;
the naval arms race cannot be dissociated from the general question of the arms race
and disarmament.
An integrated approach to other world problems is just as necessary as it is for
the management of ocean affairs. Land boundaries are becoming porous, as production
systems, financial systems, communication and information systems move unhindered
across them.
In the case of the oceans this interrelationship was more obvious. This is why the
Law of the Sea is the most advanced legal instrument and institutional framework for
the integration of Environment and Development. Let us try to learn the lessons the
ocean has taught us and apply them to wider global concerns. E.M.B.
53
