I INTERVIEW



SADRUDDIN
AGA KHAN
Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan is the son of
Mohammed Shah, the Aga Khan III, religious
leader of the Nizari Ismailis, a Shiite Islamic
reformist movement which has many
followers in India, Pakistan, Central Asia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Syria and East Africa.
In 1958, at UNESCO, he embarked on a
brilliant international career, and in 1965
became United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, a position he held until 1977.
Still extremely active In the field of
humanitarian action, Sadruddin Aga Khan
created the Bellerive Foundation, Geneva,
which is concerned with development aid and
the protection of the environment, notably in
Africa. He is also vice-president of the World
Wide Fund for Nature.
You have been associated with the United
Nations system for many years. Did you feel
a vocation to serve the UN?
I think people are primarily influenced by
their family environment. Because of my
origins I belong both to the East and the West.
Iran is the cradle of our family, but we have
never lived there. I was born in Paris, and my
mother was French. Through my father, who
had a strong influence on me, I came into con¬
tact with Islam when I was very young. We
travelled widely in the Islamic countries and
often visited Egypt. My father was a pioneer in
international organizations: he played an active
part in the creation of the League of Nations,
was its president in 1937, and even inaugurated
the Palais des Nations in Geneva. My office
is only a few steps away from the one he
occupied. That makes for a kind of continuity.
As well as being a senior international civil
servant, you are also known as a man ofideas
and someone who is closely involved in grass¬
roots issues.
have tried to resist the forces of bureaucratic
inertia. In the corridors of diplomacy people

Poster produced by
the Office of
the United Nations
High Commissioner
for Refugees (UIMHCR).
gradually tend to lose their capacity to distin¬
guish between what is important and what
isn't. A phrase or a comma in a draft resolu¬
tion suddenly come to assume dispropor¬
tionate importance. Negotiations go on for
hours, for nights on end, before agreement is
reached on what is generally the lowest
common denominator. You feel that you have
won a great victory. But no-one will read the
text which was so difficult to draft.
Don't you find this sort of thing futile?
History will judge. Perhaps we shall have
a more objective perspective on the United
Nations when we come to celebrate its fiftieth
anniversary. Certainly it is a good thing not
to always observe the world through United
Nations spectacles. That's why I have set so
much store by my independence.
While waitingfor the judgement ofhistory,
don't you see positive aspects in the work of
the United Nations?
Indeed. It is now widely and rightly
accepted that we live in a world which is more
interdependent than ever before, and that
problems are increasingly global in character.
At the risk of stating the obvious, I would say
that when governments realize that certain
problems are beyond their powers, it is clear
that the United Nations has an irreplaceable
role to play.
At the same time, the world is changing
considerably and the United Nations must
change too. It must become an instrument
which responds to the needs of the interna¬
tional community of the year 2000, which will
be quite different from that of 1945. This is
very far from the case. We should not delude
ourselves into thinking that the United
Nations is going to change because a certain
role has been restored to the Security Council.
The Security Council is an exclusive club with
a restricted membership, sensitive to the
moods of the moment. Its resolutions only
remotely affect the organs and institutions of
the United Nations which face the great
challenges of today.
To return to your own career, which has
always taken you towards the mostpractical
activities of international life. I believe you
started by taking an interest in the problem
of the Abu Simbel temples.
Yes, I took my first steps in international
life at UNESCO, which at that time was con¬
ducting an exciting campaign to save the
monuments of Nubia, a campaign which in
my opinion remains one of UNESCO's great

achievements. In the middle of the Cold War
it was quite remarkable to get East European
archaeologists to join archaeologists from the
United States and other Western countries in
order to save the treasures of ancient Egypt.
Not to mention that since 1956 Nasser had
not exactly been the most popular Arab figure
in the West.
Did the general feeling that Abu Simbel
should be saved crystallize at a precise
moment?
Not only Abu Simbel. There were other
monuments which were just as important: the
temples of Philae and Kalabsha, the Christian
churches of Nubia. The Upper Egypt of the
great pharaonic civilizations did not stop at
Aswan, it extended to Nubia, to Khartoum
in the Sudan. In order to develop, all these
regions needed the resources that tourism
could bring them.
From an entirely different point of view,
in face of the threat of the flooding of archaeo¬
logical sites by the construction of the Aswan
dam, all kinds of people from many countries,
independently of their political orientations,
were united in thinking that something should
be done. At that time I was executive secre¬
tary of UNESCO's international action com¬
mittee for the preservation of the Nubian sites
and monuments, and I was strongly aware of
this feeling.
So this was your first mission?
I was also Head of Mission and Advisor to
the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). I was principally con¬
cerned with World Refugee Year (1959-1960).
Through a philatelic programme to which all
member states of the UN and the Universal
Postal Union contributed, we collected a large
sum of money and also gave pleasure to stamp
collectors.
Was this for the benefit of European
refugees alone?
No. World Refugee Year was very useful
for the Palestine refugees, since the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency
(UNRWA), which was responsible for
providing them with assistance, had been in
existence since 1949. But it is true that around
this time refugees began to appear in the Third
World who did not benefit from United
Nations aid. One such case was that of the
Vietnamese who had fled from the north of
their country after the battle of Dien Bien
Phu. In Africa, the first refugees from Angola
were entering Congo-Kinshasa and Congo-
Brazzaville. Refugees from Algeria were
flowing into Morocco and Tunisia. These
were new situations for UNHCR, which had
been originally created for refugees from
Eastern Europe and was a kind of European
club. Very early on, and perhaps this is the
best thing I have done in my career, I tried
to avoid all discrimination between European
and Third World refugees.
Why were there different categories of
refugees and what form did these differences
take?
They were the result of constraints that
were essentially legal. United Nations action
was subject to the 1951 UN Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees, an interna¬
tional instrument which was drawn up during
the Cold War and, as everyone now accepts,
made UNHCR a propaganda instrument
against the Eastern countries.
In order to benefit from UNHCR protec¬
tion, a refugee had to be able to prove that
he or she was persecuted for reasons of race,
religion, nationality or political opinions, was
outside his or her country of origin, and could
not enjoy that country's protection. At that
time refugees were pictured as people who
crossed the Iron Curtain and were fired on
from frontier watchtowers. But where did this
leave the African populations who were
victims of general instability, fleeing tribal
warfare on both sides of frontiers traced
arbitrarily by the colonial powers? In Hun¬
gary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968
people knew where the frontiers with Austria
were. But there was not a single frontier post
between Angola and what was then Congo-
Kinshasa!
I
/*

Above, refugees on the border
of Cambodia and Thailand.
Left, at the Bellerlve
Foundation's centre In Nairobi
(Kenya), meals are prepared
on the low-fuel stoves which
the Foundation distributes In
Africa.
It was necessary to widen the UNHCR
mandate, and this was a long and legally com¬
plex process. The protection of the High
Commissioner was finally extended to new
categories of refugees by virtue of a Protocol
which was adopted in 1967 and which I myself
strongly supported. These same refugees were
also able to benefit from the so-called "good
offices" resolutions voted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations.
It looks as if Third World refugees were
a frightening prospect at that time...
People saw millions of men, women and
children who could not be integrated. They
feared the economic and financial conse¬
quences and the repercussions on the labour
market. It was already a North-South
problem. If it was easy to resettle Czechs, Rus¬
sians or Hungarians in countries like Australia,
New Zealand, the United States and even
South Africa, it was difficult to integrate in
those countries displaced people originating
from Africa or Asia. In any case, most of these
refugees did not wish to be resettled perma¬
nently. They looked forward to the day when
they could return home.
In the twelve years you spent as UNHigh
Commissionerfor Refugees, did you see any
major changes in the situation of refugees
worldwide?
Yes. First of all, the problem of European
refugees was virtually solved, except for cer¬
tain specific cases such as Polish emigration
to the Scandinavian countries or the case of
the Baltic countries today. In the Third World,
on the other hand, we had to face massive exo¬
duses. In the 1950s in Europe, there were
between 200,000 and 300,000 refugees to be
helped. In 1971, in Bangladesh alone, there
were 10 million overnight! And they were not
the only ones. Hundreds of thousands of
refugees from the Sudan, Mozambique,
Angola, Guinea-Bissau and Viet Nam, were
waiting to go home.
At present, my successors at the head of
UNHCR are faced with another problem:
that of the refugees who quit their country
and find themselves in camps which they
cannot leave on the borders of Cambodia and
Thailand, in Hong Kong or El Salvador. They
can neither return to their own countries nor
go to another. They cannot be integrated, for
political, economic or ethnic reasons, either
because they do not want to stay in the host
country or because the latter refuses to have
them. It is a terrible problem.
There is also a new category of refugees
which I will call "ecological" refugees. They
leave regions in which they can no longer sur¬
vive, because the food resources are exhausted,
the desert is advancing inexorably, and they
can no longer even find enough firewood to
cook their food. And so they leave. They are
not stopped by frontiers. In many cases they
cannot return for political reasons.
So you decided to do something about this
problem yourself...

Afghan refugee camp In Dobha, Pakistan.
I have always been in favour of individual
initiatives. I also take a very close interest in
the environment, animals, plants, disappearing
species....And so I set up the Bellerive Foun¬
dation, which takes its name from that of the
Geneva commune where I live. It is a non¬
governmental organization (NGO) which
finances a certain number of studies and activi¬
ties in collaboration with international insti¬
tutions, British and Scandinavian bilateral aid
organizations, and other NGOs such as the
World Wide Fund for Nature.
Initially we were very closely involved,
along with UNICEF, the United Nations
Children's Fund, in the struggle against
deforestation. But we wanted above all to be
present in the field and to do things at the local
level. Rural populations in the Third World
suffer far less from the oil crisis than from a
very serious firewood shortage. With the help
of Swiss specialists we have developed cooking
stoves which use very little fuel, and use
renewable energy sources such as methane and
biogas. We have used these stoves to equip
communities, the armed forces, police stations,
schools, bush hospitals and many rural African
families. These low-priced stoves are today so
highly appreciated that we can no longer
satisfy the demand, notably in Kenya.
Our programmes are extremely decentral¬
ized, we have regional offices. The main one
is in Nairobideforestation has wreaked
havoc in Kenya, whose demographic growth
rate is one of the highest in the world. The
population doubles every seventeen years!
We are also interested in the risks from
nuclear energy. We are a many-sided group
whose members include scientists, churchmen,
university teachers and senior international
civil servants. We organize conferences and
inform the public about the possible different
options in this field. We are also helping to
strengthen the Treaty on' the Non-
proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Finally, we are helping to defend certain
threatened species such as the elephant, which

UNHCR has helped thousands of Namlblan
refugees to return to their homeland. Below, a
refugee group about to leave Lubango airport
(Angola), June 1989.
has almost been exterminated by ivory
poaching.
Is collaboration increasing between the
institutions ofthe UnitedNations system and
non-governmental organizations, which are
more flexible and closer to people?
Certainly. I noted this in Afghanistan, for
example, at a time when the UN could not
enter the country and when a number of
NGOs managed to operate there.
I have worked hard to bring together
NGOs and UN agencies, and I am happy to
see my efforts bearing fruit. Of course there
are still certain suspicions. The NGOs fear the
bureaucratic weight and political pressures to
which international organizations may be sub¬
jected. The international organizations, for
their part, fear the sometimes anti-
governmental inclinations of the NGOs.
Can any lesson be learned at this stagefrom
the co-operation between intergovernmental
institutions and NGOs?
When major infrastructure work such as
airport, dam or road construction is not
involved, the approach of the NGOs, which
intervene at grassroots level, is certainly prefer¬
able in development projects.
The success of any development project
is based on encouraging people to shoulder
their own responsibilities and become aware
of their own capacities, their rights too, rather
than providing them with ready-made solu¬
tions. Who knows better than a peasant
farmer the agricultural conditions in his
country or region? It is not always necessary
to send an FAO expert to tell him what crops
to grow or what seeds to use. Give him the
seeds he asks for, and he will do the rest. Don't
tell him how to renovate his irrigation system:
give him the necessary equipment and he will
do the job far better than us. He will know
how to make use of local raw materials. The
international expert will turn up with plastic
piping and reinforced concrete in a situation
where it is better to use beaten earth. As if
one could ask UNESCO experts to teach
Afghans how to weave carpets!
Let us show great humility towards the
peoples we wish to help, for we have very little
to teach them. I think we go wrong when we
insist, as some have done since 1945, on using
experts who are paid Western salaries, drive
beautiful cars and live in air-conditioned
houses to teach people in the Third World
how to improve their living conditions.
So what is the point of international aid?
It helps the experts themselves! Multilateral
aid should be continued all the same, for it is
impossible to remain unaffected by extreme
poverty. But to be effective, this aid should
enable the victims of poverty to achieve a cer
tain form of self-sufficiency, however modest. :
It is better to concentrate on less ambitious
projects in rural areas than to pursue, for
example, the mindless policy of industrializing
at all costs in countries where such a course
is impossible, in order to obtain currency with
which to buy imported mineral water and
Camembert!
Those responsible should be induced to
change their approachthere should be a kind
of peaceful revolution. Here I think that we
are starting to learn the lessons from natural
catastrophes provoked by man, such as
deforestation and drought. Of course the pes¬
simists will say that in any case the planet is
ruined, but there are also optimists who
believe that it is still possible to influence the
course of events.
