'Every angel's terrifying'
by Olivier Messiaen
A great French musician pays tribute to Mozart
%»EAUTY'S nothing but the start of terror, and
we adore it because of the serene scorn it could
kill us with". These lines by Rainer Maria Rilke
apply very well to Mozart's music. It is a music
of purity and perfection, as befits this most
musical of musicians. No flaw can be found in it.
Accentuation in Mozart. In his feminine
rhythms (anacrusis, stress accents, pauses), the
stress is always in the right place. Melody in
Mozart. Melodic lines suffused with his own spe¬
cial poetry. What enchantment in Suzanna's aria
in Figaro, what gentle strains of birdsong in the
andante of the Haffner symphony!
Harmony in Mozart. Always light, always
perceptible, always appropriate. A soothing har¬
mony when it is tonal (listen to the "Ave Verum"
and the slow movement of the Jupiter symphony),
a heartrending harmony when it is chromatic
(listen to the symphony in G minor, the andante
of the concerto for piano in A major, K. 488, and
the slow movement of the concerto in E flat, K.
271). Sometimes it is an otherworldly harmony,
as in the amazing Statue scene at the end of Don
Giovanni, where we already find (underscored by
the trombones) two sonorities favoured by
Debussy: the chord of fifths and fourths, and an
altered chord belonging to the whole-tone scale.
Form in Mozart. It is always perfect and cons¬
tantly renewed (listen to the great symphonies
and the piano concertos).
Theatre in Mozart. A man of the theatre if
ever there was one, Mozart, at a single stroke, cap¬
tures with one aria the essence of a character
(listen to Cherubino, the Countess, Sarastro,
Papageno). His finales are masterpieces of the
stage. Pierre Jean Jouve said of the finale of Don
Giovanni that it was "an awesome piece of
music".
Mozart's orchestration carries the same force
of truth as his accentuation, his melodic line, his
harmonies and his form. Mozartbefore
Berliozhad a sense of specific timbre. First
example: the trio from the minuet of the sym¬
phony in E flat (K. 543) where the two clarinets
thread together low notes and high notes, echoed
by the flute, and where the chromaticism of the
violins gives way to the warm, mellow tones of
the horns returning to the theme. Second
example: the entreaties of the three masked
figures, before Don Giovanni's ball, where the
singing lines of the two female voices are backed
only by tenor voice, horns and woodwinds.
Third example: in The Magic Flute, the almost
modern effect of the high notes of the solo glock¬
enspiel, accompanied by the hushed tones of the
male choir. Fourth example: the ballroom scene
in Don Giovanni with, before Darius Milhaud,
its four superimposed levels of music: the large
orchestra, two small orchestras on stage and the
dialogue of the characters.
Mozart has been portrayed in a variety of
ways: the small boy playing the harpsichord for
the elegant ladies of the court; Leopold's
respectful son; the young man in love with all
the opera singers; the insulted servant giving his
notice to the unpleasant Prince-Archbishop; the
misunderstood composer of genius, dying of
hunger, cold and fatigue.
All these images are at once true and false.
The adjective "angelic" is perhaps the least inap¬
propriate. Angelic, yes, and, on that account, very
difficult to come to grips with. His apparent charm
hides a deep mystery. To quote Rainer Maria
Rilke once more: "Every angel's terrifying".
