The return of the RA al-Safamaft
by François-Bernard Huyghe
Or'n 25 April 1991 the Fulk al-Salamah, the
"Ship of Peace", dropped anchor in the port
of Mina Qabus in Muscat. Six weeks had
already gone by since the ship, which had been
loaned by Sultan Qabus of Oman to
UNESCO's Maritime Silk Roads expedition,
had left its passengers at Hakata, Japan. But
the festivities to celebrate the return of the cap¬
tain and his crew had been postponed until
the end of Ramadan. Like the celebrations on
17 November last that had marked the start
of the voyage, these were in traditional Omani
style and featured hundreds of dancers.
It would be an understatement to say that
the expedition received a royal welcome. Her¬
alded by fireboats spouting great jets of water
and with a helicopter whirring above our
heads, escorted by launches and patrol ships
and encircled by a flotilla of white boats
decked out in the national colours, our ship
pulled into port. There we were greeted by
floating rigs adorned with the United Nations
flag, the Sultan's portrait and a mysterious
flower that several of usclearly no great
shakes as botaniststook for a lotus, seeing
it as a possible symbol of East-West relations.
Later we were told that the flower thus
depicted was a new variety of rose, the "Sultan
Qabus".
But it was the noises that made the strong¬
est impression: drumbeat, chanting and
whooping sounds punctuated the dances per¬
formed by hundreds of dancers on board boats
crammed with people. They brandished sticks,
swords and kandjarsthe traditional dagger
sported by Omani men on solemn occasions.
Meanwhile, on land, ministers, members of
the royal family, an escort, other dances, and
a procession of official cars awaited us. . . .
Our arrival in Muscat coincided with the
twentieth anniversary of the Sultan's accession
to power. In actual fact, what was being
celebrated in the city, transformed into a daz¬
zling tricolour array by thousands of light
bulbs in the national coloursgreen, red and
whitewas the amazing leap in time that had
78 been made in less than a generation, and the
change that had occurred in people's minds.
It was the transition, effected through dynastic
succession and with the help of petrodollars,
from an Oman immersed in its history, where
electricity and sunglasses were suspected of
bringing the evils of modernism, to the most
up-to-date form of civilization. And yet, here
more than anywhere else, there was clearly a
concern to maintain spiritual values, and evi¬
dence of a discipline that seemed to be freely
accepted.
The stereotype image is of an "Arabian
Switzerland", of a place where camels and
computers exist side by side, but what I actu¬
ally saw was: a city rebuilt in accordance with
aesthetic standards which endow it with unity;
a military parade ended with a tribal march-
past featuring ancient rites of war; sheiks from
Dofar visiting an ultra-modern cultural centre
in Salalàh, amazed to see objects from their
everyday lives being displayed in showcases;
hundreds of youngsters moving together in
unison to create an electronic tableau vivant
reminiscent of the opening of the Olympic
Games, and in the stands every single man
without exception dressed in the traditional
Omani costume. Few places present such
striking contrasts.
I leave it to better-informed observers than
I to explain how the people can experience
such a culture shock while remaining seem¬
ingly unperturbed. I would also ask them to
make allowances for what may be no more
than a superficial impression.
Losing our bearings
But for us passengers of the Fulk al-Salamah
the culture shock had been even greater. We
had left behind us the agricultural and urban
Mediterranean world with its layer cake of
different cultures, and found ourselves face to
face with something radically other. The Euro¬
pean writer of these lines, who had been
taught to see the succession of Egyptian,
Greek, Roman, Byzantine and Islamic civili¬
zations as a harmonious continuum within
which "influences" could be identified and
studied, was gradually losing his bearings.
From kafenion to fonduk, from Memphis to
Ephesus, from the archaeological museum in
Athens to the one in Cairo, a line of develop¬
ment could be discerned, or interactions could
be seen. Now there was no longer any per¬
ceptible pattern.
At the seminars which we attended ashore
and during the twice-daily working meetings
on board we were supposed to be adding to
our knowledge. Inundated with new informa¬
tion, faced with the impossible task of sum¬
ming up that which constitutes the fabric of
all the different cultures, namely exchange,

UNESCO IN ACTION
THE SILK ROADS
1
13
how could we know which clue to follow? We
could at least try to remember what our points
of reference were, for they seemed to have
gone astray somewhere in the Red Sea.
In Athens, we hadn't yet lost the thread.
It wasexcuse the play on wordssilk. We
knew that the introduction of this precious
fibre in ancient Rome had triggered a riot of
indulgence and a craze for imported fabrics,
leading finally to a debt of such proportions
that the English historian Edward Gibbon
considered it to be one of the causes of the
fall of the Roman Empire. The case of Byzan¬
tium is no less striking. In the time of the late
empire silk clothes were highly prized and
passed on from generation to generation, so
it is not surprising that the introduction into
Byzantium of the modest silk-worm in the
mid-sixth century caused a total upheaval.
Trade in this precious commodity and its sub¬
sequent manufacture were strictly controlled
by the state. Silk was also the source of con¬
siderable economic activity in some parts of
Greece up to the nineteenth century.
At a seminar in Izmir in Turkey we like¬
wise discovered the role of ancient Smyrna in
the silk trade and the relationship of the city's
periods of prosperity and decline with fluc¬
tuations of the international market. The links
between the maritime silk route and the
caravan trails helped to reassure us that we
were indeed finding similarities and exploring
a unifying network which was a cause of strife
among the powerful but which was usually
kept open in the interests of a deep-rooted
need for security.
Little by little, we turned from silk to
other commodities. The spice road increas¬
ingly attracted our attention, and this was per¬
fectly logical. The expression "silk roads" was
to be understood not in geographical and eco¬
nomic terms but, to quote one of our fellow
passengers, as a "metaphor of dialogue".
A sense of identity
To return to Oman, what we found bewil¬
dering there was not the absence of such links
but their profusion. Archaeological studies
have only recently been undertaken in the
country, but they already reveal links that
reach far back into pre-Islamic times. As early
as the third millennium BC and right up to
the beginning of the following millennium,
Oman, the land of Magan, exported copper
and diorite to Mesopotamia. At the same time
pottery from Mesopotamia appeared in
Omani tombs. Similarly, relations between
Magan culture and the Indus Civilization can
apparently be traced back to about 2,300 BC.
A number of stories from later times
provided us with other examples of cultural
exchanges between Oman and other countries.
One of the specialists on board recounted
to us the tale of an Omani merchant of Indian
Left, the Fulk al-Salamah in
the port of Venice. In
foreground is the Zlnat al-
Bihar, a traditional Omani
ship.
Above, three-coloured
enamelled statuette of a
bearded camel driver. It was
found in an 8th-century tomb
near Xi'an (China).
79

origin, Sayyid, who lived in the thirteenth cen¬
tury. Not only did he have frequent and cor¬
dial commercial dealings with the Chinese
navigators who came to Oman but, when
Prince Ma'abar took exception to these friend¬
ships, Sayyid fled to the court of Kubla Khan,
who showered him with gifts and wedded him
to a Korean princess. He died a rich man in
Beijing in 1299.
A story from the early fifteenth century
concerns the famous Chinese navigator Zheng
He, a Muslim, who travelled several times to
El Balidid, present-day Salalah, in the south
of Oman. Zheng He was provided with inter¬
preters who were trained in a special school;
their writings are the source of our information
about his visits to Oman.
These cases are striking not only because
they suggest vast areas for study. The first two
examples take us back several thousand years,
and far from the regions which the expedition
had studied. The second two show that rela¬
tions between China and Oman were by no
The Fulk al-Salamah is welcomed
in style on its arrival in Muscat, capital
of the Sultanate of Oman.
means confined to trade but had a cultural
dimension.
The history of Oman, until relatively
recent times, seems to consist only of accounts
by foreign observers and of the records of
trade. For a people which has taken as its
national heroes Sindbad the Sailor and Vasco
da Gama's helmsman, Ahmed bin Majud,
travel and discovery led not to self-enrichment
but to identity.
Coming into port
With hindsight, our magnificent welcome in
Muscat came to assume a significance that it
had not possessed at the moment when we
landed there. Several times during our voyage
we had talked about how we had gained
another sense of time and had come to see
travelling in another light. We had slipped our
moorings, both physically and metaphorically,
forgotten our everyday lives for several
months and formed a community. We had dis¬
covered that coming into port is an event, that
it has nothing in common with the triviality
of modern travel which blots out distances and
differences. The distant noise of war reached
us but was somehow muffled. And this helped
to remind us of the strangeness of our adven¬
ture, causing us to look at the world with new
eyes.
One specialist pointed out that the
presiding geniuses of our journey, Marco Polo
and Ibn Batuta, had been able to roam freely
through the then known world without being
arrested or murdered. What was their secret?



What signs of peace did they use, what code
of salutation? Our voyage could be an occa¬
sion for meditating upon the rituals that defuse
aggression in different cultures.
If the longest journeys are in the mind,
the flood of sounds and colours that greeted
us in Muscat or celebrated the homecoming
of the Fulk al-Salamah perhaps showed that
the traveller is someone for whom novelty can
be a source of inner change. Far from the
world of total and instantaneous media
coverage, we had come to see things in a
different way.
FRANÇOIS-BERNARD HUYGHE,
French writer and journalist, is a former member
of UNESCO's Division of Cultural Heritage.
80
