HERTA LEPIE, German art historian, is head of the
jewellery and precious metal workshop of Aachen
cathedral. She is the author of many publications on
the cathedral and religious pilgrimages to it.
ROLAND WENTZLER is a German art historian who
is chief public relations officer for the cathedral and
other churches in the city of Aachen.
ACHEN cathedral, which incorporates
the Palatine Chapel of Charlemagne, is the
most beautiful surviving example of Carolin-
gian architecture. On 31 March 1978 it became
the first German monument to be inscribed
on UNESCO's World Heritage List.
A living monument
Situated at the westernmost tip of Germany,
close to the frontiers of The Netherlands and



Belgium, Aachen once symbolized the polit¬
ical and cultural unity of the Carolingian
empire. Today it is the European city par excel¬
lence. Its principal attraction is the Palatine
Chapel, a remarkable monument rich in art
and history, which attracts more than a mil
lion visitors each year. Besides its historical
and cultural interest, Aachen cathedral is also
a place of pilgrimage, just as it was in the
Middle Ages, when it vied in importance with
Rome and Santiago de Compostela. Besides a
venerated image, Our Lady of Aachen, the
cathedral houses Charlemagne's tomb and,
among other sacred objects, a reliquary con¬
taining four particularly remarkable pieces of
material: the robe of the Virgin Mary, the
swaddling clothes of the Infant Jesus, the gar¬
ment that girded the loins of Christ on the
Cross, and the cloth used at the beheading of
St. John the Baptist.
These great biblical relics have been
solemnly displayed every seven years since

1349, and it is expected that in June 1992
countless pilgrims will again gather at Aachen
to join fervently in the procession held in their
honour.



The Palatine Chapel
The region of Aachen, in the central part of
the Frankish kingdom, was rich in game and
possessed hot springs whose beneficial proper¬
ties were already known to the Romans. It was
in fact on the ruins of the ancient Roman
baths that Charlemagne built his palace, a
building whose function was political, eco¬
nomic and religious as well as residential. Not
much survives to recall its political role, origi¬
nally embodied in the Throne Room, except
the foundations of the tower known as the
Granusturm, whose stones were used to build
the city's Gothic town hall. The residential
quarters and storehouses have disappeared
without trace. But the church that
Charlemagne dedicated to the Virgin and
chose as his final resting-place has stood the
test of the centuries.
The building was probably completed
around the year 800. Two years previously,
the theologian Alcuin had announced in a
letter to the Emperor that the columns of the
chapel were being built. Originally, the Pala¬
tine Chapel consisted of three elements: the
central building, with a rectangular choir to
the east and an entrance porch to the west.
The peripheral chapels and the Gothic choir
with its stained-glass windows are later
additions.
Built on an east-west axis, the church fol¬
lowed the plan of early Christian basilicas, an
atrium surrounded by colonnades. Traces of
it can still be seen in the parvis.
The way into the building is through a
combined porch and belltower, flanked by
two towers with staircases in them. The effect
is one of fortress-like bulk. The two brass
doors of the main portal were cast in Aachen
in Charlemagne's time. Four other doors and
eight grilles from the same workshop are deco¬
rated with motifs recalling Roman Antiquity.
There are two artefacts from Roman times in
the narthex: a brass she-wolf and a bronze pine
cone that may once have decorated a fountain
in the atrium.
The chapel itself is clearly modelled on the
architecture of Ravenna and of Byzantine
basilicas. It consists of a two-storey-high
octagonal rotunda encircled by a sixteen-sided
ambulatory. Heavy polygonal pillars support
Opposite page, Aachen cathedral, an engraving
by Abraham Hogenbergh (1632). One of the
cathedral's 4 great relics, the robe of the Virgin
Mary, is being shown to a gathering of pilgrims.
Above, the octagonal Palatine Chapel, built in
Carolingian times. In the upper storey are ancient
marble columns brought by Charlemagne from
Rome and Ravenna. At centre, a copper
chandelier presented by the emperor Frederick
Barbarossa in 1165.
45

Below left, the high altar adorned with gilt bas-
reliefs (1020) before which the Germanic
emperors were crowned.
Right, mosaics In the vault of the Carolingian
chapel.
Opposite page, the gilt pulpit studded with
precious stones (11th century), a gift of emperor
Henry II.



. the eight arcades of the upper storey, which
are flanked by bronze grilles from the Carolin¬
gian period. Within the arcades are the famous
marble columns brought by Charlemagne
from Rome and Ravenna to stress the con¬
tinuity of his project with the architecture of
the Roman empire.
This imposing edifice is topped by a dome
of a type which had never previously been
constructed north of the Alps. To support the
weight of so large a structure, Charlemagne's
architect divided the calotte of the vault into
eight sections, allowing him to distribute the
weight equitably across eight pillars. A ring
of metal dating from Carolingian times helps
to support the base of the dome. The roof is
decorated with a mosaic representing the
twenty-four elders of the Apocalypse. The
height of the building (32 metres) exactly cor¬
responds to the diameter of the church's outside
46
wall, so the building would fit perfectly into
a cube, thereby respecting the proportions
attributed in the Bible to the Tower of Babel
and the Heavenly Jerusalem.
The high altar, the oldest in Germany, is
situated in the western part of the aisle, on the
site of an earlier altar. Its marble had already
been used previously. On it were crowned
twenty-five of the thirty German emperors,
from Otto the Great in 936 to Ferdinand I in
1531.
The altar is decorated with seventeen
golden bas-reliefs dating from the early
eleventh century, which were probably com¬
missioned by Otto III and completed in the
reign of his successor, Henry II. Christ the
Redeemer is shown in the centre, flanked by
the Virgin Mary and the Archangel Michael,
both intercessors for the human race. Four
medallions representing the symbols of the
Evangelists surmount scenes from Christ's
passion.
The gilded archbishop's throne presented
to the cathedral by emperor Henry II also
dates from the same period. At first installed
in the octagonal chapel, it was moved to the
southern wall at the time of the construction
of the Gothic choir in the fifteenth century.
It is splendidly decorated with sixth-century
Coptic ivory plaques carved to represent
mythological scenes, and with bas-reliefs of the
four Evangelists.
The cathedral contains the remains of two
German emperors: Charlemagne himself, who
died in 814, and Otto III, who died in 1002.
The exact location of Charlemagne's original
tomb is no longer known. Otto III discovered
it in the year 1000 and removed some relics.
In 1165, Frederick I moved the emperor's
bones to a temporary cenotaph, and since 1215

they have lain in a shrine restored to its full
splendour by the patient efforts of the
cathedral's conservators.
The Palatine Chapel soon became a place
of pilgrimage, but unlike the ancient basilicas
it had not been built with that purpose in
mind. That was why the cathedral chapter
decided in 1355 to construct the Gothic choir,
which was completed in 1414, exactly 600
years after Charlemagne's death.
The Carolingian edifice is surrounded by
a crown of Gothic chapels, on two levels like
the central octagon. A staircase dating from
Carolingian times provides access to the upper
storey. There stands the marble throne of the
German emperors. Impressively sober and
massive, it is made of four slabs of marble from
the eastern Mediterranean, set on four blocks
of stone; six steps lead up to it. A tenth-
century chronicler informs us that the throne
was set between two marble columns so that
the sovereign "could see everything and be
seen by everyone".
No building north of the Alps so power¬
fully evokes the new Rome that Charlemagne
dreamed of founding. The choice of architec¬
tural models from the fifth and sixth centu¬
ries was intended to indicate to contem¬
poraries that he considered himself as the heir
of the Western Empire. Columns brought
from over the Alps, brass doors and grilles
bearing Roman motifs: these and other details
were meant to give visible expression to the
enduring link between the ancient world and
the medieval West. The Palatine Chapel was
originally conceived as an image of the
heavenly Jerusalem as described by St. John
the Divine in the Book of Revelations. And



it is true that the magnificence of its gold and
precious stones and the mysterious harmony
of its architecture do bring to mind the splen¬
dours of the heavenly city.
A masterpiece in peril
The people of Aachen have always done their
best to maintain their cathedral, but histor¬
ical events have often come close to destroying
it, notably during the Second World War.
Once hostilities were over, the demanding task
began of making good the considerable
damage done to the building. The roof had
to be repaired, stained-glass windows to be
replaced, the entry to the choir to be restored.
The chapel in the tower had been completely
destroyed and needed to be rebuilt.
One problem that still remains is the
cleaning of the Carolingian masonry. Prelimi¬
nary work is now virtually completed, and
tests are currently being carried out to estab¬
lish the best method of treatment. Other
future projects include the restoration of the
Hungarian chapel and the chapels of St. Anne
and St. Matthew, as well as repair work on
the roof, particularly over the octagonal
chapel.
It would be impossible to restore and con¬
serve the cathedral and its treasures without
outside help. Although the cathedral benefits
from generous public funding, private initia¬
tives have also played a part. The earliest dates
back to 1847, when citizens of Aachen formed
the first association dedicated to preserving the
site, the Karlsverein. Part of this tradition is
the "Aachen Cathedral, masterpiece in peril"
campaign, which was launched in 1988 and has
received an encouraging response from the
business community and from private
individuals.
Good works do not exclude good
humour, to judge from the many unusual
ideas the campaign has sparked. A circus put
on a special performance, a brass band gave
a charity concert, a modelling club contributed
a competition prize, and newly-weds have
asked for contributions to be made to the
cathedral instead of wedding presents. Banks
and savings banks have provided sponsorship;
a colouring book has been produced to reveal
the cathedral to children; local newspapers
keep their readers informed on the state of the
restoration work; the 400-odd participants of
a world conference of iron-smiths offered
hand-crafted work for sale at auction.
The results of these and other activities are
swelling the funds already available from offi¬
cial sources, proving that the cathedral can also
count for its survival on the people of the city.
47
