Time to act
JLyNVlRONMENTAL problems have been a major
international preoccupation ever since the United
Nations Conference on the Environment was
held in Stockholm in June 1972. That Confer¬
ence took place in a climate of optimism and
determination to act.
Action was indeed taken: international
organizations such as the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) were created;
Ministries of the Environment came into being;
and ecologically-minded political movements
emerged. The results, judged in terms of the
volume of publications that have appeared, the
knowledge that has been acquired, and the
number of reforestation and drainage projects
that have been carried out in the newly-
established protected zones, have undeniably
been important. And yet, paradoxically, our
environment has continued to deteriorate. Local
successes have been recorded here and there, but
the current situation is much more critical than
it was twenty years ago.
In the industrialized countries, water is con¬
taminated by chemicals, soils are degraded by
excessive use of pesticides and fertilizers, coast¬
lines are disfigured by ill-planned urbanization,
forests are destroyed and lakes made sterile by
by Francesco á Castri
acid rain, health is threatened by the accumula¬
tion and transport of toxic wastes, cities are
choked with traffic and asphyxiated by air pol¬
lution. The developing countries are confronted
with problems of desertification, the erosion and
salinization of soils, floods, the extinction of
animal and plant species, particularly in tropical
regions. Shanty-towns proliferate, with their
attendant poverty, disease and delinquency.
All these problems, both in the North and
in the South, are linked by a common thread.
They arise from inappropriate development
choices. Of course, the problems are far more
flagrant in the South, because demographic pres¬
sure there is far higher than in the North. But
the true origin of these problems is planetary in
nature, and is connected with the interdepen¬
dence of economies, the competitive interactions
of international markets, monetary disorder, and
the thorny issue of foreign debt.
Some thirty years from now, the human race,
whose numbers will by then have reached ten or
twelve billion, will be affected by the emergence of
environmental problems which will also be of a
global nature: probable disturbance of the climate
owing to the greenhouse effect (caused by the
increase in the amounts of trace gases, especially
carbon dioxide and methane, in the atmosphere), 41

2? y^i^ * *?t?
Drought and desertification in
the African Sahel.
42
FRANCESCO DI CASTRI
is the co-ordinator of
UNESCO's environmental
programmes. He Is also
president of the Scientific
Committee on Problems of the
Environment (SCOPE) of the
International Council of
Scientific Unions (ICSU). He Is
the author of many
publications on ecology.
the depletion of the ozone layer in the upper
atmosphere, and the irreversible impoverishment
of biological diversity.
We are thus faced with extremely complex
issues, in some cases uncertain and unpredictable,
all highly dependent on one another, and
changing rapidly on a planetary scale. And yet
our institutions of education, research, adminis¬
tration and management have not been designed
to face problems of this type. Even with a con¬
siderable increase in funds, it is unlikely that we
shall be able to solve them immediately. The key
to a solution is not conjunctural but structural.
To tackle the crucial problems of the environ¬
ment effectively calls for an interdisciplinary
approach which few institutions can provide at
the present time. Research bodies and universi¬
ties are in thrall to evaluation systems strictly
compartmentalized according to discipline, and
there is a widening gap between university
training and research on the one hand and the
real needs of society on the other. Very little cur¬
rent research in this field has an effective appli¬
cation, either because in most cases it does not
address the true problems, or because it is not
integrated into the decision-making and manage¬
ment processes, or because it is not adapted to
the compartmentalization of administrative
structures.
No discipline, not even ecology, can claim
alone to apprehend all the planetary economic
and social ramifications of environmental
problems, no research body or administrative
service can consider itself to be self-sufficient in
this field. No country, not even the most
powerful, can claim to resolve problems whose
causes and effects lie in other countries, nor pre¬
vent their repercussions on its territory. Yet most
disciplines ignore one another or are rivals in the
search for research funding. The professions with¬
draw into their traditional corporatism, ministries
are divided into sectors virtually impermeable to
interaction, and countries only agree on insuffi¬
cient norms for protection.
In these conditions it is easier to solve a few
immediate or partial problems than to succeed
in establishing institutions really capable of
managing and overcoming what has to be called
the environmental crisis.
MUST THERE BE
AN ECOLOGICAL CATASTROPHE
BEFORE WE ACT?
Technical solutions exist for most of the
problems, even if they meet psychological and
structural resistance and clash with powerful and
contradictory economic interests. Perhaps we
shall take the necessary measures in time, as
public opinion and economic and political circles
gradually become aware of what is at stake.. It is
more likely, however, that we shall wait until a
far greater shock occurs than any we have yet
known. It would be most regrettable if our col¬
lective instinct for survival could only be aroused
in the face of a major ecological catastrophe.
Let us hope that this will not happen. It is
particularly important that partial lack of results
or precise data should not provide an excuse for
inaction, both by decision-makers and by each
and every one of us. Delay would be terribly
costly and some forms of environmental damage
may be irreversible. It takes only a few hours to
cut down a forest, a few months to cause erosion
and desertification, a few years to change world
climate. But a species that disappears never reap¬
pears, tens or hundreds of years are required for
a forest to regenerate, a thousand years to restore
eroded soil.
Let us hope that the environmental crisis,
with all its gravity and complexity, may ulti¬
mately act as a catalyst for better communication
in our laboratories, for greater flexibility in our
administrative structures, and above all for greater
equity between countries rich and poor, and
towards the future generations to which we owe
responsibility for the Earth which has been
entrusted to us.
A change in behaviour by each individual,
each institution and each State is the only basis
from which an acceptable future can emerge from
the constraints of the environmental crisis. Let
us hope that this change can take place without
being provoked by a major ecological catastrophe
from which no-one would be secure.
