Dutch ships In a Chinese harbour. Detail from a Chinese Coromandel lacquer screen (18th century).


SEA FEVER

'IF they but knew, almost all men in their degree, some time sea increased rapidly. New and valuable mineral and energy
or other, cherish very nearly the same feeling toward the ocean resources were discovered, and later recovered, from the sea
with me," says Ishmael, the narrator of Herman Melville's great floor. Marine transportation methods were revolutionized. New
novel Moby Dick. Melville was alluding to a universal bond uses of the ocean were proposed and studied: obtaining clean
between people and their ocean, though he readily admitted energy from the difference in temperature between warm sur-
many of his contemporaries were unaware of it. face layers and cold deep waters, for instance, or from tides and
What are the reasons for this bond? Some scientists believe waves; recovering new and promising drugs from a variety of
that our reactions may have something to do with the sound marine organisms; or disposing of certain wastes, safely and
waves emitted by water. Others feel there is a connection with effectively, in the ocean environment,
the visual appeal of water. Water is playful and refreshing. For But soon this sense of optimism was marred by a number
most of us it is an essential ingredient of natural beauty. of incidents. Just over thirty years ago the Minamata incident
Our feelings for the sea seem to reflect intuitively the impor- shocked the world. People living in or near the Japanese town
tance of water to life. Water made life possible on Earth, of that name were poisoned, killed or crippled for life by indus-
Without it there would have been no atmosphere, and condi- trial pollutants discharged into the sea and returned to them
tions on the planet would have been too extreme to make life through the marine food chain. Shortly thereafter, other inci-
possible. Life probably originated in water, and we still carry dents occurred, seemingly with increasing frequency. There was
traces of these origins. The blood that runs through our veins concern over radioactive contamination caused by the fallout
is similar in the composition of its salts to sea water. So is the from nuclear tests. Pesticides such as DDT began to affect the
amniotic fluid in which the human embryo floats for the dura- coastal environment. Valuable fish stocks disappeared, fished
tion of its gestation period. No wonder then that babies appear to near-ruin by increasingly effective fishing methods. Massive
to thoroughly enjoy a warm bath, as though it were a return oil spills, from platforms as well as vessel accidents, smothered
to the maternal womb. beaches and birds, causing a public outcry and providing visible
Some scientists believe that there may even have been an evidence for the first time that there were limits to human
aquatic phase in our evolution. In their view, our ancestors may domination of the sea. No matter how much we may think
have spent a good deal of their time in the balmy waters of we control the sea, it has many ways of reminding us that it
tropical seas rather than in trees or on grass flats. The theory will always have the last word.
is by no means universally accepted, but it would help explain The development of mass communications, especially of
our attraction to the sea and our kinship with dolphins and television, has greatly affected our perception of the sea to the
whales, mammals that joined the migration to the sea but stayed extent that we no longer need to be at sea, or even see it in
there and readapted to fish-like forms and habits. person, to experience its mysteries. As a result of television
If any of the above is true, our feelings toward the ocean today's generation knows more about the sea than any before,
should be universal. And that is what this issue of the UNESCO although the information is not necessarily based on first-hand
Courier seeks to explore. By examining the role of the ocean experience; nor is it always of high quality,
in the human imagination, it looks for similarities in the ways Today the ocean is perceived less as a place of danger and
in which people in different parts of the world have sought to menace than as a beautiful, romantic place where it is possible
express their feelings about the sea. Are there themes common to live and relax. In it live creatures not like Moby Dick, the
to sea stories of the distant past and their modern equivalents? threatening monster that sank Captain Ahab's ship, but gentle,
What about cultural divisions? Are there, for instance, similar- singing whales. In an age when sea travel has become far safer
ities between the attitudes towards the sea of the Polynesians, than it once was, we relive the fear of shipwreck in the com-
who have always been surrounded by water, and the Chinese? fort of our living rooms. We feel more comfortable and familiar
In the last few decades there have been dramatic changes with the sea, and yet at the same time we want it to remain
in our uses of the sea. Driven by a need for more space and mysterious. What lurks beneath the surface, in the eternal
resources, we built machinery to explore and exploit the sea, darkness of the abyss? L.C.
even to its deepest reaches. We apportioned and reapportioned	
it, and SOUght tO live or relax along its shores in ever growing LUC CUYVERS is a Belgian writer and film producer who specializes in marine
numbers. And finally we acquired the ability to affect and even and maritime affairs. He is president of the Mare Nostrum Foundation, a non-
i profit educational organization created to inform the general public about ocean
resource issues. He is the author of 4 books and numerous articles on the ocean,
Much Of this was, at least initially, accompanied by a Sense and recendy completed an 8.pan international television series on man's rela-
of optimism. During the 1960s, the annual food yield from the tionship with the sea, entitled The Blue Revolution. 1 1
