by Jean Matricon
From the sundial to the atomic clock, the search for split-second accuracy
16
XlME is both the most familiar and the most
elusive of concepts, yet it is one which human
beings know that they will never fully grasp. The
most they can hope for is to make the best use
of the time allotted to each one of them.
How can time be measured? Length, volume,
mass, energyalmost all the physical values of the
world around us submit to our manipulations.
Time is an exception. It is impossible to cut out
a segment of time and compare it with another
segment taken from somewhere else. To measure
time, we must select some other phenomenon
which we can manipulate and which recurs in
identical fashion. We do not measure time itself,
but its manifestation through a physical
phenomenon of our choice.
As well as the inherent difficulty of meas¬
uring time, there is another problem which stems



from the ambiguity of what is being measured.
Most of the instruments devised for this purpose
measure intervals of time, or duration, notions
which give a sense of the irreversibility of the
march of time but do not enable us accurately
to situate the chronology of events. Measuring
time also implies situating events in relation to
each other, in other words, dating them.
By providing a time scale with a periodic
return of identical situations, which can be cal¬
culated, the time divisions offered by the cycles
of the stars, the rhythm of the seasons, the phases
of the Moon, and the alternance of day and night,
enable us to establish such chronologies.
Chronologies and calendars
Very early on, observation of the sky, by day and
by night, revealed the complexity of the move¬
ment of the stars. A complete rotation of the
Earth in relation to the pole star (a sidereal day)
takes four minutes short of twenty-four hours.
The Sun's leisurely visitation of the thirteen con¬
stellations of the zodiac is completed in 365 and
a quarter days. This movement puts the Sun a
little more out of phase with the stars each day
and produces a solar day of twenty-four hours.
As for the Moon, its revolution around the Earth
period from one new Moon to the next-
takes about twenty-nine and a half days.
All these data seem to have been accurately
measured by Babylonian astronomers as early as
1800 BC. They were used to establish a calendar
based on a lunar month consisting sometimes of
twenty-nine and sometimes of thirty days. Predic¬
tion of these intervals required a remarkable
knowledge of the apparent movements of the Sun
and the Moon. The Egyptians, whose life was
linked to the flooding of the Nile, opted for an
annual calendar with a year of exactly 365 days.
This put the calendar year out of phase with the
solar year, and therefore with the agricultural
(seasonal) year, by one day every four years. Thus
the civil (calendar) year only coincided with the
solar year once every 1,460 years!
Almost all civilizations have based their
calendars on either the lunar month or the solar
year, despite the inherent difficulty that the year
is not made up of an exact number of lunar
months. Each civilization thus invented its own
more or less fixed, more or less arbitrary, system
of adjustment. This put great power into the
hands of the religious or political hierarchy
which took this decision. Although today these
adjustments are no longer arbitrary, the variety
of calendars and of cultures that they reflect
remains.
The role of the calendar has not changed since
the time of its ancient origins. It is the guarantor
of the cyclical recurrence of natural phenomena,
such as the tides and the seasons, and of human
events, such as religious and civil festivals. It also
makes possible the establishment of a chronology
attributing to each event a date and a precise posi¬
tion in the unfolding of time. The calendar is
undoubtedly one of the most stable and most
specific elements of any society.
The demands of daily religious and domestic
life created a need for some kind of time scale
or chronology of night and day. The Egyptians
were skilled astronomers, and drew up a list of
the stars that rose every day just before the Sun,
thus signalling the final hour of night. Having
decided, for the sake of simplicity, to allot the
JEAN MATRICON,
French scientist, is professor
of physics at the University of
Paris VII (Jussieu). As scientific
adviser for an exhibition
entitled L'invention du temps
("The Invention of Time") held
at the Cité des sciences et de
l'industrie, La Villette, Paris, in
1989, he wrote a catalogue
(with Julien Roumette), which
will be reissued in October
1991 as Le temps et les
hommes ("Time and Man") by
Collection Explora, Editions
Presses-Pocket, Paris.

The Intlhuatana at the ancient
Inca fortress city of Machu
Picchu (Peru). A monumental
carved rock surrounded by
walls, doors and
passageways, it is thought to
have been a solar calendar.
An early 19th-century French
water clock or clepsydra. The
water is contained in a drum
divided by partitions pierced
by small holes. It slowly flows
through the holes, causing the
drum to turn and descend
between the graduated
uprights as the 2 cords
attached to its axis unroll.
role of herald of the dawn to the same star for a
period of ten days before passing it on to another,
they drew up tables showing, for each night of the
year, the order in which they rose, from twilight
to dawn. Thus, for the 365 days of the year, there
were thirty-six ten-day periods. During the short
summer nights twelve risings of these herald stars
could be observed and it was therefore decided
to divide the night into twelve "hours".
During the day, the height of the Sun and the
shadow cast by a column, or gnomon, on a gradu¬
ated scale was also used by the Egyptians to
measure the passing of time. From the middle of
the second millennium BC, we find these "solar
rulers" indicating a division of the day into twelve
hours. Thus the Egyptians can be said to have
invented the twenty-four-hour day. These hours,
however, were not all of the same length since
days and nights vary in duration throughout the
year.
The most ancient sundials were Egyptian, but
it is certain that similar devices existed very early
on in other civilizations, notably in China,
Babylon and pre-Columbian America. Ranging
from a simple stick thrust vertically into the soil
to the refined instruments by means of which,
as late as the end of the last century, mechanical
watches could be set by the Sun, the sundial, in
all civilizations and at all latitudes, has proved to
be the most reliable, the most widely accessible
and the most accurate timekeeper.. .provided, of
course, that the Sun shone.
The first mechanical
devices
Very early in history, instruments that measured
duration, or periods of time the start of which
could be selected at will by the user, were to be
found alongside chronological timekeepers. 17

The oldest known water clock dates from
1400 BC. It consisted of a cone-shaped vase
with a hole in the bottom and with a series of
graduated lines drawn horizontally on the inside.
The vase was filled with water and as it slowly
emptied the level of the remaining water indi¬
cated the time that had elapsed since the filling
of the vase. An immense variety of these water
clocks, or clepsydras, were made in different
civilizations.
From Greco-Roman times, the technique was
known of using the dynamic power of water to
drive a system of gears which in turn could
operate visual time indicators and set off sound
signals. This tradition was perpetuated and the
mechanisms perfected by the Arabs. In the year
602 of the Hegira, al-Jazari described the construc¬
tion of impressive instruments that acted both as
clocks and as astronomical calendars.
A huge water-powered astronomical clock,
housed in a twelve-metre-high tower, was built
and perfected in China in 1094 by Su Song. Only
a written description of this clock has survived.
Telling the time
Since machines for telling the time were made,
there must have been a need for them. In the
Middle Ages, the great majority of the world's
population were peasant farmers, and the time
indicated by the Sun in the heavens was adequate
for agricultural purposes. Accurate knowledge of
the time of day was, however, a necessity of
Muslim calendar in wood
(41 x 28 cm) from Benin.
The circles on the upper part
represent the days of
the week and important times
of the day; those on the
lower part represent the days
of the lunar year.
; ü so©*
s ? <-s : g s*e
18
?' Í>c '¡'f ""r -««
*>3fcMJ	i	-
L»- 0-**	--1* ;; i»u..kyl^(
g

religious life, and for both Muslims and Chris¬
tians the hour of prayer had to be scrupulously
and accurately observed. Others who needed to
know the time of day included astronomers and
astrologers who, though few in number, were in
all countries close to the centre of power. In the
Islamic world and other places where the climate
made the use of sundials or water clocks feasible,
these needs were met. This was not always the
case in regions such as northern Europe where
the Sun is often hidden by clouds, the days are
short in winter, and water is liable to freeze.
During the eleventh and twelfth centuries, a
new form of urban life developed in Europe.
Banks and industry came into being and crafts
flourished. These activities brought with them the
need for more precise and permanently available
means of telling the time. The old instruments
were unsatisfactory, and by the end of the thir¬
teenth century the time was ripe for the inven¬
tion of the mechanical clock operated by weights
and pendulums. The appearance of these devices
marks one of the great turning points in the his¬
tory of science and technology.
The earliest clocks were neither accurate nor
reliable, but the method of measuring time that
they introduced, which was independent of the
stars or the elements and a pure product of
human ingenuity, was to revolutionize our ways
of life. Advancing to the rhythm of the pen¬
dulum, the new instruments would lead the way
to the technological and industrial civilization we
know today.
From the thirteenth to the twentieth century,
in response to increasingly stringent demands,
mechanical clocks were constantly improved and
became more accurate, more reliable, smaller and
A modern Nepalese calendar.
*-'

less costly. The first clocks took as long as a year
to make, could easily gain or lose an hour a day,
and lasted only about ten years, whereas the best
mechanical marine chronometers made in the
nineteenth century were accurate to within a
tenth of a second a day and are still working as
well as ever.
Universal time
Until the last century few people travelled and
those who did travelled slowly. Each town and
village lived by its own time as registered by its
own sundial, which was more accurate than any
mechanical clock. All this changed with the
coming of the railway and the telegraph, which
gradually drew all the cities of the world into a
single network and obliged them to agree upon
a coherent time system.
An international system of time zones, under
which the hour in each zone differs whilst
Bronze pins from the
Mesopotamian site of Susa
(3rd-4th century BC) being
analysed by ultraviolet
spectrometry. The pins can be
dated by measuring the
radiation given off after they
are heated by the electrical
arc, and comparing It with
that of control objects.
minutes and seconds are synchronized with
Universal Time (mean solar time at the Green¬
wich meridian), was proposed in 1885 and in less
than thirty years had been adopted worldwide.
Synchronization was initially regulated by tele¬
graph, but today satellites, accurate to a millionth
of a second, have taken over the task.
Quartz and caesium clocks
Since the seventeenth century all mechanical
clocks have been regulated by the oscillation of
a pendulum or of a balance-wheel connected to
a spiral hair-spring. Until the twentieth century
no more accurate form of oscillator was known.
In 1928, however, following the discovery that
the mechanical vibration of a quartz crystal is
accompanied by electrical oscillation, the possi¬
bility was envisaged of replacing the old balance-
wheels by suitably cut crystals.
The first quartz-crystal clock was cumber¬
some and only moderately accurate. Sixty years
later, thanks to advances in electronics, cheap
quartz watches can be more accurate than the
finest mechanical observatory clocks. Amazingly
accurate timekeeping suddenly became widely
possible. Wherever we may be, the time is posted
up for us to see, with minutes and seconds the
same throughout the world.
When the atom, a new and even more
accurate oscillator, became available to the
world's physics laboratories, even the rotation of
the Earth itself, which used to be the absolute
standard of time, revealed its inaccuracies. The
atom, and especially the caesium-133 atom, now
provides the basis of the new standard of time.
The best atomic clocks can keep time with an
accuracy of the order of a second over a period
of a million years. But scientists are still not
satisfied-
Time, however, is more than just an abstract,
regulated framework for our activities, univer¬
sally controlled and posted up around us on mil¬
lions of clock faces. It also embraces the
biorhythms, the internal impulses that have no
dials or hands but to which all living beings are
subject. Some of these last only a few thousandths
of a second, others several years. Most of them
are synchronized with astral, diurnal, lunar or
annual rhythms.
In a few hundred years, man has pushed back
the frontiers of space, both outward towards
immensity and inward towards the infinitesimal.
We have achieved the same with time scales. We
are capable of measuring the fifteen thousand
million-year lifetime of the universe and also a
femto-second (one thousand million millionth of
a second).
Yet people have not changed the pace at which
they walk, the pace of their heartbeats or even,
significantly, their life-span. The rhythms of life
have not varied. Even though certain hours may
seem longer or shorter than others, time is the
same for everyone, for it belongs to no one. 19
