hm mmttm to action by Charles Hopkins
it is in the minds of men that the strongest
defences of the environment can be con¬
structed. Environmental education is an essen¬
tial element in these defences and one with



great potential to provide assistance in the
quest to save the planet. Its aim is to raise the
awareness and understanding of all people,
from their childhood onwards, of the physical
and biological systems that support life on
Earth, to which they belong and upon which
they can act positively or negatively.
In 1977, an international conference was
organized by UNESCO and the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in
Tbilisi (USSR) to provide ideas and leadership
for an international programme in environ¬
mental education. While this was a major
global launch and implied recognition of the
importance of the subject, it was not the begin¬
ning of the concept. Before then educators had
recognized the need for environmental edu¬
cation and had begun a number of small
programmes tailored to local needs and con¬
ditions.
In the industrialized countries, such estab¬
lished activities as nature study, conservation
education and outdoor education, which had
focussed largely on education in the outdoors
and about nature, began educating/or the out¬
doors and/or the conservation of nature. Non
governmental organizations also launched
activities which highlighted the plight of the
environment and developed advocacy
programmes to protect it. By the mid-1970s,
a few urban environmental studies projects
had even emerged, as a response to the
growing impact of cities on the natural
"The aim of environmental education
is to raise people's awareness
and understanding of the physical and
biological systems to which they belong."
environment. Several universities began to
include environmental education in teacher
training. Classroom materials aimed at
addressing this new concern of students,
parents and educators were produced by a
number of countries and organizations.
In the developing world, environmental
education programmes were particularly
aimed at the workplace and at decision-makers
in government and industry. To take but one
example, agricultural workers handling and
applying fertilizers and pesticides, often for the
first time as part of local "green revolutions",
needed vocationally-oriented environmental
education. Environmental education and
training were sought to assist professionals in
such diverse fields as wildlife management and
urban planning.
In all regions of the world, educators
working in this new field were and are ham¬
pered by a host of similar problems. Most have
no environmental education training them¬
selves, the topic being barely twenty years old.
There is often no overall conceptual frame¬
work within which to organize programmes
or curricula. Equipment for "hands-on" dis¬
covery approaches is scarce, and the media,
advertising, and non-governmental organiza¬
tions provide an abundance of contradictory
information about environmental issues.
"Educators working in this new field are hampered by the fact that most
have no environmental education training themselves."

Educating the consumer
While too many people live in total poverty
or in regions where consumer choice is a
luxury, there are still several billion who can
make a difference through their purchases.
Today enough of them are crossing the
environmental apathy line and changing their
life styles and purchasing habits to encourage
corporations and governments to address the
"green" marketing issue. Ecomark in Japan,
Eco-logo in Canada and the Blue Angel
programme in Germany are but the begin¬
nings. While these programmes are founded
on scientific research, much of the informa¬
tion upon which people are basing their new
"eco-actions" is fragmented and in some cases
totally erroneous. Society's actions must be
based on environmental literacyaccess to
information and the competence to understand
the overall significance of that information.
The consequences of an environmentally
illiterate society are incalculable, but enough
of them have become apparent to persuade
governments and leaders of industry to address
the situation. It is costly to repair ecological
damage caused unintentionally by the general
public, such as the disposal of toxic or
hazardous waste into domestic sewer systems
or the cavalier use of non-renewable commodi¬
ties. It is often said that environmental damage
costs about ten times as much to correct as
to prevent.
In a similar vein, ecological damage caused
unintentionally by employees not only costs
their employers money in fines, restoration,
restitution and lost raw material, it also has
an impact on their firm's image and eventu¬
ally on its sales. This type of damage may
trigger off emotional campaigns against the
firms in question by citizen activist groups and
thus actually jeopardize large-scale corporate
investment. It is both difficult and expensive
to overcome a negative image of this kind.
A desperate need for the jobs created by
industry may pressure an environmentally
illiterate community to accept an ecologically
inappropriate enterprise. Ironically, the com¬
munity may find that by allowing its ground¬
water or other resources to become polluted
it is jeopardizing its possibilities of attracting
"Decision-makers are
in particular need
of environmental education
programmes."
i 	
UNESCO IN ACTION
ENVIRONMENT



ecologically sound projects in the future. Even¬
tually, the community may find that the costs
of remedying environmental damage caused
to the site may outweigh any benefits from
the operation.
Environmental education must be re¬
examined in this new perspective of interac¬
tions between the public, industry, govern¬
mental and non-governmental action. The
early diagnosis is not encouraging. No country
has achieved the goals set forth at Tbilisi
fifteen years ago. It is not that the goals were
unattainable or insufficiently important, but
rather that the available resources in the tradi¬
tional spheres of education have been insuffi¬
cient. Environmental education has been
approached in a traditional way, and tradi¬
tional sectors have tried to cope using existing
resources. This effort is totally inadequate.
Breaking down the barriers
between business, government
and education
It is time to explore new partnerships in
environmental education. All those involved
must learn to work synergistically. The com¬
bined energies of a multi-sectoral, multi
national and interdisciplinary approach must
be sought and mobilized. The forthcoming
UN Conference on Environment and
Development which will take place in Brazil
in 1992 will provide an opportunity to pro¬
mote this new approach at the highest level.
Advertising and public relations can
indirectly support teacher training, and the
media and publishing can produce learning
materials that highlight areas of environmental
consensus and areas of disagreement. Let us
teach the citizens of the future basic
philosophical principles to follow, the ques¬
tions to ask, and methods of interpreting data.
Let the communications industry explore
ways of using new technologiesespecially in
the developing worldto help all nations and
cultures share their environmental knowledge.
We all have much to learn regarding such
issues as development, biodiversity, environ¬
mental accounting and global trade.
Educators themselves must learn to work
with the community and ensure that curricula
are relevant both locally and internationally.
This will be difficult in some countries, where
years of mistrust have built up between busi¬
ness, government and education. The task
ahead for educators, for the media, for
industry and for governments alike, is formid¬
able. It is also urgent if we are to reconcile our
technological world with our environment
and with our traditional values and cultures.
CHARLES HOPKINS, Canadian educator, is a School
Superintendent for the Toronto Board of Education.
He is a former director of several field study centres
in environmental education and is currently assisting
in the preparation of the United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development in the area of edu¬
cation and training.
