JACQUES-YVES
COUSTEAU
The French oceanographer Jacques-
Yves Cousteau is internationally
renowned as a marine explorer and
defender of the oceans. A pioneer of
undersea investigation, he has sailed
all over the world on océanographie
expeditions and has also written and
produced films about the oceans
which have attracted immense
audiences. He is now preoccupied
with the protection of the environ¬
ment in an age of rapid economic
expansion and population growth.
How did you come to be interested in
nature andparticularly in nature in aquatic
surroundings?
I have always been curious about things.
When I was a child I used to go out bird-
watching at night. I ran into a certain amount
of opposition from my parents, who weren't
very keen on curiosity if it exposed me to
risks.
I first really started to learn about water
when I was ten years old. I was in a holiday
camp near a lake in the United States. We had
to collect garbage from under the children's
diving platform, and to do that I learned how
to dive and swim under water. I had no
goggles or any other special equipment and
bringing the garbage to the surface was quite
a job. I spent two or three weeks diving into
that lake and eventually I learned how to hold
my breath under water.
Later, when I was fourteen, I improved
my underwater swimming techniques. There
was a swimming pool at my school in Alsace,
and I used all kinds of contraptions made from
tubes and pumps in order to breathe under
water. I wasn't trying to observe the natural
world. I was imitating the James Fenimore
Cooper heroes who hid under water and
breathed through hollow reeds when trying
to escape from their pursuers.
I slowly became convinced that I wanted
to be a sailor. I passed my baccalaureate and
Interview by
8 Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat

The resources
of our planet
then, when I was twenty, I won a place at the
French naval academy. Two years later,
during a round-the-world voyage on a training
ship, the feanne d'Arc, I witnessed a scene that
had a decisive impact on my life. At Cam
Ranh Bay in Indochina, at the hottest time of
day, between noon and two o'clock, I saw
people diving from their boats and then sur¬
facing with fish in their hands. They told me
that while the fish were having their siesta
they were very easy to catch! I thought that
this was so extraordinary that I decided to
improve my underwater swimming tech¬
niques further.
For the time being, however, I had no
opportunity to do so. I was given command
of the French naval base at Shanghai,
providing supplies for ships which docked at
the French concession. It was only later, when
I returned to France and thought about the
people of Cam Ranh Bay, that I came back
to the idea of developing underwater swim¬
ming techniques. In the meantime I had
become friendly with Frederic Dumas and
Philippe Taillez. We became the Three
Musketeers of underwater adventure.
I became obsessed with the problem of
breathing underwater. My friends and I tested
all the breathing apparatus that existed at that
time and found that none of it was satis¬
factory.
Then came the war and the occupation.
That was when I met Emile Gagnan, an
engineer with the Air Liquide company who
had developed a motor vehicle powered by
carbon dioxide produced from burning wood.
The combustible gas reached the engine via
a special feeder valve. This system is used in
the underwater breathing device with which
my name is associated, millions of which have
been sold. In my device, which is entirely self-
contained, the gas passing through the feeder
valve is compressed air. Using this system,
Dumas, Taillez and I were able to extend the
possibilities of underwater swimming and start
to make films.
are
. . .there is a limit
that should not be
exceeded,
a habitability
threshold that must
not be crossed.
When the war was over, I told officials at
the Navy Ministry about this entirely new
system we had developed and suggested that
a study centre be opened at Toulon. As a
result, a centre for underwater study and
research was created in the Arsenal at Toulon.
You didn't stay there very long.
No. In 1949 I decided that it was time to
apply what we had learned. To do this we
needed a ship. Where was the money to come
from? I opened my address book. Under the
letter A, I saw the name Auniac. He was a
charming fellow. I had met him and his wife at
winter sports. He was the agent of Guinness
which, among its other activities, controlled
the shipyard at Antibes. After a meeting,
Guinness opened credit facilities for 25 million
francs and put the manager of the Antibes
shipyard at my disposal.
It sounds like a fairy tale.
Absolutely! With the manager of the
Antibes shipyard we went to Malta where we
found a converted minesweeper that was being
used as a ferry between Malta and Gozo, the
little island that is supposed to be the legen¬
dary Ogygia of the Odyssey. In fact that's why
the minesweeper's owner had named his ferry
the Calypso. We bought the ship for seven mil¬
lion francs. The Calypso was in perfect condi¬
tion, but we had to use the rest of my credit
to refit her and equip her with
oceanographical research instruments.
Then we began our cruises. The credit
from Guinness was used up and I had no more
money. I joined the CNRS.* Since the war,
France had had no océanographie vessels, and
so for a few years we served as a transport and
liaison vessel for French oceanographers.
Then came the great success ofyour film
The Silent World. . .
The Silent World dates from 1956. The first
Calypso expeditions, in the Red Sea, go back
to 1951. We had already made some quite

Commander Cousteau and
his son, Jean-Michel.
Conshelf II, an underwater colony
in the Red Sea in which a group of
oceanonauts lived for a month
in 1963.
remarkable films, one of which won the
Grand Prix at the Paris documentary film fes¬
tival in 1951. We were making colour films
as far back as 1953. Things were very difficult
in those early days. Water tends to absorb
colours and we had many lighting problems.
We did a lot of work on the development of
camera techniques, filters, optical and lighting
systems, and so on. Gradually we were able
to start using video up to professional stan¬
dards, initially in black and white.
Around that time I constructed the first
French underwater television cameras. Later,
at Marseilles, I created the Centre d'Etudes
Marines Avancées. It was at Marseilles that we
built the first submarine for exploration, spe¬
cially designed to carry out scientific obser¬
vation at a depth of 350 metres. Then, for the
French State, we made an observation subma¬
rine capable of going to a depth of 3,000
metres and, for the Americans, a third sub¬
marine capable of operating at 600 metres. I
also built two one-man pocket submarines
which are still in working order today. Finally
we began to build a bigger submarine from
which divers could emerge. When the hull was
finished work had to stop because we had no
more money. That's how things stand today,
twenty years later.
In 1954 we carried out a mission for the
Darcy Exploration Company. We had a very
good contract which enabled us to install the
radar and measuring equipment we lacked. We
were the people who discovered oil in the
Gulf! It was us who made the emirate of Abu
Dhabi rich!
The Silent World brought in enough
money to finance our work until 1972, virtu¬
ally without any other source of income.
Since then we have made many films. In
1962 we also carried out experiments in which
men lived and worked underwater at consider¬
able depths. The first of these, known as Con-
shelf I, was carried out at Marseilles. Then
came Conshelf II, in the Red Sea, and finally
in 1965, Conshelf III off Cap Ferrât.
How were these experiments carried out?
We used a spherical vessel within which the
atmosphere, consisting of a mixture of oxygen
and helium, was maintained at the sur¬
rounding water pressure. Six people lived in
the sphere for three weeks, and when they
emerged it took another week to gradually
decompress them.
With this experiment we became the first
people to do what is known as saturation
diving. Since then, the offshore oil industry
has gone in for this in a big way.
We made innovations in a wide variety of
fields. We developed cameras which we have
used as far down as 8,000 metres.
We have taken thousands of photos and
made extraordinary films in a number of
Atlantic trenches. We were also the first to
dive in the Antarctic with a submarine and
to carry out systematic exploration there in
diving gear. We recently made the first diving
equipment using plastic bottles filled to a pres¬
sure of 300 bars.
How did you become interested in environ¬
mental problems?
It was an interest that developed slowly.
Right at the start we coined a slogan: "Know,
Love, Protect". That is exactly what happened
to me! I began by exploring. When I saw all
this beauty under the sea, I fell in love with
it. And finally, when I realized to what extent
the oceans were threatened, I decided to cam¬
paign as vigorously as I could against every¬
thing that threatened what I loved. My story
forms a cycle. I hope my children can follow
the same path.
What are the main dangers that, threaten
the Earth today?
After travelling the world as I have for years
on end, and seeing it from helicopters, as a
diver, from on board ship ... I would sum
up my feelings by saying that the resources
of our planet are finite, that there is a limit
that should not be exceeded, a habitability
threshold that must not be crossed.
We should ask ourselves how many
animals and people our planet can continue
to support before the quality of life deteri¬
orates, before all Earth's beauties fade. Fifteen
years ago, when I was in the United States,
I tried to construct a mathematical model to
find out how many people our planet could
support with the income, purchasing power,
and amenities enjoyed by the average
American at that time. The data at my disposal
were not very precise and right from the start
I knew that the approximation would be of
the order of 40 to 50 per cent. At that time
I was friendly with the director of the Océano¬
graphie Laboratory of the University of
Southern California, whose researchers served
my colleagues and myself as advisers. With the
parameters I had at my disposal, I came up
with the figure of 700 million. Seven hundred
million people enjoying a standard of living
comparable to that of the average American!
Fifteen years ago our planet was unable to pro¬
vide an agreeable life for more than 700 mil¬
lion people! World population was then four
billion!
10

I was alarmed by the results of my
research and told the laboratory director about
it. Do you know what he said? That my
results were highly optimistic. He had con¬
structed the same model as I had and had come
up with a figure far lower than mine! Since
then I have been obsessed by the problem of
the habitability of the planet.
World population currently stands at 5.7
billion, a figure that is rising at dizzying speed.
Every six months, a population equal to that
of France is added to the current figure. And
every ten years a population equal to that of
China is added to that of our human ant-hill.
Everyone is convinced that population
growth cannot go on in this anarchic, can¬
cerous way. But when the question arises as
to what should be done, nobody wants to
know. People make out that nothing can be
done, that it's all too complicated, that things
are even more difficult because of ingrained
habits, religions and whatever. In fact, religion
has nothing to do with it. Italy is the world's
most Catholic country and yet it has the
world's lowest birth-rate. Spain, which is also
Catholic, is in a similar position. Its birth-rate
is dropping vertiginously. In Indonesia, the
world's biggest Islamic country, a birth con¬
trol campaign in the last ten years has reduced
the birth-rate by almost 50 per cent.
So religion shouldn't be held responsible.
Fear of the future may be, however. In the
so-called developing countries there is no
insurance for old age. Retirement pensions, if
they exist, do not even provide for basic needs.
Even when they are young people panic when
they think about their old age, especially since
they grow old quickly because of poor sani¬
tary and other conditions. To care for them
in their old age they need a male child they
can rely on. And since they have to take
account of their chances of having daughters
as well as sons, of mortality rates, and of the
possibility that some of their children are not
going to be interested in looking after them
when they get old, they need to have six off¬
spring before they can be sure of having a
dependable male child. Six children to be sure
of having three boys. Three boys to be sure
of having two who survive. And two living
boys to be sure of having one who will look
after his parents.
In addition to the insecurity factor there
is the factor of female illiteracy, which is also
a result of poverty. In the developing coun¬
tries education has made great strides but there
are still not enough schools. Selection is thus
made on the basis of sex. Boys take priority
over girls when it comes to enrollment in
school.
Why? My answer may make you raise
your eyebrows, but the fact is that little girls
do not go to school because there is no safe
drinking water. When there is no drinking
water in the vicinity the girls have to go and
fetch it from the spring. I have seen adoles¬
cent girls fetch drinking water from twenty
and sometimes thirty kilometres away, which
takes a whole day. By the time they are four¬
teen or fifteen years old, these girls whose lives
are geared to meeting the urgent need for
water have never been to school, have never
learned anything. How can they use con¬
traception or even know that contraception
exists?
Some people even try to explain exces¬
sively high birth-rates by the fact that for
hundreds of millions of people love is the only
source of happiness. Contraception neither
prevents nor reduces happiness. The con¬
traceptive pill is distributed freely in many
poor countries and yet the women do not take
it. Why? Because they have had no education
and are subjected to the will of the men who
either do not care about the consequences or
want children to look after them in their old
age-
Overpopulation is our planet's number
one problem. Of the 5.7 billion people on
Earth, less than 2 billion live in decent
11

conditions. This figure will soon double.
Perhaps we shall manage to feed the expected
10 or 12 billion. But that's just about all we
shall be able to do.
Some people believe that the sea can be a
rich source offood. . . .
That is a ridiculous idea. The sea's resources
are diminishing. There is far too much over¬
fishing already. And even if we manage to
keep on harvesting the same quantity of pro¬
tein from the sea, this quantity is bound to
diminish as a proportion of consumer needs.
I remember that at the beginning of my career
10 per cent of the protein consumed came
from the sea. Today the proportion is of the
order of 4 to 5 per cent. Tomorrow, when the
population has doubled, it will fall to 2 per
cent. Here too, productivity has a ceiling
which cannot be exceeded. We are already in
the overfishing zone.
And yet we can increase productivity on
land. Why can't we do the same with the sea?
The rates of return are not at all the same.
In the Antarctic, for example, it takes ten
tons of microscopic algae to form a ton of
krillkrill are tiny shrimps ... and it takes
one ton of krill to produce 20 kg of whale.
This is a transformation factor of 40 to 1. To
produce a cow on land, the transformation
factor is ten to one.
What about désertification? Isn't it true
that whereas the desert has been invading
agricultural land it may now be retreating.
The information on which this view is based
is too recent and needs to be confirmed. All
the same, I am willing to accept that the Sahara
was created by human beings and that it may
consequently be unmade by them. If the
Sahara were to become cultivable, its output
would be far higher than that of the sea.
What about pollution?
Global warming and the increasing rarity
of water are far more serious and urgent
threats than the chemical pollution we hear
so much about. There is less and less water

because water is squandered, and this too goes
hand in hand with overpopulation. Water is
being wasted at a terrific rate. In the West,
farmers water their crops in such a way that
90 per cent of the water evaporates. We draw
on groundwater and then let it evaporate! This
year, in spite of abundant rainfall, France will
be facing drought problems. Why? Because in
the last three years we have wasted much of
the water we have drawn.
The damage caused to the planet is a func¬
tion of demography but also of levels of
development. One American tires the planet
far more than twenty Bangladeshis. Damage
is also linked to consumption. Our society is
geared to increasingly useless consumption.
It's a vicious circle which I compare to a
cancer.
Some snakes, mosquitoes and other animal
species pose threats or dangers for
humankind. Can they be eliminated like the
viruses that cause certain diseases?
Getting rid of viruses is an admirable idea,
but it raises enormous problems. In the first
1,400 years of the Christian era, population
numbers were virtually stationary. Through
epidemics, nature compensated for excess
births by excess deaths.
I talked about this problem with the
director of the Egyptian Academy of Sciences.
He told me that scientists were appalled to
think that by the year 2080 the population of
Egypt might reach 250 million.
What should we do to eliminate suffering
and disease? It's a wonderful idea but perhaps
not altogether a beneficial one in the long run.
If we try to implement it we may jeopardize
the future of our species.
It's terrible to have to say this. World
population must be stabilized and to do that
we must eliminate 350,000 people per day.
This is so horrible to contemplate that we
shouldn't even say it. But the general situa¬
tion in which we are involved is lamentable.
And yet solutions must exist. . . .
It's a question of cost. We need $400 billion
a year for fifteen years. To provide people with
safe drinking water. To provide schooling
for girls and low pensions for the elderly.
With $4 billion over fifteen years we can not
only reduce demographic pressure but halt
population growth.
Is there anything we can do to control
industrial pollution?
Not much. Carbon dioxide is the big
problem. We are going to suffocate because
of carbon dioxide. As you know, it stimulates
breathing, and we shall all end up panting to
death if amounts of carbon dioxide continue
to increase. This increase is the result of a mis¬
guided energy policy. What's more, we have
preferred to invest enormous sums in nuclear
energy produced by fission rather than by
fusion, which is clean. But nuclear energy
produced by fusion makes it possible to have
the bomb!
There are other, more "picturesque"
forms of pollution. Planet Earth is now sur¬
rounded by a girdle of fragments of broken
satellites which move at the speed of a bullet
and will eventually prevent any attempt to
reach outer space.
To manage nature a certain amount of
wisdom is needed. Perhaps one day, taking
long-term factors into account, we shall suc¬
ceed in managing nature as we now do when
we create a pretty garden. But let's get back
to the mosquitoes. For the last ten years I have
owned a house in the country. When I first
went there, there were swallows, robins and
Jacques-Yves Cousteau
in Papua New Guinea.
mosquitoes. Today the mosquitoes have gone,
but so have the swallows, the grasshoppers and
the butterflies. The crops have been sprayed
with pesticides from the air, and so the insects
have been almost totally wiped out. If we
carry on like this, children will never see a
swallow, a dragonfly or a butterfly. Well done!
Perhaps you couldfind a more hopeful note
on which to end this conversation?
Real interest in environmental problems
began in 1988 when the American magazine
Time featured planet Earth on its cover, and
titled it "Planet of the Year" instead of its
usual "man of the year".
In July 1989, the leaders of the seven great
industrial nations devoted a third of the time
at their annual summit and twenty-three pages
of the report to environmental problems.
Later a meeting was held at The Hague and
there were others too. At long last people were
realizing that the danger was global and that
everyone was threatened.
This realization on the part of world
leaders has been encouraged by powerful pres¬
sure from public opinion all over the world.
The combination of these two forces, at the
top and at the grassroots, should lead to the
beginning of a solution. I hope that this is a
sufficiently hopeful note on which to conclude!
* The French National Centre for Scientific
Research. Editor
13
