FAROUK
HOSNY
is one of Egypt's most outstanding
contemporary painters. He has lived
and worked for many years in
Europe and is receptive to artistic
trends in both the Arab world and
I
the West. Today he is Egypt's
Minister of Culture.
You are a painter who has become a government
minister. How compatible are these two occupa¬
tions? Artists are supposed to live in the world of
I the imagination, while ministers are administrators
u'r» take action to try to achieve precise objectives
on behalf of the state. Isn't it impossible to recon¬
cile these demands?
There is a contradiction, certainly, but how
serious it is depends on the people and circumstances
involved. In my own case, I find it quite easy to
resolve. I can't conceive of being a minister-
especially a Minister of Culturewithout imagina¬
tion and without being able to mobilize imagina¬
tion, my own and other people's, in the service of
a bold cultural policy.
The raw material of my ministry is memory,
talent and beauty. When we deal with the cultural
heritage, we are managing the products of society's
imagination throughout history. In the case of new
creative work, we deal with the most innovative
. Opposite page,
4 a painting by Farouk Hosny (1990).

elements of society, with visionaries and poets. With
other ministries we share the responsibility of
reflecting on major future projects which must
respond to long-term social needs that are barely
perceptible today.... At all these levels, the artist's
intuition is just as necessary as the administrator's
efficiency.
If we want to gear up for the future while
keeping our feet on the ground, if we want to fulfil
even a fraction of our dreamsthen we always have
to make a compromise between ambition and
reason, between the risk that must be taken and the
error that must not be committed....
Of course my functions as a minister are a brake
on my personal work, my career as a painter. But
that is a choice one makes, and I am not the only
person who has made such a choice. I think that
artists in many countries today feel a need to devote
part of their time to other things than their creative
work. They go into television or advertising, they
become active in a political party, a human rights
association or an environmental protection organi¬
zation. Sometimes they even go into businessor
join a government.
I think this trend is probably irreversible. Not
only politics but industry, finance, and education,
increasingly demand a wide range of talents, cultural
inputs, ethical and aesthetic points of view that can
only come from the world of letters and arts. Today
perhaps Mozart and Modigliani would not have died
in isolation and poverty.
Let's look at the matterfrom another angle. Some
states refuse to create ministries ofculture because
they think such institutions act as a kind of
bureaucratic straitjacket, a limitation on the
freedom to create and perhaps even a way of
dragooning artists. It's true that they cite the
examples of ministries of culture that have been
notorious for stifling true culture.
Culture can be stifled by a ministry, but it can
also be stifled by a market governed by the laws of
vulgarity, where competition encourages mediocrity
and commissions only go to the most conventional
artists.
This is what happens in many Third World
countries where private patronage doesn't exist,
where entrepreneurs who venture into the field of
culture do so for strictly commercial motives and
the vast majority of creators have no chance of
making an impact because they lack the basic
resources to do so.
What can a Ministry of Culture do in these cir¬
cumstances? As you have just suggested, it can try
to plan artistic productionthat is to say, to define
the areas to be encouraged and those to be dis¬
couraged, promote one direction rather than
another, in short, treat artists as sub-contractors and
works of art as products that can be produced to
order like canned sardines or luxury textiles. This
happens, and it has led to disasters. We must hope
that it will soon be only an unhappy memory.
In this country, on the other handand

increasingly, as far as I can judge, elsewhere in the
worldthe Ministry of Culture seeks above all to
be a place where creative work is stimulated and sup¬
ported, and the freedom of the creator is protected.
We generally intervene indirectly. We do not define
objectives, we offer meeting-placescultural
centresor provide creators with opportunities to
make radio or television programmes, to produce
plays, organize exhibitions of their paintings, or pub¬
lish their poems. We insist on quality but we make
no ideological demands.
Outside Cairo and a few other big cities, theatre
or film production would be impossible without a
subsidy from the ministry. Our role is to increase
the opportunities available to artists all over Egypt
and do all we can to present their work to the widest
possible public.
There is another reason why a Ministry of Cul¬
ture is absolutely essential in a country with a
heritage as outstandingly rich as Egypt's.... What
other institution could mobilize the resources, skills
and efforts that are needed to preserve this heritage?
The same problems arise in Greece, India, China
and France.
If a country has a heritage which includes the
pyramids and the Temple of Karnak, to whom can
it entrust their protection and safeguard? Local enter¬
prises don't have the resources, and a foreign mul¬
tinational would soon incorporate them into a hotel
complex. These are not reasonable options. These
wonderful monuments and sites are the property
of the Egyptian people, who assume the moral
responsibility for their upkeep, not only for them
selves, but on behalf of all humanity. Only the Egyp¬
tian state, which carries out research, excavates,
makes inventories and protects all the treasures of
the heritage from pilfering by local thieves as well
as from big international predators, is in a position
to meet the needs of site protection as well as those
of tourism, which offers our heritage to the admi¬
ration of the world.
What specific dangers threaten these sites?
Egypt's antiquities are in danger, but they are not
alone in that. Antiquities are threatened everywhere
today. Not because of neglect but because even the
most advanced techniques that are used to protect
them have some side-effects. We do not know for
certain what precautions to take against these side-
effects.
The problem exists on a much larger scale, the
ecological scale. Modern technologies are beneficial
to humanity in many fields but beyond a certain
threshold they often have repercussions that are
harmful to our healthand to the health of plants
and the stone with which the masterpieces of Antiq¬
uity were built. When car exhaust gases, factory
smoke and radiation are added to the results of cli¬
matic change, humidity, drought, and the wear and
tear caused by the passage of time, then the
chemistry of the stone, the freshness of the colours,
the delicate harmony of forms and volumes are
insidiously altered....
It is possible to combat some kinds of wear and
tear, but not others. To take one example, the vibra¬
tions caused by traffic can to some extent be reduced
by prohibiting the use of vehicles within a certain
radius around important sites. But it's much more
difficult to take precautions against the vibrations
caused by aircraft. The threat of pollution from
industrial activity can only be countered locally.
What can be done about threats from an ecological
disaster on the other side of the world? We had
nothing to do with the Chernobyl disaster but we
have not escaped some of its consequences. We face
a Sisyphean task. But we must resist wherever we
can. We must never give up.
Paradoxically, the very wealth of Egypt's histor¬
ical, artistic and architectural heritage poses
problems. Every square metre of Egyptian soil may
conceal unsuspected treasures. To date we have
brought to light 2,000 Pharaonic tombs of great
value. Let's suppose that it would take two years'
work to restore each of them. That means it would
take no less than 4,000 working years to finish the
job! As for restoring them all at once, that's far
beyond the country's capacities.
We operate like firefighters whose priority is
to extinguish fires as and when they occur. We con¬
centrate on the antiquities in most immediate
danger, those that must be preserved from irremedi¬
able deterioration. Unfortunately there's not much
we can do as things stand at present. I would have
liked to do more and better, to restore all the won¬
derful things that successive civilizations have created
in Egypt over fifty centuries, and show them to the
world in perfect condition.
You say that restoration means usingprocedures
that sometimes cause certain materials to deteriorate
more quickly. Why is this?
There are different schools of thought about resto¬
ration and we should beware of making categorical
judgements. A particular process may be efficient
within certain limits for the restoration of one
material but it may destroy another. It is often neces¬
sary to change from one process to another, to com¬
bine several and adapt some of them to unforeseen
circumstances.... Apart from technical procedures,

the very philosophy of restoration is sometimes
questioned. To restore an ancient city which
has long been abandoned or has been destroyed
by war, it may be legitimate to rebuild entire
districts. To restore the Sphinx we should clearly
try to restore its original appearance without
changing anything.
Mistakes are sometimes made. They were made
in previous attempts to restore the Sphinx. Products
were used and elements added which would have
modified its appearance. Fortunately, we were able
to step in before it was too late. The new processes
being used to protect the stone should not so much
maintain the Sphinx in its current dilapidated state
as restore it to its former splendour.
Some ten years ago there was a highly controver¬
sial project to develop the famous plateau of the
pyramids. You yourself have initiated a new
rehabilitation project with UNESCO's help. How
do things stand at present?
There is a fundamental difference between the
two projects. The first would have devastated the
site forever, since it involved the construction of
-hotels, villas, swimming pools and casinos. That
would have been a violation of its historical dimen¬
sion and sacred character. The new project, on the
other hand, aims at clearing away all extraneous
elements: resthouses, public toilets, warehouses, the
homes of certain officials. There are plans to replace
the existing tarmac access roads by stone-paved
paths, remove the street lamps and stop encroach¬
ment by dromedaries, horses, sheep and goats.
But it wasn't always like that....
No. These are quite recent developments. Only
twenty years ago, the site was separate both from
the town of Giza and the outer suburbs of Cairo.
When visitors arrived they found themselves, in a
place of magical silence, they were right back at the
dawn of time.... But surreptitiously some of the
more chaotic features of our time have been allowed
to invade this mythical space, to erode and gradu¬
ally smother it.... At this rate, it will soon be impos¬
sible to distinguish the Sphinx from the newest
buildings in the village of Nazlet el-Simman....
We can't destroy this village but we can, and
should, mark the boundary of the site with a wall
to isolate it from the buildings around it. This solu¬
tion will not restore to the Sphinx the perspective-
open to infinitythat it had for thousands of years.
It will impose a fixed perimeter on the site but at
least the site will be protected. And from certain
angles, visitors will still be able to appreciate the
majestic beauty of the place.
M A more general question about the durability of
the construction materials ofthe pyramids and the
Sphinx. Nothing lasts for ever. Can such ancient
material be maintained indefinitely? Isn't there a
risk that one day the problems will become
insoluble?
I don't believe that there are any insoluble
problems in this field. But there are problems which
cost too much to solve. We are often faced with ter¬
rible dilemmaswe have masterpieces to restore and
the technical solutions exist, but the price is far
beyond what we can afford. A choice then has to
be made between masterpieceswhich ones should
be sacrificed? This is always heartbreaking. Egypt's
drama is that it has produced so many wonderful
things, each of which would be the pride of any of
the world's great museumsand most of them are
crumbling away, disappearing before our eyes.
Of course, the pyramids and the Sphinx are
among the treasures that will be saved whatever the
cost. But what about the materials they are made
of? The Sphinx is carved from a limestone rock that
has already endured much.... I am not talking about
the Sphinx itself, which is about 4,500 years old. I
am talking about the rock, which is more than 50
million years old. For a long period the statue was
completely buried in sand. Herodotus, for example,
does not mention it. The sand concealed it from
view but also protected it from the ravages of time.
Since the sand has been cleared away, the Sphinx
is once more exposed to the wind and sand-storms
that will gradually erode it.
You know, the Sphinx was already in need of
restoration 3,500 years ago at the time of Thutmose
IV, again during the period of Roman rule 2,000
years ago, and again at the beginning of the present
century. Its history is full of ups and downs, times
when it was neglected and times when it was care¬
fully looked after. Our own age is doubtless the most
paradoxical of all. There is universal concern for the
Sphinx yet modern conditions and tourism are
exposing it to forms of aggression it has never had
to endure in the past.
Can we square this circle?
We shall never give up. We shall find the
resources. We shall continue to improve our
methods. And the world is not content simply to
look on. It is backing us. And UNESCO, notably,
is giving us very valuable support.
