From siren song to shanty, the sea
has always been associated with
music. For songwriter Georges
Moustaki it was a formative
influence as he grew up in the
cosmopolitan port of Alexandria. On
the Atlantic shores of Brazil it has
brought inspiration to the "saltwater
poets" who have created explosive
forms of popular music from a
multicultural tradition. The sea is
also a cradle where, alone beneath
the stars, the sailor can find solace,
away from the pressures of modern
life ashore.
Mask 0/ the f«
1 HE sea, a source of sustenance to those who live on her
shores, the homeland of travellers, of those who span worlds;
the sea, which rises and falls with all the majesty of a symphonic
poem. The sea, fountainhead of sounds and rhythms. The sea
wind plucks the strings of guitars, harps and lutes, and makes
the tom-tom skin vibrate. It fills the bellows of the accordion.
Great music and light music, Debussy and Trenet, live and
breathe the cadence of the waves as they endlessly advance and
retreat.
I am a son of Alexandria, and my vocation as a musician
grew in a port city, a seaside city where from childhood my
rovings were accompanied by the tang of algae, by glittering
cascades of spray, by the splashing of waves against the stone
blocks of the jetty and their discreet murmuring as they died
on the sand, by the sirens of liners, by the lapping of water
around the hulls of the caiques, and the cries of seagulls.
As I walked along the seashore to school, I would hear the
first songs of the day being intoned by the fishermen as they
drew in their nets, hauled their boats ashore or serenaded an
early morning bather.
After the war, a film entitled Fièvre was shown in Alexandria
in which Tino Rossi, alone in the middle of the Mediterranean,
sang Schubert's Ave Maria unaccompanied. As I spent most of
my time on the Maiscaizone, the cockleshell my father had given
me, I identified spontaneously with the hero of the film and
sang away as I pulled on the oars. Later, I learned that the writer-
sailor Gérard d'Aboville sang my songs during a solo voyage,
to break the silence, fight exhaustion or simply to amuse
himself.
When I wrote the music of Milord for Edith Piaf, I tried
to remember the sounds I had heard in the sailors' dives I knew
when I was a teenager, with the disturbing beauties of the port
and the songs the seamen bawled out to the accompaniment
of a honky-tonk piano.
Songs of the sea, of love, of death.
Songs of the deep or the shore. . .
. . . My memory is steeped in them, and my verses some¬
times hymn the urge to travel. It was on the Greek island of
Spetsai that the sea whispered my first notes to me.
GEORGES MOUSTAKI, French singer and composer, was born in Alexandria
(Egypt) of Greek parents. He wrote songs for a number of well-known French
singers before becoming a successful singer himself. He is the author of two
books, Questions à la Chanson and tes filles de la mémoire (with a preface by
Jorge Amado).

by Georges Moustài
Wherever there is sea, songs are born to reduce tensions,
ease partings, salute arrivals, win the girls waiting on the jetty
or console the wives dressed in black who have learned that



the sea, their rival, has kept their husbands.
The songs of Dorival Caymmi, a poet, singer and musician
from the north of Brazil, describe the daily odyssey of the
fishermen of Bahia, lovers of the ocean, victims of its fury, cap¬
tivated by its sorcery and by Yemanja, goddess of the waves,
who sometimes takes them to her underwater kingdom.
Before Hertzian waves, the waves of the sea transmitted
music between people, countries and continents, mingling with
other forms of music to give rise to new melodies and new
rhythms.
The bandoneón, a portable harmonium invented by the
German musician Heinrich Band to accompany religious
processions, was introduced by the sailors of Hamburg to the
porteños of Buenos Aires, where it became indissociable from
the tango.
At Tananarive I bought a kind of musical bow and a drum
whose notes could be modulated by a stick fixed on to its skin.
Some time later I came across almost identical instruments in
Brazil where they were known as the "berimbau" and the
cuica .
Andalusian music, which originated in Pakistan or Byzan¬
tium, was brought to north Africa and southern Spain by
nomads who travelled by land and sea.
The meeting of European folklore and emigrants to the New
World with the pulsating songs of the African slaves, all borne
by sea, created the musical expression of the two Americas. This
intermingling brought universality to American music.
The World of Silence is the title of a great film about the
sea. Silence, too, is music.
