Night waé, ahne
A M I T I É is a 7.60-metre cutter with
L\ a blue hull and white sails. We
JL Jl. named her for friendship
ours, that of the people we hoped to meet
on our two-year cruiseand for a song
well known to international volunteer
workcampers. We only discovered much
later the other Amitié which appears,
dragged up on the beach, in a painting by
Van Gogh.
One late April afternoon, our Amitié
nosed out of the harbour of Las Palmas,
capital of the Canary Islands, and turned
west. Objective? Bridgetown, Barbados,
some 2,700 sea and tradewind miles
toward sunset. On board were Nicole
(France), Glyn (UK) and I (USA). Glyn's
first son had just been born back in
England. In a paternal gesture (and
perhaps to ward off storms and evil
spiritssailors still tend to worry about
both), he streamed astern, on a short line,
a rubber duck borrowed from the new
baby. "There," announced Glyn, making
sure the line was tied fast to a cleat, "by
the time he gets back to England, that
duck's going to be a very salty bluewater
sailor!"
The first night and day were har¬
rowing as we crossed a heavily-travelled 37

north-south shipping lane. We were not
much bigger than a single lifeboat on the
deck of one of the monster craft that
loomed on all sides. Our radar reflector
probably graced their screens with a blip
not much bigger than that of a seagull.
Then the shipping lane was behind us.
And before us? Nothing. We would
not see another human being for over a
month.
Nothingness. . . . Sea, sky, wind,
waves: huge rollers towering above our
stern, raising us to their crests in slow-
motion roller-coaster style, and depositing
us (not always gently) in the following
trough. A nothingness made the more
impressive by the fact that, as we settled
into a routine, each of us spent several
hours out of every twenty-four on watch
alone.
Nothingness, the sea? Beneath our
keel were something like two kilometres
of salt and waterelemental substances
that make up some 70 per cent of you and
me. The surface of this ever-heaving,
often-roiling liquid was about one metre
beneath the seat of the slicker trousers-
then, as the weather warmed, swimsuit
of whoever was on watch.
Close enough to observe the dolphin
fish that followed us, the dolphins that
preceded us, and the flying fish chased by
some ominous icthyomorphous cousins
off the crests of waves and practically into
the open jaws of frigates and other sea
birds that wheeled and waited for a
winged snack.
SOLITUDE
Nothingness, the sky? Sun and stars gave
us our bearings; the sight of a bird trying
to light on the wildly gyrating masthead



gave us mirth; and the Moon and Jupiter
joined forcesI enjoyed night watch-
to light up whatever reading matter I
wanted, even an old copy of Le Monde (a
newspaper not renowned for large type).
Not nothingness, then; but solitude
for certain. A solitude made the more
present by the disappearance of Glyn's
son's ducky. A sharp tooth had been at
work: the line was severed, not
unravelled.
Solitude, then, although humankind
wasn't far: strewn along the whole trans¬
atlantic crossing were bobbing oil drums,
38 petroleum-coated plastic containers of

many shapes and sizes and other flotsam
and jetsam of our "civilization". One
plastic box wheedled to nobody but us
and the birds: "Drink Coca-Cola!" "Like
hell I will!" I shouted after it as it drifted
astern, already on the lookout for another
yachtsman-client, improbable before a
few days ... or months.
Other news that came, via the BBC,
included civil war in Africa, student dis¬
turbances in Europe, and twice-daily time
checks for our navigation. We also heard
May Day in Red Square: thank you,
Radio Moscow; the bands came in loud
and clear and we cavorted in the
1.5-square-metre cockpit.
"IT'S RAINING IN RIO"
About two a.m. one night I craned my
neck as two planes approached each other
in opposite directions overhead. At first
mesmerized by their warning flashes, I
then jumped for the radio and heard two
British Airways pilots chat offhandedly:
"Hope you've brought your mac, friend;
it's raining in Rio. Over." Crackle.
"Roger, friend. And /advise you to take
the Underground in from Heathrow.
They've got the motorway dug up a treat
again. Over."
For me, there was nobody to talk to,
but I was speechless anyway. And then I
started laughing out loud. Those fellows
were each doing about 800 knots and
would reach their respective destinations
in scant hours. We were churning out
about four knots and had several weeks
to go yet.
Little by little, night solitude turned
one's thoughts inwards. Fear? I honestly
searched for it, and knew there were
objective reasons to find it. A Swedish
sailboat had recently been becalmed in
mid-Atlantic and turned up in the West
Indies with no more drinking water and
only one tiny pot of jam left to eat for
the five-person crew. We ourselves had
had a dicey moment when one of the
crosstrees started to crawl down the port
staythat could have been catastrophe.
Luckily, Glyn was on deck at the same
time as I and, standing on my joined hands
(a prayerful stepping stool they made),
managed to jury-rig a repair. In Las Palmas
we had met Poland's first single-handed
round-the-world sailor, Leonid Telega.
He showed us his logbook in which the
Soviet poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko, whom
he had met in Tahiti, had written that his
boat's name, Opty, made him "half an
optimist". No, there was not much fear,
however. (No superman, I'm scared of
high places.)
On the other hand there was some
(pardonable?) satisfaction. Contrary to
friends' predictions, I had managed to
learn to use a sextantwe were, in fact,
only about five sea miles off course when
we arrived "on the other side"; not bad for
a bunch of amateurs. And I had managed
to rig a twin headsails arrangementFred
and Jim we called them following the
example of a pre-war French solo sailor
and seascape painter, Marin-Marie. They
enabled Amitié to steer herself most of
the time. (Giving time to think.)
I felt only a distant relative of the
Tabarly-type racers. Amitié was a friendly
donkey, not a sleek racehorse; our only
competitor was danger, not the chronom¬
eter; and minus an obsession with speed,
we were able to savour the slow passing
of time.
THE CALL OF THE DEEP
But if the racers were distant relatives,
they were kin all the same and I thought
often of them. Other nocturnal kindred
visitors included some of our hardy
predecessors, who managed with wood,
hemp and canvas (compared with our
fibreglass hull and synthetic running rig¬
ging and sails), who had no radios, no self-
inflating life-rafts, and were often months
on a single crossing.
Grandad among the solo artists was
probably Yankee Capt. Joshua Slocum,
who built his boats with his own hands
and may well have beenas early as the
nineteenth century the first singlehander

to circumnavigate the globe. There was
also Vito Dumas, an Argentine relative
of writer Alexandre, who had to operate
on himself with a penknife at sea when
an abcess threatened his life. Then there
was painter Marin-Marie, just mentioned.
In 1933, he crossed the Atlantic from east
to westa real "first"alone but in rela¬
tive comfort and with a modicum of rest.
Of sixty-five days at sea, he only spent
twenty-three at the helm. The twin-
headsails system he invented obligingly
steered his eleven-metre cutter Winibelle
II the rest of the time.
Why did they do it? Why were we
doing it? "To get away from it all"at
least for a whileand literally to rub
shoulders with Nature in her many
moods, to be in and of and completely
dependent on Nature, and to learn not
to try to dominate her, but to co-operate
with her. To test ourselves, too, since we
were fairly young at the time. For the
sheer joy of the days when the Sun shone
and the wind sped us along leaving a
straight bubbling, glistening wake astern;
for the thrill of facing nasty blows (that
had been in the winter Mediterranean a
few months earlierand we'd had quite
enough of that particular kind of thrill!).
And, finally, because one hot summer
evening years before, sitting on
Geneviève, a hulk where we lived under
the Pont de la Concorde in Paris sniffing
