The
The Convention on the Rights of the Child
has been described as a Magna Carta for
children. It has fifty-four articles detailing
the individual rights of any person under
eighteen years of age to develop his or her
full potential, free from hunger and want,
neglect, exploitation or other abuses.
The outcome of ten years of
negotiations, the Convention was adopted
by the United Nations on 20 November
1989 and entered into force on 2
September 1990 after being ratified by
twenty States. So far 139 countries have
either signed the Convention or have
become States Parties to it by ratification
or accession*. When ratified by a State,
the Convention becomes binding law in it.
A Committee of ten experts will monitor
compliance in the States Parties to the
Convention.
The Convention goes beyond previously
existing instruments by seeking to balance
the rights of the child with the rights and
duties of parents or others who have
responsibilities for child survival,
development and protection, and by giving
the child the right to participate in
decisions affecting both the present and
the future.
Among the pressing issues addressed,
some of which appear for the first time in
an international convention, are obligations
to children in particularly difficult
circumstances, such as the needs of
refugee children (article 22), protection
from sexual and other forms of child
exploitation (articles 34 and 36), drug
abuse (article 33), children in trouble with
the law (article 40), inter-country
adoptions (article 35), children in armed
conflicts (articles 38 and 39), the needs of
disabled children (article 23), and the
children of minority and indigenous groups
(article 30).
Education is the subject of two major
articles (27 and 28), which were reinforced
by the World Conference on Education for
All, held at Jomtien (Thailand) from 5 to 9
March 1990. Primary education is to be
compulsory, free to all, and should be
directed to the development of a child's
personality, talents and natural abilities,
with due respect for cultural identity,
language and values. Stress is placed on
equality of educational opportunity for girls
and boys.
The inherent strength of the new
Convention lies in its flexibility, its
capacity to accommodate the many
different approaches of nations in pursuit
of a common goal. It has not evaded
sensitive issues, but has found means to
adjust to the different cultural, religious
and other values which address universal
child needs in their own ways.
Below is a summary of the main
provisions of the Convention.
* As of 25 July 1991. 39

THE MMN PROVISIONS OF THE CONVENTION
Preamble
The preamble recalls the basic principles of
the United Nations and specific provisions
of certain relevant treaties and proclama¬
tions. It reaffirms the fact that children,
because of their vulnerability, need special
care and protection, and places special
emphasis on the primary caring and protec¬
tive responsibility of the family.
It also reaffirms the need for legal and
other protection of the child before and
after birth, the importance of respect for the
. cultural values of the child's community,
and the vital role of international co¬
operation in securing children's rights.
Definition of a child
(art. 1)
A child is recognized as a person under 18,
unless national laws recognize the age of
majority earlier.
Non-discrimination
(art. 2)
All rights apply to all children without
exception. It is the State's obligation to pro¬
tect children from any form of discrimina¬
tion and to take positive action to promote
their rights.
Best interests of the child
(art. 3)
All actions concerning the child shall take
full account of his or her best interests. The
State shall provide the child with adequate
care when parents, or others charged with
40 that responsibility, fail to do so.
Nursing victims of an earthquake,
by Ayan Chatterjee, age 7 (India).
Implementation of rights (art. 4)
The State must do all it can to implement
the rights contained in the Convention.
Parental guidance and the child's
evolving capacities (art. 5)
The State must respect the rights and
responsibilities of parents and the extended
family to provide guidance for the child
which is appropriate to her or his evolving
capacities.
Survival and development
(art. 6)
Every child has the inherent right to life,
and the State has an obligation to ensure the
child's survival and development.
Name and nationality (art. 7)
The child has the right to a name at birth.
The child has also the right to acquire a
nationality and, as far as possible, to know
his or her parents and be cared for by them.
Preservation of identity (art. 8)
The State has an obligation to protect, and
if necessary re-establish, basic aspects of the
child's identity. This includes name, nation¬
ality and family ties.
Separation from parents
(art. 9)
The child has a right to live with his or her
parents unless this is deemed incompatible
with the child's best interests. The child also
has the right to maintain contact with both
parents if separated from one or both.
Family reunification (art. 10)
Children and their parents have the right
to leave any country and to enter their own
for purposes of reunion or the maintenance
of the child-parent relationship.
Illicit transfer and non-return (art. 1 1)
The State has an obligation to prevent and
remedy the kidnapping or retention of chil¬
dren abroad by a parent or third party.
The child's opinion (art. 12)
The child has the right to express his or her
opinion freely and to have that opinion
taken into account in any matter or proce¬
dure affecting the child.
Freedom of expression (art. 13)
The child has the right to express his or her
views, obtain information, make ideas or
information known, regardless of frontiers.
Freedom of thought, conscience
and religion (art. 14)
The State shall respect the child's right to
freedom of thought, conscience and
religion, subject to appropriate parental
guidance.
Freedom of association (art. 15)
Children have a right to meet with others,
and to join or form associations.
Protection of privacy (art. 16)
Children have the right to protection from
interference with their privacy, family,
home and correspondence, and from libel
or slander.
Access to appropriate information
(art. 17)
The State shall ensure that information and
material from a diversity of sources is acces¬
sible to children, and it shall encourage the
mass media to disseminate information
which is of social and cultural benefit to the
child, and take steps to protect him or her
from harmful materials.
Parental responsibilities (art. 18)
Parents have joint primary responsibility
for raising the child, and the State shall sup¬
port them in this. The State shall provide
appropriate assistance to parents in child-
raising.

Protection from abuse and neglect
(art. 19)
The State shall protect the child from all
forms of maltreatment by parents or others
responsible for the care of the child and
establish appropriate social programmes for
the prevention of abuse and the treatment
of victims.
Protection of a child without family
(art. 20)
The State is obliged to provide special pro¬
tection for a child deprived of the family
environment and to ensure that appropriate
alternative family care or institutional place¬
ment is available in such cases. Efforts to
meet this obligation shall pay due regard to
the child's cultural background.
Adoption
(art. 21)
In countries where adoption is recognized
and/or allowed, it shall only be carried out
in the best interests of the child, and then
only with the authorization of competent
authorities, and with safeguards for the
child.
Refugee children
(art. 22)
Special protection shall be granted to a
refugee child or to a child seeking refugee
status. It is the State's obligation to co¬
operate with competent organizations
which provide such protection and
assistance.
Disabled children
(art. 23)
A disabled child has the right to special care,
education and training to help him or her
enjoy a full and decent life in dignity and
achieve the greatest degree of self-reliance
and social integration possible.
Jumping onto the see-saw at Harvest
Thanksgiving, by Chang Hua-Jung,
age 12 (Korea).
Health and health services
(art. 24)
The child has a right to the highest standard
of health and medical care attainable. States
shall place special emphasis on the provi¬
sion of primary and preventive health care,
public health education and the reduction
of infant mortality. They shall encourage
international co-operation in this regard and
strive to see that no child is deprived of
access to effective health services.
Periodic review of placement
(art. 25)
A child who is placed by the State for
reasons of care, protection or treatment is
entitled to have that placement evaluated
regularly.
Me going to school,
by Mailin Bedoya Rivero,
age 9 (Cuba).
Social security
(art. 26)
The child has the right to benefit from
social security including social insurance.
Standard of living
(art. 27)
Every child has the right to a standard of
living adequate for his or her physical,
mental, spiritual, moral and social develop¬
ment. Parents have the primary responsi¬
bility to ensure that this responsibility can
be fulfilled, and is. State responsibility can
include material assistance to parents and
their children.
Education
(art. 28)
The child has a right to education, and the
State's duty is to ensure that primary edu¬
cation is free and compulsory, to encourage
different forms of secondary education
accessible to every child and to make higher
education available to all on the basis of
capacity. School discipline shall be consis¬
tent with the child's rights and dignity. The
State shall engage in international co¬
operation to implement this right.
Aims of education
(art. 29)
Education shall aim at developing the
child's personality, talents and mental and
physical abilities to the fullest extent. Edu¬
cation shall prepare the child for an active
adult life in a free society and foster respect
for the child's parents, his or her own cul¬
tural identity, language and values, and for
the cultural background and values of
others. 41
A<VK

Children of minorities or
indigenous populations
(art. 30)
Children of minority communities and
indigenous populations have the right to
enjoy their own culture and to practise their
own religion and language.
Leisure, recreation and cultural
activities
(art. 31)
The child has the right to leisure, play and
participation in cultural and artistic activities.
Child labour
(art. 32)
The child has the right to be protected from
work that threatens his or her health, edu¬
cation or development. The State shall set
minimum ages for employment and regu¬
late working conditions.
Drug abuse
(art. 33)
Children have the right to protection from
the use of narcotic and psychotropic drugs,
and from being involved in their produc¬
tion or distribution.
Sexual exploitation
(art. 34)
The State shall protect children from sexual
exploitation and abuse, including prostitu¬
tion and involvement in pornography.
Sale, trafficking and abduction
(art. 35)
It is the State's obligation to make every
effort to prevent the sale, trafficking and
abduction of children.
Make peace, not war, by Mihir Desai
age 5 (Mauritius).
Other forms of exploitation
(art. 36)
The child has the right to protection from
all forms of exploitation prejudicial to any
aspects of the child's welfare not covered
in articles 32, 33, 34 and 35.
Torture and deprivation of liberty
(art. 37)
No child shall be subjected to torture, cruel
treatment or punishment, unlawful arrest
or deprivation of liberty. Both capital
punishment and life imprisonment without
the possibility of release are prohibited for
offences committed by persons below 18
years. Any child deprived of liberty shall
be separated from adults unless it is consi¬
dered in the child's best interests not to do
so. A child who is detained shall have legal
and other assistance as well as contact with
the family.
Armed conflicts
(art. 38)
States Parties shall take all feasible measures
to ensure that children under 15 years of
age play no direct part in hostilities. No
child below 15 shall be recruited into the
armed forces. States shall also ensure the
protection and care of children who are
affected by armed conflict as described in
relevant international law.
Rehabilitative care
(art. 39)
The State has an obligation to ensure that
child victims of armed conflicts, torture,
neglect, maltreatment or exploitation
receive appropriate treatment for their
recovery and social reintegration.
Administration of juvenile justice
(art. 40)
A child in conflict with the law has the right
to treatment which promotes the child's
sense of dignity and worth, takes the child's
age into account and aims at his or her rein¬
tegration into society. The child is entitled
to basic guarantees as well as legal or other
assistance for his or her defence. Judicial
proceedings and institutional placements
shall be avoided wherever possible.
Respect for higher standards
(art. 41)
Wherever standards set in applicable
national and international law relevant to
the rights of the child are higher than those
in this Convention, the higher standards
shall always apply.
Implementation and entry into force
(arts. 42 to 54)
The provisions of articles 42-54 notably
foresee:
1) the State's obligation to make the rights
contained in this Convention widely
known to both adults and children.
2) the setting up of a Committee on the
Rights of the child composed of ten experts,
which will consider reports that States Par¬
ties to the Convention are to submit two
years after ratification and every five years '
thereafter. The Convention enters into
forceand the Committee would therefore
be set uponce 20 countries have ratified it.
3) States Parties are to make their reports
widely available to the general public.
4) The Committee may propose that spe¬
cial studies be undertaken on specific issues
relating to the rights of the child, and may
make its evaluations known to each State
Party concerned as well as to the UN
General Assembly.
5) In order to "foster the effective
implementation of the Convention and to
encourage international co-operation", the
specialized agencies of the UN (such as the
ILO, WHO, and UNESCO) and UNICEF
will be able to attend the meetings of the
Committee. Together with any other body
recognized as "competent", including
NGOs in consultative status with the UN
and UN organs such as the UNHCR, they
can submit pertinent information to the
Committee and be asked to advise on the
optimal implementation of the Convention.
42 Source: United Nations Centre for Human Rights and
> UNICEF
