A testing ground for
urbanism
by Hardt-Waltherr Hämer
I
Sculpture by the "Tonteufel"
group of artists In Berlin's
Admiralstrasse, 1985.
F you want to get to know Berlin you are
bound to visit the Kreuzberg district at some time
or other. There you will find an audacious mix
of architectural styles in a crowded city environ¬
ment. Modern buildings stand next to run-down
tenements. There are workshops in upper storeys
and sheds in the courtyards of recently restored
apartment blocks. In the streets, the squares and
the few open spaces, native Kreuzbergers rub
shoulders with punks, Turks wearing headscarves
as if in Anatolia, and urbane figures sporting the
typical Berlin look. There are many dogs and
even more youngsters. Kreuzberg must house
more children than any other neighbourhood in
Europe. You may also, however, notice a burned-
out supermarket on a street corner; for in Kreuz-
berg, they will tell you, something goes up in
flames every May Dayif not a supermarket,
then at least a car or two. You will hear of a grim
tradition of disturbances and street fighting.
33

A building erected In 1984
near the Landwehr Canal,
Berlin.
34
HARDT-WALTHERR HAMER,
German architect, is vice-
president of the Berlin
Academy of Sciences. From
1979 to 1985, he was head of
urban renewal in the follow-up
to the Internationale
Bauausstellung, an
international architectural
exhibition held in Berlin in
1978. He has published a .
number of books, notably on
theatre construction and urban
renewal.
For the story of Kreuzberg is first and fore¬
most that of the conflicts and controversies that
punctuate social change in our society. It is a dis¬
trict where extremes clash head-on and urban
chaos reaches its peak. In a city that is constantly
trying to learn the secrets of peaceful coexistence,
Kreuzberg has for generations been a testing
ground for urban development.
Lenné's green city
The district's history began with a plan for an
ideal garden city drawn up by an architect named
Peter Joseph Lenné in 1841, shortly after the
revolution brought by the coming of the railway.
In Lenné's project, the district was to be called
Südliche Luisenstadt.
After 1850, however, Berlin spread out
beyond the ring of boulevards that surrounded
the old city to accommodate an influx of new¬
comers from the provinces. The first expansion
was so rapid that before long dwellings were
being built even in gardens in the courtyards
of apartment blocks. This was when Berlin's
Mietskasernen (literally, barrack dwellings) were
born. Tenements with tiny courtyards, they were
popular with property speculators at a time when
housing was in short supply.
The masses flocking to the city crowded into
ever-smaller dwellings that often served in addi¬
tion as cottage-industry workplaces. Then
manufacturing industry moved in, and factories
went up next door to the tenements. The district
that in Lenné's mind had been crisscrossed with
broad avenues, canals, promenades and gardens
was now overbuilt and overpopulated. It had
become a working-class slum.
Eventually conditions became bad enough to
stir up an outcry, directed not just against the city
authorities but also against the whole develop¬
ment process that had created the slum. Property
speculation fell into ill repute and the concept of
the garden city was revived. The modern homes
of the 1920s were a reaction to the social misery
of the old, stone Berlin.
The aftermath of war
Almost a quarter of the city was destroyed during
the Second World War. Only ruins remained of
the streets in the neighbourhood of the ministry
buildings and the Ritterstrasse, where the arms
factories had been located. But the working-class
district, including Kreuzberg, between the River
Spree and the Landwehr Canal escaped relatively
unscathed.
Some years later, in 1961, the Cold War
resulted in the construction of the Berlin wall,
which split the city from north to south and cut
Kreuzberg off from the old city centre and tradi¬
tional leisure areas such as Treptow park, which
were situated in the eastern sector of the city.
Once a central district, Kreuzberg became
peripheral, a dead end.
Yet the damage caused by the war and the
Berlin wall pales into insignificance in compar¬
ison with that caused by redevelopment
programmes between the 1950s and the 1970s. An
urban planning competition held in 1957, billed
as Berlin, Capital City, launched the idea of a mas¬
sive motorway network. A four-lane ring road
was to serve the business centre, and expressways
with stacked interchanges replacing junctions
would separate residential islands from commer¬
cial areas.
The problem was that the existing urban
fabric stood in the way of this planner's dream.
For more than two decades entire streets were
expropriated and torn down. The buildings put
up in the 1960s and 1970s still bear witness to the
damage done. For those who had to suffer its
effects, urban renewal became synonymous with
destruction.
Kreuzberg's revolt
Kreuzberg's inhabitants were transferredwhole
neighbourhoods at a timeinto new apartment
blocks. But the apartments they vacated were
filled, even before they could be demolished, by
immigrant workers and by tenants driven from

Above, a Kreuzberg façade
decorated with ceramic
figures by the Turkish artist
Hanefl Yeter.
Below, mural on an
Admiralstrasse apartment
block, painted In 1985-1986.
their previous homes by development
programmes elsewhere in the city. The evictions
left thousands of apartments empty at a time
when some 80,000 people were urgently looking
for accommodation. Some of these people ended
up by occupying and refurbishing the empty
buildings, as the property companies that had
bought them up were no longer maintaining
them.
The squatter movement grew too fast for the
police to hold it in check. By May 1981 there
were 168 illegally-occupied buildings in Berlin,
86 of them in Kreuzberg. The new residents lived
with the threat of eviction and demolition
hanging permanently over their heads. But they
also had some popular backing. Demonstrations
in their support drew tens of thousands of people.
The politicians were thus confronted by the con¬
sequences of their own planning decisions.
In combination with increasing construction
costs and a reduction in housing subsidies,
popular resistance eventually paralysed the
renewal programme around 1978. Faced with
growing unrest and the indignation both of those
who upheld property rights and those who
attacked them, the municipal authorities decided
to try to get the city's development back on
course.
An international architectural exhibition held
in 1978, the Internationale Bauausstellung (IBA),
provided an opportunity for returning the city
centre to residential use. A company was founded
to rebuild on sites left derelict since the war. It
also led to the renovation of the district between
the Spree, the Landwehr Canal and the old
Luisenstadt Canal, in other words the very dis¬
trict that had sparked off the opposition to the
original redevelopment programme.
A fresh mistake
The city council outlined a plan of action: 1,600
new homes were to be built and 1,500 existing
ones restored at the heart of the Kreuzberg
redevelopment zone, on both sides of the Mari¬
annestrasse. More than 12,000 people and several
hundred businesses would be directly affected, as
their homes and workplaces would be expropri¬
ated and in 80 per cent of cases demolished. '
During the winter of 1979, Kreuzberg 35

36
residents complained that draughts and snow
were coming in through gaps in their roofs, doors
and windows. The buildings needed urgent
repairs but the authorities were not in a position
to carry them out and the property companies
wanted to put off work until the following year,
to the anger of the residents. At a public meeting,
the latter decided to give up their weekends to
restore four houses in Manteuffelstrasse that had
already been partially cleared of their occupants
and were awaiting demolition. The houses, which
are still standing today, are now the property of
the Instandebesetzung-the squatter-renovators,
organized into co-operatives.
For Kreuzberg residents, the experience of
working together in the cold and damp changed
many things. They were no longer prepared to
let themselves be evicted, and wanted to be
involved in all decision-making that affected their
neighbourhood. Their representatives drew up a
list of demands and complaints to be presented
at the IBA.
At first the authorities were hostile to their
pleas for participation. It was feared that the
redevelopment programme would become
bogged down in interminable discussions, or that
unreasonable demands would make its cost
excessive.
To soften their opposition, the residents drew
up, with the help of experts from Rotterdam,
Hamburg and Vienna, a list of guidelines for "rea¬
soned renewal". It was the action of the squatter-
renovators, though, that brought things to a head.
Although some Berliners considered them justi¬
fied in taking the law into their own hands, most
of them considered their action to be intolerable.
Together with a series of housing scandals, the
unresolved problem of urban renewal led to the
fall of the government a year before elections
were due. Now at last it became imperative to
find realistic solutions.
It was not until March 1983, however, that
the residents' guidelines finally received official
approval. They specified that plans for redevelop¬
ment should be drawn up in consultation with
the people directly affected by them, and that
their views should be taken into account when
any decision was made. The inhabitants of a
building were to have a right to vote before any
work was done on it. Disagreements could be
taken to a redevelopment commission or a neigh¬
bourhood committee.
Although this programme has not yet been
formally accepted by the authorities, it has
proved its worth on many occasions. In any case,
critics have been silenced by the results achieved.
Far from slowing things down, the assent of those
concerned, for instance in matters affecting home
maintenance or temporary removal while repairs
are carried out, has actually made for faster
progress. As for the cost of the operation, the
adaptation of renewal measures to the wishes and
pockets of the residents has saved money, both
by reducing construction costs and avoiding rent
increasesand consequently rent allowances. It
has been estimated that, partly as a result of the
consensus approach, the redevelopment has cost
about 58 per cent less in public subsidies than the
1978 programme would have done.
The 1978 plan has in fact been profoundly
altered. Only 360 new dwellings have been built
in place of the 1,600 originally specified, but
7,000, not 1,500, have been restored. Ten schools
are to be expanded and improved, and 24 creches
will be provided to receive 1,640 children. The
courtyards of 320 buildings have been turned into
small parks orwith the approval of the
residentsinto private gardens. Streets and
squares have been landscaped in over 170 places,
and many facilities have been provided for cul¬
ture, sport and young people.
There is still squalor in Kreuzberg, but
working with the victims of that squalor has
provided 7,360 decent rented properties and has
improved schools, creches and the general
environment. The demolition has been stopped,
and living conditions have become more bearable.
Everyone involved now knows that it is possible
save a cityeven when it has been largely
destroyed.
A children's farm beside the Berlin wall, Kreuzberg district.
4>1
X 1
W
vr
r t
ra
Ä;
