THE FIASCO OF PARADISE
BY GILLES LAPOUGE
SOME people think that when God drove Adam
and Eve out of the Garden of Eden He was
warning Utopians that the ideal society is not
something for this world but for the next.
Certainly the fiasco of Paradise, had human
beings only learnt a lesson from it, could have
saved us from many disappointments. We should
never have had to put up with those radiant

societies that lapse inevitably into despotism,
mania, torture and genocide, or with those com¬
munities which promise to deliver the world
from evil and actually do the opposite.
The Bible's advice unfortunately fell on deaf
ears. For as long as people have been capable of
thought, Utopians have peered into their crystal
balls, scribbled down grandiose schemes, and
sketched out never-never lands.
They told themselves that the Garden of
Eden was pleasant, and full of good intentions,
but a bit sloppy, very muddled, and perhaps (of
all things) even anarchic. So they produced more
modern, more cruel, and better-organized models
of Paradise. Utopians are suspicious of every¬
body. They are disciplinarians who like their
cities to be correctly laid out, prefer calculation
to love, evict tramps and dreamers, execute
deviants, and do away with the family, individual
destiny and Old Father Time.
So they produce assembly-line people, aseptic
and uniform. They put their charming societies
into straitjackets and clap freedom in irons. They
do away with controversy and destroy the
pathogens of evil. Too bad if people die, or live
in slavery. Utopian skies, which should be blue,
are actually black.



Hippodamus and Plato:
the demon of geometry
Five centuries before Christ, Hippodamus of
Miletus lived in Ionia, a blessed land on the
Aegean coast of Asia Minor which brought the
Greek genius to its apogee. There, between sea
and sky, an elegant civilization blossomed,
carefree and gay. Unfortunately from the other
side of the Taurus Mountains the armies of
Darius, King of Persia, cast covetous eyes on the
smiling coast. The Ionians led a revolt, and set
Expulsion from the Garden of
Eden, oil on canvas by the
American Romantic landscape
painter Thomas Cole
(1801-1848).
17

18
fire to Sardis. Darius flew into a rage and
unleashed his troops on Ionia; and in 494 BC the
town of Miletus, between Halicarnassus and
Ephesus, was stormed and sacked.
Hippodamus the architect was very pleased.
Here was a chance in a million to build a city
from scratch, rather as Oscar Niemeyer in the
twentieth century would build Brasilia on a site
untrammelled with any historical associations.
"Hippodamus," says Aristotle in his Politics,
"invented the geometric grid plan for towns. He
designed a city of 10,000 inhabitants sub-divided
into three categories, craftsmen, farmers and
militiamen."
Let us remember the grid plan, a design that
marks Hippodamus out as the earliest known
Utopian. The Milesian architect wished to con-
finenature within straight lines and virtually
abolish it, forging a mould that would produce
a clean, tidy, egalitarian, public-spirited, rational
society.
Plato went further than Hippodamus. In the
Laws he describes a blissfully happy society, and
in the Republic he explains how it works.
The city centre is dominated by an acropolis,
from which twelve spokes radiate so as to divide
the city into twelve sections. The streets are
straight, the squares circular, and all the houses
alike. This is a far cry from Athens, the real



Athens, which is a network of delightful, dirty,
winding streets. The city in the Laws, like Hip-
podamus's, is geometrical: it is a beehive, the cells
of which are occupied by people. There are few
amusementsmusic and dancingand all inno¬
vations are prohibited. Poetsdirty, unpredic¬
table dreamersare banished. People eat in
canteens. Statistics are impeccably kept: in the
city of the Laws there are no individuals, only
Left, oil on canvas by the
American artist John Martin.
Below, illustration from a
15th-century edition of The
City of God by Saint
Augustine (354-430).
citizens. Idlers, dreamers, tramps and bachelors
are outlawed.
This mathematical city works like a com¬
puter, without mistakes or breakdowns. The idea
is to cram the soul into the pattern of the city
and the city into the pattern of the cosmos ("the
well-organized"). Plato wants to protect society
from the disastrous whims of "sublunar nature"
and the bloody horrors of history.
Plato's society was divided into three layers:
at the top were the philosophers, who kept the
state together and took the decisions. (Being
immune from unexpected circumstances and the
caprices of history, the ideal city should have no
need of a strong government. In the more
extreme utopias that came later, government
withers away: the city alters itself, unfailingly
reproducing the same movements. The cosmos
needs no rudder; it spins of its own accord, and
never goes off the rails.)
Plato, however, kept a government. The
philosophers who constituted it were assisted by
guardians or watchdogs, who needed to be both
"irascible and also philosophical". They in turn
were in charge of the third category, viz. the


workers and peasants. The guardians were fierce
because the workers were uneducated people
with "covetous souls" who only did stupid
things. These mindless people even allowed them¬
selves the luxury of having instincts and feelings,
loving their neighbours' wives, adoring their chil¬
dren and grieving when their mothers diedin
short, of harbouring a multitude of germs which
Plato, the skilled physician, set out to kill. Plato
was an obsessional disinfecter: he wanted an open
society of passionless citizens devoid of memory
and imaginationa dreary collection of "people
without attributes".


The abolition of the family
The philosophers who govern the city in Plato's
Laws are indefatigable. They are on the lookout
for trouble night and day. They strike at the first
hint that any feeling, desire or softness is creeping
into the crystal city. Everything "organic" is to
be organized out of existence.
Hence the family is one of their favourite
targets. For Utopians the family spells disaster,
trauma and calamity, for it contains within itself
the seeds of everything primitive, dark, instinc¬
tive and "organic". The state could of course
Roman mosaic depicting Plato
teaching his followers.
GILLES LAPOUGE,
French writer and journalist,
has published several novels,
including Les pirates (Phébus,
Paris, 1987), travel books such
as Equinoxiales (Flammarion,
Paris, 1977) and two essays
on utopia, Utopies et
civilisations and Le singe de la
montre (Flammarion, Paris,
1982).
negotiate with the family, or put it in a strait-
jacket. Many despotic states did this later on but
they all came to grief on the rock of the family.
More shrewdly, Plato opted for a radical solution:
realizing that the family would always be an
obstacle to a dictatorial state, he abolished it.
Children are taken from the bosoms of their
families and returned to the state. No more
mothers, fathers, sisters or cousinsand good rid¬
dance! The family expands to the size of the city,
and is thus dissolved.
Destroying the family in this way is both log¬
ical and insane. Logical, because a mathematical
society cannot tolerate the untidiness of the
family, its warmth and intimacy, its demands, and
its murky depths. Insane because the family is
intractable. It resists and will always resist attacks
on it from the state.
It may seem odd that mammals are not good
at setting up rational societies. Even beavers are
anarchists, rogues and eccentrics by comparison
with ants or bees. Mammals are politically inept
because the familya husband's link with his
wife, a mother's with her childrenstands up to
all acts of violence by the state.
This is where social insects excel. In beehives
and anthills the young are taken over by the state, 19

20
so there can be no bond of affection or sentiment
between parents and their offspring. Heedless of
the passage of time, immobile and submissive,
contemptuous of individual liberties, blindly
obeying pre-programmed instructions, an anthill
fulfils the irrational dream of absolute reason. The
mistake made by Plato and all the Utopians who
followed in his footsteps was to suppose that man
is a political animal. He is not, but ants are. Plato
was a philosopher for bees and termites.



The diktat of the clock
Plato's designs were never implemented. The
philosopher's advice was rejected by Dionysius
the Elder, the tyrant of Syracusehimself no sen¬
timentalist. Nevertheless the philosophical exer¬
cise initiated by Plato was to beget many
offspring, including Thomas More, Etienne Cabet
and Robert Owen.
Even in Antiquity other thinkers constructed
ideal cities. The Stoic Iambulus has left us a
description of seven "happy isles", but they are
not attractive. Anyone stranded on one of these
islands would have wanted only to get away. The
islanders were divided into groups of 400. Procre¬
ation and education were state-controlled, with
the aim of making all the children physically
equal. The citizens were all alike and could not
be told apart. Intellectual and mental equality was
engineered by means of monotonous working
shifts continually repeated.
Historians of utopia tend to neglect the
Middle Ages, which is not right, for that obscure
period produced two very important Utopian fea¬
tures, convents and clocks.
Convents, abbeys and monasteries were oases
of peace and quiet in a stormy world, harmonious
settled communities that would have delighted
Plato. There were no families, nor even
individuals. Monks and nuns did not even use
their own names. The rule of St. Benedict was
so strict and all-embracing that abbots and
mothers superior had nothing to supervise but
stillness and the meticulous, contented repetition
of the same rituals. This was a glowing success
one of the few successes of utopia. But it becomes
less impressive when one realizes that the splen¬
dours of monastic architecture belong to eternity
rather than history.
Clocks came into being, by chance, in a con¬
vent, that is in a Utopian environment. The
mechanism of this magnificent invention-
unchanging, inhuman and implacable, incapable
of error, free from whims or inconsistencies, and
immune from the constraints of history, . is
reminiscent of a perfect society. It is because they
are timeless that clocks can show the time.
Plato's utopia was based on a model, the
cosmos, and drew its inspiration secretly from
another model, the anthill. Post-Renaissance Uto¬
pians in their dozens used another model to feed
their rational hallucinations: the watch.

