by Jean d'Ormesson
Commercial and technological pressures are turning modem sport into a ruthlessly competitive industry
34
iJLT first sight games, sport and play seem so
similar as to be indistinguishable. People play
tennis, rugby and baseball. The loftiest expres¬
sion of competition in sport bears an illustrious
centuries-old name: the Olympic Games. Play is
a form of sport, and sport is a kind of play. But
on closer inspection the illusion of identity
between play and sport is soon shattered. Far
from being similar, they start to look like oppo-
sites. Play has something spontaneous and unor¬
ganized about it, whereas sport is governed by
rules. It is true that a game such as chess is also
codified by very strict rules; and that, conversely,
a sport such as walking has very few. The matter
becomes confusing. As so often, looking closely
at apparently simple, obvious ideas (which in fact
conceal a lurking element of linguistics and
philosophy) leads to mental confusion. But let us
try to be clear.
Play is so ancient that its origins are lost in
the earliest history of mankind. And it goes even
further back. Monkeys, cats, dolphinsmost
animals and their young ones play. Nobody is
going to maintain that animals engage in sports,
but it is obvious that they play. In a well-known
French ñ\m,.La Guerre du feu, we witness the
birth of laughter and speech in our most remote
forebears. Even in those distant times play
occupied an important place. Ontogeny repeats
phylogeny: i.e. the development of the individual
passes through the same stages as the development
of the species. From their earliest years children
play, alone or in groups, with things or with their
hands, without ever having had a single lesson.
They are not thinking of taking part in a sport,
developing their physique, competing with
others, or breaking records: but they play. People
in all cultures, latitudes and periods, however
serious their preoccupations and duties, will go
on playingtill their dying day. Indeed, it may be
that the loftier their functions the more important
play is for them. A head of state with his guard
of honour, his protocol and his personal style
perhaps does more playing than a tramp does.
All the world's a game,
with obscure rules
The multifarious activities we call play, appar¬
ently so simple yet actually so complex, have
interested philosophers, historians, psychologists,
sociologists and ethnologists. They have a bearing
on religion, war, science, technology, culture and
art. The whole world ends up looking rather like
a great big game, with obscure rules involving
every one of us.
Play is ubiquitous; and in one form or
another has probably been a feature of every suc¬
cessive civilization. Bull-running, still a feature of
Spanish culture, was practised in ancient Crete.
The ball games of the Aztecs, played on holy
pitches called tlatchi, combined the blood of their
defeated enemies and a highly-developed religious
symbolism. The famous buzkashi of the Afghans,
a kind of polo played with the carcass of a goat,
has inspired novels in many languages. Basque
pelota, Moroccan fantasia, Japanese martial arts,
aquatic processions such as those on the Grand
Canal at Venice, the famous palio at Siena, the
Carnival of Giants in Belgium and northern
Franceall these and many more are popular
regional manifestations of universal play.
UNESCO set out recently to preserve and make
known these valuable and varied features of
national identity. Like so many monuments in
Greece, Italy, Cambodia, India, China, Mexico
and elsewhere, they too are part of mankind's
cultural heritage.
Again, we cannot help being struck by the
enormous variety of games. Among the old
Above, javelin thrower
painted on a Greek drinking
cup (5th century BC).
Opposite page, a Chinese
gymnast at an international
tournament held at Corbeil
(France) in 1989.

traditional types, some have to do with religion,
others with the collective memory, social dissent
and violence. Others again are obviously the fore¬
runners of sport. These are all group games,
imbued with history, religion and culture. But
then there are all the innumerable children's
games, card games, games of chance, chess, cha¬
rades, word games and helter-skelter. It is enough
to make one's head go round. To introduce a little
order into this medley, Roger Caillois, a French
sociologist who for many years held a post at
UNESCO, suggested a classification of games.
From competition to vertigo
Building on the foundations laid by Johan
Huizinga, Rector of the University of Leyden
between the wars and author of a seminal book
about games, Homo Ludens, published in 1938,

Caillois divided games into four main categories:
agon (the Greek word meaning competition); alea
(the Latin word for chance); mimicry; and ilinx
or vertigo. These main categories, according to
Caillois, were influenced to a greater or lesser
degree either by what Caillois called paidia (from
the Greek for childhood) or by what he called
ludus (Latin for play), that is, either by the
elemental force of improvisation and exhilaration
or by a taste for gratuitous regulated difficulty.
Sport obviously comes under the heading of
ludus (gratuitous regulation) rather than oípaidia
AGON ALEA
(competition) (chance)
MIMICRY ILINX
(vertigo)
PAIDIA
noise races
agitation wrestling
laughter etc.
nursery childish roundabouts
rhymes imitations swings
heads or tails
36
kites boxing betting
patience fencing roulette
crosswords football lottery
draughts
chess
LUDUS
(uncoordinated movement). Imitation plays little
part in sport: and chance certainly needs to be
kept out of it. Sport has a lot to do with vertigo,
and even more with competition: the ancient
Greeks taught us in the Olympic games that sport
is primarily competition, regulated as strictly as
possible.
Sport is born of play, in its infinite variety.
It satisfies the body's urge to surpass others, and
itself. Baron Pierre de Coubertin, who revived
the Olympic Games of ancient Greece, defined
it as going faster, further, higher and harder. It
is human to want to transcend others (and one¬
self) but in accordance with arbitrary rules. Thus
sport is a form of play, and also a peaceful imita¬
tion of war, and a set of moral standards into the
bargain.
Money invades sport
What is now happening is that under the
threefold influence of money, technology and
advertising, sport is being taken over by increas¬
ingly harsh and exclusive competition. Tech¬
nology is becoming more and more important
in what was once a matter of emulation between
amateurs. Money invaded sport in a big way some
years ago. Television, whilst helping to propagate
Right, buzkashl, a traditional
Afghan game played on
horseback.
Below, a football crowd In
Milan (Italy).
dressing up fairground
acting attractions
skiing
mountaineering I

and popularize sport, also serves to arouse pas¬
sions and turn games into shows. The chauvinism
involved in some football matches and tennis
tournaments, plus the atmosphere of violence sur¬
rounding some sporting occasions, means that
sport is no longer a game but a feverish ultra¬
modern industryand an industry dominated by
ruthless competition often involving huge finan¬
cial interests. When Baron de Coubertin revived
the Olympic Games, he naturally put the stress
on emulation, but he emphasized that what
matters is not winning but taking partthus
keeping them as games. Nowadays this aspect is
fast disappearing under the impact of big money,
the influence of advertising and the ruthless use
of high technology to defeat one's opponent.
Following the American historian and sociol¬
ogist E. Weber, who has carried out research into
traditional forms of play, Pierre Parlebas has
pointed out that with the advent of modern sport
traditional games have gradually disappeared. To
put it another way, the higher the stakes the less
important the game. The spontaneous and joyful
effervescence that Caillois called paidia is losing
ground to ludus, a system of arbitrary albeit con¬
stricting rules. Competition, which in games con¬
sisted of excelling oneself, now consists of setting
records and beating a rival who is often ridiculed
and even hated. The high stakes in modern sport
banish the fraternal and disinterested delight in
the game.
Sport is a fundamental activity in the modern
world, casting its spell over its many participants
and spectators. We must not allow it to be
swamped by money, debased by violence, or
cause hostility between nations, regions, cities and
clubs. It must remain exhilarating, pure, young
and dignified. It must become play once more.
UNESCO has done much, particularly in the
context of the World Decade for Cultural
Development (1988-1998), to propagate and
preserve traditional games. With active help from
the Intergovernmental Committee for Physical
Education and Sport and the International Fund
for the Development of Physical Education and
Sport (see page 38), it has also turned its atten¬
tion to the problems of sport that receives a very
high degree of media coverage and faces the threat
of violence. UNESCO has, for instance, stressed
the notion of fair play, the spirit of generosity
and impartiality in games played for their own
sake rather than to win. Instead of violence, the
appeal of financial gain at all costs, and
dehumanized technology, this means going back
to the idea of pleasure which is disappearing in the
harsh world of high technology, and to an ethic
in which an opponent is a human being to be
respected rather than an obstacle to be flattened. 37

A pelota player depicted In a
frieze from the ancient Maya
city of Chlchen Itza, Mexico.
38
JEAN D'ORMESSON,
French writer, is Secretary-
General of the International
Council for Philosophy and
Humanistic Studies and Editor
of the international journal of
human sciences, Diogenes. A
member of the French
Academy since 1973, he is the
author of many essays and
novels, a number of which
have been published in
English, including The Glory of
the Empire (New York, 1974)
and At God's Pleasure (New
York, 1977).
Sport must continue to combine enthusiasm and
regulation, exhilaration and effort, pleasure and
moral standards. It must remain a game in which
emulation is essentially a mark of harmony and
complicity.
Obviously not all games are sports. Poker,
the theatre, roulette, crossword puzzles and pun¬
ning hardly fall within the category. But all sports
must remain gamesgames calling for effort, per¬
sistence and courage, sometimes for heroism. The
great thing about sport is that physical pleasure
is transmogrified into moral standards. In a
freedom that accepts constraints, it makes rules
for itself in order the better to surpass itself. Vio¬
lence, cheating, self-interest and hatred are off¬
side. Sport is a matter of struggling, emulating,
competing and surpassing. It must also above all
be a matter of friendship, happiness and coming
to terms with oneself and othersfor it is above
all a game. Adultslike the children they once
wereshould play only to be happy. People only
ever play with their own kind. Sport, like play,
is a fraternity.
