¿j
- -
--».
»_ . . .
Tk roa ¿oí o
by Caroline Haardt
38
U^or¿s in italics are explained
in box on page 41



JLAMED for its thousands of prehistoric rock
paintings and engravings, Tassili N'Ajjer is
also one of the last bastions of the Tuareg
Berber pastoralists. A 1,200-metre-high plateau
shaded by cypress trees, some of which are
over a thousand years old, it rises from the
desert like a gigantic natural fortress. Its
natural and archaeological wonders are spread
over a vast areathe Tassili National Park
covers more than 80,000 square kilometres.
The first thing you notice about the high
plateau is the extraordinary verticality of the
landscape. Then, once you have got over your
initial surprise, your attention is captured by
the odd contours of the place. Curiously
eroded sandstone blocks, vertiginous canyons
and rock columns 20 to 30 metres high all bear
witness to an eventful geological past. It is
these remarkable rocks, some as massive as
buildings, others as delicate as wax tapers, that
give the region what one historian, F. Soleil-
havoup, has described as "the look of another
planet, unique, mysterious, sometimes
unnerving".
Human activity, changes in climate and
the wear and tear of time have all played a part
in radically altering the heart of Africa. It is
less than 4,000 years since the Sahara became
a desert. The valleys, canyons and stacks worn
away by erosion are the last vestiges of an
earlier, humid time. The fossil record even
indicates that, several hundred million years

A "forest of stone", Tassili N'Ajjer.
ago, the area formed part of the vast Silurian
sea.
Then wind took over from water, shaping
and polishing the rocks like a sculptor. What
vegetation now survives the rigours of the
desert climate does so thanks to the gueltas and
wadis. Here the tarout, the ancient cypress
unique to the Sahara, still adds a touch of
green. Olive and myrtle, lavender and
oleander, call to mind the softness of the
Mediterranean climate. Along the Iherir and
Edarène wadis, luxuriant reed-beds have sur¬
vived. Other plants such as the date palm and
the acacia play a primordial role in the Tas¬
sili ecosystem.
We are accustomed to think of the desert
as a hostile, lifeless place, so the ways in which
the surviving animal and plant species have
adapted to it seem all the more marvellous.
Most of the mammals, including the mouflon
and the gazelles, have sand-coloured coats, the
better to resist the heat and camouflage them¬
selves in its vastness. In even the most arid
UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
areas rodents and reptiles survive. There are
fish in the gueltas, which also serve as staging
posts for birds migrating southwards towards
black Africa.
An open-air museum
The Tassili National Park is also one of the
world's finest open-air museums of prehistory.
The Neolithic civilization of the Sahara was
closely linked to the prevailing geological and
ecological conditions. Once the desert started
to advance, the people gradually lost much of
their nomadic character.
The region's rock paintings illustrate the
animals that were crucial to the survival of the



inhabitants of Tassili at different periods in
their history. It is possible to distinguish four
separate eras via the prevailing fauna, though
historians have not established a unanimously
accepted chronology for them.
The first is that of the bubal or great
buffalo, which is depicted in rock art from
about 7000 to 4000 BC. Elephants,
rhinoceroses and various savannah antelopes
are all typical of this period. Oxen appear
around 4000 BC. They are depicted without
humps, and with hprns that are short or splen¬
didly lyre-like. After 1500 BC horses make
their appearance, and finally, around 1500 AD,
camels. About this time the first written
characters in the Tuareg tifmagh script can also
be observed.
Three main styles
There are three principal modes in Tassili's
rock art. Size and symbolism are characteristic
of the first, archaic manner. The animals are
gigantic and are often represented in isolation;
only magic seems to have been capable of
coping with their terrible force. Simply drawn
in the bubal style, they are depicted with an
acute sense of observation. Along Wadi Djerat
4,000 separate figures have been itemized. One
bestiary stretching over 120 square metres fea¬
tures giraffes 8 metres high: it is the largest
complex of prehistoric engravings in the
world.
The appearance of antelopes and mouflons
marks the start of a second sub-period within
the archaic style. The beasts are more often
painted than engraved, and they are pursued
by hunters with round heads. One can sense
the presence of totem animals, masked men
and ritual dances. As well as single figures,
groups are depicted in frescoes whose splen¬
dours can be admired at Iharen or Séfar.
The second style, best typified at the Jab-
baren site, is naturalistic. The images are
Round-headed figure (Séfar).
39


smaller and more brightly coloured, reflecting
a more sedentary lifestyle. Humankind is now
in charge, dominating the surrounding
animals.
The final mode is schematic or even
abstract. The engravings are less finely
executed, but the paintings are more elegant
and skilful. There are wonderfully stylized
horses, chariots andlaterdromedaries. The
use of a wash technique allows for delicate por¬
trayals such as the tender scene at Iharen in
which a young antelope is shown being
suckled by its mother.
The sites


Where are these works of rock art? Hardly
any of them are to be found in the so-called
"forests of stone". The strangest paintings are
in the heart of the "towns" of Tassili, such
as Séfar and Jabbaren. F. Soleilhavoup has even
suggested that there may have been a sanctuary
where rituals were practised by Neolithic men
in the archaic period.
The naturalistic works on the other hand,
showing everyday scenes from the life of the
shepherds and their flocks, are most often situ¬
ated in isolated spots outside the towns, while
the third, schematic style is best represented
on standing stones in the regs, or stony deserts,
where late works depicting camels point to the
degeneration of rock art.
The wall paintings of Tassili provide
glimpses of a whole society, its everyday life
and the animals that were essential to it. The
works indicate that a revolution took place
in the region sometime in the Neolithic
period, linked to the change from a hunter-
gatherer lifestyle to one based on agriculture.
Nevertheless, many mysteries still remain.
Among them are:
The techniques used in rock art. The
engravings generally seem to predate the
paintings, yet at Tissoukai the existence of
carved sketches suggests that the stone may
have been engraved before the paintings were
executed. Sculpture is rare in Tassili; the only
examples are miniatures like the resting
ruminant at Wadi Amazzar.
The lack ofhomogeneity within each style.
The archaic manner, for instance, is very
diverse. There is nothing to link the bull at
Séfar with the masked figures also depicted
there.
The secret world of magic and religion.
What do the two-headed bulls at Wadi Djerat
signify? What is the meaning of the magnifi¬
cent spiral engraved on the great buffalo at the
same site? Is it a symbol of the continuity of
life? Or did it form part of a spell cast on the
40 animal, as in hunting rites elsewhere?
Three fine examples
of Tassili rock art.
From top:
deer; an archer; animal in the bubal style.
Problems ofdating. It was once thought that
the Neolithic civilization of the Sahara was
later than those of North Africa, Egypt and
the Middle East. Now scholars tend to believe
the opposite, maintaining that the Saharan cul¬
ture was independent of and even earlier than
the artistic flowering of Egypt. André Malraux
considered the zoomorphic heads of Wadi
Djerat to be "préfigurations of Egyptian zool-
atry". If this is the case, Saharan representa¬
tions of cattle with discs between their horns
may be earlier than Egyptian images of the
cow-goddess Hathor. As for the war-chariots
of Tassili and Fezzan, their origins are still
swathed in mystery.
The spectacle of this rock art, executed by
generations of Tuareg and handed down
almost intact to the present day, arouses strong
emotions in the viewer. Despite their image
as "lords of the desert", warriors living in a
hierarchical society, the Tuareg were in fact
primarily herdsmen. According to one
historian, J.D. Clark, they appeared less than
5,000 years ago, and led their flocks through
the Sahara until the time when increasing
desiccation drove them out.
Of all African peoples, it was the Tuareg,
together with the Peul and the Masai, who
remained most strongly committed to the
pastoral life, which they refused to combine
with arable farming. They also tamed and
herded the biggest flocks. The sparse Tuareg
population commuted seasonally between the
desert regions of the Sahara and the high
plateaux, the Hoggar and Tibesti as well as
Tassili. Pastoral skills were passed on from
father to son. The herders learned how to find
their bearings in the desert, how to read the
stars and recognize plants.
Now a growing population and changing
ways have created new pressures. Djanet, with
between 5,000 and 6,000 inhabitants, Illizi and
other centres have become the focus of a rela¬
tively sedentary lifestyle that the former
nomads do not always handle well.
Knowledge of skills is no longer being trans¬
mitted from generation to generation. And on
top of these problems, the arrival of tourists
has forced the Tuareg to come to terms with
a radical change in their way of life.
Why the heritage is in danger
The cliff walls themselves are at risk. Exposed
to the desert winds and eroding particles of
sand, they are showing signs of age. As the
sandstone base starts to break up, rock
crumbles, paintings lose their colour and
engravings the sharpness of their line. The
ageing of the rock is also leading to flaking,
discolouration, encrustation, Assuring,
blotching, and the growth of lichens. Other
problems include oxydization and rainwater
run-off on the walls themselves, and the
damage caused by nests of flies.
Now, however, a new danger has been
added to the wear and tear of time. The Sahara
has become fashionable, and anarchic forms
of tourism are developing, bringing in their
wake a host of threats to Tassili's natural and
cultural environment. Vandalism is one
problemsome supposed lovers of the past do
not scruple to break off pieces of rock as sou¬
venirs. One person was arrested at Djanet air¬
port with more than 800 archaeological
specimens. Paintings and engravings are
harshly treated. Photographers have been
known to scratch or dampen the rock to bring
out line or colour, or even to touch up the
images. Sometimes graffiti are added as a joke.
The pristine desert is being polluted.
Camps have no lavatories, rubbish is left
behind, scant water resources are abused,
gueltas are fouled. The natural pastures of Tas¬
sili, used for grazing since the Neolithic era,
are today menaced by the gathering of fuel for
cooking and by the comings and goings of
vehicles off the recognized trails. It is hard to
judge how much damage is being done by
unauthorized hunting, but certainly there is
a great demand for mouflon and gazelle, as
well as for the flesh of some reptiles.

UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
What can be done
to preserve Tassili?
The idea is to preserve the heritage while also
opening it up to visitors in a way that will not
threaten its natural and cultural riches. For
some years now, UNESCO has been working
with the Algerian government and, locally,
with the Tassili National Park authorities to



promote acceptable forms of tourism. The
accent is on stricter supervision of the park
and on the training of guides.
Yet some local agencies seem completely
unaware of the importance of Tassili's
inheritance. Instead of protecting it, they drum
up business by promising to take clients to off-
limits sites and encouraging them to swim in
the watercourses, and even to take away rock
fragments as souvenirs. Sometimes they fail
to bury the rubbish from their camps; and
they permit long evenings round the camp-
fire when it is vital to economize on firewood.
These unscrupulous operators should not be
allowed to cash in on the attraction of
unspoiled sites, and clandestine archaeological
excavations should be discouraged.
The preservation of the cultural heritage
will require clearly thought-out conservation
and security measures. All the rock art will
need to be inventoried, and a guttering system
will have to be installed to protect the works
from rainwater run-off. Sand barriers will have
to be constructed to ensure that visitors keep
their distance.
Various ways of preserving the paintings
and engravings are being tested. Since 1982
UNESCO has operated a solar-powered
laboratory in the area and is working on
samples from the worst-affected sites. The
International Centre for Conservation
(ICCROM) is experimenting with the appli¬
cation of silicone to preserve the paintings.
Another crucial problem is that of con¬
serving Tassili's extraordinary natural environ¬
ment. As part of a solution, tourists must be
persuaded not to pollute the desert. Clear
instructions must be given about the gathering
of wood, and visitors must be made to under¬
stand that the maintenance of water resources
is crucial to the ecosystem.
The Tuareg will need help to adjust to the
new conditions. A pilot scheme that could
serve as a model has already been set up at
Ihérir, a magnificent site that has been at risk
since it was opened up to visitors by the
Djanet-Illisi road. The local people are being
encouraged to develop their crafts, diversify
their occupations, improve livestock raising,
and above all to protect and develop the
existing watercourses. Housing also affects the
quality of life, and a special effort will have
to be made to ensure that new buildings fit
in with the local architecture and conform to
the aesthetic imperatives of this exceptional
region.
CAROLINE HAARDT, French journalist, was a staff
member of UNESCO's Division of Cultural
Heritage from 1983 to 1987. She is currently
preparing an exhibition as part of the UNESCO Silk
Roads project on the Croisière Jaune, a motor rally
from Beirut to Tibet held in 1931-1932.
A guelta in Tassili.
