A GOLDEN AGE
BY ANANDA W.P. GURUGE
BUDDHIST texts speak of an ideal golden age in
the distant past, when prevailing standards of
moral propriety precluded the need for kings and
government or even private property, boundary
marks or fences. Then deceit and theft brought
a gradual degradation and led to the need for all
these institutions. A king, the Great Chosen One,
was democratically elected. This, in a nutshell,
is an explanation of how contemporary society
and its institutions came into existence.
Buddhist writings contain no Utopian remedy
for a return to the lost golden age, but they do give
plenty of advice about how to improve society,
especially in the form of ethical principles. An
ideal king must possess ten qualities: generosity,
moral conduct, sacrifice, honesty, gentleness,
asceticism, the. capacity to refrain from anger,
non-violence, forbearance and non-oppression.
A community should guarantee its stability
by assembling for consultation in harmony, trans¬
acting its business in harmony, and dispersing in
harmony. It should not introduce revolutionary
laws or break away from established conventions.
Elders should be honoured and obeyed. Women
should be respected and safeguarded. Spiritual
obligations should be performed and free access
and facilities to saints and holy persons should
be allowed.
An individual gained merit not only by per¬
forming religious observances but by rendering
services to fellow-beings, such as providing them
with roads and water, shady trees and rest-houses,
medicine and food. The old and the very young
were also to be protected.
Buddha did not confine himself to the
promulgation of an ideal social order. He actu¬
ally experimented with one. The community of
Buddhist monks, the sangha, was an institution
whose members observed monastic vows which
enabled the Buddha's Utopian social values and
norms to be applied. Rules governing property
ownership emphasized the egalitarian structure
of the sangha. Every giftand originally gifts
were the only form of revenue as the members
of the sangha did not engage in economic
pursuitswas received collectively and held in
perpetuity in the name of the sangha. No one had
any private possessions. When a monk died or
left the sangha, his personal effects reverted to col¬
lective ownership and were redistributed to
others according to need.
Fortnightly meetings were held at which the
members of the sangha confessed and atoned for
any transgressions and collectively committed
themselves to observe the rules of conduct227
in the southern Buddhist tradition, 250 in the
Chinese tradition.
Because of its elaborate procedures and the
extremely demanding regulation of behaviour,
the sangha was a social model which only the
most highly motivated could adopt. Thus,
although it continues to exist and thrive after
more than twenty-five centuries (with some relax¬
ation in its original rules), the sangha was never
a model that could be applied to society at large.
Nevertheless, many of its elements were emulated
by later Hindu institutions such as the monastic
communities founded by Sankara, and the Arya
Samaj movement founded by Dayananda Saras-
vati in 1875.
But above all, a practical application of Budd¬
hist ethical principles can be seen in the extraor¬
dinary experiment carried out in the third
century BC by the Emperor Asoka, who deve¬
loped a humane socio-political system for the
governance of his empire, the largest ever to exist
in the Indian sub-continent.
Nearly 200 inscriptions have been discovered,
which reveal Asoka's twofold strategyon the
one hand of seeking to convince people through
admonition and on the other of issuing decrees
and orders. Preferring the first course to the
second, he used education to propagate his prin¬
ciples, appointed a cadre of officers who under¬
took regular tours of inspection, and inscribed
edicts and instructions on rocks and stone pillars.
Asoka's socio-political system operated suc¬
cessfully for at least two decades. But his empire
declined and was dismembered almost immedi¬
ately after his demise. Was this because its foun¬
dations were Utopian? This is a question which
historians have yet to answer.
Lion capital from a pillar
Inscribed with an edict of the
Emperor Asoka (3rd century
BC). It was found at Sarnath
(Uttar Pradesh), one of the
holy places of Buddhism.
ANANDA W.P. GURUGE
is Sri Lanka's ambassador to
France and permanent
delegate to Unesco, where he
is a member of the Executive
Board. A specialist In Asian
and Buddhist cultures, he has
published over twenty books in
Sinhala and English, including
The Society of the Ramayana
(1960). 25
