The social and historical ! 0/ C ? t MOC
ofcKKM/-- M M
T
THE periods between 711 and 1086 AD in the
Islamic territories of aI-AndaIus and between 1085
and 1370 in Christian Spain were golden ages of
social and cultural coexistence. What religious and
legal foundations were they based on ?
Judaism never defined a social status for other
religions, since until the Babylonian diaspora it
considered itself the only monotheistic faith.
Thereafter, when It lost its political independence,
its own social status became identified with that
of the Jewish people.
At first Christianity too had no status as an
independent social entity. Saint Paul directed
Christians to accept the Roman Empire, to pay
taxes to it, obey Its magistrates and observe its
Deta)) from a 12th-century
Andaluslan Qur'an.
laws, holding that the power it exercised was
God-given. It was only after the conversion of
Constantine's day, when Christianity became the
civic religion of the Empire, and the Empire was
Christianized by the Church, that the tolerance
early Christianity had shown was gradually
eroded.
In the Middle Ages, Christians came to con-
sider Jews as deniers of the faith because they had
refused to regard Jesus of Nazareth as the
promised Messiah, and as deicides insofar as they
were held collectively responsible for his death.
As for Islam, medieval Christians at first consi-
dered it a fraud and its prophet, Muhammad, an
impostor. This view was only gradually modified
as a result of cultural coexistence on the Iberian
peninsula.
Islam, on the other hand, took as a starting-
point the fundamental unity of the Faith, as
revealed to the first man, reiterated by all the
prophets, and socially codified by divine mes-
sengers, notably by Moses in the 7b for the
Jews and by Jesus in the Gospels for Christians.
Muhammad was then sent in his turn because
these religious laws had become distorted and
were incomplete. For Muslims, Muhammad is the
final messenger, the seal set on the work of the
prophets, and the Qur'an is the true and defini-
tive revelation of the Faith.
Muslims consequently considered Jews and
Christians as People of the Book (Ahl al-Kitab),
whose incomplete systems of belief nonetheless
allowed them to know and venerate God, to
understand and obey His commandments, and to
merit eternal salvation.
People of the pact
Following the principles spelled out in the
Qur'an, Islam gave full recognition to only one
social grouping, the « K77M, the community of the
faithful, whose members are theoretically equal.
20

The apothecary,
a mural of glazed and pain
ti) es (azufe/os) executed at
Seville around 1900.
But the faith expanded into lands that were
socially highly organized and inhabited largely
by Christians and Zoroastrians, with Jewish and
Buddhist minorities. AI-AndaIus, with Its
Mozarabs and Jews, was one of these lands. All
those who possessed a revealed Book and who
agreed to a position of subordination by signing a
pact became " tributaries ". There was no legal
problem where Christians and Jews were con-
cerned. Zoroastrians, initially at least, were granted
a similar status, even though they were not con-
sidered to have a revealed Book.
Legally speaking, the tributaries did not
belong to the umma, but enjoyed protected status
as dhimmis or " people of the pact", and were
implicitly treated as the members of another
society, which did not exist in political terms but
whose religious structure assumed responsibility
for administering the tolerated social rights.
The relationship between the umma and the
ahl al-Kitab was based on the concept of a pact
which could be either expressed or tacit. In the
Christian context, the parties to the pact were,
on the one hand, the Christian nobility and
bishops, and on the other the caliph. The accord
held good not just for the Umayyad rulers of al-
Andalus but also for those of the taifas, the petty
kingdoms that flourished after the collapse of the
caliphate.
When, from the ninth century on, the Chris-
tian kingdoms of the Iberian peninsula began to
englobe sizeable Jewish and Islamic
communities-the latter of which were known
as M<e/7'M-the Christian kings took up the
Islamic policy of offering protected status. As the
incarnation of the link between the different com-
munities, the kings of Castile and Leon even
assumed, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
the title of " Lord of the Three Religions ".
A unique social fabric
The way In which medieval Islamic society was
organized does not easily lend itself to forms of
class analysis practised by modern social science.
In any case, the cohabitation of Muslims with
dhimmis (Mozarabs and Jews) took different
forms in the different social strata within each
community, and the relationships that were estab-
lished did not always exactly coincide with those
prescribed by law.
Social cohabitation and cultural coexistence
worked to the advantage of the Islamic
aristocracy, the khassa, which consisted of the
ruling family and the upper ranks of the military
and civil authorities, and of the freedmen and
clients of the monarch. The notables of Islamic
society (a'yan)-men of learning, successful
craftsmen, merchants and great land-owners-also
benefited from the arrangement. The masses, on
the other hand, found it hard to live alongside
Mozarabs and Jews.
Among the Mozarabs, those who had the
closest cultural connections with Muslims were
the nobility ; a class composed of the descendants
of the Visigothic comites, the upper ranks of the
clergy and some scholars. We know from the
writings of such strong champions of the 21

Mozarabic identity as Alvaro and Eulogio of Cor-
doba that they associated with Muslims, shared
their literary tastes and fashions, and even took
pride in speaking good Arabic.
As for the Jews, the guides (rabbis and
scholars), rich merchants, traders and financiers
also associated with the Islamic and Mozarabic
upper classes, but had almost no dealings with
the lower social orders. Cultural coexistence
between Jews and Muslims was, however, more
tangible than that between Muslims and
Mozarabs, because the Jews had accepted Arabic
as their language of thought and culture.
The law known as the fiqh maliki proved an
effective instrument for regulating the relations
between the different social groups. It had origi-
nated in certain traditional Arab usages dating
from the pre-lslamic period that reflected the
influence of Roman jurisprudence and had
provided a basis for the " canonical " principles
of Islam.
Craftsmen, shopkeepers, merchants and small
landowners of the Mozarabic and Jewish com-
munities were able to maintain their traditional
way of life without much difficulty. Obviously,
though, this process of convergence broke down
whenever religious disputes arose.
Patterns of coexistence
Cultural coexistence took many forms, weaving
a pattern of contact and tradition, creation and
rediscovery. It was of decisive importance in the
eighth, ninth and tenth centuries, when the legal
and ideological principles that gave it Its justifi-
cation were working satisfactorily.
The contact between external influences,
Above, an frustration from th<
Spanish monk Beatus of
Llebana's Commentary on the
Apocatypse, a manuscript
produced atthe abbey of
Saint-Sever (southwestern
France) ! n the middle of the
llth century. The scene ! s
from a part of the manuscript
devoted to the genealogy of
Chrtst. The tnftuence of Arabic
art ts notable.
Left. the menorah (a
candelabrum with seven
branches) ! s shown ! n thts
miniature from a Hebrew Bib) t
illuminated by Joseph
Assartatt a Cervera ! n Spain
() ate 12th century).
notably Islamic cultural imports from the Orient,
and intellectual life in Muslim Spain, was
genuinely extraordinary, as a glance at the art,
astronomy, mathematics, medicine and thought
of the caliphate shows. The cultural legacy of al-
Andalus is impressive in its scale and splendour
even though, for obvious reasons, Mozarab cul-
ture was closed to some aspects of Islamic
thought. Jewish thinking, on the other hand, was
so open to Muslim influences that two parallel
yet communicating currents are apparent in
Andalusian philosophy : on the one hand the
Arab-Islamic tradition of Avempace, Ibn Tufayl
and Averroes, on the other the Judaeo-Arab
heritage of Ibn Gabirol and Maimonides, thinkers
who used Arabic as their medium of expression.
There were certainly differences between
Islamic and Jewish culture, but they did not
extend to such common and universal fields as
astronomy, mathematics, science, medicine, logic
and metaphysics. One example, taken from my
own speciality, philosophy, will suffice to show
22

the creative possibilities that sprang from cultural
coexistence.
Comparisons have often been made between
the Summa contra gentiles of St. Thomas Aquinas,
Maimonides'Guide of the Perplexed and Averroes's
Incoherence of the 7coAerccc, a rebuttal of al-
Ghazali's work Te/McoC7-CMce o/c t/o.
It is undeniable that the three works are unique
of their kind and in their time. The similarities
between them lie in certain common themes of
medieval thought, in the use of certain formal
procedures, and In their method.
It is true that the Incoherence of the Incoher-
ence cannot be understood without reference to
specifically Islamic ideas ; similarly, the Guide of
the Perplexed raws on the rabbinical tradition,
and the Summa contra gentiles on the Christian
Inheritance. Yet all three heritages share a
common link with Greek thought, but not as it
had been recreated by Islamic philosophy.
The relationship between the three works Is
a complex one, full of reciprocal influences. Two
MtGUEL CRUZ HERNANDEZ.
of Spain, is professor f
Islamic thought at the
Autonomous University of
Madrid and formerly taught at
the Universities of Granada
and Salamanca. Among his
many published works are a
2-volute history of thought in
the Islamic world (1981). a
history of thought in ai-Andaius
(1985) and a study on the life.
work. thought and influence of
Averroes <1986).
of them were written by Andalusian thinkers,
and even the third-the Summa-would not have
been possible without the contribution of the
ideas of Avicenna and Averroes, passed on via
translations made In Toledo. After Aristotle,
Averroes Is the author most frequently cited by
St. Thomas.
Cultural coexistence of this kind was made
possible by religious and legal principles that were
far-reaching In their implications even though
they were often transgressed In practice. The
Andalusian experience was an exceptional
moment In history, probably unique In Its own
time and rarely matched In any other. Its most
worthy, notable and creative feature was that
cohabitation and coexistence were based on reli-
gious and legal principles. Our own era, which
prides itself on the liberalism and universality of
Its ideas, offers few examples to match It.
