Echoes
from afar
Music from
other cultures
has helped
many
composers to
discover their
creative
identity
by Véronique Brindeau
T
30
HE Paris Universal Exposition of 1889 revealed
to Debussy the music of Java and the theatre of the
Far East. The musical results of this shock were
soon to appear in his work. What concerns us
here, however, is the extent to which Debussy's
discovery was a sign of the times of which he was
a witness. For in his attitude, his willingness to
listen to the music of other cultures and assimi¬
late elements of it into his own creative activity,
this composer so often cited for his role in the
modern movement was anticipating the
behaviour of many later musicians.
Debussy's encounter with Asian music did
not lead him to borrow phrases, to imitate or
adopt the superficial colouring of another style.
In a word, it did not lead him to exoticism. What
now began to appear in his works, particularly
his piano pieces, was in part a new sense of dis¬
tance but above all a confirmation of styles of
composition that were already apparent but now
became more pronounced.
Debussy might have reflected the influence
of Javanese music in a more direct and literal way.
His attraction for what he saw in it tells us some¬
thing about the kind of person he was, in the
sense that he seems to have taken from a world
of sounds that was unfamiliar to him something
thatwith his fascination for timbre and
resonancehe already possessed. This was the
time when he was writing Pagodes for piano,
which recalls the Javanese slendro scale.
Encounters and
metamorphoses
One of the many questions this story brings to
mind is how the profound changes of the present
century, and especially the revolution in commu¬
nications and in recording techniques, have
affected the impact of similar discoveries on other
composers.
Encounters with cultures radically different
from their own have marked an important step
in the work of many twentieth-century artists,
not only musicians but painters who experienced
a revelation when they discovered African art or
Chinese wash drawings, or even painting in oils
and pastel.
What has for the most part been new in this
century is that musicians have no longer limited
their use of foreign models simply to imitative
borrowing. Theirs has been no tourist's glance
at an unfamiliar culture. This is not, of course,
to deny that many compositions have revelled in
the idiom of their models, from Erik Satie's La
Tyrolienne to the tearoom chinoiserie of Ravel's
L'Enfant et les sortilèges-Ravel, who so skilfully
harmonized his Cinq mélodies grecques and com¬
posed his Chansons madécasses with far-away
Madagascar in mind.
What we have seen is a rapid metamorphosis,
in which composers have striven to incorporate
as organically as possible in their own music

In a studio in New Mexico
(USA), composer Tony Hymas
(at the keyboard)
records his work Oyaté with
American Indian saxophonist
Jim Pepper.
elements that they had discovered in other musi¬
cians' work. I say other "musicians", because I
think that it makes more sense to talk of the
process in terms of learning from other
individuals and forms of music rather than from
styles that are specific to different world regions.
It is worth pointing out at this juncture that
the very idea of cultural intermixture implies that
traditions are in some curious way "pure",
whereas they are, of course, virtually inextricable
from a highly complex pattern. To divest them
of all the blends and alloys that have gone into
them as they have been shaped by the history of
peoples, their instruments, and their wanderings
is to simplify the picture and introduce notions
of frontiers jealously defined and defended.
How important are cross-cultural encounters
for composers? Often when the change in their
work is closely scrutinized, all it boils down to
is the discovery of a particular scoreand the
study of that score, for without study the initial
impression would leave only a passing wave of
enthusiasm and not stimulate any real creative
power. The role that Asian theatre played in
Debussy's creative development could in this
respect be compared to works closer to his own
tradition that also inspired him, such as Mus¬
sorgsky's opera Boris Godunov, or even the
writings of the French poet Pierre Louys.
The work of Oliver Messiaen raises the same
question. Peruvian folklore plays a part in
Harawi, and deci-talasrhythms borrowed from
Indian musicwere of crucial importance in his
work on intervals; but the influence of India, like
that of Japanese court music on his Sept hai-kai,
was eventually melded into a language that was 31

32
the composer's own, taking its place along with
such other influences as plainsong, bird-calls and
the Christian faith.
Recognizing oneself in others
For several contemporary composers, however,
contact with non-European music has had a more
profound effect, taking them on something other
than a mere armchair voyage, to the land of their
inspiration. Some have visited the country that
caught their attention, or even studied under one
of its master-musicians.
Look at the work of these musicians more
closely, however, and you will find that the
payoff, however much it may have deepened the
first shock of discovery, invariably only went to
confirm the initial effect. Take Steve Reich's fas¬
cination with Ghanaian drumming, for example.
In fact he only spent three weeks in Ghana
studying it. What he learned served to confirm
and develop tendencies that were already
apparent in his work, notably in his researches
into the superimposing and separating of musical
units and the signals needed to break a pattern
in moving on to the next phase of a composition.
Reich's experience calls to mind that of Jean-
Claude Eloy with regard to Japan. Eloy disco¬
vered oriental traditions at a point in his life as
a composer when, as with Reich, something new
was emerging in his work, encouraging him to
break with the academic traditions which had
shaped him but which were perhaps starting to
seem constrictive. In Japanese music he found an
image of his own musical aspirations.
An encounter of this type is not so much a
matter of imitating or intermingling styles as a
way of recognizing elements of oneself in
someone else. And that process need not involve
exotic cultures. For Bartok, for Kodaly, for all
those composers, particularly in Scandinavia,
whose work was initially shaped more by aca¬
demic tradition than by the sounds around them,
the route to self-discovery lay not in the Far East
or Africa but at home.
Ransacking the shelves
of history
For many composers, though, distance is synony¬
mous with freedom, particularly in matters of
rhythm, pitch or tonality. Such has certainly been
the case for the Japanese composer Takemitsu,
who first fell in love with Western music, then
VERONIQUE BRINDEAU
is a French musicologist.
Formerly in charge of the
Contemporary Music
Documentation Centre in
Tokyo, she is currently working
with Espaces Nouveaux, an
acoustics research centre in
Paris. She is a regular
contributor to a number of
specialist periodicals.

Left, Djamchid Chemirani of
Iran plays the zarb, a goblet-
shaped drum, with the
American musician David
Hykes (1990).
Below, a selection of compact
discs produced by Unesco.
returned to study his own musical tradition, and
whose work now flows freely from both these
sources of inspiration.
Such examples raise the question of whether
there is a difference in kind between seeking inspi¬
ration from foreign cultures and from history
the repository to which composers traditionally,
and peacefully, apply. In effect, all sources,
whether near or far, are grist to the composer's
mill. Half-cuckoo and half-bee, he takes up his
lodging where he will and turns whatever
nourishment he finds there into musical honey.
As a consequence, any reference a Western com¬
poser makes to an Asian or an African theme,
no matter how respectful or closely-studied it
may be, may have relatively little significance as
compared with the influences that same artist has
picked up, consciously or not, from his
predecessors. For is there really any difference in
the mechanism by which, say, listening to
Mongol songs would influence a musician's
development as compared with studying the way
in which one of his own precursors treated the
melodic unit?
Music of other times
and other places
Thus a sense of affinity may draw a composer
to study, often in a detailed way, either the music
of distant lands or the past traditions of his own
country. Both Mauricio Kagel and François-
Bernard Mâche, in their very different ways, take
into aesthetic account the tonality of the instru¬
ments of the Middle Ages as well as of non-
European cultures and of rare languages.
John Cage chooses opera as the starting-point
for a playful process of superimposition and of
assemblage in his unique work Européra (1990),
which includes references to more than a hundred
operas from the repertoire. Stockhausen made use
of hymns from all over the world in his 1967
work, Hymnen.
These cultural intermixtures also lead even¬
tually to a fusion of genres, a breaking down of
barriers between different categories of music.
When Pierre Boulez conducts a work by Frank
Zappa, or when Michel Portal alternates between
playing jazz and Mozart (or when he improvises
with traditional musicians, as in a recent Lille
Festival performance appropriately entitled Métis¬
sages or "cross-fertilizations"), the contours
separating contemporary music from jazz and
rock disappear.
This process seems to be largely in the hands
of musicians who practise improvisation. There
was a time when groups like Can and the Sun
Râ Orchestra recruited would-be Stockhausens;
but now for the most part composers of "serious"
contemporary music choose to remain strictly
within the boundaries of their own musical tra¬
ditions. The dismantling of barriers is mainly left
to the exponents of so-called "crossover" music,
whose very name indicates the route they intend
to take.
It is not certain that the music of distant lands
holds an attraction for composers today. The
wealth of recordings now available means that it
is as easy to listen to Eskimo songs or Tibetan
horns as to baroque opera, without the need to
seek the help of native teachers or of musicol¬
ogists.
The scarcity factor has gone. Now horizons
are closer, and material is freely available. Artists
are confronted by an immense Tower of Babel.
It is up to them to open, at a rate of their own
choosing, whichever window on the world's
music takes their fancy. Now, in fact, the most
important thing might well be to forget much of
what they hear, the better to achieve the crucial
metamorphosisthe one that transforms that
first, blinding encounter with other music into
their own, individual work.
uss,ASS?P*
