The swan song
ofa master
by Kazutoshi Watanabe
MASTER of Go is one of the finest
novels of Yasunari Kawabata, who
won the Nobel Prize for Literature
in 1968. Kawabata, who committed suicide in
1972, is one of Japan's best-known authors in
the international world of letters, where he is
considered to be an heir to the Japanese literary
tradition. In spite of his wide knowledge of
Western literature and civilization and his great
interest in modern thought, Kawabata was the
spokesman of a certain idea of beauty which, he
believed, was exclusive to traditional Japan. As
a Master of the Japanese novel, he had much in
common with the main character of the Master
of Go.
The eponymous hero of the novel embodies
an age that is over and a certain ethical position
associated with it. True, his mastery only
extends to Go, a game which is in some res¬
pects comparable to chess. But the story of
how he is defeated for the only time in his
career and dies shortly after is also a deeply-felt
description of the decline of a generation
invested with old traditions, and the death-
throes of its values. The novel is imbued with a
sense of natsukashisa a word which means
"nostalgia" and in Kawabata denotes an intense
desire to return to a place or a person one has
known and loved, who is lost for ever, and
whom one will only meet again after death..
Master Shusai, the hero of the novel, was
based on a real person, and Kawabata, who
covered his final tournament for the daily
newspaper which organized it, knew him at
first hand. The tournament took place in 1938
and Shusai died early in 1940. Kawabata began
to write his novel in 1942, but did not finish it
until 1954. This slow gestation seems to.have
been a long exercise in mourning for a master
who for Kawabata was irreplaceable.
A CONFRONTATION between two
generations
The novel gives an account of Master Shusai's
farewell tournament against Otaké, a player of
the Seventh Rank who is regarded as his poten¬
tial successor. To win the right to challenge the
Master, Otaké has had to beat all the other can¬
didates in a qualifying tournament. The stakes
are high. Shusai has never been defeated and
this is the last chance for a young player to pit
his wits against him. For Shusai to retire unde¬
feated would imply that the rising generation of
players were no match for him and would feel
inferior to him for ever.
The Master and his challenger seem to have
nothing in common, starting with their attitude
during the game. "Seated at the board, the
Master and Otaké presented a complete
contrast, quiet against constant motion, nerve-
lessness against nervous tension." Otaké likes
to joke while playing and often gets up to go to
the toilet, whereas "Once he had sunk himself
into a session, the Master did not leave the
board". Physically, Otaké weighs twice as
much as the Master. His family life with his
wife and their three children seems to be
happy. He is surrounded by pupils. The
Master, on the other hand, has no children and
his favourite pupil, of whom he expected great
things, is dead. He lives a solitary life shared
only by his wife. This, then, is a face-to-face

A game of Go. 19th-century
Japanese engraving.
encounter between an old Master who has lost
almost everything and is staking his reputation
on this confrontation, and a happy young pro¬
digy with his life before him.
But it is also a confrontation between two
conceptions of the game. The Master has only
played two tournaments in the previous dozen
years, and in the intervening time much has
changed. Now there is little scope for the
players to express their individuality. The



Master, like any other player, is required to
obey strict rules which guarantee that the
contest takes place in conditions of complete
equality. The players are sealed in an inn during
the several months of the tournament. Each one
is allowed a strictly controlled time in which to
make his moves. All these rules are new to the
Master and put him at a disadvantage.
Throughout the tournament the Master
tries to resist the constraints imposed on him.
Otaké, who is presented as a fair competitor,
protests vigorously against the many ways in
which the Master bends the rules, not so much
deliberately as through inability to grasp the
new spirit of the game. The Master plays like
an artist. In his eyes a game is a work of art
which the two players create together, each
according to his own style and vision of the
game, a fair encounter based on a moral com¬
mitment and mutual confidence, rather than on
the strict application of a host of pettifogging
rules which, as the narrator points out, merely
encourage the players to find loopholes in
them.
But this conception of the game has become
outmoded, and when Otaké makes a move that
may seem unfair, the Master is put out of his
stride. He thinks that the game has been "be¬
smirched" and is no longer worth playing. This
is a somewhat hasty judgement and one which
he later reverses. Nevertheless, the Master
seems to regard the game of Go as an aesthetic
experience, whereas his adversary is primarily
concerned with efficiency and plays to win.
Otaké is just as interesting a character as the
Master. He embodies the spirit of rationalism
and modernity which is taking over contempo¬
rary Japan as well as the game of Go. He does
not lack human qualities. Throughout the tour¬
nament he is shown to be profoundly res¬
pectful towards the Master, and at the end is
grieved to defeat him. He is caught in a
dilemma. On one hand he wants to be faithful
to the new spirit of the game, which enforces
equality between the players and strict obser¬
vance of the rules, and is constantly discon¬
certed by what he regards as the Master's arbi¬
trary demands. At the same time he is acutely
embarrassed to be playing against an opponent
whose failing health eventually brings to the
tournament the atmosphere of a slow and cruel
execution. Whatever reservations the narrator
may feel about the spirit of modern rationalism
represented by the rising generation of players,
and in spite of his patent sympathy for the
Master, he casts no aspersions on Otaké's inte¬
grity, except for one brief moment of doubt
which is immediately overcome.
Otaké represents a new mentality, a new
system. If he plays the role of executioner of
the old Master, it is not by choice but because
he is part of the evolution of Go. To remain 35

Playing Go in Japan. Go is a
game that demands great
skill and strategy. It is
played on a board with black
and white go-ishi (flat, round
pieces known as stones).
36
KAZUTOSHI WATANABE,
of Japan, has a special
interest in French literature
and in particular in the works
of Marcel Proust. He is
preparing a study on Proust's
À la recherche du temps
perdu ("Remembrance of
Things Past"), which is to be
published shortly in
Japanese.
popular, Go, like other traditional games, must
adapt to social change and meet new demands
such as those of the media. The old Master is
not opposed to attention from the media, since
he agrees to take part in a tournament spon¬
sored by a leading newspaper. The firmness
with which Otaké opposes any laxity in the
application of the rules seems less a reflection
of his personality than part of the implacable
law of modernity, which excludes all forms of



favouritism, even above all those that may
benefit the Master. The network of rules tight¬
ens around the old player with his outmoded
ideas which are sacrificed on the altar of pro¬
gress, a relentless process on which the very
survival of the game in the modern world
depends. From this point of view, Otaké does
no more than perform as conscientiously as
possible his duty, which is to cross the thresh¬
old of a new era; to do this he must immolate
the Master, the glorious representative of a past
that must be rejected in favour of modernity.
'A STARVED URCHIN WITH AN APPETITE
FOR GAMES'
Where does the Master stand in this ideological
struggle between two generations, two visions
of the world, two universes? Why do we
respond to him as readers, and what makes his
death at the end of the novel so poignant?
Even while he suffers, the Master is quite at
home in the claustrophobic atmosphere of the
tournament, the morbid and almost inhuman
world of the game. He has no life outside the
competition. Paradoxically, he is swallowed up
by the game, to which he abandons himself
totally. "Most professional Go players like
other games as well, but the Master's addiction
was rather special. He could not play an easy,
nonchalant match, letting well enough alone.
There was no end to his patience and endu¬
rance. He played day and night, his obsession
somewhat disquieting. It was less as if he were
playing to dispel gloom or beguile tedium than
as if he were giving himself up to the fangs of
gaming devils."
There is a kind of morbidity in this passion.
On each shobû (victory or defeat) in which his
reputation is staked, the Master stakes his life as
a Go player, and this joust with death seems to
bring him an enjoyment which is quite differ¬
ent from the anodyne pleasure that people
usually look for in a game. In this sense, the
connection made between the Master and death
is by no means gratuitous: the Master is
someone who enjoys dicing with death at every
moment, even in a pursuit which for other
people is only a diversion.
And yet in a way he is absent-minded.
Questioned by the narrator about his amazing
powers of endurance, he explains: "Maybe I
have no nerves. A vague, absent sort maybe
the vagueness has been good for me." The
word bonyari (which means "absent-minded"
or "vague") is often used to describe the
Master's behaviour, reactions or facial expres¬
sion. Here, perhaps, we see the other side of his
constant confrontation with death. At the other
extreme to the mental effort deployed in a
game whose strategy is governed with mathe¬
matical rigour, this "vagueness" which is so
much a part of the Japanese aesthetic tradition
is connected to the Master's remarkable capa¬
city for concentration. Terms such as muga
(absence from oneself) or boga (forgctfulness of
self) are often used to describe the Master's
total absorption in the game. His trance-like
state illustrates an artistic side öf Go, for the
game fever that consumes him is one aspect of
the joy of creation.
This tireless quest for enjoyment, in which
the game becomes simultaneously more serious
and more dangerous, also shows up another
facet of the Master's character, a childishness
which conflicts with his physical appearance.
The doctor says that "He has a body like an
undernourished child" and that his body only
tolerates medicines in doses that "a thirteen- or
fourteen-year-old might take". Like a child he
rejects lukewarm pleasures and unreasonably
seeks intense enjoyment in the frenzy of the
game. "The Master was like a starved urchin in
his appetite for games". He cultivates childish¬
ness rather than the wisdom that we might
expect to find in an old master.
For the Master does not want to grow up,
whereas Japan, society, and the game of Go
itself, are forced to do so. The coming of matu¬
rity is an irresistible process which duly takes
its toll in the form of the death of the childlike
Master. O
