THE ARTIST
AS INSECT
byAndré Brink
44
IN this age of violence and strife, terrorism
and famine, multinational corporations and
global power alliances, we have understand¬
ably abandoned Shelley's romantic faith in
poets as the unacknowledged legislators of the
world. Yet there is reason to believe that
without the poet, the intellectual, the artist, the
creator, life might be even worse.
If it is always prudent to remind ourselves
that no single society in the world dares call
itself totally free or totally democratic, I am
mainly concerned here with those societies
which, having emerged only recently from
various forms of absolutism and political
oppression, are now groping towards defini¬
tions of democracy and freedom of which, as in
Czechoslovakia or Germany, they have been
deprived for a long time or which, as in the case
of South Africa, they have never known.
The territory of the intellectual and the
creator is culture: it is that territory in which
the private and the public interact in order to
transform the raw matter of experience into
meaning. No wonder that, in a state of oppres¬
sion, culture should function in particularly
intense ways. For decades, samizdat in Central
Europe has provided a vibrant and electrically
charged cultural experience. In Chile, when no
other forms of protest were allowed by the
Pinochet regime, illiterate washerwomen began
to record, in embroidery and weaving and
appliqué, the passionate experiences of an
entire generation otherwise doomed to obli¬
vion. In a South Africa dehumanized by apar¬
theid, when successive States of Emergency vir¬
tually smothered overt resistance, when
children were killed and women maimed and
men blown up by parcel bombs, a veritable
explosion in the arts in dance and music, in
photography and painting and sculpture, in
poetry and the theatre ensured that the
oppressed black masses were activated in soli¬
darity and awareness, and that even the
conscience of a white ruling minority was cease¬
lessly assailed and provoked into a discovery
of what was really happening behind the
façades of official lies, distortions and half-
truths. Even on the basic level of disseminating
information, artists were performing an invalu¬
able function.
Now comes a transitional stage fraught with
difficulties and danger. Much of this derives
from a clash between different notions of "cul¬
ture". And it seems to me that in our attempts
to formulate the role of culture in the precar¬
ious movement towards freedom and the
function of the intellectual creator within that
process, much of our effort should be directed
towards a redefinition of culture and of the aes¬
thetic which forms an integral part of it.
On the one hand there is the Great Tradi¬
tion of the West, of a Capital-C-Culture for the
privileged few. And how can one reject a tradi¬
tion which has bequeathed to us Sophocles,
Dante, Michelangelo, Shakespeare, Rembrandt,
Mozart, Tolstoy, Proust, Kafka and Picasso?
At the same time this tradition becomes prob¬
lematic if it is seen, as it so often is, as exclusivist,
deriving from a Greek model state which could
afford the luxury of distinguishing between
manual labour and mental exertion only
because the presence of enough slaves made it
possible for full citizens to devote their time to
"higher pursuits"?
In this respect a culture of struggle against
oppression brought a valuable corrective, since
it activated, not individual artists only, but the
masses, the whole of an oppressed people. This

grassroots culture has opened, for all societies
closed until very recently, new vistas of invalu¬
able opportunities. Yet this culture, too, can
be demonstrated to harbour seeds of destruc¬
tion: directed, through the exigencies of
oppression, only towards a struggle for poli¬
tical liberation, the field of focus of such a cul¬
ture threatens to become extremely narrow and
immediate. What is not expedient, what cannot
be sloganized or digested immediately, what
does not offer itself as a praxis, as "a weapon
for liberation", is all too easily discounted or
discarded. The problem of this vision of cul-
Year 3000 (1987),
by the British photographer
Michael Freeman.
ture, and of the role of the intellectual/creator
in it, does not lie in the fact that it summons
culture to fulfil a political function, but that it
conceives of culture only in function of its poli¬
tical usefulness.
A well-known anecdote told by the Spanish
poet Federico García Lorca illuminates the
problem. A rich farmer and a peasant are walk¬
ing along a river bank on a particularly beau¬
tiful morning. Moved by the scenery, the rich
man stops to exclaim, "Isn't it beautiful? Look
at those trees ... the clouds ... the reflections!"
But the peasant can only clutch his stomach, 45

Demolition, a trompe l'gil
mural in La Plata, a town in
Buenos Aires province
(Argentina).
groaning, "I am hungry, I am hungry, I am
hungry!" This has often been interpreted to
suggest that aesthetics are obscene; that our
needs are first of all material. But such an inter¬
pretation is an insult to our humanity. The poor
and the oppressed do indeed require food, and
shelter, and comfort. But to suggest that beauty
or excellence are attainable only at the expense
o/what are alleged to be more "basic" needs is a
denial of what makes us human. The needs of
the mind are as essential as those of the body. It
is not enough that we live; we also need to ask
questions about living: we need to pursue, inces¬
santly, the endless possibilities of meaning in
life. And this defines culture as a key dimension
of any society's movement towards a fuller
experience of freedom and democracy.
But what role is to be assigned to the indivi¬
dual intellectual or artist in this process?
Our secular world has no room any more



for Carlyle's "poet as hero", for the lone thinker
or creator as vates, as prophet or priest or visio¬
nary. In the clamour of a people the vox cla¬
marías is all too often drowned, or ignored. It is
so easy to fade into irrelevance. In an endan¬
gered society, threatened by authoritarian rule,
the single dissident voice that dares cry out may
acquire an inordinate resonance. It can become a
rallying point for the oppressed masses. But
once the masses have begun to shake off their
most visible shackles, once a people as a whole
has broken down its walls and fences, has
thrown open its prisons and its Gulags and its
Robben Islands, what role is left for the indivi-
46
dual artist? Is his or her function not superseded
by the collective needs of the people?
If the individual persists as a function of an
obsolete elitist tradition, then indeed there can
be little, if any, justification for him. (And I
say "him" advisedly, as this kind of function is
essentially male and chauvinist by nature.) The
individual as "free agent" is a figment of the
mind, a person without history, ultimately a
person without conscience, who denies or
ignores his utter involvement in the whole rich
fabric of the world. Yet the opposite notion,
that of the "commissar", Stalin's "cultural
worker", is also suspect: he (again it is essen¬
tially a male function) acts primarily as an agent
of power and of bureaucracy.
For this reason the culturally significant
individual should be redefined as a creative and
intellectual being with social, historical and
moral responsibilities. Such a person can fulfil
an indispensable function within the processes
that propel a society towards democracy.
This function, as I sec it, is that of a compo¬
site insect.
First, it is the function of Gregor Samsa
who, one morning, woke up to find himself
"transformed in his bed into a gigantic insect".
Terrifying his family and acquaintances into a
rediscovery of themselves, a redefinition of
their own individual and collective roles, he is
rejected and "misread" by all. In the end he is
starved to death; he becomes forever "the thing
next door". He becomes society's Other; he
forces society to acknowledge its own alterity.
Even if it tries to deny him, it will never be the
same again. At the end of the story his sister
"sprang to her feet first and stretched her
young body": femininity and youth affirm
themselves through her; the possibility of
rebirth and renewal is admitted to the once
stale world of habit and convention.
A second insect to bear in mind is the bee in
the French novelist Jean Paulhan's essay
"L'abeille". If you catch a bee in your hand,
says Paulhan, it will sting you before you crush
it to death. This may not amount to much; yet
had it not been so, there would not have been
any bees left in the world.
My third insect is very humble indeed. It is
the gadfly of Socrates, described by the critic
Tzvetan Todorov in his recent essay "Les taons
modernes". Superficially the gadfly is nothing
but a nuisance, leaving nothing and no-one in
peace or at ease, but in the final analysis it is a
restless questioning spirit which acts to "reveal
and possibly to modify the complex of values
which serves as guiding principle to the life of a
cultural group".
A fourth insect which serves as model to the
intellectual/creator is the cricket in Miroslav
Krleza's "The Cricket below the Waterfall".
This is how the main character in the story des- '
cribes it:
"I discovered a cricket in the men's room,
my dear fellow; down there in the men's room
I discovered a cricket. Underneath the waterfall
that splashes over the putrid black-tarred wall,
where the citron slices float and the smell of
ammonia bites our nostrils as in some labora¬
tory, right down there at the very dregs of the
human stench, one night I heard the voice of

the cricket. There wasn't even a dog in the pub,
the wind roared like a wild beast, and in the
stench of the men's room was a voice of the
ripe summer, the redolence of August, the
breath of meadows surging like green velvet:
the voice of the cricket out of the urine and
faeces, the voice of nature that transforms even
stinking city toilets into starry sunsets, when
the mills arc softly humming in the russet
horizon, and the first crickets announce them¬



selves as the harbingers of an early autumn.
Here, you see, I've brought him some bread¬
crumbs. Come, let's pay him a visit."
In order to keep alive this faith in something
beautiful, something meaningful, in a sordid
world; in order constantly to shock the world
out of complacency; in order to prod the human
mind into that kind of awareness which never
takes yes for an answer, the first allegiance of the
creator-intcllectual-artist is to his or her
conscience, not to a party or a group, not even
to a cause, not even to "the people". But and
this is the crux of the matter unless that
conscience is forged in action and in commu¬
nion with others, with "the people", and unless
the most private of its discoveries is informed by
the acknowledgement of a total involvement in
Spiritual presence, by the
Samoan artist Feu'u.
ANDRE BRINK,
South African writer, is
Professor of Modern
Literature at Rhodes
University, Grahamstown,
South Africa. He has written a
number of novels which were
originally banned in his own
country and are now
internationally known. They
include Looking on Darkness
(1974), An Instant in the
Wind (1976), Rumours of
Rain (1978) and A Dry White
Season (1979).
the history the past, the present, the future
of its society, it has no weight and no relevance.
Whether the individual creator wills it or
not, whatever he or she does, or neglects to do,
in a society still groping towards democracy, is
allied to one of the two great social dimensions
involved in the process: that of the erstwhile
power establishment, the haves, the oppressors;
or that of the erstwhile victims, the have-nots,
the oppressed. The moral choice is obvious.
Yet there is no point in simply promoting or
advancing a cause, however worthy it may be
in itself. And before we can accede to a fuller
awareness of the truly democratic, we need to
be liberated as much from the mentality of
"victim" as from that of "oppressor". This is
why our composite insect acquires such vital
importance.
He or she cannot be circumscribed by, or
forced into subservience to, any cause or ideo¬
logy or programme: yet in his or her freedom
lies the assumption of his or her full responsibi¬
lity as a human being, in the midst of that diffi¬
cult, dangerous and exhilarating process
through which a people numbed by oppression
moves tentatively but inexorably towards more
democracy and greater freedom. Q 47
