Against intolerance
by Edgard Pisani
38
EDGARD PISANI,
French politician, has been
his country's Minister of
Agriculture (1961-1966) and
Minister of Industrial
Development (1966-1967).
He was elected to the
European Parliament in 1979
and later carried out special
missions for the President of
the French Republic. Founder
and political director of
the periodical L'Evénement
européen, he has been
President of France's Institute
of the Arab World since
1988. He has published a
number of books, including
Pour l'Afrique (Paris, 1988),
Persiste et signe (Paris, 1992),
and Health and Social Welfare
(Pergamon Press, Oxford).
THE world vacillates between indifference
and intolerance. Fellow feeling seems to
be a thing of the past.
Indifference is a serious matter. In the big
cities, in Western societies, wherever small
human communities are withering away or
have already disappeared, the individual is iso¬
lated, and nobody communicates any more.
We no longer see or listen to each other. Do
other people exist for us or we for them? Our
encounters with them are random, self-centred
affairs and when we do speak we sense only the
painful vibrations of a voice without echo.
Little is said about this malady, although it
is magnified by the media, with their tendency
to turn everything into a happening. Yet it is a
destructive sickness that leaves us alone in the
crowd, alone in our homes, alone in the world,
alone in a void that our lost sense of the sacred
is no longer there to fill.
Intolerance is just as serious. It is not simply
the lack of a sense of solidarity with other
people: it is the rejection of others for what
they are, for what they do, for what they think
and, eventually, simply because they exist.
We are not talking here of the intolerance
of youth, that potent cocktail of intransigence
and revolt to which the French novelist Roger
Martin du Gard was referring when he wrote:
"I quite like the intolerance of youth. It is a
good thing for an adolescent to be systemati¬
cally in revolt against everything." We are
speaking rather of an urge that can soon
degenerate from irritation to murder.
Intolerance is probably no more wide¬
spread today than it was in earlier times. It has
always existed throughout history. It may be
akin to that instinct for possession and secu¬
rity that impels an animal to defend its terri¬
tory against intrusion. Going beyond the
spirit of conquest and the desire to acquire
possessions, it leads to domination and exter¬
mination. Intolerance is a refusal to admit the
existence of those who do not share the same
beliefs as oneself.
Once the others have been exterminated,
the intolerant man turns on his own brother,
accusing him of being lukewarm, divisive or
deviationist. From the Inquisition to the Stali¬
nist régime, the passion to convince gave way
to an urge to dominate, to twist the written
word and use it as a weapon.
Intolerance is an unquenchable desire for
absolute power, whether to preserve the iden¬
tity of the clan, the purity of the race, territo¬
rial dominion, the triumph of a political doc¬
trine or the glory of the Almighty.
At a certain stage in their evolution, both
religion and politics carry within them the
risk of intolerance. Social and economic life
too, although in different forms, as well as
ethnic and cultural matters. Even freedom
may cease to be a quest and become a doc¬
trine instead.
Intolerance is the rejection of difference, the
blood-drenched search for uniformity, the
exclusion of any form of autonomy or diver¬
sity. It repudiates exchange because exchange


defuses hatred; it excludes cohabitation because
cohabitation means accepting differences.
It is the death of Thought, pronounced in
the name of an idea. It spurns doubt, which
enriches our lives by inciting enquiry. It turns
its back on discovery, because discovery
upsets established certainties. It abhors inven¬
tion because invention rejects the old patterns.
It rejects democracy because democracy
implies freedom, debate and alternation in
office. It is the negation of diversity, however
discreet.


Intolerance and the struggle against intol¬
erance will last as long as there are human
beings on Earth. But is it possible to fight
intolerance without becoming intolerant one¬
self? Is there not a danger that what happened,
for example, in France, in the clash between
the clergy and the secularists, will happen
elsewhere and in other circumstances? At the
outset the secularists spoke out against the
domination of society by the Church, but this
soon developed into a struggle against the
Church simply because the values it stood for
were different.
Racism is but one form of intolerance. The
human species consists of men and women
who are different, but who are all evidently
human. Yet there many who deny the diver¬
sity that exists in nature and claim that there is
a superior race their own, of course.
How can we learn to accept the infinite
diversity of human beings within the evident

The Omnibus (1929), oil on
canvas, by the Mexican artist
Frida Kahlo (1907-1954).
Original and deeply rooted in
Mexican culture, her work
had a significant influence on
the Surrealist movement.
unity of the human species? How can we learn
that, like order and disorder, unity and diver¬
sity are but two facets of the same truth?
It is because of the inherent unity of the
human species that I accept and love its diver¬
sity. It is because of the diversity of cultures,
heritage, climate, ethnic groupings, beliefs,
customs, visions, that I seek the unity without
which diversity would be meaningless.
Although each taken singly is a relative
concept, unity and diversity together form an
absolute good.
Tolerance is the cultivation of diversity
within an awareness of and a quest for unity.!-.
39
