I^Tlie UN's lon¿ campaign against apartliéi
T
40
.HE United Nations has been in the forefront
of the struggle against apartheid for over four
decades. The General Assembly has condemned
apartheid as a crime against humanity, and the
Security Council, which has considered the ques¬
tion since 1960, has termed apartheid a crime
against the conscience and dignity of mankind.
The United Nations has sought to help bring
about a peaceful solution of the conflict by
promoting concerted international action,
including the isolation of South Africa diplomat¬
ically, economically and militarily, the develop¬
ment of international norms against apartheid and
the provision of assistance to the victims of apart¬
heid and their liberation movements.
The racial policies of South Africa were dis¬
cussed at the very first United Nations General
Assembly session in 1946, when India complained
that the Government had enacted legislation
which discriminated against South Africans of
Indian origin. During the 1950s, as South Africa
persisted in and intensified its policies of racial
segregation, numerous resolutions concerning
apartheid were adopted.
The Sharpeville massacre
In March 1960, sixty-nine people were killed and
180 wounded at Sharpeville, when South African
police opened fire on peaceful, unarmed demon¬
strators protesting against the "pass laws". The
"pass laws" required that all Africans carry
"reference documents" which served as identifi¬
cation and as work and travel permits. The inci¬
dent and its aftermath, which rocked South
Africa, aroused world opinion and marked a
turning point in deliberations on apartheid at the
United Nations.
For the first time the matter was taken up
by the Security Council, which on 1 April 1960
adopted a resolution stating that a continuation
of South Africa's racial policies might endanger
international peace and security and calling upon
the South African Government to abandon its
policies of apartheid and racial discrimination.
The General Assembly asked Member States to
break off diplomatic relations with South Africa,
boycott South African goods and refrain from all
exports to South Africa, including the export of
armaments. In 1962, it established a special body,
known since 1974 as the Special Committee
against Apartheid. The mandate of the Com¬
mittee is to review all aspects of South Africa's
policies of apartheid and the international reper¬
cussions of these policies.
The Committee quickly assumed an activist
role in what the General Assembly in 1966 would
formally designate as the "international campaign
against apartheid". It has promoted sports, cul¬
tural, consumer and other boycotts and, with the
Centre against Apartheid, established in 1976, has
co-operated with Governments, intergovern¬
mental t^rgamzations, religious leaders, student
and youth movements and anti-apartheid groups
in mobilizing international public opinion in sup¬
port of United Nations resolutions against
apartheid.
In a move to provide assistance to the victims
of apanheid, the General Assembly in 1965 estab¬
lished the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa. The Fund is based on voluntar)' contri¬
butions from which grants are made to organi¬
zations for legal aid to persons persecuted under
South Africa's repressive and discriminatory laws,
relief to such persons and their dependents, and
relief for refugees from South Africa. Two years
later, the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa
(UNETPSA) was set up. One of its functions is
to provide scholarships for higher education to
disadvantaged students from South Africa and
Namibia.
During the 1970s, continued efforts by the
United Nations to persuade South Africa to
abandon the system of apartheid were intensified.
In 1973, the General AssembK' adopted the Inter¬
national Convention on the SuppressK:)n and
Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, which
came into force in 1976. The following year, the
General Assembly barred the delegation of South
Africa from participating in its work, and recom¬
mended the exclusion of South Africa from par¬
ticipation in all international organizations and
conferences under United Nations auspices as
long as the authorities continued to practice apart¬
heid. Since then. South Africa has not participated
in the proceedings of the General Assembly.
In 1974, the UN invited the national libera¬
tion movements recognized by the Organization
of African Unity the African National Congress
and the Pan Africanist Ctmgress of Azania to
participate as (observers in its debates on the ques¬
tion of apartheid, and later recognized the move¬
ments as "the authentic representatives of the
overwhelming majority of the South African
people". They attend United Nations meetings
and conferences, and are consulted on decisions
concerning South Africa.
In 1976 and subsequently, the Cjcneral
Assembly denounced South Africa's declaration.s
of "independence" for the so-called homelands
«A6A1h

pkUÍ7^LM^^/*¤í^
Untitled (1982), a collage by the American artist Robert Rauschenberg. This poster and that
shown on page 44 were produced for an exhibition entitled "Fifteen Artists against
Apartheid", organized on the occasion of the International Day for the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, 21 March 1983.
or bantustans, none of which has consequently
gained any diplomatic recogniticm bv the inter¬
national community,
A historic step the mandatory
arms embargo
The Security Council took a historic step in
November 1977, making mandatory the volun¬
tary arms embargo against South Africa which
It had called for in 1963. This marked the first
time that the United Nations had taken action
against a Member State under Chapter VII of the
Charter, which provides for enforcement actiem
with respect to threats to the peace.
In 1982, the South African Government began
to introduce measures which it claimed were
reforms of the system, among them the establish¬
ment of a raciall)' segregated tricameral parlia¬
ment, including Asians and Coloureds but
excluding Africans. The General Assembly con¬
demned these measures since they maintained
power exclusively in the hands of the white
majority and failed to offer any political rights
to blacks.
Efforts by the United Nations in the first half
of the 1980s were directed mainly towards gaining
support for the implementation of comprehen¬
sive mandatory sanctions against South Africa in
order to isolate the country from the interna¬
tional community and force it to abandon its
apartheid policies.
In 1985, the level of violence and unrest
increased in South Africa, and the Government
declared a nation-wide state of emergency, ban¬
ning many opponents of apartheid or detaining
them without trial. Acting in response to the
imposition of these repressive policies, the
General Assembly stepped up its anti-apartheid
activities. In February 1986, the Security Council
adopted a sweeping resolution including a
demand for the lifting of the state of emergency,
the release of all political prisoners and detainees
and the eradication of apartheid. However, efforts
in the Security Council in July 1986 and several
subsequent attempts as well to make economic
sanctions mandatory were not successful.
Sport and cuhural boycotts
win world-wide support
The sports, cultural and academic boycotts of
South Africa, whose implementation has been
monitored by the United Nations, have been
important means of exerting pressure on the
South African authorities. By involving millions
of people worldwide they became a particularly
effective way to educate public opinion, demon¬
strate international abhorrence of the apartheid
system and press for reforms.
The ban on sporting contacts with individuals
or organizations from either inside or outside
South Africa was legalized when the International
Convention against Apartheid in Sports, adopted
by the General Assembly in 1985, came into
effect in April 1988. The Commission against
Apartheid in Sports has since 1989 mcmitorcd the
sports boycott. Since 1981, at the request of the
Special Committee against Apartheid, the Centre 41

42
against Apartheid has published a periodic register
containing the names of athletes who ignored the
ban.
Under the cultural boycott, first called for by
the United Nations in 1968, entertainers, actors
and other artists were requested to work towards
the cultural isolation of South Africa. From 1988
onwards, the guidelines for the boycott, which
were elaborated by prominent entertainers and
artists at a Symposium held in Athens, Greece,
placed outside its scope those cultural and aca¬
demic activities which had the intent and effect
of opposing apartheid, enriching the culture of
the oppressed people of South Africa and fur¬
thering the liberation struggle. Since the early
1980s, and at the request of the Special Com¬
mittee against 


Apartheid, the Centre has pub¬
lished a Register of entertainers, actors and others
who have performed in South Africa.
On 13 December 1991, in recognition of the
progress that had been made towards abolishing
apartheid, the General Assembly called unani¬
mously for nations to start restoring sports, cul¬
tural, scientific and academic ties with South
Africa. It recommended that sports links be
resumed with unified, non-racial sporting organi¬
zations within South Africa and that assistance
be given to disadvantaged athletes in the country.
It also called for a resumption of links with
democratic anti-apartheid organizations and
individuals in the cultural, academic and scien¬
tific fields.
Many United Nations bodies and specialized
agencies such as UNESCO and the International
Labour Organisation have played an important
part in the campaign against apartheid. The Com¬
mission on Human Rights has kept apartheid
under close review and oversees the implemen¬
tation of the conventions against racial discrimi¬
nation and apartheid. The United Nations Centre
on Transnational Corporations has focused on
the role of foreign investment, trade and loans
through the transnational corporations in sus¬
taining apartheid.
The Declaration on
Apartheida milestone in UN action
In the late 1980s, world developments and events
in South Africa contributed to an important
breakthrough at the General Assembly. In 1989,
through the efforts of the Special Committee and
the Centre Against Apartheid, consensus was
achieved for the first time on substantive resolu¬
tions on apartheid. In December 1989, at a Spe¬
cial Session, the General Assembly aJDproved
specific guidelines for the peaceful dismantling of
apartheid in South Africa. The guidelines were,
contained in the Declaration on Apartheid and
its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa.
The adoption of the Declaration by consensus
was unprecedented, and clearly demonstrated the
unity of the world community on the South
African question and its resolution.
The Declaration encouraged the people of
South Africa to join together to negotiate an end
to apartheid and to agree on all the measures
necessary to transform South Africa into a non-
racial democracy. It indicated the fundamental
principles for a new constitutional order;
measures to be taken by the South African
authorities to create a climate conducive to
negotiations and free political activity; guidelines
to the process of negotiation; and a programme
of action that called for sustained international
action until there was clear evidence of profound
and irreversible changes, bearing in mind the
objectives of the Declaration, namely the eradi¬
cation of apartheid and the establishment of a
united, non-racial, democratic South Africa.
Nelson Mandela at the UN
In February 1990, in a speech at the opening of
parliament two months after the Special Session,
South African President F,W. de Klerk
announced a lifting of the ban on the African
National Congress and other anti-apartheid
movements together wdth a number of other
reform measures, and stated that his final aim was
a totally new and just constitutional dispensatitm
Two posters issued in 1988
by the United Nations Centre
against Apartheid.
This article has been specially
prepared forth'e UNESCO
Courier by the United Nations
Centre against Apartheid

for South Africa. On 11 February 1990, Nelson
Mandela was released after twenty-seven years of
imprisonment, and in June 1990 he addressed a
special meeting of the Special Committee against



Apartheid at United Nations Headquarters.
The Secretary-General sent a mission to
South Africa in June 1990 to report on progress
that had been made in the implementation of the
UN Declaration towards the dismantling of apar¬
theid. The General Assembly took careful note
of the ensuing Secretary-General's report, and in
September 1990 adopted a resolution which called
upon the South African Government to take a
number of steps and the international commu¬
nity to maintain the pressure on South Africa,
in order to bring about a speedy end to apartheid
through negotiations.
Despite certain setbacks, considerable pro¬
gress was made during 1990 and 1991 towards the
resolution of the conflict in South Africa. A
number of steps specified in the United Nations
Declaration as necessary for establishing a climate
conducive to negotiations were implemented,
including the repeal of the major apartheid laws.
the ending of the state of emergency and the lif¬
ting of bans on political organizations. Also,
many political prisoners were released.
As noted by the Secretary-General in his
second progress report, released in September
1991 and covering the period from June 1990, the
process towards the ending of apartheid in South
Africa, although halting, has remained on course.
As he pointed out, the convening of a meeting
of all parties concerned to discuss and draft a new
constitution based on non-racial, universal suf¬
frage tops the political agenda.
A continuing struggle
One of the major obstacles to the beginning of
the talks was removed when an agreement was
reached in August between the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the South African authorities, which cleared the
way for UNHCR to begin to provide assistance
in the voluntary repatriation of an estimated
30,000-40,000 political exiles and refugees, who
will now be able to return home, free from the
threat of persecution.
Although the end of the road may be in sight,
the long struggle against apartheid is certainly not
over yet. An array of discriminatory laws are still
on South Africa's statute books, political trials
continue, and a number of political prisoners are
still in jad. Outbreaks of the violence which has
wracked the country continue. Furthermore, the
apartheid system has generated widespread
poverty and grave crises in the economy, parti¬
cularly in the education, employment, health and
housing sectors. Unless concerted efforts to
redress these issues are made, the social and eco¬
nomic problems they cause could jeopardize the
ongoing process towards negotiations, the success
of a constitutional settlement and the future sta¬
bility of the country.
Through its concerted efforts over the years,
the United Nations has played a vital role in for¬
ging an international consensus on action for the
elimination of apartheid. The Organization will
continue to work to maintain that consensus
throughout the transitional period. It will con¬
tinue to promote the maintenance of the pres¬
sure needed for the early establishment of transi¬
tional arrangements, the agreement on a n-.-w
constitution, and the installation of a democratic
government.
The United Nations will also provide assis¬
tance to the opponents of apartheid and the disad¬
vantaged sectors of South African society in a
concerted and co-ordinated manner, as well as
encourage the international community to assist
in addressing the glaring socio-economic inequa¬
lities in the country. By this two-track approach,
the United Nations alms at reinforcing the
momentum towards the establishment of a
united, democratic and non-racial South Africa.
Only when this has been achieved can it be said
that the international community has fulfilled its
moral and political obligations to remove a
system from the world that affronted the sense
of dignity and humanity of mankind. 43
