^Jí»:)
40
Above, the patio of the monastery of
San Pedro Claver, Cartagena de Indias.
EDOUARD BAILEY is a French journalist who
has been a correspondent with the weekly
L'Express and a press officer in UNESCO's
Office of Public Information.
IT is a magnificent city. Its ramparts
face the Caribbean Sea. Within the for¬
tifications, dominated by the imposing
fortress of San Felipe de Barajas, lies a tra¬
cery of narrow lanes dating from colonial
times, lined with white houses bearing
carved wooden balconies, with churches,
palaces and aristocratic dwellings. The
tropical atmosphere is intoxicating, with
its lights, its scents of fruits and spices, its
cumbia and vallenato rhythms, the beauty
of its mestizo women.
Cartagena de Indias in Colombia,
which is listed as a World Heritage site,
contains the most beautiful architectural
ensemble of any city of the Americas. A
UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE



The splendours
and miseries
of Cartagena
de Indias
by Edouard Bdlby
centre of the slave trade in Spanish colonial
days, a port of embarkation for treasure
galleons laden with gold and emeralds, a
stronghold whose formidable defences
held out against repeated pirate assaults, it
can claim on many counts to be a place of
exceptional historical interest. "It's a
magical city," adds the painter Alejandro
Obregón, who lives in a studio in the calle
de la Factoría.
In 1501 Rodrigo de Bastidas, a lawyer
from Seville, sailed into the Bay of Carta¬
gena with a small band of conquistadors.
The coast was flat and marshy. But the
Spaniards soon noted that the local
people "the Indians", as they called
them were not mere hunters and
fishermen. Their leaders wore golden
jewellery, and their temples were full of
precious stones.
Convinced they were on the threshold
of El Dorado, the longed-for land of gold,
the conquistadors sailed up the Río Mag¬
dalena, penetrating 1,500 kilometres
towards the Andes cordillera. What they
found surpassed all their expectations. In
each village, the richly decorated houses
of the wealthier citizens, the temples and
burial places all indicated the existence of
extraordinary civilizations, Chibcha,
Quimbaya and others. So the Spaniards

A street in the old city.
decided to build a port on the Caribbean
to serve as a warehouse for the wealth of
the country before it was loaded onto
boats for the journey to-Seville.
The Slave of the Slaves
Pedro de Heredia, a Madrid nobleman, laid
the foundations of the city in 1533. The site
was exceptional: the bay, stretching for
seven kilometres, was separated from the
open sea by the Bocagrande peninsula
now a district of the modem city and by
the islands of Tierra Bomba and Baru.



It did not take long for the wealth
stored in Cartagena to attract the greed of
the pirates who were already prowling the
Caribbean. The Spaniards undertook vast
public works to protect the city. The
keystone of the defences was San Felipe
de Barajas, which was built on the highest
point of the neighbourhood. To prevent
the treasure convoys from the Andes from
the risk of attack on their journey to the
Caribbean, the Spaniards dug a 114-kilo-
metre-long canal, navigable for some
ocean-going vessels, from the Río Magda¬
lena to the Bay of Cartagena. It was the
most ambitious engineering venture of the
Spanish colonial epoch.
All these projects required a cheap and
plentiful labour force. At the beginning of
the seventeenth century Cartagena, along
with Vera Cruz in Mexico, was granted a
monopoly of the Caribbean slave trade.
The city subsequently became the greatest
slave market of the New World.
Exhausted by the months-long sea cros¬
sing, the African captives went virtually
straight from the ships to auction at the
feria de negros, or slave market, whose
vestiges can still be seen in today's Plaza de
los Coches, by the entrance to the old city.
When the Jesuit Pedro Claver learned
of the Africans' sufferings on his arrival in
the town in 1610, he made up his mind to
help them, vowing to become the "slave of
the slaves". Subsequently he gave himself
up body and soul to the cause. He died in
1654, and his remains now lie in the eigh¬
teenth-century church that bears his name.
The slaves brought more than just
their misery with them. They also
imported their culture. The traditions,
songs and dances they introduced from
Africa did not please their masters, so to
avoid punishment they mixed Catholic
ritual with animist or Islamic rhythms.
From 1610 on, the Office of the Holy
Inquisition, operating from a palace whose
magnificent baroque gateway can still be
admired in Bolivar Square, was all-
powerful. The rulers of Catholic Spain
thus linked the cross and the sword, the
better to impose their authority. The
Inquisition's first victim was Luis de
Andrea, the leader of a group of slaves
who practiced their traditional religion in
secret on the Popa hill, outside the fortifi¬
cations. In all, 767 people were condemned
for heresy before Colombia attained inde¬
pendence in the early nineteenth century.
Five of them were burned at the stake.
An impregnable fortress
After the pirates who recognized no law
at all, privateers operating in the name of
the King of France or of England came to
threaten Cartagena. In March 1741
English ships were sighted in the bay. The
fleet was bigger than the Armada sent by
Philip II to threaten England in 1588. Its
commander, Edward Vernon, had under
his orders 12,600 sailors, 8,000 soldiers,
2,000 auxiliaries and 1,000 slaves, as well
as a regiment of 4,000 Americans led by
Captain Lawrence Washington. To
confront this force the Cartagena garrison
could only muster 3,000 soldiers, 600
natives armed with bows and arrows and
six warships. The boats were under the
command of Admiral Blas de Lezo, the
hero of 22 previous naval encounters.
Admiral Vernon succeeded in entering
the bay and on the night of 20 April
attacked the fortress of San Felipe de
Barajas. De Lezo and his men resisted
with a ferocity bom of desperation. After
a month the besiegers were forced to
weigh anchor. Today a statue of the hero
of Cartagena still stands at the foot of the
fortress to recall one of the bloodiest epi¬
sodes in the city's history.
The siege of 1741 persuaded the Spanish
to turn Cartagena de Indias into the prin¬
cipal stronghold of their empire. It took
sixty years' work to make it impregnable.
The fortress itself was completely reno¬
vated, and several powerful gun batteries
among them the celebrated Twelve
Apostles were installed in it. They were
linked to one another by an ingenious net¬
work of ramps, drawbridges, turrets, look¬
outs, cul-de-sacs and underground galleries
planned to doom any attempted siege to fai¬
lure. Immense storehouses were hollowed
out of the rock to hold supplies and muni¬
tions. In addition, the fortress was linked to
the city by a submarine tunnel.
The Spaniards did not stop at that,
however. To prevent hostile ocean-going
vessels from entering the bay, they closed
off the principal access channel by building
a kilometre-long barrier on the sea-bed
between the Bocagrande peninsula and the
island of Tierra Bomba. Over a twenty-
five-year period from 1753 to 1778, hun¬
dreds of slaves carted rocks by the ton to
the seashore to be lowered into place
beneath the waves. The dyke remains in
place to this day.
To put the finishing touches to the
defences, the Spaniards built two new forts
to guard the bay's other entrance, between
the islands of Tierra Bomba and Baru. They
were so designed that the guns of one fort,
San Fernando de Bocachica, were directed
at the masts of enemy boats while those of
the opposite one, San José, aimed at the
water-line. The coastal fortifications were
also strengthened, and numerous store¬
houses known as bóvedas were installed
to hold arms and provisions. Cartagena de
Indias was now ready to take on the
strongest fleets.
Behind the fortifications the city was
growing. Sumptuous homes and gardens
enriched it. The house of the Marquis de
Valdehoyos, granted "the privilege of
importing slaves" by the Spanish crown,
remains the architectural jewel of the
colonial era. It lies in the old city, near the
Palace of the Inquisition, and now houses
the Office of Tourism.
Andalusian-style houses line the
neighbouring streets, where horse-drawn ^
carriages circulate until late at night. Inter- ^_

m
The Palace of the Inquisition.



spersed among the houses one finds a
monastery, a baroque church, a museum.
Around squares that are anything but
square, arcaded buildings provide shade
from the burning Sun. Tables on the pave¬
ment, a stone bench under palms, naive
paintings hanging outside a shop, ice¬
cream vendors strolling by, then suddenly
the blare of Caribbean rhythms ripe with
trumpets and brass from inside a record
shop: that is Cartagena de Indias.
Keeping faith with the past
The city has preserved its ramparts and
fortifications as well as most of its build¬
ings. But the sea-winds and the tropical
climate have in some cases started to erode
the stone. To save the most important
monuments, the authorities have for the
past few years undertaken a restoration
programme costing more than $7 million.
But work is frequently halted for lack of
funds. This was the case with the cathedral
clock-tower, whose foundations were laid
at the close of the sixteenth century. Six
hundred thousand dollars are needed to
repair its beautiful, austere façade, and it is
not clear where they will come from.
Work on the Heredia Theatre, built in
1911, has been similarly affected. The
wood frame had to be replaced, and the
monumental staircase, made of Carrara
marble, needed to be taken out and com¬
pletely reconstructed. Operations, which
42 began three years ago, came to a halt again
^m last November.
"There is no general plan for the resto¬
ration of the city," says Alberto Samudio,
forty-six, one of the architects in charge.
For want of funds a handful of monu¬
ments, chosen in consultation with the
City Council and the Ministry of Cultural
Affairs, have been given priority status.
Samudio, who is responsible for the
restoration of the Heredia Theatre, spends
part of his time working on old houses that
have been bought by private buyers. He
has just handed over a seventeenth-century
mansion in the Calle de la Factoría, one of
Cartagena's oldest streets, to its new owner
after two years' work. The floors are of
ebony, increasingly rare in Colombia, as
are some of the beams; the rest are made of
guayacâu, a still more precious wood.
Humberto Benedetti is President of
the Fondo Mixto de Promoción Turística,
the body charged with encouraging pri¬
vate investors and foundations to take an
interest in the restoration of the old
quarter. He states categorically that "Every
house, every building, every fortress that is
to be restored must be assigned a specific
function. It is the only way to stop them
deteriorating again." So the handsome fort
of San Sebastián del Pastelillo has become
the headquarters of the Fishing Club. The
restored Convent of San Diego now
houses the College of Fine Arts. Within
the walls of the Convent of Santa Clara a
250-bed luxury hotel is to be built. The
"Classic de Andrei" restaurant has opened
in an expensively-restored colonial house
boasting sixteenth-century tilework. The
only problem with this policy is that the
lack of systematic supervision by the
authorities allows property developers to
undertake projects that are not properly
thought through, at the risk of defacing
the city.
One reason why it is difficult to res¬
pect the past is because there are few
ancient records for architects to consult.
The director of the city's archives, Moisés
Alvarez, who has twice travelled to Seville
with the aid of a UNESCO grant, has grand
plans. But sadly the only reliable archives
he possesses, apart from a few late-eigh¬
teenth-century protocols, date from the
nineteenth century. "Everything else is in
Seville or Madrid, or was destroyed by the
climate," he says. He has only two dusty
rooms providing 100 square metres of
floorspace in which to store his docu¬
ments. A round table stands in the patio
of the old building next to the Palace of
the Inquisition. It is there that students
UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
and historians must sit when they come to
consult the dossiers.
The city's historian, Eduardo Lemaître,
laments the fact that he has never been
able to raise the money to bring out a
second edition of his four-volume history
of Cartagena. The first edition, running to
only 3,000 copies, is now unobtainable.
Nicolas Cury, the mayor of Cartagena,
sits in a vast office in the Town Hall, which
bears on its façade a UNESCO plaque
placed there in 1985. "The situation is
serious," he says. "In spite of general
goodwill and aid from the state, the Bank
of the Republic and foundations, we still
don't have the resources to restore this
magnificent city as it deserves. We're not
asking people to give us money, simply to
provide long-term credit that would let us
do better than we are at the moment."
In Bolivar Square at the heart of the
city, an equestrian statue of the Liberator
rises up among the palms. Bolivar was
given a hero's welcome when he freed the
city from the Spaniards in 1821. In his
speech of thanks he pronounced the
famous words "Si Caracas me dio la vida,
vosotros me desteis gloria" "Caracas
may have given me birth, but you gave me
glory". Now a city of 500,000 people
whose modern Palace of Congresses bears
testimony to its vitality, Cartagena de
Indias is keeping faith not just with Simón
Bolívar: it is all its past that it intends to
preserve.
A street in the old city with the cathedral in
the background.
