Foreigners
who served
Spain
By Juan Gil
Ï
The welcome extended to
cosmographers and navigators from
other countries was one
of the glories of Renaissance Spain
B
ETWEEN the late fifteenth and the early
sixteenth centuries, Spain was host to a
large number of illustrious foreigners.
Some of them were only passing through, but
others eventually settled there permanently and
in many cases their adoptive country profited
from the qualities they may not have been able
to use in their land of origin.
The presence of foreigners in a country may
sometimes be a pointer to the existence of cer¬
tain failings in it and, as happened in Spain, help
to bring these failings out into the open. At the
end of the Middle Ages, Spain was a country of
many shortcomings and weaknesses which
belied its outstanding achievements and may be
seen as part of the alternating pattern of dark¬
ness and light that is a characteristic feature of
Spanish history. It seems inconceivable that a
country like Castile, which was capable of pro¬
ducing such an accomplished work of literature
as Fernando de Rojas's La Celestina, should be
lacking in humanists. And yet nobles and
royalty alike went off to Italy in search of Latin
tutors for their children. It was in this capacity
that scholars like Pedro Mártir de Anglería,
Lucio Marineo Sículo, the Geraldini brothers,
and many others came to Spain, while Antonio
de Nebrija and Rodrigo de Santaella journeyed
to Bologna to complete their education at the
college founded by the Spanish cardinal
Albornoz. Similarly, many of Spain's printers
came from Germany, the most outstanding
being the Combergers of Seville, who carried
on the family tradition in the New World by
setting up the first printing shop of the Indies in
Mexico early in the sixteenth century.
Many of Spain's shortcomings were plain to
see and it was only natural that the country
should have looked elsewhere in order to com¬
pensate for them. Sometimes, however, when
such a course did not really seem necessary,
foreigners were welcomed and accepted with an
alacrity that surprises us today, given as we are to
more insular ways in spite of the apparent cos¬
mopolitanism of the modern world. In those
days perhaps Spain was more flexible and accom¬
modating than it is now. We certainly did not
lack for generals in the sixteenth century, and yet
the French Constable de Bourbon was summa¬
rily appointed Captain-General of the Spanish
armies which took Rome in 1527 and in which
German, Spanish and Italian soldiers fought side
by side. Some decades later, it was the turn of the
Genoese military commander Spihola to win
fame fighting in Flanders in the service of Spain.
AN OUTWARD-LOOKING AGE
Indeed, one of the most striking features of the
great age of the Spanish discoveries was the
number of foreigners who played a decisive part
"The Reception of
Christiopher Columbus by
Isabella and Ferdinand the
Catholic" (1860), by the
French painter of historical
subjects Eugène Devéria.
19

20
1. The "House of Commerce"
established at Seville in 1503. It
scheduled shipping, collected
duties and trained navigators.
Its buildings today house the
Archives of the Indies.
in them.. The list of names is impressive. The first
Admiral of the Indies, Christopher Columbus
(1451-1506) was from Genoa. Magellan (1480-
1521), who discovered the Straits bearing his
name and gained access to the "South Sea", the
ocean mistakenly called Pacific, was of Portu¬



guese origin. The three great pilots of the Casa
de la Contratación de las Indias^ were foreigners:
Amerigo Vespucci (1454-1512), who went by
the name of Américo Vespucio in Spain, was a
Florentine who acquired Castilian nationality;
Juan Díaz de Solís (who died in 1516) was Por¬
tuguese; and Sebastian Cabot (1476-1557) was
an Englishman whose father was Venetian.
Spain was certainly not lacking in good
navigators and reputable cosmographers.
Vicentiáñez Pinzón was as good a sailor as Soli's
and proved as much in 1492 and in 1499, when
he discovered the mouth of the Amazon, and
again in 1508, when he followed the Central
Vasco Da Gama (left) and
Bartolomeu Dias (right),
portraits in oils painted In
1969 by José Dias Sanches
for the Naval Museum in
Lisbon.
American coast from Honduras to Yucatán.
Juan de la Cosa was as skilful a cosmographer
as Américo Vespucio. Yet the fact remains that
preference was given to competitors from other
countries than Spain.
Considerations other than the intrinsic quali¬
ties of the individuals concerned were clearly
taken into account when the Spanish Crown
chose its servants. It was not advisable to be
proud or ambitious: Vicentiáñez Pinzón and
Juan de la Cosa both made the mistake of seeking
office as Governors of the Indies. Another
factor that may have gone into the reckoning
was the prestige of a navigator's country of
origin, as in the case of Américo Vespucio, who
basked in the glory of Renaissance Florence.
Cabot was a persuasive talker who claimed to
be the recipient of divine inspiration. His elo¬
quence and distinguished bearing may have
stood him in good stead. Monarchs or their

advisers may also have simply been blessed
with good fortune when they took foreigners
into their service; they certainly did the right
thing in welcoming Columbus and Magellan
with open arms. The ambassadors of the period
were not mistaken when they remarked on the
wisdom with which the Catholic Monarchs
chose their associates.
To my mind, this open-minded and out¬
ward-looking attitude was one of Renaissance
Spain's finest qualities. Today the idea of an
Italian becoming a Spanish minister is almost
unthinkable, whereas Columbus in his time
rose not only to the rank of Admiral but
became Viceroy of the Indies. It is not so long
since professors in the Spanish university
system were required to be of Spanish nationa¬
lity, as though our lecture theatres were being
used for trafficking in highly secret matters
that should on no account be allowed to leak
out. Five hundred years ago, a Portuguese
citizen, Barbosa, could teach at Salamanca
without having to go through any tiresome
bureaucratic formalities, yet he was, in theory,
a national of a rival power.
The one thing all these foreigners who came
and settled in Spain had in common was a wish
Sebastian Cabot, illustration
from a 19th-century book on
navigation.
to be integrated into the society of their time.
Their first concern was to cross the language
barrier, and the men who embarked on the
voyages of discovery all successfully overcame
this obstacle, even though they may have
retained the slight trace of an accent and the
occasional peculiar turn of phrase. However,
they were deeply influenced by their newly
acquired language and the large number of Spa¬
nish borrowings which crept into the letters that
Américo Vespucio wrote to the Medicis in the
Tuscan dialect bear witness to the considerable
extent to which he had assimilated Spanish cul¬
ture. Columbus acquired an excellent command
of Castilian Spanish and seldom used Italian,
apart from a celebrated note scribbled in the
margin of his copy of the works of Pliny.
ENTRANCED BY SPAIN
If foreigners were to be well received, it was
politic for them to take a Spanish wife. Almost
all the navigators mentioned above made a
point of fulfilling this requirement, even
though they tended to club together by natio¬
nalities and form clans. The one exception was
Columbus, who did not marry his Cordobán
mistress Beatriz Enríquez Harana, perhaps so
as not to jeopardize his prospects at Court.
Columbus, the most austere of them all, was
the only one whose descendants were to
achieve distinction. Vespucio and Cabot left no
offspring, and Magellan's wife died in child¬
birth, as did their new-born child, while
Magellan himself lost his life on the Philippine
island of Mactán at more or less the same time.
Nothing is known of the fate of Cristus de
Solís, the son of Juan Diaz.
The main thing is that almost all these for¬
eigners ended up, sooner or later, by identifying
themselves with Spanish values, which differed
in many respects from those of other countries
at that time.
Columbus himself is an excellent example
of this. In adult life, Cristoforo Colombo the 21

22
Genoan became Cristóbal Colón the Spaniard.
Keen to promote trade, taciturn and grumpy,
something of a miser, a stubborn defender of
his rights and at the same time an inveterate
dreamer Columbus was all of these. Even¬
tually he came to adopt the way of thinking of
the Spaniards, wanted to be like them and to
compete with their heroes.
It was under this "Castilianized" exterior
that the Admiral of the Ocean Sea faced one of
the most tragic moments of his life, when he
was removed from office as Viceroy in 1500.
After being humiliated by the Franciscans and
stripped of his powers, Columbus wrote to
Doña Juana de la Torre, the governess of Prince
Don Juan de Castilla, not to demand that he be
paid back the millions of ducats he was owed
but rather to plead that he "be reinstated in his
honour" a splendid phrase worthy of the dra-
matiát Calderón de la Barca.
A few paragraphs later, the great navigator
went back on his words and, although not a par¬
ticularly enthusiastic warrior, boasted of his



heroic deeds in battle, saying: "I should be
judged as a captain who set out from Spain for
the Indies bent on conquering many warlike
peoples with very different customs and beliefs
where, through God's will, I have placed another
world under the rule of Their Highnesses, the
King and Queen". Hence, Columbus wanted
to go down in history less as an admiral, or
even a discoverer, than as the conqueror of
boundless lands, where he purported to have
subjugated fierce and and restless peoples. This
statement is particularly incongruous since
these terrifying enemies were in reality the
kindly and peaceable Tainos, who formed the
human cargo of Indians he dispatched in chains
to the Spanish monarchs, by the same token
burdening Queen Isabella of Castile with an
uneasy conscience.
Magellan, another non-Spanish navigator,
was also captivated by Spain. No sooner had he
arrived in Seville than he submitted a plea to
the Emperor Charles I, asking to be allowed to
join the military order of Santiago. His request
was granted almost immediately and may per¬
haps indicate even more strongly than in the
case of Columbus a desire to belong to the Spa¬
nish nobility.
After 1492, Spain had to contend as best it
could with the many challenges brought by the
conquest and colonization of territories situated
hitherto unimaginable distances away. However,
before it was caught up in this whirlwind, and
even afterwards, it welcomed many foreigners
who made major contributions to its glory and
gave them a social status which they had been
denied in the countries where they had been
born. Cabot never received in England the cor¬
dial reception which Columbus enjoyed in
Spain. This is a highly topical lesson in an age
like ours, when some disturbing xenophobic
tendencies are emerging. In the past, Spain had
the magnanimity to welcome Columbus and
Magellan. Had it not done so, it would not have
become the country it is today. D
JUAN GIL
is a Spanish philosopher with
a special interest in the
discovery of America, on
which he has lectured widely
in Europe and in the United
States. He has written a
number of books on the
subject, including: Mitos y
utopías del descubrimiento
(1989; "Myths and Utopias of
the Discovery"), El Libro de
Marco Polo anotado por
Colón (second edition, 1989;
"The Book of Marco Polo with
annotations by Christopher
Columbus") and Hidalgos y
samurais (1991; "Hidalgos
and Samurai").
