TIME OF PROMISE
WE are living in times of radical change, and the
international community through the United
Nations system must address the many challenges and
opportunities to which these changes give rise, not least
in the field of human rights.
With the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of East-
West confrontation, ideological disputes on the basic
concept of human rights have been replaced by general
agreement on the crucial importance of their obser¬
vance, notably for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Human rights are assuming new
dimensions in international relations. A new practice is
emerging: the scope of domestic jurisdiction is narrow¬
ing and the principle of non-intervention is being inter¬
preted more flexibly. Respect for human rights is now a
factor influencing bilateral and multilateral relations and
is moreover regarded as an important criterion for the
recognition of newly independent states. This new and
broader perspective offers the United Nations opportu¬
nities for strengthening human rights mechanisms and
procedures, as well as for establishing new forms of pre¬
ventive and early-warning action.
The substantial progress of civil and political rights
in many regions of the world today in particular Cen¬
tral and Eastern Europe, Latin America and Africa is
obviously a source of great satisfaction. However, such
progress is hardly matched by improvements in eco¬
nomic, social and cultural conditions. There is a real
danger that advances in the political sphere will be
eroded by poverty and underdevelopment. Moreover,
totalitarian or authoritarian régimes in many countries
have left behind them a legacy of hatred, intolerance and
prejudice that can easily express itself as discrimination
based on differences in ethnic origin, language, religion
or belief. These risks are naturally increased by a wider
context of escalating population growth, environmental
threats and the pressures to which many national and
cultural communities are subjected.
TRAINING MINDS
The founding fathers of UNESCO were surely right to
affirm that the political and economic arrangements of
governments are not the sufficient conditions for build¬
ing a more prosperous and secure world. Such a goal
also requires the intellectual and moral solidarity of
mankind, universally recognized values, including res¬
pect for international law, human rights, fundamental
freedoms and human dignity. The surest location for the
defences of peace and human rights is in the minds of
men and women. It is therefore important that human
rights education should become part of the curriculum
from the earliest stages of schooling, since it is the best
way to forge attitudes, shape behaviour and prepare
individuals for assuming rights and responsibilities.
Our ultimate goal is the creation of a comprehensive
system of human rights teaching and education for all
citizens and populations, extending from primary
through university education to out-of-school education.
There are many areas in which UNESCO can make an
original contribution to the development of human rights.
One such area is that of academic freedoms. This issue has
hitherto been dealt with mainly in terms of the profes¬
sional status of teachers and scientific researchers. The
time would seem ripe to discuss and analyse the question
from a broader standpoint in terms of the rights and
freedoms of the members of the academic community,
freedom of scientific research, the right to teach, freedom
of intellectual co-operation, as well as the special respon¬
sibilities of scientists. Another area concerns the impact of
scientific and technological progress on human rights. Of
particular interest here is the study of bioethics. UNESCO
also envisages activities aimed at further elaboration of the
concept of cultural identity and cultural rights, which in
our view cannot be regarded as a sufficiently developed
category of human rights.
LIFE IN DEMOCRACY
But perhaps the most important area of reflection relat¬
ing to human rights at the present time is that of demo¬
cracy. No one can doubt the close links between human
rights and democracy. The struggle for human rights has
paved the way for the democratization process we are
currently witnessing in various parts of the world.
Equally, it is clear that only genuine democracy can
guarantee the full implementation of human rights.
However, democratic institutions can only function
effectively in a cultural context in which citizens,
playing their full participatory role as the agents and
beneficiaries of democratic processes, are able to exer¬
cise the free and informed choices on which democracy
ultimately depends.
Democracy rests on cultural foundations including
patterns of knowledge acquisition and exchange, atti¬
tudes and values which ultimately transcend political
structures. These cultural dimensions of democracy
merit the same kind of serious reflection that the cul¬
tural dimensions of development are at last receiving.
Only democracy can provide the framework within
which minority cultures can find full expression, inter-
cultural dialogue can effectively take place and tolerance
can flourish.
It is our deep conviction that research and education
on human rights need to be supplemented with research
and education on democratic practice. Our main objec¬
tive is to assist in the formation of citizens able and
willing to participate actively in the political, social, eco¬
nomic and cultural life of society and in the decision¬
making process. UNESCO is committed to play a part in
this endeavour, which we have called "the preparation
of societies for life in democracy". O
