The demographic transition
by Jacques Véron
IN 1934, the French politician and polymath Adolphe
Landry formulated a new concept relating to population
change which he termed "the demographic revolution".
This concept was later taken up and given wider currency
by demographers at Princeton University, under the new
label of "the demographic transition".
The concept can be summed up as follows: Economic
advance (or development) upsets the initial equilibrium
between the mortality rate and the birth rate within a given
population, but this equilibrium will eventually be automat¬
ically restored by the interplay of internal mechanisms.
Before the rapid advances in medicine and public
health that have been made over the past century, today's
industrialized countries experienced high birth and mor¬
tality rates and, as a consequence, their demographic
growth rate was low. As medicine and public health
improved, this equilibrium was temporarily broken; the
mortality rate fell, but the birth rate remained unaffected.
As a result, these countries (with high birth rates and low
mortality rates) went through a period of rapid population
increase. Finally, the fall in mortality rates was "absorbed"
and birth rates fell until a new equilibrium (low mortality
and birth rates) was established. The birth rate seems in
some way to react to the fall in the mortality rate, but only
after a certain time-lag.
It is worth taking a closer look at the logic of this
model. Within a given society, vaccination campaigns and
advances in public health come as an impact from the
exterior. The mortality rate is affected immediately, since
some of these medical advances have a major effect on
one of its essential components, infant mortality. The
society, however, is accustomed to a high rate of infant
mortality for which it compensates by a high birth rate.
To counter the risk of losing children in infancy, parents
have more children; and the birth rate will not be modi¬
fied (intermediate period of disequilibrium) until parents
are fully conscious of the change that has occurred in the
mortality rate. Gradually, however, the change in the mor¬
tality rate is perceived and registered by parents, who will
then tend to have fewer children. At the same time, in a
society that was originally rural, but which is tending to
become urban, the status, role and utility (in terms of work)
of children is no longer the same.
The demographic transition model is based on obser¬
vation of demographic change throughout history in
today's developed countries in which the fall in mortality
rates was followed by a drop in birth rates, by urbaniza¬
tion, industrialization and improvement in education. Were
these changes really linked and, if so, how? Can there
really be said to be an automatic mechanism that restores
the demographic balance?
If the demographic equilibrium will automatically be
re-established, then there is no need for concern about
the rapid population growth occurring in many Third World
countries. The very high population growth rates in Kenya
and Bangladesh, for example, may simply mean that these
countries are passing through the intermediate stage of
disequilibrium. But can there be an automatic readjust¬
ment when the intermediate dislocation is very intense?
Excessively rapid population growth raises acute problems
concerning education and employment. There is a danger
that there will be no fall in the birth rate, since the socio¬
cultural changes required to bring the automatic adapta¬
tion mechanism into play will not occur.
If it is accepted that the demographic transition theory
may be faulty, then this implies that political action through
population policies may be necessary and that population
control programmes should be implemented. This view
takes the debate out of the scientific field and places it
in the realm of politics, and attention is then focused on
the persistence of high birth rates as an argument for inter¬
ventionist policies. " 17
