Latin America:
a different
way forward?
by Ernesto Sábato
52
Robotized industrial nations
can learn a salutary
lesson from the supposedly "less
advanced" societies
THE problem of the relationship between
cultures is subtly linked to that of
national or regional identity. For proof
one need only look to Latin America, where
the movement of opposition to the Spanish
conquest, five centuries after the fact, has made
the "return to tradition" a rallying cry without
specifying to which tradition we are supposed
to return. Am I, as an Argentinian of Italian
parentage, expected to write in Quechua or in
Araucanian? Or to reject the influence of
Greek and Latin culture and then that of the
European nations?
World history is a story of invasions, con¬
quests and the intermingling of peoples. Con¬
sider, for instance, a nation like Spain. What is

its "real" identity? If we go far enough back into
the past, we reach the mysterious Iberians
about whom almost nothing is known. In their
footsteps came Phoenicians, Celts, Romans,
Germanic peoples, Greeks and Arabs. What
could the "real" language of such a nation be?
Castilian Spanish with all its Teutonic, Arab,
Greek, Latin, Italian, English and now Amer¬
ican derivations expunged? Purity is a concept
that only has meaning in the world of Platonic
ideals. Nothing in the human world is pure
nor on Mount Olympus either, contaminated
as its denizens were by Egyptian and Babylo¬
nian divinities.
In 1978 I was told that we were celebrating
the millennium of the Spanish language. Sur¬
prised by such precision, I requested further
information. What I learned was that in the
year 978 a monk of the monastery of San
Millán jotted notes in a grotesque Roman dia¬
lect in the margins of a Latin manuscript. He
can hardly have imagined that he was inventing
Castilian Spanish. This is no joke on my part. I
am simply paraphrasing the arguments put for¬
ward to justify the anniversary.
Since Spanish is a living language, not an
invented one, we must refuse the good monk
the honour of having invented it. All he did was
to put into writing some words of a dialect that
had developed over the centuries in the clumsy
and poorly articulated utterances of illiterate
peasants who had no need to read Cicero in
order to raise their pigs, shout for food, scold
their wives or berate their children. It is impos¬
sible to know how long it took to "corrupt
Latin", as one purist has put it but then Latin
had already been corrupted by the Roman sol¬
diery, and would continue to be so through the
development of other tongues. The same point
could be made about the languages of other
nations once invaded by so-called "barbarians"
and now celebrated for their culture.
I am perfectly well aware of the atrocities
committed by the Spaniards in the course of
the conquest, and I am in no way condoning
them. The Spanish conquest of the Americas
was, like all such events, abominable. But if the
descriptions of the "black legend" and all its
attendant horrors were the whole story, it is
hard to see why the defenders of the indige¬
nous peoples' cause do not make their case in
Mayan or the Aztec language. Come to that, it
is also difficult to see why Rubén Dario and
César Vallejo, two of the greatest poets of the
Spanish language and both of mixed race, not
only felt no rancour towards Spain but even
hymned it in memorable poems. Nor is it easy
to explain how, in those circumstances, the cul¬
ture of Hispanic America, having undergone
the influence of the great European intellectual
currents, could not merely have produced one
of the great literatures of the contemporary
Opposite page,
a Mayan stucco sculpture
of a man's head
(classic period, 600-900),
Chiapas, Mexico.
Below, Mask
(pastel and coconut fibre, on
wood), by the Hungarian
artist Blaise Simon (1990).
world but also have influenced European
writers in its turn. Finally one could adduce the
subversive and paradoxical argument that the
colonies owed their liberation to the doctrines
of the Enlightenment and of Romanticism,
both of which originated in Europe.
I am not for a moment denying the element
of snobbery that has characterized Hispanic
America's passing imitations of the great Euro¬
pean intellectual movements. But snobbery is
not limited to new nations: it was not us, to the
best of my knowledge, who invented the word
"snob". True, a great Argentinian intellectual
of the last century discovered the beauty of one
of our own trees by reading a European
Romantic. But just as illustrious, and even
more ridiculous, examples of similar behaviour
can be found in Europe itself. Although Frede¬
rick the Great spoke German as his native
tongue, he only read Wolff's metaphysical
works after they had been translated into
French. The story is frightening as well as
comical, rather as if nineteenth-century Greeks
had had to read Goethe to appreciate the
beauty of the Parthenon.
But that is how culture works, in strange
and roundabout ways. We should not be so
hard on our feeling of awe in face of European
culture, for thanks to it we have in turn been
able to dazzle the Europeans themselves
those same Europeans who once turned to
53

Left and opposite page,
wood sculptures from a
Sakalava royal tomb at
Tsianihy, Madagascar
(c. 1897).
The influence of Indonesian
art has been turned to
original effect in these
imposing figures (height
159.1 and 180.5 cm).
Ernesto Sábato, Argentinian
writer, philosopher and
essayist, is the author of a
number of novels that have
had a great influence on
Latin-American literature.
Among the best-known are El
túnel (1948; The Outsider,
1950) Alejandra (1967) and
Abaddon el exterminador
(1974; "Abaddon the
Exterminator").
Spanish-American novels only for picturesque
effects and local colour, as though solitude, suf¬
fering and death, the ultimate attributes of the
human condition, were not common to all
peoples. I mention this because one American
critic has written, with reference to Borges, that
the Argentinians have no "national" art, doubt¬
less because our culture lacks that quality of
local colour that tourists so admire. What
would this critic make of Moby Dick? Would
he consider Melville stateless on the grounds
that in American territorial waters metaphy¬
sical whales are in short supply?
A THREATENED
WORLDVIEW
Great artists seek the absolute, for art comes,
mysteriously, not just from the conscious mind
but also, and perhaps to a greater extent, from
the submerged layers of the unconscious, the
domain of the life urge and the death wish. Yet
although this visionary form of art is essentially
subjective, its subject-matter does not exist in
isolation, but has a specific society and a given
culture as its context. And every artist, however
magisterial, reflects the influence of others, just
as Beethoven came out of Mozart. In the same
way, our art has European antecedents, but the
link in no way diminishes its (relative) origina¬
lity, for those forms of artistic expression that
are not collective endeavours, like the building
of the cathedrals, are individual and unique.
The basic difference between science and art
lies in the fact that scientists strip away the self
from their view of the world, while artists do
not aspire to such abstraction. The originality
of art lies precisely in this apparent incapacity,
which explains why art has style while science
does not: it would be meaningless to look for
the "style" of Pythagoras in his celebrated
theorem. The language of science is ultimately
no more than a sequence of abstract and imper¬
sonal symbols, while a work of art is a unique
and original mark left on the world, the
concrete expression, enigmatic and uncertain,
of a creature of flesh and blood.
Although this difference between science
and artistic creation has always existed, it has
now attained critical importance. By overval¬
uing science and technology, the thinking of
the philosophers of the European Enlighten¬
ment and their positivist successors has
involved the human race in an accelerating pro¬
cess of abstraction and rationalization. The
resulting crisis is not just that of capitalism or
of socialist dictatorships, but also that of a cer¬
tain view of the world that has ended by forc¬
ing both opposing camps into the same mould
and establishing the reign of mass man. Under
both systems for scientific knowledge knows
no politics the sciences are all the more
powerful because they are abstract. Humanity

has been led off towards a mathematical
Olympus, leaving flesh-and-blood humans
increasingly alone and confused. Steel and the
triangle, logarithms and nuclear energy have all
come together with the most abstract forms of
economic power to create a diabolical machine
in which human beings have become anony¬
mous and powerless cogs.
It is already possible to measure the terrible
price we have had to pay for having. banished
the archaic powers of the unconscious mind.
The hidden gods have had their revenge in the
form of collective hysteria, widespread anxiety,
the devastation of whole peoples by technol¬
ogy, sadistic violence and drug abuse, which is
not, as is often wrongly claimed, a problem of
delinquency.
The true
realists
So what does the dialectic of cultures amount
to? What role is there for the poor nations
that huge majority of peoples oppressed by the
myopia and mad avarice of the world banking
system and the rich countries in a world in
which social injustice prevails and where mil¬
lions of children are dying of hunger?
Some countries, including my own, have
already advanced halfway along the path sepa¬
rating us from the great industrial powers and
it is important that we should not make the
same mistakes as they have. Progress must be
welcomed, but only if it is illuminated by the
light of the great philosophies of life and by the
wisdom and foresight of those thinkers who in
the nineteenth century were already looking
for ways of restoring a sacred dimension to
nature and to humankind. Let us avoid at all
costs the alienation of the individual by exces¬
sive state power, the world of mass man, the
spread of megalopolises built for robots, the
destruction of ancient cultures, centralization,
and contempt for small nations, however small
they may be above all if they are very small.
All of this may sound Utopian and may
draw smiles from so-called realists. But if "re¬
alists" are those who are destroying all forms of
reality, from nature in all its nobility to the
souls of children and adolescents, it seems wise
to turn instead for inspiration to those who
believe it is impossible to live without these
ideals. We are all aware of the crisis of ideolo¬
gies, but that does not mean that we must give
up the great ideals of freedom, justice and a
belief in the sacred nature of the human being.
In this respect, the so-called "backward" coun¬
tries, in which people have not been trans¬
formed into robots, have a salutary lesson to
teach us all. As Schopenhauer put it in a phrase
later quoted by Nietzsche, "There are periods
of history in which progress is reactionary and
reaction is progressive". O 55
