Five hundred
44
THIS is a year of great historical significance,
since it enables us to look back and take stock
of a remarkable series of events which took
place 500 years ago. The passage of time has brought
a new perspective on these events, the effects of
which can now be fully appreciated. The capture of
Granada on 2 January 1492 by the Reyes Católicos
the "Catholic Monarchs" as Ferdinand and Isabella
were known had a European-wide impact. Spain
had abstained from taking part in the Crusades and
had instead devoted its energies to its own reunifica¬
tion. When engaged on research in the archives of
Genoa, I came across a decree signed by the Doge of
that maritime republic ordering that the taking of
Granada should be celebrated not only with the
usual artillery salute but with a three-day holiday.
On 31 March the Edict expelling the Jews was
signed. And Spain, the melting pot of European and
Mediterranean cultures which she transmitted to the
western hemisphere, has the privilege of having been
named by Arabs and Jews in their own languages as
Al-Andalus and Sefarad, respectively.
Had these two historical events, with their far-
reaching geographical and political consequences,
not taken place, Christopher Columbus would pro¬
bably have not been able to secure the signature by
the King and Queen on 17 April 1492 of the Capi¬
tulaciones de Santa Fe, that extraordinary contract
(or so it seems today), between a government and a
private individual who demanded advance recogni¬
tion of his rights to something which no-one yet
knew existed. Without this agreement, Christopher
Columbus and the Pinzón brothers would not have
been able to fit out the three vessels in which they
set sail from Palos, in Huelva province, on 2 August
and lost sight of land off La Gomera, in the Canary
Islands, on 9 September.
In his letter of 15 February 1493 to the Catholic
Kings, Columbus reported that, after thirty-three
days' sailing, he had made landfall on the previous 12
October, the date that has since been regarded as that
of the birth of a New World through the encounter
between the indigenous peoples of America and
voyagers from the old continent. Apparently,
however, Columbus's discovery did not make the
same impact as the capture of Granada: in the
Genoese archives I was unable to find any trace of a
reaction to his exploit, although the letter describing
it had circulated widely in Europe. Of course this
does not necessarily mean that the event had not
been reported, especially in view of the relations that
then existed between Genoa and Barcelona, where
the Catholic Kings received Columbus on his return
to the peninsula after his first great voyage.
Little must have been known in Genoa of the
approaches made to European monarchs by
Columbus, who, it is true, had more links with Por¬
tugal than with his native city. How different was
the impact of the letter sent later to Florence by
Amerigo Vespucci, then in the service of Spain,
which was so considerable that the name of the Flo¬
rentine navigator would be given to the newly-dis¬
covered lands. Columbus had little influence on the
political life of the Republic of Genoa, where he was
only remembered many years later.
A GRAMMAR FOR AN EMPIRE
It would scarcely have been possible for
Columbus's caravels to have taken with them the
"Grammar of the Castilian language" which Elio
Antonio de Nebrija published at Salamanca on 18
August. The date is worth mentioning, because if
Nebrija thought that a language can play a role in
strengthening an Empire, he was of course thinking
of the Holy Roman Empire and certainly not of the
Spanish Empire, which did not then exist.
It is also sometimes forgotten that Nebrija's
monumental work, the fruit of many years' study,
was on a language that had already existed for 500
years. Today, fortunately, the language has ceased to
be an instrument of domination and has become a
vehicle of international co-operation and solidarity.
This year, Spanish-speakers will have the satisfaction
of seeing their age-old language being used for the
first time officially at a World Fair, EXPO 92 at
Seville, a city dear to the heart of Nebrija.
If the modern communications media had
existed at that time, what account might have come
down to us of the events of 1492, that annus
mirabilis which saw Spain transformed into a
modern nation-state like France and England, if
only because the political union concluded between
Castile and Aragon was extended to lands whose
size and importance were still unknown, and were
seen in terms of a logic specific to Europe at that
time which nothing seemed likely to contradict. It
would have been fascinating to know how the Taino
Indians reacted to their discovery of Columbus and
to the arrival of men whose apparel and customs
were so unlike theirs.
Of all these events, and the many others that
occurred in Europe in the same year, the discovery
of a new continent was to have the greatest geogra¬
phical, scientific and historical impact. As Seneca
had predicted, Thule would no longer mark the end
of the Earth. The European countries with an
Atlantic seaboard began to compete with each other
overseas. Spain and Portugal would carve up much
of the New World between them, and England and
France would contend with each other for the north
of the continent. Curiously, these voyages of dis¬
covery, which were prompted by political and, later,
by economic imperatives, did not all have the same
impact on Europe. Much time would elapse before
historical and geographical atlases took full account
of the Portuguese and Spanish voyages of explora¬
tion. Columbus's landing on the island of Guaha-
nani was profoundly important, but the dreaded
crossing of the African Equator was no less so. It is
accepted today that 1492 can only be seen in the
context of the maritime expansion of the Iberian
peoples in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, a
process whose effects were so far-reaching that they
can still be felt five centuries later. One need only
think of the exhibition UNESCO organized last
spring on the theme of "The Encounter between

YEARS FROM NOW
By Félix Fernández-Shaw
Two Worlds in the Written Word," in which over a
thousand recently published volumes in many lan¬
guages were presented to mark the fifth centenary.
To the best of my knowledge this encounter was
commemorated for the first time on its fourth cente¬
nary. On that occasion the Uruguayan Minister Ple-
nipoteniary, Zorrilla de San Martín, speaking in the
name of the Ibero-American diplomatic corps as a
whole, made a speech at Palos which is still remem¬
bered. At the same time the important Raccolta
colombina was appearing in Italy, while in the
United States too, on the initiative of Italians, the
anniversary of 12 October 1492 was celebrated for
the first time. Today the time is ripe to make an
assessment of all the studies that have been pub¬
lished on the subject, including a number of docu¬
ments that have recently come to light, and to relate
them to the age in which we live. It is both
constructive and necessary to examine certain
aspects of history more closely.
In my opinion, however, it would be wrong to
dwell exclusively on what has happened between
then and now. I reel that we should also think about
the future and ask ourselves how future generations
will judge us in 500 years' time. Shall we have been
capable of taking the giant strides needed for history
and humanity to move ahead, or shall we have clung
to our old ways, forgetting that they can only
remain valid if they are geared to the future and
thus have fallen victim to a historicist narcissism
which it is hard to excuse?
For the history of international relations no
event has ever been so rich in consequences as the
encounter between two worlds. Christopher
Columbus used the word "discovery" in his letter
to the Catholic Kings and it has been accepted ever
since as being perfectly normal by generations of
teachers and students on both sides ofthe Atlantic.
From discovery to encounter
Since that time perceptions of the world have
changed, as can be seen from the fact that one fea¬
ture of this fifth centenary is a preoccupation with
the "Other". In the context of an age dominated by
communication it is essential to listen to and respect
the "Other". The encounter between two worlds is
a fact that cannot be denied. It is clearly something
that transcends the notion of discovery which
(whether we are thinking in terms of geography,
biology or chemistry) is invariably associated with a
specific date, and needs to be complemented by the
more timeless concept of encounter, which implies a
continuing process. On the eve of the third millen¬
nium, this is a concept that is attractive to all
concerned, since it expresses a common desire for
unity and integration that, with all due respect to
minorities and their past, opens the way to dialogue
and harmony.
The word discovery gives prominence to the
heroes of the enterprise; the word encounter gives
more emphasis to the peoples who actually
"encountered" each other and gave substance to a
New World. Whereas discovery marks a happening,
an event, encounter conveys better the idea of the
political journey that has brought us to the reality of
today, spanning the five hundred years since 1492.
As I have written elsewhere: "Every commemo¬
ration has both an historical and a political meaning.
It is not enough simply to recall an event, all its
implications must also be thrown into relief, since,
generally speaking, we remember only what is
important. We always associate an event with a date
for this is how we pass it on to the next generation.
A commemoration is a historical act since it forms
part of a chain of events. These historical and poli¬
tical milestones are valuable because they relate the
present to both the past and the future." It was
inevitable that history written from a Eurocentric
standpoint should speak in terms of discovery and it
is equally inevitable that, as history has now come
to be seen in universal terms, we should have
adopted so evocative a term as encounter.
What legacy shall we hand down to the genera¬
tion living five hundred years from now? What pro¬
gress will have been made between now and then to
understanding how people live and what their aspi¬
rations are? What contribution will those who cele¬
brate the sixth, seventh or eighth centenaries make
to the complex pattern of historical and political
developments? Will the attempts made today to
achieve a better understanding of the events of 1492
be of any interest five centuries hence? Take as an
example my own country in which it took so much
effort and such great sacrifice to restore democracy
and to work out a Constitution that would bring all
Spaniards together. Who would have thought that,
before 1992, Spain would have altered its political
and historical dimension by espousing the cause of a
European Community, or that, on 1 January 1993,
she will turn the page on ancient rivalries? Who
would have thought that in July 1991, for the first
time in their common history, the Heads of State
and of Government of the Spanish- and Portuguese-
speaking countries would hold an Ibero-American
summit conference at Guadalajara, Mexico? Who
would have thought that, before the end of 1991,
Arabs and Jews would meet in Madrid for a peace
conference and would return after so many years, to
discuss their problems on soil once so familiar to
them?
Some anniversaries cannot be overlooked, for
they form part and parcel of the history of peoples.
Even so, we should take advantage of them to bring
the event being commemorated into sharper focus
against its particular political and social background.
For myself, I should prefer to be thinking of the 500
years that lie ahead. We must go forward with a
greater awareness of the past but in the full know¬
ledge that we in the present have to look to the
future. The anniversary of 1492 will come round
again in a hundred years' time and it will again be
imperative to take stock, for history constantly has
to be rewritten. It is up to us to ensure that the event
is an ever-richer source of hope. The year 1992 can
only make sense if we find in it a justification for the
future. G
FELIX FERNANDEZ-SHAW,
a Spanish diplomat with
doctorates in law and in
information science, has
served as his country's
Ambassador to Syria, Cyprus,
Uruguay, Chile, and,
currently, to Unesco.
45
