The two faces of Europe
by Enrique Barón Crespo
European imperialism has
led many peoples to look
askance at the universal
values proclaimed by
Europe. But it is on this
heritage that the future
must be built
WHY should we be concerned with the
universal? For one thing surely
because the future of humanity on our
planet is the day-to-day responsibility of all of
us, everywhere. For another because the uphea¬
vals of the past few years have often triggered
reactions that oblige us to ask where we stand in
relation to the universal. What do we see around
us? A retreat into self-absorption, a resurgence of
aggressive sectarianism, a rising tide of nationa¬
lism, communities turning to fundamentalism.
We are witnessing a collective identity crisis
accompanied in some cases by a crumbling of the
forces that hold societies together.
In spite of this perhaps even because of
it the context in which these shifts in identity
are taking place is one of an irresistible march
towards globalization. Societies everywhere are
involved in the same processes of wealth-cre¬
ation and exchange. All societies, at least those
that are free, have access to much the same
information and, for better or for worse, the
same television mythology, the same games, the
same tragedies and the same hopes. But this
globalizing trend is egalitarian only in appear¬
ance, since it reproduces inequalities, imbalances
and tensions across the planet. To see that this is
so, one need only consider the current state of
North-South relations.
Yet out of this contradictory situation, with
its convergences and divergences, a completely
new historical configuration is emerging. We
may be entering an era of global immediacy.
Universality is ceasing to be an abstraction, as
part of a natural process shaped by the qualities
of each and every one of us. We cannot join in
this chorus of many voices unless we accept its
diversity. People today are no longer only
asking themselves about their place in their
families, their towns and cities, their regions
and their countries, but also about the role they
should play in the future of our planet, and
what they must do to remedy the harm caused
by pollution, technology and progress. 11

Both for societies and for individuals the
word universality has many different meanings,
coloured by a host of historical, cultural and
religious connotations. It would be wrong to
attach priority to one of these meanings and try
to impose it on everybody. Modern anthropo¬
logy and ethnology have taught us that no civili¬
zation is superior to any other, that there is no
such thing as "advanced" or "primitive" intelli¬
gence, only collective mental images that must
be judged on their own terms. Yet we must
beware of falling into the trap of all-comprehen¬
sive relativism. When widely differing cultures
come into contact, some values remain inviolate,
and we must try to preserve them and ensure
that they are respected, not so much because
they serve our own particular interests as
because, through each and every one of us, they
reach out to embrace the whole of humanity.
Have we not entered a historico-cultural
period in which it will be possible to win uni¬
versal support for certain fundamental values?
A twofold demand for freedom and human
dignity is evident in social relations every-
Tofem (1991),
mixed media on batik by the
Slovenian artist
Anièce J. Novak. In the
words of its creator, this
work inspired by the sand-
paintings of the Navajo
Indians of North America is
an attempt to express a
"vision of one world in which
each element has its place
in a harmonious whole, thus
linking us to the universal."
where. This fundamental imperative is at the
heart of all questions relating to human rights.
Having contributed to the downfall of more
than one monolithic empire, it now requires
those of us who rightly defend equality of
opportunity and living conditions to reflect on
the best way to equate living well with living
freely. This equation is becoming a funda¬
mental and, when it is solved, a universal value.
Like Janus, Europe has two faces, a dual
identity oscillating between good and evil. As
the French historian Fernand Braudel once put
it, Europe is both hell and paradise. The past
two centuries have seen modernization and
progress but also war, revolution, colonization
and totalitarianism. Paradoxically, it is through
this duality that Europe has, since the sixteenth
century, made its mark on the world. Its great¬
est sin, perhaps, has been to fashion that world
in its own image. For the most part the rest of
the globe has paid it back by assimilating
its humanitarian ideals while rejecting its urge
to dominate. This is a lesson we must never
forget.
LA /'"NN / ,
12
Enrique Barón Crespo,
former Spanish
government minister,
was president of the
European Parliament at
the time when the
seminar on "Universal
culture and Europe" was
held. He is the author of
El rapto de Europa
(1990).
