WHAT IS DEMOCRACY?
byAlain Touraine
8
DEMOCRACY these days is more com¬
monly defined in negative terms, as
freedom from arbitrary actions, the per¬
sonality cult or the rule of a nomenklatura, than
by reference to what it can achieve or the social
forces behind it. What are we celebrating today?
The downfall of authoritarian regimes or the
triumph of democracy? And we think back and
remember that popular movements which over¬
threw anciens régimes have given rise to totalita¬
rian regimes practising state terrorism.
So we are initially attracted to a modest,
purely liberal concept of democracy, defined
negatively as a regime in which power cannot
be taken or held against the will of the major¬
ity. Is it not enough of an achievement to rid
the planet of all regimes not based on the free
choice of government by the governed? Is this
cautious concept not also the most valid, since
it runs counter both to absolute power based
on tradition and divine right, and also to the
voluntarism that appeals to the people's inter¬
ests and rights and then, in the name of its libe¬
ration and independence, imposes on it military
or ideological mobilization leading to the
repression of all forms of opposition?
This negative concept of democracy and
freedom, expounded notably by Isaiah Berlin
and Karl Popper, is convincing because the
main thing today is to free individuals and
groups from the stifling control of a governing
élite speaking on behalf of the people and the
nation. It is now impossible to defend an anti-
liberal concept of democracy, and there is no
longer any doubt that the so-called "people's
democracies" were dictatorships imposed on
peoples by political leaders relying on foreign
armies. Democracy is a matter of the free
choice of government, not the pursuit of
"popular" policies.
In the light of these truths, which recent
events have made self-evident, the following
question must be asked. Freedom of political
choice is a prerequisite of democracy, but is it
the only one? Is democracy merely a matter of
procedure? In other words, can it be defined
without reference to its ends, that is to the rela¬
tionships it creates between individuals and
groups? At a time when so many authoritarian
regimes are collapsing, we also need to examine
the content of democracy although the most
urgent task is to bear in mind that democracy
cannot exist without freedom of political choice.
The collapse of the revolutionary
illusion
Revolutions sweep away an old order: they do
not create democracy. We have now emerged
from the era of revolutions, because the world
is no longer dominated by tradition and reli¬
gion, and because order has been largely
replaced by movement. We suffer more from
the evils of modernity than from those of tradi¬
tion. Liberation from the past interests us less
and less; we are more and more concerned
about the growing totalitarian power of the
new modernizers. The worst disasters and the
greatest injury to human rights now stem not
from conservative despotism but from modern¬
izing totalitarianism.
We used to think that social and national
revolutions were necessary prerequisites for the
birth of new democracies, which would be
social and cultural as well as political. This idea
has become unacceptable. The end of our cen¬
tury is dominated by the collapse of the revolu¬
tionary illusion, both in the late capitalist coun¬
tries and in the former colonies.
But if revolutions move in a direction dia¬
metrically opposed to that of democracy, this
does not mean that democracy and liberalism
necessarily go together. Democracy is as far
removed from liberalism as it is from revolu¬
tion, for both liberal and revolutionary regimes,
despite their differences, have one principle in

m,
H -i'-W
1 j^HBHH^^K'4
common: they both justify political action
because it is consistent with natural logic.
Revolutionaries want to free social and
national energies from the shackles of the capi¬
talist profit motive and of colonial rule. Lib¬
erals call for the rational pursuit of interests and
satisfaction of needs. The parallel goes even fur¬
ther. Revolutionary regimes subject the people
to "scientific" decisions by avant-garde intel¬
lectuals, while liberal regimes subject it to the
power of entrepreneurs and of the "enlight¬
ened" classes the only ones capable of
rational behaviour, as the French statesman
Guizot thought in the nineteenth century.
But there is a crucial difference between
these two types of regime. The revolutionary
approach leads to the establishment of an all-
powerful central authority controlling all
aspects of social life. The liberal approach, on
the other hand, hastens the functional differen¬



tiation of the various areas of life politics, reli¬
gion, economics, private life and art. This
reduces rigidity and allows social and political
conflict to develop which soon restricts the
power of the economic giants.
But the weakness of the liberal approach is
that by yoking together economic moderniza¬
tion and political liberalism it restricts democracy
Démocratie (1991),
mixed technique (rope on
canvas), by Hamid, a
Moroccan painter living in
Martinique.

10
to the richest, most advanced and best-educated
nations. In other words, elitism in the interna¬
tional sphere parallels social elitism in the
national sphere. This tends to give a governing
elite of middle-class adult men in Europe and
America enormous power over the rest of the
world over women, children and workers at
home, as well as over colonies or dependent
territories.
One effect of the expanding power of the
world's economic centres is to propagate the
spirit of free enterprise, commercial consump¬
tion and political freedom. Another is a grow¬
ing split within the world's population be¬
tween the central and the peripheral
sectors the latter being not that of the subject
peoples but of outcasts and marginals. Capital,
resources, people and ideas migrate from the
periphery and find better employment in the
central sector.
The liberal system does not automatically,
or naturally, become democratic as a result of
redistribution of wealth and a constantly rising
standard of general social participation. Instead
it works like a steam engine, by virtue of a big
difference in potential between a hot pole and a
cold pole. While the idea of class war, often dis¬
regarded nowadays, no longer applies to post-
revolutionary societies, it still holds good as a
description of aspects of liberal society that are
so basic that the latter cannot be equated with
democracy.
The twilight
of social democracy
This analysis is in apparent contradiction with
the fact that social democracy developed in the
most capitalist countries, where there was a
considerable redistribution of income as a
result of intervention by the state, which
appropriated almost half the national income
and in some cases, especially in the Scandina¬
vian countries, even more.
The main strength of the social democratic
idea stems from the link it has forged between
democracy and social conflict, which makes the
working-class movement the main driving-
force in building a democracy, both social and
political. This shows that there can be no
democracy unless the greatest number sub¬
scribes to the central principles of a society and
culture but also no democracy without fun¬
damental social conflicts.
What distinguishes the democratic position
from both the revolutionary and the liberal
position is that it combines these two prin¬
ciples. But the social democratic variant of
these principles is now growing weaker, partly
because the central societies are emerging from
industrial society and entering post-industrial
society or a society without a dominant model,
and partly because we are now witnessing the
triumph of the international market and the
weakening of state intervention, even in
Europe.
So Swedish social democracy, and most par¬
ties modelled on social democracy, arc
anxiously wondering what can survive of the
policies constructed in the middle of the cen¬
tury. In some countries the trade union move¬
ment has lost much of its strength and many of
its members. This is particularly true in France,
the United States and Spain, but also in the
United Kingdom to say nothing of the ex-
communist countries, where trade unions long
ago ceased to be an independent social force. In
nearly all countries trade unionism is moving
out of the industrial workplace and turning
into neocorporatism, a mechanism for protect¬
ing particular professional interests within the
machinery of the state: and this leads to a back-

lash in the form of wild-cat strikes and the
spread of parallel ad hoc organizations.
So we come to the most topical question



about democracy: if it presupposes both parti¬
cipation and conflict, but if its social-demo¬
cratic version is played out, what place does it
occupy today? What is the specific nature of
democratic action, and what is the "positive"
content of democracy? In answering these
questions we must first reject any single prin¬
ciple: we must equate human freedom neither
with the universalism of pragmatic reason (and
hence of interest) nor with the culture of a
community. Democracy can neither be solely
liberal nor completely popular.
Unlike revolutionary historicism and liberal
utilitarianism, democratic thinking today starts
from the overt and insurmountable conflict
between the two faces of modern society. On
the one hand is the liberal face of a continually
changing society, whose efficiency is based on
A symbolic ¡mage of
tradition and modernity.
Young Algerians play in front
of the shrine of a marabout
(a Muslim holy man) and, in
background, a natural gas
processing plant.
the maximization of trade, and on the circula¬
tion of money, power, and information. On the
other is the opposing image, that of a human
being who resists market forces by appealing to
subjectivity the latter meaning both a desire
for individual freedom and also a response to
tradition, to a collective memory. A society free
to arbitrate between these two conflicting
demands that of the free market and that of
individual and collective humanity, that of
money and that of identity may be termed
democratic.
The main difference as compared with the
previous stage, that of social democracy and the
industrial society, is that the terms used are
much further apart than before. We are now
concerned not with employers and wage-ear¬
ners, associated in a working relationship, but
with subjectivity and the circulation of sym¬
bolic goods.
These terms may seem abstract, but they are
no more so than employers and wage-earners.
They denote everyday experiences for most
people in the central societies, who are aware
that they live in a consumer society at the same
time as in a subjective world. But it is true that
these conflicting facets of people's lives have not
so far found organized political expression
just as it took almost a century for the political
categories inherited from the French Revolution
to be superseded by the class categories specific
to industrial society. It is this political time-lag
that so often compels us to make do with a
negative definition of democracy.
Arbitration
Democracy is neither purely participatory nor
purely liberal. It above all entails arbitrating,
and this implies recognition of a central conflict
between tendencies as dissimilar as investment
and participation, or communication and sub¬
jectivity. This concept can be adapted to the
most affluent post-industrializing countries and
to those which dominate the world system; but
does it also apply to the rest of the world, to
the great majority of the planet?
A negative reply would almost completely
invalidate the foregoing argument. But in Third
World countries today arbitration must first
and foremost find a way between exposure to
world markets (essential because it determines
competitiveness) and the protection of a per¬
sonal and collective identity from being deval¬
ued or becoming an arbitrary ideological
construct.
Let us take the example of the Latin Amer¬
ican countries, most of which fall into the
category of intermediate countries. They are
fighting hard and often successfully to regain
and then increase the share of world trade they 11

Search for identity (1989),
elmwood sculpture by the
French artist Francis Cuny.
once possessed. They participate in mass cul¬
ture through consumer goods, television pro¬
grammes, production techniques and educa¬
tional programmes. But at the same time they
are reacting against a crippling absorption into
the world economic, political and cultural
system which is making them increasingly
dependent. They are trying to be both univer¬
salist and particularist, both modern and faith¬
ful to their history and culture.
Unless politics manages to organize arbitra¬
tion between modernity and identity, it cannot
fulfil the first prerequisite of democracy,
namely to be representative. The result is a dan¬
gerous rift between grass-roots movements seek¬
ing to defend the individuality of communities,
and political parties, which are no more than
coalitions formed to achieve power by support¬
ing a candidate.
The main difference between the central
countries and the peripheral ones is that in the
former a person is defined primarily in terms
of personal freedom, but also as a consumer,
whereas in the latter the defence of collective
identity may still be more important, to the
extent that there is pressure from abroad to
impose some kind of bloodless revolution in
the form of compulsory modernization on the
pattern of other countries.
This conception of democracy as a process
of arbitration between conflicting components
of social life involves something more than the
idea of majority government. It implies above
all recognition of one component by another,
and of each component by all the others, and
hence an awareness both of the similarities and
the differences between them. It is this that
most sharply distinguishes the "arbitral"
concept from the popular or revolutionary view
of democracy, which so often carries with it the
idea of eliminating minorities or categories
opposed to what is seen as progress.
In many parts of the world today there is
open warfare between a kind of economic
modernization which disrupts the fabric of
society, and attachment to beliefs. Democracy
cannot exist so long as modernization and
identity are regarded as contradictory in this
way. Democracy rests not only on a balance or
compromise between different forces, but also
on their partial integration. Those for whom
progress means making a clean sweep of the
past and of tradition are just as much the ene¬
mies of democracy as those who see moderni¬
zation as the work of the devil. A society can
only be democratic if it recognizes both its
unity and its internal conflicts.
Hence the crucial importance, in a demo¬
cratic society, of the law and the idea of justice,
defined as the greatest possible degree of com¬
patibility between the interests involved. The
prime criterion of justice is the greatest possible
freedom for the greatest possible number of
actors. The aim of a democratic society is to
produce and to. respect the greatest possible
amount of diversity, with the participation of
the greatest possible number in the institutions
and products of the community. Q
12
ALAIN TOURAINE,
French sociologist, is Director
of Studies and Director of the
Centre d'analyse et
d'intervention sociologiques
(CADIS) of the Ecole des
Hautes Etudes en Sciences
Sociales in Paris. He has
published many books and
articles on sociological theory
and the sociology of
development. His most
recent book is Critique de la
Modernité (Fayard, Paris,
1992).
