Homerand the Greek ideal
by Bérénice Geoffroy
Homer the story-teller,
by the French artist Félix
Boisselier (1776-1811).
THE two great epic poems of ancient
Greece, Homer's Iliad and Odyssey, have
been called "The Bible of the Greek
world". An inexhaustible source of fable and
myth, they lay bare before us the system of
values of an élite warrior society. Leaving aside
their literary qualities, the Homeric epics
become a kind of manual of ethics or treatise
on the ideal. Regarded as "classics" in the same
way as, later, were the works of Dante in Italy
and Shakespeare in England, they were essen¬
tial reading for any cultivated Greek. Alexander
the Great himself is said to have carried them
with him on his campaigns.
Behind the shadowy figure of Homer the
poet, there seems to loom the silhouette of the
archetypal educator, the "transmitter of culture"
that one comes across in many civilizations.
Whether the works of "Homer" were born of
the inspiration of a single man or of a number of
bards (a question that does not concern us
here), the epic became a "teaching art", contain¬
ing elements of both technology and ethics,
which was to have considerable influence on

10
the poets and philosophers of later centuries.
Did not Plato himself accord to Homer the
glorious title of "Educator of Greece"?
The Iliad and the Odyssey (generally
thought to date from the middle and the end of
the eighth century BC respectively) are peopled
with gods and heroes who provide models for
posterity and are the instruments of an inci¬
pient paideia (education system). Far from
being a kind of spontaneous emanation from
the people, as was the accepted view in the
nineteenth century, the epic was a complex
creation which became the main instrument in
the training of the individual and his or her
integration into society.
Like Valmiki, the supposed author of the
Ramayana, like the Akkadian, Kirghiz and
'Tibetan poets, and like Scheherazade of the
Thousand and One Nights, Homer draws on
heroic inspiration to convey a moral message.
The French philologist and historian Georges
Dumézil was not mistaken when he declared that
the Indo-European epics were "works of mature
reflection, carefully thought through by talented,
ingenious, learned experts" with the backing of a
warrior class imbued with aristocratic ideals.
Paths of glory
As the German historian Werner Jaeger has
pointed out: "The history of Greek culture is
paralleled in most important respects by the
history of Greek literature; indeed, literature, in
the sense that this was understood by its earl¬
iest creators, was the expression in words of
the process by which the Greek ideal was
formed." The word paideia did not come into
use until the fifth century BC, but the word
aretee (virtue, in its original sense) occurs fre¬
quently in the epics, signifying a mixture of
manly pride, courtly behaviour and soldierly
valour. In Homer, aretee means not only indi¬
vidual merit but also the perfection of things
superhuman, and then, finally, the essential
quality of a noble man. The root of the word
aretee is the same as that of aristos (best), from
which is derived the English word "aristocrat"
in the sense of member of the nobility.
Used at first to extol the manly strength and
skill of the soldier or the athlete, then primarily
ardour in battle, aretee gradually took on a wider
ethical significance. In addition to the notion of
manly valour, it came to take on the sense of
aidos (duty) and its counterpart in case of dis¬
honour, nemesis (retributive justice). Bearing this
in mind, it becomes more clearly evident that the
Iliad is really a tragedy of offended honour, as
portrayed through the wrath of Achilles. The
unending struggle to achieve supremacy over
one's peers ("Always be the best and maintain
your superiority over others" such was the
precept that Peleus gave to his son Achilles)
now developed, for the first time, into the com-
BERENICE GEOFFROY is a
French journalist specializing
in archaeology and the history
of art. She contributes to a
number of magazines and
publications including
Archaeologia, Muséart and
the encyclopaedia Clartés.
bative ideal, which saw life as an athletic com¬
petition and was to become one of the most
significant features of the Greek psyche.
Gradually, however, the notion of nobility of
mind came to be added to that of nobility of
deed, heralding the concept of kalokagathia
(beauty/good), which Plato and Aristotle were
to define some centuries later. "One should
strive to be a good orator as well as a valiant war¬
rior", declared Phoenix, mentor of Achilles, the
archetypal Greek hero, epitome of refined
humanity and all-round example for posterity.
Nobility of spirit the manifestation of this
moral and intellectual superiority was accom¬
panied by a certain "self-esteem" which, devoid
of egoism, reflected an aspiration to "Beauty" as
it was later defined by Aristotle. Prepared to give
up everything and to fight to the death to gain
the reward of imperishable glory, such perfect
heroes as Ajax and Achilles were ready to sacri¬
fice their physical being in the service of a higher
ideal. In so doing they laid the foundations of the
classical pedagogical tradition that Plato and
Aristotle were to develop to supreme heights.
Master and pupil
In early Greek thought, no distinction was
made between ethics and aesthetics. For
example, the Greeks always looked upon the

Left, the centaur Chiron
tutors Achilles in the martial
arts. Fresco in the Château
de Fontainebleau, France, by
the Italian artist II Rosso
(1494-1540).
Below, putting the finishing
touches to a statue of a
Greek warrior. Detail from a
Greek red-figure vase (5th
century BC).
faced with the awesome, irrational power of the
goddess Ate, the personification of blind folly.
Homer contrasts the unbending Achilles
with the gentle, docile figure of Telemachus,
destined in turn to become a glorious hero after
a long apprenticeship. In Book I of the
Odyssey, Athena herself, taking on the form of
Mentes, gives the youth his first lessons. In
Book II, disguised as Ulysses' old friend, the
wise Mentor, the goddess accompanies Telema¬
chus on his journeyings to Pylos and to Sparta,
watching over him with benevolent affection.
Today the very name of Mentor has passed into
common usage, symbolizing the deep and abi¬
ding affection that a Master feels for his pupil.
Like the Iliad, the Odyssey (particularly the
Books primarily concerned with Telemachus),
follows a clear educational plan, providing its
young hero, as well as the wider circle of read¬
ers for whose edification it was created, with
glorious examples to follow. Just as Meleager
was evoked in the Iliad as an example for
Achilles, in the Odyssey Orestes becomes the
model for Telemachus, the paradigm to copy so
as to fulfil his heroic destiny. Far from being
simply a literary stylistic form, the epic is here
transformed into an educational tool. L"J
¿¿i
Jtö*
^
poet as "the educator of the people", in the
broadest, most profound meaning of the term,
as the Master and, in a sense, "the architect of
the nation". The Homeric epics proclaim their
pedagogical mission by emphasizing the close
and privileged relationship between master and
pupil. Book IX of the Iliad draws a remarkable
picture of the education of a young noble,
immortalizing the educator in the person of
Achilles' old tutor, Phoenix, the faithful vassal
of king Peleus, father of Achilles. In Homer's
epic, Phoenix appears to replace the wise cen¬
taur Chiron, whom other literary traditions
portray as the tutor, not only of Achilles but
also of Asclepius, Actaeon, Jason and Nestor.
Perhaps Homer deliberately chose to replace
the centaur, half-man half-beast, by the sym¬
bolic knightly figure of Phoenix, as the only
man capable of tempering Achilles' wrath.
Phoenix making his exceptionally long
appeal (one hundred verses) to Achilles to set
aside his anger is the very model of a Master
addressing his pupil. Like any didactic address,
Phoenix's harangue includes an edifying
example in this case that of Meleager's fruitless
wrath. As Achilles' comrade in arms and at
court, tutor, friend and virtual father, Phoenix
becomes the hero's moral guide. Yet how vain
appear all the moral resources of education when 11
