The invention
of a culture
By Leopoldo Zea
«
Five centuries since the shock of
conquest have seen the creation of
an American identity based on
racial and cultural intermingling
A*% 1. Fernand Braudel, Civilization and Capitalism: 15th-
^ 18th century. 1967
DISCOVERY? Encounter? Conquest? Colo¬
nization? Many more such words could
be cited, but the one people choose will
depend on their point of view. For Europe the
event to which they refer was an expression of its
need to project itself outward by imagining Uto¬
pian worlds. Columbus's voyage brought such
worlds into the realm of the possible. As Fernand
Braudel put it, America is the invention of
Europe: "Did it not discover and invent America
and celebrate Columbus's voyage as the greatest
historical event since the Creation? . . . Europe
patiently created America in an image and a like¬
ness that gave substance to its desires."'
America was the realization of the utopias of
More, Bacon, Campanella and many others.
Europe reborn projected itself into the world
Columbus discovered. The most complete
expression of this phenomenon was North Am¬
erica, the United States, where the European
peoples' dreams of freedom became reality. There,
it is easy for Europe not only to commemorate
but to rejoice in the realization of long-felt aspira¬
tions: Europe and North America can celebrate
their own specific universalization in history.
The process of conquest and colonization
initiated by Columbus in 1492 was something
quite different. The region in which it took
place was something more than vast open
spaces inhabited by wandering tribes. Unlike
the Puritans who arrived later on the May¬
flower, the men who followed Columbus
found themselves face to face with people
whose cultures were different from their own
and changed their view of the world. This was
why it was necessary not only to enslave the
bodies of these people but to take possession of
their souls. The Puritans who settled the prai¬
ries of North America felt no such need to
impose their culture, religion and habits on
those whom they regarded as unconcerned by
such matters. Thus there were two quite diffe¬
rent forms of expansion: one involved the
conquest of bodies and souls while the other
was content to domesticate the natural
resources of a new world and the people living
there, who were regarded as part of Nature.
The Iberian expansion initiated by
Columbus was a response to mercantile consi¬
derations, but it also reflected an obligation to
preach the Gospel. Had Columbus met the
Great Khan of Cathay, he would certainly have
attempted to convert his subjects to Christia¬
nity. Unlike its counterpart in North America,
the Iberian conquest set out not only to amass
wealth but to save souls. There was greed on
both sides, but in a bid to curb the greed of the
Spanish, the missionaries set out to understand
the peoples they encountered and wanted to
welcome them into the bosom of Christianity.
Since they wished to conquer souls, they
first had to destroy the heathen cultures
imposed by the devil, or at least push them out
of sight. They organized mass baptisms,
although these ran counter to the views held by
Father Bartolomé de Las Casas (1474-1566),
who argued that the indigenous peoples were
capable of rational thought and should first be
intellectually convinced of the truth of Chris-
Above, an aerial photo of a
portrait of an American
Indian "drawn" in earth near
Oskaloosa, Kansas, by US
artist Stan Herd using
ploughs, tractors, mowers
and other farm implements
to give an impression of
relief. The head, traced in a
field of corn stubble,
measures about 300 metres
from the top of the
headdress to the
neckerchief.

tianity. In order to save their souls, a "just war"
would be waged against them, and they would
pay the price by serving masters who would
have been justified in exterminating them
because of their barbarity. As Juan Ginés de
Sepúlveda (1490-1573) said: "What fate could
be more fitting for these barbarians than to be
the subjects of an empire whose qualities of
prudence and uprightness can make civilized
people of them?" What should they give in
exchange? It was only right, he continued, that
"they should pay for the endeavours devoted
to redeeming them by working for the masters
to whom they had been entrusted." Bartolomé
de Las Casas and other missionaries denounced
the falsity of this argument and the genocide
perpetrated in its name.
It was no mere coincidence that two far-
reaching historical events the fall of Granada
and the discovery of America should have
both occurred in 1492. The surrender of Gra¬
nada marked the completion of the reconquest
of Spain and the end of Arab dominion, which
dated back to the year 711. Those eight centuries
of dominion taught the inhabitants of the penin¬
sula to live side by side with other races and civi¬
lizations and produced the men who were to
spread far and wide through the unknown
continent. In spite of arrogance, greed, and the
atrocities that, incidentally, the Spanish them¬
selves were the first to condemn, there would be
racial intermingling in the New World.
During the colonial period, the Spanish
attempted to impose their culture on the van¬
quished peoples, but the latter turned the tables
on their conquerors through countless forms of
cultural and racial cross-fertilization. African
peoples uprooted from their homes to perform
the thankless work that had decimated the ori¬
ginal population would later contribute their
blood and their cultures to those of Ibero-Am-
erica. Later still, other peoples and cultures would
come to be added to this gigantic melting pot.
In this year of 1992, five hundred years after
Columbus's exploit, America is not commemo¬
rating an event that marked the beginning of its
servitude but its significance in shaping the conti¬
nent's special identity. Latin America cannot
repudiate its past, for there was a clash of cultures
between the conquerors and the conquered. But
there was also coexistence and give and take. As
José Vasconcelos put it: "It is in the mingling of
blood and cultures that we must look for the true
features of our individuality." O
LEOPOLDO ZEA,
Mexican philosopher and
essayist, is professor of the
philosophy of history and the
history of ideas at the
National Autonomous
University of Mexico. His
many works on the culture
and history of Latin America
have been translated and
published in several
languages. They include:
América en la historia (1957;
"America's Place in History"),
El pensamiento
latinoamericano (1976;
"Latin American Thought")
and Latinoamérica, tercer
mundo (1977; "Latin
America, the Third World").
See also the interview with
prof. Zea published in the
November 1990 edition of
the Unesco Courier. 43
