
Dossier
iIT IOHR
m
26
The ozone layer, the tenuous
layer of gas that surrounds our
planet between twelve and
forty-five kilometres above our
heads, is being rapidly deplet¬
ed. Seasonally occurring holes
have appeared in it over the
Poles and, more recently, over
the temperate regions of the northern
hemisphere. The threat is a serious
one since the ozone layer acts as a fil¬
ter that traps almost all in-coming
ultraviolet radiation, which is harmful
to all living organisms humans, ani¬
mals and plants.
Even though the ozone layer is some
twenty-five kilometres thick, the
atmosphere in it is very tenuous and
the total amount ofozone, compared
with other atmospheric gases, is quite
small. If all of the ozone in a vertical
column reaching up through the
atmosphere were to be compressed
to sea-level pressure, it would form a
layer only a few millimetres thick.
Monitoring
and forecasting
Ozone (chemical formula O3), from
the Greek ozein, meaning "to smell",
consists of oxygen (O2) which under
the effect of solar radiation acquires a
free atom of oxygen. Ozone is highly
reactive to chlorine, hydrogen and
nitrogen. Of these chlorine is the most
The hole in the ozone layer was dis¬
covered in 1985 and became headline
news. How serious is the problem and
what is being done to solve it?
dangerous since it is very stable and
has a very long life. When they reach the
stratosphere, chlorine atoms attach
themselves to the ozone molecules and
destroy them, with consequent reper¬
cussions on the quality oflife on Earth.
Detailed study of the ozone layer
began comparatively recently, in 1930,
the earliest observations being made
by the English scientist Sydney Chap -
man. These initial observations were
taken up by the World Meteorologi¬
cal Organizatiop (WMO ) which estab¬
lished the Dobson Network consisting
of one hundred observation stations.
Since 1983, on the initiative ofWMO
and the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), seven of these
stations have been entrusted with the
task of making long-term forecasts of
the likely evolution of our precious
shield.
In 1958, the researchers who per¬
manently monitor the ozone content
of the layer above the South Pole
began to observe certain seasonal
variations. From June there was a
slight reduction in ozone content
which reached a minimum in Octo¬
ber. In November there was a sudden
increase in the ozone content. These
fluctuations appeared to result from
the natural phenomena ofwind effects
and temperature change.
However, although the October
minimum remained constant until
1979, the total ozone content over the
Pole was steadily diminishing until, in
1 985, public opinion was finally roused
by reports ofa "hole" in the ozone layer
and observations were intensified.
The culprits responsible for the hole
had already been identified as being
supersonic aircraft, such as Concorde,
(although these have now been exo¬
nerated) and the notorious com¬
pounds known as chlorofluorocar-
bons, or CFCs. Synthesized in 1928 by
chemists working at General Motors in
the United States, CFCs are com¬
pounds ofatoms ofchlorine and fluo¬
rine. Having the advantage of being
non-flammable, non-toxic and non-
corrosive, they came into widespread
use in the 1950s. They are widely used
in refrigerators (15%), air-conditio¬
ners (20%) and to make the "bubbles"
in the foam plastic used, for example,
in car seats and as insulation in buil¬
dings (24%). They are also used as
propellants in aerosol sprays and as a
cleansing solvent in the computer
industry (24%).
In 1989 they represented a market
valued at over $1.5 billion and a labour
force of 1 .6 million. Of the twenty-five
countries producing CFCs, the United
States, France, the United Kingdom,
>
Japan and Germany account for three-
quarters of the total world production
of some 1.2 million tons.
The economic issues
These figures give some idea of the
importance of the economic interests
that are at stake in any decision to ban
the industrial use of CFCs. But, with
CFCs incriminated by scientists, the
question arose as to whether we were
prepared to take the risk of seeing an
increase in the number of cases of skin
cancer, eye ailments such as cataract,
or even a lowering of the human
immune defence system, all effects
that would follow further depletion of
the ozone layer. Not only humans
would be affected. So would repro¬
duction and growth ofplant-life; phy-
toplancton, the first link in the ocean
food chain and an element vital to the
survival of most marine species, would
not be able to survive in the first two
metres below the surface of the ocean.
UNEP decided that something had
to be done, and in March 1985 it orga¬
nized the Conference of Plenipoten¬
tiaries on the Global Convention for

the Protection of the Ozone Layer, the
Vienna Convention as it has come to be
called, which was adopted by twenty-
two countries. This was followed, in
1987, by the signing by twenty-four
industrialized countries of the Mon¬
treal Protocol on Substances that
their alarming statements ? In Novem¬
ber 1991 the United States and sixteen
European countries launched a vast
projectthe European Arctic Strato¬
spheric Ozone Experiment (EASOE).
Scientists from almost every European
country, as well as from Japan and the
million tons ofvolcanic gases into the
atmosphere.
Even if the entire world were to
agree today to halt all production and
use of CFCs, this would not provide
an immediate solution to the problem.
A single molecule of chlorine can des-
Map of the northern hemisphere
showing the distribution of
stratospheric ozone on 11 January
1992. Concentrations are
colour-coded from blue ( lowest ) to
red ( highest ). The map shows a
large loss of ozone over the tropics,
coinciding roughly with the
plume from the volcanic eruption of
Mt. Pinatubo (Philippines)
in June 1991.
Deplete the Ozone Layer, the first world
agreement aimed at halting the pro¬
duction of CFCs. As more evidence
emerged concerning the seriousness of
the threat, it became apparent that the
protocol was not stringent enough and,
year by year, its severity was increased
until in 1990 in London, seventy coun¬
tries agreed to stop all production of
CFCs by the year 2000. Clearly itwould
be extremely costly for the richer coun¬
tries to produce satisfactory substi¬
tutes that would meet the require¬
ments of efficiency, safety and
non-pollution; for the newly indus¬
trializing countries, however, the prob¬
lem would be even greater.
Two German chemists from the Max
Planck Institute, Frank Arnold and
Paul Cruzen, maintain that there has
always been a hole in the ozone layer
over the Antarctic. The French volca-
nologist Haroun Tazieff lays the blame
on the rays of the sun which, being
oblique at the Pole, bring an insuffi¬
cient amount ofultraviolet radiation to
reconstitute the missing ozone veil.
Have those who incriminate the
CFCs sufficient evidence to support
United States, participated. Funds for
the project were provided by various
. national research organizations and
the European Economic Community.
Observations previously made by
satellites of the US National Aeronau¬
tics Space Administration (NASA)
were completed by a series of land sta¬
tions, a ship, four aeroplanes, a num¬
ber of rockets and forty balloons each
carrying from 20 to 500 kilograms of
equipment. The objective was to mea¬
sure not only the ozone but also to
detect the presence ofCFCs, methane,
nitrogen dioxide and other substances.
The project ended in March 1992.
A new culprit
In December 1991, scientists work¬
ing on the project noted a depletion of
the ozone layer over the Arctic. In
February NASA announced that the
ozone layer was being depleted faster
than had generally been anticipated
and that it was also depleting over the
northern hemisphere. The finger was
pointed at another culprit, the Pina¬
tubo volcano in the Philippines, which
erupted in June 199 1 releasing twelve
troy from 10,000 to 100,000 molecules
of ozone. Furthermore, CFCs have a
lifespan of between 75 and 400 years
and they take ten years to reach the
ozone layer. In other words, what we
are experiencing now results from
CFCs emitted ten years ago.
Industrialists are now urgently
searching for substitute products.
Some, such as propane, are too dan¬
gerous because they are inflammable;
others, the HCFCs, might prove to be
toxic and to contribute to the green¬
house effect, i.e. to the process of glo¬
bal warming. Nevertheless, even if
there is no denying that the atmos¬
phere is at present in a state ofdistur¬
bance, nobody can say that the situa¬
tion will not right itself, whether in the
short or in the long term, especially if
we ourselves lend a hand.
FRANCEBEQUETTE, a Franco-Americanjournalistspecia¬
lizing in environmental questions, has been involved since
1985 in the WANAD-UNESCO trainingprogrammeforAfri¬
can news-agencyjournalists. She has played a leadingpart
in the preparation ofthis "Greenwatch" section.
