The greying of the planet
Now that people are living longer more and more generations are coexisting,
often in the same family
^
k
A HE world has just experienced three decades
of rapid demographic change. In the past thirty
years, world population has grown from 2.7 bil¬
lion to a little over 5 billion. During this period
of unprecedented expansion, something occurred,
at first unremarked, that, nevertheless, was of
great importance for the futurefor the first time
since the eighteenth century, during the early
1970s, the growth rate of the world population
began to decline.
This new trend was an indication that, fol¬
lowing the industrialized countries, Third World
countries were in their turn entering the phase
of demographic transition (see box page 17). In
other words their fertility was dropping. The
speed with which this demographic transition is
completed is likely to be the factor which deter¬
mines not only the future size of the populations
concerned but also their age structure. The faster
the transition phase is completed the more
quickly their populations will age; for, as the
French demographer Alfred Sauvy used to say,
populations have no other choice than to grow
or to grow old.
When all is said and done, the aging of a
population, defined here as an increase in the
proportion of old people in relation to total
population, is striking evidence of the successes
achieved in gaining technological mastery over
certain aspects of life and death. The sometimes
excessive fears expressed about population aging
seem, therefore, somewhat paradoxical. Perhaps
this rather pessimistic attitude finds its roots in
the negative idea that the individual has of his or
her own agingan ineluctable process that ends
in death. No one can halt the passage of time and,
for the individual, rejuvenation is merely a
metaphor. Populations, however, do not stand
in the same relationship with time; through the
interplay of fertility and mortality rates, they can
indeed grow younger or older or maintain a stable
age structure. Of course, there are thresholds
above which the aging of a population becomes
virtually irreversible, but it is possible to achieve
a stable state in which the process of aging is, as
^rU it were, suspended in time.
The age pyramid
In demographic studies, intuition is not the most
trustworthy of guides, especially when the study
concerns the causes of population aging. For
example, of the three major demographic factors
(fertility, mortality and migration), the one that
has, until recently, contributed most to popula¬
tion aging is the drop in fertilityand not, as one
might have thought, a drop in mortality.
Reducing as it does the number of births, thus
reducing the size of the lower levels of the age
pyramid, a drop in fertility has been the most
influential factor affecting the age structures of
the developed countries. The same holds true
today for the developing countries.
The effect of lower mortality is less marked,
since it is applicable to all ages; indeed, it may
contribute to a certain rejuvenation of the popu¬
lation when it is centred primarily upon infant
mortality. It is only during the last twenty years
that the fall in mortality, which in the developed
countries has affected primarily the older age
groups, has contributed to the aging of these
populations by increasing the number of those
surviving within these age groups. Migration,
however, appears to have only a marginal effect
in the context of the population as a whole.
Mention should also be made of a fourth
factor that has recently been brought to the
forethe initial age structure. Populations that
have experienced important demographic change,
such as the postwar baby-boom, have stored up
a considerable potential for population aging. A
similar situation exists in certain Third World
countries such as China, where rapid population
growth has been followed by a sharp fall in
fertility.
Growing old together?
Comparative figures for population aging,
together with their recent and foreseeable evolu¬
tion, show that, in the industrialized countries,
the 60-and-over age group has grown from 1 1 per
cent to 17 per cent in 40 years and is expected
to increase by another 8 percentage points in the
next 35 years, attaining a proportion higher than
"\
fl
Q
-.--

". . . The reduction in the ranks
of the younger generations, the
demographic burden of the older
generations and the lengthening
of the average life-span are
helping to reshape the family
pattern." Ink on watercolour
paper, by Faouzia Niazi-Lane
(Egypt).
that of the steadily diminishing under-15 age
group.
In 1950, in the developing countries, the
60-and-over age group represented 6 per cent of
total population, the equivalent to the propor¬
tion that obtained in France in 1775. Not until
the year 2025 will this proportion rise to the level
attained in the industrialized countries in 1950.
Nevertheless, the foreseeable pace of popu¬
lation aging for the developing countries seems
likely to be faster than that in the countries of
Europe. When the European countries entered
the phase of demographic transition, it took them
at least 100 years (in France), and often 150 years
(Germany and UK), to reach the threshold of 12
per cent in the 60-and-over age group, a point the
developing countries as a whole are expected to
reach in 75 years. In countries such as China,
where fertility has fallen dramatically, this per¬
centage will have been reached in a period of about
50 years, some time between 2005 and 2010.
Governments, however, whose task it is to
draw up policies and programmes, are less con¬
cerned with percentages than with absolute
numbers of elderly people. In 1950, there were
430 million people in the world aged 60 and over.


Of these, 250 million were in the developing
countries. In other words, the Third World coun¬
tries had 70 million more people in the 60 and-
over age group to look after than the industrial¬
ized countries, but with nothing like the same
resources with which to face up to the problems
of old age.
One last figure deserves examinationthat of
the very old. Medical advance has made and will
continue to make it possible to enhance the
chances of survival of the very old. Unfor¬
tunately, this has not been matched by any very
significant improvement in the physical and
mental condition of these survivors. In 1950, in
the industrialized countries, 40 per cent of those
in the 60-and-over age group were over 70 years
of age. In 1990, the proportion was of the order
of 50 per cent, and this is likely to be maintained
until the end of the century. In the Third World,
in 1950, the very old accounted for 30 per cent 41

Four generations of women
under one roof (Marie-Galante
island, French Antilles).
42
of the 60-and-over age group; in 1990, the propor¬
tion was over 37 per cent and, in 2025, is likely
to reach 40 per cent.
In absolute numbers, there are today as many
very old people in the industrialized countries as
in the developing countriesjust over 90 million.
By 2025, however, the situation will have changed
completely, since there will be 160 million very
old people in the North as against 338 million
in the countries of the Southan increase of 400
per cent on present numbers. This "explosion"
of the number of very old people should be seen
in the context of an increase in total population
in the Third World over the same period of 70
per cent.
Clearly, changes on this scale in the age struc¬
tures will have important repercussions on the
demographic structure of families. In the indus¬
trialized countries, the reduction in the ranks of
the younger generations, the demographic burden
of the older generations and the lengthening of
the average life-span are helping to reshape the
family pattern. At the beginning of the industrial
revolution, half the individuals born lived beyond
the age of twenty; today nearly half live to
celebrate their seventy-fifth birthday. The family
of two or three generations will be replaced by
the four-generation family, which will include
two generations of retired persons and will be
predominantly female.
Does this evolution signal one of the final
manifestations of the nuclear family, which will



have gained vertically what it has lost horizon¬
tally? Or should we talk simply of the
phenomenon of family aging? In most Third
World countries, this situation is still a long way
off, but in a few, in which life expectation is
approaching seventy and in which fertility is
almost at replacement level, nearly all the condi¬
tions are in place for the appearance of this new-
type family. One essential point to note is that
this aging has become apparent in countries
whose level of development bears no comparison
with that of the industrialized countries at the
time when their populations began to age.
The weight of years
In the analysis of change in the age structure of
populations, demographers have the easiest role
to play. Their task is merely to lay down markers
to the more important trends that will be of use
in making projections for the future. It is quite
another story when it is a question of drawing
the economic and, above all, the social conse¬
quences of population aging. It would obviously
be impossible to deal here with all these conse¬
quences, but mention should be made of some
of them.
The first of these is the potential effect of
aging on the process of production, and especially

World population trends by age group between 1950 and 2025
(percent)
World population Industrialized countries Developing countries
0/14 15/59 60 and Total 0/14 15/59 60 and Total 0/14 15/59 60 and Total
over over over
1950 35 57 8 100 28 61 11 100 38 56 6 100
1990 32 59 9 100 21 62 17 100 36 57 7 100
2000 31 59 10 100 20 61 19 100 34 58 8 100
2025 24 61 15 100 18 57 25 100 26 62 12 100
Source : Economic and social implications of population ageing. United Nations. New York 1988.
on the working population. In the industrialized
countries, the irregularity of the generation flow
since the war will result in a series of peaks and
troughs in the work force. There will also be
longer or shorter spells of aging. Caught between
the conflicting evolutionary currents of the
younger and the older age groups, the working
age group will start to decline from the beginning
of the next century (see Table this page). The
increasing entry of women into the working
population has, it is true, helped to compensate
for earlier demographic deficiencies, but it is by
no means certain, in some countries at any rate,
that fuller incorporation of women into the work
force can be achieved without an unacceptable
fall in fertility. Increased immigration of foreign
workers could provide an alternative demo¬
graphic solution, but the problems this can raise
in the industrialized countries are already evident.
These difficulties have led to plans for greater
participation of older people in the work force.
In the industrialized countries, however, where
the burden of supporting retired persons is very
heavy, governments are torn between the desire
to reduce unemployment by allowing those close
to retiring age to take early retirement and the
need to have a sufficiently large work force to
finance their retirement systems. These con¬
flicting preoccupations also exist in the
developing countries, where employment policies
are impelling governments to allow retirement
at a relatively low age bearing in mind the levels
A 100-year-old man and his
95-year-old wife tend their
garden in Beverly, Mass.
(U.S.A.). As a result of
progress in medicine, the
number of very old people is
increasing.
already reached in expectation of life at birth. It
is clear, therefore, that the size of the retired
population is as much a result of political and
economic choices as it is of the vagaries of demo¬
graphic change.
No definite conclusions have yet been
reached on the much-debated question of the
negative effect of the aging of the work force on
productivity. Some experts maintain that popu¬
lation aging results in a reduction in the struc¬
tural flexibility of the productive machine and
acts as a brake on necessary change; others reject
this pessimistic view, recalling that, in the middle
of the nineteenth century, the French sociologist
Auguste Comte was predicting that an increase
in the life-span would act as a brake on social
advance since it would slow down the pace of
generation replacement. Closer to our day, Japan
and Germany provide examples of how popula¬
tions seriously affected by aging can demonstrate
extraordinary economic dynamism provided that
the aging process has been assimilated into their
long-term development strategies.



The role of the family
Population aging, however, does more than
modify the structures of the productive
mechanism; it also imposes on it considerable
constraints the financing of pension schemes and
of certain very expensive forms of consumption
specific to old age, such as medical attention.
The ratio between the numbers of economi¬
cally active and inactive adults gives us an initial
approximation, in demographic terms, of the size
of this burden. In the industrialized countries, this
ratio, which now stands at 3 to 1, will, by 2025,
fall to 1.5 active adults to 1 inactive adult. In the
developing countries the ratio is much more
favourable; at present it stands at 7.2 active adults
to 1 inactive adult, but, by 2025, it will have fallen
to 3.9 to 1. Time and space comparisons such as
these must be treated with circumspection, since
this ratio, which does not take into account
present and future differences in the productivity
of the working population, has only limited value
as an indicator.
The increase in public expenditure devoted
to pension schemes and medical and social
services for the elderly has revived discussion of
the respective roles of the family and the com¬
munity in assisting the older generation. But
before embarking on a discussion as to the rela¬
tive merits of this or that form of assistance, we
need to know how global demographic trends
will affect kinship structures and thus the con¬
straints that demographic change will have on the
family.
The English historian Peter Laslett has pointed 43

44
out that in England, in the time of Thomas
Malthus (1766-1834), the poor laws already bore
the stamp of demographic necessity. Despite high
fertility and a high marriage rate, 20 per cent of
female children were orphans by the age of 10,
and, at the age of 65, the same proportion of
women had no close relatives. The only possible
solution was for these people without family to
be cared for by the community.
Today, the number of orphans is very low
owing to a great reduction in the mortality of
parents. On the other hand, the marked fall in
fertility may create situations in which adults will
find themselves with no family support in their
old age. Since empirical data on kinship structures
are rare, even in the .developed countries,
demographers have had recourse to models which
enable them to reconstitute the initial shape of
kinship structures and to learn how these struc¬
tures evolve under certain demographic con¬
straints. For example, if mortality is held at a very
low level, and if the fertility rate is made to vary
from 1.8 children per woman to 1.4 over the same
50-year period, the proportion of elderly women
aged 65 or over without children of working age
will vary from 4 to 14 per cent.
Although the demographic situation is very
different in the developing countries, applying
such models to them is of greater use, since in
these countries the family still plays an essential
supportive role. Warning signs of difficulties to
come are already apparent in countries such as
China, where the policy of one child per family
has not only accelerated the onset of the demo¬
graphic transition, but has also upset the tradi¬
tional equilibrium within the family.
Competing generations
The rapid demographic changes that have
occurred in recent decades will lead to new rela¬
tionships between the generations. The extension
of the life-span implies an increase in the number
of co existing generations. As one writer pointed
out, today's societies are made up more and more
of people who are not contemporaries. To this
must be added the ups and downs in the numbers
of successive generations, whose economic, social
and demographic behaviour tends to be radically
different. To take just the question of the varia¬
tions in the generation flow, particularly within
the youngest and the oldest age groups, this is cer¬
tain to contribute to an intensification of social
tensions when a choice has to be made concerning
the allocation of resources to the various depen¬
dent groups. In the present climate of reluctance
to add to the tax burden, it seems unlikely that
there will be any increase in these resources. More
than this, the competition between the genera¬
tions is likely to be all the more acute in that
modern industrial societies seem to be prepared
to sacrifice the principles of solidarity on the altar
of immediate individual satisfaction.
"The marked fall in fertility
may create situations in which
adults will find themselves
with no family support in their
old age."
JEAN-CLAUDE CHASTELAND
is a French demographer who
was head of the United Nations
Population Division in New
York until 1990, and is now a
consultant with the French
National Institute of
Demographic Studies (INED) in
Paris. He has published many
articles on the demographic
problems of the Third World
and on questions of population
and development in general.
