INTERVIEW
JOSEPH KI-ZERBO
talks to Bahgat EInadi and Adel Rifaat
A former member of UNESCO's Executive Board artd a member
of the Council of the United Nations University, Joseph Ki-Zerbo has an international
reputation as a historian of Africa. He Is the author of many articles and books,
including a history of black Africa (1972) that has been translated
into eight languages, and was editor of volume 1 of UNESCO's
General History of Africa (1981)*. In 1990 he published Educate or Perish
(UNESCO/UNICEF, L'Harmattan, París,). In this interview he corrects some
widespread misconceptions about African history.
* Co-published with Heinemann Educational Books Ltd., United Kingdom, and
the University of California Press, Berkeley, U.S.A.
You have been one of the architects of
UNESCO's monumental General History of
Africa project. How does writing the history
of Africa differ from writing the history of
other continents?
Historians all over the world perform vir¬
tually the same social function. Their mental
processes and methods are generally similar.
But insofar as the subject being studied is
somewhat different in Africa, then the logic
they follow and the methodological principles
they employ must be adapted. Some principles
and criteria have to be redefined to fit into the
African context.
We also have to take into account the
methods developed by those who performed
the historian's function in our precolonial
societies. One can't just forget them and say,
as has been done in the past, that "there is no
African philosophy since there were no
philosophers before the ones who were tramed
at the Sorbonne." That is the wrong way of
looking at the problem.
Precolonial African historians at least tried
to situate man in time, even if they did not
always succeed in domg so. On the other hand
we should not go to the other extreme of
claiming we are so different from the rest of
the world that we must adopt different mathe¬
matical or scientific principles from theirs! The
fact is that it is impossible to grasp our situa¬
tion simply by importing knowledge as it has
been developed in the West.
Let me give you two examples of what I
mean. The first concerns the oral tradition as
a historical source. During work sessions
organized at UNESCO in connection with
the History of Africa project, we had an
opportunity to give due regard to this source
which Europeans had tended to consider as
irrational. We showed that it could be a
rational tool with which to study history. In
return this has also influenced historical
research in the European countries themselves.
A proof that the intellectual flow is not just
one-way. . . .
The second example concerns traditional
8

A àmcracj kd on tk mátutimd diàritj oftk Africm ijM mid niâk
Africa a crdèk mmkr ofd new pknetarj pârtn&éip,
African medicines, which are also a subject of
historical research. African medicine has
stressed the importance of some principles,
such as the psychosomatic effects of certain
substances, which Western countries have
tended to neglect. In other words African
countries contain reserves of rationality, of
logical principles, which might well open up
new horizons in various fields of knowledge.
That, in my opinion, is the right approach.
Let's take from Europe but let's give some¬
thing back in return. To say that we must start
from scratch would be to accept a kind of
mental apartheid.
Let's get back to the oral tradition. Ham-
pâté Bâ used to say that when an old man
dies in Africa, a library disappears. What is
the precise value of the oral tradition as a
historical source?
There are a substantial number of oral texts,
but they have been neglected because the his¬
tory of Africa was for centuries viewed exclu¬
sively from the outside. And yet they are
extremely valuable because they come from
within Africa. Of course they need to be care¬
fully sifted and subjected to critical analysis
before they can be considered as credible
evidence.
The oral tradition takes different forms.
The most sophisticated form, and the one
closest to written documents, is what is
known as the institutionahzed or formalized
text. In some cases, monarchical and dynastic
structures have existed in Africa for 500 or a
thousand years. In these cases, a body of State
functionaries -^yith the responsibility of
administering the collective memory gradually
came to be established. Sometimes they were
known as griots; in Mali they were called dyeli;
elsewhere they had other names. But these
griots had nothing in common with the
"griots" who pander to the modern tourists'
appetite for the exotic. They were State func¬
tionaries.
Thus, among the Moose, in Burkina Faso,
in Mali, or in the kingdom of Abomey, what
is now Benin, there were organized corpora¬
tions which were responsible for managing the
collective memory. The members of these cor¬
porations were trained in specific places, each
of which had its own traditions. In these places
masters taught their pupils a curriculum that
took several years to complete. This process
had to be followed before the student could
become a full member of the corps of griots.
All this is well described in Djibril Tamsir
Niane's book about the western Sudan.
In these cases, we can be sure that the
process of transmission was correct. Even so,
the content must be subjected to a series of
internal and external analyses to check its con¬
sistency. If, for example, two warring peoples
give the same version of the same battle, there
is a strong likehhood that the version is
accurate. If a vanquished people admits in its
oral tradition that it has been defeated, there
are also good grounds for believing that such
a defeat actually took place. On the other
hand, conflicts between rival princes jockeying
for power within the same society may give
rise to different versions, special oral tradi¬
tions. In such a case the different accounts can
be compared in the same way as written docu¬
ments. Comparison makes it possible to reach
a hypothesis that can be labelled "certain",
"probable" or "possible", as the case may be.
The oral tradition is subjected to precisely this
kind of eminently rational criticism.
To give you an idea of just how reliable
these texts may be, in the land of the Moose,
in Burkina Faso, the head griot had to recite
the genealogical list of the "Mogho-Naaba"
every day! It was out of the question that he
should forget it. This knowledge was passed
on, for the head griot practiced his craft until
he died or was removed from office. Each day
he had to make this connection with the past.
And he trembled as he did so, for the slightest
error could cost him his life. If he forgot a
name or wrongly attributed an act to someone
who had not performed it, he was immedi¬
ately taken to task by his audience, who acted
as a vigilant jury and guaranteed the accuracy
of what he said. Exactly the same thing hap¬
pened at the court of the king of Abomey.
Other traditions were less explicit, less
stereotyped. One example is the "Sundiata
fasa"the history or eulogy of Sundiata, a
hero from the early history of Mali in the thir¬
teenth century. We know about him from
other, Arab sources, especially from Ibn Bat-
tuta, who visited Mali in the fourteenth cen¬
tury. The cycle describes a cluster of events
that evoke certain economic, social, political
and religious structures. The stories are
chanted to the accompaniment of instruments
kept specially for the purpose. They may seem
epic and purely legendary, but in some cases
they are corroborated by the written docu¬
ments. In fact sometimes they flesh out or
even correct the written record.
What was the relationship with time? Was
there a single notion of time, or several? One
gets the impression that tribal time is cyclical,
made up of endless renewals, all linked to a
cosmogonie overview. Yet you have been
talking ofdynasties and successions. How are
these two concepts of time linked?
I think that in the African system the two
are combined. The cyclical aspect is very
important, especially in agrarian societies. Not
that these societies lacked either leaders or
State structures. Each one had a government
and its own administrative conventions.
Nevertheless, these were peasant societies sub¬
jected to a cyclical rhythm. But even in them,
there is reason to believe that people were not
enmeshed in a process of eternal recurrence
which is implicit in certain philosophies that
accept the idea of reincarnation.
Take this episode from an African cos¬
mogony, which was quoted by the late Ham-
pâté Bâ: "God created man in order to have
an interlocutor, a companion with whom to
speak." These words, and the status they
accord to mankind, imply that our role is not
merely to go on repeating the same actions.
That is the message of the African version of
the Prometheus myth, according to which

A murai decoration by
the South African artist Johanna iVIkwebani
in the KwaNdebeie bantustan.
God invented fire to warm his mother, then
man discovered the fire and carried it off. Thus
began an epic chase between God and man,
which lasted until the day God stopped and
saw in man his equal and his brother. Such
is the grandeur of the human condition.
To return to the conception of time,
Africans say that tomorrow must be better
than today and claim that those who have
lived longer possess more wisdom and
knowledge. In medicine, for example, anyone
who inherits knowledge is expected to add
something new himself. So the idea of an
accumulation of knowledge is to some extent
accepted, but it serves the common good and
not just the individualthis is very important.
This was both a great strength and a weak¬
ness of the African system.
The idea ofaccumulation as a community-
based concept brings us to the idea ofchange.
How was change regarded? Was it controlled?
Despised? Feared?
It has often been said that the African only
repeats what his ancestors did. This is one
principle, but it is not the only one. It is reduc¬
tionist to limit Africans to this dimension. In
Africa there has been change as well as con¬
tinuity.
The first thing to remember is that all
Africans do not have the same social situation.
Some people maintain that there were no
social classes in Africa, others say that even
if there were, they did not radically call social
structures in question. This is to some extent
true, for we have not reached the stage of
industrial capitalismeven though we helped
it to become estabHshed in Europe! Neverthe¬
less, differences of status have existed, and con¬
sequently conflicts which could generate cer¬
tain kinds of change.
Let me give you two examples from
African history. The first is that of Biton
Kulubali, king of Segou. He owes his impor¬
tance to the fact that he introduced a personal
tax. He also created a professional army,
which had not existed before, and a collégial
system of leadership. This is a specific case of
a transition due to the inventiveness and
creativity of a leader who was literally an initi¬
ator of history.
The other example, that of Shaka, is better
known. The rise of Shaka was an amazing
phenomenon that changed the destiny of
entire peoples in southern Africa, by amal¬
gamating them into the Zulu nation. There
was a concept of nationhood. Some people
have talked in terms of a "pre-nation", but
there were real nations, even if they did not
have all the attributes or external signs of
nationhood that existed in Western
countriesalthough even in the West nation¬
hood developed at different times in different
countries and regions.
Shaka gave a common name to all those
who had been brought together by war and
conquest. He transformed the army by
changing its weapons, turning it into a body
equipped only with hand-arms for hand-to-
hand fighting. Later he introduced a strategic
system based on age. The youngest soldiers
were posted in the vanguard and on the flanks
so that they could attack and envelop the
enemy. Behind them were the men of mature
years who bore the brunt of the main shock.
The oldest waited in the rear, ready to carry
out other missions if necessary. This was the
"buffalo-head" order of battle whereby Shaka
revolutionized the art of war. Unfortunately,
he ended up as a dictator.
Even so, Africans felt an almost visceral
attachment to the past, and this was linked to
the oral tradition. In countries where history
is a matter of books, written documents and
archives, there is a kind of distance, a detach¬
ment from the past. In Africa, however,
people remained so closely bound to the
spoken tradition with its cargo of familiar
names that history tended to be transmuted
into common property, proclaimed and
reproclaimed from generation to generation.
Is it possible to pinpoint a moment that saw
the emergence of an African consciousness,
transcending not only the consciousness of
tribes and clans but that of States and
empires? Was the shock caused hy the slave
trade a moment of this type?
Objectively, yes. I would say that there was
a continent-wide dawning of awareness, in the
sense that almost all African societies at the
time of the slave trade shared a feeling of alie¬
nation, of self-deprivation. But how can one
talk of a subjective pan-African conscience?
How could It be propagated and diffused? You
must bear in mind the immensity of the con¬
tinent and the natural obstacles within it. The
miraculous thing is that truly pan-African ele¬
ments did eventually emerge and coalesce in
spite of these barriers.
When I first went to Northern Rhodesia,
what is now Zambia, one evening I heard
through the window of my hotel room a tom¬
tom rhythm from a distant part of the city
that was exactly the same as that of my home
villageso much so that I started dancing!
There definitely are elements of unity.
But let me get back to the natural
obstacles, which were for long virtually
impassable. The great equatorial forest, for
example, might have been a melting pot of
social innovations and technologies, but it was
an obstacle all the same. The Sahara too was
a barrier that filtered and slowed down com¬
munication. All of which meant that the
dawning of pan-African awareness was bound
to be a slow process. In other words, even if
all Africans felt the same thing at the same
time, this common sentiment could not be
transformed into a collective desire to take
action. Not to mention the internal
contradictionsthat some Africans were set
against others, by encouraging ethnic conflicts
and in other ways.
m Asa historian ofAfrica, what is your aim
today? Is it just to carry out research and then
to analyse what happened in the past? Or do
you want to draw conclusions, find lessons for
the future?
The answer to this question is immense. On
10

the one hand there is the problem of the
historian's craft. On the other, the idea that
peoples have of history. And thirdly, the dis¬
tinction to be made between real history as
it unfolded and the history we try to recon¬
stitute: the representation of history as
fashioned by historians.
First of all I should like to make a distinc¬
tion between the journalist and the historian.
I'm thinking of what is called instant history.
Communications today are so rapid that
historians feel swept along by the demand and
the need to describe immediately events that
have just happened. Popular works of instant
history appear a matter of months, sometimes
just weeks, after the events they describe. This
kind of history is next door to journalism. But
the historian should be distinguished from the
journalist by a concern for the long term, by
the fact that he takes into consideration a spell
of time sufficient to indicate sustained con
tinuities and trends in events or structures
in short, a landscape beyond the present.
This concept of extent in time, not to say
in space, is one of the distinguishing elements.
There is also the matter of whether one is con¬
fined to the surface of events, to the waves
splashing before one's eyes, or whether one
is examining the deeper currents, the substruc¬
tures that explain the waves. This is the well-
known distinction between the Annales
school of historians and others concerned with
the history of events.
But it is also important to emphasize that
the historian is not independent of his or her
society. He responds to its needs, and even if
the latter seem subjective or personal they still
have a social dimension. The historian has not
dropped from the clouds. He belongs to a
many-faceted social context that leaves its
imprint on him, if only through his genetic
inheritance. The historian is not a kind of
independent judge dealing in abstractions. He
is more or less impHcated, if not committed,
in what he describes.
There was a time when historians had to
fulfill social obligations, such as passing on the
genealogy of kings or teaching princes ethics
via examples from the past, which is why
royal tutors in Europe at a certain period were
usually historians. Then came the develop¬
ment of nationhood, which produced
historians who primarily stressed the events
or the men that created the nation-state.
Now we are living in a period that con¬
cerns itself with structures, sometimes on their
own, some'times in combination with ideolo¬
gies. It was the Annales school, and my teacher
Fernand Braudel, that really opened up this
new space, this intellectual galaxy, to history.
I must say that the African historian can
really spread his wings here because of the
durability of the structures in our civilizations.
11

One finds things which have not changed for
centuries, or which repeat themselves as they
were a hundred years ago. Over twenty years
ago I attended the enthronement of the moro
naaba. His grandson was enthroned recently,
and the sacred ritual was the same. But please
note that durability is not the same as immo¬
bility. The structures are never entirely fixed.
Things move, eventually. The important thing
is to analyse African realities in depth, to X-
ray the combination of factors which
introduces a process of mutation into a per¬
manent structure.
You have talked throughout this interview
ofpermanence and enduring structures, but
also ofnew departures and changes. African
society seems to be a mixture of the two. But
it is also clear that in the modern world, with
colonization and what has followed, the
processes of change have been accelerating.
In your opinion, what is the most important
change?^What is happening to communities
that were once based^ on permanence but have
been profoundly shaken in the last century?
How has the perception of African society
been transformed?
There have been at the same time
astonishing elements of continuity and also
rapid movements forward. Sometimes the
latter have been purposeless, mere aimless
avalanches, what's more, because they have
A reconstruction
of Ethiopia's Lower Omo
valley as it might have
appeared 2 million years
ago, based on
palaeontological research.
12

been non-indigenous, brought in from the out¬
side. I think the period of the slave trade can
be considered as a haemorrhage which under¬
mined and exhausted the biological and social
forces of Africa.
But the fundamental change was coloni¬
zation. Colonizadon was a major amputation.
It was a brutal separation that cut its victims
off from many essential things, ft was an
enforced divorce from their own history, the
social structure they knew, their organized
civic identity: their society's particular way of
organizing space, the use of its language in the
main public places ... in short an ethnocide
punctuated by occasional genocides.
But out of this change, new things deve¬
loped: colonization, through a kind of
dialectic, made it possible to accomplish cer¬
tain things in Africa. For example, it created
large spaces containing numbers of commu¬
nities and established, sometimes by means of
massacres, a peace within them that recalled
the ancient "Pax Romana". But Africans did
not lose their creativity under colonization,
whatever some colonial historians might have
claimedhence the importance of an African
history viewed from within. In reality, many
supposedly "static" and passive societies kept
alive, developing processes that often led to
protest or even insurrection, until the Second
World War.
But this creativity, since the end of coloni¬
zation, hasn't merely sought to rediscover the
rhythm of the past. It also inevitably seeks to
innovate, to invent a future that isn't just a
repetition of what's gone before. . . .
Actually, the strategies of resistance have
often been similar in the colonial and the post-
colonial periods, for example in what is now
known as the "informal" sector of the
economy. The struggle for identity and
autonomy, which must not be confused 


with
a pig-headed rejection of change, has taken a
multitude of forms, the most obvious being
armed resistance. But even reputedly docile
leaders, called on to send their children to the
white man's school, often preferred to substi¬
tute the sons of their servants in order to cut
off their children from the foreign system.
Young people called up for mihtary service
or forced labour got out of it by migrating or
even by mutilating themselves.
As for religion, even in our own day it
is a bastion of resistance to the powers-that-
be. Africans have shown an audacious willing¬
ness to reinterpret faiths, to blend elements
of Christianity or Islam with traditional beliefs
and customs. Some marabouts, under cover
of inculcating a work-mystique in their pupils,
have become successful producers of cash
crops. African traders have used their own
methods and connections to seize market
share in the trade in colonial products. Tradi¬
tional healers have modernized the packaging
of their products, even the preparations they
sell. Rejecting imported legal codes, peasant
cadres have revived working groups based on
the old tribal age-groups. Herdsmen who have
always worked more or less without the idea
of profit have sold their animals on the
market.
But overall, in comparison with Asians
for example, the Africans adapt little and
adopt much. And for good reason. When you
have no autonomous industrial sector, the
creative imagination has Hmited room for
manoeuvre. . . .
The last few years have seen young people
rising in the name of liberty and democracy,
and some have been willing to die for these
ideas. Who are they? Where do they come
from?
These splendid young people are the fruit
of a long-standing system of disagregation.
They have been doubly trapped. Uprooted by
the potent influence of an exogenous school
system and by radio and television series
pouring out from the North, they have
become cut off from the African system of
rights and responsibilities. They are simultane¬
ously free and slaves; for they are entering the
modern market-place with tiny purchasing
power but an enormous appetite, whetted by
the media. Confronting them are dictators
who are often far less educated than they are,
but who have power and possessions 	 For
these young people, the past is blind, the
present is dumb and the future is deafi
In these conditions, the youth bomb is
bound to explode. The dictatorships don't
create jobs, except for policemen or torturers,
whose targets are these same young people.
But democracy is a delusion, a placebo, if
it is only a matter of outward forms. A multi¬
party system is a necessary but not a sufficient
condition. If other structural conditions are
not met, democracy is reduced to a skeleton,
a text without a context. Without the flesh of
a certain amount of development and the
blood of a minimum level of democratic cul¬
ture, there is a risk of falling into the bitter
disappointments that followed independence
and the blind race for economic growth.
Where are the programmes and social
projects of the hundreds of poHtical parties
that have mushroomed in Africa in the last
few years? Now that communism, which was
humanistic in theory but in fact crushed the
populations who came under its sway, is on
the way out, and capitalism is reveaHng its
many structural weaknesses, has the African
system really got nothing to offer? To take
one example, by what kind of social securky
system have Africans hitherto managed to
look after their children, their sick and their
old?
That is a form of constitutional solidarity
that may be a new boundary of civilization,
if civilization hopes to advance beyond today's
barbarian and suicidal selfishness. A
democracy based on that spirit of solidarity
could make Africa a credible member of a new
planetary partnership 	 On condition that
another equally essential precondition is met:
the integration of Africa, which alone can give
us access to major industries, that is the
capacity to harness our economy to a new set
of values marrying the best from elsewhere to
the flnest fruits of our own history.
13
