Beyond the consumer society
32
The Seikatsu Club, which takes
its name from the Japanese
word meaning "life", was
founded in 1968 by 200 Tokyo
women who wanted to fight
inflation. Today it is a major
network of non-profit-making
co-operatives that has
400,000 members in Japan
and 300 representatives on
local councils. The Club, 80
per cent controlled by women,
seeks to bring consumers and
producers closer.together and
promote the distribution of
natural, high-quality,
"environmentally-friendly"
products. It also encourages
debate and action on other
social issues such as the
status of women, working
conditions and the problems of
old people.
JLwENTY years ago only two kinds of tooth¬
brush were available in Japanone kind for
adults and one kind for children. Ten years ago,
the children's market was divided up. There were
brushes designed for infants, brushes for kinder¬
garten pupils, brushes for primary schoolchil¬
dren, and brushes for secondary-school students.
Today, market segmentation has gone even fur¬
ther, and you can buy toothbrushes for one- to
three-year-olds, two- to four-year-olds, three- to
five-year-olds, and four- to six-year-oldsnot to
mention separate brushes for the front teeth, the
back teeth, bridges and interdental spaces.
And yet Japanese dentists are still as busy as
ever, for the fact is that the proliferation of tooth¬
brushes has had no effect in combating tooth
decay. Dentists still say what they have always
said, that the important thing is for people to
spend sufficient time cleaning their teethseven
minutes a day is a figure often suggested. But in
Japan's consumer society advice from dentists is
not enough. Consumers must be persuaded to
buy products by advertising.
The morning shampoo is another example of
consumerism in the Japanese personal-hygiene
industry. In spite of many warnings about the
dangers of washing one's hair too often, a daily
morning shampoo has become fashionable, par¬
ticularly among young people and housewives.
The shampoo industry has latched onto an
opportunity to extend its market, not just by
selling more of the core product but also by mar¬
keting such incidentals as specially-designed
morning-shampoo basins and towels. (The latter
have been tested for water absorption and found
to be no different from any others.)
The side-effects of this commercial bonanza
include a 50-per-cent increase in the volume of
water used per family in the mornings, and
increased pollution caused by flushing away the
active ingredients in the shampoo. Many young
people are suffering premature hair loss as a result
of washing their hair too often. The big profits
from the morning-shampoo market have gone to
private corporations, but the costs of cleaning up
the water have been paid by the public in taxes.
The Japanese food industry has grown fat on
Japan's affluence, and because of market satura¬
tion now finds it difficult to launch new products.
The latest catchwords are "fresh" and "perish¬
able". Even sake, wine and beer are described as
perishable. They should, it is suggested, be
decanted straight from the bottle into the glass.
Consumers who know no better are per-
Japan's Seikatsu Club
suaded by the "perishable" label to buy more
foodstuffs, even products that may have been
heat-treated to conserve them. As a result, market
volume is boosted, but at the cost of increased
dumping of products suspected by their pur¬
chasers, perhaps wrongly, of having gone off.
Consumers thus play into the hands of manufac¬
turers, who encourage them to consume to the
hilt and then throw things away.
Food has become a commodity like any
other. Transplanted to cities, farmers forget how
to farm and children do not learn how to grow
things. City kids can be forgiven for thinking that
tomatoes and peppers are produced in green¬
grocers' shops and that the cows back home on
the land are creatures of myth. The inhabitants
of Third-World countries where lobsters are
trapped cannot afford to eat them, but must
export them to Japan, where only parts of the
head are eaten and the rest is thrown away.
Reforming the structures
of consumption
We Japanese, a century after our Industrial Revo¬
lution, are in danger of becoming puppets of the
market economy, but this trend is not going
unchallenged. One organization which is trying
to do something about the situation is the Seikatsu

Top, members of the Seikatsu
Club tour one of the Club's
dairies.
Above, in a Tokyo street,
demonstrators show how to
make home-made soap from
used cooking oil.
Left, shoppers appraise the
wares at an organic-food
market in the Japanese
capital.
Club, a 400,000-strong consumers' co-operative.
Actually, we do not call ourselves consumers.
The word itself derives from the Latin consumere,
"to take up wholly, to consume, waste, squander
or destroy". It acquired its present meaning with
the development of industrial capitalism, which
saw the consumer as a passive receiver of pub¬
licity and advertising, which by awakening wants
and needs dreamed up by the corporations would
link mass consumption to mass production.
In the Seikatsu Club, we reject this commer¬
cial definition of consumerism. Instead we see
ourselves as autonomous individuals forming an
integral part of the whole cycle of production,
distribution and disposal.
The Club has pioneered the joint purchase
of essential goods in Japan. Its members are
referred to not as consumersby implication,
passive acceptors of merchandisebut as "the
living people". We speak of "necessities of life"
rather than of consumer goods, rejecting a term
that implies production in the name of profit and
that fails to recognize the link between consumer
and producer.
We want to speak out against the evils of
industrialized society, and also to create a sus¬
tainable communal society in its place. We hope
to breathe fresh life into the idea of a lifestyle of
individual autonomy in co-operation with others.
We think of the Club as a weapon: the power
to buy also implies the power not to buy, in other
words to boycott. Our goal is not just to offer
safe consumer goods at reduced prices, or to pass
on organic or environmentally-friendly produce
at rather higher prices, in the name of an intelli¬
gent and well-informed consumerism. On the
contrary, we want to reform the structures of
consumption in depth.
The joint buying system aims to focus the
power of our members so as only to purchase
necessities produced by like-minded producers.
We hold joint discussions about the disclosure of
ingredients, additives and, where applicable,
processing measures and pesticides employed,
thereby establishing direct linkage between con¬
sumers and producers. We aim to create an alter¬
native market, one in which value-added and
surplus-value-added profits do not increase costs.
In our Club only the intrinsic value of the
product matters.
An alternative lifestyle
We will not buy synthetic detergents, which
harm the environment, nor chemically-flavoured
foods nor products we consider inessential. We
do buy soap, 100-per-cent fresh orange juice and
the dried bonito used to make miso soup. We pur¬
chase reusable bottles and cans but not plastic
containers. We have two dairy farms of our own,
and our members collect used cooking oil in their
workplaces to form the basis for natural soaps.
The next step is to extend the principles of
the Club as the basis of a universal alternative
lifestyle. Therein, we believe, lies the key to
instilling the new values society needs. Further¬
more, the Club's style of co-operative action can
also be used as a tool to reform political, educa¬
tional and cultural institutions.
The goal is for every individual in the Club to
think for him- or herself, and to act indepen¬
dently in order to create a new civil society based
on the slogan "Autonomy in Life". We are
calling on our neighbours to join us in doing so;
for this form of struggle is the best way to say
goodbye to the consumer society once and for all.
33
