UNESCO AND SPORT
i
A gymnastics class at Phnom Penh (Cambodia).
Unesco is the only organization in
the United Nations system whose
mandate covers the whole range of
problems relating to the international
development of physical education and
sport. Other institutions such as the World
Health Organization (WHO) and the Inter¬
national Labour Organisation (ILO) have
responsibilities in this field, but only in
specific areas relating to their constitu¬
tional competence sport and health and
sport in working life.
The broad thrust of Unesco's activities
in the field of sport is as follows:
Unesco supports intergovernmental
machinery concerned with the institutional
and normative aspects of sport. In 1978,
Unesco's General Conference adopted an
International Charter and created an Inter¬
governmental Committee for Physical Edu¬
cation and Sport. At the same time, an
International Fund for the Development of
Physical Education and Sport (FIDEPS) was
established. In view of the gradual disen¬
gagement of states which consider that
sport generates sufficient resources to be
self-financing, the statutes of the Fund now
enable representatives of the private sector
to sit on its Governing Board.
In 1988 an international conference of
ministers responsible for physical educa¬
tion and sport, held in Moscow, assessed
the world situation in this field and noted
the emergence of new forms of co-opera¬
tion and partnership between official and
voluntary organizations. The Conference
approved a series of eleven recommenda¬
tions, which provided a conceptual frame¬
work for action, as well as a text entitled
the Moscow Declaration, which contains
ten proposals of a general nature. A joint
declaration was adopted by Unesco and
the International Olympic Committee
(IOC) which defined common objectives
for the two organizations.
In order to reduce disparities between
countries in physical education and sport,
various activities have been and continue
to be carried out in co-operation with non¬
governmental organizations, and espe¬
cially with the International Council of
Sport Science and Physical Education. The
purpose of these activities is:
a) to encourage access to and participation
in physical education and sports of chil¬
dren and adolescents in the school system
and in the framework of non-formal edu¬
cation programmes;
b) to promote the practice of sport for all;
c) to train educators at the national,
regional and international levels;
d) to organize annual international phy¬
sical activity weeks which may form part
of a broader and more systematic pro¬
gramme entitled Fitness for Everybody;
e) to encourage the development of
research in sport science and the interna¬
tional exchange of information through the
creation of specialized facilities.
A third range of activities is designed to
safeguard and protect the ethical values of
sport: fair play, harmonious self-fulfilment,
the desire to surpass oneself, solidarity,
team spirit, self-sacrifice, loyalty, generosity,
respect for the rules and for one's adver¬
saries, mastery of aggression and violence.
These values are today threatened by forces
outside sport which are tending to reduce
sport to a money-making activity and are
leading to bitter and in some cases even
fatal confrontations. They cannot be main¬
tained by decree, even though decrees and
regulations can be useful and even indis¬
pensable. This is a task which society as a
whole must shoulder through the self-devel¬
opment that education provides. Physical
games take their meaning from the mental
climate in which they are played. L~J
