He future for mml
The difficult path to a non-sexist
as well as a non-racial democracy
vJender discrimination, inherent in South
African society, is rooted in the ethnic traditions
of the multi-cultural communities, largely
through the compliance of women themselves.
Each cultural and ethnic group is grooved in
systems of values that perceive women as subor¬
dinate to men. The apartheid State simply con¬
firmed these values and in some cases incorpo¬
rated them into its legal system.
Radical feminists m South Africa see the
family as the foundation of women's oppression,
Flowever, the vast majority of women in South
Africa, in particular black African women,
experience the family as a source of emotional
strength and the theatre of their self-realization,
and value their roles as mothers and home
workers. Their separatum from the sphere of cap¬
ital and power tends to make them relatively
unambitious, far mc)re value-centred than men
and far more dependent on the famil\' for their
well-being.
Black South African women have waged the
liberator)' struggle from within the family, in
response to oppression experienced by the
family less-than-subsistence wages, schooling,
housing and medical .services that were inadequate
or non-existent, and so on. During that struggle,
they have come to understand their own pt)ten-
tial and have laid claim to their own freedoms.
Far from experiencing the family as an insti-
tutitm of oppression, they trace the subjugation
of the African people to the violation of the
African familv and to the ways in which family
members have been treated as commodities and
turned into labour units for the convenience of
the job market.
Most women in South Airica and this is
confirmed in interviews conducted by the Insti¬
tute of Black Research with almost a thousand
Indian, African and Cxiloured women working

by fatíma Meer
A home in Soweto, the
sprawling black ghetto
outside Johannesburg.
FATIMA IVIEER,
South African sociologist, is
director of the Institute for
Black Research at the
department of sociology of the
University of Natal, Durban
She IS the author of many
published works, including
Higher than Hope, a biography
of Nelson Mandela (1990).
in factories in Durban accept their subordina¬
tion and do not feel a sense of oppression. Nor
do they feel alienated from their men, whom they
see as the most immediate victims of white domi¬
nation. It IS after all their men who fought and
lost to the colonizer, who have made up by far
the greatest number of casualties in political pro¬
test, and who have suffered most extensively from
the brutal exploitations of capitalism.
This does not imply a blindness to gender
oppression, but an inbred understanding that the
major conflict in the country is racial and that
the people need to be galvanized to resolve that
conflict. Any deflection to subordinate conflicts
like class and gender can only weaken the
struggle,
African women, who comprise over 70 per
cent of all women in South Africa, are generally
the most oppressed group in the country.
suffering the cumulative effects of racial and
gender-based discrimination. Untrained in every
sphere, under-educated and largely confined to
the rural areas, the vast majority remain excluded
from the job market. Those who are employed
find employment in the lowest paid rungs. Of
African women in gainful employment, 57 per
cent are employed as domestic servants or agricul¬
tural labourers, and as such remain outside
unionization and are subjected to the whims of
their employers with regard to wages and condi¬
tions of work.
The problem of agricultural land affects
African women most crucially, since the vast
majority of them live in rural areas and are almost
wholly responsible 


for any cultivation that exists
in the homelands, to which African land rights
are still restricted, despite the recent abolition of
the Group Areas and the Native Land Acts,
Twenty-five per cent of rural African families are
entirely dependent for their subsistence on the
land, worked largely by women, who are forced
to farm using primitive techniques.
Industrialization in South Africa, for the
African people who constitute 75 per cent of the
population, is based on the principle of migrant
labour. This has deprived the African family of
its male head and destroyed the economic base
of the African family.
Simultaneously, it has placed greater curbs on
the entry of African women into the urban areas,
subjecting them to authorization from male
magistrates and male guardians. Thus while
African men remain dangling on the margins of
urbanization, the vast majority of African women
remain unurbanized and impoverished, and
poverty is their greatest oppressor.
These are some of the oppressive conditions
from which South African women need urgent
relief. 31

Until 1943, women were excluded from
membership of the African National Congress,
although the Bantu Women's League was active
in it as early as 1913. Today the ANC slogan
IS "Forward to a non-racial, non-sexist demo¬
cracy", and Its Draft Bill of Rights provides 


for
a minimum of social and economic rights and for
affirmative action to redress disadvantages faced
by women. This recognition of a double oppres¬
sion in need of correction is significant for the
South African future, since it comes from the
political party popularly tipped to constitute the
post-apartheid Government. Proposals from
other parties speak of a women's ministry, of
women's desks in government departments, and
of affirmative action in as many public areas as
possible until equality is achieved between the
sexes.
However, a policy approach is one thing: its
implementation another. The post-apartheid
government, to justify itself, will have to redress
imbalances that have accumulated over more than
300 years, and these include gender imbalances.
The post-apartheid societ)' will be under
serious constraints to give priority to the full
employmenr of young men. Women themselves
can be expected to support such a policy, as is
evident from the Durban survey, in which 69 per
cent of the women held that men needed jobs
more than women. Young black males ctm.stitute
the most volatile sector of the South African
population. They have played the crucial role in
toppling apartheid, and they are eager to collect
their dues. There is no matching expectation
among young women.
While the post-apartheid State will be under
enormous pressure to develop local black skills,
it will find It easier to ctmcentrate <m the black
male sector, and it will probablv do so at the
expense of women. Very probably, it will do so
with their co-operation.
The integration of women into the public
sector in South Africa, at a rate and under condi¬
tions equivalent to that of men, will thus depend
on economic development, industrial need and
industrial policy. The Durban survey revealed
that while employers were satisfied with the per¬
formance of women in the workplace, women
constituted the most vulnerable sector of the
work force during depressions. The South
African cconom)' is in a slump, and while some
recovery is expected in the post-apartheid era, this
will hardly result in full employment for some
time to come. Since industry will not need to
draw massively on their labour, the State can be
expected to spend no more than the minimum
on child-care services, thereby confining women
to the home and placing low priority on their
skill training. Women will thus be in danger of
remaining gripped in a vicious circle no skills,
unskilled low-wage occupations, high birth rate,
inadequate child-care services and so risk remai¬
ning confined to domestic and child-minding
chores, Women at work in Soweto.
32
