Getting the show on the road
by Françoise Grund
An Indian painting (c. 1850)
depicting Raja Ram Singh
and his son in a procession.
PEOPLE take to the streets for many rea¬
sons. They may be angry or afraid, or
they may want to take part in a civic or
religious festival. Often the idea for a festival
comes from above from the authorities, who
invite the people to go out into the streets. Such
events are politically inspired, for a festival can
be an astute way of arousing public opinion
while also keeping it carefully channeled. This
type of festival provides an opportunity for the
relationship between the people and their rulers
to be assessed.
To organize a festival, the authorities
simply give the word. The people are free, for
a time, to take control of their surroundings
and bring fresh ideas to the urban environ¬
ment. Who could refuse such an offer?
At once the festival machinery swings into
action. Its efficiency will provide a measure of
the city's vitality, and will also convey a coded
message about its power structure. While the
authorities seek to mobilize enthusiasm for a
memorable achievement, the citizens have the
chance to express their creativity by devising
heroic combinations of sound, movement and
(if the festival takes place at night) light. Theirs
is a collective effort, though it is normally made
up of individual flashes of inspiration.
Parades and pilgrimages
Ancient Rome had its triumphal processions,
for which architects, armourers, and scenery
and costume designers devised visual and
sound effects intended to stir up patriotism and
make the spectators feel gratitude towards the
victors and hatred or pity for the vanquished.
The processions became such important events
that stone steles and commemorative arches
were built for them.
Renaissance Italy staged sumptuous cele¬
brations for the gods of the theatre. Extraordi¬
nary processions wheeled machines, tanks of
scented water, monumental thrones carrying
the stars of the first operas, dance-floors carried
25

26
on men's backs, and catapults made out of pre¬
cious wood and designed to hurl human can-
nonballs would make their way through the
city to the sound of silver trumpets. Hundreds
of actors took part, wearing make-up and all
kinds of finery, their heads crowned with vine-
leaves and feathers. From time to time they
would stop to declaim verses or intone eulogies.
For centuries past northern India's holy
city of Benares has restaged the great Hindu
folk-drama of Ramlila. Each year millions of
pilgrims cram together on five successive
nights to watch the combat between good and
evil. Actors and audience mingle in an arena
that is more than a kilometre long. Lofty
mobile platforms enable the spectators, who
know the text and the music by heart, to live
every moment of the play. The crowds, the
dust and the noise provide a benediction. The
spectators feel they have been in the presence
of the gods and have acted alongside them,
and when they go home on the morning of the
sixth day, they are convinced that they are the
better for their outing.
Something similar may have happened in
Malta in the sixteenth and seventeenth centu¬
ries, when the Christian Knights Hospitallers
took to the streets on the orders of their Grand
Master and held a military and religious proces¬
sion that was executed with music and style.
The knights sang and acted, and performed
operas at certain specially built sites. Part of the
power structure thus turned its hand once a
year to street theatre. Power had to be publicly
manifested to strengthen the people's faith.
Carnivals or concert-halls?
Nowadays towns and cities are taking over the
state's role as sponsors of outdoor events. A
mayor can affirm his independence and autho¬
rity by organizing and paying for a spectacle
that will inevitably be covered in the media.
Even the Rio carnival is today sponsored by
the city authorities, in conjunction with the
Brazilian Ministry of Tourism. There are
grandstands packed with European and Amer¬
ican visitors who pay to spend hours watching
thousands of dancers in spangled costumes, the
winners of the samba-school contests. A more
spontaneous carnival takes place in the work¬
ing-class districts of Rio, but in a sense the
official parade is a betrayal of its origins now
that it has become competitive and people have
to pay to watch it. At least the stars of the show
today belong to the most underprivileged
classes, whereas at the beginning of the century
it was the wealthy who took to the streets in a
brightly costumed annual display of power.
The Fiesta del Gran Poder (Festival of the
Almighty) in La Paz (Bolivia) has only existed
officially since 1985. In fact the Indian popula¬
tion of the poorer quarters high on the hillsides
had long held an annual procession in honour
of a figure of Christ the Almighty in a small
local church, which they credited with miracu¬
lous powers. The procession was traditionally a
modest affair, followed principally by Aymara
Indians wearing masks and woollen shawls. Its
focal point was a masked and costumed dancer
who would gyrate convulsively to exorcise the
sins of the little community.
All that is now changed. The event has
become an organized fiesta that takes over the
whole city. The sacred procession has been
turned into a light-hearted pageant featuring
folklore groups from many countries. Con¬
tained within security barriers and overlooked
A Dogon funeral procession
in Mali.
by covered grandstands for official guests, it
follows a route that ends in the fashionable dis¬
tricts down in the valley. Television cameras
record the proceedings, which spectators are no
longer permitted to join. Masked dancers still
take part, and they are as beautiful and impres¬
sive as ever; but now they only serve to bring
back colourful memories of the past, and to
give tourists the chance to take dramatic snap¬
shots against the backdrop of the eternal snows
of the Cordillera Real.
In France the Festival of Music held each
year on 21 June has become a national event
since 1981. The streets, bridges, open spaces,
gardens and quays of Paris are transformed
for the day into improvised concert-halls
where amateur musicians of all kinds, from
flautists to opera singers, can perform in
public. A delighted city savours its creative
talents, and passers-by suddenly discover that
they are music-lovers and musicians.
Yet each year more and more platforms
and stages are put up in the most fashionable
quarters of the city for professional musicians
and star singers performing for money. The
concerts are nonetheless free, and the public

flocks to them. Meanwhile the amateur flau¬
tists still play in the streets and alleyways, and
in the suburbs and in provincial towns. Yet as
the festival increasingly becomes a media
event, the popular enthusiasm of earlier years
is waning. People's hearts are no longer in it.
The Festival has grown out of cheerful and
spontaneous anarchy into an organized event.
Advance booking, complete with favoured
access for the privileged, has replaced the
freedom and spontaneity of earlier days. This
urge for order and stability is in marked
contrast to the original intention, which was
to encourage creativity and self-expression,
not to produce a performance. In this case, the
authorities have been upstaged by the media,
the artists' agents and record companies.
Winning back the streets
The Bread and Puppet Theatre in the United
States and India's Jagran Company are examples
of initiatives which go against the trend for state
sponsorship.
It was during the Viet Nam War that Peter
Schumann took his troupe out onto the streets
of New York. An important event in theatre
history, this original step had a considerable
impact in the United States. In the next few
years, its huge skeletons and monstrous man-
nikins wearing gas masks, performing to the
sound of sirens and lugubrious drumming,
became familiar sights in the busiest parts of
Manhattan. The puppets carried gigantic
images of death and rocked simulated cadavers
of Vietnamese babies. The attention of Ame¬
rica was caught by this protest whose imagery
was as violent as its intentions were pacific.
The Bread and Puppet Theatre made a
comeback in 1975, with a protest against the
US bicentenary celebrations. The formula was
unchanged, mixing masked actors and puppets,
some of them five metres high.
In India, Alok Roy followed a similar path.
He took his troupe of twenty actors, all of
them skilled mimes and musicians, to the slums
of Delhi and later to those of other Indian
cities. He would assemble a crowd largely
consisting of women and children around a
communal tap or on a disused railway line or
piece of wasteland. The actors' faces were plas¬
tered with white make-up and had grossly
exaggerated features, so that from a distance
they looked like clowns. The troupe employed
simplified and deliberately coarse gestures,
pantomime routines and acrobatics to protest
against everyday social injustices. Some of their
shows, which were short and more or less
improvised to encourage audience participa¬
tion, gave advice on nutrition and health, for
example showing how to cook spinach (which
is very cheap in India) or to boil water. Jokes
and slapstick helped spread the message; there
was nothing sententious about this theatre of
the slums.
Private initiatives both, these isolated
attempts to reclaim public spaces were suc¬
cessful not just in their own countries but also
elsewhere. The two groups set such high
artistic standards and their impact was so
strong that governments did not object to their
going from strength to strength. But how many
other similar ventures around the world have
been held back or else nipped in the bud?
Scene from an open-air
performance by India's
Jagran theatre of a political
satire denouncing the
pressures that voters may
encounter.
FRANÇOISE GRUND,
of France, has been art
director of the Maison des
Cultures du Monde, in Paris,
since its creation in 1982,
and was also director of the
Festival of Traditional Arts at
Rennes (France) from 1974
to 1983. She travels the
world in search of traditional
and contemporary forms of
folk music, dance, theatre
and the plastic arts.
27
