THE outbreak of the Second "World War
set back the emergence of television in
the United States as it did elsewhere. The
new medium did not really take off until 1946.
It then developed so fast that it was soon seen
as a threat by film production companies,
already unsettled by the 1949 antitrust law that
prohibited the Hollywood studios from com¬
bining the production, distribution and exploi¬
tation functions.
In 1953, some studios launched a counter-
offensive based on technological developments
such as CinemaScope, 3-D, Cinerama and ste¬
reophonic sound, as well as on superproduc¬
tions with huge sets, spectacular special effects
and casts of thousands. This was a clever strat¬



egy, for television with its tiny black and white
screen hardly seemed capable of competing
with wide-screen epics like Ben Hur, El Cid,
Spartacus or The Alamo. It was also short¬
lived, however, for such productions were by
their nature exceptional. Besides, the studios'
position was ambivalent: while setting them¬
selves up as rivals of television, they were also
signing agreements with intermediary organi-
The United States:
the early years
by Alain Garel
zations and with the TV channels themselves to
produce programmes, sell film rights and hire
out equipment.
Radio days
Television started with one great advantage: the
three national channels (ABC, CBS and NBC)
were already established across North America.
They had run radio stations since the 1920s,
and each had a privileged relationship with its
financial backers. A fourth channel, DuMont,
stopped broadcasting in 1956 because it failed
to ensure equivalent technical, financial and
commercial support.
A cigar-toting Groucho Marx
presents the game-show You
Bet Your Life on America's
NBC television network. The
show, which began in 1947
as a radio programme,
transferred successfully to
the small screen, where it
ran until 1961.
29

The Honeymooners was one
of the best-known sitcoms of
the 1950s and 1960s, the
golden age of American
television.
30
Building on their broadcasting experience,
the three national channels immediately carved
out a sizeable audience for themselves. The
1930s had been the decade of radio. Received in
every home, the comedies, dramas, serials,
game and variety shows that made up the bulk
of its repertoire had an enthusiastic following.
Naturally enough, most television programmes
started life as adaptations of popular radio
shows.
It is hard to imagine what American televi¬
sion was like in the 1940s and 1950s, because
virtually all programmes went out live and few
were recorded. Most of the recordings have
subsequently been lost or else have deterio¬
rated. Nonetheless, the vitality and creativity of
the young medium were never in doubt. Nor
was there much argument about the quality of
the programmes, in particular the prestigious
drama series featuring material written by
authors such as Gore Vidal and Rod Sterling
and directed by the likes of John Franken-
heimer and George Roy Hill who once
recreated the sinking of the Titanic live with
700 actors and thirty-five sets.
The film industry soon began to hire televi¬
sion directors both to make original films and
to adapt small-screen successes for the cinema.
Some of these films became classics. They
included Robert Mulligan's Baby the Rain
Must Fall, John Cassavetes' A Child is Waiting,
Martin Ritt's Edge of the City, Arthur Penn's
The Left-handed Gun and The Miracle
Worker, Delbert Mann's Marty, Ralph
Nelson's Requiem for a Heavyweight and
Sidney Lumet's Twelve Angry Men.
Noted film directors such as Tom Gries,
Arthur Hiller, Sam Peckinpah, Sydney Pollack
and Steven Spielberg started their careers in
television. Other directors with established
reputations in the cinema followed the example
set by many film actors and went to work in
television. Veterans like John Ford, Robert
Siodmak and Alfred Hitchcock (who even had
his own programme), as well as younger film¬
makers like Blake Edwards, Samuel Fuller,
Robert Parrish and Don Siegel, all worked for
the new medium.
This movement between television and the
cinema was encouraged by the dropping of live
shows in favour of taped ones and by the
development of recording on film. Television
drama, a hybrid between radio drama and stage
plays that was the high spot of what is now
often called American television's golden age,
gave way gradually to a new genre, the series,
which in many ways recalled the old B-movies,
employing low budgets, limited shooting times
and formula plotting.
Sitcoms triumphant
Audience interest determines how long a series
runs. Some never reach ten episodes, while
others rack up a hundred or even 400 instal-

ments. Most episodes last for thirty or sixty
minutes, but some may stretch to ninety
minutes, including advertising breaks. Some
series have featured the same characters week in
week out. Others, including such celebrated
examples as Alfred Hitchcock Presents, Police
Story and The Twilight Zone, have an entirely
new cast each time, while conserving a consis¬
tent tone and narrative style, generally set by
the personality of the presenter.
For years TV, like the cinema, went in for a
wide range of genres. There were spy series,
detective stories, comedy, adventure, war,
science fiction, the supernatural, westerns. In
the past decade, however, the range has nar¬
rowed, and the dominant genres today are
police and crime shows and comedy usually
domestic situation comedies featuring typical
American families.
One reason why the series formula became
so popular is that it could be easily scheduled
into strategic time-slots. A weekly series, with
the same characters reappearing at the same time
in similarly structured adventures, could attract
Right, Alfred Hitchcock
(1899-1980), master of
suspense.
Below, a scene from Sydney
Lumet's Twelve Angry Men
(1957), starring Henry
Fonda.
a faithful audience and keep advertisers happy.
But the limitations of the format nonetheless
soon became apparent, and the networks, which
were no longer able to make do with the back-
lists of the old Hollywood studios, began to
finance "telefeatures" with the encouragement
of the film companies themselves. In 1964 Uni¬
versal became the first studio to produce tele¬
films with David Lowell Rich's See How They
Run and two films by Don Siegel, The Hanged
Man and The Killers (the latter of which was
finally adjudged too violent for television and
was released in cinemas instead).
Some telefilms are self-contained stories;
others are "pilots", intended to be the first, fea¬
ture-length episodes of series that only go into
production if audience response is favourable.
Like the series, they work B-movie territory.
At first they too used a broad range of material,
but soon confined themselves to a limited
number of subjects.
At present there are basically three types of
telefilm: police or crime stories, drama, and
remakes of classic films. The large number of
crime films can partly be explained by the suc¬
cess of "cop movies" in the cinema, where they
are virtually the only kind of film to have sur¬
vived the disappearance of the Hollywood
giants. Moreover, the dimensions and technical
characteristics of the television screen, as well
as TV's association with news and reporting,
give such a sheen of realism to crime stories
that many telefilms opt for a documentary
format, which they often accentuate by recons¬
tructing authentic cases in detail. In this res¬
pect, the productions are very different from
their equivalent in the cinema, which for the
past decade have tended to be overreliant on
spectacular action sequences.
The would-be-documentary style is also
used in the most interesting and original kind
of television films, those which tackle social
themes and are often referred to as "docu-
dramas" or drama documentaries. These films
highlight social problems such as unemploy¬
ment, pollution, homosexuality, sexism, racism, 31

Bagdad Caté, a film made by
the German director Percy
Adlon, was so successful
that it was subsequently
adapted for American
television (below).
suicide, drug addiction, prostitution, incurable
disease, divorce, loneliness, delinquency, justice
and education. Some of them are based on real-
life events, whose implications are skilfully
explored with the aid of fictional techniques.
The fictional element creates an emotional
interest, prevents the films from becoming disa¬
greeably didactic and helps increase awareness
of issues the public may have been genuinely
unconscious of or pretended to ignore. In a
modest way, television today acts as a provider
of information and civic education and has
adopted a similar role to that played by the
cinema during the Great Depression of the
1930s, in the 1940s and 1950s in the wake of the
Second World War, and in the 1960s and 1970s
at the time of the protest movements a role
which it now seems to have abandoned in
favour of spectacular entertainment.
The third type of telefilm is less original
than the other two. Just as cinema, for want of
good scripts, has for the past ten years or more
gone in for remakes, so television has been
content to recycle big-screen classics without
being able to equal them in quality, as the new
versions of The Best Years of Our Lives, The
Letter, Operation Petticoat, The Red Badge of
Courage and Winchester '73 testify. Freed from
the time constraints of the cinema, television
has also adapted works of literature that have
already been filmed, such as From Here to
Eternity and East of Eden, and has produced
screen versions of best-sellers by writers
including James Clavell, Arthur Hailey, James
Michener, Harold Robbins, Irwin Shaw,
Sydney Sheldon and Herman Wouk. Because
of their length, these dramatizations are shown
in a number of episodes as mini-series, which
run from four to twenty-six hours. The plot¬
ting is often weak and confused.
Mini-series constitute a further link with
American television's roots in radio, which is
also the original source of the "soap operas",
melodramatic serials that owe their name to the
fact that they were initially sponsored by the
major soap and detergent manufacturers. Most
are shot from day to day with. three video
cameras in a few fixed sets, as they were in
Sydney Pollack's parody Tootsie. They are
intended primarily for internal consumption
and few of them are exported.
On the other hand, more expensive and ela¬
borate productions such Dallas, Santa Barbara
and West Coast have attracted a vast audience
worldwide. Week after week, the same stereo¬
typed characters, moved by simple emotions,
become involved in situations full of conflict and
drama. The formula is always the same: at the
end of each episode the cast is enmeshed in ten¬
sions that are resolved the following week. In this
respect, soap operas have some affinities with the
serialized novels that were popular in nineteenth-
century Europe, whose contemporary equiva¬
lents they in many ways seem to be. O
ALAIN GAREL
¡s a French film critic,
historian, and lecturer on the
cinema. He is the co-author
of a study on the French film-
director Philippe de Broca
(1990), and a dossier on
music and the cinema
(1992).
