ANNIVERSARY
1881-1942
Stefan
Zweig
by Gertraud Steiner
HE was a man of letters, a cosmopo¬
litan European in that period be¬
tween the World Wars when the old
world had been shaken but not destroyed by
the fall of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy.
It was Hitler who finally delivered the
death-blow. In his London exile, in 1940-41,
Stefan Zweig erected a lasting monument to
that period and to turn-of-the-century
Vienna in his memoir Die Welt von Gestern
(The World of Yesterday). He was himself an
embodiment of the bygone age that he so
matchlessly described.
Zweig, the son of a Jewish-Bohemian
textile manufacturer, was born in Vienna but
wrote most of his numerous biographies,
novellas and essays at his Salzburg villa. He
was attracted to Salzburg in part by its
baroque setting, but even more by its ideal
location as a jumping-off place for his exten¬
sive European travels. Here, in his "little
palace", he lived the story-book life of an
internationally famous author, receiving
visits from other leading European writers
such as Thomas Mann, Arthur Schnitzler,
H.G. Wells and James Joyce. Unlike most of
/*
I
his fellow authors, he did not have to live by
his pen. Yet his writing made him a wealthy
man. By the 1920s and 1930s his works had
been translated into almost forty languages.
A pacifist, Zweig was one of the most
prolific letter-writers of his age and spun
across Europe a web of correspondence that
included such figures as Romain Rolland,
Maxim Gorky and Rainer Maria Rilke. "I
felt I was living completely as a European,"
he wrote. "Borders were insignificant lines."
Looking back on his life, he admitted, "I stu¬
died philosophy. But my real studies began
only when I started travelling extensively
throughout Europe, America and India. My
inner education began through friendships
with some of the leading personalities of my
generation Verhaeren, Romain Rolland,
Freud and Rilke." His underlying pacifism
was based not least on this transcending of
international boundaries.
His rich and abundant output, which
includes biographies of Marie Antoinette,
Mary Stuart, Fouché, Erasmus and
Magellan, offers a tour d'horizon of Euro¬
pean culture. His most famous work is
Sternstunden der Menschheit (The Tide of
Fortune). In it he discussed certain "momen¬
tous occasions when a decision with lasting
consequences can be pinpointed to a single
date, a single hour." His profound know¬
ledge of the human soul and his ability to
recognize and portray the subtlest emotional
nuances clearly illustrated in his Schachno¬
velle (The Royal Game) led him to be
among the first to honour the founder of
psychoanalysis. In his essay "Sigmund
Freud" he exposed the nineteenth century as
an epoch of prudery.
A refugee from fascism, Zweig moved to
London in the 1930s and took British citi¬
zenship in 1940. In 1942 he moved to Brazil.
In exile he found new companionship with
his secretary, Lotte Altmann, who became
his second wife. Believing that his world was
lost forever and that Europe would be
plunged into eternal barbarism, he was
seized by despair. In a crisis of depression
and resignation, he committed suicide to¬
gether with his wife in Petropolis, a suburb
of Rio de Janeiro. He was sixty-one. In a
farewell letter he wrote: "Greetings to all my
friends. May they live to see the red sky of
morning, dawning after a long night. I am
too impatient and go before them." O
Gertraud Steiner, Austrian journalist, is
responsible for cultural information in her
country's Federal Chancellery. She has
published many articles and two books: Die
Heimat-macher (1987), a history of Austrian
cinema, and a study on the history of the
Marshall Plan in Austria, 25 Jahre ERP-Fonds
(1987).
73
