India: TV at the crossroads
Fiction
by Aruna Vasudev and
L.K. Malhatra
Above, a family watches
television in the Punjab.
WHEN the decision to introduce televi¬
sion to India was taken in 1958, there
were many who questioned it. Can
we afford it? asked some. Why have television
when we don't have enough food, clothing and
shelter? Television will degenerate into enter¬
tainment and we can do without that, said the
puritans. Who will watch television? others
asked. If, as intended, it is going to be purely
educational, then those who can afford a set
won't watch and those for whom it is designed
will not have access to it.
Despite the controversy, television broad¬
casting began in 1959. It was a modest begin¬
ning there was one little studio, from which
an hour of programmes was transmitted twice a
week. There were farm programmes for rural
audiences, folk dancing and music, pro¬
grammes of practical interest to women, the
occasional short play telecast live. It was all
very basic and simple and so it remained for
several years. Gradually the hours of transmis¬
sion were increased, but technical improve¬
ments were very slow in coming. The problem
was that television was treated by the govern¬
ment as an extension of radio, which had been
well established for decades. For a long time it
was conceived of as sound accompanied by ele¬
mentary black and white pictures. One deci¬
sion stood unchanged through all the years:
there would be no imported programmes, we
would consume our own images. 37

38
The transformation came in 1982, when the
Asian Games were held in Delhi. The then
Minister for Information and Broadcasting,
Vasant Sathe, was determined that the coverage
of the games should be of international quality.
A crash training programme was launched for
technicians, and the major decision was made
to shift to colour. Controversy erupted again.
Why should we spend so much on colour? It
was pandering to pressure from urban televi¬
sion owners who wanted entertainment. What
about education? the purists asked. Sport is
educational, came the reply. The same ques¬
tions that had been heard twenty years before
were asked again. But the situation had
changed, economically and technically. Values
too had changed.
The arguments for and against colour con¬
tinued for many months. Educational transmis¬
sions had been started in the afternoons, mainly
of science programmes for children. These, said
the authorities, would be much more effective
in colour, easier to understand and a more
attractive proposition for young viewers.
Audiences were accustomed to colour because
of the cinema. Technocrats and many media
commentators also felt that it was time we
caught up with advancing technology. Black
and white was being phased out all over the
world. Agreements were made with Japan,
Korea and Germany for thousands of TV sets
to be supplied in time for the Asian Games, and
import restrictions were lifted for a specific
period to enable people to bring colour televi¬
sion sets into the country. Colour television
sets poured in.
Family entertainment
Another development was taking place simul¬
taneously. The Minister had been struck by the
use Mexico had made of soap operas to spread
developmental messages, and a team of experts
was sent there to find out why this operation
had been so successful. Following the Mexican
trip, the idea for a soap opera called Hum Log
("People like Us") was developed in collabora¬
tion with a well-known writer named Manohar
Sham Joshi and a little-known feature film
director, P. Kumar Vasudev. Starting from the
romantic yearnings of a modest young man
from a poor family for the beautiful and spoilt
daughter of a wealthy widower, it turned into
the epic story of two families, with sub-plots
involving brothers and sisters, aunts, uncles and
grandparents. The young man ends up working
for the girl's father who, it turns out later, is a
big-time smuggler. The daughter marries a
prince of doubtful antecedents who is later
involved in getting her father murdered. The
prince is finally unmasked and killed. Through¬
out the story, the young man's devotion does
not waver.
Floods of letters poured in, those asking
when the two would marry outnumbering
those expressing disapproval of such a union.
The serial ended two years and 159 episodes
after it had begun. Whether or not the two
would come together remained an open ques¬
tion, perhaps in a gesture to conservative opin¬
ion that might have been disturbed by such a
"happy ending". This was family entertainment
of a kind that had not been seen before in India,
but any development message it might have
contained was well hidden.
Even the producers of the serial and the
authorities responsible for its birth were taken
aback by the extent of its popularity. No stars
had been cast in it. The young people who
played the two leading roles were just out of
school and had no acting experience, and the
other actors mostly came from amateur theatre
in Delhi. Then, overnight, India's first televi¬
sion stars were born. The actors were mobbed
in the streets, overwhelmed with awards and
accolades. It was as if people were yearning for
situations and characters they could identify
with.
The tremendous response to Hum Log
opened the floodgates. Televiewers who had
been hooked on it and advertisers who had
suddenly discovered the phenomenal reach of
television called for more serials of the same
kind. Hopeful young film-makers offered to
make them. The authorities, finding that adver¬
tising could painlessly provide the immense
amount of capital required for large-scale
expansion, threw open television to advertising,
going against the principles and policies they
had laid down earlier.
With money easily available, production
standards improved rapidly. The commercials
acquired a slick Western look and made a
clever sales pitch. Many felt with dismay that
this was an open invitation to the disasters of
consumerism. Advertisements are often aimed
at children, who sing the commercials and
demand the products television dangles before
their eyes. Advertisers compete for prime
advertising spots that go with the serials, which
are shown seven days a week at 9 p.m., between
the twenty-minute national news telecast in
Hindi at 8.40 and in English at 9.30 p.m.
A kind of "serial madness" has taken over.
Everybody from film producers and film stars
to retired government officials and clerks with
contacts in high places wants to produce serials.
Many succeed. After the amazing run of Hum
Log, hundreds of other serials have been
shown, some with over a hundred episodes.
They have featured an extraordinary variety of
subjects, but only a few have captured the
hearts and minds of the television public.
Shortly after Hum Log came Buniyaad
("Foundation Stone"). Another family epic, it
took as its starting point the partition of India
in 1947 and followed the fortunes of a single
family over three generations. The family's
plight arriving in Delhi as refugees from Lahore
struck a chord with many people in northern
India who still retained traumatic memories of
ARUNA VASUDEV is an
Indian film historian and
editor of the Asian cinema
review Cinemaya. She is co¬
author with Philippe Lenglet
of Indian Cinema
Superbazaar (1983).

partition. Buniyaad, which was broadcast twice
a week for a year and ran to 104 episodes,
became a cult, and its characters became house¬
hold names. It ended in March 1987, but
cassettes of it are available in all video rental
libraries in India. It appears to have been
equally popular in Pakistan.
Nothing, however, could equal the aston¬
ishing impact of the serialization of the great
Indian epics that came soon after the
Ramayana and, two years later, the Mahabha-
rata. The popularity of the Ramayana particu¬
larly surpassed all expectations. When it was
shown on Sunday mornings, people would
bathe and dress before sitting down reverently
in front of their television sets. Popular myth
combined with religious sentiment to evoke
total audience identification. It was proof, if
any proof were needed, that for Indians the
roots of cultural expression still lie firmly
embedded in these two great epics.
However, many people were alarmed by
what they saw as elements of kitsch in a pro
duction that reduced great poetry and high cul¬
ture into a kind of bazaar art. Apprehensions
about a worrying Hindu revivalism were also
expressed because the Ramayana serial, more
than the Mahabharata, emphasized the Hindu
religious rather than the Indian cultural nature
of the stories. Perhaps to counter this criticism,
the Indian television authority, Doordarshan, is
now ready to start serializing stories from the
Bible.
Sport and
late-night movies
Sports programmes are almost as popular as
serials. Cricket has always been popular with
Indian audiences, but television has turned it
into a national passion. Life virtually comes to
a standstill during one-day international
matches. In shops and offices transistors are
turned on full blast, while those who can, stay
at home to watch television. The rate of absen¬
teeism from offices, schools and colleges rises
dramatically during those days. Two cricketing
A scene from Paras Pathar
(1958), a film by the great
Indian director Satyajit Ray
(1921-1991).
39

idols, Ravi Shastri and the legendary Sunil
Gavaskar, have produced and presented cricket
serials that attracted a wide following on
Sunday mornings. Live coverage of tennis, par¬
ticularly the Wimbledon semi-finals and finals,
football and hockey matches and athletics, has
proved to be a great incentive to sports partici¬
pation among students.
For many years, Sunday evening was
reserved for a popular Hindi film of the kind,
produced in Bombay, which has served as the
model for commercial films made in all the lan¬
guages of India. Today this film is shown on
Saturday evenings, and on Sundays the regional
networks show popular films in local languages.
Twice a week half-hour programmes of
song sequences compiled from popular films
reinforce the passion for cinema. To offset this
to some extent, an attempt was made to intro¬
duce audiences to the "alternative" cinema,
showing a "serious" film in different Indian lan¬
guages (with English subtitles) on Sunday after¬
noons. But sandwiched between a morning of
serials and the popular film in the evening, this
remains a gesture rather than a genuine attempt
to create a deeper understanding.
The latest controversy focuses on Doordar-
shan's decision to show outstanding films twice
a week at 11.30 p.m., an Indian film on
Tuesday nights, a film from another country on
Friday nights. These films are meant for adult
viewing, but there has been a vigorous protest
that children stay up to watch them and that
even adults arrive at work bleary-eyed the next
morning. No matter that it is for parents to
prevent children from watching and for the
adults to take adult decisions about their sleep¬
ing hours. The blame is placed squarely on
Doordarshan for providing the temptation.
Meanwhile, the late-night movies continue.
Accused of selling out to commercialism
and the serials, sponsored by big business,
Doordarshan has taken another significant step
in dealing directly with directors and producers
to buy documentary serials on such topical
issues as the environmental crisis and drug
addiction. But these are usually shown late at
night, defeating their very purpose.
Programming has to take account of the
audience's lack of homogeneity and the
number of languages spoken in India. From 6
p.m., when the evening transmission starts,
each station broadcasts locally produced pro¬
grammes in regional languages. At 8.40 p.m.,
the National Programme beamed from Delhi
takes over, with the news in Hindi. Nine p.m.
is serial time, followed by the news in English.
Discussions on current affairs, a documentary
of "national" interest, classical dance or music
bring the evening to a close at 11 p.m., except
for the Tuesday and Friday late-night film.
The last two years have brought dramatic
changes in the Indian media environment. In
answer to persistent criticism of the low stan¬
dard of programmes and the stultifying system
that did not allow a more lively spirit to
emerge, the government took the daring step of
introducing a Bill to create autonomous bodies
both for sound radio (AIR) and TV (Doordar¬
shan) This project has had a chequered history.
A Bill was passed by Parliament and became an
Act towards the end of 1990, but before it
could be implemented there was a change of
government. And so after thirty-four years of
existence Indian TV continues to be at the
crossroads, a prisoner of indecision.
40
A dancer performs in the
television version of the
Ramayana.
