Gorée today
by Antonella Verdiani
Gorée's architecture has so many distinctive
features that it is possible to talk of a spe¬
cific Gorean style. Some of these features,
such as large, airy rooms opening onto porches, bal¬
conies and galleries, are typically colonial. Others
are dictated by naturethe use of black volcanic
basalt; walls limewashed in pink, ochre and yellow;
straw thatched roofs, the flat roofs and red tiles that
came later. The effect is so charming and the build¬
ings are so well integrated into their environment,
that it is almost possible to forget the island's tragic
past.
It has been said that Gorée "has preserved an
architectural coherence that combines widely differ¬
ent cultural elementsChristian and Islamic, nor¬
thern and Mediteranean a unity imposed by limita¬
tions of space, exposure to the ocean winds, the
homogeneity of the building materials and, perhaps
most of all, the forces of a tumultuous history that
turned every dwelling into a slave warehouse and a
defensive redoubt."
In 1974, at the request of the Senegalese author¬
ities, several consultants made preliminary studies
with a view to establishing a detailed plan of action for
the protection, preservation and development of this
architectural heritage. The plan proposed that ten
sites of historic interest should be restored, including
the Hortala, Sudan, Diouga Dieng and Victoria Albis
houses, the William Ponty School, the Nuns' Pavilion,
the remains of the open-air theatre and the harbour¬
master's building. It also recommended the establish¬
ment of a cultural programme aimed at developing a
sense of national identity.
On 22 December 1980, the Director-General of
Unesco appealed to the international community to
help safeguard Gorée, which had been placed on the
World Heritage List in September 1978.
More than 10 years have now passed since the
Plan of Action was adopted. On the positive side,
three buildings have been restored and are now serv¬
ing various cultural functions. The Sudan House has
become a research centre; the Harbourmaster's
Building is temporarily being used as an annexe to
the Université des Mutants; the Victoria Albis house
¡s used for exhibitions, as well as providing a home
for the Office of the Architecture of Historical Monu¬
ments and for Unesco's expert on the island. The
structure of a fourth building, the Diouga Deng
House, is currently being strengthened, and plans to
rehabilitate the William Ponty School for residential
and cultural use with the aid of the EEC are about to
be approved.
But \he Plan of Action gives priority to the
island's cultural role, and now needs to be reviewed
so that more attention is given to the development
of the economy and tourism. The risk is that the
stress on cultural activities might otherwise turn
Gorée into an island museum deserted by its own
inhabitants.
The restoration of the House of Slaves is very
important in this respect. Even though it was not
one of the priorities indicated by the Plan of Action,
the building, which has great historical significance,
was repaired in 1990/91 with the aid of a French
association, the Comité France Liberté. It is a typical
eighteenth-century slave building, with the trading
areas on the ground floor and the masters' apart¬
ments upstairs. A small door in the central courtyard
opening towards the sea was the threshold through
which the slaves passed to the ships that took them
to America.
This house, which has become one of the great
symbols of slavery, receives more than 20,000 visi¬
tors a year from all around the world. Prominent
among them are black Americans who come as pil¬
grims, repeating in a reverse direction the journey
their ancestors made from the shores of Africa two
centuries ago.
The museum, which has been open for years,
has recently been provided with a faithfully recons¬
tructed dwelling-room, furnished for the most part
with the original furniture and objects. There is also
an exhibition of documents relating to daily life on
Gorée in the eighteenth century. l~J
