r UKCO and k élimination of apartlieiíf^lif;;^^
u.
44
'nescx") drew up a programme for the elimi¬
nation 


of apartheid in the 1950s. In fact, it was
in reaction to studies carried out within this
programme, which were being circulated by the
Institute of Race Relations in South Africa, that
South Africa decided to withdraw from
UNESCO in 1955,
In 1965, at the request of the UN Special
Committee against Apartheid, UNESCO
initiated a programme of social science research
to elucidate the effects of apartheid and to
produce reliable and objective information on
what was actually happening in South Africa. The
publication Apartheid, Its Effects on Education,
Science, Culture and Information (1967, revised
edition 1972) was the first in a series of works
that UNESCO has produced over the years on
the problems of apartheid in South Africa and
Namibia. Other studies deal inter alia with the
impact of apartheid on social science research, the
falsification of history, the influence of apartheid
policies on news repiorting, anti-developmcnt in

the so-called bantustans, the effects 


of emergency
rule on education, information and culture, and
the dynamics of race and class in an apartheid
society.
UNESCO has also undertaken to mobilize
the intellectual and academic community, artists,
creators, media professionals and educationalists
in various countries.
A UNESCO International Meeting of
University Researchers held in Beijing, China,
from 1 to 4 September 1986 drew up a Five-Year
Research Plan on Apartheid. As a follow-up to
the recommendations of this meeting, several
international working groups of scholars were
convened to reflect on problems of apartheid: one
on the economy and apartheid in co-operation
with the University of the West Indies (in King¬
ston, Jamaica, 21 to 28 April 1989); one on
women, apartheid and options for a post-
apartheid society (in Caracas, Venezuela, 19 to
21 September 1989); and one on apartheid and
culture (in Dakar, Senegal, 27 to 30 November
1989). Problems encountered by the Front-Line
States were examined during a sub-regional work¬
shop organized under contract with the Zim¬
babwe Institute of Development Studies on the
effects of destabihzation policies of South Africa'
m the fields of education, science and culture
(in Harare, Zimbabwe, 20 to 24 February 1989).
Over the years, UNESCO has likewise
provided technical and material assistance,
through the African National Congress and the
Pan Africanist Congress, to the development of
educational structures and programmes for
refugees in asylum countries and for training key
personnel.
In 1989, UNESCO adopted a Special Project
which, while continuing to focus on the eradica¬
tion of apartheid, also has the longer-term objec¬
tive of reflecting on and helping the people of
South Africa to prepare the foundations for a
future apartheid-free, democratic society. In order
to contribute to reflection on the needs and pri¬
orities of an apartheid-free society, three major
meetings were convened during 1991.
1. A Workshop on Human Rights Issues for
a Post-Apartheid South Africa was organized
jointly by UNESCO and the African Commis¬
sion for Human and Peoples' Rights in Banjul,
The Gambia, from 18 to 21 June 1991.
Participants at the Workshop, while noting
certain positive developments, pointed out the
shortcomings of on-going législative reforms. Cer¬
tain apartheid structures remained intact
notably the "bantustans", the tri-cameral racially
defined parliament, the police and the security
Opposite page: Apartheid No,
a poster created by the Italian
painter Leonardo Cremonini in
1983. Above, a class of black
pupils in the so-called Bantu
system of primary education.
45

Frederik de Klerk and Nelson
Mandela at the signing of the
National Peace Accord in
Johannesburg on 14
September 1991.
46
FRANCINE FOURNIER
IS UNESCO's Assistant
Director-General for Social and
Human Sciences. A former
professor of political science
at the University of Montreal
and at the University of
Quebec (Montreal), she has
served as director of research
and later president of the
Quebec Human Rights
Commission and as president
of the Canadian Equality Rights
Panel. She is the author of
several books and articles
related to human rights
forces. Affirmative action, including for women,
was required to tackle the legacies 


of apartheid
and institutionalized racism.
2. An International Conference on Educa¬
tional Needs of the Victims of Apartheid was
organized by the UN Special Committee against
Apartheid and UNESCO, in co-operation with
the Advisory Committee of the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa, at UNESCO Headquarters in
Paris from 25 to 27 June 1991.
The Conference called for a radical restruc¬
turing of the entire educational system and inter¬
national support for urgent training of the black
population. Universities and other educational
institutions which were promoting educational
and training programmes for the black majority
population deserved particular support from the
international community. The role played by
anti-apartheid organizations during the transition
period was recognized, and the Conference
endorsed the convening of a national meeting of
non-racial educational organizations and
specialists, to take place in South Africa at an
early date, in order to further work out national
priorities and strategies in education and training.
3. UNESCO convened a Working Group on
Problems of Access of Africans to Science and
Technology, with particular reference to South
Africa, in Lusaka, Zambia, from 17 to 20 Sep¬
tember 1991, in which African specialists in
science and technology participated, as well as
representatives of ANC, PAC and UN special¬
ized agencies. This workshop examined various
obstacles to the involvement of the black popu¬
lation in science and technology, with particular
reference to tertiary-level education and possibil¬
ities for future assistance in preparing a non¬
discriminatory science and technology policy for
a free South Africa.
In the immediate future, UNESCO plans to
contribute actively to the Conference on the
Future Role of the United Nations System in
Efforts to Redress the Socio-Economic Inequali¬
ties in South Africa being organized under the
auspices of the UN Centre against Apartheid and
the Special Committee against Apartheid in
Windhoek in February 1992, as well as a joint
UN system study on this topic. A workshop on
problems of nation-building and of promoting a
culture of peace and democracy will be convened
in co-operation with the OAU in southern Africa
in 1992.
UNESCO will provide assistance in the
training of leaders and planners in key nation-
building areas, including applied social sciences,
science and technology, social communication
and education.
