The Statue of Liberty after its two-year
restoration (1984-1986).
46 SUZANNE PATTERSON
is an American journalist based in Paris.



NOW 106 years old, the Statue of
Liberty is more than a grand old
lady. The embodiment of freedom,
eternal youth and strength, she has inspired
countless immigrants with hope and Ame¬
rican citizens with pride. Known affection¬
ately as "Miss Liberty", the statueFrance's
magnanimous gift to the United States to
commemorate the Declaration of Indepen¬
dence is also a symbol of Franco-American
friendship. The world's largest metal statue,
the "iron lady" is a titan of monumental pro¬
portions; the figure measures 46 metres from
toe to tip, or a total of 93 metres if the base is
also included.
The statue was conceived over dinner in
a fashionable Paris salon in 1865 when the
host, a historian named Edouard René
Lefebvre de Laboulaye, suggested that a
monument should be donated to celebrate
America's Independence Centennial in 1876.
Besides cementing the friendship of the two
countries, the gift would also express the
French intelligentsia's espousal of liberty at a
time when many chafed under the autocratic
rule of the Emperor Napoleon III.
A guest at the dinner, a talented thirty-
one-year-old sculptor named Frédéric
Auguste Bartholdi, enthusiastically volun¬
teered to create the sculpture. It was to take
him more than twenty years to realize his
dream.
For the gargantuan task he had set him¬
self, Bartholdi sought inspiration from
ancient Egyptian statuary, from Italian
monuments and from reconstructions of the
Colossus of Rhodes. Once he had settled on
the image he wished to create, the next step
was to fashion an 11 -metre-high plaster
model on which the finished statue would be
based.
At his workshop in the Montparnasse

UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
The Statue
ofLiberty
by Suzanne Patterson
district of Paris, dozens of workers laboured
under his supervision to construct the
colossus. He enlisted the aid of Gustave
Eiffel, who was later to build the Eiffel
Tower, to advise on the engineering of the
statue's iron infrastructure.
To make the statue, full-sized sections,
drawn to the proportions of the original
model, were cast in plaster. Carpenters then
carved wooden moulds matching the shapes
of the plaster sections. Copper sheets were
hammered onto the moulds and were then



riveted together to form the statue's outer
layer, or "skin".
The money for the construction of the
statuethe equivalent of some $1.3 million
in today's currency was raised via lotteries
and by donations from over 100,000 indivi¬
duals. Bartholdi supported himself with out¬
side commissions, the most famous of which
was the celebrated Lion of Belfort. Problems
with the financing led to delays, however,
and it was not until 1884 that the statue was
finally assembled, to the bemusement of the
sculptor's Parisian neighbours.
But there was still no pedestal to support
Miss Liberty in New York. An extra
$250,000 was needed to provide it. An
appeal was launched in America to raise the
money. A poet named Emma Lazarus
donated the manuscript of a sonnet contain¬
ing the words, "Give me your tired, your
poor, your huddled masses yearning to
breathe free," garnering $1,500 at auction for
the appeal; the words themselves would later
be inscribed on a bronze plaque inside the
monument. The target was finally reached
after the New York newspaper magnate
Joseph Pulitzer, himself an immigrant from
Hungary, took up the cause in the New
York World, chiding his fellow-citizens for
accepting such a gift without providing for
"a landing-place". Sufficient funds soon
rolled in.
The site chosen for the statue was on
Bedloe's Island, adjacent to Ellis Island,
where prospective immigrants were pro¬
cessed before entry to the United States.
Bartholdi himself had noted the site on an
1871 visit to New York as a place "where
people get their first view of the New
World".
Once the pedestal was ready to receive it,
the statue was disassembled and shipped
across the Atlantic in 214 massive crates. The
official inauguration ceremony finally took
place on 28 October 1886, four months after
the sections had landed on American soil.
The weather was foggy and drizzly, but the
mood was festive. Boats plied the harbour,
cannons were fired, flags were flown and
suffragettes seized the opportunity to wave
mottoes. Few could hear the inaugural
speech delivered by US President Grover
Cleveland.
Since then the statue has become familiar
across the world, but it has also suffered the
assaults of bad weather, pollution and the
salt sea-spray. A survey in the early 1980s
revealed that years of corrosion had left it in
poor condition, and restoration was recom¬
mended. The task began in 1984, the year in
which the Statue of Liberty was included on
UNESCO's World Heritage List, and was
undertaken by American experts with the
help of ten technicians from Rheims in
France. The cost of $31 million was met by
donations from foundations, corporations
and private groups, many of them grouped
under an umbrella organization called the
Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island Foundation.
Individual citizens also contributed, and
thousands of schoolchildren raised about
$3 million by selling flowers and washing cars.
Restoration involved complex technical
work to eliminate corrosion, particularly
from the statue's 1,800 metal ribs. The
French contingent chosen for their metal¬
lurgical skills brought two tons of tools
with them, including 100 hammers that they
had made themselves. They stayed for
months, even braving a picket line set up by
New York iron-workers, to hammer the
copper outer surface and restore the spikes,
torch and flame.
For more than two years, the statue was
veiled by scaffolding as the technicians
worked to restore it, incorporating improve¬
ments along the way. A double-deckered
glass elevator and a new interior stairway
were installed, and a heating and ventilation
system was fitted. Following renovation, the
statue was pronounced strong enough to
withstand winds of up to 125 miles per hour, - _
and experts estimated it would stand for at If

48
least another 500 years. Restored to her full
splendour, the colossus was opened to the
public again in time for the centennial of the
original installation, attracting sight-seers by
the million and souvenir-hawkers galore.
Over the years, the statue has become an
icon of freedom worldwide. At least 206
replicas have been planted on the soil of the
United States and its territories by the Boy
Scouts of America. Look-alikes hold up the
flame in Buenos Aires's Belgrano Park, near
Rio de Janeiro, and in Bangkok. There are
several versions in Japan.
In France, a 2.75-metre model of the
statue decorates the Luxembourg Gardens in
Paris. A fibreglass model now standing in a
sculpture garden at Barentin, near Rouen,
has a particularly bizarre history. It was
created as a prop for a film starring Jean-Paul
Belmondo, in which it served as a receptacle
for smuggling stolen goods into the United
States. After shooting was completed,
French customs officials wanted to destroy
the model, and it was only saved through the
intervention of Belmondo's father, himself a
sculptor.
The most noteworthy of all the French
copies is, however, the 16-metre-high ver¬
sion that greets tourists on pleasure-boat
trips through Paris as they cruise by the He
aux Cygnes near the Pont de Grenelle.
Guides explain that the model was donated
UNESCO IN j
WORLD HERITAGE
Frédéric-Auguste Bartholdi (pointing at the
plan of the statue) and members of the
American Monument Committee, including
the famous press magnate Joseph Pulitzer
(leaning against the back of the sculptor's
chair). The illustration dates from 1886.
Below, construction of the statue's left hand
in the assembly workshop in Paris.
to the city in 1885 by Americans in Paris
eager to reciprocate the French gift. A cen¬
tury later the French government spent
several million francs restoring the replica,
making use of the opportunity to patch up a
shoulder that had been damaged by a shell
during World War II. In 1989, to celebrate
the bicentennial of the French Revolution,
the International Herald Tribune, an Ame¬
rican newspaper based in Paris, erected a
gold-leaf-covered replica of the liberty flame
nearby, off the Place de l'Aima.
Ultimately, the passions the statue
arouses reflect the grip the image has taken
on the public imagination round the world.
And the roots of its evocative power lie in
the impression the colossus has made on
generations of visitors getting a first impres¬
sion of the New World. "I'll never forget
Miss Liberty as I first saw her when I arrived
in New York Harbour on the ship with my
family forty years ago," says one such, Mar¬
celle Ergas, a British-French citizen who
now divides her time between France and
New York. "We got up at the crack of dawn
just to see her, and for us, after the war, it
was truly thrilling to see that great sign of
liberty and she also meant 'food' to us, a
symbol of prosperity after so much hardship
during the war."
