THE SOUTH
AN
ELUSIVE
IDEAL
byRomila Thapar
Right, Marks of Hope, a
polychrome wood engraving
by the Korean woman artist
Ja Rhee Seund.
THE democratic ideal has never been fully
translated into practice. Many so-called
democratic societies in the past were
hijacked and became oligarchies in which
democratic rhetoric was used to preserve the
fiction that the ruling group represented the
majority. The Greek city states, for example,
are often cited as the first democracies, but it is
conveniently forgotten that in them slaves
often outnumbered free citizens and were nei¬
ther represented nor had any rights. In the light
of historical experience, how can democracy be
adapted to the circumstances of the late twen¬
tieth century?
In modern times democracy has often been
associated with the nation-state. But perhaps
we should not overlook the experience of the
smaller social and political units which in the
past have been run on quasi-democratic lines.
Those who sought to endow the nation-
state with an identity by associating it with the
middle class or with a regional, linguistic,
ethnic or even religious group, claimed to be
doing so in the name of democracy. Sometimes,
it has been argued, these communities were fic¬
titious and their ostensible identity camou¬
flaged hidden aspirations. By equating the
group's identity with nationalism, national and
democratic causes coalesced. But in these
nation-states the functioning of democracy was
limited by the nationalism with which they
were linked. Now that the nation-state is
increasingly being questioned, should we also
question democracy or certain kinds of
democracy?
One question that might be asked is wheth¬
er democracy presupposes secularism. In many
parts of the world, religion is now being politi¬
cally manipulated on an unprecedented scale.
In saying this I am not objecting to people's
right to practice their faith, but to the way in
which various politicians and fundamentalists 35

36
have distorted this right. If questioning the
public function of religion necessarily leads to
secularism, then this could encourage the pro¬
motion of another approach to democracy,
particularly in societies where several religions
exist side by side.
Democracy implies both representation and
decisions based on the views of the majority.
But what constitutes a majority? If it is simply
a matter of the number of votes cast at elec¬
tions, this opens the way to vote-rigging or to
the mobilization of mass support by ideologies
that appear to espouse a variety of causes but in
reality are no more than a mechanism for
attracting and controlling large numbers of
people. I am thinking here of the kind of reac¬
tionary populism based on race or religion that
has time and again caused tensions and violence
in many parts of the world, both North and
South. In the interests of true democracy, it
would be worth considering how such move¬
ments can be prevented from imposing their
definition of majority rule, especially when
religious communities are exploited politically
as part of a supra-national hidden agenda.
The modern nation-state also faces the
problem of accommodating minority cultures,
which are increasingly aware that they cannot
be excluded from the democratic majority. This
problem is likely to become especially acute in
the industrialized countries, where sharply dif¬
fering groups have been forcibly brought to¬
gether through past colonial connections and
present economic needs, and where a numerical
majority is sometimes reduced to the status of a
political minority. In ex-colonies where such
conflicts are also known, the divergent groups
do at least normally share some common inher¬
itance and history.
The best way to understand the correlation

between culture and democracy is to examine
the manner in which individuals or groups
choose their identity and perceive the differ¬
ences between themselves and others. In part
this is the result of early socialization. It can
also spring from tension and conflicts, which
sharpen people's perception of their identity.
Why, incidentally, should the nation-state
insist on a single identity? After all, individuals
have multiple identities. The sterility of a single
identity could be replaced by a multi-faceted
one involving more complex social and cultural
patterns. A multi-faceted democracy would
also be more difficult to control politically.
Representational democracy often ends up
with power far removed from the individual
citizen. Now that cinema, television and
advertising have all got into the act, would-be
representatives of the people find themselves
addressing audiences they cannot even see.
A budding orator
in Haiti.
True representativity must be based on some
reference back to the electors, who must also
retain the right to recall their representatives,
if they so wish. These seemingly negative
rights can provide an essential corrective to the
tendency of representatives to turn into power-
brokers.
Beware of the watchdog
The collapse of some socialist economies has
led the peoples in the countries concerned
to a desperate hope that the free market will
protect them against the revival of totalitarian
regimes. But the experience of other countries
shows that the market cannot do this. Unfortu¬
nately, the market can equally well lend itself to
other kinds of dictatorial demand from
consumerism, the armaments industry, multi¬
national corporations and other interests. Such
demands, which undermine equality of oppor¬
tunity and social justice, can only be countered
by an equitable economic system and a legal
system that is accessible to all citizens and pre¬
vents the erosion of human rights and the
annulling of human dignity.
However, any system can be thwarted,
abused or rendered ineffective if those who
control it cannot be challenged. Institutions
which are expected to act as watchdogs often
end up by becoming a party to the abuses they
are supposed to prevent. The articulation of
dissent and protest is imperative for democratic
systems. Even in democratic societies, when
children are taught their rights and duties atten¬
tion is rarely drawn to their right to disagree.
Conformity is at a premium, and dissent is
frowned upon or ignored. The submissive sub¬
ject rather than the autonomous individual is
regarded as the ideal citizen.
In pleading the case of the autonomous
individual, I am not advocating an anarchic
society. Autonomous individuals do not set out
to destroy society; they are concerned with
changing it in creative ways. They do not
necessarily form part of the power structure
themselves, but they comment on it and if
needs be protest against specific actions taken
by those in power. As long as it is accepted that
there is room for moral authority as well as
political and social authority in the running of
society, such people will always have a place in
the democratic process. Q
ROMILA THAPAR is a noted Indian writer and historian
who ¡s Professor of History at Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi. She has published many books,
including Volume I of the Penguin History of India,
Ancient Indian Social History (1978) and From Lineage
to State (1984). 37
