How far is Europe meeting the
standards it sets itself?
Louder than words
by Sami Naïr
At a crossroads of cultures.
18
THE universal can no longer be regarded as
an abstraction. The process of unification
resulting from membership of a single trad¬
ing nexus, the worldwide domination of media
and information networks, and the sharing of
mythologies at the planetary level all imply that
any discussion of the universal is meaningless if
it does not take account of the individual cul¬
tures of which it consists. We shall not be
awarded a diploma for proficiency in universal¬
ity merely because we affirm our belief in the
fundamental values of humanism, freedom,
equality, tolerance, progress and human rights.
Societies are now judged by the world at large,
and the events that take place in them are
matched against the account they give of them¬
selves and the values they claim to epitomize.
For example, what the West says about uni¬
versality seems to be extremely constructive
when looked at in abstract terms, but much of
the shine rubs off when it is set against the
facts. In the past, colonization went forward in
the name of progress and civilization. Today,
although democracy may ensure that freedoms
are protected, in Western Europe it also finds
expression in the return of racism and xeno¬
phobia and the resurgence of exclusive local
allegiances.
The fact is that we are living in a zone of tur¬
bulence created by the revolution in world eco¬
nomic structures which took place in the 1970s
and 1980s. That revolution turned everything
upside down, including the chessboard of world
politics, relations between North and South and
between East and West, and even the forces of
social cohesion within the democratic societies
of Europe and America. The nature of the tradi¬
tional social classes is changing this is particu¬
larly true of the traditional middle and working
classes and new classes, with different values
and attitudes to life, are emerging. The rise of
new middle classes all over the world makes it
very difficult to define universal values rooted
in solidarity and progress, because these middle
classes are confronted with influxes of new
migrants in Europe from the developing
countries of the South and from Eastern
Europe, and in North America from Spanish-
speaking America. This encounter prompts
people in the host societies to reassert their own
identities and in many cases leads to attitudes of

refusal and rejection. It will not be easy to give
tangible form to a universal vision of the world.
Thought must also be given to the scope and
limitations of the European social and political
model. Although democracy and the economic
system subtending it seem to be here to stay,
they are far from perfect. It would be worth¬
while investigating the relationships between
different forms of power cultural, political and
economic. The media can in some cases be of
decisive importance in encouraging emancipa¬
tion and freedom, but they can also be extremely
dangerous by leading to new forms of alienation
(especially television) and by manipulating indi¬
viduals. Democratic access to the media is now
becoming a key issue, and the modern concept
of freedom of opinion clearly hinges on it. The
concept of democracy should also be refined,
since in these closing years of the twentieth cen¬
tury democracy cannot be considered simply as
an institutional form. It must be given a content
that will make it possible for social communica¬
tion to flourish and, in its wake, for society itself
to take responsibility for its problems.
Europe is, in the words of Enrique Barón
Crespo, former President of the European
Parliament, "easy to describe but difficult to
build". It cannot be defined in terms of an
ethnic, denominational or even narrowly cul¬
tural identity. In reality, Europe is both an
idea the idea of a dialogue and a universal
humanist outlook and a combat against ten¬
dencies which within Europe itself wish to
pervert this idea. Seen from the outside, Europe
must be both of these things simultaneously.
This is now the only way it can exert its power
of attraction.
European universality no longer depends
on the force of arms or even on the power of
words to convince. It faces a much more
difficult test in which success or failure will be
measured by the account which European
society will be seen to give of itself, day in day
out. Europe is no longer a source of fascina¬
tion, and that is all for the good. It will be
judged on its acts. It no longer holds the mono¬
poly on universality, but the Universal will be
recognized as the foundation stone of its iden¬
tity if and only if it provides itself with
appropriate democratic facilities; if it extends
democracy to all the people of whom it is
constituted; and if it supports the emergence
and strengthening of democracy the world
over. O
Opéra cosmique
(1991, "Cosmic Opera").
Composition by the French
artist Hélène Mugot.
Sami Nair, French
philosopher, is Professor of
Political Science at the
University of Paris-VIII. His
books include Machiavel et
Marx (1984), Le Caire, la
Victorieuse (1986) and Le
regard des vainqueurs
(1992).
19
