Islam: a conflict ofmodels
by Mohammed Arkoun
34
IN what sense can we speak of tolerance in
an Islamic context? The tolerance sought
after nowadays stems from the very situa¬
tion that down the centuries gave rise to the
intolerance of the traditional religious sys¬
tems, underpinned as they were by the appa¬
ratus of state power emperors, caliphs and
sultans, drawing their justification from reli¬
gious institutions.
In this respect Christianity and Islam are
very similar: their expansion as religions went
hand in hand with the establishment of
empires and kingdoms committed to a strict
definition of God's truth as the basis of
human laws. God intervenes in men's affairs
in different ways depending on their religion:
but power structures invariably derive their
justification from transcendent sacred
teachings whose orthodox versions are pur¬
veyed and sustained by what Max Weber
called "managers of the sacred".
Starting in the eighteenth century in
Europe, competition developed between two
historical models for the production and
reproduction of societies: one gave rise to
"Societies of the Book"; the other to secular
societies devoid of any theistic content and
relying for their legitimacy on universal suf¬
frage and democratic debate.
So the distinction is not, as commonly
stated, between religions such as Christianity,
Islam, Judaism and Buddhism, but between
functional religion-state solidarity and the
collapse of this solidarity in the model that
stemmed from the French Revolution and the
Enlightenment.
Now what becomes of the question of
tolerance if we look at it in the context of this
analysis?
Historically, first, the crucial break in the
eighteenth century constituted a watershed.
Before it, tolerance (in the sense of freedom
of religion and legal protection for basic
human and civic rights) was psychologically
and intellectually inconceivable in relation to
_Ji \- v t'
tvt* *
"<¿s
«£
¿fa. ¿JC/&> ¿¿hj¿>\^&p»~/^ :
\¿>$¿¡A
v .. y
'¿Jf¿ <rU*t>j h»*J¿/¿> IJSjj dy & '
Ï
hl

mutually exclusive theological systems
constructed by religious communities for
their own protection or perhaps their
expansion.
A PROTECTED AREA
A dogmatic theology claims for its commu¬
nity a monopoly of revealed truth, and hence
of the power that defends it. Islamic law was
less exclusivist than other systems: under it,
Christians and Jews enjoyed the famous
dhimmi (protected person) status. But this
was tolerance born of indifference, together
with humiliating measures designed to
emphasize the superiority of Islamic truth.
Judaeo-Islarhic and Christian-Islamic polemic
commonly uses the example of this dhimmi
status to stigmatize Islam's fundamental,
ever-active intolerance.
It is, however, anachronistic as well as
unfair to judge one of the Societies of the
Book in this way whilst sparing the others
any criticism, and to use the postulates of the
Enlightenment model to disqualify Islam
alone. On the Muslim side, one way of an¬
swering such accusations of intolerance
against Islam formulated on the basis of
Enlightenment logic would be to use verses
from the Qur'an chosen to bring out the idea
of tolerance. This would be equally anachro¬
nistic and manipulative, and I reject it: I know
very well that the traditional interpretation of
the verses most favourable to tolerance has
given way to the theological postulates of
God's truth placed under the vigilant protect¬
ion of theologian-jurists who confer on their
decisions a specially exalted ontological,
cognitive, legal and spiritual status.
Certainly the great texts of Islamic
thought helped, with others, to pave the way
to tolerance in its modern sense. I am think¬
ing of the writings of the mystics, the intellec¬
tual breakthroughs, the political protests, of
writers like Hasan al-Basri (d. 772), al-Jahiz
(d. 869), al-Kindi (d. 870), al-Tawhidi
Above, the constellation
of Aquarius. An illustration
from the Liber de stellis
fixarum (The Book of Fixed
Stars), a 13th-century
Latin translation of an Arabic
treatise. Opposite page,
detail of a 15th-century
Arabic commentary on the
Elements of Geometry by
Euclid, the mathematician
of Greek Antiquity.
(d. 1014) and al-Ma'arri (d. 1058). But all
these anticipations, intuitions and musings
form part of what anthologies since the days
of ancient Iran have called "the eternal
wisdom" (Javidan Khirad or al-hikma al-
khalida).
THE SYMBOLIC CAPITAL
What happened after the break?
Islam as a religion, Islamic thought and
Muslim society remained aloof from events.
While European societies underwent accele¬
rated change, planned and directed by a capi¬
talist mercantile bourgeoisie, the world of
Islam was subjected to the reverse process: it
grew feebler, its intellectual horizons and cul¬
tural activity contracted, and the tribal system
expanded as the central authority was 35

weakened. These developments helped the
establishment of the colonial empires, which
worsened the situation economically, politi¬
cally and culturally and led to the wars of
liberation following the Second World War.
This historical résumé, which deserves
to be amplified with detail, at least shows
that tolerance cannot be on the agenda in
societies which since the thirteenth century
have undergone a process whereby cultural
and ethnic groups became independent,
urban élites and popular masses became dif¬
ferentiated, and religion, language and cul¬
ture became homogenized in towns, villages
and regions. The Ottoman régime, and in
many respects the colonialists, fostered this
break-up of societies into particularist
groups; religion split into sects and fraterni¬
ties, power became hereditary, the economy
tended towards self-sufficiency, languages
became diversified into dialects, and culture
became confined to what the French socio¬
logist Pierre Bourdieu has called "the sym¬
bolic capital".1
These societies, fragmented into groups
isolated from each other, jealous of their
"identities" and often in revolt against the
government (especially if it was distant),
remained cut off from modernity until the
1950s. The colonial régimes certainly encour¬
aged the formation of socio-cultural enclaves,
in which the need to modernize institutions,
and ideas about society and intellectual life,
began to be felt. But it was not until the era of
political independence that nation-states
everywhere compelled separatist groups and
local independence movements to play a part
in "national reconstruction". This novel
socio-political driving force was very soon to
36
Tradition and Modernity,
a work by the Bahraini
painter Ahmed Baqer which
draws inspiration from
Arab life and festivities.
MOHAMMED ARKOUN,
Algerian-born scholar, is
Professor of the History of
Islamic Thought at the Univer¬
sity of Paris III (Sorbonne
Nouvelle) and Visiting Profes¬
sor at the University of
Amsterdam. He was formerly
Director of the Paris Institute
of Arab and Islamic Studies
and has lectured at many
of the world's academic and
cultural centres. Among his
published works are L'Islam,
religion et société (Paris,
1981), La pensée arabe
(Paris, 1985) and Ouvertures
sur l'Islam (Paris, 1989).

make tolerance as topical and as urgent as it
was in the Christian societies of eighteenth-
century Europe.
Thus we see that tolerance is not a cardinal
virtue dictated by the great religious and phi¬
losophical teachings, but represents rather a
response to social and political demand at
times of great ideological turmoil a ques¬
tioning of the "values" peculiar to the various
social groups that make up a nation.
The practice of tolerance everywhere calls
for an effort of individual will, plus political
will on the part of the state. We can say that
these two wills have so far by and large been
lacking in many Muslim countries, but this is
attributable to historical, sociological a'nd
anthropological factors rather than to the
silence of religious texts or the inadequacy of
Islamic thought.
The Encyclopaedists' audience consisted
of concerned citizens, ready to translate the
ideas of the Enlightenment into political and
economic terms. A similar audience existed
for brief periods in the history of Islamic
society: in the ninth and tenth centuries a
mercantile middle class in the big towns pro¬
vided scope for the development of an
Arabic-speaking humanism open to the
teachings of the "eternal wisdom", in which
Islam was but one of several components.2
A similar situation prevailed in several
societies between 1850 and 1940: this was the
so-called Renaissance (nahdha) period, espe¬
cially in the Arab world. An intelligentsia
open to the teachings of the Enlightenment
sought to promote liberal democracy, espe¬
cially after the abolition of the Ottoman sul¬
tanate; but the narrow social base of this

movement, coupled with the political vigi¬
lance of the colonial powers, prevented any
real development of modernity. Since the
1960s, population growth and the spread of
populist ideologies, together with large-scale
uprooting of settled populations and harsh
supervision in one-party states, have tipped
Muslim societies towards violent confronta¬
tions, growing protest movements and a
sense of collective frustration all of which
tend to foster the development of intransi¬
gent doctrines.
In this brief analysis I aim to suggest
and this will be my conclusion that in
contemporary societies the tolerance-intol¬
erance question takes on dimensions and
meanings which make it impossible to res¬
trict oneself to the isolated case of this or that
society, mode of thought or religion. What is
so inappropriately called "Islam" cannot be
removed from the context of the world forces
that govern the destiny of all peoples. When
journalists, political scientists and sociolo¬
gists use terms like fanaticism, xenophobia,
"0 mankind ! We created
you from a single pair of a
male and a female. . . ."
(The Qur'an, Surah XLIX, The
Apartments, v 13).
Calligraphy by Namane Zakri.
violence and intolerance in relation to pre¬
sent-day Islamic movements, these terms
need to be understood in the light of the
internal and external causes that give rise to
these manifestations.
This is not to minimize the climate of
intolerance that has grown up in some
Muslim societies in connection with what is
called the "awakening of Islam". If I stress
the magnitude of the political and economic
pressures still being exerted on these socie¬
ties, and argue that the changing importance
of religions needs to be appraised in the light
of the historical conditions and social set¬
tings in which they carry out their vocations,
it is in order to reinforce a tolerant approach
to the phenomenon of religion in general,
and hence to suggest a more understanding
attitude towards the expressions of contem¬
porary Islam.
1 . Pierre Bourdieu, Le sens pratique, Editions de Minuit,
Paris, 1980.
2. Mohammed Arkoun, L'humanisme arabe au IVe/Xe
siècle. Vrin publishers, Paris, 1982.
37
