INTERVIEW
OSCAR
NIEMEYER
talks to Edouard Bailby
I At eighty-four years of age, with more than
three hundred projects already built or at the
planning stage and with Brasilia as the pin¬
nacle ofyour achievement, you can justifiably
claim to be the most prolific architect of the
century. Do you still feel the urge to carry on
with your creative workf
I have little time left. I no longer travel, so
as to be free to devote myself to my family
and friends. However, I still go to my office
in Copacabana every day from nine in the
morning to seven in the evening, Saturdays
included. I am incapable of sitting in an arm¬
chair doing nothing or simply brooding over
the miseries of existence.
For me, architecture has always been a
hobby as well as a profession; it attracts and
absorbs me, but I don't attach overmuch
importance to it. The main thing for me is to
feel at ease with myself, to remain on the side
of the needy and to denounce social injustices.
That said, I have acquired a certain renown and
the commissions still flow in. I have, however,
reduced my team to four people so as to have a
quieter life. It is important tó remain active
right up to the end. You only live once.
So you are still working as an architect.
What projects are you currently working on?
I am going to complete the Monumental
Axis of Brasilia by constructing three build¬
ings which will possibly be the finest in the
capital the Museum, the National Library
and the Historical Archives. They will put the
final touch to my work as architect within the
framework of the master plan elaborated by
Lucio Costa, the great Brazilian town-planner
to whom I owe so much.
One of the most outstanding
exponents of modern archi¬
tecture, Oscar Niemeyer has
created buildings of dazzling
formal inventiveness in
his own country, Brazil, and
elsewhere in the world.
He is particularly noted for
his work on Brasilia,
the new capital of Brazil.
In telling the Courier about
his remarkable career he
recalls that architecture
Is not only utilitarian,
but art art form of major
significance, in which
he gives pride ofplace to
the imagination. Oscar
Niemeyer has published
many articles and
a number of books
Including Oscar Niemeyer
(Milan, 1977). French
journalist Edouard
Bailby is the author of
a book about Niemeyer
which will be published
later this year by
Balland, Paris.
I have a number of other projects in hand
that have already been approved, including
the Museum of Niteróia city pf 500,000
inhabitants near Rio de Janeiro and the
Brazil-Portugal Centre in the heart of Lisbon.
I have received orders for others, notably in
Sao Paulo. The site of my most recent com¬
mission is the Island of Gorée, offshore from
Dakar. I am particularly committed to this
one because it will enable me to denounce the
massive transportation of African slaves to
our continent in the days of the slave trade. In
Brazil, we received over four million of these
slaves. Much as they were humiliated and
exploited, they nevertheless took part in the
struggles for independence and made a deci¬
sive contribution to our culture. At a time
when we are celebrating the five hundredth
anniversary of the discovery of the Americas
by Christopher Columbus, it is essential to
recall their sacrifice.
You have always been alive to the problem
of human suffering to which you have given
expression in several monumental sculptures.
The most famous of these is the bloody hand
of the Latin American Memorial in Säo
Paulo, which symbolizes the struggle of
peoples against oppression. What are you
planning for Gorée?
Through the good offices of an eminent
personality for whom I have the greatest
esteem, the Government of Senegal invited me
to take part in an international competition.
As usual, I declined the invitation, but offered
instead to undertake the project without
charging a fee. My project was approved at the
beginning of this year and two missions came
to Rio de Janeiro to see me and settle the
details. Work should begin shortly.
The monument itself consists of an
eighty-metre-high panel in which I have cut
out the outline of a human figure. Rising
above the sea, it symbolizes the uprooted
African slave, vanished into space. The monu¬
ment is linked to the land by a simple foot¬
bridge which in no way detracts from its
appearance. I have designed a museum, a
reception room for important visitors and a
restaurant which will be open to the public. I
am pleased with this project, the form of
which I visualized whilst out walking,
because it emerged from deep within me.
Yet, in looking at your most remarkable
works, one has the impression that they have
involved many long hours of meticulous
research.
Like sculpture, architecture demands a cer¬
tain sensitivity and a capacity to escape from
one's surroundings. When I am asked to carry
out a project, I always think about it alone,
sitting in my office, lying on a couch, or while
out walking. Usually the broad outlines of the
project come to me fairly quickly; I don't get
bogged down in detail. Sometimes my creative

thoughts come to me as if in a dream. My
plans for the Mosque in Algiers which
unfortunately has not yet been started owing
to lack of funds actually came to me in my
sleep. I imagined it amid the sea, sparkling
with beauty. As soon as I awoke, I began to
draw it. I conceived the theatre in Brasilia
during the three days of Carnival. After I had
roughed out some sketches early on the fourth
day, Ash Wednesday, the project was ready.
I usually draw oh a very small scale
something which always seems to surprise my
fellow-architects and then I write an explan¬
atory text in the clearest and simplest possible
terms. I don't like looking up complicated
terminology in the dictionary. When we were
building Brasilia, each time President Jusce-
lino Kubitschek read my notes he was imme¬
diately able to grasp the thrust of my ideas.
Of course, I consult my engineer to see if my
project is suited to the terrain, the climate and
the budget, so as to be able to make any
modifications that might be needed. But that
is a purely technical matter, a question of
detail. As I am not an engineer or a specialist
in reinforced concrete, it is not my job to
resolve problems of stress or the resistance of
the materials employed. The main thing is for
the concept to be there.
What is your current conception of archi¬
tecture? Has it evolved since Brasilia?
The new technology now available would
perhaps have made it possible to have
constructed the buildings of the Square of
Three Powers in a different way. But I'm not
absolutely certain. Such modifications as I
might make today would not necessarily be
substantial ones.
Baudelaire once wrote that the unexpected
and the irregular, surprise and astonishment
are an essential aspect of beauty. I think he was
right. An architectural work must be beautiful,
light, different. I have always rebelled against
predetermined rules, didactic constraints and
right angles, which are a rigid, man-made
imposition. When that marvellous architect Le
Corbusier, the master par excellence of my
generation, walked up the ramp to the
National Congress building, he uttered these
words which I have never forgotten: "There is
a spirit of invention here."
Imagination is the starting-point in archi¬
tecture. From the time of the building of
Pampulha, on the outskirts of Belo Hori¬
zonte, in the early 1940s, I wanted to do
something different. I had the good fortune to
meet Juscelino Kubitschek, a remarkable man
full of drive and enthusiasm, who was Mayor
of Belo Horizonte at the time. Despite our
political differences, we soon became friends.
He gave me complete creative freedom and
this allowed me room to express myself. An
opportunity such as this is very rare in the life
of an architect. I have often been attacked
because I have questioned all the traditional
classicist and rationalist dogmas, but I have
remained indifferent to these criticisms.
When you speak of imagination, what
exactly do you mean? Do you consider your
style ofarchitecture to be withoutprecedent?
People may not like the monuments and
palatial buildings I constructed at Brasilia, but
no one can say that they have ever seen any¬
thing like them before. Some attempts have
been made to imitate the Presidential Palace,
the Alvorada, and I am flattered, but I don't
think imitation should play any part in archi¬
tecture, with the exception, perhaps, of hous¬
ing projects. We have to outdo ourselves, to
break free from the straitjackets in which we
are confined and give free rein to our in¬
ventiveness. Heidegger said that reason was
the enemy of thought, and therefore of imagi¬
nation. Beauty in architecture demands
freedom, and even more, perhaps, the element
of surprise.
Right angles separate and divide. Person¬
ally, I have always loved curves, which are an
essential feature of the natural world. It is not
easy to draw curves, to give them the sponta¬
neity they demand and then to organize them
in space in such a way as to achieve the visual
architectural effect that one is looking for.
Like Matisse, I maintain that my curves are
not gratuitous; they have a meaning. At one
point, even Le Corbusier, who had proclaimed
the virtues of right angles, began to despise
them. In the end he admitted that we were
right. One day he said to me: "What you do is
baroque, but you do it very well. You have the
mountains of Rio in your eyes."
You refer constantly to Le Corbusier. How
well didyou know him personally?
I was working as a member of Lucio
Costa's team when Costa was Director of the
School of Fine Arts in Rio de Janeiro. One
day, I think it was in 1936, he asked me to
accompany him to the airport to meet Le
Corbusier. You can imagine what a thrill this
was for a young architect. Everyone of my
generation in Brazil felt boundless admiration
for this man from the old continent, highly
cultivated and full of new ideas. Our architec¬
ture was strictly classical and lacked origi¬
nality. With his wisdom and experience Le
Corbusier turned everything upside down.
I was barely twenty-nine years old when
he produced his design for the Ministry of
Education and Public Health in Rio de
Janeiro. I already felt that I would be no
The Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Brasilia.

ordinary architect. I had had a gift for drawing
from the age of seven and my mother kept all
the drawings I had made at school. When Le
Corbusier's plans came into my hands, I made
a few alterations to them, for my own per¬
sonal pleasurefor instance I increased the
depth of the piles from four metres to ten.
This was a piece of teamwork under Le Cor¬
busier's direction, and the final plans took ev¬
erybody's suggestions into account. We sent
them to Le Corbusier for his approval and he
had them published in an architectural maga¬
zine with his own drawing of the building.
It is often said that you believe that an
architect should work alone, without calling
on outside collaborators. Yet your projects
seem to prove the contrary. At Pampulha, for
example, you called in the great Brazilian
painter Candido Portinari.
I have always said that it is for the architect
to choose the painters or sculptors who will
embellish his work. That is what I have done.
When I imagine an empty space, a room, or an
amphitheatre, I always know in advance
whether I shall furnish it with a granite wall,
tapestries or paintings. Architecture is a whole
which demands a symbiosis between the
structure and its decoration. When I built the
headquarters of the French Communist Party,
in Paris, which is one of my favourite works,
Jacques Duelos asked me: "Oscar, I have an
old desk of which I am very fond. It has his¬
toric associations. Can I put it in my office?" I
greatly appreciated his respect for my work as
an architect. Such respect is not always shown.
I thought that the seats that were put in the
nave of the Cathedral of Brasilia were really
dreadful. The last time I saw Jack Lang, the
French Minister of Culture, he asked me: "Are
those chairs still there?"
Why was your design for the cathedral of
Brasilia so totally different from conventional
church design? Why did you have a dark
entrance-way and a nave flooded with light?
The contrast is really striking.
I did not want it to be a place of penitence.
I am not myself a believer, but I tried to put
myself in the shoes of a Christian. Worship¬
pers enter the cathedral down a ramp, a dark,
underground passage, before emerging inside
the crown-shaped, translucent nave of
concrete and glass. To enhance the visual effect
and soften the impact of the Sun's rays, I
visualized stained-glass panels designed in
such a way as not to block out the view of the
sky. Marianne Peretti's work on these panels
was admirable. Lying flat on the ground in a
most uncomfortable position, she drew the
sixteen stained-glass panels, each the size of a
Left, inside the
cathedral of Brasilia.
Opposite page,
the cathedral seen
from outside with,
in foreground,
statues of the four
Evangelists by
Alfredo Ceschiatti.
basketball court. Unlike the Louvre Pyramid
in Paris, the nave of the cathedral opens out
into space. The first time he saw it, the papal
Nuncio said to the Bishop of Brasilia: "The
architect who created this masterpiece must be
a saint to have achieved so close a communion
between the Earth and God." As you can im¬
agine, I was very touched by these words and
I am still moved when I recall them.
I You cannot deny that you are more inter¬
ested in monumental architecture than you
are in designing low-cost housing. Doesn't
this indicate a degree ofconflict between your
political commitment and your work as an
architect?
I could have earned a lot of money if had
let myself be tempted into undertaking pater¬
nalistic operations or indulging in property
speculation. But that is not in my nature. I am
not motivated by profit. I worked on the
monumental buildings of Brasilia as a salaried
civil servant, receiving no commission or
under-the-table payments. In this way I felt
free and at ease with my work. However, I
did design some residential tower blocks in
the new Barra da Tijuca district of Rio de
Janeiro. I have also recently built some
schools, using a design which is beginning to
be generally adopted. Although these are pre¬
fabricated constructions, I tried to make the
most of a restricted budget.
Architecture, like any other profession, is
a way of earning a living. But when, as I did,
you have a patron of the stature of Juscelino
Kubitschek, you have to seize the opportu¬
nity to extend and fulfil yourself. I have
always refused to follow the mediocre, facile
path. Architecture must lead to beauty. The
problem is how to achieve that goal without
the risk of error. There have been occasions
when I have modified a project at the last
minute because it lacked perspective or as the
result of an acute observation by a friend. I
don't think I am an architect who is imper¬
vious to outside influence. I am prepared to
make any concession or to introduce any note
of fantasy that can enhance the plastic beauty
of an edifice.
Nevertheless, you are quite categorical
when you state that architecture can only be
beautiful if it is the fruit of invention or a
new departure.
I cannot work up any enthusiasm for
rationalist architecture, with its functional
limitations, its structural rigidity, its dogmas
and its theories. Reinforced concrete enables
architects with a sense of poetry to express
themselves. Architecture is the product of
dream and fantasy, curves and large areas of
open space. The architect must know how to
invent, while making use of all the technology
available. Why submit to rules and abstract

principles? When I was working on the
monuments of Brasilia, I deliberately did not
read a single, architectural magazine, for fear
of being influenced.
What I admire most in an architect is a
spirit of liberty. Gaudi, whose best-known
work is the Church of the Holy Family in
Barcelona, was an architect whose ideas were
confused. However, he had the courage to
break the established rules and this has given
him a special place in modern architecture,
even though the role played by Le Corbusier
was much more important.
When I designed the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs building in Brasilia, I did not, as some
writers have suggested, branch out into a new
form of architecture. I simply wanted to
prove that it was easy to create something,
using a form of architecture that was tech¬
nically irreproachable but also generous in
spirit, that would please everybody, whatever
their aesthetic background. It is not the build¬
ing that corresponds most closely to my own
temperament.
Ifyou had to devise a course for students of
architecture, on what principles would you
base it?
This year I have been asked to produce a
series of twelve lectures on video cassette for
the new university of Campos, a city of
400,000 inhabitants some 289 kilometres from
Rio de Janeiro. I am going to continue the
experiment that I began in Algeria in the
1960s, when I was building the university of
Constantine.
I think that the most important thing,
before students start out on an architectural
course, is to find out whether they have a gift
for the profession. The teachers must get to
know their students, sound them out, discover
their artistic leanings and their general back¬
ground knowledge, get talking to them so that
they can point out the hazards of the profes¬
sion. It is also essential that they know how to
draw, since this is basic to architecture. Stu¬
dents should spend six months in a school
learning to make technical and decorative
drawings; in this way they will develop a sense
of beauty. When this stage is completed, they
should be attached to a major architectural
office where they will learn to study a city
from both an architectural and an urban plan¬
ning point of view. They should be surrounded
by people with technical know-how experts
in concrete, air-conditioning, water, and so on.
Then, for a period of three years, they should
follow, on site, the construction of a town or
city, or an urban district, from start to finish.
Then all they would have to do would be to
learn how to write a clear, concise explanatory
report on a project. During my own profes¬
sional life I have often found that it has been
what I wrote rather than what I drew that won
approval for a project. Very few non-profes¬
sionals are capable of understanding an archi¬
tectural drawing.
Brasilia made you world famous, but you
have never lived there. Why not?
I did, in fact, live there for three years, the
time it took to execute my projects. At that
time, Brasilia was the end of the world. To
visit Rio de Janeiro or Sâo Paulo meant a
thousand-kilometre journey along muddy
roads. I lived in a small room with a bed, a
table, two chairs and a cupboard. I had a few
friends with me, not all of whom were archi¬
tects. There were two journalists, a football-
player and a poet. At night, for relaxation, we
used to strum away on our guitars and sing.
We never talked about work. This is my idea
of a convivial life. With the workmen with
whom we rubbed shoulders, the prostitutes
from their wooden huts and the dogs that
barked all day long, we all formed one huge
family. There was a real frontier atmosphere.
We had the feeling that the world was about
to change. For the thousands of workers who
came from every corner of Brazil, but mainly
from the north-east, Brasilia spelled hope.
The day in April 1960 when the new
capital was inaugurated, in the presence of the
President of the Republic and other authori¬
ties and personalities, everything changed.
The workers found themselves even poorer
than they had been before. That was the end
of our illusions. As soon as my work was fin¬
ished, I left. Never again have I experienced
the same fraternal atmosphere.
Today, some people criticize Brasilia as
cold, impersonal, inhuman, empty. But they
do not know Brasilia. Ask those who live
there with their families, ask their children.
They like it. They are far from the bustle of
the great urban agglomerations. There they
can enjoy open spaces and tree-lined avenues.
The light from the sky seems to bring with it
kindlier ways of living. Lucio Costa's genius
has made the new capital a model of urban
planning. As far as I am concerned, I am
nappy to have been the originator of the prin¬
cipal landmarks of the city. It is not our fault
if Brasilia has fallen victim to the injustices of
the capitalist society.
You might well repeat your question and
ask: "Why don't you five there, since the city
is built in your image." My reply would be a
simple one. I was born in Rio de Janeiro,
beside the sea, at the foot of mountains
covered in tropical vegetation. I have always
lived there. I know that this city is becoming
impossible to live in, with its six million in¬
habitants, its wretched shanty-towns, its vio¬
lence, its disorder, its polluted beaches and the
frenzied activity of daily life. But this is what
I am used to. How can you expect me to
adapt to anything else? I love Brasilia, but at
Rio de Janeiro I am at home. O
