INTERVIEW
WILLIAM STYRON
talks to Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat
The Pulitzer Prize-winning American writer
William Styron is the author of a strikingly original body of fiction,
almost baroque in style, in which the South where he was born
and grew up is the setting for violent and tragic events. In this interview
he talks about his life and experience as a writer and makes some
trenchant comments on current world developments.
M Everybody knows of William Styron,
author of the Pulitzer Prize-winning The
Confessions of Nat Turner and of Sophie's
Choice, but few people know much about
your pastfor example, that you served in
World War II as an officer in the US
Marines, or how you came be one of Amer¬
ica's most important andpopular novelists.
- Well, it is not all that exciting. I was born
in Newport News, Virginia, in June 1925,
and I did get in at the end of World War II. I
was seventeen when I joined the Marines
and at that time they had a programme, if
you were very young, to give you some edu¬
cation before they sent you out to the Pacific
to get killed. I was aiming to become a
second lieutenant in the Marine Corps and
second lieutenants in the Marines had a
higher mortality rate than any other grade in
the services, but that was all part of being
young and "macho".
So I went to Duke University, in North
Carolina, for a time, and in 1944 I was trans¬
ferred to the Marine training camp in South
Carolina and then went on to the officers
training centre, in Virginia. I was on my way
to join the Second Marine Division when the
war ended with the dropping of the atomic
bomb. My feelings about the atomic bomb
are ambivalent because, despite the tragedy
of Hiroshima, I think that it saved not only
my life but the lives of hundreds of thou¬
sands of young men, both American and
Japanese.
I came back, returned to Duke Univer¬
sity and continued my education. When I
went back I had an extraordinarily gifted
professor, William Blackburn, who became
my mentor and who gave me guidance and
encouraged me to become a writer. So when
I graduated I went to New York and worked
briefly for the McGraw Hill Publishing
Company as an editor and manuscript
reader. I was unhappy and frustrated in the
job. I really wanted to be a writer, so I was
8

not very successful as an editor and was soon
relieved of my duties, which was a relief.
So I just began to write. I then met another
remarkable man, Hiram Haydn, who was
teaching at the New School of Social Research
in New York, and he encouraged me, saying,
"I think you should write a novel". So I sat
down and wrote a novel. It took me several
years, because I wanted to write a full-fledged
novel, not a typical young man's novel full of
sorrow and sentiment.
The book was published in 1951 under
the title Lie Down in Darkness. Amazingly it
was a best-seller. I don't mean that it was a
"blockbuster", but it sold 35,000 copies,
which in those days, and even now, was a
good sale for a first novel.
It is said ofDostoievsky that when he was
writing his novels he used to become very,
very overwrought even a little mad. How
are you affected when you are writing, espe¬
cially a novelas long as Sophie's Choice?
- Well, I think I have avoided madness, but
every work that I finish leaves me in a state
of depression and extreme anxiety about
what I have done. It is analogous to the post¬
partum depression women experience after
giving birth. I think there is a very distinct
connection. Anything of any great length I
have attempted and finished has certainly
been succeeded by a mood of severe anxiety,
a general sense of let-down euphoria at
first, extreme euphoria, but euphoria fol¬
lowed by a descent into a very deep depres¬
sive mood.
How do you live through these creative
years f How do you relate to other people
during theseperiods?
- It is hard to describe how I live when I am
involved in a long continual work, during
the days when I am creating in a continuous
way. My working periods are very intense
and then, when I withdraw from work and
live normally through the rest of the day, it is
as if the work itself is germinating constantly
in my head. I mean, I live a perfectly normal
life, visiting friends, driving to New York
and so on. But it is as though the work is
never too far away from my conscience. I am
always thinking about what is to come.
Likepregnancy?
- That's right. In a sense it is being conscious
of being pregnant, of having it in oneself not
yet delivered or not yet about to be delivered
but waiting for the day when it will be. I
remember when I was finishing Sophie's
Choice. I live in two places. I live in Connec¬
ticut in winter, early spring and late fall and I
live in Martha's Vineyard in late spring,
summer and early fall. Just before leaving
Martha's Vineyard the year I was to finish
Sophie's Choice, I remember standing on the
sidewalk and realizing in a flash that I had
only two more months to go and it would be
done. The sense of deliverance is a very
important factor. I remember saying to
myself "I am almost done'Vlt must be like a
woman saying, "In another month I am
going to be delivered".
Could you tell us something about how
you came to write The Confessions of Nat
Turner? Apart from its importance as a
novel, it seems to contain clues about Amer¬
ican society and about what slavery did not
only to blacks but to whites as well.
- 1 should start by saying that I was brought
up in the South, during the 1930s, in the
days of segregation. Virginia, like every
other ex-Confederate State, had legal sanc¬
tions against blacks. It was literally against
the law to mingle. When you got on a bus,
and if you were white, you sat up front,
black people sat at the back. In small towns,
if you went into a movie theatre black
people were always in the balcony and white
people below. In larger cities, like Newport
News where I lived, black people had their
own theatres, and most public facilities, from
restaurants to drinking fountains, were
labelled "coloured" or "white". It never
crossed your mind to go to school with a
black child.
I was brought up in this environment in
a family that was pretty liberal by those
standards. Yet we all obeyed the segregation
laws. But I was a young kid and I remember
being almost romantically drawn to the tra¬
gedy of black people. Somehow I had heard
about the Nat Turner revolt, which occurred
historically some forty or fifty miles away in
an area called Southampton County. A sign
had been erected there stating that in 1831 a
slave revolt had occurred led by a fanatical
slave named Nat Turner, who massacred
sixty white people and that he had been
hanged nearby on a tree.
As a youngster I was pretty rebellious
myself and as I grew older I became fasci¬
nated by this tale as an historical event and
wanted to write a fictional account of it. I
wanted this to be my first novel, but I soon
realized that I was not then ready to tackle
it. It was not until the early 1960s, when I
was in my late thirties, that I decided that it
was time to write this book. But it required
research. I realized that I did not know what
slavery was really about. So, although I did
not become a scholar in slavery, I read a lot
in the field and it was a revelation to me.
Early scholarship, which began in the
1920s, led by a historian called Ulrich B.
Phillips, presented slavery as a benign and
happy institution providing a satisfactory
solution to labour problems. Then, in the
1950s, a scholar named Kenneth Stampp
wrote a book which violently confuted the
Phillips view of the contented slave. Being
revisionist, this version went overboard in
the opposite direction and tended to present
slavery as a state of horrible depravity, com¬
plete oppression and brutality.

When I began to write about it, in the
early 1960s, it had begun to become clear
that the truth lay somewhere between these
two extremes. Without being doctrinaire or
following any rigorous dogma, I just said "I
am going to use my intuition, knowing every¬
thing I know about Nat Turner, and try and
write a book which will be my vision of
slavery". Whether rightly or wrongly, it
would at least be my vision and could be dis¬
puted. Nonetheless, it would be what I saw
the truth of slavery to be. It sprang from a
tremendous feeling on my part that W.E.B.
Dubois was right when he said, in 1900, that
the problem of the twentieth century would
be that of race. I believed it when I wrote Nat
Turner and I still believe it. I believe that the
central anguish of American life resides in
race. It informs virtually everything we do.
Of course, the Nat Turner book received
an extremely hostile reaction from black
intellectuals and it has only recently emerged
from the opprobrium heaped upon it. To
some degree this was to be expected, since I
wrote it in the first person. That was one of
the things that the black people were very
upset over that I as a white person had
tried to enter the skin of a black man, and that
was resented very much. I think, however,
that if the book has a kind of reality and vita¬
lity it has to do with the fact that I certainly
was trying to humanize an abstract figure in
history. Almost nothing was known about
Nat Turner because the records of the time
were very crude and primitive.
So would it be true to say that you see cur¬
rent American issues as being a continuation
of the historical racial issue?
- Yes, up to a point. There are, however, so
many contradictions that I don't like to state
anything categorically. Black people in the
United States have achieved enormous gains.
If you had told me when I was a kid that the
Governor of Virginia would be black, I
would have said "You're crazy". It would
have seemed totally impossible. So would
the idea that the Mayor of New York would
be black, or that we would have not one but
two blacks in succession as Supreme Court
Justices.
Nevertheless, blacks are still basically
disadvantaged en masse. For whatever rea¬
sons, they do not achieve the same success as
whites in the lower forms of education. Not
that the whites go to particularly good
schools either, but at least they are going to
schools in which the sense of chaos and
crime does not exist with the same intensity
as in the big cities like Detroit, Los Angeles,
New York and so on. This, to my mind, is
still the legacy of slavery. Moreover, the
family life of most blacks, not all, but cer¬
tainly, I would suspect, of the majority, is, by
white standards, deficient in all of the ameni¬
ties that white people hold out as ideal. And
this exacerbates the sense that they have not
much future. In this way the futurelessness
of slavery has been carried over to a large
degree into this century, with the exception
that the legal avenues are open and that, at
certain levels, blacks are able to achieve very
high goals. But they are exceptions.
Part of me says that we had this tragic
historical development slavery. But the
other part of me says that, with all the horror
and degradation that black people have suf¬
fered in America, with all the negative aspects
of black life, black people have produced
some extraordinarily energetic, marvellous
things, such as jazz music. Jazz has had a ter¬
rific effect on our culture, and that is just one
thing. There is something wonderfully eccen¬
tric about the way the black way of life has
sort of rubbed off and helped white people to
be less rigorous and puritanical. It has
become inherent in the national spirit. Just
the black way of saying things, the black
spirit, has added a whole lot to our culture.
And world music and dance today are
black in essence, in their origins.
- Yes. An interesting example of the black
transfusion is rock music. From the begin
ning there was the transfusion of black
rhythm, which gave rise to jazz, which then
developed into rock, which went to England
to be further developed by the Beatles and
other great rock performers. An enormous
amount of rock is derived from England.
But it would not have been derived from
anything had it not been for the black origin.
It was attacked very strongly at first
because it introduced an element of black
sexuality.
- That's right. Elvis Presley, who was from
Mississippi, was a white man performing in
the black mode, and the shock of it earned
him his nickname Elvis the Pelvis.
Let us come back to literature today. For a
long time American writers have been accu¬
sing the Soviet system of not giving writers
enough liberty to fulfil themselves. Yet in
America, England and France writers have

all the liberties, but there is a feeling that
they are not producing what they couldpro¬
duce.
Maybe. I don't know. Periods come and
periods go. Maybe it is hard to say at this
moment. Maybe at the time you cannot tell
until the period is over. But I know what
you mean. I don't think England has pro¬
duced a really exciting writer since Evelyn
Waugh and Orwell. I really think the writing
in England has been incredibly frivolous. I
am exaggerating; there have been some very
good writers in England since World War II,
but I always like to think of Evelyn Waugh
as the last one who really made an impact.
You think of the nineteenth century in
England. You think of Dickens, and D.H.
Lawrence later, you think of Thomas Hardy
even, who may not be read much any longer
but still is a tremendous writer. Despite my
own self-interest, I think that the United
States has been a more exciting nation of
writers since World War II than England, or
France for that matter. With France I think it
ended with Albert Camus. They have had
some excellent writers in France, but not
with that great excitement. I mean Margue¬
rite Duras, Nathalie Sarraute, I mean good
writers but nothing on that large exciting
level. Marguerite Yourcenar is a very good
writer. I don't know what causes literature to
become what it is.
So freedom alone is not enough?
- Philip Roth, whom I know quite well, went
to Czechoslovakia he got very interested
in Czechoslovakia during the time of its
occupation and he made a very interesting
statement comparing the totalitarian system
and the American system. He said that over
there everything matters and nothing goes; in
the United States nothing matters and every¬
thing goes. This is an indication of a very
large gulf between consciousnesses. I
remember going to Prague in 1985 and just
by sheer coincidence one of my books was
being published while I was there. I was vis¬
iting a friend who was the American Ambas¬
sador there and he took me to a bookstore
the next day and I learned there had been an
edition of 45,000 copies (I think of The
Confessions of Nat Turner) and the line of
people waiting to get that book stretched out
five blocks.
Were you there signing the books?
- 1 signed some later, but before that they
were just buying copies. It was very touch¬
ing to see that kind of interest. In the United
States, however, even though a writer like
myself has some reputation, no one would
line up to buy a book. There is a difference,
because in Czechoslovakia they only had
these 45,000 copies to sell. But it shows you
that in Czechoslovakia they care. They don't
care in America. There you have this abso¬
lute freedom, meaning that everything goes
but nothing matters. It is a big difference, a
big distinction. In the West, especially in the
United States, there is such a glut of every¬
thing. We are so overwhelmed by goods, by
objects, by sensations, by showbiz, that
these other things tend to be drowned out.
The novel is being written in the United
States like never before. First novels are
being published and yet nothing happens to
them. They sink. Someone writes a first
novel in the United States, but, unless it has
ballyhoo, showbiz, it is lost. The publisher
doesn't care about it, the public doesn't care
about it and the writer is left in the lurch.
You can, of course, with luck achieve a repu¬
tation as a writer, but, generally speaking,
any sense of a serious commitment to litera¬
ture just does not exist. It's too bad. D
11
