A mysterious medium
By Jean-Claude Guillebaud
THE cultural hegemony of television, this reign of
the image that extends over the entire planet, is
disturbing because it is largely incomprehensible.
Television's empire obeys laws that have not yet been
fully grasped, and brings into play emotional mecha¬
nisms that nobody entirely masters. Rarely has any
creation become so independent of its creator. Televi¬
sion is an explosive, hazardous instrument, an ambiva¬
lent and proliferating spirit peddling a symbolism
whose meaning is uncertain. It is both all-powerful and
much less mature than people imagine. The empire of
television extends around the planet; but it is an empire
ruled by a child.
There is something mysterious about what appears
on the television screen and the "message" it sends
across the world. No-one can predict precisely what
signal will be transmitted to the viewer neither the
journalist, the technician, the politician sitting under the
studio lights, nor the producer. The reason for this
unpredictability is that the message vehicled by televi¬
sion does not consist exclusively of words, or reflection,
or pictures, or a duplication of the real world, but of a
complex mixture of all of these things so complex, in
fact, that no-one can totally control it.
A tiny gesture caught by the camera can rob an argu¬
ment of its content. The unexpected impact of a single
image can erase the meaning from a thousand words of
commentary. The accidental drama of a live report last¬
ing a few seconds can ignite flames of emotion in mil¬
lions of homes. A moment of silence can say more than
a speech. What the pitiless eye of the camera looks for is
authenticity, a mysterious capacity to move or to
convince, the elusive heart of the matter. This random,
unpredictable quality of television is grounds for humi¬
lity. Perhaps this is why it receives so little attention.
People usually tend to criticize the manipulative
power of the image. The subversive genius of television,
which now crosses frontiers with the aid of dish
antennae, eluding all kinds of censorship, played no
small part in the collapse of communism. The telefrenzy
that accompanied the Gulf War further demonstrated
that even in democracies public opinion could be para¬
lyzed by a (calculated) surfeit of images.
This manipulative power explains why television is
politically so important in every nation of the world. A
survey has shown that in 102 countries television is
directly controlled by the state. Even in the most demo¬
cratic countries, the political authorities have never
entirely relinquished influence over the small screen,
and the "televisual landscape" is the subject of constant,
though often misguided, debate.
That is not all. Television has radically affected the
functioning of democracy itself. It undermines the
influence of intermediary bodies and representative ins¬
titutions such as parliaments. It replaces, at least partly,
the elective principle with the ephemeral and uncertain
reign of the public opinion poll. It highlights declara¬
tions of political intent rather than political action, and
encourages politicians to stage "media coups". By turn¬
ing its spotlight on criminal investigation procedures, it
unsettles the judicial system. The list is endless.
In all of these cases the result is the same. Represen¬
tative democracy has been transformed by television. It
has moved away from the principles on which it was
once based and the precise mechanisms invented by its
theorists, from Rousseau to de Tocqueville, from Mon¬
tesquieu to Adam Smith. A new, ambiguous and only
imperfectly conceptualized political model is now at
work, literally before our eyes. The model is that of
"media democracy", and neither constitutions nor laws
have been adapted to it. Hence the widespread anxiety
about television, a malaise that seems likely to be with
us for some time.
It is not hard to see what is at stake. Confronted by
this mysterious box that so suddenly appeared a few
decades ago, we are all learning our way on both sides
of the screen. On one side techniques of manipulation
are being developed and refined. On the other the view¬
ing public is gradually learning to detect lies, to decipher
the sometimes false evidence of the image and to resist
the television barrage that it has for the most part
passively accepted until now. A race is on between the
two, and what hangs in the balance is democracy.
By a strange paradox, television, which is both futu¬
ristic and archaic, takes us back into a world of magic.
We must find the right way out. O
JEAN-CLAUDE GUILLEBAUD writes for the French newspaper Sud-Ouest
and the weekly Nouvel Observateur, and has produced a number of
programmes for French television. One of his films, Carte Orange, won
the Prix des Télévisions Francophones in 1982. His most recent books
are Le voyage à Keren (1988), L'accent du pays (1990) and Le rendez¬
vous ó'lrkoutsk (1990).
