Brightening the city m -
by Juan Carlos Langlois
18
JUAN CARLOS LANGLOIS
Is an Argentine artist whose
work has been shown at
many exhibitions in museums
and art galleries of Latin
America, North America and
Europe. Between 1977 and
1987 he was head of
UNESCO's International Fund
for the Promotion of Culture.
WITH the rapid spread of industry, the
exodus from the countryside and the
resultant transformation of the urban
landscape, city-dwellers of the second half of
the twentieth century have found themselves
living in an increasingly colourless environment.
The density of urban populations, the deve¬
lopment of complex transport systems and the
proliferation of industrial wastes are among the
factors that have contributed to the rapid rise in
atmospheric pollution. Veiled in soot, towns
and suburbs have lapsed into grimy taciturnity
as an all-pervading drabness has progressively
overcome the great urban complexes.
From the time of the first industrial revolu¬
tion, Western societies have systematically
favoured the use of sombre, neutral colours in
their towns and cities, judging them to be more
functional, and this anti-colour attitude has
been further accentuated by the desire to imitate
what were thought to be the canons of Graeco-
Roman classicism. As we now know, however,
the city-dwellers of Antiquity gave pride of
place to colour; the vision we have of the
temples and market-places of old, built solely in
white marble, is mistaken. On the contrary,
judging by the rich and subtle palette found in
the art of very ancient civilizations, the use of
colour as a symbolic language seems to have
been an important cultural development.
In more recent times in the West, Roma¬
nesque and Gothic architecture also made great
use of colour as witness the cathedrals of
Siena, Florence and Venice, with their stained-
glass windows, frescoes, mosaics, and precious
coloured marble.
The façades embellished with traditional
paintings still to be seen in many countries
today, are an indication of the extent to which
the peoples of those countries nourished their
spiritual, imaginative vision through contact
with a world of colour. The extraordinary rich¬
ness of this world is to be seen in the cities of
Islam, Greek villages, Thai Buddhist temples,
the fishing villages of the Caribbean and the
mud edifices of Africa and the Middle East, to
name but a few examples.
Sensitivity of this kind finds little place in
the monotonous environment of the great
contemporary conurbations. Fortunately, in
recent decades, the notion of bringing colour
back into building projects has been gaining
ground. The modern vision of the city implies a
rediscovery of the role of colour as an inva¬
luable aid to architects and town-planners,
enabling them either to emphasize or minimize
space and volume.
Murals and trompe-l'
Bold and judicious use of colour has an impor¬
tant role to play in street art. In the bustle of
encounter, exchange and dialogue that the
street engenders, façades, doorways, windows,
pavements and urban fittings, decked out in
colour, provide a favourable background for a
revived "urbanism" in search of a new form of
"urbanity" in its original, positive sense. The
whole city becomes more understandable and

.*
'
í* A
more convivial as colour, the poetry of the
street, triumphs over drabness.
Murals and trompe-l'ceil façades are gra¬
dually making a come-back. Sometimes they
strike a chord in the collective memory by allud¬
ing to an event in the history of a district, a city
or a country, or by recalling the temporary
decors with which the streets were once trans¬
formed and embellished to mark political, reli¬
gious or artistic events.
The first great manifestations of mural art of
the twentieth century are to be found in the
work of three Mexican artists Diego Rivera
(1886-1957), José Clemente Orozco (1883-
1949) and David Alfaro Siqueiros (1896-1974).
In the 1920s, in quest of a form of art that
would be monumental and heroic yet human
and popular, they began to paint gigantic fres¬
coes that retraced the major episodes in the his¬
tory of Mexico and in the revolution of 1910.
A street in La Boca, a
working-class district of
Buenos Aires (Argentina).
Their initiative caused a great stir and
brought them many commissions for similar
works in Mexico and, later, in the United
States, where they inspired a vast programme
of publicly financed commissions designed to
provide work for American artists gravely
affected by the economic crisis of the 1930s.
More than 2,500 murals were completed over
the next few years under the aegis of the New
Deal, initiated in 1933 by President Franklin D.
Roosevelt.
In 1967, a mural conceived as a "collage" of
portraits, photographs and verse was created on
a derelict building in the southern suburbs of
Chicago by a group of black American artists
headed by William Walker. Entitled Wall of
Respect, it paid tribute to public figures who
had fought for civil rights for blacks. This ini¬
tiative, which was followed in other American
cities such as Los Angeles, San Francisco, Balti-
19

20
more and New York, marked a new point of
departure for mural painting.
During the 1960s, the creation of murals in
public places became the spearhead of an
authentic popular art movement which
responded particularly to the need for expression
felt by community groups to whom access to
visual creativity had previously been barred.
A more recent phenomenon has been the
renewed popularity of trompe-l'til, which has
developed in reaction to a form of architecture
that has shown an exaggerated predilection for
the bare wall. Widely employed from the six¬
teenth century following the adoption of geo¬
metric perspective but already used much
earlier, as the frescoes of Pompeii attest
trompe-l'fil is coming back into favour in
modern urban design as one of the best ways of
combining dream and fantasy with the useful
and the functional.



Improving the quality of life in the urban
setting is one of the prime objectives of street
art. The aim is to provide the city-dweller with
the opportunity to participate collectively in the
rebirth of a more colourful environment. By its
very nature as shared space, the street lends
itself to collective creativity. Proof of this is to
be seen across the world in the growing number
of wall paintings which young people, artists
and educators have collaborated to create.
Those whose task it is to use colour to reha
bilitate or bring life to communal space should
try to involve local people in their projects.
Whether it be in historic centres or in suburbs,
near industrial complexes located on the outs¬
kirts of cities or on big housing estates, space
must be found to allow collective creativity to
find an outlet through the use of colour, as part
of a process of renewed community dialogue
the imperative need for which becomes daily
more apparent.
Colours that calm
It is now recognized that if people are cut off
from the colours natural to their environment
they become more aggressive. To stop this
from happening, children and teenagers must
be taught how to see, to use the faculty of sight,
that key instrument of understanding. Research
has already been done on the influence of
colour on the behaviour of individuals and
communities. It should be pursued further and
its results made more widely known.
This is not to say that the time is ripe to
apply therapeutical methods based on the use
of colour. Nevertheless, many experiments
have already demonstrated the far from negli¬
gible role colour can play at key stages in many
scientific, technological and artistic activities.
There is, however, a danger that, for want of
sufficiently rigorous projects, the reintroduc¬
tion of colour into the urban landscape may
The wall of a house in the
Indian city of Benares, on
the Ganges.
Snow sculptures carved as
entries for an international
competition held in 1991 at
the French ski resort of
Valloire (Savoie).

lead to a chromatic cacophony, particularly on
the edges of cities.
On the other hand, when systematic use is
made of blended colours that are predomi¬
nantly white, grey or brown, this soon results
(with the help of pollution) in a relapse into a
new drabness. Bright colours, judiciously used,
can enhance a litter-bin, a building or an entire
neighbourhood. In the same way major
construction industrial buildings, bridges,
reservoirs, road or rail infrastructures can
become the basis of a new form of decorative
expression. One example of this is the way in
which the bridge at Vierzon railway station in
France has been painted (see box). Following a
colour scheme established by artist Christiane
Groud, this imposing grey metal structure has
been repainted in strong, bright colours. The
marriage of iron and colour gives the bridge an
interest, a fascination even, rarely found in this
type of utilitarian edifice.
Colour can also help to save, rehabilitate or
give new life to areas doomed to demolition,
dereliction or anonymity. This was the case of
the working-class area of La Boca, in Buenos
Aires (Argentina) which changed totally after
its wood and corrugated iron houses were
repainted in contrasting shades. This project,
carried out some fifty years ago by the painter
Benito Quinquela Martin, himself a resident of
La Boca, gave a new sense of identity to an area
which had previously been lost in an urban
complex that today has over twelve million
inhabitants.
A district of San Francisco provides another
example of what can be done with colour. The
bright colours selected for the redecoration of a
group of Victorian-style houses strikingly
enhance their pediments, columns, friezes and
bow-windows, creating a remarkable sense of
joy and well-being. D

