A,LmadOU Hampâté Bâ, the man who was
known as the "living memory of Africa", was
born into an aristocratic Peul family in Mali
at the dawn of the twentieth centuryhe liked
to say that he was "one of the eldest sons of
the century"and was a member of
UNESCO's Executive Board between 1962
and 1970. He died on 15 May 1991 at Abidjan
(Côte d'Ivoire).
Some people at UNESCO still cherish the
memory of this warm-hearted, smiling man,
who always wore a full-length embroidered
garment and was addressed by many as
"Papa". The saying with which he will always
be associated, that "In Africa, when an old
man dies, a library disappears"has become
so famous that it is sometimes quoted as an
African proverb.
Perhaps few still remember the occasion
on which it was uttered. It was in 1962, at a
meeting at which the rescue of the great
pharaonic monuments of Nubia, threatened
by the waters of the Aswan High Dam, was
being discussed. After expressing his pleasure
that UNESCO was endeavouring to save
artistic treasures of universal value, Amadou
Hampâté Bâ explained that other monuments
existed in Africa that were just as precious for
the cultural heritage of mankind, but were
unfortunately far more fragile and perishable.
These monuments were the great repositories
of ancestral African lore who were not being
replaced and whose knowledge would prob¬
ably die with them. "In sixty years," he said,
"the Nubian stone monuments, even if water¬
logged, will still be there, but our last great
'illiterate scholars' will have gone for ever, and
their knowledge with them."
Throughout his time as a member of the
Executive Board he pressed for the systematic
collection of these oral teachings and for the
rescue of African oral traditions, not only
because of their cultural value but also because
they enshrine a vast sum of historical, reli¬
gious, philosophical, scientific and literary
knowledge. He liked to quote this phrase by
his philosophical master, the Sufi mystic
Tierno Bokar: "Writing is one thing and
knowledge is another. Writing is the pho¬
tographing of knowledge, but it is not
knowledge itself. Knowledge is a light which
is within man. It is the heritage of all the
ancestors knew and have transmitted to us as



seed, just as the mature baobab is contained
in its seed." Amadou Hampâté Bâ was one of
those who made the greatest contribution,
notably at UNESCO, to winning world-wide
recognition for the cultures of Africa.
It is less well known that Amadou Ham¬
pâté Bâ often proved to be an outstanding con¬
ciliator on UNESCO's Executive Board. He
would defuse tense situations by telling an
apposite African story in which his audience
could recognize themselves. He was capable
of engineering a unanimous vote when a few
moments before the divergence between
different viewpoints had seemed insur¬
mountable.
Willingness to hear and respect the other
person's point of view, a desire to seek mutual
APPRECIATION
A <*
HAMPATE BA
THE GREAT CONCILIATOR
by Diélika Diallo
understanding through dialogue, hatred of
intolerancethese were the outstanding
characteristics of Amadou Hampâté Bâ. He
was a great African humanist, or rather,
simply a great humanist, since he transcended
frontiers: "When we are tuned in to the
universal," he said, "we shall have earned the
right to call ourselves human beings and be
worthy of our place in the concert of nations."
Nothing in his early life seemed to ear¬
mark him for a role in international affairs.
In childhood he received a traditional educa¬
tion, Islamic and African, Peul and Bambara.
His automatic entry into French education at
the age of twelve took him along a new path.
Who knows where it would have led if, at a
time when he was preparing to enter the Wil¬
liam Ponty college of education on the island
of Gorée (Senegal), his mother had not
ordered him to go no further with his studies
in French, "which had gone on quite long
enough". He bowed to her wishes and refused
to join the pupils who were leaving for Gorée,
with the result that the colonial authorities
sent him to distant Ouagadougou, where he
occupied a junior post as a "temporary writer
employed on a highly precarious basis."
Nevertheless, he achieved advancement. By
1933 he was senior secretary at the town hall
of Bamako and occasional interpreter to the
Governor of French West Africa.
His career took a new turn in 1942 when
he was appointed to a post at the French Insti¬
tute of Black Africa where he worked with
the founder of the Institute, Théodore Monod.
Ever since he was a child, he had collected oral
traditions wherever he had gone, but now he
could do so to his heart's content as part of
long-term ethnological, historical and lin¬
guistic research in the field. He published
many articles and a longer study, L'Empire
peul du Macina, a work entirely based on the
oral tradition.
In 1951, Théodore Monod obtained for
him a UNESCO scholarship which enabled
him to spend a year in France, where he estab¬
lished firm friendships with scholars such as
Marcel Griaule, Germaine Dieterlen and Louis
Massignon, who specialized in African and
Oriental studies. Subsequently, he returned to
France each year and gave a series of lectures
at the Sorbonne on Peul culture and civiliza¬
tion. With Germaine Dieterlen he published
Koumen (1961), a major anthology of Peul
initiatory stories.
In 1958, when Mali became independent,
he founded the Institut des Sciences Humaines
at Bamako. In 1960 he represented his country
at UNESCO's General Conference and in
1962 was elected to UNESCO's Executive
Board. In the same year he became Mali's
ambassador to Côte d'Ivoire and remained in
this post as long as his country, which had
broken with Senegal when the Federation of
Mali broke up, needed access to the sea via the
port of Abidjan. Four years' later he resigned
to devote himself entirely to his mission as "a
man of cultural and religious dialogue".
He began to publish a flow of works,
saving from oblivion some of the finest
examples of Peul oral literature including
Kaïdara, L'Eclat de la grande étoile, Petit Bodiel,
Njeddo Dewal, mère de la calamité, and La
Poignée de poussière (contes et récits du Mali).
In 1974 he was awarded the Grand Prix Lit¬
téraire d'Afrique Noire for his most famous
work, L'Etrange destin de Wangrin. He also
catalogued his vast collection of manuscripts,
the outcome of half a century's research into
African oral traditions. When they have been
reproduced on microfiche and a number of
works relating to them have been published,
they will be made available for consultation
by researchers at libraries in Paris and in
Africa.
The death of Amadou Hampâté Bâ is a
great loss for the world of African culture and
for all those who knew and loved the man.
However, his ideas live on in his works and,
remarkably, in his memoirs, the first volume
of which, recently published'under the title
Amkoullel l'enfant peul (Actes-Sud, Paris, 1991)
is a unique account of colonial Africa at the
beginning of this century as seen through the
eyes of a child.
D1ELIKA DIALLO
is a translator and a UNESCO staff member. 13
