Save Our Sports by Roland Renson
Women of the Canela people
(Brazil) take part in a log
C:
i
i OMPARED to what we usually describe as
"modern sports", that is to say the
highly standardized Olympic disciplines
that are practised in many parts of the world,
traditional sports and games tend to be
confined to a limited geographical area and are
often referred to as "national" or "local". They
are regarded as symbols of ethnic or regional
identity and are called "folk games" by analogy
with "folk music" or "folk dance". Such a
"folk-lorization" of traditional sports can have
both positive and negative consequences.
The positive effect is that the conscious "tra-
ditionalization" of certain sporting activities
provides them with a kind of cultural charter for
their protection. Such a charter should,
however, not be aimed at preserving them in a
reservation or in a folklore museum, where they
can be peered at by spectators or tourists. They
should be conserved actively by being incorpo¬
rated into our culture of play and movement.
It was a curious quirk of history that the
typical sports of Victorian Britain should have
been given international prominence as symbols
of progress by the French Baron Pierre de Cou
bertin (1863-1937). These "modern sports"
became part of a new dynamic life-style of the
social elite, the so-called "leisure class". In
contrast to the international breakthrough of the
modern sports movement around the turn of
the century, local traditional sports and games
gradually came to be regarded as the anachro¬
nistic remnants of a static and rustic pre-indus-
trial society. The same process is occurring
today, but it has now been "exported" to Third
World countries.
In much the same way as these countries
tend to regard the growing ecological aware¬
ness in the Western world as a luxury they
cannot afford, they have also set themselves
other technological and economic priorities
than the protection of their traditional sports
and games. Moreover, it is tempting for them
to invest in success in the international sporting
arena in order to gain worldwide recognition
and status. This combined process of moderni¬
zation and sportification, with its imitation of
the Western cultural model, has even been des¬
cribed as a symptom of colonization.
In this article we define traditional sports as 41

Athletes of the Indonesian
island of Nias are renowned
for their prowess as high
jumpers.
42
"sports which already existed or had their roots
in physical activities before the spread of
modern internationally organized sport". A
limited sample of traditional sports has been
chosen to illustrate this heritage.
Ball games
There is a rich variety of traditional ball games.
They can either be played by hand or foot or
with a batting device. Traditional European
team-handball games include pärkspel on the
Swedish island of Gotland, kaatsen in the
Dutch province of Frisia, balle pelote in Bel¬
gium and France, pallone elástico in Italy and
pelota in Spanish Valencia or in the Basque
country. Most of the ancient and violent foot¬
ball forms have disappeared and have been
replaced by modern soccer, except for the tra¬
ditional calcio florentino in Florence (Italy).
In many southeast Asian countries, sepak, a
kind of "foot-volley-ball", is played with a
light rattan ball. In Meso- and South America,
various traditional rubber-ball games were
played using head, hand or elbow, hip or foot.
Most of them have vanished today but they are
sometimes re-enacted as tourist attractions.
Some ball games, such as Gaelic football in
Ireland and Australian or New Zealand rules
football, are played with both hands and feet.
All kinds of batting devices are used, from rac¬
quets, as in real tennis and in France's longue
paume game, to the sticks which are used to
play crosse, a variant of golf played in northern
France and Belgium. A traditional stick-ball
game played by the North American Indians
was also called crosse by the early French
explorers and is now known as lacrosse. Other
ball games make use of a tambourine (France
and Italy), a forearm cover or "bracchiale", as
in the Italian pallone, or a "chistera" in the
spectacular jai alai of the Basques.
Bowl and
pin games
Bowl games are played with a solid spherical
object that is either rolled or thrown at a target.
In pin games, targets are knocked down. Italian
bocee and the French jeu de boules are now
played far from their original home countries.
A special case is the game of closh, which at the
time of Erasmus (1469-1536) and Brueghel the
Elder (1525-1569) was popular all over Europe.
In this game a shovel-shaped bat is used to roll
a heavy round bowl through an iron ring fixed
in the ground. Apart from the well-known flat
green bowls, which spread from England to the
former British colonies, a wide variety of bowl¬
ing games are found in Britain and in the cen¬
tral and southern European countries.
The modern American game of tenpin bowl¬
ing has several historical variants, some of which
are highly standardized and mechanized, such as
kegeln in Germany and bordering countries.
Other pin games range from Karelian pins, in
which a stick is thrown instead of a bowl, to
pendelkegeln (Germany), in which the bowl
swung at the pins hangs on a wire.
Throwing
games
Throwing a stick or a stone as far as possible or
to hit a target is a basic human movement pat¬
tern. It appears in the modern athletic events of
javelin, discus and hammer throwing, and in
shot putting. In Sweden's traditional varpa
game the projectiles are heavy discs. Smaller
discs or coins, or sometimes stones, are used in
both children's and adult throwing games all
over the world. Javelin throwing is still practised
by several peoples, not only as a form of train¬
ing for combat or hunting, but also for recre¬
ational and competitive purposes. Such games
are reported in many parts of South America.
North American Indians have revived the game
of "snow snake", in which a short spear is
hurled as far as possible along a track in the
snow. Hammer throwing and tossing the caber
are typical events of the well-known Scottish
Highland Games. A log-throwing event vir¬
tually identical to caber-tossing is found in Por¬
tugal, where it is known asjogo dopanco, and in
Sweden, where it goes by the name of st'dng-

Terra-cotta figurine probably
depicting a pelota player.
Dating from around 900-
1350, it was discovered at
Colima (Mexico).
In the Sudan, Nuba wrestlers
prepare for a match.
storming. Stone putting is practised in the tradi¬
tional festivals of Swiss farmers in the Alps.
The game known as road bowls in Ireland,
klootscbieten in the Netherlands and bosseln or
klootschiessen in East Frisia (Germany), is an
interesting example both of the expression of
regional ethnic identity and of the growing
international awareness of traditional games. In
1969, these three independent groups of bowl¬
ing enthusiasts joined together to form the
International Bowl Playing Association.
Shooting games
Shooting games have flourished in all cultures
and have evolved into modern high-tech sports.
Popinjay shooting, in which the target is a "jay"
or set of "jays" attached to a tall mast, is depicted
in many medieval and Renaissance paintings and
prints and is still a very popular traditional sport
in Flanders (Belgium). It even featured in the
1920 Antwerp Olympic Games. The target
shooting practised by Japanese samurai and Zen
priests is another example of the art of archery.
Some present-day crossbow guilds in Flanders
originated in the fourteenth and fifteenth centu¬
ries and can thus be considered as the first sports
clubs in Europe. The impressive crossbow shoot¬
ing festivals of the Italian balestrieri, such as are
held in the magnificent city of Gubbio in the
Umbrian hills and elsewhere, also have a long
historical pedigree. Witnessing the pageantry of
such competitions of crossbowmen competing
to win a flag ("palio") is like stepping back into
the living past.
When firearms were introduced, many
archery and crossbow societies replaced their
traditional weapons with culverins or carbines.
These associations of riflemen, especially in
Germany and Austria, but also in Denmark, are
highly organized and have preserved to a
notable extent their character as patriarchal
men's clubs, especially in rural areas.
Fighting games
Wrestling is probably the oldest and the most
universal traditional sport of humankind. So-
called Graeco-Roman wrestling, which has
43

Yabusame, a form of archery
on horseback practised in
Japan since the 11th
century, is also a form of
meditation in Zen Buddhism.
Three targets are set up
beside a 218-metre-long
track for the archer,
traditionally a samurai, to
shoot at as he gallops along.
44
ROLAND RENSON,
of Belgium, is head of the
research unit in Sociocultural
Kin a nth ropo logy at the
Institute of Physical
Education at Leuven. In 1990
he was elected President of
the International Society for
the History of Sport and
Physical Education. He is the
author of a number of books
on traditional sports and
games, including, with
V. van Mele, Traditional
Games in South America
(1992), which has been
published under the auspices
of the International Council of
Sport Science and Physical
Education with financial
support from Unesco.
acquired official Olympic status, has no connec¬
tion with the wrestling styles of Greek and
Roman Antiquity, and the type of wrestling
practised during the ancient Olympic Games
has much more in common with present-day
pelivan (Turkish wrestling) or even with
modern judo. In Japan, sumo wrestling is
considered as the most typical national sport.
Wrestling is Africa's most widespread tradi¬
tional sport. The fierce wrestling of the Nuba
people in Sudan is particularly famous. Tradi¬
tional African wrestling is, however, rapidly
changing or disappearing and being replaced by
sports such as boxing and karate. Attempts are
currently being made to establish an interna¬
tional federation of traditional wrestling styles.
In Europe, international competitions have
already been staged, in which glima wrestlers
from Iceland were matched with adepts of the
lucha canaria wrestling style practised in the
Canary Islands. Moreover, an International
Federation of Celtic Wrestling was founded in
1985, bringing together Icelandic glima, Scottish
backhold and Breton gouren.
Tilting, the favourite sport of the knights of
medieval Europe, was officially abolished in
France in 1559 when King Henri II was mor¬
tally wounded in a confrontation with his cap¬
tain of the guard. However, some of its variants
have survived. They include ring tilting and
quintain, which can be practised either on land
or water, as in the case of joutes girondines in
France and the Fischerstechen in Germany.
The martial arts are practised all over the
world. Many of these sports have been highly
ritualized and stylized in an endeavour to make
them less lethal. Special protective gear is worn
by practitioners of such dangerous sports as
Kendo (Japan), and fencing, the latter of which
has had Olympic status since the first modern
Olympic Games were held in Athens in 1896.
Animal games
Several animal games have gained a reputation
as "blood sports" in the course of history and
have been officially abandoned in many coun¬
tries. Such cruel sports as bull-baiting and bear-
baiting were popular in medieval and sixteenth-
and seventeenth-century England, but these
baitings, in which specially trained bulldogs
were used, have not survived the so-called civi¬
lizing process. Cockfighting, however, is still
very popular in southeast Asia, especially in
Indonesia and the Philippines, and in the north
of France. In some countries where cockfights
are illegal, these games still have their clandes¬
tine but loyal supporters. Animals are also
matched in fair competitions, as in pigeon
racing and dog racing.
In most of these animal competitions,
people train and coach the animals. In other
cases, people engage in a direct and hazardous
confrontation with animals, as in North Amer¬
ican rodeos, bull-running in France and Spain,
and bull-fighting in France, Mexico, Portugal
and Spain.
Locomotion
games
Some traditional races with a cultic significance
still exist. The Tarahumara Indians of Mexico
take part in a kickball race during which run¬
ners may cover over 300 kilometres in forty-
eight hours as they run barefoot over rocky
mountain trails, kicking a small hardwood ball
in front of them. Another fantastic running feat
is the log race of the Timbira and Kraho
Indians of Brazil. In these annual relay races,
each of two rival teams has to carry a heavy log
over a considerable distance. All the partici¬
pants have to run the entire route but relays
take place every 100-150 metres. The race is
widely seen as an act of worship, and so the
concept of "achievement" seems more appro¬
priate to describe it than that of "competition".
The Watusi of Rwanda in Africa and the
inhabitants of the Indonesian island of Nias are
famed for their prowess as high jumpers. In
each place the jumpers use an inclined stone to
take off, but whereas Watusi athletes try to
clear a horizontal wooden bar, their Nias coun¬
terparts jump over a solid stone wall.
Among nomadic peoples who depend
almost entirely for their subsistence on their
reindeer, horses or camels, traditional sports
tend to highlight riding skills. Striking examples
include the reindeer-sledge races of the Sami
people of Norway, Sweden, and Finland,
Afghanistan's buzkashi game in which two
teams of horsemen vie with each other to cap¬
ture the carcass of a calf, or the annual King's
camel race in Saudi Arabia, in which almost
3,000 contestants take part. The famous Palio of
Siena, a traditional annual horse-race in the very
heart of this old Italian town, attracts so many
visitors that it is now held twice a year.

A bullfight at Pamplona
(Spain).
Acrobatics
Because of the limitations of the human
neuro-muscular system, which has hardly
changed since the emergence of homo sapiens,
acrobatic performances are strikingly similar
regardless of historical periods or cultures.
The acrobatics that we see in the modern
circus are, for example, very similar to those
performed in the arenas of ancient Rome. Nor
are the vaults and somersaults of modern
gymnastics very different from the tumbling
exercises described in 1599 by the Italian pro¬
fessional acrobat Tuccaro (1536-1604). The
"Cong-Fou" gymnastic exercises of the Chi¬
nese Taoist monks described by the French
Jesuit Amiot (1718-1793) had so much in
common with the Swedish gymnastics system
of Per Henrik Ling (1776-1839) that the
French physician Nicolas Dally (1859) was
tempted to believe that Ling had simply
copied them.
In all cultures, people try to keep in good
physical shape by performing coded sets of
physical exercises which arc clearly linked to
the ideological superstructure. These cover a
wide range, from Zen meditation, Tai Chi, and
yoga in the Eastern cultural hemisphere, to
aerobics, aquabics and callanatics in the Wes
tern world. A striking example of such tradi¬
tional acrobatics are the castellers or human
pyramids formed by amateur gymnasts in Bar¬
celona (Spain) as towering symbols of their
Catalan identity.
Traditional sports and games are too often
treated as the "Cinderellas" of modern sports.
It should not be forgotten, however, that these
traditional sports and games are at the origin of
almost all modern sports and that they may
offer a welcome alternative to a worldwide pro¬
cess of uniform "sportification", which tends
to reduce the great variety of past and present
forms of play to the narrow category repre¬
sented by modern competitive sports.
With the radical sociocultural and eco¬
nomic changes that are turning the world into
a single "global village", there is a risk that
many traditional sports may be lost for ever.



Traditional sports are important aspects of our
cultural heritage and deserve to be studied
more carefully. Analysis of this heritage could
help us to rethink and modify certain negative
aspects of modern sports. Traditional sports
should no longer play the role of barefoot
Cinderella. The time has come for them to
step into the boots of Tom Thumb and to
stand up and speak out. ö
>
.is*
45
