il bright but fíi
by Pierre Henquet
AFTER a period of remarkably rapid
growth throughout this century, sport
has, during the last thirty years, devel¬
oped into a phenomenon of worldwide impor¬
tance. Analysts and advocates of sport, political
leaders, researchers, journalists and administra¬
tors, have styled it an important aspect of
contemporary culture and civilization, a field of
social activity in its own right, a key factor in
political strategy and an economic force of the
first magnitude. In short, it is seen as a pheno¬
menon that has done much to shape our time.
More enthusiastic or lyrical sports fans go so
far as to view sport as the common denomi
nator of all humanity, a sublimated form of
capitalist competition, the most accessible form
of community experience or even, in the words
of Pierre de Coubertin, father of the modern
Olympic Games, "the brightest flame to blaze
in the hearts of humanity".
At once a technique, a leisure activity, an
institution and a myth, sport is a protean
concept. Although it appears to be a somewhat
irrational notion, it has attracted researchers
from a number of fields to a new discipline that
has come to be known as "sport science". Its
many definitions are often partial in both
senses of the word, and have led to debate
An archer prepares to light
the Olympic fire during the
opening ceremony of the
Summer Games at Barcelona
in 1992.

10
(which usually tends to be artificial or
semantic) over the distinction between sport
and games, body movement, physical activity,
physical education and physical culture. For its
part, UNESCO uses a single conceptual package
comprising "physical education and sport"
both in its programme and in the text of an
International Charter that was promulgated on
the subject in 1978.
Access to sport
In recent years, sport has become increasingly
institutionalized, with most countries estab¬
lishing systems of sporting activities jointly
administered by the government and voluntary
organizations. With its enormous pool of dedi¬
cated voluntary workers, this system is prob¬
ably the world's largest associative movement
in terms of numbers.
Between 15 and 70 per cent of the popula¬
tion of every country practises a sport (whether
Cameroonian soccer players
jump for joy after scoring a
goal in the World Cup,
Naples, 1990.
supervised or not) on a regular basis. It is esti¬
mated that the numbers involved amount to
over a billion persons worldwide. This
powerful force, grouped in a multitude of sport¬
ing clubs, leagues and federations at the local,
regional, national and international levels, is
considered by some to be a mainstay of demo¬
cracy in action and an opportunity for young
people, who are the most involved, to learn the
meaning of democratic pluralism.
However, access to sport and physical edu¬
cation is far from being a universal right, des¬
pite the brave words of the International
Charter of Physical Education and Sport. The
map of underdevelopment in sport is in all but
a few details identical to that of underdevelop¬
ment in general. In many countries of the
South, four out of five young people have no
opportunity to practise a sport.
Nevertheless, despite such discrepancies
and inequalities which are tending to get
worse instead of better sport has become
much more democratic. A marginal, elitist acti¬
vity at the turn of the century, it is now a mass
phenomenon which, if used for political ends,
can lead to risks of regimentation or the estab¬
lishment of a state of childlike dependence.
Traditional and modern sport
Whereas games involving imitation and illusion
prefigure the arts of entertainment, sport is the
offspring of physical games, especially competi¬
tive games, and should be regarded, in the words
of former UNESCO Director-General René
Maheu, as "a free and disinterested activity of
free people." Otherwise the game element disap¬
pears. Maheu considered sport to be the modern
incarnation of chivalric tradition, declaring that
"sport that resembles work is not sport".
The recent boom in top-flight competition,
to the detriment of amateur sport (a notion
that has disappeared from the Olympic
Charter), gives grounds for fearing that the
"play" dimension of sport will be increasingly
ignored and that competitive sport will
become professionalized.
For athletes subject to the constraints of
modern training methods, the fun has gone out
of sport, which is becoming hard labour. Some
regard sport as ambiguous, part work part play,
"playful work" or "industrious play". Others
consider sports as play insofar as they are
practised for their own sake. How far does
such disinterestedness exist today when it is
common knowledge that the leading lights of
sports that receive wide television coverage are
lavishly paid?
Traditional games and sports are another
matter altogether. Richly symbolic of the heri¬
tage of traditional societies, they are part of a
cultural totality of which they are a form of

expression and a means of regulation. The
values they enshrine and the skills and tech¬
niques they call for are very often different
from if not antithetical to those of modern
sport. Most often practised in an informal and
non-institutional context, traditional games and
sports are the reflection of both individual and
collective cultural identities as well as being
significant factors in cultural development.
In many countries, popular national and
regional games and sports (with few excep¬
tions) are losing ground, and this seems likely
to be an irreversible process. Some observers go
so far as to predict that the world's game cul¬
ture, however rich and diversified it may be, is
doomed to extinction even if certain "fossi¬
lized" forms may be preserved as folklore and
that it will be replaced by a sanitized, institutio¬
nalized, standardized, universal sports culture,
erected as a shining example of modernity.
However, physical activity as reflected in
sport is far from being the universal practice
handed down through the ages that many claim
it to be. To establish the preponderance of
sport over every other approach to physical
activity throughout the world is to proclaim
the hegemony of a specific concept of sport
that practised in the Western world today.
Traditional games and sports are neverthe¬
less part of the non-material cultural heritage of
humanity. As such, they deserve to be included
in a descriptive inventory, as recommended to
UNESCO by the International Congress on
Physical Activities, Sport and Development,
held in Nabeul (Tunisia), in February 1992. If
certain sports have to be preserved as folklore,
then at least let us have a catalogue of them.
Those countries most exposed to the seduc-
A phalanx of press
photographers during a
World Cup soccer game.
tion of modern sport (notably soccer and
tennis) risk seeing their cultural identity becom¬
ing gradually impoverished. Yet many leaders
in the developing countries fear that attempts
to promote the revival of national games and
sports, or a return to traditional physical activi¬
ties, would tend to marginalize their young
people even further, by denying them access to
internationally recognized modern sports,
which are an incomparable source of national
pride and prestige. Policies of this kind, they
argue, would run counter to the drive for inte¬
gration, as they would promote cultural prac¬
tices deeply rooted in the ethnic subsoil and
stifle the sense of national identity and of
belonging to the international community. The
world appears to be moving inexorably
towards the adoption of a universal sporting
culture, wherein sport, like society itself, may
well lose in spirit what it gains in strength.
After the brain drain the brawn
DRAIN
Sport is a flourishing and fast-expanding
market. The sports industry alone accounts for
between one and two per cent of the industria¬
lized countries' Gross National Product and is
growing more quickly than most other sectors
of the economy. Moreover, it managed to sur¬
vive the crisis of the 1980s with a healthy aver¬
age annual growth rate of five per cent.
Research on this new branch of the eco¬
nomy has revealed the considerable sums of
money involved in the production, trade and
distribution of sport-related goods and ser¬
vices. To take one example, in 1980 almost
7,000 companies with a total of over 300,000
employees belonged to the French Federation

Youngsters at play in China.
of Sporting Industries. A survey carried out in
Germany estimated the number of salaried
posts in this sector at 45,000. Comparable
figures for the developing countries are not
available, but it can be assumed that the same
trends exist there, although to a lesser degree
and with a slight time lag.
At the same time, the sports industry is
becoming increasingly international, account¬
ing for between two and two-and-a-half per
cent of world trade. The world market for
sporting accessories, excluding infrastructures
and facilities, is far in excess of $50 billion.
Nevertheless, the terms of trade are unfavour¬
able to the countries of the South, which
depend on the industrialized world for
imported high-technology products, whereas
they themselves export goods with very low
added value.
Sports underdevelopment is a corollary of
economic underdevelopment, as indicated by
the unimpressive scores obtained by the devel¬
oping countries in international sporting
events (at the 1984 Olympics, only 62 medals
out of 687 9 per cent went to athletes from
these countries) and by the "brawn drain" that
goes hand-in-hand with the brain drain. We are
perhaps closer than we think to the time when
it will become virtually impossible for an ath¬
lete to step up to the Olympic podium if he or
she has not been trained in a country equipped
with modern facilities, or by a coach from one
of the industrialized countries.
Sport has thus come to play a prominent role
on the world economic scene. This relatively
recent development, as well as the internationa¬
lization of sport, is largely explained by the
close, complex, almost symbiotic relationship
that has been created and constantly reinforced
between sport, the media and advertising. Des¬
pite the important role played by the written
press in the early days of sport, it was televi¬
sion, more than any other medium, that seized
upon sport, turned it into a vehicle for advertis¬
ing and provided it with financial backing. In a
country like France, for example, in 1990,
soccer was financed by spectators to the tune of
35 per cent (as opposed to 80 per cent twenty
years before), by television (23 per cent), by
sponsors (22 per cent) and by official sources
(20 per cent).
Economic interests, inextricably linked to
media interests, are playing an increasing role in
shaping sports programmes, influencing their
rules, transforming sport into entertainment,
and having a large say in the way it is per¬
formed. With three sports (cycling, tennis and
soccer) taking up half the air-time devoted to
sport on European television, the standardiza¬
tion of physical activity is more than just an idle
threat. Economic interests, the media and sport¬
ing authorities have no choice but to get to¬
gether and make sport profitable. With the
twenty-first century just around the corner,
competitive sport needs television in order to
survive.
Top-level sport or sport for all?
What importance should be attached to top-
level sport in relation to the concept of sport
for all, and to the promotion of physical activ¬
ity and sport at school and in non-formal edu¬
cation programmes, particularly in the develop¬
ing countries? The cost of high-level
competitive sport already expensive is grow¬
ing more rapidly than the number of people
taking part. The priority facing developing
countries is to satisfy the basic needs of their
populations. Should top-level sport be regarded
as a basic need? Is it wise for such countries to
invest in sport at this level and host major
international sporting events?
Economists are divided on this question.
The necessary facilities are difficult to amortize
and maintain. They are ill adapted to the needs
of the local population and lead to technolo-
j*M
12

"Three sports (cycling,
tennis and soccer) take up
half the air-time devoted to
sport on TV".
Right, American tennis star
Pete Sampras keeps an eye
on the ball during the 1991
French Open in Paris.
PIERRE HENQUET,
of France, was a Unesco staff
member between 1946 and
1983. He is the author of
many articles on non-formal
education, functional literacy,
communications, youth and
sport. He is currently
assistant secretary-general of
the International Council of
Sport Science and Physical
Education.
IACOST
-
gical dependency on other countries because of
the complex ancillary equipment that is
required. Hosting the Olympic Games or
international championships often turns out to
be more expensive than expected, so that coun¬
tries have to resort to borrowing. However, the
sporting authorities in the Third World, moti¬
vated more by political than economic consider¬
ations, set great store by top-flight sport and
continue to campaign for greater geographical
diversity in the location of major events, and a
more balanced representation of countries in
international sporting bodies.
On the other hand, the promotion of phy¬
sical activity and sport for all should definitely
be considered an integral part and a vehicle
of development. The individual and collective
benefits to be derived from the regular, moder¬
ate practice of sport are incontestable. Physi
cally speaking, the practice of a sport, when
combined with sensible eating habits, is
unquestionably the most effective, pleasant and
inexpensive way to stay young and fit and to
reduce state expenditure on health. It would be
hard to imagine a more important asset to a
country than the health of its citizens.
At the psychosocial level, sport is character-
building and conducive to the full development
of the personality, improving emotional
balance, and helping the individual to put per¬
sonal success or failure into proper perspective.
Intellectually, it is a source of knowledge and a
guide in the learning process. Lastly, sport
encourages co-operation, solidarity and mutual
understanding, and can thus help people to
play a full part in the society in which they live,
and can contribute to the struggle against all
forms of exclusion. O 13
