fallen stars by Aieksei Srebnitsky
34
ALEKSEI SREBNITSKY,
Russian journalist, is editor-
in-chief of the Moscow
newspaper Ismailovskii
Vestnik. He is a member of
the International Sporting
Press Association (ISPA) and
the author of many works on
athletes and sport.
THE other day a parcel arrived for me from
the United States at the address of what
was once the Novosti news agency,
where I worked for thirty years. Stephanie
Vogel of Seattle had discovered from my
articles in Soviet Life that I was an old friend of
Valéry Brumel, her favourite sportsman, and
asked me whether I could send her some
Brumel memorabilia postcards, catalogues,
badges, commemorative medals and suchlike.
Her parcel also contained a few ounces of
sliced dry sausage in a plastic packet, with the
following accompanying note: "I hope this will
be of some comfort to you, Brumel, in these
times of shortage."
Stephanie Vogel's gesture was not quite as
cranky as it may seem at first sight. In Soviet
Life I had chronicled the problems of the
former Olympic high-jump champion (1964)
after serious injury had prevented him from
pursuing his career in top-level competition.
Once a Soviet national hero, Brumel found
himself out of a job almost overnight. He was
no longer needed. Through a combination of
optimism and resourcefulness, he eventually
managed to survive by giving lectures and
publishing his autobiography. But by then he
had been through some very hard times indeed,
sometimes having to rely on the money he got
from returnable bottles at twelve kopeks a time
to pay for his next meal. It was only after Gor¬
bachev had introduced perestroika that Brumel
was able to draw a disablement benefit of 110
roubles a month. With that sort of income, the
ex-world-record-holder was certainly not
going to turn his nose up at the sausage sent by
his American fan.
There is nothing particularly unusual about
this story in the Soviet context. As long as
champions earn medals and foreign cur¬
rency for their country they are supported by
the state and feted by the media. But the
moment they fail to make the grade they are
left to their own devices. If they are accommo¬
dating and know how to please their superiors,
they can hope to land a job as a trainer or admin¬
istrator. But if they are independent-minded,
like Brumel, they can expect no support. That
is why, for many years, Soviet sportsmen who
were able to travel abroad often resorted to
smuggling on a grand scale so as to have some¬
thing to put away for a rainy day.
An athlete's career is a short one. The
physical effort required, unrelenting pressure
and psychological stress inevitably result in
serious traumas and premature ageing. There is
some truth in the joke about beer being better
for the health than sport. By the age of twenty-
three, young sports "veteran" Brumel had
already had a cartilage operation for a com¬
plaint that is common among high jumpers.
But not all athletes were lucky enough to get
patched up in this way. The only ones who got
help were those still capable of winning events
and breaking records. The legendary triple-
jump champion, Victor Saneyev, world record-
holder and Olympic champion in 1968 and
1976, was even sent to Finland for treatment.
When necessary, the Sports Ministry paid in
hard currency. It was just too bad for those
who were past their peak.
The sad story of
Vladimir Kissilev
We Russians are only just beginning to admit,
to our embarrassment, that the craze for drug-
taking, an activity once described as "the result
of bourgeois habits," also swept the Soviet
Union, the world's "leading worker and peas¬
ant state." At the 1980 Moscow Olympics
which were once hailed as "outstanding" and
are now regarded as "shameful" the Soviet
Union took advantage of its status as host
nation to drug its sportsmen as never before. In
athletics alone, it swept the board with fifteen
gold medals, a suspiciously high success rate
even in the absence of the Americans. Some of
the medal-winners had never been heard of
before the Games and were immediately for¬
gotten afterwards.
Vladimir Kissilev astonished everyone by
winning the shot-put event. He then completely
vanished from the public eye. Only recently did
his sad fate come to light. Drugs had taken their
toll: the ex-champion became an invalid and
several times came close to death. He eventually
managed to pull through, but the athletics offi¬
cials who had earned laurels and well-paid jobs
as a result of his exploits did not lift a finger to
help him.
As for the celebrated ice-hockey player
Victor Yakushev, he owed his salvation to a
sympathetic foreign sportsman. At the end of
his playing career he became a trainer and
enjoyed a relatively comfortable position. But a
few years later his former injuries manifested
themselves again. In. the course of an outstand¬
ing career, Yakushev had broken his femur
several times: no sooner had the bone set than
he would be sent back on to the ice rink. He
eventually contracted coxitis, which meant that
he would never be able to move again unless he

Valéry Brumel,
Olympic high jump champion
in 1964 and world record
holder until 1973.
had a special hip operation of the kind hardly
ever performed in the Soviet Union.
Had Soviet society not slowly but surely
become more democratic, the famous Swedish
ice-hockey-player-turned businessman, Tumba-
Juhensson, would probably never have opened a
golf club in Moscow. During one of his frequent
trips to the capital he learned of the misfortune
that had struck down his former comrade and
opponent, and decided to try to raise money for
Yakushev to have an operation in Sweden. The
appeal he launched got plenty of publicity in the
media and brought in 150,000 kronor. When the
surgeons subsequently waived their fees, the
money was used to set up the Tumba Founda¬
tion, whose aim is to aid disabled sportsmen.
Yakushev was able to walk again.
Champions for sale
The wind of change which swept successively
through the Soviet Union, the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS) and Russia even¬
tually had repercussions in the world of sport.
Various charities were set up to help veteran
and disabled sportsmen, and a union of phy¬
sical-education, sports and tourism workers
saw the light of day.
All these organizations are driven by noble
ideals and make even nobler statements of faith,
but the country is in the throes of such eco¬
nomic chaos that it would be a mistake to expect
them to come up with a solution to everyone's
problems in the immediate future. Even so, I
have to admit to a feeling of uneasiness when 35

Pole-vaulter Sergei Bubka
sets a new world record with
a Jump of 6 metres in Paris
in 1985.
36
perfectly fit young sportsmen brazenly beg for
what can only be called charity. Pair figure-skat¬
ing Olympic champion Aleksandr s Zaitsev,
husband and partner of Irina Rodnina, was
appalled to see certain sportsmen, during a press
conference at the 1 992Albertville Winter Olympic
Games, giving their bank-account numbers to the
assembled journalists and appealing, through
them, to the generosity of the public.
Since the collapse of the Iron Curtain,
dozens if not hundreds of young CIS athletes
have been offering their talents to the highest
bidders on the world market. With a few
exceptions, the terms they get offered are
modest, though better than what they could
expect at home. Sergei Bubka, who has just
settled in Germany, told me that his new athlet¬
ics club in Berlin had offered him $120,000, as
well as a very comfortable home, a car and a
number of other perks, such as free return trips
with his family to Donetsk, his home town,
whenever he wants. But Bubka is Bubka, an
unrivalled champion who deserves even better
than that. Colleagues of his in various other
disciplines accept less attractive offers, which
nevertheless guarantee them and their families a
decent living for several years.
As a result, football in the CIS has been
bled dry. Hundreds of top players have joined
professional clubs all over western Europe.
And the national ice-hockey team has been
forced to enter its B team, and sometimes even
its C team, in international championships
because its best players have been snapped up
by clubs on the other side of the Atlantic.
The altar of top-level sport
Young sportsmen do rather well, but the out¬
look for their elders is less rosy. Few manage to
hold their own like Yuri Sedykh. At thirty-
seven, he can do only one thing: throw the
hammer. But he can throw it a very long way
further than anyone else in the world. He is a
"veteran" sportsman who will make a great
contribution to athletics in France, where he has
settled with his family, and will earn a better
living than he could back home. But his is an
exceptional case. Most of those who give up
competition are doomed to a life of vegetation.
After having sacrificed their lives and their
health on the altar of top-level sport, all they
can do is sit back and hope that one of the new
mutual funds set up to help them will do its
job. But they should not expect too much.
Brumel told me, doing his best not to sound
sarcastic, that the former middleweight boxer
Boris Lagutin, who was Olympic champion in
1960 and 1964, came round one day to give him
an "exceptional allowance" of 500 roubles from
the social welfare fund.
I am told that the Yashin Fund of the
Dynamo Sports Club has set up a monthly
pension of 500 roubles for its veterans, with the
help of its football and ice-hockey teams. Some
payments have already been made. Athletes
also receive invaluable help from the Associa¬
tion XXI fund which, for example, enabled



Nikolai Balboshin, a superb wrestler who had
fallen ill and lost all hope of recovery, to get
better. There are thousands of other examples
of the way such welfare organizations have
brought back to life the expression is not too
strong former sporting stars who were in
danger of dying prematurely, such as the bas¬
ketball players Anatoly Polivda and Aleksandr
Siznenko, who at 2.42 metres is currently the
tallest man in the world.
Things are beginning to change, and sooner
or later there will be results. It is all rather
novel for us: we had got too used to leaving
everything to the state, which has other prob¬
lems on its plate at the moment.
Meanwhile, I have not yet had a chance to
give Brumel his sausage. At the moment he is in
Genoa (Italy), whose city council has given him
an award for his sporting achievements, and
where he is thinking of applying for Italian citi¬
zenship, since Russians are now entitled to dual
nationality. I am keeping the Seattle sausage for
him, as a reminder of Stephanie's thoughtful-
ness and the still recent period in his life when
things looked pretty bleak. O
