JUST PUBLISHED
Lotfallah Soliman on a new



critique of UNESCO
L'UNESCO:
'Une entreprise
erronée'?
by Chikh Bekri
Editions Publisud, Paris 1991
Space Flight (above) is a sculpture symbolizing
the scientific and cultural achievements that
have made possible the exploration of the
cosmos. Presented to UNESCO by the USSR, it
spent 16 weeks in space on board the Soyuz
7 spacecraft in 1982.
c;hikh Bekri's book L'UNESCO: "Une
entreprise erronée?*' is a heartfelt statement
from a man who was a senior international
civil servant for twenty-five years and between
1976 and 1987 occupied the posts of Assistant
Director-General of UNESCO and head of its
Director-General's Executive Office. Its pur¬
pose is to try to halt "the kind of creeping state
intervention which will end by robbing the
institution of its special identity".
Even for those who do not share Bekri's
idealism, the book is essential reading. It is the
work of a thoughtful and well informed
author who at no point in its 300 pages allows
himself to be carried away by the passion
within him. He scrupulously charts the his¬
tory of UNESCO, not in order to describe
how it works or to make a list of what it has
and has not done but to reveal the malforma¬
tion, which he regards as "congenital", that
has led it from "brilliance" to "inertia" and
may eventually cause it to disappear or dis¬
integrate into a group of "small, specialized,
purely technical institutions, tightly controlled
by those who hold the purse-strings".
The title of the book is borrowed from
the Italian philosopher Benedetto Croce,
though Bekri has carefully added a question-
mark. This is a way of suggesting that
UNESCO could conceivably not be "a mis¬
taken enterprise" after all. But in what circum¬
stances might this be so? To answer this
question, the author first draws a genetic
map of UNESCO with the aim of identifying
its constituent parts and discovering the fun¬
damental reasons for its functioning and mal¬
functioning.
UNESCO, in his view, is an international
organization with a difference. It is essentially
an "ethical" or "moral" enterprise that must
be served by "missionaries". Like the Jesuits
who do nothing that is not "for the greater
glory of God", UNESCO's staff must devote
themselves totally to "the greater glory of the
League of Intellects" (here he takes up an
expression of Paul Valéry, who said in 1930
that "the League of Nations presupposes a
League of Intellects").
Starting his enquiry from these Kantian
perspectives, Bekri notes that politics have
been an ever-present factor in UNESCO's
history, not to mention its prehistory:
"politics were written into the Organization's
genes". The very affirmation of a desire to
"contribute to peace and security by
promoting collaboration among the nations
through education, science and culture" is in
itself a political act. To challenge such an
objective is also political.
The divergences that appeared at the time
of the conference held in November 1945 to
establish UNESCO were not between politi¬
cians and others, but between "those who
wished for the creation of an organism of tech¬
nical intellectual co-operation in which emi¬
nent scholars and great thinkers of incon¬
testable moral and spiritual authority would
predominate (as they had at the time of the
League of Nations in the International Com¬
mission for Intellectual Co-operation) and
those who wanted an intergovernmental
organization that would be political in its
nature, ethical in its objectives and technical
in its fields of action, in which decisions would 47

be taken exclusively by those who have the
power, the responsibility and the means to
carry them out".
So there never was any question of
creating a kind of gigantic non-governmental
organization. In UNESCO the political
powers-that-be controlled from the outset not
merely the material but also the legal means
of international co-operation. UNESCO's
great achievements in Italy, Egypt or
Indonesia would, for example, certainly have
been impossible without the authorization,
not to mention the participation, of the
governments concerned.
Chikh Bekri has too much experience of
international co-operation to be put out of his
stride by this. However, a reading of his book
makes it possible to see where his own prefer¬
ences lie. If governments must be involved, it
is in order to provide the "missionaries" with
the means to carry out their programmes, not
to make them subject to their political
interests.
For Chikh Bekri, UNESCO's founders
put the fat in the fire when they failed to
clarify "the ambiguous relationship between
political power and the intellectual commu¬
nity". That, in his view, is UNESCO's
"original sin". From that point onwards,
political interference steadily increased at the
cost of the "League of Intellects". This has not
been without "disastrous consequences", since
such interference not only threatens to end up
by failing to manage UNESCO but by itself
becoming unmanageable.
The author's attitude to UNESCO is at
once understanding and critical. He recognizes
that UNESCO cannot be the "League of
Intellects" that he would like to see, yet it is
in the name of such a League that he makes
his principal criticisms of it. He develops his
argument from an uncomfortable position,
both "inside" and "outside". He looks for
inspiration to the tripolar model of the Inter¬
national Labour Organisation, which, he feels,
rests on a viable compromise. "A greater role
(in national delegations and the executive
board) for intellectuals organized as such
through their associations and unions . . .
would reduce the influence of the politicians
and would allow educators, scientists and men
of culture to make their voices heard".
This proposal raises a problem. It would
be attractive if it were possible to define pre¬
cisely what the term "intellectual" means, but
this reviewer for one is obliged to confess that
he has long since given up trying to do that.
iO There is no such thing as a professional
intellectual. Teachers, engineers, doctors, jour¬
nalists, even writers, are none of them neces¬
sarily intellectuals. Look in the encyclopaedias
and you will find no-one listed there as an
"intellectual"not Diderot, not Hegel, not
Marx, not Sartre, not Bertrand Russell. Edgar
Morin is referred to as an anthropologist and
sociologist. He becomes an "intellectual"
when, as an offshoot from his academic work,
he makes a stand on a given issue and takes
risks.
The intellectual, then, is a phenomenon
that has no existence as such but can only exist
conjuncturally. Outside a given situation in
which they become involved, ask questions
and explode myths, intellectuals are jour¬
nalists, writers, engineers, doctors, physicists,
lawyers, civil servants or whatever.
So there can be no association of intellec¬
tuals "as such". Any association of this kind
is instrumentralized right from the word go.
And when pseudo-intellectuals gather in such
pseudo-associations, it is usually for reasons
that have nothing to do with the life of the
intellect.
Nowhere, either in the initial proposal
made to the Conference of Allied Ministers
of Education, in the French project, or in the
final documents that were approved by the
Conference at which UNESCO was estab¬
lished (all published by the author as appen¬
dices to the main text), does the word
"intellectual" appear as a noun. The expres¬
sion "intellectual co-operation" only appears
(and there with great frequency) in the French
project, and seems to have been used (albeit
sparingly) in the final document simply to
satisfy the French delegation.
Chikh Bekri is aware of this, and at one
point uses the expression "intellectual
workers" instead of "intellectuals". But then
the whole concept of the "League of
Intellects" is cast into doubt, for the civil
service (to cite only one example) is full of
"intellectual workers", so called only to dis¬
tinguish them from "manual workers"a dis¬
tinction which, moreover, is becoming
increasingly vague.
The idea of a "League of Intellects" is an
honourable one. Chikh Bekri wants to remind
us that the species is not extinct. He should
be heeded as a wise man for whom ethics,
morality and devotion to a just cause are ines¬
timable values.
LOTFALLAH SOLIMAN, Egyptian writer, and
journalist, is the author of a history of Palestine,
Pour une histoire profane de la Palestine (La
Découverte publishers, Paris, 19S9).
