UNESCO'S m$l 45 MRS (Part ll/j
by Michel Con/7 Lacoste
Education
The rescue of Abu Simbel
m
General policy
At its 15th session, the General Conference
takes the first step towards medium-term plan¬
ning with the decision to draw up the broad out¬
line of a plan for 1971-1976.
René Maheu is reelected for a new six-year
mandate.
UNESCO has 125 Member States.
4 new literacy pilot projects are inaugurated
(Ethiopia, Guinea, Madagascar, Tanzania); 3
others will follow: in Venezuela (1968), Sudan
(1969) and Zambia (1971).
The World Crisis in Education, by Philip
Coombs, is published.
The Youth Division is created within the Edu¬
cation Sector (it is currently part of the Sector
of Social and Human Sciences).
Exact and natural sciences
A Conference on the Scientific Basis for
Rational Use and Conservation of the Biosphere
is held in Paris. This meeting, the first inter¬
governmental conference on the environment,
leads to UNESCO's programme on Man and the
Biosphere (MAB).
Social sciences
First edition of Birthright ofMan, a selection
of texts on human rights prepared under the
direction of Jeanne Hersch.
Culture
Meeting in Italy, the Executive Board exa¬
mines a UNESCO report on the problems of
Venice. The report was later published in Italy
(Mondadori/UNESCO) and in France ( Sauver
Venise, Robert Laffont/UNESCO).
The Abu Simbel temples, reconstructed 64
metres above their original site on the banks of
the Nile, are officially unveiled.
Events
A symposium on "The role of Karl Marx in
the development of contemporary scientific
thought" is held to mark the 150th anniversary
of Marx's birth.
Left, moving the cliff temples of Abu Simbel was
one of the most spectacular achievements of the
International campaign to save the monuments of
Nubia, launched In 1960.
Below, a scientist working on a MAB project In
French Guiana studies the canopy of the rain
forest, an ecosystem rich In animal and plant
life.

1W
Education
The International Bureau of Education in
Geneva (IBE) becomes part of UNESCO. Estab¬
lished in 1925, the IBE became an intergovern¬
mental organization in 1929. It was for many
years headed by Jean Piaget (Switzerland).
The USSR establishes the Nadezhda K.
Krupskaya prize to help promote UNESCO's
campaign against illiteracy. Four other interna¬
tional prizes to encourage literacy work are
currently awarded: the International Reading
Association Literacy Award, the Noma Literacy
Prize, the Iraq Literacy Prize, and the King
Sejong Prize.
Exact and natural sciences
UNESCO organizes an international sympo¬
sium on the origins of modern man.
Communication
A meeting of experts held in Montreal out¬
lines a plan for long-term research on technical
progress in the communications media and the
impact of the mass media on contemporary
society.
Events
A symposium is held on "Truth and non¬
violence in Gandhi's humanism".
The UNESCO Prize for Architecture,
awarded for the first time, goes to the Japanese
architect Mitsuo Morozumi. The prize, awarded
every three years at the assembly of the Interna¬
tional Union of Architects (IUA), rewards the
authors of works of architecture inspired by the
moral aims of UNESCO.
m
General policy
A new building in rue Miollis is inaugurated
at UNESCO Headquarters in the presence of the
Head of State of the host country, M. Georges
Pompidou.
The Director-General decides to create a
Secretariat Round Table to study improvements
in programmes, management and human rela¬
tions within the Secretariat.
An experimental project to promote equal
access of girls and women to education is
launched in the Gandaki region of Nepal, with
financial assistance from NORAD (the Nor¬
wegian Agency for International Development).
Exact and natural sciences
At a Conference of Ministers responsible for
science policy in European Member States
(MINESPOL), held at UNESCO Headquarters,
170 Ministers and delegates from 30 countries
discuss the relative importance to be attached to
applied and fundamental research.
A Climatic Atlas ofEurope is published jointly
with the World Meteorological Organization
(WMO). This is the first of a series of climatic
atlases covering the different continents.
A Vegetation Map ofthe Mediterranean Region
is published.
Social sciences
The first part of a comprehensive study on
Main trends of research in the social and human
sciences is published. It covers sociology, polit¬
ical science, psychology, economics, demography
and linguistics. The second part (1978) covers
anthropology, history, aesthetics and art, law and
philosophy. Authors include: Jean Piaget, Stein
Rokkan, Paul Ricceur, Mikel Dufrenne, Maurice
Freedman, Geoffrey Barraclough.
Culture
The first volume of the General History of Africa
appeared In 1981. Since then 5 more volumes
have been published In English.
HISTORIA
GENERAL
DE
AFRICA
\I,.|,«W'«I'" l I
OF AFWÇA
àfrifanPldUSttffV.
An intergovernmental conference is held in
Venice to examine the institutional, administrative
and financial aspects of cultural policies. The con¬
ference, which marks the emergence in the late
1960s of the notions of "cultural development"
and the "cultural dimension of development",
leads to a series of regional intergovernmental
conferences: Eurocult (Helsinki, 1972); Asiacult
(Yogyakarta, 1973); Africacult (Accra, 1975);
Americacult (Bogota, 1978), Conference of Arab
Ministers of Culture-Alecso (Baghdad, 1981).
The Convention on the Means of Prohibiting
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property is
adopted to combat a form of smuggling which
has been known to rob entire peoples of their
heritage.
A study programme on Slav cultures is
launched.
Focus on the environment
im
General policy
Portugal announces its withdrawal from
UNESCO (effective end 1972). Portugal resumes
membership in 1974.
The Executive Board adopts a resolution
recognizing the People's Republic of China as
the only legitimate representative of China at
UNESCO. A similar decision had been taken
previously by the United Nations.
Exact and natural sciences
The International Co-ordinating Council of
the Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme
holds its first meeting. MAB is an intergovern¬
mental interdisciplinary programme which seeks
to develop scientific knowledge about the rational
management and conservation of natural
resources. More than 10,000 researchers from
some 110 countries participate in this world-wide
effort to reconcile the demands of development
with respect for the environment and its
resources.
An Intergovernmental Conference for the
establishment of a world science information
system (UNISIST) is organized in conjunction
with ICSU.
Education
International Education Year. Paul Lengrand's
study, An Introduction to Lifelong Education, is
published.
Culture
The first session is held of the International
Scientific Committee for the drafting of a General
History of Africa (39 members, two-thirds of
whom are Africans).

Communication
A survey in 1 1 African countries on the prac¬
tical possibilities of developing a rural press leads
to the launching of a series of rural newspapers
in Africa. The following year, the first rural
newspaper in Bambara is published in Mali with
UNESCO aid.
Protecting the heritage
Wl
General policy
Education
Learning to Be, the report drawn up by the
International Commission on the Development
of Education, under the chairmanship of Edgar
Faure (France) makes a stimulating contribution
to world thinking on education.
The European Centre for Higher Education
is established at Bucharest.
Educational innovation networks for develop¬
ment are launched in Asia (1972); Africa (1976);
Southeast Europe (1977), the Caribbean (1979)
and the Arab States (1981).
Prospects, a quarterly review of education, is
launched. Currently published in 7 languages.
Culture
A ten-year plan for the study of the oral tra¬
dition and the promotion of African languages
is adopted.
The first festival of the arts of the Pacific is
held in Fiji. Others will be held later in 1976
(New Zealand), 1980 (Papua-New Guinea), 1985
(Tahiti), 1988 (Australia). The 6th is scheduled
to take place in 1992 in the Cook Islands, which
became a full Member State of UNESCO in
1989.
Two series of cultural studies on Latin Ame¬
rica are launched: (1) América Latina en su cul¬
tura (6 volumes published to date, on literature,
the plastic arts, architecture, etc.); (2) El mundo
en America Latina (3 vols, on the different ethno-
cultural components of the population of Latin
America).
im
Education
The General Conference adopts the Conven¬
tion concerning the Protection of the World Cul¬
tural and Natural Heritage. The Convention
comes into force in 1975, and becomes opera¬
tional in 1978 when the first 12 sites are put on
the World Heritage List and the first financial
aid is given from the World Heritage Fund.
The German Democratic Republic becomes
UNESCO's 130th Member State.
A reader scans Klbaru ("News"), a rural
newspaper published In the Bambara language In
Mall.
International Book Year is marked by the
launch of a long-term reading and book develop¬
ment programme.
Communication
UNESCO holds its first enquiry into the
international diffusion of television programmes.
Consultants are sent on mission to the Carib¬
bean to launch a multi-media enquiry into the
development of the communication media in the
region. Results include a training programme for
journalists and media technicians and the creation
of a Caribbean news agency (CANA).
A training programme for radio and TV spe¬
cialists in Asia is launched, paving the way for
the establishment of the Asian Institute for
Broadcasting Development. It is later expanded
to include the Pacific region.
A Regional Office for Education in the Arab
States is established in Beirut. Similar Offices
already exist in Dakar, Bangkok and Santiago
(Chile). In this year funding for UNESCO¬
UNDP teacher training projects stands at $22
million.
The International Council for Adult Educa¬
tion (ICAE) is established.
Exact and natural sciences
	.	L	
The first session is held of the Board of the
International Geological Correlation Programme
(IGCP). This programme, executed jointly with
the International Union of Geological Sciences,
seeks to increase our understanding of the Earth's
crust and the origin of natural resources.
An International Manual on Irrigation, Drai¬
nage and Salinity is published jointly with the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO).
Culture
The Director-General appoints a specialist as
his personal representative to report on changes
in the Holy City of Jerusalem since 1968.
A seminar held in Belgrade lays the founda¬
tions of a programme of intercultural studies
which focuses largely on the interaction between
cultures and completes the traditional regional
cultural studies which have long been a feature
of UNESCO's work.
Ornate façades adorn the historic centre of St.
Petersburg, one of the sites on the World
Heritage List.

im 4§ fcfl L
1 1
~-» A V fl
General policy
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow (Senegal) is elected
Director-General.
The General Conference grants observer status
to the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
and to African liberation movements recognized
by the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
The General Conference condemns Israel on
the Jerusalem question.
The refusal of the General Conference to
include Israel in the European region of
UNESCO leads the United States to suspend
payment of its contribution. This situation comes
to an end in 1977 when the arrears are paid.
IGCP
Social sciences
lifts
The logo of the International
Geological Correlation
Programme.
The General Conference adopts the Recom¬
mendation concerning Education for Interna¬
tional Understanding, Co-operation and Peace
and Education relating to Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms, and also the Revised
Recommendation concerning Technical and
Vocational Education.
An interdisciplinary programme on "Man and
his environmentthe Human Habitat" is
launched. This programme includes components
from the social sciences, culture, the cultural
These terracotta dragons
come from Kasongan, Java.
Supporting arts and crafts Is
a priority of the International
Fund for the Promotion of Culture.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow (Senegal),
Director-General of UNESCO
from 1974 to 1987.
heritage, and architecture (the history and evo¬
lution of architectural forms in different cultural
regions, their influence on modern building, etc.)
Culture
An International Fund for the Promotion of
Culture is created, with the aim of promoting
cultural values, aiding artistic creation and
regional and international cultural co-operation.
So far almost 400 projects have been carried out
in 92 Member States for a global total
approaching $3.5 million, financed by voluntary
contributions.
The General Conference authorizes a study
programme on Arctic cultures.
Communication
The notion of the "right to communicate",
formulated in 1969 by Jean d'Arcy, is studied in
UNESCO's programmes. The importance of this
right is largely based on its capacity to condition
the exercise of many individual rights already
established (rights of meeting and association, the
right to belong to a trade union, etc.) and on
progress in communications technology.
Events
His Holiness Pope Paul VI awards the John
XXIII Peace Prize to UNESCO.
y
