An awkward virtue
by Bernard Williams
Peace-lover (1987), a
painted terracotta
sculpture by the Iraqi
artist Dhia Azzawi.
THE difficulty with tolerance is that it
seems to be at once necessary and
impossible. It is necessary where differ¬
ent groups have conflicting beliefs moral,
political or religious and realize that there is
no alternative to their living together; no
alternative, that is to say, except armed
conflict, which will not resolve their disagree¬
ments and will impose continuous suffering.
These are the circumstances in which tol¬
erance is necessary. Yet in those same circum¬
stances it may well seem impossible.
If violence and the breakdown of social
co-operation are threatened in these circum¬
stances, it is because people find others'
beliefs or ways of life deeply unacceptable. In
matters of religion, for instance (which, his¬
torically, was the first area in which the idea
of tolerance was used), the need for tolerance
arises because one of the groups, at least,
thinks that the other is blasphemously, disas¬
trously, obscenely wrong. The members of
one group may also think, very often, that the
leaders or elders of the other group are keep¬
ing the young, or perhaps the women, from
enlightenment and liberation. In this case,
they see it as not merely in their own group's
interest, but in the interest of some in the
other group, that the true religion (as they
believe it to be) should prevail. It is because
the disagreement goes this deep that the par¬
ties to it think that they cannot accept the
existence of each other. We need to tolerate
other people and their ways of life only in
situations that make it very difficult to do so.
Tolerance, we may say, is required only for
the intolerable. That is its basic problem.
We may think of tolerance as an attitude
that a more powerful group, or a majority,
may have (or may fail to have) towards a less
powerful group or a minority. In a country
where there are many Christians and few Mus¬
lims, there may be a question whether the
Christians tolerate the Muslims; the Muslims
do not get the choice, so to speak, whether to
tolerate the Christians or not. If the propor¬
tions of Christians and Muslims are reversed,
so will be the direction of tolerance. This is
how we usually think of tolerance, and it is
natural to do so, because discussions of tol¬
erance have often been discussions of what
laws should exist in particular, laws permit¬
ting or forbidding various kinds of religious
practice and the laws have been determined
by the attitudes of the more powerful group.
But more basically, tolerance is a matter of the
attitudes of any group to another, and does not
concern only the relations of the more
powerful to the less powerful. A group or a
creed can rightly be said to be "intolerant" if it
would like to suppress or drive out others,
even if, as a matter of fact, it has no power to
do so. The real problems of tolerance are to be
found at the level of human relations and of
the attitude of one way of life towards another;
it is not only a question of how the power of
the state is used.
If there is to be a question of tolerance, it is
necessary that there should be something to be
tolerated: there has to be some belief or prac¬
tice or way of life that one group may think
(however fanatically or unreasonably) to be
wrong, or mistaken, or undesirable. If one
group simply hates another, as with a clan ven¬
detta or cases of sheer racism, it is not really
tolerance that is needed: the people involved
need rather to lose their hatred, their prejudice,
or their implacable memories. If we are asking
people to be tolerant, we are asking for

something more complicated than this. They
will indeed have to lose something, their desire
to suppress or drive out the rival belief; but
they will also keep something, their commit¬
ment to their own beliefs, which is what gave
them that desire in the first place. There is a
tension here between one's own commitments,
and the acceptance that other people may have
other and perhaps quite distasteful commit¬
ments: the tension that is typical of tolerance,
and which makes it so difficult.
In practice, of course, there is often a very
thin or vague boundary between mere triba¬
lism or clan loyalty, and differences in outlook
or conviction. As Northern Ireland, for in¬
stance, constantly reminds us, an old enemy
may appear not merely as an enemy but as an
opponent in the struggle for truth and en¬
lightenment.
AN ACTIVE TENSION
Just because tolerance involves this tension
between commitment to one's own outlook
and acceptance of the other's, it is not, in its
true sense, the same as mere weariness or
indifference. After the European wars of reli¬
gion in the sixteenth and seventeenth centu¬
ries had raged for years, people began to
think that it must be better for the different
Christian churches to coexist. Various atti-

tudes went with this development. Some
people became sceptical about the distinctive
claims of any church, and began to think that
there was no truth, or at least no truth dis¬
coverable by human beings, about the validity
of one church's creed as opposed to another's.
Other people began to think that the
struggles had helped them to understand
God's purposes better: that He did not mind
how people worshipped, so long as they did
so in good faith within certain broad Chris¬
tian limits. (In more recent times, a similar
ecumenical spirit has extended beyond the
boundaries of Christianity.)
These two lines of thought in a certain
sense went in opposite directions. One of
them, the sceptical, claimed that there was less
to be known about God's designs than the
warring parties, each with its particular fanati¬
cism, had supposed. The other line of thought,
the broad church view, claimed to have a
better insight into God's designs than the war¬
ring parties had. But in their relation to the
battles of faith, the two lines of thought did
nevertheless end up in the same position, with
the idea that precise questions of Christian
belief did not matter as much as people had
supposed; that less was at stake. This leads to
tolerance as a matter of political practice, and
that is an extremely important result; but as an
attitude, it is less than tolerance. If you do not
care all that much what anyone believes, you
do not need the attitude of tolerance, any more
than you do with regard to other people's
tastes in food.
In many matters, attitudes that are more
tolerant in practice do arise for this reason, that
people cease to think that a certain kind of
behaviour is a matter for disapproval or nega¬
tive judgement at all. This is what is hap¬
pening, in many parts of the world, with
regard to kinds of sexual behaviour that were
previously discouraged and in some cases
legally punished. An extra-marital relationship
or a homosexual ménage may arouse no hostile
comment or reaction, as such things did in the
past. But once again, though this is tolerance as
a matter of practice, the attitude it relies on is
indifference rather than, strictly speaking, tole¬
rance. Indeed, if I and others in the neighbour¬
hood said that we were tolerating the homo¬
sexual relations of the couple next door, our
attitude would be thought to be less than
liberal.
There are no doubt many conflicts and
areas of intolerance for which the solution
should indeed be found in this direction in
the increase of indifference. Matters of sexual
and social behaviour which in smaller and
more traditional societies are of great public
concern will come to seem more a private
matter, raising in themselves no question of
right or wrong. The slide towards indifference
may also provide, as it did in Europe, the only
solution to some religious disputes. Not all
religions, of course, have any desire to convert,
let alone coerce, others. They no doubt have
some opinion or other (perhaps of the "broad
church" type) about the state of truth or error
of those who do not share their faith, but at
any rate they are content to leave those other
people alone. Other creeds, however, are less
willing to allow error, as they see it, to flour¬
ish, and it may be that with them there is no
solution except that which Europe discovered
(in religion, at least, if not in politics) a
decline in enthusiasm. It is important that a
decline of enthusiasm does not take the form
of a movement's merely running out of steam.
As the various sects of Christianity discovered,

Eloge de la liberté
(c. 1926), oil on canvas,
by the German-born
painter Max Ernst.
a religion may have its own resources for
rethinking its relations to others. One rele¬
vant idea, which had considerable influence
in Europe, is that an expansive religion really
wants people to believe in it, but it must rec¬
ognize that this is not a result that can be
achieved by force. The most that force can
achieve is acquiescence and outer conformity.
As Hegel said of the slave's master, the
fanatic is always disappointed: what he
wanted was acknowledgement, but all he can
get is conformity.
THE IDEAL OF AUTONOMY
However, neither a decline in enthusiasm nor a
retreat into private taste can solve all problems.
If everything becomes a matter of private
judgement or taste, people lose a sense of social
identity and of belonging to a community
whose interests reach beyond their own. To
some degree, it is possible for people to belong
to communities bound together by shared
convictions religious convictions, for in¬
stance and tolerance be sustained by a dis¬
tinction between those communities and the
state. The state is not identified with any set of
such beliefs, and does not enforce any of them;
equally, it does not allow any of the groups to
impose its beliefs on the others, though each of
them may of course advocate what it believes.
In the United States, for instance, there is a vir¬
tually universal consensus that supports the
Constitution in allowing no law that enforces
or even encourages any particular religion.
There are many religious groups, and no doubt
many of them have deep convictions, but none 11

0 £#**.< W ¡fr>* ö ¿¿7
s * - X- 57/- o; *, JV rj * * il.m- ¿ ^
> © <£,Vi. "A
;Vf ; !ií4:^
12
4 <J"> i"
V^ -O-- i<£
ít , A ^ X »A > ,. I &
^¿9
A medley of signs
by the Tunisian painter
Gouider Triki
(gouache on paper).
BERNARD WILLIAMS,
Fellow of the British Academy,
has been White's Professor
of Moral Philosophy at
the University of Oxford since
1990. He was Provost of
King's College, Cambridge from
1979 to 1987, and Monroe
Deutsch Professor of Philoso¬
phy at the University of
California, Berkeley, from 1988
to 1990. His many published
works include Ethics and the
Limits of Philosophy (1985),
Utilitarianism and Beyond
(1982), Moral Luck, (1981,
ed with A.K. Sen) and
Descartes: The Project of
Pure Enquiry (1978).
of them wants the state to suppress others, or tions in groups or communities less than the
to allow any of them to suppress others. state, while the acceptance of diversity is
Many people have hoped that this can serve located in the structure of the state itself,
as a general model of the way in which a This is not to say that there is no need of
modern society can resolve the tensions of any shared beliefs. Clearly there must be a
tolerance. On the one hand, there are deeply shared belief in the system itself. The model of
held and differing convictions about moral or a society that is held together by a framework
religious matters, held by various groups of rights and an aspiration towards equal res-
within the society. On the other hand, there is
a supposedly impartial state, which affirms the
rights of every citizen to equal consideration,
including an equal right to form and express
his or her convictions. This is the model of
liberal pluralism. It can be seen as enacting
tolerance. It expresses tolerance's peculiar
combination of conviction and acceptance, by
finding a home for people's various convic-
pect, rather than by a shared body of more spe¬
cific substantive convictions, demands an ideal
of citizenship that will be adequate to bear such
a weight. The most impressive version of that
ideal is perhaps that offered by the tradition of
liberal philosophy flowing from Kant, which
identifies the dignity of the human being with
autonomy. A free person is one who makes his
or her own life and determines his or her own

convictions, and power must be used to make
this possible, not to frustrate it by imposing a
given set of convictions.
This is not a purely negative or sceptical
ideal. If it were, it could not even hope to have
the power to bind together into one society
people with strongly differing convictions. Nor
could it provide the motive power that all tol¬
erant societies need in order to fight, when
other means fail, the intolerant.
There must be, on any showing, limits to
the extent to which the liberal state can be
disengaged on matters of ethical disagreement.
There are some questions, such as that of abor¬
tion, on which the state will fail to be neutral
whatever it does. Its laws may draw distinc¬
tions between different circumstances of abor¬
tion, but in the end it cannot escape the fact
that some people will believe with the deepest
conviction that a certain class of acts should be
permitted, while other people will believe with
equal conviction that those acts should be for¬
bidden. No society can avoid collective and
substantive choices on matters of that kind, and
in that sense, on those issues, there are limits to
tolerance, even if people continue to respect
one another's opinions.
Some critics of liberalism claim that the
liberal pluralist state, as the supposed enact¬
ment of tolerance, does not really exist. What is
happening, they say, is that the state is subtly
enforcing one set of principles (roughly in
A dramatic scene
from the film version of
the famous American
musical IVesi Side Story
(1961), directed by
Robert Wise.
favour of so'cial co-operation and business effi¬
ciency) while the convictions that people pre¬
viously deeply held, on matters of religion or
sexual behaviour or the significance of cultural
experience, dwindle into private tastes. Other
critics will admit that the liberal pluralist state
does exist and to some extent succeeds in
expressing tolerance, but will insist that tol¬
erance is at best one political virtue, to be
weighed against other goods such as the satis¬
factions of a deeply experienced sense of com¬
munity, or of a society in which people's rights
(or the lack of them) are taken for granted,
rather than constantly staked out with fences of
litigation and explicit argument.
I suspect that only the future will show
whether liberal societies can preserve a variety
of strong convictions on important mat¬
ters. Perhaps it will show, too, how much it
matters to humanity if that variety, and so all
but a few convictions, fades away. Maybe tol¬
erance will prove to have been an interim
virtue, serving a period between a past when
no-one had heard of it, and a future in which
no-one will need it. For the present, however, it
is very obvious that there are still fanatical
convictions that are only too anxious to insu¬
late themselves against criticism; and there are
many people whose rights can be asserted only
by unwelcome speech. It does not look as
though the time has come yet in which we can
do without the awkward virtue of tolerance.
Jfc. '" ">
13
