o shadow over sport
by Miguel Angel Bermúdez Escobar
Drawing by Blachon.
LEGEND has it that, once upon a time, a
young hunter from the north of what was
to be known much later as the continent
of America went to ask the medicine man for a
magic formula which would make him the fast¬
est and most cunning hunter in the tribe. The
medicine man told him: "Catch the first
monarch butterfly you see at the beginning of
the summer and rub the gold dust from its
wings on your chest, and you will become as
light as it is." The hunter did as he was told and
was soon darting along as swiftly as the
brilliant-hued butterfly.
We also know that the gladiators of Ancient
Rome ate the raw flesh of wild animals in order
to absorb the animals' strength and ferocity,
and that in Greece the dust and sweat from
wrestlers' bodies were used to make a tonic
prized by their admirers and would-be rivals,
who believed that it would pass on to them the
vitality and bravery of their idols.
We know from accounts left by the early
ßU_.y.>\
31

32
chroniclers of the New World that the pre-
Columbian civilizations were familiar with the
properties of plants used for curative or ritual
purposes. The Mexican Indians enlisted by
Hernán Cortés took peyotl during their
exhausting route marches, and the Indians of
the Andean regions of Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador
and Colombia chewed the leaves of the Ery-
throxylon coca shrub in order to stave off
hunger and fatigue. Coca leaves were so widely
used that they eventually became a form of cur¬
rency known as "cocada".
During the Second World War, special
rations were distributed to troops in order to
help them fight cold and fatigue and to prepare
for combat. Cannabis and other psychotropic
substances were widely used by American sol¬
diers in Viet Nam.
It is not known precisely when these prac¬
tices spread to sport although it is certain that
people in every age have sought to improve their
performance and sharpen their physical and
mental faculties. Certainly they have become
increasingly sophisticated with the progress of
science, and notably with the development of
amphetamines and anabolizing drugs.
A CONJURING TRICK
Even today, it is not easy to draw the line
between the physiological action of substances
which are capable of stimulating the body's
functions, and what is known as the placebo
effect the psychological impact and the ele¬
ment of auto-suggestion that accompany all
forms of medication.
The magical power of primitive rituals is not
altogether absent from modern sport. Trainers
and athletes alike admit that psychological
factors such as self-confidence, motivation, and
the will to win, all have a decisive influence on
results. "Neutral" foodstuffs, vitamins or injec¬
tions may have an extremely beneficial effect if
competitors are convinced that they are effec¬
tive. Substances of this kind are sometimes used
to upset other competitors, as when athletes in
the United States team at the Olympic Games
in Mexico City made a great show of inhaling
draughts of oxygen and when, in one particular
case, a runner put his opponents off their stride
before the start of a race just by lifting a per¬
fectly harmless pill to his mouth.
The result of a sporting competition depends
on a range of factors, including the athletes'
physical condition, their standard of training,
tactical skills, and psychological state. Nowa¬
days, when the results achieved in competition
are often only a hair's breadth apart, electronic
devices have to be used to measure them.
Hence, it is hard to know which of these factors
is responsible for a winning performance, and it
is even harder to tell whether the additive effect
of doping really has anything to do with it. And
supposing that doping does help to improve the
The American runner
Florence Griffith-Joyner
(far right) hoping for victory
before the start of the
women's 400-metre relay at
the Seoul Olympics, 1988.
MIGUEL ANGEL
BERMÚDEZ ESCOBAR,
of Colombia, is a specialist in
sports administration, on
which he lectures at the
University of the Rosary,
Bogota. Director-General of
his country's Institute of
Youth and Sport and vice-
president of the
Intergovernmental Committee
for Physical Education and
Sport (IGCPES), he has
played an important role in
the development of sport,
especially cycling, in
Colombia.
athlete's performance, how is it possible to
distinguish the placebo effect from that of the
chemical substance itself?
I am convinced that if it were possible to
isolate the effect of each of these factors,
doping would be found to be so counter-pro¬
ductive that no sane athlete or trainer would
follow a practice that runs counter to ethics and
is bad for the health.
Victory at any price
We all want to win because these days victory is
the key to happiness, to the earthly paradise.
Success at all costs is the motto of our modern
world.
It would have been surprising if sport had
managed to steer clear of this obsession. The fact
is that the determination to win at any price has
corrupted the sense of sportsmanship which
Baron Pierre de Coubertin wished to infuse into
the Olympic Games when he said in 1908 that
the main thing was not to win but to take part.
Why does this mentality exist? Is it because
of the sheer pleasure that people feel at win¬
ning, at coming first? We all know that this is

not so. The great principles that informed sport
only a few decades ago have given way to less
noble ones that are more in tune with the
consumer society in which we live.
Sporting success now offers material
rewards that bear no relation to the benefits of
sport as visualized by the Ancient Greeks or by
those who, with Pierre de Coubertin, laid the
foundations of modern sport. In addition, some
of those who profit from the exploits of ath¬
letes urge them to use, to the detriment of their
health, drugs that are capable of boosting their
short-term performance but invariably take a
heavy toll later on.
These pressures, coupled with personal
ambition and the demands of team-mates, sport¬
ing and commercial organizations, and society at
large, come to carry more weight than warnings
about the risks of doping and even the prohibi¬
tions spelt out in the rule-book.
An ethical problem
Sporting champions, then, are faced with the
awkward dilemma of whether to use drugs or
other stimulants to improve their performance
or whether to abstain and accept that their
opponents who do use them will have the edge
over them.
The advocates of doping use a battery of
arguments. They claim that the consequences
of drug-taking are less serious than the irrevers¬
ible and sometimes even mortal injuries caused
by the practice of sport itself, or that there is no
difference between taking drugs to cure illness
and using them to improve performance in
sport. None of these arguments is very convinc¬
ing. All of them conveniently gloss over the
ethical dimension of the problem.
Doping, like any other fraudulent practice
that purports to give an artificial boost to
people's physical potential, runs counter to the
very nature of sport, since it denies athletes a
chance to excel through their own unaided
endeavours. By giving an unfair advantage to
one competitor over the others, it violates the
elementary rules of competitive sport. It cor¬
rupts athletes morally and physically, under¬
mines their mental balance and the image
society has of them. It sullies the image of sport
and casts a shadow over sporting events. O 33
