UNESCO'S FIRST 45 YEARS (M \l)
by Michel Conil Lacoste
The impact of the Experiment!
World Literacy Programme
im
General policy
The United Nations University is established
in Tokyo under the joint auspices of the United
Nations and UNESCO.
A conference is held in Pans on the educational
problems of the 25 least developed countries.
A group of experts commissioned to evaluate
funttional literacy work carried out in 11 Member
States since 1967 presents its report, which is pub¬
lished the following year by UNESCO and the
United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP). Its conclusion: the Experimental World
Literacy Programme has had mixed results, but
has yielded important lessons for the future.
Exact and natural sciences
The Intergovernmental Co-ordinating Council
of the international Hydrological Programme
(IHP) meets for the first time. The IHP follows up
the work of the International Hydrological
Decade, putting emphasis on methodology and
training in the rational management of water
resources.
A World Network of JVIicro biological Resource
Centres (MIRCENs) is established, with branches
in Bangkok, Brisbane, Dakar, Guatemala City,
Cairo, Nairobi and Porto Alegre (Brazil).
A meeting of experts on the ethical problems
posed by recent advances in biology is held at
Varna in Bulgaria. Btology and Ethws, a publication
based on the proceedings of the meeting, marks
a notable advance in thinking on the subject.
Culture
An Advisory Committee for the Study of
Oceanic Cultures is set up to promote research
into the cultures of the Pacific.
sconces «t»«"*^
m
General policy
The General Conference, held in Nairobi, is
opened by Jomo Kenyatta, President of the
Republic of Kenya. It decides to create a Drafting
and Negotiating Group to seek consensus solu¬
tions to sensitive questions.
The Conference adopts a Medium-Term Plan
for 1977-1982.
A General Information Programme is inau¬
gurated to regroup activities relating to the
exchange of scientific and technological informa¬
tion, covered by UNISIST, and those dealing
with the planning of national library, archive and
documentation infrastructures, covered by
NATIS (National Information Systems).
Education
The General Conference adopts a Recommen¬
dation on the development of adult education
that enshrines the concept of lifelong education,
defined as follows, that UNESCO has helped to
propagate: "Education and learning, far from
being limited to the period of attendance at
school, should extend throughout life, include
all skills and branches of knowledge, use all pos¬
sible means, and give the opportunity to all
people for full development of the personality."
The first international conference of ministers
and senior civil servants responsible for physical
education and sport in the training of young
people is held in Paris.

Exact and natural sciences
After 12 years' work, UNESCO completes
publication of the Geological World Atlas, pre¬
pared in collaboration with the International
Geological Congress's Commission for the Geo¬
logical Map of the World.
Social sciences
A meeting of experts on inter-regional co¬
operation in the social sciences is held in Paris.
Culture
In Nairobi, the General Conference adopts a
Recommendation concerning popular participa¬
tion in cultural life.
An advisory committee for Arab culture is
established.
Communication
San José, the capital of Costa Rica, hosts the
first in a series of regional intergovernmental con¬
ferences on communications policies. Others will
later be held m Kuala Lumpur (1979), Yaounde
(1980), and Khartoum (1987).
UNESCO contributes to the establishment in
Nairobi of the African Council on Communi¬
cation Education. Initially grouping 19 institu¬
tions, the Council now has 65 members.
UNESCO uses a communications satellite for
the first time during a session of the General
Conference.
Events
Two Nobel Peace Prize winners, Willy Brandt
and Philip Noel-Baker, and Alfred Kastler, Nobel
laureate for physics, take part in a Round Table
organized by UNESCO on the theme of "Cul¬
tural and Intellectual Co-operation and the New
International Economic Order". Other par¬
ticipants included Nancy Reeves, Tewfik al-
Hakim, P.-M. Henry, Samir Amin, Jean d'Or-
messon, Yannis Xenakis, Buckminster Fuller and
Peter Ustinov.
Opposite page, from top:
Mauritania's Zravié dam Is one of
several that liave been repaired by
the iViauritanian rurai engineering
service with the aid of a joint
OPEC/UNESCO project; French edition
of a worl< published by UNESCO on
the techniques of information and
documentation (2nd edition, revised
and expanded, 1990); a poster of the
International Fund for Physical
Education and Sport (1985).
This page, from top:
Han Suyin, writer; Willy Brandt,
politician; Iannis Xenal<is, composer.
Wl
Education
An Intergovernmental Conference on
Environmental Education is held in Tbilisi,
USSR, under the joint auspices of UNESCO and
the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP).
Culture
UNESCO contributes to the Festival of
African Arts (FESTAC) in Lagos.
Communication
The Asia-Pacific Institute for Broadcasting
Development is established in Kuala Lumpur
(Malaysia) to train broadcasters.
The International Commission for the Study
of Communication Problems starts work under
the presidency of Ireland's Sean MacBride. Its
report. Many Voices, One World (1980), will be
published in 17 languages.
Events
A Round Table on "The Challenge of the
Year 2000" is attended by Han Suyin, Michel
Jobert, André Fontaine, Prem Kirpal, Alicia
Penalba and others.
im
General policy
UNESCO has 145 Member States, 129 of
them with National Commissions.
The first World Congress of UNESCO Clubs
is held at UNESCO's Paris headquarters.
Education
A Regional Centre for Higher Education in
Latin America and the Caribbean is established
in Caracas.
The General Conference sets up an Inter¬
governmental Committee for Physical Education
and Sport to orient and supervise UNESCO acti¬
vités in this field. The Committee adopts an inter¬
national Charter and creates a fund to promote
the development of sport and physical educatiim.
Working in collaboration with the International
Council of Sport Science and Physical Education
and the International Council for Health, Phys¬
ical Education and Recreation, UNESCO focuses
on the role of sport in education and the role
of education in sport.
Exact and natural sciences
UNESCO completes publication of the Soil
Map ofthe World, the fruit of 17 years' work in
collaboration with the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations.
An Intergovernmental Conference on Strate¬
gics and Policies for Informatics is held at Tor-
rcmolinos (Spain).

L* eft, a drawing
"^ommissioned from the
""tomanian-born French
"''rtist André François for
U^INESC0 poster on the
""licit transfer of cultural
P"iroperty.
'"llight, the Egyptian socia
><=cientist Aziza Hussein.
Teaching Human Rights
Social sciences
To mark the 30th anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, an international
congress on the the teaching of human rights is
held in Vienna. Panels of experts meeting in Í979
and 1982 work with the International Institute
for Human Rights, based at Strasbourg (France),
to develop a programme. The plan eventually
adopted by UNESCO includes a section on
women's rights.
Culture
The General Conference approves the statutes
of the Intergovernmental Committee for
Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to
its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case
of Illicit Appropriation.
A meeting of scholars is held in Port-au-Prince
(Haïti) on the African slave trade from the 15th
to the 19th century.
The General Conference decides on the prepa¬
ration of a History ofthe Civilizations ofCentral
Asia.
Communication
After several years of difficuh discussions, the
General Conference adopts the Declaration on
Fundamental Principles concerning the Contri¬
bution of the Mass Media to Strengthening Peace
and International Understanding, to the Promo¬
tion of Human Rights and to Countering
Racialism, Apartheid and Incitement to War.
A UNESCO-UNDP Programme leads to the
creation of an Institute of Mass Communications
at the University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Events
A Round Table is held at UNESCO head¬
quarters in Paris to commemorate the 23rd cente¬
nary of the death of Aristotle. Participants include
Helene Ahrweiler, M. Arkoun, J. Beaufret, J.
Berque, J. Dausset, D. Dubarle, J. Merleau-Ponty,
E. Moutsopoulos, R. Thorn. A notable contri¬
bution is made by Jacques Lacan.
im
Exact and natural sciences
Two reports summarizing the existing state of
knowledge about tropical forest ecosystems and
tropical grazing-land ecosystems are published
under the joint auspices of UNESCO, the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations.
The International Soil Museum (now the
International Soil Reference and Information
Centre) is officially opened at Wageningen in the
Netherlands. It was established as a result of co¬
operation between UNESCO, the Netherlands
government and the FAO.
Socta) sciences
A meeting of experts held in Quito (Ecuador)
to study "Research on the Idea of Integrated
Development" leads to the publication of A new
concept ofdevelopment: basic tenets, by Francois
Perroux, in 1981.
Culture
The editorial committee of a series on studies
on Different Aspects ofIslamic Culture, financed
by a donation from the Islamic Call Society,
holds its first meeting.
The consultative committee for the study of
Malay cultures is enlarged to address the cultures
of Southeast Asia.
Communication
UNESCO and the International Telecommu¬
nications Union (ITU) set up a working party
to examine international telecommunications
charges, a common obstacle to the exchange of
information.
Events
A Peace Forum organized by UNESCO and
the International Council for Philosophy and
Humanistic Studies brings together Yevgeny
Yevtushenko, Aziza Hussein, Yuri Zhukov, Sean
MacBride, Daniel Oduber, Edgar Faure, Philip
Noel-Baker, M.L. Mehrotra, Helen Vlachos and
others.
Within the framework of International Anti-
Apartheid Year, Miriam Makeba sings in
UNESCO's main conference hall.
General policy
At the 21st session of the General Conference,
held in Belgrade, Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
becomes the fir.si Director-General to be re¬
elected unanimously.
For 1980, UNESCO spends $61,510,230 of
UNDP funds to the benefit of its Member States.

The General Conference examines the case of
a staff member prevented from returning to his
post at UNESCO on political grounds, and
adopts a resolution on the independence of the
international civil service.
Education
The International Panel on the Future
Development of Education holds its first meeting
in Paris. Participating bodies include the Inter¬
national Association of Universities and the
World Confederation of Organizations of the
Teaching Profession.
Exact and natural sciences
Eight major regional scientific projects are
launched on: applied biotechnology and microbi¬
ology (Africa and the Arab states); technological
research, training and development (South-east
Asia); geology for development (Africa); the
management of water resources in rural areas
(Latin America; the Arab States); the integrated
management of humid tropical zones (inter¬
regional); arid and semi-arid regions (inter¬
regional) and coastal ecosystems (inter-regional).
Social sciences
A World Congress on Disarmament Educa¬
tion is held in Paris.
A symposium is held in Paris on Human
Rights in Urban Areas (the same theme will be
discussed again in Cairo in 1982).
A meeting of experts on Teaching and
Research in Philosophy in Africa is held in
Nairobi (similar meetings will be held for Asia
in 1983 and for Latin America in 19851.
Culture
The General Conference adopts the Recom¬
mendation concerning the Status of the Artist.
The Nubian campaign comes to an end with
the inauguration of the temples of the island of
Philae on their new site on the nearby island of
Agilkia.
The first volumes of the. General History of
Africa are published: Methodology and African
Prehistory and Ancient Civilizations ofAfrica. Six
further volumes are planned.
Controversy over Communication
Communication
Following the series of regional intergovern¬
mental conferences on communications policies,
and in line with the directives of the 20th ses¬
sion of the General Conference, UNESCO con¬
venes a special meeting of Member States, the
International Conference for Communication
Development (DEVCOM), in Paris.
Taking up a DEVCOM recommendation, the
21st session of the General Conference decides
to launch an International Programme for the
Development of Communication (IPDC), the
goal of which is to correct the imbalances, above
all between North and South, in communication
infrastructures and capacities.
The General Conference invites the Director
General to carry out studies relating to the estab¬
lishment of a new world information and com¬
munication order. Two Round Tables on this
theme, jointly organized by UNESCO and the
United Nations, will be held at Igls (Austria) in
1983 and in Copenhagen three years later. A long
and stormy public controversy, partly rooted in
misunderstandings, will ensue until the General
Conference proposes a new communications
policy based on a broader consensus in 1989.
Events
Pope John Paul II visits UNESCO head¬
quarters in Pans. In his address he says, "Yes,
the future of mankind depends on culture! Yes,
world peace depends on Ûie primacy ofthe Spirit!
Yes, the peaceful future of mankind depends on
love! Your contribution ... is vital. It consists
in adopting the correct approach to the problems
with which you have to wrestle. My final word
is this: Do not abandon the struggle! Continue
thout ceasing
A series of conferences on Islam, philosophy
and the sciences are held in Paris.
Left, inauguration of the monuments of the island
of Philae (Egypt) after they had been transferred
to a new site.
Above: Bhutan's radio service, which went on the
air in the 1970s, has received aid from UNESCO
in the framework of the international Programme
for the Development of Communication (IPDC).
TO BE CONTINUED
