Raising our voices
A leading feminist sets forth her views on the eve
of the Earth Summit
Women play an important
role in rural development in
Guinea.
"Women have been trained to speak softly and carry
a lipstick. Those days are over."
BELLA ABZUG
A former member of the U.S. Congress, a
lawyer and feminist activist, Bella Abzug has
become a leading advocate of environmental secu¬
rity and a more economically just world. As spe¬
cial adviser to Maurice Strong, the Secretary-
General of the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development (UNCED), she
is encouraging women around the world to speak
up and take part in the Conference's decision¬
making processes.
"I want to see women remobilize on a global
scale," she says. "Women are the very core of
the environment, which is the sine qua non of
existence. Women's knowledge, skills, experience
and instincts have not been taken into consider¬
ation. Yet women, who constitute 50 per cent
of the world's population, are also the majority
of the world's food producers80 per cent in
Africa, 60 per cent in Asia, 40 per cent in Latin
Americaas well as its major users and con¬
sumers. They are the most concerned about
threats to the health of our planet, the most active
in cleaning up man-made messes. But women
must be more than global housekeepers, and until
they are treated equally with men nothing will
change.
"I believe women will bring a new vision,
with new perspectives as to how and what to
change. It's easier with women because they are
not part of what has taken place. They are totally
unshackled, not only by lack of ownership but
by lack of involvement in decisions to date. They
are freer and more independent.
"So we are going to strengthen the existing
networks of women (of which there are many),
not just for the Rio conference but for the next
century. Things have to change from the bottom
up. I'm involved in organizing international

The logo of the World Women's
Congress for a Healthy
Planet, held in Miami (USA) in
November 1991.
conferences where women come who act locally
even while they learn to think globally. I am
going to tell people about the need to create a
movement to change the world and the condi¬
tions for women's self-empowerment.
"The Miami Congress (see box this page) gave
women significant strength and a sense of them¬
selves. It brought women together to talk about
the interconnection of hunger, disease, poverty,
maldevelopment, misallocation of resources,
illiteracy, war and peace. None of this is in isola¬
tion. Environment and development are
connectedsustainable development is only pos¬
sible in a sound environment. So the agenda we
are launching for the twenty-first century is for
a world in which we settle disputes peacefully,
give priority to health and conquering poverty,
disease and illiteracy; in which people are housed
and have food and other securities; in which
women share equally with men the power to
decide what the world looks like, a peaceful
world in which to educate our children in an
environmentally sound planet.
"We have a message for the Heads of State
who will attend the Earth Summit. Our message
is very simple. We are here to say that this mad
race towards self-destruction must stop and the
great military powers must show the way by
working much harder for peace and disarmament.
We are here to say that no country has the right
to call itself a democracy when it denies equal par¬
ticipation in policy-making to women. We are
here to say that women must be represented at
every level, that our exclusion from economic
and political power must end.
"I believe that the political empowerment of
women may well provide the missing part of the
equation that is needed to restore the health of
our planet. Over the years, women have lobbied,
marched, toiled, pleaded, prayedthere was
always music and dancing. But for some time this
has stopped. It is now time to start up the music
again."
The World Women's
Congress for
a Healthy Planet
Following on from the Global Assembly of Women
and the Environment (see page 27), the World
Women's Congress for a Healthy Planet, held in
Miami the following week, brought together more
than 1,200 women from 83 countries. The Congress
was organized by the International Policy Action Com¬
mittee, a body created by Bella Abzug. It summed
up its deliberations in an Action Agenda for the 2 1st
Century, which it described as "a challenge to women
and men to work together to create a safe and sus¬
tainable future." Some of the major points on the.
Agenda were:
To demand full and equal participation for women
and men in decision-making and policy implementa¬
tion at international, national and community levels.-
To recommend that all public policy-making groups
contain no more than 60 per cent and no less than
40 per cent of either sex.
To work for adoption of an International Code of
Environmental Conduct by business and industry as
well as by governments and UN agencies.
To demand time-use studies of women's work,
including housework and care of children and the
elderly.
To urge governments to agree to a timetable for
implementation of full-cost accounting that would
include environmental and social costs in both
national accounting systems and in calculating sub¬
sidies and incentives in international trade.
To demand an end to nuclear testing and the dis¬
mantling of existing nuclear weapons.
To demand the creation of gender-balanced
national civilian commissions to open all military
activities and expenditure, including research and
development, to public scrutiny.
To demand that armies be used as environmental
protection corps to monitor and repair damage to
natural systems.
To support indigenous people's efforts to protect
their natural environments.
To pledge to use women's consumer power to boy¬
cott businesses and institutions that are not eco-
conscious, and to support and commend those that
are.
To encourage global networks of women to facili¬
tate the analysis of consumer goods, from the extrac¬
tion of the raw materials through the production
process to their use and disposal.
To promote environmental ethics education in
schools.
To call for the creation of a permanent gender-
balanced UN Commission on Environment and
Development to promote environmental awareness
and to investigate complaints.
To call on world leaders attending the 1992 Earth
Summit to sign a Global Climate Change Convention,
with industrialized countries making a minimum com¬
mitment to a 20% reduction of carbon dioxide by
the year 2000. 37
