America and
Russia: dialogue
from a distance
By Vera Kuteischikova
Surprising affinities link two
regions separated by geography
and history
THE lands of America set alight by the
Conquest were still blazing when, at the
other end of the world, in distant Mus¬
covy, a theologian by the name of Maximus the
Greek (1475-1556) had already recounted the
exploits of the Spanish and Portuguese. His
information was inaccurate, to say the least, and
he did not even mention the name of Columbus.
Nevertheless, he grasped the significance of the
Discovery and predicted that a new human com¬
munity would emerge from the coming-together
of the Europeans and the indigenous peoples.
News from America was slow to reach
Russia and what little there was came piece¬
meal from European sources. It was not until
the eighteenth century, during the reign of
*r:±r>

Peter the Great, that the Russians set up trading
links with the American territories and came
into contact with the inhabitants of California,
which at that time was a province of the Vice-
royalty of New Spain. They were thus able to
add to their geographical knowledge and gain a
clearer picture of America.
Russian society was above all interested in
the Conquest as an event of global significance,
and it was as such that it came to feature in the
works of such leading authors as the poet and
scientist Mikhail Lomonosov (1711-1765), the
dramatist Aleksandr Sumarokov (1718-1778),
the great fable-writer Ivan Krylov (1769-1844),
and the poet Gavrila Derzhavin (1743-1816).
Sumarokov puts forward a highly personal
view of the Conquest in his "Conversation in
the Kingdom of the Dead", consisting of a dia¬
logue between Cortés and Montezuma, in
which the conquistador claims that he owes his
victory to the hatred for the Aztec emperor felt
by his own' subjects. The moral which the
author, as a freethinker and fierce critic of
absolutism, draws is perfectly clear: rulers must
take care not to lapse into tyranny.
BOLIVAR'S HAT
These eighteenth-century writings bleed with
compassion for enslaved and oppressed indige¬
nous peoples. They denounce the shackles of
colonialism, but what their authors are really
doing is to use America to point an accusing
finger at Russian serfdom, which is likened to the
institution of slavery in the American colonies.
This analogy is also drawn in the celebrated
Journey from St. Petersburg to Moscow, by
Aleksandr Radischev (1749-1802), the first plea
for the abolition of serfdom in a country where
two-thirds of the population were deprived of
all rights. Inione passage, Radischev recalls the
summer afternoons when he lingered on the
quayside, watching the ships from America that
had brought back their rich cargoes of sugar,
coffee, dyes and other precious fruits of the
earth, still damp from the sweat, blood and tears
of the people who had grown them. In this
connection, the author makes an oblique allu¬
sion whose meaning only later becomes plain,
when he writes: "Remember, as a friend once
told me to do, that the coffee you pour in your
cup and the sugar you dissolve in it were the
cause of the martyrdom of your fellow-men and
the reason for untold torture and outrage".
Radischev's pamphlet incurred the wrath of
the Empress Catherine II and he was hauled
before the courts. It was only then that the
name of the unknown friend who had
denounced the fruits grown with the sweat and
blood of the American slaves became known.
Radischev admitted that he had drawn inspira¬
tion from the Philosophical and Political His¬
tory of the Settlements and Trade of the Euro¬
peans in the East and West Indies, which had
been published in 1770 by the abbé Guillaume
Raynal, a French philosopher. It is hardly sur¬
prising that Radischev should have referred to a
thinker of the French Enlightenment, since
Russian culture in the eighteenth century was
profoundly influenced by that movement and
embraced the ideas of Voltaire, Rousseau,
Montesquieu and Marmontel, among others.
The Enlightenment reached Spanish America
at the end of the eighteenth century, at the very
outset of the anti-colonialist movement, which
made Raynal's work the spearhead of its struggle
against Spain. Here again, France was the go-
between in the dialogue that was established
between Russia and the Ibero-American world.
In Russia, Simón Bolívar became an almost
legendary figure and enjoyed a vast reputation,
which gave rise to a widespread fashion for a
type of broad-brimmed hat imported from
France. This exotic headgear is even mentioned
in one of the masterworks of Russian literature,
Eugene Onegin, the verse novel by Aleksandr
Pushkin (1799-1837). The structuralist and
semiologist Yuri Lotman has pointed out that
the hat, which had been taken as a symbol by
the Spanish American rebels, was used for the
same purpose by the French liberals and was
sported by the freethinkers and dandies of St.
Petersburg, where it was known as a bolivar.
FROM THE RUSSIAN STEPPES TO
THE ALTIPLANO
Later, Russian visitors to America were particu¬
larly struck by the originality of the continent.
Siglos y hombres
Siguiendo
las huellas
de Colón
Relatos de escritores, científicos
y viajeros rusos y soviéticos
sobre América Latina
; 5?*,'/''
"In the footsteps of
Columbus. Latin America as
seen by Russian and Soviet
writers, scientists and
travellers". A book published
In Spanish in Moscow in
1990.
33

34
However, their fascination with the splendour
of the landscape did not prevent them from
voicing their opposition to slavery. The exalta¬
tion of nature and the urge for freedom that
were the characteristic features of nineteenth-
century Romanticism profoundly influenced
their view of the Latin American world.
As well as the logs kept by mariners, which
are full of vivid although necessarily brief des¬
criptions, there are more substantial accounts
whose authors have not so much attempted to
describe the landscapes as to analyse their views
on the new social, political and ethnic issues
which they encountered.
Aleksandr Rotchev, a writer who visited
several Caribbean countries at this period, saw for
himself the danger which North American expan¬
sionism represented for Central America and was
appalled at "the cruelty of the customs and the
intolerable treatment which the North Americans
meted out to the natives of the country".
In the meantime, at the other end of the
continent, Russian travellers repeatedly
expressed their astonishment at the gauchos. In
his "Voyage across the pampa of Buenos Aires",
Platon Chikhachov, who crossed the vast plains
of La Plata, admitted to feeling a mixture of
admiration and fear for these proud, intrepid
horsemen, with their haughty independence.
The accounts of Russian travellers in the New
World are so varied that it is difficult to draw any
general conclusions from them. However, nearly
all of them, no matter how great their sense of
wonderment at the landscapes, were unable to
stifle their nostalgia for their far-off homeland.
There are insistent echoes of the siren call of
Russia in "Through South America", a monu¬
mental work by the writer and diplomat Alek¬
sandr Ionin, who lived in the region from 1892 to
1896. Ionin had a sharp and enquiring mind and
described his experiences with a somewhat lofty
detachment, although without losing sight of the
finer points of detail. However, the interest and
originality of this major work lies in the ideas he
developed in it. These are encapsulated in his
prose poem "Lake Titicaca", in which he departs
from the Eurocentric view of history. At an alti¬
tude of 4,000 metres, beside a lake close to the
sky, he experiences a kind of revelation. As he
contemplates the natural wonders, he suddenly
realizes that nature and culture are inseparably
linked and that rational thinking stands
condemned because it has been unwilling to
recognize that fact. He writes: "I then saw that
my native steppes, like these high plateaux, do
not conform to the theories of life drawn from
the writings of the Old World and that they
both have to inspire us to look for new ways of
thinking and reasoning."
Another illustrious visitor to the New World
was the Symbolist poet Konstantin Balmont
(1867-1942), who arrived in Mexico in 1905 and
At his dacha, the Russian
writer llya Ehrenburg (1891-
1967) with his friend the
Brazilian novelist Jorge
Amado.
VERA KUTEISCHIKOVA,
of the CIS, ¡s a literary
historian and a specialist in
Latin American studies. A
member of the Academy of
Sciences and of the Gorky
Institute of World Literature,
Moscow, she is also co-
director of the Latin American
Literature Project of the
American Council of Learned
Societies of the USA. She is
the author of many articles
and books, notably on
twentieth-century Latin-
American fiction.

An illustration for the first
chapter of Eugene Onegin
drawn by Pushkin in a letter
written to his brother Lev in
November 1824.
immersed himself in the atmosphere of the
ancient Indian civilization which, he confessed,
filled him with "feelings of magic". Like Ionin,
he calls on his readers to acknowledge the limita¬
tions of the self-absorbed European view of
things and urges them "to look out on plains and
valleys, not from little Mont Blanc swarming
with tourists but from the volcanic heights of
gigantic Chimborazo and its snow-capped peaks,
at the feet of which the Peruvians built temples of
gold to the Sun and of silver to the Moon".
A NEW DIALOGUE
At the end of the nineteenth century, what had
hitherto been an embryonic dialogue really
began to take shape with the publication of the
classics of Russian literature in Latin America,
where the works of Turgenev, Tolstoy and
Gorky aroused considerable interest. The Latin
Americans discovered the harsh predicament of
the Russian people, weighed down by the
burdea of social and spiritual bondage, and suc¬
cumbed to the attraction of the "naturalist mysti¬
cism" in which "these vast and mysterious- fast¬
nesses" are steeped. The Venezuelan writer
Arturo Uslar Pietri sees the Russian people as
having "secret affinities in terms of their sensibi
lity, fatalistic outlook and taste for the tragic",
which links them to the people of Latin America.
It is perhaps in these affinities that we should
look for an explanation for the extraordinary
commotion which the Russian Revolution of
1917 caused in Latin America. It was not by
chance that Pablo Neruda and Jorge Amado
should have been the first to acquaint the Rus¬
sians with their wild continent and its tragic
beauty and life-enhancing energy. Russian rea¬
ders were enthralled by Amado's Terras do
Sem-Fin (The Violent Land) and moved by the
exuberant poetry of Neruda's Canto General,
in whose stanzas the entire history of Latin
America unfolds.
The creative freedom of the new novel, as
practised by Alejo Carpentier, Carlos Fuentes,
Mario Vargas Llosa, Julio Cortázar and Gabriel
García Márquez, was a source of fascination to
Soviet writers. Chingiz Aïtmatov said that,
after having read García Márquez, he could
no longer write in the same way as before.
Whereas some fifty years earlier Latin Ameri¬
cans felt a spiritual kinship with the characters
of the Russian novel, Russians now see some¬
thing of themselves reflected in the Latin
American novel.
The publication of the Russian translation
of El señor Presidente (The President) by
Miguel Angel Asturias, with its gripping por¬
trait of a small country ground down by dicta¬
torship, alerted us to the machinery of death
operated by tyrannical Latin American
regimes. In the 1970s, three other novels on the
same subject had a resounding success. These
were El Recurso del método (Reasons of State)
by Alejo Carpentier, Yo, el Supremo (I, the
Chief) by Augusto Roa Bastos, and El Otoño
del Patriarca (The Autumn of the Patriarch) by
Gabriel García Márquez. No matter how
exotic Russian readers may have found the cha¬
racters and settings of these novels, they still
saw something chillingly familiar in their histo¬
rical plots and the unfolding of the action.
The Autumn of the Patriarch has been read
all over the world, but the Russians were the
only ones to shed tears when they recognized the
features of the diabolical and insane dictator as
those of the totalitarian regime that was tram¬
pling them underfoot. Only the Russians or
rather the Soviets have had to submit to myth-
making and mendacity raised to a system of
government.
The phenomenal success of García Márquez
in our country reminds me of the words of the
Russian linguist and literary critic Mikhail
Bakhtin, who claimed that "a culture only reveals
itself in its full magnitude and depth when it is
looked at by another culture". He also stressed
that dialogue between cultures is the driving
force behind the spiritual progress of mankind.
This idea is a very topical one for, as humanity
approaches the five-hundredth anniversary of the
encounter between two worlds, it is at last begin¬
ning to realize that the world to which it belongs
is actually one and the same. O 35
