Between two
worlds
by Tahar Ben Jelloun
The uncomfortably acute
perceptions of the intellectual
who is an intermediary between
two cultures
IN 1967, the Moroccan historian Abdallah
Laraoui published in Paris a book called
L'Idéologie arabe contemporaine ("Arab
Ideology Today"). In it he formulated the
problem of the Arab quest for identity in these
terms: "For three-quarters of a century, one
question has absorbed the Arabs: 'Who are the
others and who am I?'. . . Who are the non-
Arabs? They long went by the names of Chris¬
tianity and Europe. Their new title is at once
vague and precise: the West".
Twenty-five years on, the question is still as
topical as ever. It was brutally. restated by the 27

28
Gulf crisis and the subsequent war. Some have
answered it by rejecting everything associated
with the non-Arab world, and have gone so far
as to blame all the ills of the Arab world on the
West. Others have known the attraction and
fascination of the West but also its capacity to
repress, and to cultivate indifference and even
ignorance.
Those who are considered as links or inter¬
mediaries between the Arab world and the



West are in an unenviable position. They do
not stand between the two camps but rather
have one foot in each, casting a critical eye in
both directions.
The uneasy world of the Arab
intellectual
The days when Arab intellectuals were fasci¬
nated by Europe are over. Now the relation¬
ship is more complex. They are preoccupied
with Europe's future, with its weaknesses. As
for the Arab world, they feel a responsibility
towards it, but live in uncomfortable isolation
from it.
Arab intellectuals living in Europe today
feel uneasy. Perhaps this is a necessary stage in
developing a clearer sense of their own identity.
For many of the values born of the French
Revolution have become universal, as part of a
process that is making ever greater headway.
Now people around the world take to the
streets to fight for freedom and democracy as
well as for bread. Europe no longer has a
monopoly of values to which much of the
world now stakes a claim.
These intellectuals must constantly rectify
their vision of the world if they are not to be
abandoned by their own folk while at the same
time feeling alienated from a Europe that they
find disturbing. It is not a comfortable situation
to be in. But the tension it creates is interesting
insofar as it obliges thinkers constantly to take
stock, like photographers recording their sur¬
roundings.
In Europe Arab intellectuals have an oppor¬
tunity to express their individuality, to test
their subjectivity and affirm their uniqueness,
for the individual, both as a unique entity and
as a value, enjoys an unchallenged status there
that is linked to the rule of law. Until the coun¬
tries of the southern Mediterranean arrive at
the same situation, the individual will not
achieve recognition there.
Yet at the very time when the emergence of
the individual is a rallying cry in the Third
World, the individual is being increasingly
demeaned as a value in the West. A selfish indi¬
vidualism is gaining ground. A chill wind is
blowing as people become more and more self-
absorbed and unresponsive. This tendency can
be seen in the way in which the industrially
developed countries of Europe have reacted

Basta Game Over
(1991).
A print made by Mélik
Ouzani to promote peace and
understanding between
peoples.
recently to the phenomenon of immigration.
Europe on those terms has not just lost its fas¬
cination, it provokes anger. Arab intellectuals
won over to Western values have good reason
to be concerned by the ways things are going in
such a Europe, which apparently seeks to
rekindle the spirit of colonialism and revive
ethnocentric attitudes.
The paradox is that these intellectuals some¬
times accept the achievements of liberal devel¬
oped societies without adopting certain aspects
of the cultures of those societies that are not
compatible with their own backgrounds. On
the other side of the Mediterranean there is a
similar paradox: Europe has such a splendid
image there that the picture sometimes verges
on caricature, since everything that comes from
the West is regarded as being good.
Everything? Well, not quite. In some non-
democratic countries, for example, the import
of large quantities of material goods is per¬
mitted, but the frontier is firmly closed to cer¬
tain ideas and principles. We have all heard
politicians claim that democracy, multi-party
elections and universal suffrage are "foreign
products" whose "consumption" would be
harmful for a traditional society. Even so, these
principles are now accepted as valid for all
countries and all peoples.
Prejudices
and suspicions
Is Europe equally fascinated by the Arab
world? Various clichés distort the picture,
resisting rational analysis as firmly as prejudices
always do. To begin with, the Arab world is
often confused with the Muslim world; people
hardly bother to distinguish between Arabs
and, say, Berbers. There is a passion for the
desert, but it is often viewed as a kind of
country retreat. Harems still haunt the popular
imagination, even though they have long since
ceased to exist. Polygamy is generally consid¬
ered to be widespread, despite the fact that it is
forbidden in many Arab and Muslim countries.
People think that the wearing of veils by
women is prescribed by Qur'anic law, when in
fact it is merely a matter of tradition (though
women do have to wear a veil when praying).
How can the picture be set right?
This is one of the duties of those intellec¬
tuals who wish to serve as intermediaries be¬
tween the two cultures. It is no easy task, for
politically the Arab world in general is held in
low esteem, its image tarnished by régimes that
can claim no democratic legitimacy. But there
is more to the Arab world than these un¬
popular systems. How can one set about
adjusting the image?
The Israelo-Palestinian conflict has only
reinforced European prejudices, while also
constituting an obstacle to the progress of 29

democracy in the Arab lands. Sometimes it
serves as a litmus test for attitudes towards the
Arabs and their role in history. Arabs do not
understand why Europe defends some causes
more than others. All this clouds relations be¬
tween the Arab world and Europe with mutual
suspicion. When a misunderstanding arises, it is
allowed to fester. Frank dialogue and healthy
curiosity free of all hypocrisy are in short
supply.
Time for
co-operation
If the era of fascination with the West is over,
let us hope that a new age of co-operation on
equal terms will not be slow in replacing it,
when specific projects can be tackled together.
It ..is time, for example, for the West to recon¬
sider the status of immigrants and to stop bran¬
dishing them as a threat at election time.
Consideration must be given to those
North African countries that want closer rela¬
tions with the European Economic Commu¬
nity. At the very least their demand to be
treated as fully-fledged partners and interlocu¬
tors should be taken seriously.
It is time, too, to highlight the originality of
the Mediterranean countries, whether they lie
north or south of the sea. In order to bring
them closer together for want of being able to
unite them, which is another matter what is
needed is a great moral force capable of over¬
coming suspicion, fear and unhealthy stereo¬
typed opinions.
Jean Monnet said that "people only accept
change out of necessity; and it takes a crisis to
make them recognize the necessity". Imagina¬
tion is needed as well as a sense of urgency, for
as Monnet also said, without imagination
peoples die.
Misunderstandings poison relations be¬
tween peoples, in defiance of all logic. That is
why it is so important to nip them in the bud.
Even when they have flowered, should we not
have the courage to try to clear the ground so
as to allow new co-operation to grow, free of
malice and suspicion?
In a time of exceptional historical upheaval
will an Arab voice be heard, so that its unique,
authentic tones, its own special contribution to
the universal heritage, can again join in the
chorus of history? O
Tahar Ben Jelloun is a
Moroccan-born novelist and
poet whose La Nuit sacrée
(The Sacred Night) won the
Prix Goncourt, France's most
prestigious literary prize, in
1987. Among his other works
published in English are The
Sand Child (1987) and Silent
Day in Tangier (1991). He is
also the author of a number
of essays, including
Hospitalité française: racisme
et immigration maghrébine
("French Hospitality: Racism
and Immigration from the
Maghrib", 1984).
Les Princes du désert
("Princes of the Desert").
Wash-drawing by the French
artist Claude Quiesse.
30
