UNESCO'S FIRST 45 YEARS (ROT VII)
by Michel Conil Lacoste
1987
General policy
November: The General Conference
elects Mr. Federico Mayor of Spain as
Director-General of UNESCO. Mr. Mayor,
53, a biochemist by training, is a former
Rector of the University of Granada (1968-
1972), Minister for Education and Science in
his country (1981-1982), Deputy Director-
General of UNESCO (1978-1981) and Special
Adviser to the Director-General (1983-
1984).
The twenty-fourth session of the General
Conference adopts a budget of $350,386,000
for 1988-1989, corresponding to zero growth
in real terms.
At the same session, the issue of "sexist"
language is raised for the first time in
UNESCO and a Resolution on the subject is
adopted at the instigation of Canada and the
Nordic countries.
EDUCATING AGAINST DRUG ABUSE
Education
March-April: "Promedlac II", a meeting
held in Bogota (Colombia), reviews the
Major Project in the Field of Education in
Latin America and the Caribbean. It is fol¬
lowed by a Conference of Ministers of Edu¬
cation, who express their anxiety at falling
investment in education in the Region,
attributed notably to the enormous burden
of external debt borne by the countries
concerned.
May: An International Symposium for
the Preparation of International Literacy
Year (1990) is held in Ulan Bator (Mon¬
golia).
Rock star Michael Jackson supports the
literacy activities carried out under UNESCO's
Co-action Programme.
June: An International Conference on
4 Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking (ICDAIT) is
H held in Vienna. UNESCO, which is primarily
Mr. Federico Mayor
on his election as Director-General
of Unesco in 1987.
concerned in this field with preventive edu¬
cation, contributes to the drafting of the
recommendations.
June-July: The First International
Congress on the development and improve¬
ment of technical and vocational education
is held in Berlin.
August: 295 participants and observers
from 80 countries attend the Unesco-Unep
(United Nations Environment Programme)
International Congress on Environmental
Education and Training held in Moscow.
They note that problems are becoming more
serious and adopt an action strategy for the
1990s.
September: Unamaz, a consortium of 25
higher education institutions in 8 countries
of the Amazon basin, is set up with
UNESCO's support. It is concerned with
transdisciplinary training for development
and environmental conservation in the
region.
8 September: International Literacy Day:
Awards are presented at UNESCO Headquar¬
ters to four teachers or schools from Indo¬
nesia, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Thailand and Spain. A message from Pope
John Paul II is read out.
An International Symposium on the right
of women to education with a view to their
access to employment is held at UNESCO
Headquarters and analyses progress recorded
since the Copenhagen Conference of 1980.
IHP, MAB, IOC:
THREE KEY SCIENTIFIC ACRONYMS
Exact and natural sciences
February: The Commission for the Geo¬
logical Map of the World, with which
Unesco regularly publishes geological, tec¬
tonic and metallogenic maps of the different
world continents, holds its Plenary Assembly
at Unesco Headquarters.
March: An international scientific con¬
ference prepared by Unesco is held in
Yaounde on the natural disaster at Lake
Nyos, in Cameroon, where in the night of
21-22 August 1986 a huge build-up of gas
from the volcanic lake of Nyos exploded and
caused 1,700 deaths.
March: Meeting in Geneva, the Third
Unesco/Wmo (World Meteorological Orga¬
nization) Conference on Hydrology and the
Scientific Bases of Water Resources Manage¬
ment reviews the Action Plan it adopted ten
years earlier in Mar del Plata (Argentina).
Unesco takes part through its International
Hydrological Programme (Ihp).
March: The Bureau of the International
Co-ordinating Council of the Programme
on Man and the Biosphere (Mab), meeting
at UNESCO Headquarters in Paris, approves
five new applications to join the network
(three in Cuba and two in China), which
now comprises 266 biosphere reserves in 70
countries.
March-April: The International Océano¬
graphie Commission (loe) holds its 14th
session at UNESCO Headquarters. The acti¬
vities of the IOC and UNESCO's Marine
Sciences Division are concerned notably
with the study of ocean currents, marine
pollution, the climatic interaction between
the oceans and the atmosphere, ocean obser¬
vation systems, living and non-living marine
resources, cartography and other related
subjects. The IOC co-ordinates international
océanographie expeditions.
July: The Second Conference of Ministers
of the African Member States Responsible for
the Application of Science and Technology to
Development (Castafrica II) is held in
Arusha (United Republic of Tanzania)
The Director-General notes that the
number of engineers and scientists in Africa
is ten times lower than the world average.
The discussions stress the adaptation and
improvement of traditional techniques.
September: An International Symposium

Oceanographers take samples of
sea water during experimental studies carried
out by the Malagasy National Océanographie
Research Centre with Unesco's assistance.
on Innovative Methods in Technological
Education is held at Orsay (France), in co¬
operation with the European Society for
Engineering Education (Esse), Louvain.
"SUSTAINABLE": A NEW ADJECTIVE FOR
DEVELOPMENT
Social and human sciences
June: Governmental and non-govern¬
mental officals responsible for programmes
of youth exchanges meet in Rome to pre¬
pare a World Directory of Youth Exchange
Programmes.
July: A meeting of specialists is held in
Marrakesh (Morocco) on teaching, reflec¬
tion and research in philosophy in the Arab
States.
August-September: An international sym¬
posium on the controversial issue of the
"rights of peoples" and the relationship bet¬
ween that concept and human rights is held
in Canberra (Australia).
August-September: An international
congress on human rights teaching, informa¬
tion and documentation is held in Valletta
(Malta).
October: An international seminar on
human rights and cultural rights is held in
Recife (Brazil).
December: A meeting of experts on social
and cultural factors that impede the promo¬
tion of equality and the application of the
Convention on the elimination of all forms
of discrimination against women, adopted
by the United Nations in 1979, is held in
Baku.
The report of the independent World
Commission on Environment and Develop¬
ment (the "Brundtland Report") is published
and gives wide currency to the idea of "sus¬
tainable development".
Culture
The Secretariat for the World Decade for
Cultural Development (1988-1997) is es¬
tablished at Unesco.
March: The first world meeting of repre¬
sentatives of research centres on interactions
and synergies between culture, science, eco¬
nomics and society is held in Seoul in co¬
operation with the Korean Foundation for
Culture and the Arts.
22 October: The Director-General launches
an appeal on behalf of the revival of the
Library of Alexandria.
O December: UNESCO and the German
National Commission for UNESCO organize
a workshop on the use of audio-visual tech¬
niques as instruments of creativity in the
plastic arts at Offenbach-am-Main.
December: An international meeting of
experts on the role of television satellites in
the diversification of audio-visual creation is
held in Brussels.
May: UNESCO collaborates with the Inter¬
national Federation of Film Archives (Fiaf)
in organizing, in Berlin, the first consulta¬
tion of users and manufacturers of equip¬
ment for audio-visual archives.
At a meeting in Tunis in June, senior
communication officials in the Arab Region
lay the groundwork for a Radio and Televi¬
sion Exchange Centre via Arabsat, the Arab
satellite launched in 1985, for the purpose of
co-ordinating programme broadcasting.
H An Intergovernmental Conference on
Communication Policies in the Arab States
(ARABCOM) is held in Khartoum in July.
INTERDISCIPLINARY
Inter-sectoral activities
^> This heading covers projects and activities
which are not exclusively confined to a single
UNESCO sector. Such activities are the result
of efforts which UNESCO has been making,
especially since the second half of the 1980s,
to ensure that its programmes reflect an
interdisciplinary approach to the problems
facing society today.
2-17 November: with the participation of
a large number of NGOs, the Youth Division
and the Division of Educational Science
organize a three-day forum to alert people
to "problems connected with drug use and
abuse".
December: The World Heritage Com¬
mittee holds its. 11th session at Unesco
Headquarters in. Paris, and adds the Great
Wall of China, Brasilia, Westminster Abbey
and 38 other sites to the World Heritage
List.
Since its creation in April 1981, the Arab
Gulf Programme for United Nations Deve¬
lopment Organizations (AGFUND), which is
chaired by Prince Talal bin Abdul-Aziz Al
Saud, has contributed $16,040,000 to 35
Unesco projects.
Events
23 March: On the occasion of the Interna¬
tional Day for the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, James Baldwin, the Ame¬
rican novelist and dramatist and a former
fellow campaigner of Martin Luther King,
gives a lecture on "Language and power" at
UNESCO Headquarters.
July: The second Congress of the World
Federation of UNESCO Clubs and Associa¬
tions is held in Madrid.
September: On the occasion of the 40th
anniversary of the UNESCO Courier, an exhi¬
bition devoted to the magazine is held at the
Georges Pompidou Centre in Paris.
1 October, a ceremony commemorating
the centenary of the birth of the celebrated
architect Le Corbusier is held at UNESCO
Headquarters.
James Baldwin (1924-1987).

im
General policy
October: The Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe calls on the Govern¬
ments of the United Kingdom, the United
States of America and Singapore to envisage
returning to UNESCO at an early date, in a
spirit of European solidarity and universality
December: The Director-General sets up
an Independent Commission to examine the
operation and working methods of the
Organization, and to put forward proposals
for improving them and adapting them to
certain developments. The Commission is
chaired by Mr. Knut Hammarskjöld, of
Sweden.
EDUCATION:
A WIDE SPECTRUM OF ACTIVITIES
Education
May: A Third Consultation on "special
education", which is primarily intended for
disabled persons, is organized by UNESCO's
Division of Equality of Educational Oppor¬
tunity and Special Programmes and held in
Paris.
June: COPERNICUS, a network of Euro¬
pean universities for co-operation in educa¬
tion, training and research on the environ¬
ment is established.
October: A seminar devoted to new stra¬
tegies for approaching the educational and
socio-economic problems of women living
in marginal urban and rural areas is held in
Panama, with the financial support of the
Norwegian Special Fund for Women.
November: The Second International
Conference of Ministers and Senior Offi¬
cials responsible for Physical Education and
Sport (MiNEPS II) is held in Moscow. Parti¬
cular attention is given to maintaining the
ethical and moral values of sport.
September: A workshop on education for
the prevention of Aids is held in Ghent.
Since 1987, UNESCO has been seeking to
integrate the most effective Aids education
projects into school curricula.
Exact and natural sciences
June: The Intergovernmental Council of
the Ihp, meeting in Paris, adopts a Six-year
Plan (1990-1995) for rational water-resource
management.
August: More than 500 scientists take part
,ß in the World Océanographie Assembly
B organized in Acapuluco by the Interna
tional Council of Scientific Unions (Icsu),
with the support of UNESSCO and the Ioc
and the co-operation of NGOs specializing
in the marine sciences.
August: An International Conference on
Microbiology and Biotechnologies, jointly
organized by UNESCO, UNEP and the spe¬
cialized NGOs, is held in Hong Kong.
November: The tenth session of the Inter¬
national Co-ordinating Council of the Mab
Programme is held at UNESCO Headquarters
in Paris. The Council's Bureau approves the
designation of the Charlevoix region, cov¬
ering 460,000 hectares along the St. Lawrence
river in Canada, as a biosphere reserve.
November-December: The International
Scientific Council for Science and Techno¬
logy Policy Development holds its first ses¬
sion at UNESCO Headquarters in Paris.
Unesco takes part in the meetings of the
Steering Committee of the International
Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction
proclaimed by the United Nations (1990-
1999). Between 1962 and 1987, UNESCO has
dispatched nearly 50 scientific study and
prevention missions to its Member States.
Social and human sciences
May: In an address to the meeting of the
Scientific Council of the International Insti¬
tute for the Study of Human Rights, held in
Trieste, the Director-General highlights a
number of ethical problems, such as those
connected with mandatory medical screen¬
ing, which could lead to certain forms of
eugenism; organ transplants; and the deve¬
lopment of biotechnological industries.
STUDYING THE SILK ROADS
Culture
21 January, the World Decade for Cul¬
tural Development is officially launched at a
Mount Mustagh Ata, in the Pamirs,
a Central Asian mountain range crossed
by the old silk road.
press conference during which a video-taped
message from the Secretary-General of the
United Nations is presented. The Director-
General recalls the four main objectives of
the Decade:
acknowledgement of the cultural dimen¬
sion of development;
» affirmation of cultural identities;
«s- broadening of participation in cultural
life;
»s- promotion of international cultural co¬
operation.
Volume VII of the General History of
Africa, covering the period of colonial
domination (1880-1935), is published.
June: The Islamic Studies Centre of the
King Faisal Foundation is inaugurated in
Riyadh. Unesco has established a museum
and a documentation centre on Arab
manuscripts at the Centre and trained the
Saudi conservation staff.
26 June: The President of the Arab Repu¬
blic of Egypt, Mr. Hosni Mubarak, and the
Director-General of UNESCO lay the foun¬
dation stone for the new Library of Alexan¬
dria on a site near the city on the shores of
the Mediterranean.
June: A symposium of leading scientific
and religious authorities is held at UNESCO
Headquarters in Paris to commemorate the
thousandth anniversary of the introduction
of Christianity into Kievan Rus' (988-1988).
July: A meeting of experts, including
Jacques Soustelle, the French specialist in
Mexican history, is held at UNESCO Head¬
quarters to launch a ten-year plan to cata¬
logue, analyse and reproduce manuscripts in
the Náhuatl language preserved in Mexico
and other American countries and in
Europe.
September: The "Jamahiriya's Museum",
the national museum of Tripoli, now the
largest and most modern in the Arab Region,
is inaugurated. UNESCO advised on its design.
October: A seminar on "the significance
of the silk roads in the history of mankind",

held in Osaka, launches the "Integral Study
of the Silk Roads: Roads of Dialogue" pro¬
ject, during which archaeologists, historians
and journalists will take part in overland and
maritime expeditions.
October: The first 12 volumes of the
"Archives of 20th-century Latin American
and Caribbean Literature", a collection
launched in 1983 with the assistance of
UNESCO's International Fund for the Pro¬
motion of Culture, are published. Since its
creation in 1974, the Fund has supported
almost 280 projects.
4 November: The Director-General
launches an appeal to the international com¬
munity for the preservation and restoration
of the Jesuit Missions to the Guarani, in
Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay. He follows
this up, on 4 January 1989, with a similar
appeal on behalf of the International Cam¬
paign for the Safeguarding of the Monu¬
ments of Ethiopia.
Communication
June: A project to provide frequency
modulation (FM) broadcasting facilities for
Radio Bhutan is launched with the technical
and financial assistance of Denmark, in an
endeavour to overcome the difficult natural
obstacles to the development of radio links
that exist in this Himalayan country.
INFORMATION AND DOCUMENTATION
Intersectoral activities
January: The General Information Pro-
gamme celebrates its 10th anniversary. Its
purpose is to help Member States set up
information structures (scientific data net¬
works, documentation centres, libraries and
archives) and to promote the circulation of
information at all levels and in all subjects.
The Programme is based on the principles
and within the conceptual framework of the
system known by the acronym UNISIST.
October: A committee of specialists mee¬
ting in Santo Domingo draws up a copy¬
right teaching programme Intended for use
in law faculties in the Spanish-speaking
countries of Latin America and the Carib¬
bean before being adapted to the needs of
other regions, the programme covers three
levels: first degree, doctorate, post-doctoral
studies.
December: The Twelfth Session of the
World Heritage Committee is held in Bra¬
silia and decides to add to the World Heri¬
tage List 27 new sites, including Strasbourg-
Grande He; Mount Athos; Epidaurus; the
medieval city of Rhodes; the San Francisco
monastery complex in Lima; Salamanca;
Kairouan; and the Tower of London.
20 April: A gala evening in support of
action on behalf of refugees, organized in
co-operation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
is held at UNESCO Headquarters. Barbara
Hendricks and Placido Domingo are among
the participants.
21 September: At a ceremony at Head¬
quarters, the 1988 Unesco Prize for Peace
Education, established in 1980 thanks to a
donation from the Japan Shipbuilding
Industry Foundation, is awarded to Brother
Roger, the founder of the Taizé community
in France.
13 October: Prince Philip, Duke of Edin¬
burgh, in his capacity as President of the
World Wide Fund for Nature (Wwf), visits
UNESCO on the occasion of the 40th anni¬
versary of the International Union for
Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources (IuCN, now the World Conserva¬
tion Union) The Prince discusses with the
Director-General the strengthening of inter¬
national co-operation for the protection of
the natural sites on the World Heritage List.
12 October: In an outspoken address to
UNESCO's Executive Board during his offi¬
cial visit to Unesco Headquarters, Mr.
Edward Shevardnadze, Minister of Foreign
Oualata, a town in Mauritania.
Unesco provided technical assistance for the
safeguarding of its 15th-century mosque.
>t - -
* -K
.Ay*' *
Singer Barbara Hendricks
at a gala evening given on behalf of
refugees at Unesco Headquarters
on 20 April 1988.
Affairs of the USSR, says that "the principle
of tolerance inherent in UNESCO . . . has
been undermined by the excessive impor¬
tance attached to ideological approaches".
28 October: During a visit to UNESCO,
Mwalimu Julius K. Nyerere, former Presi¬
dent of the United Republic of Tanzania and
Chairman of the South Commission,
addresses the Executive Board and describes
the role of literacy in the liberation of his
country and the problems of setting priorities
in a country where poverty is widespread.
28-30 November: In a context of world
crisis, how can obstacles to vitally important
innovations be overcome? Participants in
the third session of the Issyk-Kul Forum,
meeting in Granada, attempt to answer this
question. They include futurologist Alvin
Toffler, actor and writer Peter Ustinov,
European parliamentarian Eduardo Punst
and novelist Chingiz Aitmatov, the founder
of this "brains trust", which met for the first
time in 1986 on the shores of Lake Issyk
Kul in Kirghizia, CIS.
H 7 December: On the fortieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 400 young people from 25 countries
take part in an "Open Day" organized in
co-operation with the World Federation of
Unesco Clubs, Centres and Associations
(Wfuca).
In December, the Director-General pre¬
sents the Unesco Prize for the Teaching of
Human Rights, which is awarded every two
years, to the Asamblea Permanente de los
Derechos Humanos of Bolivia, for its
defence of various rights and its work in
organizing courses on human rights in pri¬
vate and state schools. O
0 BE CONTINUE
