übe Chicanosr-muralists with a message
by Annick Treguer
"Why paint in the street?"
22
"Because there aren't any museums in Los Angeles"
THIS snatch of dialogue between Chicano
artists in Los Angeles helps to explain
the explosion of mural painting in the
United States since the 1970s, particularly in
California and throughout the southwest.
Mural painting was the first manifestation
of what is now generally referred to as Chi¬
cano art. Chicanos are people of Mexican
origin who are brought up and live in the
United States. The word came into general
currency in the 1960s. Previously it had only
been used in the "barrios" the Mexican dis¬
tricts of the towns and cities in the southwest
of the United States. Mexican-Americans
themselves adopted it as a gesture of pride in
face of American society, on the sidelines of
which they mostly tend to live. As the French
writer Pascal Letellier has noted, "it was a
time when all kinds of minorities came to the
fore, the time of the struggle for civil rights,
the era of opposition to the Viet Nam war,"
when "the Chicanos discovered an identity
and an ideology, aided by the student move¬
ment in the Californian universities".
The muralists of the Chicano movement
took over the visual language of the young
Chicanos of the barrios, giving it new stature
as they transformed and embellished the
urban landscape. In the early 1970s the walls
of newly-constructed buildings served as huge

canvases to bring word of the Chicano move¬
ment to the residents of the Mexican commu¬
nities. The walls became living museums, car¬
rying a message everyone could understand.
Graphics had always been a form of self-
expression used spontaneously by young Chi¬
canos, who would cover walls with graffiti
and with "placas" words or symbols that
identified themselves and their gangs. It was
easy to dismiss this activity as vandalism, but
in fact it expressed the frustration of margina¬
lized groups and frustrated individuals. In the
same way, the mural artists began, via their
support for the Chicano political and cultural
movement, to speak out for a culture that had
long been forgotten.
The young Chicano artists got together to
work with the local barrio communities.



Pascal Letellier describes the great frescoes
that resulted as "a savage, mystical, realistic,
flamboyant iconography that links up with
the great tradition of Mexican mural art of the
1930s, with Orozco, Rivera and Siqueiros".
They also set up group workshops. Cultural
centres of the "raza" (race or ethnic group),
Hispanic America's unifying concept, became
more and more common. This was a golden
age of community art, art in the street.
Two Californian communities provide
good illustrations of what was going on. The
murals produced in each were the result of
close collaboration between the residents,
both young and not so young, and the artists.
One is Estrada Courts, an East Los Angeles
barrio-ghetto that consists of small public-
housing blocks and has the highest concentra¬
tion of Chicanos and Mexicans in California.
The other is Chicano Park in southern San
Diego, a district at the intersection of two
freeways that cut the Chicano barrio in two.
Estrada Courts
The appearance of Estrada Courts improved
noticeably between 1973 and 1976, when
murals were painted on a number of blind walls.
Directed by artist Gato Felix, this renewal pro¬
ject was originally intended not just to make the
barrio more attractive but also to provide an
outlet for the energy and talents of young, out-
of-work Chicanos who were drawing graffiti
that were in many cases destructive. The murals
depicted Mexican subjects, boosting local
people's confidence by putting them back in
touch with the roots of a culture that was
largely ignored in North American school
curricula. In this way aesthetics and culture
were brought together.
Pre-Columbian themes, intended to remind
Chicanos of their noble origins, are common.
There are motifs from the Aztec codices, gods
from the Aztec pantheon, allusions to the Spa¬
nish conquest and images of the Virgin of
Guadalupe, a cherished Mexican icon.
Two murals represent important moments
in the history of the Chicano movement, linking
Estrada Courts to recent history. Protest ban¬
ners of the years 1965-75 float on one façade
over a bucolic scene representing the life of a
poor Mexican agricultural labourer before his
arrival in the United States. Another splendidly
recalls the Chicanos' ethnic and cultural origins:
it shows an Aztec, a conquistador, a Mexican, a
Above left, a mural at
Chicano Park near San Diego
(California) makes a
colourful backdrop for a
group photo.
Below, motifs from Aztec
manuscripts feature on a
painted wall at Estrada
Courts, Los Angeles.
23

24
Two views of Estrada Courts.
Top, a wall painting evoking
the cultural origins of the
Chicanos.
Above, a painting of the
Aztec goddess of the Earth,
Coatlicue, adorns an
expressway pier.
ANNICK TREGUER,
who teaches Spanish at the
University of Paris III
(Sorbonne Nouvelle) has
been interested in the culture
of the Chicanos for many
years. Most of her research
is focused on Chicano
theatre and murals, on which
she has lectured in France
and the United States. She
took part in an exhibition on
Chicano culture held in
Nantes (France) in 1989, and
is currently preparing a work
on Chicano mural painting
between 1970 and 1990
which will be published by
Presses Sorbonne Nouvelle.
mestizo and a Chicano, recognizable from the
scarf he wears round his head, descending from
a pyramid to join hands in planting the flag of
the Chicano movement, a black eagle on a red
background, on American soil.
Apart from these few exceptions, which
reflect the political concerns of the Mexican
minority in the United States, nearly all the
fine murals in Estrada Courts are purely deco¬
rative, depicting jungle animals, fish, mountain
landscapes and similar subjects.
Chicano Park
The Chicano Park paintings are very different
in the sense that they have a special place in
the history of the district where they were
produced. They represent some of the finest
examples of popular mural art, directly inheri¬
ting the great Mexican tradition of the 1920s
and the 1930s.
On two occasions the inhabitants of the
San Diego barrio were evicted and expro¬
priated to make way for the building of new
roads. They resisted actively, and in 1970 their
campaign to prevent the heart of the barrio
from being dehumanized or destroyed was
supported by militants of the Chicano move¬
ment. In the same year the city authorities
abandoned their attempts to -locate a scrap-
iron depot there and restored the district to its
inhabitants.
In these circumstances a historical monu¬
ment was born. What had been a hideous
forest of concrete pillars soon became a plea¬
sant and attractive place, a park decorated
with paintings of remarkable beauty whose
subject-matter was critical, even subversive.
Each year the 1970 victory is commemorated
by a festival and political meetings, which pro¬
vide an opportunity to start new paintings.
Here too pre-Columbian motifs are plen¬
tiful, among them an extraordinary pillar
representing the Aztec earth-goddess Coat¬
licue. Such images are not merely decorative:
they increase the prestige of Aztec and Mayan
culture, notably through depictions of pyra¬
mids, a recurrent symbol of the great Meso-
American civilizations, and of muscular
Indians crowned with feathers, emblems of
nobility and wisdom.
The murals also reflect a budding political
consciousness. The two frescoes decorating the
freeway access ramps are a veritable gallery of
portraits of revolutionary heroes, featuring
important moments in Mexican and Chicano
history. They provide a selective vision of
recent international history. Alongside César
Chavez, the non-violent defender of the rights
of Mexican agricultural workers, who is shown
addressing Chicano crowds, there are land¬
scapes and episodes from the Mexican revolu¬
tion interspersed with portraits of Picasso,
Santana, Che Guevara, Diego Rivera, Benito
Juárez, Hidalgo and Fidel Castro.
Pictures of the struggles of peasants and
. workers from the Mexican past, among them
Zapata's guerrillas, are an incitement to resist
discrimination. Some of the motifs are given a
Chicano gloss: putting Mexican images in the
new North American environment helps rein¬
force Chicano social cohesion. Two symbols
that are ubiquitous at Chicano Park have a
similar function. One is the Virgin of Guada¬
lupe, who plays a unifying role for Chicanos
and for Mexican immigrants. The other is the
flag of César Chavez's movement, bearing the
black Aztec eagle. Images reflecting another
Chicano concern, for an educational system
suited to the needs of their children and of
Mexican immigrants, are also common
An authentic pictorial tradition and a set of
historic circumstances have come together to
make the walls of Los Angeles and of San
Diego, new cities of seemingly limitless
growth, canvases that express vibrantly the
long-standing and ever-growing Mexican pre¬
sence in the United States. O
