Towards a new world ecological order?
Inthis month ofJune 1 992, the Earth is notquite as round as usual, for it has sprouted a summit
inRiodeJaneirowhichisbynowprobablyevenmorefamousthanthatdty'sotherpeak,theSugar-
loafMountain. From 3 to 14June, 166 headsofstate andgovernment and thousands of'delegates
willbe in Rio, gathered round tire bedsideofourailingplanet. We have treated theEarth verybadly.
Pollution has taken a heavy toll, what with the greenhouse effect and the ensuing risk ofrising
sea-levels, the hole in the ozone layer and nuclear hazards.
Prickingpeople's consciences is apainfulprocess. A heavyprice has to bepaidfor industrialgrowth
and theprovision ofmodern amenities. How are wegoingtofoot thebill? Will the main beneficia¬
ries oftheseforms ofprogress beprepared to make the necessarysacrifices ?And will those who have
hitherto been leftoutat last begin to reap the benefits or will they be penalizedforappearingon the
scene too late? Thepreparatory meetingfor theRio Summit, held inNew York, led to agreement on
the draftofan Earth Charterand on Agenda 21, definingsustainable developmentfor the coming
century, from theprotection offorests to the managementoftoxic wastes. Yet, even ifthere is a majo¬
rity infavourofthe broad principles, how will it be possible to reconcile all the points ofview?
WeneedonlytakeoneexampletMtissymptomaticofthesituation.ThepeoplelivingintheNorth
rightly denounce the damage caused by CFCs, chemical compounds widely used in refrigeration sys¬
tems, andaredemandingagain quite rightlyfrom a strictly environmentalstandpointthat they
should be banned. But what about the people in the South ? How will they react to the prospect of
beingdenied this modern amenityjust when they thought they would beabout to enjoy its benefits?
It has been estimated that it will cost$125 billion ayear to implement the resolutions setforth in
Agenda 21. Again, who is going tofoot the bill? Whether the Rio Summit turns out to be a displayof
psychological shadow-boxing, an unqualified success or simply a point ofdeparture, the fact
remains that it is thefirstofits kind. Itwillat least have had the virtue oftakingplace.
CAi
~T*sr
»
usual architecture of the
Unesco Courierhas
been modified, with the
introduction of a
new section entitled
Greenwatch which
appears in addition to the
main theme and the
regular features.
Greenwatch is a kind of
magazine within the
magazine. From its
position on the eight cen¬
tral pages it surveys,
as its title suggests, current
developments relating
to a world issue of
paramount importance
environment
and its survival. Its first
appearance coincides with
the Earth Summit being
held by the United Nations
in Rio de Janeiro, a
conference of crucial
importance for the planet.
Like the main body of
the magazine, Greenwatch
contains an interview
(in this case with a leading
specialist in ecology) and a
round-up of short news
items, as well as a longer
article on a major
environmental issue (the
depletion of the ozone
layer) and an extract from
a classic text evoking the
relationship between
humankind and nature
(the story of the flood from
the Gilgamesh Epic of
3,500 years ago)
.-X-,
r*?
'
*&r* ¿WZ*
'

World
PB
24
The United Nations Conference
on Environment and Develop¬
ment, which is being held this
month in Rio de Janeiro, will be
seeking to spell out, twenty years
after the Stockholm Conference,
the measures that need to be
taken to protect the Earth, the
only "living" planet of the solar
system. In addition to the plena¬
ry sessions to which Heads of
State have been invited, there will
be more than 250 meetings, semi¬
nars, workshops, lectures and
other events, which some 10,000
people are expected to attend.
One particularly important venue
will be the International Forum of
Non-governmental Organiza¬
tions, since the NGOs, with their
flexible working methods, are
eminently suited to be partners in
furthering the development pro¬
cess and ensuring the protection
of nature. Among the lecture
series that are being held, one will
set out to compare the methods
of sustainable natural resource
management used by indigenous
peoples.
BooJcshelf
ID1STÁII DESERTIFICATION
eserts occupyabout one fifth ofthe Earth's land surface, an area ofapproximately30 million square
kilometres. They are natural creations which have always existed, but today many ofthem are
spreading. This process of "desertification" results largely from human activities which cause
degradation ofthe land, reduce its fertility and make it unfit even for grazing. Desertification affects
certain regions in the developed countries ( USA, Canada, Australia ), but it is most acute in the
developing countries (in the Sahel, in South America and in the Mediterranean basin, as well as in
India, Pakistan and Mexico ). The problem has been aggravated in these areas by the pressures ofrapid
demographic growth.
Desertification, its causes, effects and possible ways ofcombating it are the subject ofa "Teaching
Module on Desertification", by C. Souchon and J.P. Deleage, published by Unesco and the United
Nations Environment Programme as No. 16 in their Environmental Education Series (available in
French and Spanish only). The example taken is the Sahel. The main themes covered include : The
interactions ofpeoples with their environment; water; soils and crops ; cattle-raising and grazing-land
management; energy, firewood and deforestation ; general problems ofplanning and management.
The booklet proposes a number ofpractical exercises to increase pupils' awareness ofthe state of
the environment in their region. In addition to educators and their pupils, the booklet also makes a
useful working tool for all those with an interest in the Sahel, such as technical assistance personnel
and members of non-governmental organizations. From it they can learn how to make a filter for
drinking water ora stove that makes more efficient use of fuel, how to combat soil erosion, and how
to cany out a reforestation project (which species oftree to select, etc). There is also a bibliography
and a list ofuseful addresses.
¡IE
DJi T
The luxuriant Dja Forest, in sou¬
thern Cameroon, figures on Unes¬
co's World Heritage List as a natural
site of outstanding beauty and is
also a part ofUnesco's Man and the
Biosphere (MAB) Programme net¬
work of Biosphere Reserves. A vir¬
tually intact example of a primary
tropical forest, Dja is extraordinari¬
ly rich in flora and fauna. A single
tree 30 to 40 metres high can be
home to as many as a thousand dif¬
ferent species of insect, and the
forest's streams and rivers support
some 120 species offish. Hippopo¬
tami, elephants and rare dwarf
chimpanzees are to be found in the
Dja Forest alongside gorillas, snakes
and a bird population so varied that
not all its species have yet been
identified and logged. The Dja
Forest is the site of a pilot project
whose objective is to help the
peoples who live there including
Pygmies to exploit the forest's
resources in a rational and sustain¬
able manner and to combat poach¬
ing, which is now reaching massive
proportions.
Two airlines, KLM and Garuda,
have decided that they will no long¬
er transport wild birds to the
United States. This follows bans
on this traffic imposed earlier by
Lufthansa and three US airlines.
In 1989, 87,300 wild birds were
loaded by these six airlines for
transportation to the United States.
On arrival, 2,430 of the birds were
found to be dead.

Ofthe 37 species ofwild felines, 22
are endangered to varying degrees,
according to the World Wide Fund
for Nature (formerly the World
Wildlife Fund). Agriculture, forest
exploitation and urbanization are
gradually depriving them ofthe spa¬
cious habitats they need. With this in
mind, the Indian Government and
the WWF have carried out a vast
joint campaign for the protection
of tigers as a result ofwhich India's
tiger population has more than dou¬
bled in fourteen years. Similar
results have been achieved with the
lynx which, despite protests from
sheep-raisers on whose flocks the
lynx preys, has been reintroduced in
several European countries.
The cost ofenvironmental protection
programmes in the United States is
expected to rise to over $ 185 billion by the
year 2000, according to projections made
by the US Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). Over the past twentyyears
the cost of programmes for the protec¬
tion ofair, water and the tenestrial envi¬
ronment has almost quadrupled, rising
from $30 billion in 1972 to $1 15 billion in
1990 (equivalent to 2.1% ofGross Natio¬
nal Product). Ofthe overall cost the Fed¬
eral Government furnishes 11%, the
States 3.5%, the municipal authorities
22.5% and the private sector 63%.
A
Ul<
UAtr
TOT
LL
Since 1980 the city of Beijing has
been involved in a vast clean-up op¬
eration. At night, an impressive fleet
ofwater tankers invades the streets of
the city, crewed by municipal work¬
ers who wash the deserted avenues
and spray the trees that line them.
By day, other teams sweep the
streets, calmly indifferent to the tidal
wave of cyclists that swirls around
them. The clean-up campaign has
included drives to reduce the num¬
bers of domestic animals, birds and
flies, and the installation of a profu¬
sion of litter-bins and spittoons.
Today, with the help ofa $125-mil-
lion loan from the World Bank and
The thousand hills ofBurundi, once ravaged and laid bare by deforestation, are
green once more. Staff of the French Tropical Forest Technical Centre have suc¬
cessfully carried out a number ofconservation actions. They have taken measures
to protect the last remaining stretch ofprimary forest on the Nile /Zaire watershed,
which is the habitat of a flourishing chimpanzee population and a unique pool
ofgenetic diversity. The project beganwith a vast state reforestation programme,
the encouragement ofsmaller, community tree-planting schemes, and the plant¬
ing by private individuals ofsmall copses and anti-erosion hedges. It was not until
soil and forest degradation had reached an alarming level that the local popula¬
tion prepared to do battle against erosion and re-plant trees. A strong sense ofenvi¬
ronmental awareness was finally aroused and in the last ten years fiftymillion trees
( about one hundred trees per family) have been grown in Burundi.
the International Development Asso¬
ciation, the clean-up campaign has
taken on a new dimension. Work
now planned includes the construc¬
tion of a 32-kilometre pipeline to
feed an urban heating network in the
western sector of the city; the setting
up of a company to manage a new
sewerage system; and the construc¬
tion of a 72-hectare waste disposal
centre capable ofhandling 2,000 tons
ofwasteaday. m

Interview
28
Several theories have been advanced
to explain theformation of the Earth
and the appearance of life upon it.
Which of these theories do you sup¬
port?
- As far as environmental con¬
siderations are concerned, interest
focuses much more on questions
about the origins of life on our
planet. When did it first appear?
What processes were and are in¬
volved in biological evolution? To
what extent are we altering or dest¬
roying this tendency for species to
evolve ? For me these are the key
questions.
Life on Earth began about four
thousand million years ago ( give
or take a few hundred million
years), producing a rich heritage
of marine and terrestrial species.
Yet we are affecting the environ¬
ment to such a degree that we are
quite capable ofdestroying in a few
An environmentalist of international
reputation, Francesco di Castri
launched Unesco's Man and the Bio¬
sphere (MAB) Programme and is
currently co-ordinator ofall Unesco's
environment programmes. Published
here is thefirstpartofa longinterview.
hours the fruit of several million
years of evolution.
Such destruction is irreversible.
We can rebuild a city and even,
sometimes, an ancient monument,
but it is absolutely impossible for us
to replace an extinct species. How¬
ever, we should not succumb to
sentimental dreaming; the disap¬
pearance of a species is a perfectly
normal phenomenon in the evolu¬
tionary history of the biosphere.
Long before the spectacular extinc¬
tion of the dinosaurs, other species
had disappeared. Tomorrow, yet
others will disappear.
Environmental
education for
women in Burkina
Faso.
What is abnormal is not the
extinction of species but the rate
at which they are disappearing.
According to some experts, we may
be destroying as many as 50,000
species a year. Under normal cir¬
cumstances it would have taken
several thousand years for these
species to become extinct. Apart
from the abnormally high rate of
extinctions, the problem lies in the
fact that certain species that have a
key role to play are disappearing,
not for biological reasons, but
because ofhuman activities.
The objective is not, for some
abstract reason, to attempt to pre¬
serve all species, but to keep those
that have a vital role to play, in par¬
ticular those that are essential com¬
ponents in all biological areas
such as those species that
contribute to the functioning of
ecological systems and to the com¬
position of the atmosphere.
Which species doyou class as beingof
vital importance?
-To be able to answer your ques¬
tion with any precision, we would
need to know one of the great un¬
knowns the number of species
the biosphere holds. Estimates
range from around four million to
thirty or forty million (the most
likely figure ) and on up to as many
as one hundred million. At present
we know of the existence of only a
tiny proportion of species. As a
result, many species appear and
disappear without our even know¬
ing of their existence.
Today, the words ecology and eco¬
system are on everybody's lips. What
exactly do they mean ?
- Ecology is the study ofthe inter¬
actions of living organisms. This
includes the interaction of man
with the physical environment as
well as the interactions between
the different physical environments
themselves. It is not only the study
of the effects the environment has
on living organisms, but also of the
interactions of all the species. The
human species is one among many
others, but with this difference that

it has become capable of having a
determining influence on the evo¬
lution of other species. Not only
does it influence their numbers and
alter the conditions of their habi¬
tats, it can also, through biotech¬
nology, create new species. This
double power, biological and eco¬
logical, that one species can exer¬
cise on the evolution of the entire
biosphere is a factor unprecedent¬
ed in the history of the Earth.
The concept of an ecosystem is a
rather artificial and changing one.
The fact is that the definition of an
ecosystem varies according to the
approach adopted by the research¬
er who uses the term. For some
people, their gardens, or a culture of
microbes on a laboratory dish, are
ecosystems; for others ( more cor¬
rectly) a tropical forest is an eco¬
system. Others view the entire globe
as a single ecosystem. The one fea¬
ture common to all ecosystems,
however defined, is an internal flow
of energy, of genetic information
and, sometimes, of cultural in¬
fluences which pass from one of its
components to the others. Thus
ecosystems are complex systems
that exist at different levels of orga¬
nization, from small population
groups to the entire biosphere,
including the atmosphere.
Wliat were the great landmarks in
the awakeningofawareness abouteco¬
logical problems ?
- The basic concept of ecology
had already emerged in the nine¬
teenth century, but it was looked
upon primarily as an economic tool
for increasing the productivity of
ecosystems. "Agricultural ecology",
for example, aimed at increasing
crop yield by improvement of the
species cultivated. Thus the mean¬
ing given to the word ecology was
almost the opposite ofthat which it
has acquired today.
Silent Spring, a book by the
American author and biologist
Rachel Carson, was astonishingly
successful in arousing international
awareness of the dangers of envi¬
ronmental pollution. Among other
things, it revealed the drastic dimi¬
nution in the number of bird spe¬
cies caused by the use ofpesticides.
This awareness was accelerated
by increasing pollution of urban
air, which became almost un-
breathable in some cities, such as
Mexico City.
When did this "ecological awak¬
ening"occur?
-Rachel Carson's book was
published in 1962, but widespread
awareness can be dated from the
1970s. This decade marked a turn¬
ing-point, with the birth of the first
ecological movements and with
governments themselves beginning
to react, as witness the convening
by the United Nations of the first
major conference on the environ¬
ment, at Stockholm in 1972. This
trend has been accentuated by the
discovery ofholes in the ozone layer
and of the greenhouse effect. It
became apparent that humankind
was not only destroying species but
also the atmosphere that controls
the climate.
This enhanced awareness was
not restricted to the industrialized
Francesco di Castri is involved in a wide range of interna¬
tional activities related to the environment. President of the
Scientific Committee on Problems ofthe Environment ofthe
International Council ofScientific Unions ( ICSU ), President
ofthe International Union ofBiological Sciences ( IUBS ), and
a research director at the French National Centre of Scienti¬
fic Research (CNRS), he has written some 300 scientific articles
and is the author or co-author of a dozen or so books, the
most recent ofwhich, Landscape Boundaries. Consequences
forBioticDiversity and Ecological Flows, was published ear¬
lier this year. On 25 March 1992, the United Nations Envi¬
ronment Programme (UNEP) awarded him its Global 500
prize for actions and initiatives to promote the conservation
of the environment and sustainable development.
countries, but extended also to the
developing countries. The latter
became aware that their own natu¬
ral resources their forests and
regions bordering deserts were
being destroyed, not only by their
own demographic expansion but
also by anarchic forms of develop -
ment imposed from outside. The
necessity to sell commercial pro¬
ducts to the industrialized coun¬
tries in order to acquire foreign cur¬
rency has had serious effects on
their environment.
These two aspects of ecological
awareness that triggered in the
industrialized countries by pollu¬
tion and the imminent possibility of
climate change and that aroused
in the Third World by the disap¬
pearance of forests and the lower¬
ing of levels of public health are
today, I believe, merging to form a
new "planetary ecological aware¬
ness". It is now accepted that what
happens in the North also affects
what happens in the South, and
Vice versa. To be continued
Interview by Serafín García, journalist with Unesco's
Office ofPublic Information
School of
Rusty Fish, (1988).
Sculpture in
resin and oxidized
metal by Sandra
and Christian
Gamby. 8m x 1.5m.

Voices from the past
m
The myth of the Great Flood is almost universal. Its many versions relate how the world was engulfed and
humankind virtually annihilated by the deluge, which left only a few survivors belonging to the human
race and different animal and plant species. Human sinfulness is one of the main causes of the Flood,
but so too is the decrepitude of the world, for this is an ambivalent myth in which destruction paves the
way for regeneration.
On this page is the story of the Great Flood as it is related in the oldest extant epic in world history, the Gilgamesh
epic that was composed over 3,500 years ago in Mesopotamia.
Stunned shock overAdad's deeds overtook the heavens,
and turned to blackness all that had been light. . . .
All day long the South Wind blew. . . ,
blowingfast, submerging the mountain in water,
overwhelming the people like an attack.
No one could see hisfellow
they could not recognize each other in the torrent.
The gods werefrightened by the Flood,
and retreated, ascending to the heaven ofAmi.
The gods were cowering like dogs, crouchingby the outer wall.
Ishtar shrieked like a woman in childbirth,
Babylonian thesweet-voicedMistressofthe Gods wailed:
cylinder seal "The olden days have turned to clay,
depicting an because Isaid evil things in theAssembly ofthe Gods!
offering to a How couldlsay evil things in the Assembly ofthe Gods,
divinity. Syria, ordering a catastrophe to destroy my people?!
18th century Be. No sooner have Igiven birth to my dear people
than theyfill the sea like so manyfish !"
Thegods those oftheAnunnaki
the gods humblysat weeping, sobbing with grief,
their lips burning, parched with thirst.
Six days and seven nights
came the wind andflood, the stormflattening the land.
When the seventh day arrived, the storm was pounding
theflood was a war....
Thesea calmed, fell still, the whirlwind (and)flood stopped up.
I looked around all day longquiet had set in
and all the human beings had turned to clay!
The terrain was asflat as a roof.
¡opened a ventandfresh air (daylight ?)fell upon the side ofmy nose.
Ifell to my knees and sat weeping,
tears streaming down the side ofmy nose.
I looked aroundfor coastlines in the expanse ofthe sea,
and at twelve leagues there emerged a region (of land).
On Mt. Nimush the boat lodgedfirm,
Mt. Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway.
One day and a second Mt. Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway.
A third day, afourth, Mt. Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway.
Afifth day, a sixth, Mt. Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway.
When a seventh day arrived
Isentforth a dove and released it.
The dove went off, but came back to me.
no perch was visible so it circled back to me.
¡sentforth a swallow and released it.
The swallow went off, but came back to me;
no perch was visible so it circled back to me.
¡sentforth a raven and released it.
The raven went off, and saw the waters slither back.
It eats, it scratches, it bobs, but does not circle back to me.
Then Isent out everything in all directions and sacrificed (a sheep).
¡offered incense infront ofthe mountain-ziggurat.
Seven and seven cult vessels Iput in place,
and (into thefire) underneath (or: into theirbowls) ¡poured reeds,
cedarand myrtle.
The gods smelled the savour,
the gods smelled the sweet savour,
and collected likeflies over a (sheep) sacrifice.
Just then Beletili arrived.
She lifted up the largeflies (beads) which Ami had madefor his
enjoyment (1):
"You gods, as surelyasishall notforget this lapis lazuli around my neck
may ¡be mindful ofthese days, and neverforget them!
The gods may come to the incense offering,
butEnlil may not come to the incense offering,
because without considering he brought about theñood
and consigned my people to annihilation. "
The Epic ofGilgamesh, translated by Maureen Gallery Kovacs, Stanford
University Press© 1985, 1989.
CompanionsoftheSun
An extract from the Gilgamesh epic features in an anthologyof texts on the
relationship between humankind and the natural world which is to be
published ( in French ) by Unesco, Editions de la Découverte ( Paris ) and
the Fondation pour le progrès de l'Homme. Entitled Compagnons du
soleil ("Companions of the Sun"), the 500-page anthology has been pre¬
pared under the general editorship of the notedAfrican historian Joseph
Ki-Zerbo, ofBurkina Faso, in collaboration with Marie-Josèphe Beaud. The
idea for the anthology came from the Vézelay Group, an international panel
consisting of eight members, including Joseph Ki-Zerbo.
Joseph Ki-Zerbo describes the anthology as a collection of"the fundamental
or significant texts which, in the world's different cultures, testify to the rela¬
tions between man and nature" He adds that "the battle for the health of
nature will not only be won by recourse to political or legal procedures,
technical or fiscal remedies, or international agreements, however solemn,
but by an awakening ofsociety generated by innermotivations, which are
sustained by the powerful sources ofsymbolism, ethics and aesthetics. With
respect to nature, man must choose between symbiosis and suicide.'^
