t l Î R k
1 he ancient city of Petra lies in a semi-arid
region of south-west Jordan that dominates the
desert of the Arabah depression, dropping
down more than 1,000 metres to the west. The
massif forms a natural fortress, where once was
built a strange city, the capital of a kingdom
that dared to resist the might of Rome.
Today, Petra is one of the most beautiful
historic sites of the Middle East, a testimonial,
unique in size, to cave architecture, or what
one might almost call troglodytic urbanism.
Its 45 square kilometres house a succession of
over 500 great monuments, hewn from the
rock by astonishingly gifted Bedouin architect-
sculptors more than 2,000 years ago.
The road to Petra snakes through grey,
stony desert on a high, arid plateau. It is
difficult to believe that once, in ancient times,
an oak forest grew here. Then the road
descends into a small valley. Suddenly, at a
bend in the road, the magnificent site of Petra
comes into view below, a rocky chaos to
which the city owes its name, for "petros"
means rock in Greek.
Coming down from the plateau, the
traveller is plunged into a lunar landscape of
yellowy-white sandstone carved into thou¬
sands of sugar-loaf or whaleback-shaped
domes, an expanse of humps and protuber¬
ances whose contours are thrown into relief



by the harsh light of dawn. Already the first
cave monuments of the city can be made out,
among them the Obelisk Tomb. Gradually
the whiter rock gives way to steep slopes of
rose-red sandstone, which give the Petra massif
its dominant colouring.
The road into the massif passes through
the Sik, a narrow gorge about 3 kilometres
long, 100 metres deep and narrowing in places
to a width of a bare 3 metres. Straight stretches
are punctuated by sudden bends until the
gorge gradually opens out on a huge depres¬
sion ringed by flat-topped mountains whose
sheer slopes are dotted with magnificent
monuments.
The spectacle is overwhelming. In places,
patches of black, white and yellow alternate
with the dominant red of the multi-coloured
Left, approaching Petra through the Sik.
Opposite page, the white sandstone façade of
the Obelisk Tomb, near the entrance to the site.

stone, which erosion has shaped into a natural
work of art, a ruined landscape of cliffs and
ravines pitted with grooves and cavities in
which sumptuous forms have been carved by
the hand of man.



The Valley of Moses
Everything in Petra speaks of history. Before
it even reaches the massif, the road runs
through the Wadi Musa ("the valley of
Moses"), at the entrance to which, under a
white dome, rises a spring reputed to be the
one the patriarch caused to flow from the rock
during his crossing of the desert.
Local tradition also claims that Moses'
brother Aaron is buried under the Djebel
Horoun ("Mount of Aaron"), where a small
white mosque supposedly shelters his tomb.
Charming in its rustic simplicity, it is a place
of annual pilgrimage.
Other legends have built up around the
Khazna Firaoun ("Pharaoh's Treasury"), an
astonishing cliff monument facing the mouth
of the Sik. It is topped by an urn that Bedouins
used to shoot at with their rifles in the hope
that from it would spill out the the gold of
the Pharaohs. The entire façade bears the scars
of their treasure-hunting.
Who were the sculptors and architects of
Petra? The Nabataeans, who probably origi¬
nated in southern Arabia, appeared in the
Middle East around the fourth century BC.
Strabo and Diodorus Siculus, two historians
of the Augustan era, tell us that the tribe con¬
sisted of some 10,000 nomadic Bedouins who
used to trade between Arabia and the Mediter¬
ranean. These caravaneers, "determined to
preserve their liberty . . . calling the desert
their homeland", who "have no vineyard or
field or seed, and have not built houses to
dwell in" (Jeremiah 35), nonetheless built an
empire with Petra as its capital. Diodorus Sic¬
ulus wrote of them: "They surpass other
Arabs in wealth, even though there are only
10,000 of them."
Petra benefited from a site that guaranteed
the security of its inhabitants and had its own
water source, the Aïn Musam element of
prime importance in the desert. Its location
at the crossroads of the trade routes linking
Syria to the Red Sea and India to the Gulf
and the Mediterranean gave them control of
the principal caravan routes with their traffic
in gold, precious stones, myrrh, incense,
spices, Phoenician purple, wood and exotic
animals.
King Obodas I, one of the great figures of
the Nabataean dynasty, ruled Petra during the
first century BC. Around the year 93, he
defeated Alexander Jannaeus, the king of the
Jews, in Golan, taking from him the lands of
Gilead and Moab. In 85, he killed the Syrian
king Antiochus XII in the Negev. These
events earned him divine status and he took
the title of Ilaha, meaning "God". The
Nabataean kingdom was now a power in the
Middle East and under Aretas III (84-62 BC)
it stretched from northern Arabia to the Sinai
peninsula and Damascus.
The Nabataean people underwent an
astonishing metamorphosis, the former
nomads becoming sedentary city-builders.
Many archaeological remains bear witness to
their urbanizing activities, of which Petra
remains the most spectacular example. The
city was to play a frequent part in the history
of the region in the days of Cleopatra, Herod
and John the Baptist.
In 64, Pompey created the Roman province
of Syria and, in 106, Trajan ordered its
governor to annex the Nabataean kingdom
and to turn it into the Roman province of
Arabia. The new territory was governed by
an envoy sent from Rome, and Petra itself was
given metropolitan status.
The region was gradually Romanized and,
little by little, its Nabataean character faded.
The desert fortress was unable to compete
with the economic might of the Roman giant
and, in the third century, bypassed by the new
trade routes, Petra went into a gradual decline.
Under Byzantine rule, a cave temple was trans¬
formed into a cathedral, a bishopric was
installed and Petra became a a Byzantine
administrative centre. In 636, after the battle
of the River Yarmuk, the Muslims took con¬
trol of the region, but since it was not on the
pilgrimage route to Mecca, Petra sank still fur¬
ther into decline and neglect.
At the time of the Crusades, the city, by
then in ruins, was occupied by the armies of
Baldwin I. In 1127, the crusaders built three
small forts there, the remains of which can still
be seen. The crusaders, however, did not stay
there long.
The last mention of Petra, in connection
with the Crusades, dates from 1276, during the
Syrian campaign of the Mamluk Sultan
Baybars against the crusaders. Subsequently,

48
Petra was lost in oblivion surviving, like Troy,
only as a legend.
A city reborn
In 1812, a Swiss traveller, Ludwig Burckhardt
(1784-1817), caught a glimpse of the rock-hewn
city while making a journey to Mecca dis¬
guised under the pseudonym of Sheik Ibrahim.
"I regret not being able to give a full report
on the antiquities of Sik", he wrote later, "but
... I was unprotected in the midst of the desert
where no traveller had previously gone. . . .
The inhabitants will grow used to the
enquiries of foreigners and then the antiqui¬
ties of Wadi Musa will be recognized as
worthy to figure among the most curious
remains of ancient art."
Burckhardt was soon followed by other
travellersin 1818, the British naval officers
Irby and Manglesi; in 1828, the Frenchmen
L. de Laborde and M.A. de Linant de Belle¬
fonds. In 1839, David Roberts made some fine
engravings of the site. From that time
Erosion has caused
extensive damage to
the Corinthian Tomb, right.
Preserving Petra
For several years, Jordan's Yarmuk University
has been involved in research into the weather¬
ing processes that are threatening façades and
monuments in Petra. Major studies have been
undertaken in collaboration with experts from
the Geological Institute at Aachen Technical
University in Germany, as well as with
specialists from the National Centre for Scien¬
tific Research, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and the EDF (electricity supply service) in
France.
Work is going ahead in the following areas:
Geological study of sedimentary rocks in the
Petra area.
Research into the tectonics of the Petra mas¬
sif. Some monuments, including, the Treasu¬
ry, are now showing serious cracks.
Laboratory testing of various adhesives that
could help to consolidate the stone and act as
a water-repellent. This preliminary investiga¬
tion will be followed by field tests on natural
rocks in the area in preparation for the actual
preservation of the façades.
Over the past year micro-climatic data have
been collected from Inside the Palace Tomb,
since temperature and humidity play an impor¬
tant part in the weathering process. In addi¬
tion, wind speed and direction just outside the
edifice are being measured, since strong winds
also cause damage.
T.S. AKASHEH
Higher Council for Science
and Technology, Amman, Jordan
onwards, a stream of scientific expeditions
followed. Petra was slowly reborn to become
today one of the principal tourist attractions
of the Middle East.
The erosion that originally sculpted the
wonderful landscape of Petra has begun to
cause serious damage to some of the cliff
monuments. Because they are carved from the
rock, they are relatively fragile. Like the
mountain that shelters them, they are alive.
There are many eroding agentsthe capillary
action of water, saline outgrowths,
sandstormsand their effects are cumulative, a
factor that complicates every attempt to coun¬
teract them. Controlling the tourist influx also
poses problems, for people can in some ways
be a supplementary agent of erosion.
In Jordan, the Department of Tourism
and Antiquities, Yarmuk University, and the
Higher Council for Science and Technology
are co-operating to analyse the evolution of
the site and to determine the measures that
need to be taken to protect it and to prevent
further damage. These interdisciplinary
studies, involving specialists from such coun¬
tries as France, Germany, the United States
and Italy, are beginning to produce results.
There are plans to establish a Petra Natural
and Archaeological Park.
Since 1969, UNESCO has collaborated
with the Jordanian Government and with
French and Spanish missions to complete a
large-scale photogrammetric relief map of the
site. Since 6 December 1985, the date on which
Petra was added to the World Heritage List,
the Organization has been giving technical and
financial assistance for the study and restora¬
tion of important monuments such as the
Palace Tomb and the Qasr el-Bint ("Castle of
the Pharaoh's Daughter").
JACËK REWERSKI is a French geographer who
specializes in erosion and conservation problems and
also in troglodytic settlements. Among his publications
are Le monde souterrain de l'Anjou ("The underground
world of Anjou", 1986) and a number of works on
erosion at Petra.
