The task before us by Joan Martin-Brown
Wo
"Those who are In positions
of leadership have a special
duty to support people In the
front lines of environmental
crises. They must raise their
voices for the voiceless."
Below, women and children
near Rosso in Mauritania.
ÍOMEN and the environment both provide
societies with shadow subsidies; each is an under¬
valued resource. Yet after all these years we are
still talking about the difficulty of putting dollar
signs on the value of nature and female labour.
In many communities civic concern about
the environment is the "Trojan Horse" for
citizen participation in local decision-making, and
many of the most courageous actors are women.
In many nations their commitment to live in har¬
mony with nature and to respect its capacity to
support life means questioning 300 years or more
of the compartmentalization of knowledge and
its separation from values. The process has gone
so far that today we try to divide urban from
rural policy and national from global realities.
Throughout history women have been the
integrators, the thread linking children and the
elderly, home and the resources of the commu¬
nity, the fruits of the field and the products
people use. If we are to survive the twenty-first
century and beyond, we must draw on their skill
to reconnect many disciplines the better to per¬
ceive the relationships between them. We need
to share the countrywoman's knowledge of food¬
stuffs, of flora and of fauna with the botanist, the
genetic expert, the technologist, the pharmacist,
the agricultural expert, and the engineer who
builds roads and dams in rural areas. We need
woman's voice in the design of habitats, whether
urban or rural, for around the world she is the
primary dweller. Male perceptions of social pri¬
orities and approaches to solving environmental
problems need to be enlightened and augmented
by the perceptions of women. By their inclusion,
the prospects for human development may be
doubled.
In recent times, many cultures and nations
have striven to dominate nature, to act as if they
are not part of it. Concurrently men and women
have found themselves increasingly cut off from
their children and communities. This is the exact
opposite of the situation in traditional cultures
and agrarian societies. We are the first generation
26

to put ourselves, through our self-indulgent ways,
in direct and deliberate competition with our chil¬
dren and their future.
Women must assert themselves to achieve
peace with nature. More and more they now
occupy positions of influence. Those who are in
positions of leadership have a special duty to sup¬
port people in the front lines of environmental
crises. They must raise their voices for the
voiceless.
Women must turn their attention, too, to the
decision-making processes which cause environ¬
mental destruction. They must be prepared to
educate others. Men have pretended for too long
that they can conquer nature; women can show
them how to conquer the future by placing their
decisions and activities within the context of what
nature can tolerate. This means no longer con
fusing needs and wants. What people need, the
environment was designed to provide. What
people want may put us all under sentence of
death.
All this can be changed. The human capacity
needed to heal the world is not lacking within
the community of women. The ability of women
to say "no" is alive and well. They must say "no"
to inappropriate development. They must say
"no" to industries which expect public money
to clean up what should not have been despoiled
in the first place, or expect the vast subsidies of
public taxes and growing bureaucracies to deal
with pollution. Women must say "no" to the
death and disease borne by contaminated land,
air and water systems. Only by women saying
"no" in this way can the world have hope in
saying "yes" to future generations.
JOAN MARTIN-BROWN,
of the United States, has for
more than 25 years held posts
in U.S. and international
organizations dedicated to
protecting the environment
and improving the status of
women. In 1991 she served as
co-ordinator of the Global
Assembly of Women and the
Environment, organized in
Miami by the United Nations
Environment Programme
(UNEP) and WorldWIDE
Network, which she founded.



The Global Assembly of Women
and the Environment
OMBARDED by news of oil spills, contamination by
toxic wastes and all kinds of environmental hazards, people
often wonder what they as individuals can do about it all.
Quite a lot, was the answer given recently by women from
seventy countries who met at a Global Assembly of Women
and the Environment to share their experiences of working
to combat environmental degradation.
The Assembly, held in Miami. Florida, from 4 to 8
November 1991, was organized by the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) and WorldWIDE Network,
an international non-governmental organization dedicated
to advancing women in environmental management. It
aimed, in the words of Dr. Mostafa K. Tolba, Executive
Director of UNEP. to "establish benchmarks for how men
and women can work together in specific ways to help
solve national, regional and global environmental
problems."
Over 200 projects presented at the Assembly showed
how women have taken the lead In heading off all kinds
of environmental disasters. These accomplishments,
chosen because they were "affordable, repeatable and
sustainable", ranged from the design of smokeless stoves,
solar cookers and solar greenhouses to action against
environmentally harmful projects such as dams that would
have eroded fertile soil and threatened drinking-water sup¬
plies, and road construction that threatened to cause
flooding.
Two projects, one from Asia and one from Latin
America, illustrate the kind of action being undertaken.
In India's Andhra Pradesh state, the degradation of produc¬
tive land had led to the erosion of topsoil and the choking
of water drainage systems, causing salinity, loss of food
crops and increasing unemployment in the villages. Led
by a local woman called Vasanth Kanibera, groups of vil¬
lage women decided to pool their resources and lease
degraded land. No bank was prepared to lend them money.
but they managed to raise a loan from a development
society.
They then revived the land by the use of traditional
farming methods in place of heavily-subsidized, market-
oriented, mono-crop agriculture. The techniques they
employed meant that there was no loss of topsoil, of crop
diversity or of wasted rainwater. The project eventually
involved 400 women in twenty villages. In three years, 700
acres of land were restored to productive use. The project
was so economically and ecologically sound that the
Government of India endorsed it for the entire state of
Andhra Pradesh.
Meanwhile, across the world in Brazil, a woman
doctor's investigation of a metallurgy factory that had
operated for two decades without proper controls provided
a case-study of successful action against industrial pol¬
lution. The factory had been emitting so much lead and
cadmium into the atmosphere that the surrounding area's
cadmium levels were found to be the highest in the world
and its lead levels among the world's worst. A local river
had also been despoiled by industrial wastes. Worse, the
factory had been offering free "dret" (powdered wastes
left after lead extraction) to poor families for paving
gardens, backyards and roads. It had also distributed, free
of charge, used filters from factory chimneys, which were
put to use as bedspreads and rugs. Ten per cent of the
children living near the factory were considered highly
intoxicated by lead and cadmium poisoning and another
17 per cent at risk. Intoxication causes brain and kidney
damage.
The doctor, Tania Tavares, took the lead in inves¬
tigating and rectifying the situation. Under her direction
a team of scientists and students of chemistry, biology
and medicine from the University of Bahia researched the
problem and proposed guidelines and solutions to local
authorities.
The factory management was obliged to reduce the
emissions of lead and cadmium and to accept responsi¬
bility for the medical care of poisoned children and adults.
Lead levels were subsequently reduced by about 38 per
cent and cadmium levels by 68 per cent. Nonetheless, the
local population continued to show high levels of exposure,
and Dr. Tavares and her team are still pursuing their
investigation. 27
