Women and Htim, an âme for survival
'Women know
intuitively that a
society which
turns its back on
Nature is doomed'
14
PERDITA HUSTON,
who has dual French and U.S.
nationality, is a former director
of the Population and
Sustainable Development
Programme at the World
Conservation Union. The
author of Third World Women
Speak Out (Praeger, New York,
1979), she is currently a
consultant with the United
Nations Development Fund for
Women.
X ROM the very beginning of human experience,
women's work has been close to, and dependent
upon, Nature. In early hunter-gatherer societies,
women collected seeds, nuts and roots to feed
their families and communities. Survival was
dependent upon an intimate knowledge of
Nature and her ways. This remains true in many
regions today. Women know intuitively that a
society which turns its back on Nature is
doomed. And many women today believe that
the dominant forces of global society are, in fact,
ignoring Nature's needs.
Everywhere the natural environment is being
over-exploited, weakened and soiled. Evidence
abounds that the dangers of uncontrolled indus¬
trialization are leading to the pollution of lakes
and rivers and to human tragedies like that which
occurred at Bhopal (India), where thousands died
as a result of a deadly gas leak from a chemical
plant in 1984. Just as obvious are the large-scale
loss of tree cover, soils and biological diversity
as a result. of uncontrolled economic develop¬
ment, and the horrors of chemical warfare and
nuclear power and testing.
Women have learned that their breast milk
is contaminated with dioxin, that pesticides and
herbicides are present in ground water. They are
told that the life-giving Sun is becoming dan¬
gerous due to a weakened ozone layer, that chil¬
dren everywhere are vulnerable to genetic dis¬
orders caused by contaminated environments.
Women have observed these phenomena and feel
alienated from a society which has lost touch with
the beauty and power of Nature. They fear that
future generations will be deprived of the diver¬
sity of Nature's creatures and of the music of bird
song.
Another fear emerges from women's histor¬
ical experience. Over the millennia women have
watched as men fought each other, often over
by Perdita Huston
access to Nature's resources. Women always then
picked up the pieces, planted crops anew, nursed
the sick and wounded, and carried on. So it still
is today.
As the planet's natural resources diminish,
and as a growing world population increases
demands on those resources, competition for
access to them will escalate. This struggle for
limited resources may well result in new resource
wars. Evidence of growing pressure is found in
nations which depend on the Nile or the
Euphrates, in Europe where the fouling of soils,
rivers and air by neighbouring nations is a source
of sickness and friction, and in the world's seas
where competing mechanized fishing fleets of
powerful nations deplete fish stocks of the poor
coastal and island peoples.
Fear for the futureof a damaged and dan¬
gerous natural environment or of the violence it
bringsis what unites women in today's world.
Margarita Arias, the former First Lady of
Costa Rica, added another dimension to women's
perspective when she said, "No one speaks out
for the protection of the environment with
greater moral authority than women. Only those
who have fought for the right to protect their
own bodies from abuse can truly understand the
rape and plunder of our forests, rivers and soils."
Her words reach deeply into women's experience
and being, and also help to explain women's dis¬
missal of the argument which focuses blame for
environmental degradation solely on uncon¬
trolled population growth.
Environmental degradationwho are
the real culprits?
It is true that excessive population growth rates
in some areas far exceed the capacity of commu¬
nities or nations to provide for new citizens. It
is also true that pressures on the fragile

V
!*V
'
'««**
:«v
i..rf!
\i
*
«sf
¿t-'* - '-vr
s
,
1
">'.
-ST*
*».
ecosystems of some nations with high fertility
rates are increasing at an alarming rate. At the
same time it must never be forgotten that a child
born in an industrialized country makes far more
demands on the world's natural resources than
a poor child in a poor nation. Industries and bus¬
inesses which consume resources and produce
polluting wastes are also more likely to be located
in the highly industrialized nations. Addressing
consumption patterns at the same time as one dis¬
cusses population growth rates is necessary to
refocus attention on the complexities of the
problem.
The major environmental threats to life on
Earth are the weakening of the ozone layer,
which protects all living creatures from the
damaging effects of the Sun's rays, and the
phenomenon of climate change with its attendant
rise in sea levels and changes in food production
patterns. These occurrences can hardly be blamed
on the large families of the poor. Unclean indus¬
trial production, chemical pollutants, the burning
of fossil fuels and official reluctance to curtail the
damage they cause are more appropriate candi¬
dates for attention.
Consumption patterns in wealthy nations,
militarism and poverty are major causes of pres¬
sures on natural systems. Paring back needless
"Women's labour has been
unpaid, and thus considered
without 'value', since time
began." Above, women
washing clothes in Sumatra
(Indonesia).
consumption and allocating a fraction of military
expenditures to human development and social
services and to the eradication of poverty, would
diminish pressures on the natural environment.
Hundreds of millions of w.omen have no
access to reproductive health care or family plan¬
ning services. Half a million of them die each year
of pregnancy-related causes. Millions more are
permanently maimed or ill. This is a major
public-health crisis which has gone unnoticed for
far too long. Providing reproductive health
services to the 300-500 million women who wish
to plan their families would improve women's
health and lower birth rates as well. It is simply
a matter of allocating the needed resources.
Plundering the 'free gifts'
of Nature
Women believe that the present world economic
order is the major cause of environmental degra¬
dation. The global reach of the current economic
structure is well known, and in the free market
system, which seeks profit at all costs, it is easy
to disregard Nature: her "gifts" are free.
Who could be better placed to understand
this point of view than women? Women's labour
has been unpaid, and thus considered without
"value", since time began. In Gross Domestic 15

Product (GDP) accounts, no monetary value is
attached to women's contributions to national
economies as family-farm labourers, food
processors, providers of health care, carers for the
elderly, cooks, cleaners, laundresses, and teachers
and nurturers of children. Through long
experience women have learned that societies
attach little value to that which can be exploited
without cost. And so it has been with Nature.
We live in a world which has plundered its life-
giving ecological systems for the benefit of the
few.
In Africa, Asia and Latin America, impover¬
ished peasants drift into crowded cities. In Europe
and the United States agro-businesses are pushing
family farms out of existence. In the state of Iowa
'alone, 20,000 farming families left the land in the
last decade because they were unwilling or unable
to compete with profit-driven, high-tech,
mechanized, chemical-assisted agriculture. Like
their counterparts in the developing world, these
farm families are often obliged to seek employ¬
ment in hostile urban settings.
Foreign 'aid'
from poor to rich
The debt burdens of poor nations have resulted
in structural adjustment policies mandated by the
multilateral lending institutions. Such policies
require the reallocation of national resources to
Right, women in Burkina Faso
grind karite nuts to extract oil
seed for cooking.
Opposite page, a mother
breastfeeds her twins while
weeding around seedlings at a
tree nursery in the Paro valley
(Bhutan).
Below, learning to use
pesticides at a workshop
organized in Sumatra
(Indonesia) in October 1991
by the United Nations
Development Fund for
Women.
16

systems and the societies which depend upon
them.
They are speaking up and pointing out the
connections between economic policy and
environmental and human impoverishment.
They arc deeply troubled by the increasing in¬
equities between the quality of life in the indus¬
trialized nations and that in the so-called
"developing" nations. While millions of women
walk for hours every day in search of a few twigs
with which to cook a single meagre meal, others
open cans of chemical-laden foods and cook them
in microwave ovens. Women are outraged by dis¬
parities in the nutrition, education, health and
opportunities available to the world's children.
Tens of millions of street children are the result
of failed "development".
They are demanding accountability from
governments and corporations. They realize that
they have been poorly informed about the
dangers of the contemporary world. They iden¬
tify with the ill-informed victims of dumped toxic
wastes, the residues of faraway industry, and of
military activities which damage the environment
and are shrouded in secrecy in the name of
national security.
They are denouncing those traditional
national security strategies, saying they no longer
apply to the contemporary world. Based on
weaponry, domination of trade and of regions of
provide for debt repayment. All too often, social
service budgets are diminished in the search for
additional funds, depriving families of health care,
education and family planning services. In addi¬
tion, in an absurd form of reverse foreign aid,
poor governments export precious natural
resources and capital to repay "national debt" to
the commercial banks of wealthy nations.
A recent series of meetings held in prepara¬
tion for the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development brought together
women environmentalists, social workers, poli¬
ticians and feminists from diverse cultures and
nations (see pages 27 and 37). From these
gatherings emerged consensus on the dimensions
and causes of the human and ecological crises
which we witness today. Women from the so-
called "developing world", industrialized nations
and the new nations of Eastern Europe expressed
similar views on the state of the world. They no
longer feel separated by geography or by polit¬
ical systems for they recognize a common threat
to long-term human survival.
They denounce the development model
which has produced such shameful consequences.
The international economic order is not only
unbalanced and unjust, it also destroys ecological 17

the world, these concepts are creating the very
problems which undermine the security of
natural systems.
The logic is simple: there can be no national
security without global environmental security.
Weaponry cannot provide us with global
environmental health. Only a change in lifestyles,
the adoption of ethical values consistent with
long-term respect for and protection of Nature,
and the development of environmentally-friendly
industries and energy sources, will allow us to live
lightly on the planet. As a basic human right,
"natural systems security" presupposes a radical
change in the thinking and responsibility of
global and national leadership. Yet "leaders" con¬
tinue to conduct business as usual, continue to
,take secret decisions affecting the world's seas,
polar regions, skies and forests.
Next June delegations from all over the world
will gather in Brazil to discuss global environment
and development policy for the next century at
the first "Earth Summit", the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development
(UNCED).
The Conference is providing a rallying point
for those concerned about the long-term habita-
bility of thé 'planet, but will the participants
recognize that survival depends on a redefinition
of development and its underlying values, a res¬
tructuring of the world economy to preserve
human and environmental rights? Will this Earth
Summit produce the acts of political vision and
courage which have been so lacking in the past?
Development must be built on a foundation
of human and environmental rights and dignity.
People-centred, environmentally sustainable
strategies must replace the economically oriented
policies of the past. Adjustments in life-style and
expectations must be made and, yes, all' this will
no doubt be costly. But the cost of not acting will
be far greater.
Transforming the way
we live on Earth
At the conclusion of the Global Assembly for
Women and Environment and the World Con¬
gress of Women for a Healthy Planet, held in
Miami, Florida, in November 1991, delegates
denounced nuclear power and called for boycotts
of non-environmentally friendly industries and
products. Cancellation of official bilateral debt
was deemed a first step in alleviating the
devastating structural adjustment demands made
on poor countries. This new women's move¬
ment, which joins environmental and human
rights, is bound to grow and strengthen. It is a
movement which calls into question the sectoral
approach to world problems and outmoded ideas
of security.
The women's visions that created Rachel
Carson's Silent Spring, the Greenham Common
protest in the United Kingdom, the Kenyan
Green Belt Movement and Costa Rica's Guarari
community housing, will prevail. But although
women are finding remarkable solutions at the
local level, they realize that these efforts will fail
if spoliation at the global level continues. Women
now challenge the world's governments and the
United Nations system to work with them to
create a healthy global environment in which all
species will thrive.
Indian women laden with
baskets of coal.
18
