A golden age of dialogue
Mixing reason and intuition, the
pre-Socratic philosophers of
ancient Greece reached some
surprisingly modern conclusions
and developed a spirit of
intellectual tolerance that still
has much to teach us
by Yassilis Vassilikos
AT the wellspring of universalist thought,
the pleiad of philosophers known as the
pre-Socratics belong not just to their
homelands the Greek and Sicilian coasts of
ancient Ionia but to the world. They deserve
to be known as philosophers of the Universe,
or philosophers of the four corners of the
Earth, or philosophers of the infinite.
To start alphabetically, Alcmaeon was the
first philosopher to discuss the importance of
the human brain, that most perfect of com¬
puters, which he described as a primordial ele¬
ment. A little later, another pre-Socratic,
Democritus, put forward ideas prefiguring the
first electronic brain and atomic fission. But
Alcmaeon, a pupil of Pythagoras in his later
years, has the honour of having introduced to
Western thought the Chinese concepts of yin
and yang when he spoke of humankind's essen¬
tial duality and claimed that the unitary state,
with no counter-balance, is a cause of sickness.
Duality was, of course, subsequently to prove
fundamental to the development of computers,
through the concepts of "input" and "output".
Democritus, with Leucippus (often des¬
cribed as his twin), developed the original
atomic theory. He was the first thinker to
affirm that nothing exists other than atoms
and the void. His dialectical materialism,
which presented nature as a single entity
whose parts were all linked, has been borne
out by the scientific discoveries of our 57

Mercury (Roman equivalent
of the Greek god Hermes)
with his caduceus, or staff,
adorns the façade of a house
at Melk, Austria.
58
Vassilis Vassilikos, a writer
and essayist who was exiled
from his native Greece during
the dictatorship of the
colonels, is the author of
several novels, the best-
known of which, Z, was
filmed by Costa Gavras. He
was in charge of Greek
television from 1981 to
1985, and now lives in Paris,
where he has recently
published a novel,
L'Hélicoptère (1991).
century, the century of the atom, of the theory
of relativity and of quantum mechanics. In the
1920s and 1930s in Copenhagen, Born, Schrö-
dinger, Kramers and Dirac conducted experi¬
ments on quantum mechanics and on the
uncertainty principle, the law of physics that
most directly rebuts Plato's social ideas and the
logic of Aristotle.
Heraclitus introduced the concept of psy¬
chosomatic influences on health, which has
been considerably developed in our time. One
of his fundamental beliefs was that antithesis
and antagonism are the causes of progress and
development. "War is the mother of all things,"
he claimed. Everything decays and is changed,
except for the law of change itself. Another of
his ideas, which appeared paradoxical at the
time but which anticipated many modern
scientific discoveries, was that the universe dies
and comes to life in alternating epochs, having
neither a Creator, a beginning nor an end in
time. Is the physicist's law of the conservation
of energy not the clearest possible confirmation
that the Universe is infinite and immortal?
Some years later, Empedocles foretokened
the eternal nature of matter. "Foolish men," he
wrote, "how could it be possible that anything
should come from nothing? Movement and
immobility, life and death are merely two faces
of the same reality." Yet it was not until 2,500
years later, in the eighteenth century, that
Leibniz and Lavoisier discovered the law of the
indestructibility of matter. And contemporary
atomic science has calculated that, while the
lifespan of certain atomic particles is extremely
short, every electron, proton or neutron has
always been in existence. The universe is made
up of these basic building-blocks, and it is cer¬
tain that nothing is born of nothing. "Nothing
is born of nothing and whatever is has always
been and always will be. There is neither begin¬
ning nor end. Nothing departs, for nothing has
ever arrived." So claimed Melissos, one of the
least known of the pre-Socratics, but none the
less important for that. Others of his fellows
would add precision to the concept of con¬
tinual creation: Pherecydes of Syros said that
"Water is born of time".
The beginnings
of pluralism
At the beginning of the sixth century BC,
Thaïes travelled by boat from Miletus to Egypt
with the intention of studying in the temples of
Thoth or Hermes, god of learning. On his
return, he amazed his compatriots by declaring:
"The Sun and stars are only spheres of fire of
colossal dimensions." His disciple Anaxi-
mander thought that the world originated as an
undifferentiated mass of primitive and arid
matter. He explained that this mass had grad¬
ually condensed from a gas to a liquid before
solidifying, and he stressed the role that tem¬
perature played in the birth of the world. Other
thinkers sought a comprehensive explanation in
mathematics. Philolaos, for example, con¬
sidered that "everything is numbers. Without
numbers there is neither knowledge nor
thought." And the essential power of numbers
for him lay in a decimal system.
Modern physicists have similar concerns.
Werner Heisenberg wrote that "It is perhaps
interesting to note that the problem of determi¬
ning whether the original matter is one known
to us, or something different placed above it,
re-emerges in a different form in contemporary
physics. Physicists today are trying to establish
a fundamental law of the movement of matter,
just as the pre-Socratics did in their day, a law
that would explain all the elementary particles
and their singularities." "Consequently," Hei¬
senberg noted, "in the last analysis mathe¬
matical forms replace regular bodies according
to a process that is virtually identical to that of
the Pythagoreans, whereby harmonic vibrations
can be obtained by differently arranging the
tension of strings." For Pythagoras, numbers
were "the principal elements of nature".
Thaïes, "the first astronomer to predict

Left,
bronze statuette
(7th-6th century BC) of the
ancient Egyptian Moon-god
Thoth, whom the Greeks
identified with Hermes.
eclipses of the Sun and explain the solstices",
was the founder of a new tradition of freedom
of thought, according to the British philoso¬
pher Karl Popper. The critical attitude dis¬
played by disciples towards the teaching of
their masters was a feature of the philosophy of
the Ionian school. Thaïes could tolerate criti¬
cism, and even encouraged it. That was some¬
thing new. It marked a break with the previous
tradition whereby each school had a single doc¬
trine. Acceptance of a plurality of doctrines led
inevitably to an awareness that our attempts to
understand and explain the truth are not final
but open to improvement, and that knowledge
and ideology are influenced by circumstances.
Popper believes that one of the most important
lessons to be learned from the pre-Socratic phi¬
losophers is that all of them, with the exception
of the Pythagoreans, accepted a critical attitude
and even open disagreement without ostraci¬
zing dissenters.
The path
of dialogue
Parmenides was not only the physicist who
said "Everything comes from Necessity; Earth
and Sun and Moon and air that is common to
all and the Milky Way and the glowing stars".
He was also a poet who wrote that "Every¬
where Eros encourages base procreation and
parturition, driving the female to the male to
join in union." Anaxagoras showed the same
concern for unity: "The visible is the aspect of
The Greek philosopher
and sage Heraclitus of
Ephesus (c. 576-480 BC).
Engraving by an unknown
artist (17th-18th century).
59

The Greek philosopher Empedocles (c. 490-c. 435 BC). 17th-century engraving.
60
the invisible", he wrote; "the spirit rules every¬
thing" and "what had to be, what was and is no
longer, what is now and what will be all this
the spirit has known and has disposed in good
order by its rotation." So did Xenophanes, who
wrote that "The vast sea engendered the waters,
the winds and the rivers," and Anaximander,
who claimed that "Heat separated from cold at
the creation of the world and formed a burning
sphere around the atmosphere of the planet like
bark around a tree-trunk. And the sphere split
in two to form two spheres, that of cold and
that of heat, born of the matrix at the birth of
the world."
The ideas of the pre-Socratics can therefore
be seen as astonishing intuitions of modern
experimental science. After the pre-Socratics,
according to Popper, humanity sank into the
wintry torpor of the Middle Ages until our own
time, when Einstein, with his discoveries with
regard to movement, mass, energy and time,
offered a new image of the old universe.
Popper's views may be summarized as follows:
pre-Socratic philosophy shows us the way of
debate, from which truth can emerge, whereas
dogmatic religions and rigid ideologies are
monologues delivered by a single speaker who
thinks he has a monopoly of the truth. No such
monopoly can exist. The notion of complemen¬
tarity that characterizes atomic structure and
the quanta presupposes an awareness that two
different descriptions of an experience can be
equally valuable, and are both indispensable
even though they remain irreconcilable. I would
add, myself, that the law of indeterminacy re¬
inforces this message.
The pre-Socratic philosophers investigated
not just the Earth but the universe. Today they
would be involved in star-wars research. As one
American researcher has put it, "The psycho¬
logy of the common man in the twentieth cen¬
tury is hardly different in its outlines from that
of a sixteenth-century merchant or a four¬
teenth-century peasant, even if modern man has
a car and a television set. Future historians will
be astonished by the gap between the scientific
discoveries of our time and the anachronistic
attitudes we have inherited from the Middle
Ages. This chasm is one of the causes of our
present material and psychological crisis. For a
good example of right thinking and judgement,
we could turn to the golden century of the
Greek pre-Socratics, at a time when philosophy
was synonymous with scientific thought."
And, I would add, at a time when tech¬
nology was not limited to the capacities of the
computer. Humankind cannot live without
intuition. All the great thinkers, like all the
astronauts, have turned to poetry to describe
the miracle they saw. And poetry, along with
scientific knowledge, is what we find in pre-
Socratic philosophy. O
