Gorée, island ofslaves
by Caroline Haardt
48
LYING off the Senegalese coast less than
four kilometres from Dakar, whose
roadstead it closes, the island of Gorée
was for more than three centuries the object of
bitter disputes between rival European nations.
Its charming little port, protected by a small
bay, provided an ideal anchorage for the ships
that took African slaves to the colonies across
the Atlantic.
In the Middle Ages, all that Europe knew
of black Africa was the Moroccan coast as far
as Cape Bojador. But in the fifteenth century
the discoveries of the Renaissance revolutio¬
nized navigational techniques: the compass and
the astrolabe made their appearance, as did the
caravel, which took the place of galleys and the
fragile cogs of the Crusades. Cosmographers
affirmed that the world was round and that it
should be possible to circle it. Spain and Por¬
tugal, then at the summit of their power, were
ready to take on any challenge. The rulers of
Aragon and Castile sent Christopher
Columbus to discover the New World, while
Portugal's Prince Henry, known as the Navi¬
gator, sent off to Africa the caravels that would
discover the maritime spice route.
In 1444, Portuguese explorers under the
command of Dinis Diaz passed the mouth of
the Senegal river and reached, off Cape Verde, a
small uninhabited island about 900 metres long
by 300 wide, which they called Palma. Gorée's
turbulent history had begun: the island would
subsequently change hands seventeen times!
Portuguese and Dutch
Gorée became a port of call much used by Por¬
tuguese vessels, and Fernando Po, Vasco da
Gama, Francis Xavier, Camöes and many other
explorers and missionaries landed there on
their way to the Orient. But the island is tiny
and infertile, and it long remained uninhabited.
The Portuguese who had appropriated it pre¬
ferred to build their bases on the mainland.
They nonetheless allowed English, French and
Dutch merchants to repair their boats there
and to assemble a fleet of small wooden vessels,
as a result of which the island became known
as "the isle of longboats".
In 1558, when the Portuguese no longer
ruled the seas, the Dutch took control of Palma,
which they renamed Gorée (Goede Reede
means "good anchorage" in Dutch). They built
two forts, Nassau and Orange, giving the island
a military purpose which it continued to serve
until the Second World War. The fortifications
were strengthened and kept under repair by
successive occupiers of the island.
The Dutch, Portuguese and French long
disputed control of this strategically located
base, where trading companies made fortunes
dealing in gold, gum, wax, hides and ivory.
Gorée became a fortified trading-post, over¬
flowing with African products and European
merchandise. But its most lucrative business
lay elsewhere, in the tragic slave trade.
This traffic had a long history in Africa.
For centuries slaves were transported north¬
wards to the countries of the Maghreb. Then,
with the coming of the Europeans, the slave
trade expanded to America and the West
Indies. After the arrival of the Portuguese in
the fifteenth century, Africans began to be
shipped in boatloads to Portugal, where they
were employed as domestic servants or agricul¬
tural labourers. The discovery of the Atlantic
islands, where sugar-cane cultivation was soon
established, increased the demand for slave
labour. The kidnapping of slaves became too
haphazard a means of supply, and was replaced
by regular trafficking carried out with the
complicity of certain African princes.
The House of Slaves (before restoration).
The appetite of the traders was boundless.
It has been estimated that in half a century the
Portuguese carried off some 150,000 African
slaves. Soon Senegal and the Gambia could no
longer satisfy their needs, and they went far
inland in search of communities willing to pro¬
vide them with slaves. Later, in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, it would be the turn
of the so-called Slave Coast (today's Gabon and
Angola) to furnish human cargoes to be dis¬
patched to Brazil and the West Indies. But
Gorée, where the slaves were assembled and
branded before being sent off to America, long
remained one of the pivots of this odious traffic.
Even before reaching Gorée, the slaves
were sorted into ethnic groups and put in
irons. On the island they were made to work
in spite of their chains. They were used to
break rocks, "shift earth, roll water barrels and
unload small boats." The women and children,
who were not fettered, prepared meals and
worked as servants. At night the slaves were
crammed into fetid, unlit lockups. Those who
rebelled were put in barred cells until the time
came for their embarkation, when the com¬
pany mark was branded onto them with a red-
hot iron.
The stay on Gorée was particularly distres¬
sing, and the inhuman and degrading treatment
meted out to the slaves sometimes drove them
to revolt. These risings were usually violent,
and although they were repressed with great
cruelty, they continued to occur. In Africa as in
the Americas, the blacks never resigned them¬
selves to their pitiful condition. Their determi¬
nation to break the yoke actively contributed
to the abolition of the slave trade, and of the
institution of slavery itself, at the start of the
nineteenth century.
Historians have estimated that the total
number of slaves transported out of black
Africa was between fifteen and thirty million.
It is impossible to know how many passed
through Gorée, but it is certain that the very
name of the island must have long inspired bit¬
terness and terror.
Happier times
But the history of Gorée does not end with the
slave trade. The contacts between Africans and
Europeans created a unique, mixed-blood
society there. In the wake of the first Portu¬
guese mariners to put into Gorée came an

influx of adventurers known as laucados who
mingled with the indigenous population, adopt¬
ing their clothing, language and customs.
They grew rich by trading slaves and other
merchandise, until the French East India Com¬
pany declared a monopoly of commerce from
1677 and brought about their decline. But the
departure of the Portuguese did not mean the
end of the Creole cultural melting pot, which
continued under the Dutch, English and
French.
In the eighteenth century the population of
the island was made up of agents of the East
India Company, a garrison of soldiers and a
free black community who themselves owned
slaves. The tropical climate did not suit Euro¬
peans, who were always the first to suffer from
diseases for which treatment was then un¬
known. The menfolk therefore took wives and
concubines from among the islanders, contract¬
ing what were known as "local marriages". The
mulatto offspring of these unions became
natural intermediaries between the European
trading companies and the mainland African
chiefs.
The mulatto women were known as
signares (from the Portuguese senhora). Rich,
powerful, covered in jewels and surrounded by
servants and slaves whose hair was tressed with
golden coins, they reigned over the balls and
social life of the island, splendidly combining
business and pleasure. In 1767, Cathy Louet, the
signare of Captain Aussenac, was the wealth¬
iest landowner on the island. On her estate, an
acre in extent, she built a vast mansion and



employed sixty-eight house slaves. A plan of
the island drawn in 1779 by Evrard Duporel
shows eleven villas out of eighteen belonging
to beautiful mixed-race women such as Anne
Pépin, Victoria Albis and Hélène Aussenac.
Gorée's high society led a leisured and
sophisticated life, modeling its manners on
those currently fashionable in France. There
was a vogue for building with the yellow
marble extracted from the Castel hill some¬
times to the cost of the island's fortifications.
When the marble ran out, it was replaced with
basalt or Dakar clay. The bricks were cemented
with a mortar of conchiferous limestone mixed
with sand. The landscape of the island took on
its present form: in the south-west, the bar¬
racks; in the south the village of Gourmettes
with its population of Christians and educated
and baptised blacks; in the east the dwellings of
the Bambara. The main public buildings were
the hospital and the church. Slave quarters
occupied all the lower part of the island, until
Nicolas Pépin, a brother of the celebrated
signare, built the "House of Slaves".
In 1848 Gorée joyfully celebrated the abo¬
lition of slavery. Fifteen years earlier, its popu¬
lation had peaked at 5,000 inhabitants. Hence¬
forth it would be the home of only free men
and women. 49

UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
50
After a period of adaptation the island was
given new uses. Schools and religious congre¬
gations inaugurated a new round of construc¬
tion. Gorée became a free port, and businesses,
shops and bazaars proliferated. From this
period of prosperity have survived some cool
and elegant houses with balconies and veran¬
dahs, wooden galleries and tiled roofs.
The years of decline
By the end of the nineteenth century, the island
was overpopulated and could no longer satisfy
the ambitions of its inhabitants. It gradually
lost its commercial privileges to the new
capital, Dakar. In commercial matters too it got
left behind, not being able to meet the financial
demands of ground-nut cultivation. The
railway which now linked Saint-Louis to
Dakar on the mainland did not help. With the
opening of the Suez Canal, Gorée lost its final
asset. Boats sailing for Asia no longer broke
their journey there.
By 1910 the island's population had been
reduced by half, and by 1931 there were only
300 inhabitants left. (There are 900 today).
Terrible epidemics of yellow fever had struck
in 1859, 1878 and 1927, and contaminated
houses were razed to the ground. Gorée sank
into a sleep from which it has never entirely
awakened.
Now the drowsy little island lives on
memories of the carefree luxury and suffering
of its past, to the rhythm of the daily coming
and going of the boat that links it to the main¬
land. But new dangers are threatening. Humi¬
dity and salt are taking their toll of the build¬
ings, and there are no longer enough
inhabitants to maintain them as in former days.
Unable to meet the challenge from Dakar,
Gorée has become a dormitory suburb. With
CAROLINE HAARDT, French journalist, was a
staff member of Unesco's Division of Cultural
Heritage from 1983 to 1987.
ANTONELLA VERDIANI is an Italian architect
who from 1987 to 1990 lived on the island of
Gorée, where she took part in the safeguard
campaign. She has been commissioned by the
EEC to carry out a study on the rehabilitation of
Gorée as a living community.
no local economic activity to keep them, the
islanders look for work in the capital. Mean¬
while, the island has been invaded by part-time
residents who are turning the old slave-
quarters into second homes.
In 1980, Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow,
then Director-General of UNESCO, launched
an international campaign to preserve the
island. He did so to prevent it from falling into
oblivion, and to enable it to become instead "a
place for meditation . . . where those who are
most aware of the tragedies of their history
will gain a more real sense of justice and
brotherhood."

