The cartoon
Animation by Béatrice Cormier-Rodier and
Béatrice Fleury-Vi latte
Japanese
animated
cartoons have
won a
worldwide
market. What is
the secret of
their success?
Above, the intergalactic
robot Grandizer.
THE Japanese animation industry has vast
financial resources. The foundations of its
wealth were laid in the 1950s with the set¬
ting up of production companies whose goal
was to make "the most screen hours for the
least money". Ever since those early days, com¬
panies such as Toei Animation and Tokyo
Movie have had a meticulous and inexpensive
workforce that has enabled them to produce
material at competitive prices.
At the same time a skilful marketing strat¬
egy, working to a model similar to that of the
American market, was established, linking ani¬
mation, advertising and the sale of spin-off pro¬
ducts such as toys, articles of clothing, badges
and books. Specialized boutiques opened up in
Japan's big cities to sell products inspired by
stories and characters from popular cartoons.
Since 1987, the sale of videos of the most suc¬
cessful television series has further boosted the
market.
Television made a big contribution to the
development of mass-market animated cartoon
films. Astro Boy (Tetsuwar Atomu) was the
first series to be broadcast on Japanese televi¬
sion. Inspired by Shonen, a children's maga¬
zine, it told the story of a robot child and his
family who defend peace by fighting the forces
of evil. Produced by Osamu Tezuka and his
firm Mushi Production, it introduced a
"limited-animation" technique that saved
considerable time and money at the price of
slowing down the flow of images a feature of
Japanese cartoons that has since attracted much
criticism. Nonetheless, the success of Astro
Boy, which from the start attracted a 30 per 17

In a Japanese film studio, a
designer sketches frames for
a cartoon featuring Captain
Harlock.
cent audience rating, whetted the appetite of
both producers and the public for television
series.
18
BEATRICE CORMIER-RODIER,
of France, is a lecturer in
Information and
Communications at the
University of Nancy-ll. She is
the author of a number of
books including Le choc La
presse des camps de
concentration (1985) as well
as articles on the cinema and
animation.
BÉATRICE FLEURY-VIIATTE,
of France, is a lecturer in
Information and
Communications at the
University of Nancy-ll. She
contributed to Révoltes-
Révolutions-Cinéma (a
collective work prepared under
the editorship of the historian
Marc Ferro, 1989) and herself
edited a book on the media
and the Gulf War, Médias et
guerre du Golfe (1992).
In the first rush of enthusiasm, Ace, Space
Boy, Man of Steel No. 28, Ken, the Wolf Boy
and Emperor of the Jungle went into produc¬
tion. In February 1963 there were forty-two
weekly cartoon series on Japanese television; in
1965 there were sixty-one. Currently Japanese
television programmes forty-five hours and
forty minutes of animated cartoons per week.
The conquest of Europe in the mid-1970s
was an easy matter. Efficient and profitable, the
Japanese companies met little opposition.
Grandizer (Goldorak) was enormously suc¬
cessful with children. Its hero, an ingenious
adventurer from another world who leaped
onto fantastic machines to help the helpless,
enjoyed a symbiotic relationship with a robot
that could change shape at his command. In
combat, the two became indistinguishable,
forming a single war machine.
Internationalizing form
and content
In addition to science fiction and adventure
series, two new genres were established. There
were sentimental series such as Heidi and
Candy, and series on sporting themes, such as
Olive and Tom, A New Life, and Attack No. 1.
By now Japanese animated cartoons had, to
improve their sales prospects, increasingly to
appeal to viewers of different ethnic and cul¬
tural backgrounds. To universalize the attrac¬
tions of their heroes, the physical characteris¬
tics and lifestyles of the characters were
therefore defined with less precision. In the
1970s, Osamu Tezuka introduced a graphic
style that removed all specifically Oriental cha¬
racteristics from the appearance of the charac¬
ters. Ever since, Japanese animated cartoons
have featured huge-eyed heroes with flowing
manes of blonde or brown hair.
A similar taste for Western characters is also
perceptible in advertising and the cinema, and
has even led some actors to undergo cosmetic
surgery. Some animated cartoons such as Gu
Gu Ganmo carry the attitude to excess by
giving stupid or unpleasant characters Oriental
features. Financial considerations encourage the
process, since the same characters are often
used in more than one film, with little more
than a moustache added or removed, or a
change of hairstyle or clothing.
Heroines may be blonde (as in Candy), red¬
headed like Tony in Reporter's Blues or Julie in
Daddy Longlegs, brunettes as in Julie, I Love
You, or even given flowing blue tresses, as in
Creamy and Sally the Witch. Their eyes are
deep blue or green, and their lifestyle is indis¬
tinguishable from that of young European or
American women. Their behaviour is thereby

Candy dolls, which sell in
their millions in Tokyo, are
one of many spin-off
products Inspired by
Japanese animation films.
neatly adapted to Western standards and so
to the international market without transgres¬
sing Japanese social norms. The Westernization
of cartoon characters thus provides a kind of
cultural alibi, even within Japan itself.
The heroines of these series are often in¬
spired by Western literature. Candy calls Heidi
to mind, Princess Sarah draws on the French
fairy-tale Peau d'âne, Nadia could be Captain
Nemo's daughter and spiritual heir. Some of
the stories even take place abroad: Candy is set
in the United States, Reporter's Blues and
Daddy Longlegs in France. In The Little Chef
characters try out foreign dishes, and the
heroes of Olive and Tom travel to Europe to
meet the local football teams.
Children's favourites
The films' subject-matter is very diverse, draw¬
ing on the world of children everywhere. For
example, the animal citizens of Maple Town in
Maple Town Story, with a family to represent
each species, call to mind children's relation¬
ships with their parents and with each other. In
each episode young viewers are constantly
encouraged to identify with the characters.
These programmes have affinities with such
European productions as Petit Ours brun.
Candy was launched in France in 1979,
opening the way for a succession of altruistic
heroines given to sacrificing themselves for
others. Gorgie, Princesse Saphir, Hello Sandy-
bell and Nadia all draw on familiar and well-
loved children's storylines. Like Candy, the
eponymous heroines of the latter two series are
orphans. The other characters in the cartoons
may be protective or threatening, but they do
not exist outside their relationship with the
heroine.
Each episode follows a set pattern: the
social order is first threatened or disturbed, and
then re-established. The main character always
has a mission helping someone or other, pre¬
venting a wrong or finding the person who
committed it. The other characters are good or
bad insofar as they help or hinder her in the
performance of her duty. Devoted to helping
the weak and promoting the good of society as
a whole, she eventually overcomes all obstacles,
and adventure and suspense, laughter and tears
pave the way to the obligatory happy ending.
Japanese producers have not merely drawn
on the plotlines of children's literature: they
have also adapted many of its greatest suc¬
cesses, including Pinocchio, Les Misérables,
Tom Sawyer, Huckleberry Finn, Alice in Won¬
derland and the French classic Sans famille.
The series are very long and not always faithful
to the original texts, though the decor and his¬
torical reconstruction are normally carefully
researched. These adaptations offer children
not just storylines of the type described above,
19

Characters from a popular
Japanese TV cartoon series.
but also a chance to rediscover on screen what¬
ever peoples their imagination and increases
their pleasure in life fairies and witches, hand¬
some princes and talking animals.
A SHIFT FROM VIOLENCE
TO HUMOUR
Yet Japanese animated cartoons' can be contro¬
versial, too. From Grandizer to St. Seiya by
way of Masters of the Universe, Dragon Ball 2,
Ken the Great Bear Fist, Captain Harlock and
Bioman, they have been criticized for excessive
violence and limited educational value. It is cer¬
tainly true that they are often violent, not just in
their plots but in their casts of grim-faced
heroes, horned monsters and robots. The effect
is heightened by a style of production involving
fast-changing images, loud sound effects and
aggressive colours and lighting. The violence
was initially all the more shocking for its real¬
ism, which contrasted with the comic aggressi-
vity of Micky Mouse and Tom and Jerry car¬
toons, and it was so gratuitous that it sometimes
even got in the way of plot development.
But although this kind of violence had
considerable viewer appeal until the mid-1980s,
it no longer plays much of a part. Ever since
Grandizer, energy, technology and adventure
20
have taken its place. To different degrees, the
newer cartoons promote the use of technology
to enable humankind to defend the planet
against evil forces. Remorselessly optimistic in
spirit, they invite children to identify with
heroes who are indestructible.
Yet there are also signs of a growing taste
for gentler plotlines. Today's children prefer
comical heroes to the supermen beloved of
their elders. The series shown in France as Un
collège fou, fou, fou was enormously successful
in Japan, perhaps because it gave children the
opportunity to relieve through laughter some
of the anxieties caused by a particularly demand¬
ing educational system. In Nicky Larsen, the
humour is of a different kind, a mixture of
sensuality and clowning. The main character, a
private detective in search of clients, is an anti-
hero whose constant struggles with his own
libido often make him ridiculous.
The vogue for sports series was launched by
Attack No. 1 and Jeanne and Serge. These pro¬
grammes depict sport as more than just a pas¬
time. They glorify assertive individuals, and
also extol group membership in the shape of
team sport.
Sport is depicted as symbolizing confronta¬
tion and combat, testing an individual's tena¬
city and will-power and his capacity to push
himself to the limit. In sport nothing can ever
be taken for granted, and the winner must
always be ready to defend his or her position.
In a sense these series could be said to have
some educational value in preparing children
for life. The lesson they teach is that it is no
longer enough simply to be kind and decent, as
Walt Disney cartoons might suggest. To win a
place in the adult world youngsters must do
more than just pass the tests that arise in child¬
hood. They must be winners, they must know
how to manage their lives, take risks and create
opportunities. They must be fighters and learn
to think like winners. By depicting competition
and glorifying the hero who rises above the
crowd, these series present an image of indivi¬
duals creating themselves in a context of equa¬
lity and justice.
There is nothing wrong with wanting to
encourage children to be winners, but to imply
that this is the only way to find one's bearings
in life and to define one's social identity is more
questionable. In most of these stories the mes¬
sage comes over particularly sharply because
parents tend to be absent, and the children are
responsible for their own lives. The stress on
competition and team spirit blurs the difference
between happiness and social success.
But this view of happiness is not presented
in series like Candy, Nadia and Hello Sandy-
bell, and in the many adaptations of stories that
highlight more altruistic ideals. Japan's output
of animated cartoons is nothing if not diverse,
and this diversity may be its greatest strength. D
