THE UNESCO COURIER JULY/ AUGUST 1992
EDITORIAL
The roadfromRio
byAlcino Da Costa
Attended by more than a hundred heads ofState and
government, with over 170 countries represented and
with a total of 40,000 participants, including 14,000
representatives ofNon-Governmental Organizations
(NGOs), under the eyes ofsome 10,000 accreditedjournalists,
Rio 92 has been acclaimed as the biggest world conference ever
held.
But looking beyond these impressivefigures, what did this
mega-summit achieve? The list includes adoption ofthe Rio
Declaration, ofAgenda 21 and ofa resolution on the conser¬
vation offorests and the signing by a majority ofthe partici¬
pating countries of international conventions on climate
and on biodiversity.
In some quarters, however, it wasfelt thatall these laudable
declarations ofprinciple might well remain mere words.
Disappointment was expressed about the lack ofprecise,
enforceable measuresfor the control ofcarbon dioxide emis¬
sions and the absence of any binding financial provisions
for the implementation ofAgenda 21, the action plan for
litorial
36 World
38 Dossier
Antarctica,
continent of science
and peace?
by France Bequette
40 Interview
with
Francesco di Castri
42 Ecology
A worldwide synergy
byRenéLefort
43 Biodiversity
Of cockroaches
and roses
44 Climate
The return of El Niño

y protection ofthe environment coupled with
sustainable development. Many were
alarmed by the absence ofany reference to
that important source of pollution, the
armaments industry.
Nevertheless, Rio 92 succeeded in obtain¬
ing unequivocal, worldwide recognition of
one incontrovertiblefact there is only one
Earth, itbelongs to both the rich and thepoor
and its protection is the responsibility ofall.
The Conference had the additional merit of
reinforcing awareness that all nations are
interdependentand that no individual coun¬
try could hope to escape the ecological catas¬
trophe towards which progressive degrada¬
tion of the environment, due both to
* consistent over-consumption in the North
andgrowingpoverty in the South, is leading.
There was general agreement that the dis¬
equilibrium caused by the unequal dis¬
tribution ofthe riches ofthe world had to be
corrected by a decisive actofsolidarity. The
fight against poverty has become an ecolo¬
gical imperative. This is what underlies the
concept ofsustainable development, the
multiple aspects ofwhich layat the heart of
the debates initiated by the NGOs within
theframework oftheir "Global Forum".
The extraordinary vitality of the Non-
Governmental Organizations was one of
the revelations ofRio 92. Present in force,
dynamic, even aggressive at times, and with
the confidence that comesfrom their wide
geographical representativity, they demon¬
strated their ability to analyse, to look ahead,
to mobilize, to animate and to take action.
The NGOs made a vital contribution to the
discussion on development and the envi¬
ronment. Strong in the support they enjoy in
society at large, the NGOs wield real power
and their voice will be increasingly heard in
thefield ofinternational negotiations.
Rio 92 has triggered a new dynamic. In
the words ofthe United Nations Secretary-
General, the time has comefor "a new moral
and political contract with nature". Collec¬
tively and individually we must undertake
to change our way oflife, to better our man-
gement ofthe Earth's resources and to seek
a form ofdevelopment that incorporates
the cultural dimension. Only thus will we be
able to bequeath to future generations a
world in which it willbegood to be alive.
ALCINO DA COSTA, Senegalese journalist,
is an information officer with Unesco's Office of
Public Information. He wasformerly director of
the weeklyAfrique Nouvelle.

