The face of a
stranger
by Emmanuel Lévinas
A distinguished French
philosopher reflects on the
process of ethical
Self-portrait
(c. 1655),
oil on wood,
by Rembrandt
THE process of reflection stirred by the
face of another individual is not a thought
about a representation but at once a
thought for, a non-indifference towards the
other which upsets the equilibrium of the calm
and impassive soul of pure knowledge. It is an
awakening to a uniqueness in the other person
which cannot be grasped by knowledge, a step
towards the newcomer as someone who is both
unique and a fellow being. I am speaking of the
face itself, over and above any particular
expression it may bear, the face that exists
beneath every expression that crosses its coun¬
tenance and cloaks its nudity. To look at it in
this way is not so much an unveiling as a strip¬
ping bare of something exposed and un¬
defended, revealed as it is, naked as mortality
itself. The extreme precariousness of something
unique, the precariousness of the stranger. The
totality of the exposure lies in the fact that it is
not merely a new awareness of the familiar
revealed in its true light; it is a form of expres¬
sion, a primal language, a summons, an appeal.
The face is not the only vehicle of such an
exposure. In Vassili Grossman's Life and
Fate (part three, chapter 23) the author des¬
cribes a visit to the Lubianka prison in Moscow
by the families, wives and relatives of political
detainees, come for news. There is a queue at
the window, and those in it can only see the
backs of the people in front. A woman is wait¬
ing her turn. "She had never thought that the
human back could be so expressive and could
so vividly communicate a state of mind. As
people approached the window, they had a spe¬
cial way of stretching their backs and necks,
with their lifted shoulder-blades taut as if on
springs, as though the shoulders themselves
were shouting, crying and sobbing." What is
conveyed is the extreme precariousness of
those people, and a sense that peace lies in an
awareness of this.
For the absolute directness of this face and
its expression make demands on my deepest
self. Implicit in them is a right over me. What
concerns my selfhood is the specific circum-
awakening triggered by
scrutiny of the face of
another human being
stance in which that right has meaning. It is as
if the shadow of death the other face confronts
were my business, as if that death were my
concern. In this reminder of my responsibilities
by means of a face that has a claim on my self¬
hood, the stranger is my neighbour.
Of the directness of the stranger's gaze I
once wrote that its precariousness and defence-
lessness represent both the temptation to kill
and a cry for peace, a "Thou shalt not kill".
That face is already an accusation; there is sus¬
picion in it, but also a mute appeal. A human
right is there, in the frankness of that exposure,
invocation and command, a right more ancient
than any bestowal of honours or any question
of merit. In my closeness to my fellow beings,
and the promise of peace it brings, lies my res¬
ponsibility for someone else, the impossibility
of leaving that person to face the mystery of
death alone. In practical terms, this entails a
willingness to die for him. Living in peace with
others can demand that much. That is the
momentous implication of loving one's neigh¬
bour with a selfless love.
The peace attained by loving one's neigh¬
bour is not that of pure rest, which strengthens
us in our selfhood. Rather it represents a conti¬
nual challenge to selfhood, its limitless freedom
and its power.
Emmanuel Lévinas, of France, is a distinguished
modern philosopher, whose work, which combines
elements of German phenomenology and the Jewish
tradition, has had an important influence on
contemporary thought. He is the author of more than
twenty books, including Ethique et infini (1982),
Humanisme de l'autre homme (1975) and Entre-nous
Essais sur le penser-à-l 'autre (1991). Among his works
published in English is Totality and Infinity (1980).
67
