r Tfte flí^fcíng of a tragedy by Mâcadou Ndiaye
From the arrival of the first Dutch settlers to the be^nninès of apartheid
0,
16
MACADOU NDIAYE,
Senegalese journalist and
university teacher, is vice-
president of the Ligue
Africaine des droits de
l'homme et des peuples An
International consultant on
geopolitical problems, he has
produced many documentaries
for French television
N 6 April 1652, after an exhausting voyage,
about one hundred men disembarked from
Dutch ships in Table Bay, the old name for the
area around the Cape of Good Hope. Their leader
was one Jan van Riebeeck, who had been
instructed by the Dutch East India Company to
establish a revictualling base for Company boats
en route for India.
Five years earlier, one such vessel had come
to grief in the same bay. The crew survived the
wreck, and it was they who had suggested that
a port of call be set up at the Cape. They were
encouraged to do so by th'e reputed hospitality
of the Khoi, skilled herdsmen who inhabited the
region.
Portuguese navigators had landed on the
southern shores of the African continent two cen¬
turies earlier. In 1487 Bartolomeu Dias had
rounded the Cape and reached as far as Mossel
Bay. Ten years later, Vasco da Gama disembarked
on the coast of Natal, which received its name
from him.
Unlike the Spanish guilds and the chartered
companies that financed the Habsburgs' wars
during the reigns of Charles V and Philip II, the
East India Company was a truly capitalist insti¬
tution. It was less interested in people than in the
profits it could extract from its operations. From
1656 on, it granted certificates of free enterprise,
while retaining for itself a monopoly on purchase
and the right to fix the price of wheat, cattle and
vegerables.
Meanwhile, the numbers of the small Dutch
colony were swollen by the arrival of French
Fluguenots, driven from their home country by
the Revocation of the FMict of Nantes. Van Rie-
becck's own wife was a French Protestant,
For these Crusaders of another age, fleeing
religious persecution in Europe, the fertile
African lands were manna from f-leaven, a gift
of Providence, a promised land. Even their atti¬
tude tf)wards the Company began to change.
With the granting of independent estates, they
gradually distanced themselves from it.

The colonists called themselves burghers or
citizens, but were to go down in history as boers,
Dutch for "peasants". Their dealings with the
indigenous peoples initially centred on cattle-
trading, but as their numbers grew they soon
came into conflict with the fiottentots. They
organized offensive and defensive raids, in the
course of which they seized rich pasturelands.
The struggle against the African tribes gradu¬
ally bound this little colony of uprooted
individuals into a separate ethnic community,
linked by a common, Calvinist creed. The Boers
also developed their own language, Afrikaans,
derived from Dutch.
The Boers became tough, hard-working
crusaders, firmly convinced that they were a
chosen people superior to the "godless"
indigenous peoples they called Kaffirs. They
based their faith on three pillars: the Bible, the
wagon and the whip. From 1657 on, they gradu¬
ally reduced the Khoi to servitude, despite fierce
resistance, notably under Chief Austshumayo.
The East India Company ceased to exist
in 1795. The Boers, who by then numbered
16,000, saw themselves as a race apart. But they
were soon to come into conflict with two ene¬
mies: the British, who had recently bought Cape
Colony from the Dutch for £6 million, and the
Africans, in particular the redoubtable Zulus,
with whom they were soon to come into contact.
Relations with the Hottentots degenerated,
with disputes over cattle thefts escalating sporad¬
ically into open confrontation. Travelling in ox-
drawn wagons that they used to form defensive
circles, the Boers launched expeditions against the
Africans, some of whom were reduced to slavery
after being defeated in battle.
Boer nationalism
versus
British imperialism
A community of Moravian Brothers settled at
Genadenstad in 1792, and from then on there was
a British presence on the Cape. The London Mis¬
sionary Society also sent envoys. Under the
influence of the missionaries, the British governor
at the Cape promulgated laws from 1806 on that
enabled black people to take their Boer masters
to court.
These measures aroused the opposition 


of the
Boer colonists, who saw them as acts of hostility
that both damaged their interests and offended
against their sense of superiority with regard to
the Africans. However, the British grip on the
colony tightened, and in 1828 English became the
official language of Cape Colony. Six years later,
slavery was abolished and raids against the Hot¬
tentots were prohibited.
Opposite page: in the late
15th century, the Portuguese
navigator Bartolomeu Dias
became the first European to,
round the tip of Africa and
sail up the continent's eastern
coast. To commemorate
Dias's expedition, his arrival
at Mossel Bay (South Africa)
was re-enacted in 1988.
Below: a scene from a South
African television series
entitled Shaka Zufu (1986),
which told the story of the
19th-century warrior king who
was the founding father of the
Zulu nation.
17

To escape British domination, the Boers
began in 1835 an arduous )ourney through the
and interior of the country that took them from
the Cape to the lands 


of the Transvaal and the
Orange River. For these Protestant farmers,
steeped in the Bible and brought up on memories
of persecution in Europe, the Great Trek through
lands inhabited by people they considered savage
and hostile recalled the Exodus of the Old Testa¬
ment Hebrews, which the Boers were to evoke
as a veritable national foundation myth. The
Trek indelibly marked the image and the destiny
of the Afrikaners.
One claim often made by the apologists of
apartheid is that those who took part in the Great
Trek the Voortrekkers found unoccupied,
virgin land on their arrival. In fact in the course
of their migration they came up against the
Xhosa, who barred their route. They were then
obliged to divert northwards, where they found
themselves confronted by the Zulus, a formid¬
able warrior race, under their chief Dingaan,
brother of the celebrated Shaka.
At first the Boers were received in peace; Din¬
gaan declared that there was enough land for
everybody. The Boer settlers thus had free run
of the pastures. But they immediately set up
fences and barbed wire to mark off "their" land,
thereby denying the indigenous herdsmen the
right of free passage that had been customary for
generations. For the proud Zulu warriors, who
had no sense of private property, this was a
betrayal of the spirit of hospitality that lay behind
the agreement between the two peoples. Dingaan
subsequently lured the Boer colonists to his
kraal ihn Afrikaans word for an indigenous
village and in 1838 massacred many of them.
This episode, regarded by the Boers as an act
of treachery, left them with an enduring hatred
and fear of the Zulus. Dingaan was defeated later
in 1838 at the Battle of Blood River, commemo¬
rated as a day of celebration by the Boers but
regarded as a tragedy by the Africans. Even so
the Zulus continued the struggle, especially
against the British who now arrived in their thou¬
sands, France's Prince Imperial, the son of
Napoleon III and the Empress Eugénie, was killed
while serving with the British Army in the course
of one such battle.
The Boers then founded two small republics,
the Transvaal and the Orange Free State, in which
they first reduced the indigenous peoples to
slavery and then established the principles of
apartheid, the rigorous separation of races. The
northern Sotho peoples under Moshoeshoe and
their southern counterparts under Sekhukhum
rose en masse against the Boers, and never sub¬
mitted to their domination.
The discovery of diamonds at Kimberley in
1867 and of gold in the Transvaal attracted thou¬
sands of European adventurers, many of them
British, who stirred up trouble for the Boers.
Cecil Rhodes, the founder of Rhodesia, was
among them. Financial interests underlay the
noble, humanitarian motives put forward by the
British as reasons for liberating their compatriots
and the Africans from the Boer yoke.
The British concentrated around the Boer
republics a formidable expeditionary force of
some 20,000 men, including many Africans, who
had been promised recognition of their rights.
The Boers were defeated, and signed the Peace
Above left: Paul Kruger
(1989), a sculpture of velvet
corkwood, enamel paint and
nails by South African artist
Phuthuma Seoka that evokes
the famous Boer leader.
This work, and those
reproduced on pages 23, 28,
33 and 38, featured in Art
from South Africa, a travelling
exhibition organized by the
Museum of IVIodern Art,
Oxford (UK), in association
with the Zabaiaza Festival,
London.
Left, beneath a more
conventional statue of Kruger
in the centre of Pretoria,
Afrikaners demonstrate in
February 1990 against ttte
liberation of Nelson Mandela.
Opposite page: an Afrikaner
and a Bantu photographed in
the 1940s.

of Vereeniging in 1902. Their republics were
henceforth subject to the British crown.
The birth of the Afrikaner nation
In Europe, the course of the Boer War was fol¬
lowed with great interest, and the defeat of the
Afrikaners aroused a certain amount of pity. Paul
Kruger, the President of the Transvaal, took
refuge in Switzerland and strove to sensitize Euro¬
pean public opinion to the misfortunes of what
he depicted as a brave and hardy race of pioneers
that had developed savage lands where the spirit
of darkness reigned. The Boers began to build up
a store of public sympathy, as the unfortunate
victims of persecution at the hands of perfidious
Albion, that has survived in the collective uncons¬
cious of Western public opinion to our own day.
In fact the Afrikaners of the late nineteenth
century had little in common with the early
colonists of East India Company days. Living in
Africa had changed their mentality. They had
remained isolated from the great currents of
thought favouring liberty, social justice and the
sovereignty of peoples that, in the wake of the
French Revolution, had illuminated the history
of nineteenth-century Europe. They were hostile
to any Idea of progress. Their economy was rural
and backward, and they regarded Africans as
inferior beings, to be kept at all costs in ignorance.
For the British, who stood for capitalism
based on salaried work, the system of racial segre¬
gation practiced by the Boers belonged to the
economy of another age. Britain, in full economic
expansion, looked primarily to the formidable,
undeveloped industrial potential of South
Africa "a veritable geological scandal". The
British Empire was then at its peak, and it was
less preoccupied with humanitarian considera¬
tions than with economic interests.
So the British reneged on the promise of
political rights for Africans made at the time of
the Boer War. On the other hand, they accepted
the Afrikaners as British subjects.
Far from putting an end to the injustices of
which the Africans were the victims, British
domination only made them worse. Rampant
segregation between blacks and whites was estab¬
lished, first of all in economic matters; by a series
of iniquitous laws and directives, the whites took
the best lands and introduced increasingly draco-
nian legislation to permit the compulsory exploi¬
tation of the black workforce.
Finally, the victory of the Nationalist Party
in the 1949 elections and the end of political
dominance by groups depending largely for their
support on English-speaking voters brought to
power the hard-core champions of the system of
racial segregation known as apartheid.
