Teachers at the crossroads
Jacky Beillerot talks to Rachid Sabbaghi
Working as a team in a
school in Bayonne, France.
The word maître or master has a very specific
meaning in French education. Can you tell us
something about this and more generally about your
views on the teacher's place in society today.
- In the French educational system, the word
maître or master has traditionally been used to
designate the primary school teacher. Now, as a
result of a recent reform, primary teachers are
going to be known as professeurs d'école
(schoolteachers), so that there will be a single
category of teachers in the school system pro¬
fesseurs who teach at primary and secondary
level. Incidentally, the traditional image of the
primary school teacher as a magisterial figure
dispensing knowledge is also found in higher
education, where some distinguished university
professors are still considered as maîtres à
penser, intellectual guides and mentors.
However, in terms of social history, it is a
long time since the schoolteacher ceased to be
regarded as a magisterial figure. This is an
important point, one that is central to the pur¬
pose and practice of education. In an educa
tional context, the French word maître denotes
someone who possesses mastery of a certain
body of knowledge. This person, whatever his
or her field may be, is always someone of
exceptional culture, knowledge or skill. Per¬
haps the word maître is still used to describe
the teacher because teachers are people who
initiate others into a given branch of know¬
ledge. But when you have a teaching profession
staffed by thousands of civil servants, does it
make sense to call them maîtres in the tradi¬
tional sense of the term? Let's look at the ques¬
tion from a different angle. Does the learner
really need an authority-figure? One reason
why teachers occupy a less important place in
Western society today than they once did is
because Western society's conception of author¬
ity in general, and that of the teacher's authority
in particular, has changed considerably.
Would it be correct to talk ofan "image crisis"
where teachers are concerned?
Yes. There is a crisis because traditional
37

A mobile classroom for
young, nomadic gypsies in
the south of France.
models, values and systems can no longer be
reproduced in their existing forms. Nor are
they capable of solving today's problems. This
brings us to the complex and crucial question
of the place of education in contemporary
society.
On the one hand, education and training are
required to solve all kinds of problems. In the
absence of economic or political solutions, we
turn to education. What do people say when
riots break out in the suburbs of big cities?
They say that young people must be educated.
What should we do about the spread of AIDS?
The same answer. Societies are asking more and
more of education, and refuse to accept that
education cannot deliver the goods. In the past
it was accepted that some children did well at
school and others didn't. The schools, which
were a reflection of the hierarchies and divi¬
sions that existed in society at large, didn't
worry overmuch about this. Today we want
schools to be accessible to everyone, but we
realize that the teacher's task has become so
difficult that traditional approaches and sys¬
tems are no longer adequate.
Teaching has become a new kind of job.
Many things have changed, although we
teachers tend to act as though they haven't.
Large numbers of children today don't take it
for granted that they should learn. Why is this?
The answer is that in order to learn, the learner
must have a reason to do so. Many children no
longer see the point of learning. One of the
new tasks facing the teacher today is to try to
help children to find a reason to learn.
How are teachers responding to this new challenge?
At the moment it is easier to identify the
problems that are emerging than to propose
solutions to them. One answer is for the teacher
to become a professional educator. Many
people think that teachers need something more
than mastery of a body of knowledge, that they
must use a whole range of educational tech¬
niques. This is the only way to give all children
a chance to learn. This is a technical response.
Another response, which is totally different,
is to continue to regard the teacher as a reposi¬
tory of knowledge and someone for the pupils
! L I /
38
to model themselves on. This approach leaves
many pupils by the wayside because, for
reasons it would take too long to explain here,
they cannot identify with the classic image of
the teacher. In democratic societies where every¬
one, children and adults alike, must have access
to as much knowledge as possible, I believe that
this traditional approach is not bad so far as it
goes, but it does not go far enough.
Nevertheless, these two responses do teach
us something. Learning can only be meaningful
for the pupil if teaching is meaningful for the
teacher. Teachers cannot be dissociated from



the knowledge they transmit. They cannot
simply stand up and tell their pupils what they
know; their knowledge must be an essential part
of their own lives and their own development.
There is undoubtedly a crisis here. It would
be unreasonable at the present time to define
ways of overcoming it. It may even be back¬
ward-looking to say that there is a crisis and
that a successful outcome to it is possible. In
order to understand our crisis-ridden societies
we must tell ourselves that societies expe¬
rienced crises in the past without people clearly
realizing what was happening. Perhaps crisis
may even be the normal condition of society. If
it is, then the old vision of a peaceful society
may be outdated, an idea which no longer cor¬
responds either to our perceptions or to the
facts.
If this analysis is correct, the question of
knowledge arises in a different form: how can
we come to terms with an increasingly acute
awareness of social and psychological conflicts?
In this respect our history has left most people
in a vulnerable position. Perhaps because it is
easier to live with answers than with questions.
And society today is a society of questions.
Some people believe that the crisis in the
transmission ofknowledge reflects a more general
crisis ofmediation in modern societies.
This is what I would call the crisis of autho¬
rity. Here I subscribe to the ideas put forward
over thirty years ago by the French socio-
psychoanalyst Gérard Mendel in a book called
La crise des générations. We live in societies
where the past no longer governs either the
present or the future. Essentially, education is a
conservative force since its purpose is to
transmit old knowledge. This is where things
become complicated: we no longer teach old
forms of knowledge to reproduce a model, as
we did in the past, but to make something new.
By definition, we don't know what this
"something new" actually is. The new cannot
be taught, only the past.
Any discussion of education today must
face this profound contradiction. In traditional
societies, as the French anthopologist Maurice
Godelier has explained, education consists not
only of transmitting knowledge but also
teaching about status, place and role things
that have become fluid in modern societies.
What will it mean to be the mother or father of
a family thirty years from now? What will have
happened to the different professions in the
meantime? We don't know. I would say that
we teach without any precise bearings.

This class in Colorado is
directed by a teacher of Inuit
origin.
JACKY BEILLEROT is a
French professor of education
sciences at the University of
Paris X, at Nanterre. He has
directed a number of training
courses for teachers and
instructors, both within and
outside the University. He is
the author of several articles
and a number of books
including Voies et voix de la
formation ("Trainingthe
word and the way"), Éditions
Universitaires, Paris, 1988,
and he contributed to the
collective work Savoir et
rapport au savoir
("Knowledge and how we
relate to it"), Éditions
Universitaires, Paris 1989.
How far has this new situation been brought about
by changes in the world ofwork in the last twenty
years? What knowledge should be transmitted
today? How is it possible to be a mediator in these
conditions?
Half the jobs that will be available in fifteen
years' time are jobs that don't even exist today. .
. . To teach is to be a mediator between know¬
ledge and a person. That is why there are limits
to what can be achieved by autodidacticism. For
someone to be educated or trained, there has to
be a human intermediary. In psychoanalysis,
education takes place through the process of
transference. I think that this is a supremely
important point. But here too things are chan¬
ging. It is remarkable how, in Western society
in the last fifteen years or so, parent substitutes
have been invented or reinvented. By providing
more and more teachers and educators of all
kinds we try to compensate for something
missing from relationships between individuals.
A desire to achieve greater independence of
thought, creativity, learning, and identity are all
part of this phenomenon. But at the same time
we do not know how to create the interpersonal
relationships that are indispensable to these
aspirations. This transformation of the human
relationship between child and adult, or bet¬
ween adult and adult, is crucial to most of the
problems that arise in education and training.
In view ofthe growing complexity ofknowledge,
above all ofscientific knowledge, some people are
wondering whether the classic forms ofteaching are
still valid. What do you think about this?
It is true that the quantity and complexity of
knowledge are constantly increasing and that
modern societies call for a great capacity to
understand abstractions. There are grounds for
fearing that not enough people can achieve the
necessary level. There is a risk that many
people will be left behind.
This being the case, we are probably not
allocating sufficient resources to education, but
do we have any idea what kind of new
resources are required? We have nothing firm
to go on, apart from a few experiments. Even if
we do manage to find new resources, because
we have no choice, we shall have to keep some
parts of the traditional system. It is impossible
to imagine the future of education without edu¬
cators, or, whatever Utopians may think,
without institutions. The institutions will prob¬
ably be new, but they will still be institutions.
The relationships between teacher and pupil,
educator and educated, trainer and trainee, will
be different, but they will still exist. The new
techniques will exist within frameworks which
will long remain classic, even if it is still impos¬
sible to imagine what forms they will take.
The French legal historian and theorist Pierre
Legendre has looked at the problem ofthe
transmission ofknowledge and he thinks that the
West wants to replace the idea ofreference to
established authorities by the idea ofmanagement. Is
itpossible to manage the transmission ofknowledge
without the reference to the symbolic and imaginary
landmarks that underlie it?
Let's put the problem in a broader context.
The organization of modern societies, the mas¬
tery of social and individual processes, calls for
increasing rationalism. At every level, from the
state to the village, at home and at school, more
and more reasoning, concepts and rational
behaviour are required. And so the following
question arises. Does this increased rationalism
abolish the need for what you call "reference",
that is the role of values and tradition, every¬
thing that does not belong to the rational
order? The problem, as we can see in Western
countries today, is that we are not sure what
values this rationalism should serve. We don't
really know what vision to offer to the indivi¬
dual and the community.
This conflict has worsened in the late twen¬
tieth century, notably because the grand
designs of the eighteenth and nineteenth centu¬
ries have failed. Soviet societies marked the
high point of the idea that it is possible to deli¬
berately build a society, with a little of the past
but above all with much of its future. It was a
failure. 39

It will be a long time before we reinvent,not a new utopia but a new way of thinking,
and renounce the myth of the ideal city.
Has the teacher been an agent ofsuch utopias?
Often. In France, for example. Between the
Revolution and the mid-nineteenth century, the
teacher really was a mediator, the propagator of
the values of the republic and of democracy.
What changes have there been in Western thinking
about the role of the teacher?
Contemporary thinking about the mission
of the teacher goes back to the philosophy of
the Enlightenment. Reason, in the sense of a
superior human perception of reality, of know¬
ledge based on reason, sustained the ideologies
of teaching and the teacher. In the nineteenth
century the school system was built around the
teaching of truth and science. Between the



nineteenth century and the middle of the twen¬
tieth 'there have been various changes where
French primary and secondary school teachers
are concerned. But their role continued to be
firmly buttressed by the ideas of the Enlighten¬
ment and scientific education. Every village in
France then had its exponent of Enlightenment
philosophy.
Today the status of Reason has become a
matter of controversy, as is indicated by the
new tendency to question the role of scientific
development. People no longer believe, as they
once did, that there is one right way and one
only and that science will show us that way.
Science and technology are accepted as a motor
of change, but change is regarded as having
negative as well as positive aspects. The need
for choices and values is again making itself felt.
Western societies are increasingly becoming
multicultural. Recent issues such as whether children
should be allowed to wear the Islamic scarf in
French schools or whether the children of
immigrants should be taught the mother tongues of
theirparents, have caused widespread debate in
European countries. How are teachers responding to
this situation?
France has been a multicultural society for a
long time. It started to become one when it
built itself with its own minorities (Basques,
Savoyards, Bretons, Alsatians, and so on). For
many years it has been a host country to people
from all over the world. In any case, are there
any societies that are not multicultural? If we
are more aware of this question than we once
were, perhaps it is because multiculturalism is
on the increase. And it will continue to
increase. Societies will become increasingly
multi-ethnic, multicultural and multilingual.
The question that . arises is whether the
minority culture will be crushed, pushed to the
sidelines or even ostracized by the dominant
culture. Today the idea that the dominant cul¬
ture should impose itself to the detriment of
local cultures is contested. In Western countries
we are trying to define what should belong to a
common culture and what should belong to
specific cultures. As society has not come up
with any answer, it is very difficult for the
school, which is only one element in society, to
reply alone. O
