Sixty million on the move by Alan B. Simmons
International migration
from South to North
is built into a global
system of social and
economic change
30
Xhe modern scientific community takes pride
in providing answers to world problems, yet,
paradoxically, it often makes a greater contribu¬
tion by the perspicacity with which it continues
to ask questions. The premature proposal of
simple solutions to difficult problems often does
no more than reveal ignorance.
The complex emerging patterns of interna¬
tional migration are a case in point. Efforts by
Europe, North America and other developed
regions to shut the door on the rising tide of
migrants from the Third World are not only
questionable on ethical grounds but may also turn
out to be impractical as well. Many migrants will
find ways round all but the most costly, vigorous
and harsh control systems. This is because the
very logic of social and economic change tends
to create new avenues and opportunities for
migrants. Just how this works is only now begin¬
ning to be understood.
Equally misguided is the argument that co¬
ordinated international development efforts and
economic growth in the countries of out-
migration will soon lead to a reduction in South-
to-North migration. There is a considerable body
of historical evidence to contradict this argument.
After a long period of economic growth in the
South, pressures promoting current migration
trends are indeed likely to ease or stop, but in
the short to medium termover twenty to thirty
years or even longerdevelopment efforts will
probably tend to increase South-North migra¬
tion. This is because the mechanization and
increased efficiency required to boost produc¬
tivity will mean that large numbers of workers
will lose their jobs. As unemployment rises, so
too will the numbers of people seeking refuge
elsewhere. The process may run over several
decades, since even in the best possible circum¬
stances development is gradual.

"Some 16 million migrants
are political refugees. . . ."
Above, a refugee camp in
Ethiopia.
It is estimated that some 60 million people in
the world are currently "on the move". This
figure includes people displaced by war, civil strife,
political repression, environmental catastrophe,
the threat of starvation, economic hardship or the
desire to better their circumstances. Some 16 mil¬
lion of these people are political refugees within
the definition of the United Nations Charter, that
is, they are individuals seeking asylum from a
well-founded fear of persecution.
Potential migrants are heavily concentrated
in the poor regions of the Southin the previ¬
ously colonized nations of Africa, Asia, the Carib¬
bean and Latin America, and in the southern
regions of the Soviet Union. They not only move
to neighbouring countries within their own
regions, but, more and more, they are seeking to
move to industrially advanced regions such as
Europe, North America and Australia.
The Northern nations (and some migrant-
receiving nations in the South) are reacting with
alarm. In the North, this alarm has been fed by
graphic images in the press of Haitian, Albanian
and Sri Lankan "boat people" arriving in Florida,
Italy and Canada. Some leaders are calling for the
expulsion of unwelcome migrants, while others
are calling for increased efforts to solve the eco¬
nomic problems in the sending regions so that
migrant flows will be stopped at source. In some
countries pressure is mounting to stop virtually
all immigration.
The concerns underlying these attitudes are
complex, ranging from fear that migrants will
steal jobs or be a burden on social services, to
xenophobia and even racism.
The "globalization" of trade
There is a tendency to blame current South-to-
North migration on development failures in the
South and, indeed, the 1980s, the "Decade of
Development", were marked by economic stag¬
nation and declining levels of real per capita
income in Africa, the Caribbean and Latin
America. The decade will also be viewed histori¬
cally as a period of dramatic shift towards
"globalization" of markets and a related global
co-ordination of national economic policies.
Key trends, which are still under way,
include: globalization of production (final
assembly based on parts manufactured in various
parts of the world); globalization of consumer
markets (goods assembled in one nation are sold
in many others); the spread of "structural adjust¬
ment" programmes (to favour export-oriented
development); the rise of international trading
blocs (Europe, the North American Free Trade
Agreement, the Southern Cone trading bloc in
Latin America, etc.). Clearly globalization is not
an accident. It is the result of deliberate policies
promoted by the developed nations, by major
international institutions and by many less deve¬
loped countries that have taken their lead from
one of the major players.
One of the principal effects of globalization
has been to differentiate more sharply between
the "winners" and the "losers" in economic
development. Globalization and the policies sup¬
porting it have, for example, worked to benefit
the fast-growing economies of the Pacific Rim
(The Republic of Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan,
Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand) because they
combined political stability, progressive policies
on education, low wages and other elements to
attract investors and promote exports. Mexico
may gain in the near future from globalization
due to the size of its labour force, industrial infra- '
structure and access to the United States.
Other regions have clearly been losers in the
new global trade and development game. Africa,
for example, has such poorly developed economic
infrastructures and such underdeveloped labour
force skills that even its very low wages and geo¬
graphic proximity to Europe did not attract many
new investors in the 1980s. Development aid has
Making electronic components Q A
in the Republic of Korea. O JL

Loggers at work in the Central
African Republic.
been insufficient to fill this gap. Foreign direct
investment in Africa actually declined over the
1980s, as it did in most countries of Latin
America.
Third World countries that have experienced
economic growth in recent decades have also
generally experienced long periods of high unem¬
ployment and significant out-migration, although
there are some exceptions. Puerto Rico since the
1950s, Mexico in the 1960s and 1970s, and Korea
in the 1970s and 1980s, all experienced rather
spectacular economic growth, while at the same
time losing large numbers of workers and their
families through international migration. High
rates of natural population growth and the impact
of mechanization in agriculture and industry
created far more workers in these countries than
could be absorbed in the local economy. In the
late 1970s, on the other hand, Malaysia's eco¬
nomic growth was so fast that it actually suffered
from labour shortages. This, however, was an
exceptional case and cannot be taken as a general
model.
Over the 1980s, a much larger number of
countries lost ground economically, and rising
unemployment and falling real incomes in these
nations generated political crises and rising pres¬
sure for emigration. We have no crystal ball to
indicate which countries will be tomorrow's
winners and losers in the global development
game. What does seem clear is that development
in the new era of globalization will be inherently
uneven and will inevitably continue to generate
large pressures for international migration. The
places of origin of the migrants will shift as global
circumstances change.
The environmental impact
Poor nations with limited capital and technology
are obliged to seek economic growth through
export of those products they can produce
cheaply and, when wood and minerals are key
exports, control over the negative environmental
impacts of forestry and mining tends to become
lax. Similarly, the drive to be competitive lowers
the State's revenues for environmental
programmes, so that deforestation, brought about
as poor people seek fuel or new land to cultivate
or as entrepreneurs turn jungle into grazing land
for cattle, continues unabated.
Environmental degradation is but one ele¬
ment in the interconnected web of forces tending
to generate new patterns of South-to-North
movement. High unemployment, the rise of an
underground economy in illicit drugs, animal
skins or ivory, and international migration are
all linked in this web.
The developed nations are also involved. Not
32

only do the wealthy nations promote structural
adjustment and export-driven trade policies in
Third World countries (through their central role
in the International Monetary Fund and other
international financial institutions), but the logic
of internal development patterns in countries of
the North creates opportunities for migrants
from the South.
An international division of labour
Globalization of production has reinforced an
international division of labour in which scien¬
tific, technological, design, finance, management
and control jobs are concentrated in the North,
while labour-intensive and manual manufacturing
jobs are concentrated in the South. Economic
growth in the North leads to an expanding
demand for low-cost service and support activi¬
ties in the developed countries themselves. These
are jobs which workers in the developed countries
do not want, or will not take at the prevailing
wage levelin building, cleaning, gardening,
garbage collection, etc. This situation lends itself
to the sub-contracting of services to smaller com¬
panies which in turn may hire foreign-born
workers, including illegal immigrants.
The demand for drugs and other illicit inter¬
national commodities arises mainly in the North.
This has led to a globalization of underground
commerce, creating further employment oppor¬
tunities in both the exporting and importing
countries. Illicit commercial opportunities in the
importing countries favour migrants since they
are well placed to work across languages and to
link vendors in their home countries with buyers
in their new countries of residence.
A further effect of the globalization of trade
and international commerce has been to bring
about a dramatic fall in travel and communica¬
tions costs. Information flows across international
boundaries have increased enormously and have
given rise to an unprecedented level of informa¬
tion in the South about informal job niches and
economic opportunities in the North. This,
together with the globalization of consumer
products and advertising, has generated a rising
demand for income and purchasing power, all of
which fuels motivation of potential migrants in
poor countries.
An additional level of complexity arises in
some major migrant-receiving regions in the
North, where the presence of large ethnic com¬
munities changes the politics of immigration.
Families and ethnic groups originating in Third
World countries press the State to open the door
to ethnic kin. These pressures are most evident
in the multi-ethnic receiving countriesthe
United States, Canada and Australia.
A changing social and economic world
The conclusion that current trends in South-
North migration are part of a global system of
changing social and economic relationships,
favoured and promoted by the North, will not
please those who see the current migration crisis
as a process that can be stopped by stiff migra¬
tion controls or by short-term development
programmes.
Solutions to the current crisis must include
a longer-term perspective. It must be recognized
that, although international development efforts
will probably reduce migration in the longer
term, these same efforts will almost certainly
increase pressures for South-to-North migration
in the short to intermediate term.
The overall international system, and the way
in which the economies of the Northern coun¬
tries function within it, imply at least moderate
levels of international migration. Levels that are
too low will be opposed internally as well as
externally and will work against economic
development and co-operation in the interna¬
tional system.
It is difficult to imagine how economic growth
can take place in the South without extensive and
rising trade, technical exchange and co-operation
with the North. Similarly, it is difficult to imagine
how the North can achieve greater security
without fair and just co-operation with the South.
This mutuality of interest in the new global con¬
text will require legitimate procedures to permit
the short- and long-term movement of rather sub¬
stantial numbers of people from South to North
as new international institutions and arrange¬
ments are forged and strains arising from uneven
international development are compassionately
dealt with. To imagine otherwise is to go back
to a state of greater isolation of nations, conflict
between States and international chaos.
Water-carriers in the Sahel.
ALAN B. SIMMONS
is a Canadian sociologist based
at York University in Toronto,
where he is a Fellow of the
Centre of Research on Latin
America and the Caribbean
and a member of the Centre
for Refugee Studies. He has
published many articles on
globalization and international
migration, and is the author
(with A. Laquian and S. Diaz-
Briquets) of Social Change
and Internal Migration and
(with R. Cardona) of Destino La
Metrópoli. 33
