Rediscovering
THE year 1492, whose fifth centenary we
are now commemorating, marked the
beginning of a sequence of events in
which all the peoples of the world came to
know and relate to one another. It was a year in
which a number of portents signalled the
coming of the modern age. History, hitherto
fragmented, would come to be universal, and
the human condition would be seen as one and
the same everywhere and as transcending the
differences between cultures and civilizations.
From that year onwards, man, now par excel¬
lence "historical man", would be identified with
the "essential man" sought by thinkers and phi¬
losophers ever since Classical Antiquity.
A variety of myths, presentiments and irre¬
sistible scientific imperatives all led inevitably
to the day, 12 October 1492, when the two
hemispheres linked their destinies across the
"Mare tenebrosum" which filled mariners
with such dread but whose secrets cosmogra-
phers and poets had long guessed at. The two
halves of the Earth were joined together and
by discovering others man began to discover
himself. This first encounter was to be fol¬
lowed by countless others, whose successive
reactions would lead peoples and nations into
a pattern of change and growing interdepen¬
dence that is still developing today.
With every day that goes by, such encoun¬
ters continue and multiply: encounters be¬
tween emigrants and those who welcome
them; between haves and have-nots; between
those who walk the paths of knowledge and
those who cannot find their way. We now live
on a planet in whose future we are all
involved, whether we like it or not. We are all
aboard the same spaceship Earth, and we must
keep it on a steady course if we do not want it
to founder. More than ever before, the world
is all of one piece. . . .
We should speak frankly about the major
global challenges social, cultural and ecolo¬
gical which all human beings, whatever the
colour of their skin, whatever their language,
must face on the eve of the third millennium.
None of us can be indifferent to the com¬
memoration of the fifth centenary of the
encounter between two worlds. Arguments
over the nature of the event whether it was a
discovery, a clash of cultures, an encounter, or
a missed opportunity add fuel to a contro¬
versy that is not only semantic but reflects a
concern to make a just assessment of the past
and, above all, to adopt an imaginative
approach to the future from a present whose
astonishing diversity is expressed in American
culture its art, literature and music.
It is for the sake of the future that reflection
on the American past should dwell on the cou¬
rageous and honourable aspects of all those
who lived through the events both violent
and peaceful of these five centuries. No useful
purpose would be served by passing retroactive
judgement on them, by lamenting bygone days
or deeds that cannot be undone. History must
be accepted in its totality, with its areas of
darkness and light, so that the wounds inflicted
in its most terrible episodes may heal as quickly
as possible.
The past is ever-present in the forty million
indigenous people who have kept alive their
ethnic, cultural and linguistic identity in the
continent's archaeological heritage, in national
emblems and symbols, artistic signs and repre¬
sentations, architecture and textile design,
musical rhythms, traditions and customs and
varied culinary practices. This legacy is not
only part of the American identity and the
sense of nationhood of each people, it contri¬
butes to the diversity of the human heritage as a
whole.
The greatness and posterity of Indian America
do not lie in withdrawal and isolation, but in
the fraternal coexistence of the American
peoples in a spirit of unity that at the same time
guarantees diversity. Culture, like love, can
only grow when it is shared. Mestizo America,
shining like a beacon with a myriad different
facets, bears striking witness to the truth of this
process of creation and re-creation.
The intermingling of cultures can be seen in
the Ibero-American landscape, in cities like
Cuzco, where the achievements of Inca, Spa¬
nish and republican art all meet; in the superim¬
posed styles and influences that can be seen in
the "Square of Three Cultures" in Mexico City,
in the syncretic religious practices of Chichicas-
tenango in Guatemala, in the beauty of the
Baroque architecture of Ouro Preto and Chi¬
quitos, and in the outstanding writings of the
Inca Garcilaso or Felipe Guarnan Poma de
Ayala.
The uniqueness of America stems from the
intermingling of all the peoples whether they
be indigenous, Iberian, African, European,

1492
Arab or Asian that have made the continent
what it is. It is the product of those who were
there, of those who came from outside
whether by chance, attracted by ambition or
hope, or brought against their will, and of those
who were born in the New World, the children
of history.
Thus, racial and cultural intermingling
became the mainspring of integration and
enrichment; of converging creative energies
and novel insights into the human condition;
of the disinterested sense of abnegation dis¬
played in defending a faith; of multifarious
relations between cultures marked by con¬
frontations, resistance, assimilation, learning
and borrowing. José de Vasconcelos wrote in
La Raza cósmica that "the calling of the Ibero-
American race" was primarily to become the
melting-pot in which "all cultures will merge
into one".
America is a melting-pot which can be seen
to prefigure the only possible future for the rest
of the world a future in which human beings
from different cultural backgrounds will live
side by side in peace and join their voices in
unison, mixing and intermingling to weave the
complex fabric of the human future.
Telecommunications have made it possible
to reveal to the world the complex events of
our time as and when they happen. Spanish and
Portuguese, the common languages of Iberian
America, possess qualities that are particularly
suited to communication and have made a
signal contribution to this miracle. Some people
have spoken of the "imperial" power of lan¬
guage, as did Antonio de Nebrija when he
claimed before Queen Isabella of Castile that
his Grammar of the Spanish language would
make it possible to "conquer a world". But
Latin America has long since been spared the
rule of metropolitan powers which imposed
their language on it. It is today a place where
language is being reshaped as a medium of
expression, and an arena of international com¬
munication that is open to the great events of
history.
Thanks to the Iberian vehicular languages,
the Latin American countries are now claiming
and upholding their own ethnic and linguistic
heritage, both among themselves and in the
eyes of the world. Their voices are blending in
the complex harmonies of contemporary cul¬
ture, especially in literature. "A writer's home-
By Federico Mayor
Director-General of Unesco
land is his language", said Francisco Ayala in El
escritor de la lengua española. Only a common
language can prove effective in building "a
great homeland", while at the same time
contending with the challenges of the modern
age.
Simón Bolívar wrote that "Education is the
foundation stone of freedom". Bolivar dreamt
of a united Latin America, but his dream could
not come true without the connecting thread of
language and intellect or without respect and
support for the original cultures. It was a dream
that was dashed by more than one hundred and
fifty years of discord and is only now being
revived through political determination to
move towards the unity of the continent. The
establishment of free trade areas and regional
common markets, together with co-operation
in education and science, mark the starting-
point for a series of developments which found
political expression at the First Ibero-American
Summit Meeting held in Guadalajara, in
Mexico, on 18 and 19 July 1991.
On that occasion, the Heads of State of the
countries of the Region and of Spain and Por¬
tugal embarked on a process of economic, edu¬
cational and scientific co-operation, to be fol¬
lowed up in the cultural field by measures
designed to ensure the free circulation of goods
and services, while situating the problems of
Latin America in the world context and taking
action to deal with the many world problems,
notably those concerning the environment, that
lend themselves to national solutions.
In all these areas, courage and determination
are needed to correct inequalities. Although we
may speak of the moral debt owed to Latin
America by the more advanced countries, we
must also stress the "internal social debt" of
those countries where economic and social dif¬
ferentials condemn vast sectors of the popula¬
tion to extreme poverty. Courage and imagina¬
tion are needed to create "new models" that
will be capable of erasing the bitter memories
of the past and the inequalities of the present
and of paving the way for a brighter future.
This common task faces not only Latin
America but humanity as a whole. Accepting
this challenge is the best way of commemora¬
ting 1492 the anniversary of an encounter not
only between two worlds but between modern
man and his universal destiny, in other words
with himself. D
