AFRICA PROMISE
AND UNCERTAINTY
byElikiaM'Bokolo
14
DURING the pre-colonial period, those
political units in Africa that had no
developed state structures were grad¬
ually absorbed, in an increasingly brutal way,
into larger groupings that had. African societies
thereby learned that any authority tends to
arrogate to itself as much power as it can, and
that every state, if left uncontrolled, tends to
abuse its power.
Secession was one of the oldest forms of
protest. Dissident individuals or groups would
switch their allegiance to rulers renowned for
their tolerance, or more often would set up new
units that responded better to the people's aspi¬
rations to liberty and autonomy.
Forms of political control varied between
cultures, but one characteristic common to
most traditional societies was the sanctity of
kingship. A connection was made between on
the one hand the welfare of the world and the
community and on the other the physical and
moral state of the king, who was held account¬
able for every economic, political or ecological
crisis. Royal failings, such as erratic and anti¬
social behaviour, were punishable. The holder
of supreme power would pay the supreme
penalty. These practices seem to have func¬
tioned in many parts of the continent and tem¬
pered many abuses.
In the nineteenth century a more complex
form of state organization came into being.
Most states opted for a federal rather than a
centralized system, at least until belated
attempts were made to enforce unification on
the eve of colonization. Once they had pro¬
claimed their allegiance to the king and had
accepted such obligations as paying taxes and
providing soldiers for the army, the local
units villages, ancient kingdoms or tribes
kept their own laws, customs, language and
religious practices.
There are indications that this political
model still lingers in people's memories. It is
remarkable that one factor in current demands
for democracy has been the desire to set up or
restore federal structures in many states. This
may reflect a departure from the centralization
inherited from the colonial era (in the French-
and Portuguese-speaking countries) or its
immediate aftermath (primarily in the English-
speaking ones), but perhaps it also suggests a
determination to return to older traditions.
With the coming of colonialism, collective
resistance began to express itself in new fields
against foreign domination and harsh exploita¬
tion. For too long a heroic, elitist vision credited
this resistance to modern political parties, intel¬
lectual leaders and administrators produced
under colonization, and to the future "fathers of
the nation". In fact the most enduring resistance
came, throughout the colonial period, from
"stateless societies" that opposed the forces of
occupation and the new forms of subjection
imposed by the Europeans in much the same
way as they had resisted pressure from the great
nineteenth-century African state structures.
The most perceptive colonialists were aware
that societies of this type were unfailingly hos¬
tile to all forms of oppression. Governor
Gabriel Angoulvant, who was responsible for
the "pacification" of the Ivory Coast, noted
that "One of the greatest difficulties we have
encountered in establishing our influence lies in
the attitude of the natives or, to put it bluntly,
in the moral condition of the country. . . . The
previous state of anarchy, which had real
advantages for savage populations, is still too
persistent among the natives of the centre of

.
fe vil*--»*'1'* ' '
|
114-IIAR
*"'.j*ir* *u*n*"
*p ; i .*»
.
'
',lt*licti-¿rtí-.(|
».
i
' :'
Liberté 2 (1989), woven
fabric by the Senegalese
artist Alioune Badiane.
the colony and the lower Ivory Coast. It has
left profound traces everywhere, and its gradual
disappearance is causing too many regrets for
all its effects to disappear."
By the late nineteenth century, the political
struggle of educated Africans and the urban
working classes was beginning to make an
impact in Senegal, South Africa, Ghana and
Nigeria. At first the colonial authorities
contained the agitation within the bounds of
a mild reformism, and opposition only really
took off after the Second World War, when the
rural population began to rally to the new poli¬
tical parties. It was then that the colonizers
reluctantly agreed to reform the colonial
system before being forced to wind it up
altogether.
Many forms of resistance helped to shatter
the colonial edifice: opposition from the syn¬
cretic churches and Messianic movements; 15

16
workers' strikes and mutinies among the
police; insurrections in rural areas and armed
rebellions, almost always led by self-pro¬
claimed religious revivalists; communist ideolo¬
gies and methods imported from Europe
(notably into South Africa, French West Africa
and the Portuguese colonies); and non-violent
resistance, which was particularly widespread
in Ghana.
The diversity of these home-grown and
imported forms of opposition illustrates the
extent of resistance within African societies, as
well as their capacity for invention. They
contained the demands for democracy that
were a feature of this phase of history and are
in many cases re-emerging today. Overt and
covert forms of racism were rejected. So too
were all kinds of discrimination based on ethnic
or religious criteria or on a so-called respect for
cultural sensibilities which was nothing more
than racism in a subtle and shameful disguise.
Demands for sovereignty were made. There
was a desire to replace unapproachable bureau¬
cracies in distant capitals with effective partici¬
pation in public affairs. In material terms Afri¬
cans aspired to enjoy a minimum of available
wealth. Culturally they sought the richest pos¬
sible experience of modern artistic creation and
knowledge.
The most sincere and clear-sighted leaders
of the independence movements, men such as
Patrice Lumumba and, later, Amilcar Cabrai,
expressed all these aspirations. More often,
however, the politicians who rose to head (or
were placed at the head of) these movements
emphasized the legal and political side of the
struggle. Kwame Nkrumah, one of the most
fervently nationalistic of them all, told his fol¬
lowers "Seek ye first the political kingdom, and
all other things shall be added onto it".
In practice, the citizens of the new nations
rarely found the political kingdom, still less
what was to be added onto it. One-party sys¬
tems proliferated in the post-independence
period. In many lands, the old colonial set-up
was re-established under a new name and on
different pretexts. Everywhere the people grew
poorer at a time when most of the leaders were
feathering their nests.
The notion of "second independence"
sometimes used to describe the demands and
struggles of today neatly expresses the conti¬
nuity between past and present discontent.
Continuity does not, however, imply that slo¬
gans, aspirations or political programmes are
necessarily the same. On the contrary, it seems
that unsatisfied earlier aspirations have been
absorbed into fresh ones. This suggests that the
present situation is serious and that irreversible
processes are now under way in a group of
Fresco depicting a Bamileke
chief and his court
(Cameroon). - I'- -U-
>^»J "~i¿ ti f -.y*^ r ' *_"_. * V». V
states which are all, as it were, several revolu¬
tions behind and pregnant with major reforms
that have yet to be born.
A LONG HISTORY
OF INTERNAL DISSENT
The actors who now dominate the African
political scene and are imposing a long overdue
process of democratization are merely going
through a crucial stage in what J. Copans has
called a "long march", the first steps of which
can be traced back to the disillusionment that
followed independence. Since the 1960s, pea¬
sants, young people, intellectuals, women, the
urban working classes, and professional politi¬
cians have all, with varying degrees of intensity
at different times and in different countries,
tried to change the course of events.
Specialists in African history and political
sociology have tended to pay little heed to
these counter-movements and voices of dissent.
It is only in the last decade that they have
begun to pay attention to grassroots politics
and popular dissidence, and by that time the
bandwagon was already moving at speed.

In the early 1960s, the Congo (today Zaïre)
was engulfed in peasant rebellions against a
state that was identified with bureaucratic cen¬
tralization, technocratic and authoritarian
modernization, neo-colonialism, fiscal extor¬
tion and corruption. Disturbances in the towns
and cities, whether organized by workers (as in
the case of the resignation of Abbé Fulbert
Youlou in Congo in 1963) or by school stu¬
dents like those which led to the downfall of
Jean Bedel Bokassa in the Central African
Empire in 1979, brought down a number of
regimes that exemplified the worst features of
the post-colonial period.
Even supposedly stable regimes, which
were for that reason attractive to Western
investors, had to cope with endemic protest in
forms ranging from student and teacher discon¬
tent, to remonstrations from Christian and
syncretic churches and from Muslim brother¬
hoods, and repeated criticisms from intellec¬
tuals and artists, who have had a greater impact
than is often thought.
A number of artists have done much to
instil in young people the spirit of radical criti¬
cism that is widespread today. The songs of the
Nigerian musician Fela, with their vitriolic des¬
criptions of the acquisitive lifestyle of the Niger¬
ian middle class, are one example. Another is
the Congolese singer Zao, whose less overtly
political works nonetheless praise such for¬
bidden notions as antimilitarism and pacifism,
describe the difficulties of city life, and deduce
from the equality of all people in the face of
death the same equality for the living.
The movement towards democracy accel¬
erated rapidly in the 1980s, for reasons that have
yet to be fully analysed. Many commentators
have pointed to the wind blowing at gale force
from Eastern Europe or to factors such as the
"Gorbachev effect" or the "Ceausescu effect".
But why not look at events in Africa itself?.
On the positive side, for instance, there was a
"Senghor effect", proving that a one-party
regime could move without mishap towards
multi-party democracy. There was also a "Man¬
dela effect". On the other side of the coin were
the "Bokassa effect", which showed how a
regime actively supported by a great power
could be brought down by a movement trig¬
gered by students, and the "Idi Amin effect",
the toppling of an archetypal bloodthirsty dic¬
tatorship by a long civil war.
The autocratic oligarchies are on the defen¬
sive. But though they may be shaky, they are
still on their feet. And so the extraordinary
diversity of current forms of struggle illustrates
two things: the inventiveness of the champions
of democracy, and also the resilience and adap¬
tability of the existing regimes.
The number of civil wars and latent civil
wars shows that, for many leaders, the current
situation is no more than a repeat of earlier
forms of agitation. At worst it is a transitional
period to be got through with a minimum of
damage by means of a judicious combination of
intransigence and vague promises.
Paths of transition
The increasingly hard line taken by several
governments may be the swan-song of dying
regimes. Nevertheless these regimes are one of
the great question marks hanging over the tran¬
sition to democracy in Africa. Other are trying
to prolong their hold on power by means of a
constitutional facelift.
One course that was followed in the late
1970s with the support of the Western powers,
which had no desire to lose partners with a
reputation for reliability, was for countries to
"liberalize" their ruling parties without calling
into question the principle of the one-party
state or the quasi-dynastic nature of the
regimes. In some cases, however, this provided
an opportunity for part of the political class to 17

18
detach itself permanently from government.
Moreover, the revelation of all kinds of scandal
entailed many risks. By the start of the 1980s,
most regimes had abandoned this experiment.
Another model entails the imposition from
above of a multi-party system controlled by
those in power. African statesmen who choose
this model seem to think that controlled demo¬
cratization paying lip-service to the principle of
multi-party choice can protect the long-term
interests of the ruling oligarchy more securely
than thorough-going authoritarian rule. But
there have been surprises, as we saw recently in
Cape Verde, where President Aristides Pereira
and the African Party for the Independence of
Cape Verde, which had been in power since
independence in 1975, went over to a multi¬
party system in 1990 and lost a general election
held in January 1991.
Another phenomenon is to use a "national
conference" as an original framework for a pain¬
less transition to democracy. National confer¬
ences, the first of which was called to extricate
the rulers of Benin from a political and eco¬
nomic crisis caused by a wave of strikes that had
brought the country to a halt, subsequently
spread like wildfire throughout Africa. Two
were held in 1990 (in Benin and Gabon) and five
in 1991 (in Congo, Mali, Togo, Niger and
Zaïre). In other countries, notably Cameroon
and the Central African Republic, the call for a
national conference is the main plank in the
opposition platform.
The first of its kind, the Benin national
conference was hastily organized and was
dominated by a technocratic emphasis on legal
formalities and economic detail. Its chief busi¬
ness was to neutralize a corrupt and worn-out
ruling group, so as to have access to credit from
the International Monetary Fund, the World
Bank, and France. A similar process took place
in Gabon and possibly in Mali.
In Congo, on the other hand, the confer¬
ence lasted three whole months, against the
wishes of the international financial organiza¬
tions. Regarded by some as an interminable
African talking shop, in many ways the Brazza¬
ville conference set an example for others. The
French historian Jean Chesneaux recently
pointed out, correctly, that any truly participa¬
tory democracy is time-consuming.
The time taken from coping with economic
emergencies and from the efficient despatch of
business was devoted to an in-depth scrutiny,
unprecedented in Africa, of the nation's his¬
tory. In Africa's present state of moral, political
and economic bankruptcy, there is a need for
stock-taking. Here, for the first time, a whole
country uncompromisingly examined the most
recent, and hence most shadowy and contro-
People from town and
country assemble for a
public meeting in Basutoland
in 1960, six years before
independence.
ELIKIA M'BOKOLO,
Zairean historian, is Director
of Studies at the Ecole des
Hautes Etudes en Sciences
Sociales in Paris. He has
published many books on
African history and
civilizations, including
L'Afrique au 20e siècle, le
continent convoité (Le Seuil,
Paris 1985) and Afrique
Noire, Histoire et Civilisation,
19f!-20! siècles (Hatier, Paris,
1992).

versial, phase of its history, one during which a
one-party state had decreed a monopoly over
information and its interpretation.
In my view, if democracy is the non-
conflictual resolution of social conflicts, it
requires a certain minimum of consensus to
achieve that end. No consensus has as much
force as one based on lucidity and a common
interpretation of crucial moments in a nation's
history. It is still too early to appreciate the full
significance of the new symbolism used at the
conference, which mingled Christian concepts
of forgiveness with the specifically African
pagan rite of "the washing of hands" above the
tomb of the ancestors after making confession.
This act traditionally sanctioned the renewal of
social bonds and the establishment of a new
social contract enabling the members of the
community to continue to live together and
respect clearly stated common values.
But many obstacles lie ahead. Perhaps they
are part of Africa's economic and social situa¬
tion. What should be a cause for anxiety is not
so much the economic crisis, which by defini¬
tion cannot last for ever, as the structure of eco¬
nomies long shaped by the demands of an un¬
equal division of labour and earnings. The
working people of Africa drew no profit from
economic growth during the 1960s and 1970s.
They know that the supposed reforms devised
by the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank have not solved any of Africa's
development problems, since their aim is to
redress the external imbalances of the African
economies. Their social effects, on the other
hand, have been very serious for most of the
population.
A COMMON LABORATORY
There is therefore a serious short-term risk that
almost before the gulf separating the people
from the authoritarian oligarchs has been
bridged, another one will open between a
ruling class committed to technocratic modern¬
ization and the mass of the population. If it
does, the people will feel that they have again
been denied their "revolution".
Another major obstacle is the territorial
structure of the African states, which were
shaped a century in some cases only decades
ago, at the whim of Western diplomats, to suit
the interests of the great powers. Ethnic and
regional problems are everywhere in evidence.
In the 1960s, the Katanga and Kasai dramas
in Zaïre and the Biafra trauma in Nigeria, all of
them involving outside intervention, led African
political and intellectual elites to wholeheartedly
condemn "regionalism" and "tribalism". Things
are very different today. Frantic centralization 19

A session of the National
Assembly in Lagos (Nigeria)
in 1983, following the re¬
election of President Shehu
Shagari.
in the name of the nation-state has been one of
the foundations of the dictatorships that are
now embroiled in crisis. Ethnic and regional dis¬
content in Ethiopia, Angola, Congo, Zaïre and
Togo has, on the other hand, stimulated calls for
democracy. Ethnic parties represent a consider¬
able risk, but so does a form of Jacobinism that
in Africa as elsewhere would represent the
triumph of a technocratic bureaucracy over a
participatory democracy that would invest at
least a minimum of power and responsibility in
local hands.
The struggles, achievements, difficulties and
questions described above indicate that Africa
today is not so much a confused battlefield as a
laboratory. Will it be a laboratory which will
concentrate on its own specific and intractable
situation, while others look on or at best offer
encouragement? Or, in the heat of events, will
Africa become a forum where new questions of
universal importance can be addressed and
where democratic demands and formulae of
universal relevance can be worked out?
Many people both within and outside Africa
tend to look upon the continent as a unique
case. How convincing are their arguments?
Now that the foreign loans raised by the
post-independence governments have been
exhausted, at devastating cost for the peoples of
Africa, it looks as if African countries are be¬
coming introverted, turning back again to their
own political cultures, and testing the powers
of creativity and invention of both urban elites
and villagers. There is a desire for mutual
exchange and contact among African countries.
From Cotonou to Kinshasa, from Douala to
Antananarivo, from Brazzaville to Niamey,
from Monrovia to Addis Ababa, from Bangui
to Johannesburg, the similarities seem striking:
in each place the cast in the social drama is the
same, there are the same forms of mobilization,
confrontation and negotiation.
However, I should like to correct this
impression of an introverted Africa and to put
this appearance of total originality into perspec¬
tive. Africa is currently experiencing problems
that both the old democratic states and the
many countries of the "South" and "East"
which are now coming to democracy also have
to solve. There are three main problems. The
first is that of the relationship between formal
representative democracy (with all the attendant
risks of the confiscation of power by experts,
technocrats and politicians, all of whom are
nonetheless necessary to the process) and the
indispensable role of citizens in controlling and
participating in power. The second is that of
achieving a balance between centres of power,
such as parliaments and governments, and the
places where life is lived (businesses, residential
neighbourhoods, villages and regions). Here the
settling of the ethnic question is paramount.
Thirdly, there is the question of harmonizing, in
the exercise and guarantee of democracy,
"national" territories and wider community-
type groupings.
But Africa also needs to establish new bonds
to strengthen a democratic world order. This
will only come about on two conditions. On the
one hand, colonial practices which have always
played into the hands of the African dictator¬
ships must be repudiated. On the other, aggres¬
sive and insidious forms of ideological and poli¬
tical paternalism must be done away with. Q
20
Opposite page,
The Artisan of Freedom
(1991), a colour lithograph,
with highlighting and
collages, by the Brazilian
painter Sergio Ferro.
