The urban explosion
bv Mehdi Amani
By the end of the century, nearly half the world's
population will be living in cities
I
34
N 1950, there were 155 million more city-
dwellers in the developed than in the developing
countries; by 1970, there were only 30 million
more. Since then, the developing countries have
experienced an unprecedented wave of migration
from the rural areas and, as a consequence, urban
populations have multiplied by a factor of five
or even six.
By the end of this century, nearly half the
world population will be living in an urban
environment. The number of city-dwellers in the
developing world will total 1.9 billion, twice the
total for the developed countries. At the same
time, the rural population, which by then will
be getting on for 3 billion, will continue its inex¬
orable exodus towards the great conurbations.
In regions such as Europe, towns developed
at a moderate pace as a logical consequence of the
process of industrialization. This process increas¬
ingly enhanced the importance of socio-
professional groups employed in industry and the
service sector, the two main constituent groups
of urban populations in the developed countries.
In the developing countries, however, migra¬
tion flow to the cities began without this prior
stage of industrialization and at a frenetic rate;
as a result, urban growth in those countries is
today three times as fast as in the industrialized

Computer graphic (1) shows
cities (represented by vertical
bars) projected to have over
4 million inhabitants in the
year 2000. Green portion of
the bars indicates population
in 1950; red indicates growth
between 1950 and 2000.
Developed regions of the
world are shown in white,
developing regions in brown.
Other illustrations show world
population figures for (2)
1950 and (3) 1985, and (4)
projected figures for the year
2025. Rural population is
shown in green, urban
population in brown.
Horizontal lines represent
increments of 200 million
population.
countries. One of the most serious consequences
of headlong urbanization has been to denude the
rural areas of a large proportion of their active
manpower and this has entailed a growing deficit
in the production of foodstuffs. As a result, many
countries of the South that were once self-
sufficient in food have now become major
importers of cereals even though they have at
their disposal large areas of agricultural land.
The ideal city
Economists and social scientists have long been
concerned with the question as to whether there
is an optimal size for cities. For some experts, the
optimal upper threshold, especially as far as
employment is concerned, is around 500,000
inhabitants. At between 1 and 2 million inhabi¬
tants the critical point is reached beyond which
maintenance of the general standard of living
becomes more difficult. These, however, are only
average estimates; it is clearly not possible to
establish an ideal size that could be applied to all
cities in all countries. It would be better to aim
at achieving reasonable rates of urbanization,
with moderate growth and with limited
megalopolitan development.
Nevertheless, urban growth, particularly in
the developing countries, continues at a giddy
pace. By the end of this century, the world will
have five giant megalopolitan areas with popula¬
tions of 15 million or more, three of which will
be in the developing world.
According to United Nations estimates, the
great cities in the industrialized world have almost
all reached the point of maximum growth at
which they are likely to remain for another thirty
or so years. Things are shaping very differently,
however, in the less developed regions, where
many cities that did not figure among the great
conurbations in the 1970s now take pride of
place among the great megalopolitan areas of the
world.
Mexico City, Sào Paulo, Calcutta and
Bombay, for example, which during the 1970s
stood sixth in the world ranking, topped the 10
million mark in 1985 to join the ranks of the
world leaders. In the year 2000, Mexico City will
have 26 million inhabitants, Sào Paulo 24 million
and Calcutta and Bombay a minimum of 16 mil¬
lion each. New urban agglomerations of 12 to 13
million inhabitants will also appear, including the
Cairo/al-Jizah/Imbabah conurbation, Djakarta,
Baghdad, Teheran, Karachi and Istanbul.
United Nations experts have carried their
population projections up to the year 2025, at
which time they estimate that there will be 93
cities with more than 5 million inhabitants, of
which 80 will be in the developing world. There
will be unimaginable growth, with the popula¬
tion of Abidjan being multiplied a hundredfold
in 20 years, the population of Mexico increasing
by 2,000 a day and the population of Cairo
swelling by 40,000 a month.
Tentacular
urbanization
In the developing countries, urban population
growth results primarily from migration and
from the geographical and spatial spread of cities
rather than from natural growth (excess of births
over deaths). Nevertheless, the fertility of
immigrant families and of inhabitants of areas
absorbed by the spread of the towns often
remains, for at least a generation, higher than that
of those who have been city-dwellers from birth.
When this period of adaptation is completed, the
fall in the fertility rate is often offset by a fall in
the infant mortality rate, which drops much
more quickly in the urban setting.
Under pressure from these various factors of
population growth, city limits creep irresistibly
outwards, swallowing up the surrounding agricul¬
tural land from which the cities draw their food
supplies.
In the industrialized countries, the expansion 35

36
of the large cities has no significant effect on
agricultural production, which is often in surplus.
In the developing countries, on the other hand,
this creeping expansion has a disastrous effect on
the environment, on resources, on the
geographical spread of the population and on
social and professional structures. A striking
example of this can be seen in the urbanization
of 500 hectares of fertile land every year in the
Nile delta owing to the expansion of the Cairo
conurbation.
This excessive expansion of the big cities
involves the construction of complex communi¬
cations networks which are a heavy burden on
shaky economies. Long and costly commuter
journeys weigh heavily on the limited budgets of
households forced out to the distant suburbs by
the high rentals and living costs of city centres.
Controlling urban growth
Reduction of natural population growth rates in
the developing countriesby action to influence
birth and fertility rates as well as mortality and
morbidity ratesfigures high on the list of
national and international priorities.
Without minimizing the importance of this
objective, the urgent need to curb urbanization
in the developing countries and to bring it into
line with policies for agriculture, employment
and population distribution also needs to be
emphasized. If urbanization and the mass exodus
from the rural areas continue unchecked, there_
is a danger that a slowdown in population growth
may of itself lead to a fall in agricultural produc¬
tion and an upsurge of unemployment in the
cities.
The urban crisis and the social, technological
and economic problems it brings in its train are
acting as a brake on the economic advance of the
countries of the Third World. It must be per¬
ceived as a worldwide process that requires con¬
certed action. The measures adopted should be
designed to promote the maximum development
of the economic potential of the country con¬
cerned, especially in the rural areas. The aim must
be to attempt to equate more closely the produc¬
tivity per head of the population in the various
regions by making the most of the natural and
human resources at their disposal.
An effort should be made to rectify the exces¬
sive concentration of infrastructures, economic
activities and services in the big towns and cities
and to create industries and intermediate areas of
activity to absorb rural manpower. Education
and training of rural populations, especially the
younger age groups, is essential if unemployment
and disparity of earnings, which are among the
main causes of the rural exodus and the over¬
population of the towns, are to be reduced. In
short, rural development should be integrated
into national development by closer collabora¬
tion between local communities and the public
authorities at the highest level.
MEHDI AMANI,
of Iran, is an adviser on
population and development. A
former professor of
demography and dean of the
social sciences faculty at the
University of Teheran, he has
also been a tutor at the French
National Institute of
Demographic Studies (INED) in
Paris and a project leader in
Africa for the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA). He is
the author of several books
and articles on the teaching of
demography and on problems
of population and development
in Third World countries.
