" ;^TÇtrtrr<v_
The numbers crunch
Kby Harold Brookfield
Is it possible to measure the population 'carrying capacity' of our planet?
"Continents as crammed as
the Raft of the Medusa", a
drawing by the French artist
A. Robida (1883).
wHEN we speak of "overpopulation" or of
"underpopulation" the implication is that there
must be some level of population in any region
or country, or in the world as a whole, at which
neither of these conditions exists and at which
population is "optimal". When we say that the
condition of either land or people is worse than it
would be if there were fewer inhabitants, then
there must be some "maximum" population,
probably higher than the "optimal", beyond
which stress becomes palpable. Underlying all this
is the notion that our planet has a certain unde¬
fined, sustainable population "carrying capacity".
Most modern thinking relies on the different
formulations of the problem by Malthus
(1766-1834) and Ricardo (1772-1823). Malthus
propounded the "law", or hypothesis, that popu¬
lation tends to increase to the level which just per¬
mits subsistence for the great majority. Ricardo
modified the Malthusian theory by a more
thorough development of the empirical law of
diminishing returns as applied to successive units 25

of labour input, implying that limits are attained
through rising scarcities.
Historically, it is certainly possible to find in¬
stances of something like the Malthusian law. In
overwhelmingly rural early fourteenth-century
Europe, every poor harvest resulted in an increase
of deaths. In Ireland, in the 1840s, the ease of sub¬
sisting on potatoes led to rapid population growth
among a peasantry constantly pressing on the
limits of famine, across which they were thrust
by crop failure in 1845.
In the mid-1960s, a group of researchers, con¬
cerned by demographic upsurge and evidence of
stress in either society or resource management,
or both, began to seek ways to quantify the crit¬
ical population densities which mark the onset
of stress conditions. All dealt with mainly self-
sufficient agrarian societies using pre-industrial
technology and with land-rotation farming in
which the fallow period was a critical element.
The pioneer work was carried out in Africa
where a system first developed in 1949 in Zam¬
bia by W. Allan, with the object of determining
the need for land reallocation and rehabilitation,
was later extended to societies in other tropical
parts of the continent. Anthropologists and
geographers used and elaborated formulae, similar
to those Allan used to calculate critical popula¬
tion density, to quantify the productive capacity
of an environment, the number of people it could
support at given per capita requirements, and
hence the degree of pressure on resources.
Criticism of the
"carrying capacity" concept
Substantial criticism of the whole group of con¬
cepts embraced under the notions of "carrying
capacity", "critical population levels" and "popu¬
lation pressure on resources" was, however, al¬
ready building up. Increasingly it came to be un¬
derstood that a static population-resource equa¬
tion concealed more than it revealed.
Technical problems with early attempts to
make carrying capacity an effective, applicable in¬
dicator were summarized in 1986 by P.M. Fearn-
side. They addressed only one class of agriculture
and an essentially subsistence economy. Although
some authors introduced caveats, they neverthe¬
less calculated on the tacit assumption that pat¬
terns of consumption, income and employment,
crop and livestock mix and agrotechnology were
fixed. Few considered natural resource degrada¬
tion or took account of year to year variability
in the biophysical conditions of production. Most
studies were based on limited periods of field
research and there were deficiencies in the data
used on yields, the fallow period and the quali-
¿O ties of land and its resilience under human use.
Unfortunately, some of these deficiencies have
been carried forward into more recent work.
The UNESCO/MAB Eastern Fiji project of
1974-1976, which the writer headed, was assigned
the task of improving carrying capacity estima¬
tion. It was felt, not unreasonably, that islands
would provide the best laboratory. Within the
project, T.P. Bayliss-Smith took an important
step away from the old approaches, including his
own, by recognizing that the output obtained by
people from any resource-area is not a fixed quan¬
tity, but is relative to the intensity of input. The
Bayliss-Smith model is not specific to any partic¬
ular cultivation system and is applicable to open
as well as closed economies. It abandons the de¬
terministic approach of the 1960s and creates the
potential to take account of both natural and eco¬
nomic variability.
The price of progress towards realism was a
greater need for data, more complex calculations
and a result made up of choices rather than a sin¬
gle figure. The stage was set for a new computer-
based methodological step forward. This was
taken by P.M. Fearnside, who tackled the
problem of carrying capacity in a very different
environment from islandsthat of clearings made
by settlers in lowland rain forest along the trans-
Amazon highway in Brazil.
In this rather specific case Fearnside used as
his indicator the statistical probability of colonist
failure under specific population densities. He de¬
termined this probability through a complex
computer model which simulated the whole agro-
system of the settlers, employing data collected
over more than ten years to examine the causal
relationships between over sixty variables rather
than an independent condition of the environ¬
ment. This was a far remove from the work of
twenty years before.
Fearnside's method is very demanding of
data, research time and computer time, but it
approaches realism by turning the question away
from the simple numbers that can be supported
under a given and static set of conditions. Instead,
it focuses on issues such as levels of support ob¬
tainable from environmental sources under vary¬
ing conditions, or density limits on success among
poor settlers in a new environment. It shifts away
from determinism towards questions of sustaina-
bility, but in very specific contexts.
It would not, however, be reasonable to wait
on such intensive enquiries in all situations and
certainly not in the face of the large population,
development and environmental problems that
now confront much of the world. There is a
need for answers to questions posed by another
doubling of the global population and a desire
to know the sustainable carrying capacity of
HAROLD BROOKFIELD,
of Australia, is professor
emeritus in the Research
School of Pacific Studies, the
Australian National University
(Canberra), where he was until
recently professor of Human
Geography and convenor of
the Division of Society and
Environment. His principal
research has been in problems
of cultural ecology and rural
change in Melanesia and
Southeast Asia. He has served
as chief technical adviser of
projects in UNESCO's Man and
the Biosphere Programme and
is the sole or joint author of
11 books and some 150
papers.

environments and regions for use as a develop¬
ment planning tool.
How many people
can the world sustain?
A very fair first approximation to a global esti¬
mate of carrying capacity was made by E.G.
Ravenstein in 1891. He made reasonable estimates
of the world's cultivable area, its capabilities and
capacities and of yield improvements, to arrive
at a global capacity of close to six billion people
which he thought might be reached about the
year 2070, at the then current rates of growth,
A United Nations Population
Fund poster for World
Population Day, 11 July 1991.
without much loss or gain in living standards.
Since Ravenstein made his estimation, the
global situation has been transformed, not least
by the "green revolution". This and other fac¬
tors for change were taken into account in what
was probably the most ambitious attempt at
large-area measurement of carrying capacity ever
made. This major task, carried out in the early
1980s by the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO), in collaboration with the International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA),
covered the whole developing world apart from
east Asia and sought to determine the physical 27

28
potential population-supporting capacities of all
these countries and of soil and climate regions
within them. Soil associations derived from the
FAO/UNESCO soil map of the world were used
together with a climatic inventory created to
classify lands by mean length of growing period.
Potential yields for a range of crops were cal¬
culated on three bases: of "low inputs" assum¬
ing only manual labour, no fertilizer and no pes¬
ticides; of "intermediate inputs", with draught
animals, some chemical inputs and simple soil
conservation measures; and of "high inputs", as¬
suming complete mechanization, full use of op¬
timal genetic material and all necessary farm
chemicals and soil conservation measures. Con¬
sideration was also given to fallow periods and
to' the effects of both irrigation and land degra¬
dation on productivity. Two time periods were
used to determine the relation of actual popula¬
tion to carrying capacity1975, to represent "the
present", and 2000, using United Nations "medi¬
um" projected populations.
Results from each soil/climate zone, aggregat¬
ed by country, suggest that by 2000 most develop¬
ing countries could support their populations
from their own resources only if high levels of
input were employed, but also that a number of
countries would face inevitable shortage of food;
to reach these projections, trade within countries
was assumed. Evaluation of the method is best
based on the accompanying maps of major
regions, which show carrying capacity as persons
per hectare for each soil/climate zone, at each
level of input. The sheets for a "Southeast Asian"
region that extends west as far as Pakistan provide
a good basis for analysis; this area exhibits great
internal contrasts.
In the entire region, the map for low levels
of inputs shows virtually only the north coast of
Java as capable of supporting as many as five peo¬
ple per hectare. Almost the whole of Java, Bhu¬
tan and Bangladesh, most of Nepal, India and
lowland Viet Nam, large parts of the Philippines
and several upland areas throughout Southeast
Asia have calculated capacities less than their 1975
populations. On the basis of high levels of inputs,
only a few small, mainly upland areas are in the
latter category, though it is a different story with
projected 2000 populations.
More remarkably, however, on the high in¬
put assumption most of Sumatra, peninsular
Malaysia and the Philippines and the whole south
of Kalimantan (Borneo) are shown as having
higher capacity (ten or more persons per hectare)
than all but limited areas of eastern Java and the
north coast of that island. Similarly, most of
Kampuchea is shown as having greater capacity
to support population at high levels of input than
any part of Viet Nam. This information flies in
the face not only of present population distribu¬
tion, but also of a great deal of additional infor¬
mation on the quality of soils and water in cer¬
tain of these regions, particularly eastern Sumatra
and southern Kalimantan, where serious
problems have been encountered by transmigrant
schemes.
Despite the great body of data handled and
the vast resources employed, the methodology
differs little from that of the early carrying-
capacity calculations of the 1960s. On the basis
of incomplete environmental data and a uniform
set of assumptions about agricultural technolo¬
gy and basic consumption requirements, a deter¬
ministic result is produced. Only food supply is
taken into account and industrial and trading ca¬
pacities are virtually ignored. Moreover, the
necessary assumption of the high input levels case,
that the best agrotechnology can be applied every¬
where and by everyone, displays remarkable lack
of realism. As a statement about carrying capacity,
this onebased on a one-sector, closed-economy
modelmerely reveals the impossibility of deter¬
mining or even conceptualizing what it is in a
real, interdependent world.
An empirical notion
that should be discarded
Although there have been several further esti¬
mates, nothing like the FAO/IIASA project has
ever been attempted again. Discussion of carry¬
ing capacity, however, goes on and has taken on
a new lease of life in the modern context of sus-
tainability. In the new wave of environmental
concern it is often argued that population pres¬
sure contributes causally to degradation and
depletion. It has also been shown that degrada¬
tion can arise under both high and low popula¬
tion densities and under both poverty and af¬
fluence, while restorative management can also
occur in these circumstances.
Part of the damage now being done to more
and more of the environment is due not simply
to increased numbers, but to the greater mobili¬
ty of people and their activities and the enhanced
means they have of dealing damage through such
simple innovations as the chain-saw, as well as
the tools of modern industry. Growing numbers
are certainly a major element, but are not them¬
selves a sufficient explanation.
Setting aside speculation about future global
warming, there are already ways in which the en¬
vironment of the whole planet is changed by hu¬
man activity, with growing population pressure
as a major element. Even the advances of the
green revolution have reached something of a
plateau, though worldwide there is still vast scope

for improvement in both production and conser¬
vation.
To focus only on one element, however, is
to ignore questions of access to resources and cap¬
ital as causes of poverty and also to disregard the
scope for adaptation provided by the rapidly
growing division of labour, with its potential for
a more intelligent use of technology. Environ¬
mental variability is increasingly shown to have
major effects on human welfare and we must al¬
low for the possibility that it will increase with
global change. To rely for decision-making on
carrying capacity determined on the basis of
present conditions is a recipe for disaster.
Except for very specific purposes in very
small areas, no attempt to determine a popula¬
tion carrying capacity has attained credence.
Repeated predictions have been made concern¬
ing the population capacity limits of country af¬
ter country for at least half of this century. In
almost every significant case these limits have
been exceeded, while in most cases the present
people are now better off than their less numer¬
ous predecessors.
Carrying capacity is an empirical notion and
it has been empirically faulted so many times that
it should already have been discarded, at least as
a planning tool for local application. It is an im¬
pediment to rational planning for a more sus¬
tainable future. Carrying capacity for the whole
world may be another matter and on this the last
word still seems to be with Ravenstein and the
system he employed in 1891. His limits need ex¬
pansion in the light of what has transpired since,
but his very simple methods, using quantities that
can readily be changed and updated according to
circumstances, are all that so transparently sim¬
plistic and conditional a notion deserves. The real
problem is much larger; population pressure is
as much result as cause, and population numbers,
though important, are only one part of the
whole.
Crowd 2,
a watercolour by the
American artist Diana Ong.
29
