Sri Lanka's
wayside theatre
by A. J. Gunawardana
28
A. J. GUNAWARDANA,
of Sri Lanka, is director of the
Institute of Aesthetic Studies
at the University of Kelaniva,
Sri Lanka. He has been a
contributing editor of The
Drama Review (New York)
and is well known as a critic
and screenwriter in his
country.
IN Sri Lanka, as in many other South Asian
countries, open-air entertainments are staged
in cities, towns and villages throughout the
land. In origin, style and content they can be
broadly divided into traditional and modern,
but the borderline between the two groups is
often unclear.
For over 2,000 years, Buddhism has been
the principal shaping force of Sri Lankan cul¬
ture. Sinhala-speaking Buddhists make up
nearly 70 per cent of the population and pre¬
serve patterns of worship based on the time-
honoured conventions and observances of
their faith. So do the Tamils, who form the
minority segment of the population and are
largely Hindu.
Public events connected with religious
worship in Sri Lanka, whether Buddhist or
Hindu, tend to take the form of processions,
or peraheras as they are called in Sinhala. The
best-known of these processions is the Dalada
Perahera, a magnificent nocturnal pageant fea¬
turing caparisoned elephants and traditional
dancers which is held annually in the streets of
Kandy to honour the sacred tooth relic of the
Buddha. This act of homage to the Buddha
attracts thousands of devotees and sightseers.
Many other processions, although less
grand than the Dalada Perahera, are staged at
regular intervals under the aegis of Buddhist
temples, shrines and other places of worship
dedicated to minor gods and regional deities.
Although firmly religious and devotional,
they often incorporate secular and sometimes
even slightly profane features. Peraheras are
public acts of oblation, but they are also
meant to delight the eye and the ear.
A typical perahera today consists of ele¬
phants, dancers and devotees (men, women
and children dressed in white), and may
include costumed characters such as veddahs
or wild men. These characters act in ways desi¬
gned to highlight their principal attributes or
take part in tableaux depicting familiar epi¬
sodes from history and religious lore. The
Poson Perahera, which memorializes the intro
duction of Buddhism to Sri Lanka during the
reign of Emperor Asoka of India, often incor¬
porates a tableau showing the first meeting
between the King of Lanka and Emperor
Asoka's ecclesiastical emissary.
Sri Lankan street diversions reach their
high point during Vesak, the most notable fes¬
tival in the Buddhist calendar. Vesak, or Wai-
sakha as it is known in Pali, the liturgical lan¬
guage of Buddhism, is the full Moon in the
month of May which is reckoned to mark the
birth, enlightenment and death of the Buddha.
The most striking aspect of the Vesak cele¬
bration, apart from its strictly religious side, is
the centrality it accords to illuminations.
Vesak is in effect a "Festival of Lights". No
Buddhist home, however humble, would fail
to light a few lamps or lanterns during the

nights of Vesak. In their most characteristic
form, Vesak illuminations consist of multiple
arrays of electric lights that are integrated into
high, elaborately decorated, arch-shaped
façades known as thoranas. The lights go on
and off, change colour and outline in cyclical
configurations, and offer a much-loved source
of visual enjoyment and wonder to the people.
But the thoranas are more than just a light
show. They recount stories from the Buddhist
canon, notably the Jataka Tales or Birth Stories
of the Buddha. A typical thorana displays the
main episodes of a story through a series of
painted panels, like a kind of strip cartoon.
Nowadays there is also a sound-track with
voices for the main characters, a descriptive
linking narration and a background musical
score. The result might be described as a piece
The Dalada Perahera,
above, is an annual torchlit
procession held in Kandy
(Sri Lanka) to honour the
sacred tooth relic of the Lord
Buddha.
of radio drama tagged on to a set of primitive
naturalistic paintings. Essentially an urban phe¬
nomenon, the thorana is an amalgam of popular
art media that caters to both religious sentiment
and the public taste for grand spectacles.
At the time of Vesak, wayside theatre and
mime performances are also staged on specially
erected platforms tall enough for the spectators
to have a clear view of what is going on. No
money is charged, although contributions may
be solicited from the audience.
Buddhist parables and Jataka tales provide
the subject matter for Vesak theatre, just as
they do for thorana presentations. The stories
are simply and straightforwardly told. The dia¬
logue, a blend of the colloquial and the high-
flown, is interspersed with songs. The entire
"sound track" is pre-recorded on tape and
29

30
played back through loudspeakers, exactly as in
the case of the thoranas. The acting is largely
confined to gestures and lip movements.
Modern street theatre
While peraheras, the Vesak thoranas and
Vesak theatre articulate received beliefs and
value systems and assert a sense of continuity,
in recent years a form of modern street drama
has developed in Sri Lanka which breaks with
the past and offers a critical commentary on
society, on politics, culture and religion in
short, on all aspects of contemporary life.
Modern street theatre in Sri Lanka owes its
existence to the commitment of a dedicated
man named Gamini K. Haththotuwegama. A
university teacher of literature, Mr. Haththo¬
tuwegama is inspired by a vision of theatre as
a social instrument which, he believes, can lift
the veils of falsehood and hypocrisy which
shroud many areas of contemporary life.
Seventeen years ago, Haththotuwegama
founded the Wayside and Open Theatre
Group as a workshop in actor training and
improvization techniques. Before long, the
participants most of them young, questing,
impatient with the limits of mainstream
theatre were performing out in the open,
away from the rules and rigidities of the
enclosed playhouse and the proscenium arch.
They went out to act for people who had nei¬
ther the means nor the leisure to go to the
theatre.
A typical street theatre programme consists
of a number of short pieces, each lasting less
than an hour. A play may be sparked off by a
A scene from a play acted by
Sri Lanka's Wayside and
Open Theatre Group.
recent happening or it may be an old tale
reinterpreted in the light of current events.
One example of the Group's approach is its
reworking of the "Emperor's New Clothes"
motif in which the well-known parable is
placed in the context of the modern mass
media. While Haththotuwegama himself
writes most of the "texts", there is a substantial
amount of collaboration, and plays grow,
change and take unexpected turns during per¬
formance. The texts include "free spaces" that
can be filled with fresh material according to
need. The Group is adept at getting up plays
for special occasions at short notice, plays
which favour liberation and solidarity themes.
There has been a high turnover in the
membership of the company. Young people
come and go, but a loyal core has remained.
Street theatre is not done for money, although
a collection may be taken to cover basic
expenses such as travel and food.
One of many stories Haththotuwegama
likes to tell about the Group's adventures is
about the time when its members invaded a
seminar sponsored by the Food and Agricul¬
ture Organization of the United Nations
(Fao) and acted out a skit which mocked the
delegates for indulging in excellent lunches
and dinners. Fao took the point, and the per¬
formed "text" was later printed in the Fao
Quarterly Bulletin. The Group mounted a
similar offensive at a Family Planning
Convention by presenting an "anti-pill" play
which portrayed the humanitarian dimension
often overlooked in social engineering.
Haththotuwegama's brand of theatre,

though it only exists on a small scale as yet, is
seen by its proponents as appropriate for a
country lacking the facilities found in affluent
societies and where the mass of the people are
too poor to afford the price of a theatre ticket.
While such claims may be debatable, Hath¬
thotuwegama and his co-workers have
chalked up an impressive list of achievements.
The very fact that they have been able to carry
on for seventeen years is itself no mean
accomplishment, given the risks involved in
staging itinerant outdoor performances. The
Group is run on a shoestring. It has no proper
rehearsal facilities and is too poor to rent any.
Yet, whatever the material shortfall, it has
abided by what Haththotuwegama calls "a
sacred principle" its plays are never staged
for money.
The gift of theatre
The members of the Group go to the people
bearing the gift of theatre with them, and des¬
pite their undisguised political intentions and
the difficult and trying conditions under which
they work, their shows are entertaining, ins¬
tructive and unpretentious. They induce a
mood of camaraderie and reduce the formal
distance between performer and audience. The
style is polyglot dance, song, grotesqueries,
mime, straight dialogue, spicy asides. Nearly
every tool in the actor's repertory is employed.
The cutting edge is sharp.
Paradoxically, by defying the tenets of the
contemporary mainstream stage, Haththotu¬
wegama and his associates in the Wayside and
Open Theatre movement have established a
connection with the pre-modern theatrical
culture of Sri Lanka. The pre-modern theatres,
several of which still survive, were community
enterprises largely untainted by commerce.
Their performances were also, for the most
part, staged outdoors in public precincts or
compounds. The Wayside and Open Theatre
Group fits into the pre-modern mould in
these respects, but its world-view is radically
different.
Is wayside theatre a passing phenomenon?
Haththotuwegama thinks not. He points to



the support received by the Group from spon¬
sors in all parts of Sri Lanka, and the marvel¬
lous response the plays generate. Ultimately,
however, much will depend on the Group's
capacity to attract and retain new blood and
produce durable clones elsewhere in the
country. Wayside theatre is not an easy life. It
calls for deep social commitment as well as
theatrical talent. The two rarely go together in
the modern world.
Be that as it may, the Wayside and Open
Theatre Group is a desirable presence in Sri
Lanka's theatrical arena. For quite apart from
the meaning and impact of its growing reper¬
toire, it provides a necessary counterpoint to
the placid aesthetic certainties of the conven¬
tional stage. O

