The birth of
THE MODERN AGE ""¥>>» v
àmritla A Sn
By Edgar Montiel
¥
1492 ushered in radical changes in
ways of thinking and the emergence
of a new conception of humanity
38
Anonymous mid-17th-century
drawing of a prosperous
miner from the royal city of
Potosí (in present-day
Bolivia). Silver from the
mines of Potosí was one of
the mainstays of Spanish
power in the 16th century.
An

»irte y i in millones de Qv
consta en la Real Caja d
VilladeFotossi.
rHE Letters of Amerigo Vespucci were
published at a time early in the six¬
teenth century when printing was
becoming widespread in Europe, making it
possible for ancient Greek and Latin manus¬
cripts to be reproduced and studied for the first
time, and thereby ushering in the Renaissance.
In them, Vespucci writes of new worlds popu¬
lated by hitherto unknown beings and crea¬
tures, which cast serious doubt on such emi¬
nent works as Ptolemy's Cosmography,
published in Rome in 1478, the Historia plan-
tarum of Theophrastus, published in Venice in
1498, and even Aristotle's Mechanics.
A vast body of knowledge, painstakingly built
up over the centuries, had to be subjected to a
searching reappraisal. Many long-held proposi¬
tions and assumptions turned out to be false,
while others were proved correct. Most had to be
brought up to date. There was a crisis but at the
same time it compelled a radical rethinking, her¬
alding an age that was open to all manner of intel¬
lectual curiosity and capable of imagining a uni¬
verse composed of a variety of differing worlds.
Fresh ways of representing human beings and
the world they lived in had to be devised. The
humanists began to speak of universality and
humanity, a new concept for designating a world
inhabited by men and women who were similar
yet also different. This idea of humanity marked
the beginning of the modern age in the West and
gradually imposed a new imago mundi.
THE NOBLE SAVAGE
However, these new ideas were by no means
accepted by everybody and it was a long time
before they gained wide currency. Sceptics in
the universities poured scorn on the accounts
of the extraordinary discoveries of the Spanish
and Portuguese navigators and treated them as
baseless figments of their imagination. In 1512,
the scholar Alessandro Achillini was still
teaching that the Equator was a barren and
unpopulated desert region. In 1539, J. Boemus
published his Recueil des diverses histoires des
trois parties du monde, a work whose very title
denies the existence of America, although this
did not prevent it from being regularly studied
and republished until the seventeenth century.
Vespucci's Letters were not alone in cap¬
turing the imagination of Europeans. The wri¬
tings of the explorers and conquistadors began to
circulate discreetly in the royal courts of Europe,
among shipowners and thinkers. Columbus's
correspondence with the Catholic Monarchs
gave a first-hand word-picture of the peoples of
America as being handsome, good-natured, free
and uninterested in material things, as though
they were living in an age of innocence.
This impression was borne out by Vespucci,
when he wrote: "They have no captain to lead
them and do not march in step, for every man
is his own master. . . . They have no king or
chief and they answer to nobody. They live in
complete freedom". This first impression of the
indigenous peoples of the Caribbean gave rise
to the myth of the noble savage, the first Euro¬
pean legend about the New World.
This first image of "the Other" had a consi¬
derable impact. Rabelais wrote with a mixture
of curiosity and admiration of the Indians
"who prize a piece of iron more highly than a
gold nugget", and the ideas set forth in Mon¬
taigne's Essays about people with different cul¬
tures and customs made a pioneering contribu¬
tion to comparative anthropology.
It would be possible to speak of two forms
of rational thinking or two systems of develop¬
ment, each trying to grasp what the other is
saying but constantly getting bogged down in
misunderstanding.
The idea of the "natural" condition of the
Indian as merely being an extension of the state
of nature gave rise to a discriminatory and
inegalitarian ideology so influential that it
prompted a thinker like Hegel to deny the his¬
torical dimension of American man, as though
pre-Columbian America belonged to the realm
of nature rather than to that of reason.
The myth of the noble savage died hard,
although it was soon paralleled by that of Eldo¬
rado, whereby America was imagined to be a
land of precious gems, the horn of plenty and
eternal youth, the garden chosen by Providence
to feed the rest of the world.
FROM ELDORADO
TO THE BLACK LEGEND
Another myth, known as the black legend, was
soon to emerge. Under its seemingly innocuous
exterior, the image of Eldorado as a Garden of
Eden concealed the grim reality of the large-
scale exploitation of the New World's gold and
silver mines to fill the coffers of Europe. The
French economist and politician Raymond
Barre has rightly recalled that this gold was the
basis for the commercial power of Europe,
brought mercantilism into fashion, and was
instrumental in the founding of banks in
Lyons, Antwerp, Amsterdam, Frankfurt and
Seville, and in the opening of the first stock
exchanges. It made possible the extraordinary
commercial and entrepreneurial activity which
shaped the destiny of Europe. The myth of
Eldorado closed people's eyes to the heavy toll
of Indian lives that was taken in wresting gold
and silver from the bowels of the earth.
In 1533, Father Bartolomé de Las Casas
caused a sensation when he published in Seville
with the authorization of the King of Spain his
celebrated Apologética historia sumaria (Apolo¬
getic History), in which he fiercely denounced
the abuses perpetrated by the conquistadors.
This polemical work, which was approved by
those responsible for propagating the black
legend, aroused great interest in Europe. It had
an enormous influence on humanists, the phi¬
losophers of the Enlightenment and the ideolo¬
gists of the French Revolution.
However, the turn of the century saw the 39

40
Frontispiece drawn by Picart
le Romain for an 18th-
century French translation of
the Inca Garcilaso de la
Vega's Comentarios Reales.
publication of another book that was to have
even greater influence on shaping Europe's image
of America. This was the Comentarios Reales of
the Inca Garcilaso de la Vega, which was pub¬
lished in Lisbon in 1609. The feelings of compas¬
sion which Las Casas had aroused in his Euro¬
pean readers turned to admiration for the culture
and society elegantly described by the Inca Garci¬
laso. In this well-thought-out, methodical and
balanced view of the Inca Empire, America is
seen in a new light. Garcilaso's Comentarios can
be said to have left its mark on all the leading
European thinkers and writers of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries.
THE LAST TESTAMENT
Why was Garcilaso's account so appealing and
fascinating to European readers? He was born
in Cuzco, the capital of the Inca Empire, in
1539, five years after the city had fallen into
Spanish hands. As a high-born mestizo he
EDGAR MONTIEL,
of Peru, is one of the new
generation of Latin American
writers and thinkers. His
recent publications include:
Inca Garcilaso. Identidad de
la historia (1990; "The Inca
Garcilaso. Identity of
History"), Barro pensativo.
Signos de la cultura peruana
(1990; "Thinking Clay. Signs
of Peruvian Culture") and (in
press) Negros en
Sudamérica. De la conquista
a la identidad nacional ("The
Blacks in South America.
From the Conquest to
National Identity").
was the son of an Inca princess and a distin¬
guished Spanish captain from early childhood
he was taught Latin and given a literary and
scientific education. Yet at the same time, he
was well placed to witness the tragic collapse of
the Inca Empire. Every evening he listened
spell-bound to the stories recounted by the
members of his mother's family about the glo¬
ries of the Inca past and he attended some of
the ritual ceremonies that had survived the Spa¬
nish conquest. When he was twenty-one, he
travelled to Spain to complete his studies and
claim his hereditary rights. He then embarked
on a military and literary career. On retiring to
Montilla and subsequently to Córdoba, he
spent his time reading the Greek classics and
Roman historians and took a keen interest in
agriculture, music and architecture. He closely
followed the publication of the chronicles of
the Indies, in which he found many errors and
misrepresentations, and resolved to write the

Comentarios to correct the accounts of earlier
writers and to "clarify and elaborate on many
things of which they had barely begun to speak
or had left unsaid".
He therefore embarked on the daunting task
of historical reconstruction in order to demon¬
strate to the Spanish and Europeans that the
Incas "were civilized and not barbarians" and to
dissuade Spain from using the force of arms to
rule a nation which had already suffered military
defeat and whose outstanding culture deserved to
be treated with proper consideration.
After the Spanish edition had first appeared
in 1609, translations were published in French
(1633), English (1688) and Dutch (1705). These
were followed by many later editions, including
an abridged version in French in 1744, complete
with copious annotations and commentaries by
leading scholars and travellers of the Enlighten¬
ment. A learned and rewarding dialogue took
place symbolically between the Inca Garcilaso
and La Condamine, Godin, Frézier and many
others.
Garcilaso introduced Europe to the Inca
Empire, with its unbending social organization,
its collective agrarian system and strict mono¬
theism, and its achievements in agriculture, irriga¬
tion, architecture, urban development, the domes¬
tication of plants and animals, and the fastidious
workmanship of its jewellery and woven fabrics.
This picture he painted of a planned egalita¬
rian society, coming under the authority of an
all-powerful State, was a source of wonder to the
Utopian thinkers and reformers of the seven¬
teenth and eighteenth centuries. Europe, in its
thirst for social justice and reform, saw Inca
society as proof that a different form of society
was possible and that the redistribution of goods
and wealth was not an unattainable dream. The
"New World" had succeeded in forging a new
relationship between people, nature and the state.
FROM REFLECTION TO REALITY
The view of the Incas presented by Garcilaso
can be found in Campanella, in Bacon and in,
Morelly, the French Utopian thinker whose
Code la Nature (1753) was to influence the
thinkers of the French Revolution and the Uto¬
pian socialists of the nineteenth century. Garci¬
laso also left a mark on Montesquieu, Voltaire
(whose play Alzire is set in Peru), Rousseau,
Marmontel (who wrote a historical novel
drawing heavily on the work of Las Casas and
the Inca Garcilaso) and Rameau (the composer
of the famous opera-ballet Les Indes galantes).
All these philosophers, moralists, political think¬
ers, artists, poets and musicians, whether they
were monarchists or members of the bour¬
geoisie, found in the Incas and their social orga¬
nization a source of inspiration or a means of
giving voice to their own aspirations. The
"Other" was no longer a mere reflection of
their own image but had become an intrinsic
part of the European vision.
On the eve of the French Revolution, the
num copia falubrítate admixtabominû : quxnífi
quís víderittcrediilítatem fuperat , Huíus arbores
pafcua&frudhis / multü ab íllis lohanç. dífferüt .
HajcprHífpana díuerfo aromatíi genere /
auro metallífq? abundat. cuius quidem 8í omnium
ah'arum quas ego vidi : & quarum cognítíonem
baheo íncolg vtríufq? fexus :nudí femp íncedunt :
Academy of Lyons held an essay competition on
the resolutely universalist subject of "The
influence of the discovery of America on the hap¬
piness of the human race". Many of the essays
submitted reflected the teachings of Garcilaso,
especially that of the winner, the Abbé Genty,
which set him at the heart of the debate that trig¬
gered off the Revolution. Genty considered that
collective ownership had made the Incas a
contented people, but that the lack of any form of
private property had sapped their social structure
and had ultimately led to the collapse of their
empire.
And so America, that "other" world whose
peoples, landscapes and culture were all so diffe¬
rent, found itself in the midst of another histo¬
rical process, the French Revolution, which in
turn sent to America its own universalist mes¬
sage embodying innovative ideas drawn from
Las Casas and Garcilaso. The wheel had come
full circle and was starting to turn again. O
The arrival of Christopher
Columbus in the Antilles. An
engraving from the 1493
Latin edition of the first
letter sent by the navigator
to the Catholic Monarchs on
his return from his first great
voyage.
41
