Who is really speaking in the environment debate?
'The real dialogue
is about the
model of
development and
about values'
by Peggy Mrobus and Nan Peacocke
L
Women gather in Nairobi
(Kenya) in 1985 for the World
Conference to Review and
Appraise the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace
(1976-1985).
, famous painting by Pieter Brueghel, entitled
Landscape with the Fall of Icarus, depicts a beau¬
tiful harbour with houses rising from the water¬
front. The reason for its title is not immediately
apparent, and the viewer has to look very care¬
fully to find the subject of the painting, the two
legs of Icarus protruding from the surface of the
water.
The picture can be taken to symbolize what
is happening in the environmental debate. The
story being told "on stage" does not represent
what is happening "off stage" where real life is
being lived. On stage the North often claims that
it is trying to protect the environment, while the
South, bent on development, is destroying it. But
these are simplified characters. Off stage some¬
thing else is happening. In order to understand
the real story we have to leave the stage.
"The North" destroyed much of its own
environment and that of the South as part of the
colonial project. As the ecological consequences
of this became apparent, Northern environ¬
mental groups began to challenge the practices
of unrestrained industrialization and the nuclear
39

40
age. The membership of these groups was diverse,
ranging from grassroots movements concerned
about health and land rights to members of the
scientific community and "nature-lovers".
However, "environmentalism" only emerged in
a leading role on stage when financial interests
saw an opportunity to capitalize on this situation
by offering technological solutions to the
environmental crisis.
"South" is also a complex character. Southern
governments have a legitimate concern about
creating a better life for their people. However,
this project, Development, becomes corrupted by
the alliance between certain Northern financial-
technological interests and certain Southern
interest groups. "Developmentalism" emerges as
a kind of industry, absorbing the time and talent
of millions of people in its management and
shaping the lives of hundred of millions more.
Hidden persuaders
If the characters of North and South are imper¬
sonators, who is really speaking? We have already
identified the financial interests concealed beneath
the cloaks of North and South. Their interest is
in capital accumulation promoted through inter¬
national trade. Unless these interests are clearly
identified the dialogue is meaningless. Some of
these interests are involved in exploiting the
natural resource base of the South with technol¬
ogies which destroy the environment. Others are
selling "environmentally-friendly" technologies
chiefly to Northern industries which can afford
them.
One implication of this is that the terms
"North" and "South" are not useful. On the one
hand they mask the pervasiveness of Northern
financial-technological interests in South econo¬
mies. On the other they conceal the common
interests of grassroots movements in both North
and South built around issues of health and
environment, and worst of all they set up a false
dichotomy between North and South.
The position of the North is ostensibly about
"protecting the environment", that of the South
is about "promoting development", but there are
strong voices in the South which seek to protect
their environments from the negative conse¬
quences of a development model which is
exploitative of both natural and human environ¬
ments, just as there are voices in the North
challenging the excesses of the same development
model on their health and livelihoods.
Indeed, as experience in the South shows,
there is no necessary conflict between human
livelihoods and environmental security. The con¬
flict between these two is another consequence
of the colonial project. Colonial expansion led
to the large-scale appropriation of the most valu¬
able land for the benefit of Northern industrial
interests. Millions of peopleperhaps the
majority of the Earth's populationare still being
displaced and driven to struggle for subsistence
on shrinking economic marginswhether in the
deserts of Africa, on eroded hillsides in the Carib¬
bean, in refugee camps in the Middle East, or in
the urban slums of Asia and Latin America. The
same process of marginalization is evident in the
ghettos of the United States and the polluted cities
of Eastern Europe.
The actions that are threatening to annihilate
humankind and the planet are rooted in the con¬
flict between industrial society and naturea con¬
flict in which the imperatives of industrial society

Bangladesh's Grameen Bank
provides small sums of credit
to the rural poor, and
particularly to women (below
left) who make up over 90%
of its clients. A loan from the
bank enabled 26-year-old
Feroja (below, right), to open
a drinks stall which she has
now expanded into a small
grocery. Borrowers contribute
to a fund which helps to
provide education for needy
children, above.
PEGGY ANTROBUS,
Barbadian economist, Is
General Co-ordinator of the
Women and Development
(WAND) unit at the University
of the West Indies, and
president of DAWN
(Development Alternatives for
Women for a New Era).
NAN PEACOCKE,
also from Barbados, is a
publications editor with the
WAND unit. She writes on
cultural and environmental
issues in the Caribbean.
dominate both the human and natural environ¬
ments. The environmental crisis is the conse¬
quence of an inequitable world system between
countries and within countries. The real dialogue
is therefore about the model of development and
about values. This model of development leads
to overconsumption in the North and among a
small group of people in the South and, on the
other side of this coin, underconsumption among
the majority of people in the South and a
minority in the North.
Women in search
of development alternatives
Third World women are in the forefront of the
challenge to this model, and there are an
increasing number of women in the North who
share this perspective. Women, as key decision¬
makers in consumption, are also well placed to
play a special role in changing consumption pat¬
terns. Two projects illustrate what can and is
being done: the Women & Development Unit
(WAND) of the School of Continuing Studies of
the University of the West Indies (a regional
project) and the network of Third World
feminists advocating Development Alternatives
for Women for a New Era, DAWN (an interna¬
tional project).
WAND, which was established in 1978, is an
initiative of Caribbean women determined to
ensure that the regional university would play a
more active role in advancing programmes within
the framework of the United Nations Decade for
Women. Over the years, as a result of its anal¬
ysis of the destructive impact on women of struc¬
tural adjustment policies imposed from outside,
its programmes of training, technical assistance,
communications and networking have shifted
from a focus on "integrating women in develop¬
ment" to "empowering women for social
change".
The recognition of the need to make this con¬
ceptual shift was facilitated by the involvement
of women from the Caribbean in discussions at
the international level. A meeting of Third World
women researchers, activists and policy-makers
in Bangalore, India, in August 1984 assessed what
had been learned from our experience over this
period. As we talked, the theme "crisis" emerged
as the common motif linking African food secu¬
rity, Latin American and Caribbean debt, Middle
Eastern fundamentalism and nuclear testing in the
Pacific. Our analysis showed that these appar¬
ently separate crises were related through the
growth-oriented economic model which domi¬
nated our countries, and the need for women to
organize to change the structures which keep
them marginalized. The group produced a docu¬
ment for the End-of-Decade Conference in
Nairobi and formed the DAWN network.
DAWN's perspective
on the environment
DAWN's analysis has the following charac¬
teristics: it is holistic; it is feminist; it builds on
a synthesis of regional diversity which places, for
example, the consequences of tourism in one part
of the world and desertification in another in a
context which relates them to their common
structural origins, thus linking the experience of
women at the level of their daily lives (the micro
level) to economic trends and their global
environmental impacts (the macro level); and it
is politicalit makes a critique of political systems
that ignore women's unpaid work at the level of
social and economic planning.
In relation to the environment, DAWN's ini¬
tial analysis traced the links between the food-
fuel-water crises through neglect of poor Third
World women's position as food producers,
providers and managers. Neglect of women's
work, the vital link in this chain, has been
detrimental not only to women's interests but to
the ecological systems which sustain their
livelihoods.
DAWN's current analysis focuses on the
themes of Environment, Reproductive Rights and
Population, and Alternative Economic Frame¬
works. The common conceptual framework for
the analysis will be that of livelihoods: recog¬
nizing the relationship between environmental
degradation, population pressures and economic
frameworks.
41

42
What does the ecological crisis
mean for women in the 'South'?
The ecological crisis is the other side of the coin
of the macroeconomic model. Since the end of
World War II efforts to organize a global mode
of production have been steadily gaining ground.
This mode of production has two consequences:
on the human environment (increasing dispari¬
ties between social groups and countries); and on
the natural environment (ecological degradation).
For a poor woman the global economic and
ecological crises are experienced together, and
they are experienced most immediately at the
place where her survival is affected. A woman
whose child is starving cannot be expected to
ponder the aesthetic value of a tree. Where the
ecological destruction brought on by the model
of economic growth deprives her of land, the
source of her livelihood is destroyed.
Meanwhile, disenfranchised women in the
"South" are actually being blamed for many
environmental problems. One of the limitations



of the current debate is the failure to distinguish
between macroeconomic systems and micro-level
realities. Global phenomena such as depletion of
the ozone layer, global warming, and pollution
are overwhelmingly the result of the widespread
sale and use of Northern technologies. However,
the discussion tends to ignore macroeconomic
factors and tends, perniciously, to focus instead
on problems associated with poverty and popu¬
lation, which are more immediately observable.
Perspectives on "the environment" are
informed by people's realities. There are many.
From a "South" point of view, a tendency within
the "North" to separate the natural from the
human environments obscures some of the
common structural origins of the threat to all life.
Similarly, the line drawn between an abstract
"nature" (benign, vulnerable, endangered) and
human beings (exploitative, and viewed by some
as nature's enemy) is a dangerous line. From
where we stand, the issue can be described in
more political terms: currently, the imbalance
between man-made productive systems and
natural systems is jeopardizing the productive
base, that is, jeopardizing both the natural
environment and the productive capacity of
human beings. When you look at the environ¬
ment issue from the perspective of poor women
what you see are issues of health and livelihoods.
Take any one of the key environmental issues
and follow it through its various permutations
and it will be clear that women are linked to eco¬
nomic policy and the international economy
because of their sectoral activities and social roles.
All of this points to the need for a framework
which allows for policy shifts that will address
each of the linking factors.
Country-dwellers are flocking
to Mexico City at the rate of a
thousand a day, swelling the
population of districts like the
Borde de Vias, above.
The Wheel of Life, a Buddhist
symbol from the temple of
Likir (Ladakh).
rW/<?52
;4¡"oljjU
< y Km
^i W
