ThePilgrim's way
Dervishes (members
of a Muslim mystic
fraternity) in a Turkish
cemetery.
by Leili Eshgui
12
LEILI ESHGUI,
Iranian philosopher and
sociologist, is the author of
a number of publications on
Iranian society. Her latest
book Un temps entre les
temps. L 'imam, le chiisme
et l'Iran (1992, "Time out of
time. The Imam, Shi'ism and
Iran") has just been
published by Éditions du Cerf,
Paris. She is currently
working on a study of the
philosophy of monotheism
and on the religious theatre
of Iran.
FROM the moment the existence of an invi¬
sible God is postulated, two paths open
for humankind. God communicates
through the law that he transmits via his envoy;
but he does not reveal himself in that law. To
know God it is not enough merely to obey this
law; something else is required. Hence, in
parallel with a legalistic religion, there is the
affirmation of a mystical faith, a quest whose
theme and driving principle is the desire to
know God.
Encountering the divine becomes for
humankind life's savour but also its greatest
risk. The unknowable God turns out, for man,
to be the mystery of his own existence. He
who, tormented by this mystery, sets out upon
this quest is a mystic. The encounter with the
divine becomes the highest human adventure.
It is a love tryst, for only through love does the
hidden God let himself be known.
But to encounter God face to face is impos¬
sible. The scriptures tell us so. From the begin¬
ning, the God of monotheism warns: "Thou
canst not see my face, for there shall no man see
me and live." The rare occasions on which face-
to-face meetings have taken place stand as proof.
The case of al-Hallaj is a good example. At
the conclusion of a spiritual quest undertaken
in solitude and poverty, he declares: "I am the
Truth" ("An-al-Haq "). That is his death sen-

tence. Life, distance are swept away and he is
fused with the Other an inevitably fatal
encounter.
Those that love the hidden one take a more
tortuous but safer path; they aim for a non-
fusional encounter with the Other, and for that
they must make a detour. The encounter



remains the crucial event, an irreversible rup¬
ture. But if the pilgrim is not to be consumed
like al-Hallaj, a mediator is necessary.
The mediator
It is through the concept of mediation that one
essential facet of the master's role is best
understood one that needs to be distingui¬
shed both from the image of the possessive and
despotic master, the guardian of truth, and also
from the more common ¡mage of the master as
educator or initiator.
Teachers of this latter kind initiate their
pupils into adult life by passing on to them the
heritage of earlier masters the knowledge that
will enable them in their turn to continue the
tradition. Links in a long chain, they are the
guarantors of life's continuity. Through them
are handed down, from one generation to an¬
other, those elements that re-create the ties that
bind society together. Masters of this type are
universal figures, found in every traditional
society.
But the master who mediates between God
and humankind is very different. He helps to
bring about an encounter in the course of
which man will see a part of his secret revealed.
In such cases, the master seems to hold the key
to the mystery of existence. He is a third-party
substitute through whom the love of God
allows itself to be transferred. For the disciple,
the encounter-event opens up the path he has
longed for, the new route for which he has
been searching. And the master is the agent of
this spiritual revolution.
In this case the master's principal role is not
to transmit knowledge or a tradition (even if
that aspect remains part of his function), but to
make the disciple experience an inner event that
breaks the flow of his previous existence and
marks the point of departure for a new one.
What the disciple experiences can be neither
transmitted nor apprehended. At the very
most, an individual can try to prepare to meet
it. The master is there to support his efforts in
this hazardous quest for there is no certainty
that the event will happen.
The singularity of this procedure lies in the
implicit intention of provoking a naturally
hazardous occurrence that springs solely from
the disciple's ardent desire: which explains the
reaching out of the seeker's whole being
towards a state of poverty, purification, the
annihilation of everything which would stand
in the way of being prepared.
The master's gamble is to let chance loose.
He might consider physical routines and spirit¬
ual exercises necessary to bring the disciple to
the necessary state of "surrender", "detach¬
ment", "self-abnegation", "annihilation of the
self". This mystical vocabulary attempts to des¬
cribe the most suitable state for welcoming the
Other. Other expressions such as "going out of
oneself" or "entering into ecstasy" characterize
the moment of rupture associated with the
experience, the opening up to another exis¬
tence. That is why the mystical experience is
often compared to rebirth.
Besides mediating between heaven and
earth, the master also mediates between the dis¬
ciple's two lives: that preceding the encounter
and that following it. But in this horizontal
sense he effects mediation through rupture, in
The 12th-century Persian
poet Farid-al-Din. Late
18th-century Mughal
painting.
13

contrast to the mediation in continuity offered
by the transmitter of knowledge.
The master also checks that rules and duties



are properly observed in the course of the dis¬
ciple's gradual progress. In the exercises that St.
Ignatius of Loyola (1491-1556), the founder of
the Society of Jesus, devised for his followers,
for instance, the master, when he intervenes
verbally, makes enigmatic proposals that, far
from satisfying the disciple, simply steer him
from one question to another.
Sometimes an external accident can become
a spiritual event in its own right and can set in
motion an unforeseen process. It can then take
on the role of master.
One day like any other, the celebrated
Muslim mystic Attar was exercising his profes¬
sion as an apothecary when a dervish a
Muslim mendicant monk came into his shop.
After having watched him at work for a con-
Saint Ignatius of Loyola,
portrait by an artist of the
17th-century French school
of painting.
14
siderable period of time, the mendicant said to
him: "I wonder how, busy as I see you are with
this world and its affairs, you will die". Attar
replied, "In the same way that you will". Where¬
upon the dervish lay down on the floor, put his
head on his begging bowl and gave up the
ghost. Attar "went out of himself", abandoned
the things of this world and set out ... to
become what he became. The words and deeds
of the mendicant did the job of a master, inter¬
rupting the normal flow of things and opening
up a new existence.
Why did an apparently banal circumstance
provoke a spiritual event for the future mystic?
Because it touched a hidden area within him, a
part of his constitutive mystery. The shadow of
God passing over him drew him out of himself
and set him on an unknown path.
In such cases the master fulfils only a tem¬
porary function: once the encounter has taken
place, the mediator loses his reason for exist¬
ence. He effaces himself to reveal the empty
space through which the disciple must make his
own, independent way. Everything that trans¬
pires between a real master and a real disciple
consists of bringing about spiritual autonomy
of this kind. In the ecstatic moment of the
event itself, the master must disappear.
The unique
The scriptures themselves sometimes take a
metaphorical approach to essential truths. The
monotheistic scriptures of Christianity and
Shi'ism provide a theoretical framework for
mediation. The figure of the mediating master
also exists in Judaism and Sunnism, of course,
but the singularity of Christianity and Shi'ism
lies in the fact that a mediator is envisaged in
each religion's doctrine, in the persons of
Christ and the Imam respectively.
Now each of these two figures, emblematic
as they are of the encounter-event, physically
vanishes; and it is precisely these vanishing
mediators who are called Master. The term is
rarely employed for Moses and Muhammad,
certainly in the mystical sense. But Jesus is, for
Christians, the Master par excellence, and Ali is
the Mawla ("master") not just for the Shi'ites
but also for most Sunni mystics.
Like Christ, the Imam is the point of
encounter between humankind and God. The
empty tomb of Jesus, the well where the hidden
Imam of Shi'ism disappeared are the blank
spaces from which believers set out on their
quest. For Christian and Shi'ite mystics, Jesus
and Ali remain invisible masters, functioning
like their living counterparts.
The role of the mediating master is of
course not exclusive to monotheism, but it is
connected with the uniqueness of the hidden
being. It exists in other religions and societies
in so far as they admit of a concealed, unknown
zone and elect a unique image of the divine, for
the object of adoration the missing figure
who is sought but stays out of sight-1is always

unique. An awareness of this quality is perhaps
what, in monotheistic faiths, leads the mystical
experience to express itself in terms of love; the
quest has inspired whole pages of love-songs
from mystics. The mediating master tempora¬
rily bears the weight of divine love. Christ and
the Imam become emblems of love.
Jesus Christ is a complex case, for he is at
one and the same time Father and Son, the
word and its incarnation. The mediating master
shades off into the absolute master, who is
none other than God himself. By this ambiva¬
lence, Christianity reveals that there is indeed
an intrinsic connection between God, the
Absolute, and his mediator, and that a confu¬
sion of roles is possible.
The tyrant
This leads us to examine another image of the
master, almost the opposite of the one we have
been describing: the master as dominus (pos¬
sessor), from whom no autonomy is possible,
whose slave and eternal dependent the disciple
becomes.
A similar multiplicity of meanings is at
work in the Arab word mawla, which can
mean both friend and possessor. When a word
has two different senses (and particularly if
they are contradictory), it means there is a link
making it possible to slip from one meaning to
the other. The distance between the master
who initiates the disciple into exploring his
own inner self and then effaces himself once his
pupil has found his own way and the master
who crushes all personal initiative and remains
always dominant is both infinitely great and
infinitesimally tiny: great in its consequences,
tiny in the risk of slippage and confusion.
The possessive, despotic master is the one
who does not disappear, who is not content
with fulfilling only the role of mediator, but
who finishes up by confounding himself with
the divine itself. Assimilated to Truth, he
becomes the guardian of all knowledge and all
secrets. In such circumstances, no quest can
have any meaning. The hidden is no longer
hidden; the truth is reduced to knowledge, and
all exploration is closed off for good.
What can lead to such a situation? It is not
merely the doing of the master but of the dis¬
ciple also, of the dialectic that unites them. In
the mystical experience, there are in effect pass¬
ing moments when the mediator comes so
close to God as to become confounded with
Him. These are the instants when divine love is
transferred upon him and in which the disciple
encounters in the master the shadow of the
Dearly-beloved. Both disciple and master may
want to remain attached to those moments.
In such cases, the disciple's need for depen¬
dence and the master's will to power come
together in a dialectic that installs the master in
the place of God, the Absolute Master, the
Being whose mediator he is supposed to be.
And that is tyranny. This is what happens to
WT N
<
"
tiKioia^lr.
Ezekiel, one of the great Old
Testament prophets. Detail
from a fresco by the 15th-
century Italian artist Melozzo
da Forli, in the treasury
chapel of the Basilica at
Loreto, Italy.
masters who wish to persist in their mastery,
and it could hardly be more different from the
self-effacing role of the mediating master.
The easy passage from one image to the
other in fact weighs as a threat on every master-
pupil relationship. Far from being peculiar to
monotheism, a similar conflicting duality is
found, in various forms, in the mystic expe¬
riences of other religions, and outside of the
world of religion as well. The master-pupil
pairing, with all its marvellous and disastrous
implications, is a universal one. G 15
