N T E R V I E
HERVE BOURGES
talks to Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat Hervé Bourges began his career in
journalism as editor-in-chief of the
French weekly Témoignage
chrétien. An early supporter of
Algerian independence, he was from
1962 to 1965 technical adviser to
the President of the Algerian
Republic and director of
Algeria's Ministry of Youth and
Popular Education. After serving as
director of several schools of
journalism and research institutes,
he became director of Unesco's
Office of Public Information and
spokesman for the Director-General
(1980-1981). He then became head
of Radio France Internationale and
in 1983 was appointed chairman-
director-general of the French
public television channel TF1, a post
which he held until the channel was
privatized in 1987. In December
1990 he became chairman of the
public-sector channels A2 and FR3.
He has written a number of books
including Décoloniser l'information
(1978), Les cinquante Afriques
(with C. Wauthier, 1979),
Une chaîne sur les bras (1987)
and Un amour de télévision (1989).

You are a champion ofpublic-service televi¬
sion. Could you tell us what you think about
the comparative meritsand demeritsof
public and private systems in this field,
always bearing in mind that the whole issue
is more complicated in the countries of the
South where, in many cases, state control of
the audiovisual media, especially television,
is synonymous neither with freedom nor
quality.
-Before answering perhaps I should say a
word or two about myself. I am in charge of
the two public channels of French television
and before that I was between 1983 and 1987
head of another channel, TF1, which was also
then public. I am a professional, not a theo¬
rist, and I will answer your questions in the
light of my experience of communication in
general and of French television in particular.
In the countries of Western Europe,
which developed their television networks in
the 1950s and 1960s, the basic principle of
public service in the audiovisual media is to
enable the small screen to serve the interests
of the community. One characteristic of
democracies is that they encourage respect
for impartiality, so that communications are
not governed by economic interests or poli¬
tical pressures. Here, obviously, I am talking
in ideal terms.
In practice, the public service always has
to cope with all kinds of contingencies.
There is a budget, authorities to which it is
answerable, red tape, a governing body, civil
servants, unions	 But private-sector tele¬
vision doesn't have a completely free hand,
either. The product is appealing in the case of
a pay-TV channel like Canal+ in France
which sells itself on its quality. Elsewhere
advertising the be-all and end-all for share¬
holders king, and no amount of rules
and regulations can transform a supermarket
into a cultural centre. The French system is a
mixed system which could in many respects
be improved. Some people think it's neither
one thing nor another. There is no longer a
monopoly, and the public-sector channels
are partly financed by advertising. Those
who look back nostalgically to the old days
think that the programmes are not as good as
they were a case that is not proven.
One also hears it said that perhaps adver¬
tising should be banned from the public-
sector channels in France, or that one of the
public-sector channels should be privatized.
It is hard to say what the right formula
should be. It's a political matter. My own firm
belief is that public service television limited
to a single channel would soon become a has-
been, a travesty of public service.
I am also convinced that this is a futile
debate. Viewers do not choose to watch pro¬
grammes because of what they feel about the
shareholders of the channels that broadcast
them.
On the other hand two things are cer¬
tain. Firstly, since the establishment of an
independent regulatory body ten years ago,
news and current affairs broadcasting has
been carried out in a context of freedom and
pluralism. Secondly, since programme
supply has increased to six channels, the
Viewers express their choice
through the handiest form of
voting instrument that exists,
the remote control. No theory
can escape the zapping test.
French watch television on average half an
hour more per day than they did ten years
ago. You may think that this isn't much of
an achievement, but the objectivity of the
figures is a factor in its favour.
Audience movements are signs of vita¬
lity. After fifty years of television, viewers
express their choices through the handiest
form of voting instrument that exists, the
remote control. No theory can escape the
zapping test.
So public attitudes must constantly be
observed and studied; audience expectations
must be deciphered.
There are no ready-made solutions in the
world of the audiovisual media. The French
model insofar as such a model exists
could certainly not be exported as it stands,
either to the countries of the East or to the
countries of the South. Some soap operas and
game-shows may have an audience in many
countries. But not programming concepts.
Pluralism and professionalism, on the
other hand, are universally valid ground-
rules. Pluralism, by which I mean of course
constitutional pluralism, is the basic condition
of the exercise of freedom of information. But
there must also be economic and professional
pluralism. When there is only one source, a
single newspaper, a single broadcaster, the
temptation is too strong to . . . let us say . . .
stage-manage the debate. Such a system is
rarely efficient in the medium or long term.
And it will be even less so now that the new
information1 technologies are abolishing
frontiers.
As for professionalism, I would say that
it is winning its spurs with the arrival of a
third generation of television people who did
not experience the enthusiasm of the pio¬
neers or the disenchantment of the children
of 1968.
With the increasing globalization of the
audiovisual media, people everywhere are
becoming more receptive in outlook, and
peoples and cultures are being brought closer
together. On the other hand, images of vio¬
lence andpornography are spreading and so,
perhaps more insidiously, are nationalist,
xenophobic and even racist ideas. How can
we reconcile the demands of openness and
freedom of expression with the need to pro¬
hibit excesses, without seeming to advocate
censorship?

Today the public calls the tune. This is
increasingly evident in America and Europe.
But we must understand the freedom-related
phenomena which are taking place in the
countries of the South, where satellites have
brought the audiovisual frontiers tumbling
down, not only in big cities like Algiers and
Dakar but in regions where TV had never
reached before. There are more and more
broadcasters. The supply of programmes is
diversifying, from the big nation-wide net¬
works, such as the BBC, Canal France Inter¬
national, the Servicio Iberoamericano de
Noticias, to pay TV, religious broadcasting,
educational and cultural television, and lan¬
guage programmes	
Something important is happening.
Whereas national television networks
enjoyed an undisputed monopoly until
If swift action is not taken,
some countries will be
deprived of their own
means of audiovisual
expression, except when it
comes to home news.
recently, outside voices are beginning to be
heard. Television without frontiers establishes
defacto cultural and political pluralism. More
than ever the national broadcasters will have
to harmonize their strategies and make lasting
partnerships with other stations and with
international organizations. If swift action is
not taken, some countries will be deprived of
their means of audiovisual expression, except
when it comes to home news.
Some satellites also beam violent or por¬
nographic programmes different countries
and cultures have different views about these
mattersbut I think that this is a marginal
phenomenon.
As far as we are concerned, it is to the
credit of public-service television in France
that any programme is rejected for domestic
or external broadcasting if it is likely to
encourage social, cultural, political, religious
or sexual exclusion. But it is not our role
and here I can perhaps speak on behalf of all
the other broadcastersto try to ban pro¬
grammes on other channels than those
which are under our authority.
We are committed to the fundamental
principle of the editorial responsibility of the
broadcaster, which is a corollary of freedom
of communication, and experience has
taught us to be wary of all forms of external
control as a matter of principle, however
well intentioned. Censorship is always per¬
nicious. The person in charge must be ans¬
werable for his or her programmes before
the competent legal authorities.
Interestingly enough, an international
law of audiovisual communication is emerg¬
ing. There have been many examples of
this, recently, in the fields of copyright and
performing rights. It is now clear that an
international broadcaster is answerable to
the law. There will soon be no more room
for pirates, except on the high seas!
Expressions of nationalism or even xeno¬
phobia are not, unfortunately, confined to
any particular broadcasting system. They are
everywhere. People must combat them at
their own level of responsibility. Personally,
I am constantly preoccupied with this.
Does the influence of viewing figures on
television programming necessarily mean
that programmes will become more
mediocre? Driven by competition from the
private sector and by the need for adver¬
tising revenue, the public sector seems to be
heading inexorably in this direction. Does
catering to a mass audience necessarily mean
pandering to the lowest common denomi¬
nator?
you are alluding to an internal
French debate. Believe me, the accusation is
quite groundless. Go to Britain, Italy or
Spain. Listen and compare. There have never
been so many programmes about discov¬
eries, culture, creationon French television
at any rate. Our public service fully per¬
forms its role of providing information,
entertainment and culture by offering to the
widest public the broadest range of pro¬
grammes what we call television for all.
News broadcasting is free, comprehen¬
sive in its scope, pluralistic. Live broadcast¬
ing makes it possible to experience great
events from the inside.
In the early 1960s, Jean Prat's adaptation
of Aeschylus's Persae was watched by a mil¬
lion viewers and people still talk about it as a
miracle thirty years later. At that time,
however, viewers had no choice, there was
only one channel, it was Aeschylus or
nothing.
Last July, Puccini's masterpiece, Tosca,
with Domingo, Raimondi and Malfitano was
watched by viewers all over the world, in¬
cluding two million in France. Thousands of
viewers had a choice between at least three
programmes. The audience meter does that
too; it measures real success.
So why should there be there such a
misunderstanding?
I think that television is a kind of hostage
in a wider social and cultural debate about
the role of the school, about leisure, about
training. Television isn't the real culprit, but
a scapegoat is needed. In the past, French
governments believed that it was indispen¬
sable to hold the keys of information. Until
the day when politicians realized that the
media did not form opinion not by swim¬
ming against the tide at any rate.
Is itpossible to imagine, in the North, televi¬
sion that would also be valid for viewers in
the South?
Here we are still making empirical obser¬
vations rather than scientific measurements.

We are discovering the effects of the interna¬
tionalization of the media and the transmis¬
sion speed of images and ideas. There are
three major poles. The United States, Japan
and Europe share a market in which the eco¬
nomic and cultural stakes are immense. But
viewers, who participate to varying degrees
in the globalization of cultural attitudes and
consumer practices, live in a specific context.
So, with the globalization of news and pro¬
gramming, there seems to be an increasing
need for programmes that are less remote.
How can we define this need? How can we
satisfy it? I think that these questions should
provide food for thought when it comes to
organizing efficient co-operation.
Television is already fifty years old. How far
has it fulfilled thepromise of its early years?
It made no promises, except to open a
window on the world. And it has done this.
So what expectations has television
betrayed? Perhaps those of visionaries such
as André Malraux, who imagined that its
transforming powers would be equal to
those of the printing-press. The extraordi
nary opening up that has occurred has not
changed the world, only ways of life.
Today, in a country like France, the av¬
erage viewer watches television for three
hours a day. Watching television has taken
the place of individual or group leisure acti¬
vities such as playing cards, family life, meet¬
ing the neighbours. Old traditions kept alive
by story-tellers are becoming museum
pieces. The oral tradition is disappearing. As
McLuhan said, we live in a global village.
But doubtless people have not changed.
When something close to home happens,
local ties soon take precedence over uni¬
versal affairs.
How do you see the future of television and
cinema?
The cinemas have emptied and the viewer
has become more of a stay-at-home because
of the development of television. There was
a time when people went to the cinema
almost every week. It was the family pas¬
time. Today cinema-going is largely confined
to the under-twenty-fives. If there is still so
much vitality in the film industry, it is
because it has learned to adapt to new
forms of image-consumption television
and video. TV provides most of the finan¬
cing for films. This is true in France where it
has always been government policy to sup¬
port French cinema, but also in the United
States, under the influence of market forces.
Nowadays showing films in cinemas is in a
sense the Formula 1 of the audiovisual
media. It acts as a test-bench and a source of
prestige. This is an important change, but
from an artistic point of view it is perhaps no
more fundamental than the change from
silent to talking films.
Will the new audiovisual techniques, espe¬
cially high-definition TV, pave the way for
higher quality and greater creativity or only
an increasing preoccupation with mass
entertainment?
To my mind, neither one thing nor the
other. High-definition television uses the
same basic techniques as mass television
Hertzian wave diffusion and the cathode ray
tube. All it changes is sound and image qua¬
lity at the moment of reception by satellite

Already people can do
their own TV programming;
they can zap.
or by cable. There is no fundamental tech¬
nical improvement from the point of view of
the producer. The best image for high defini¬
tion is still 35 mm or 70 mm film, and digital
technology can be applied to all kinds of
supports. As for the wide screens manufac¬
turers envisage for the future, let me tell you
that they will exist in ordinary standard ver¬
sions. What is really happening, behind all
the technological innovations, is a big fight
between the major European, American and
Japanese companies. Considering the speed
with which the economies of the three
industrial blocs are hooking up, this is per¬
haps the last great challenge for the electro¬
nics industry in the twentieth century.
The effects of technological change are
often unpredictable. Think of FM radio
which has become popular in France with
the development of small independent sta¬
tions. The compact disc, which brought
improvements to audio that are perhaps
comparable to those that high definition
television will bring to video, has first and
foremost led record publishers to give prio¬
rity to their classical music lists and compila¬
tions of show-business hits.
Today, contrary to what many people
believe, the trend towards catering to a mass
audience has stopped; progress has not
continued along the lines that might have
been imagined at the end of the 1960s. The
globalization which audiovisual communica¬
tion makes possible has been accompanied
by many innovations of a more or less inter¬
active nature. The diversification of the
supply of mass programmes, over the air¬
waves or by satellite, is only a stage. Already
people can do their own TV programming;
they can zap. In France VCRs and light cam¬
corders constitute what amounts to an
eighth channel, on which the French now
spend 25 per cent of their culture and leisure
budget. We are far from the electronic high
mass that celebrated man's first steps on the
Moon. Events like the Olympic Games that
generate intense emotion all over the planet
are still broadcast. But what's wrong with
that? Television has grown up, reached the
age when one has a few less illusions.
8
