A museum with a difference
"Walls are the skin people
live in. "
Cité de la Creation
In 1920, the French architect and urban planner Tony Gamier (1869-1948) des¬
igned a low-cost housing scheme in an area of Lyons, one of France's largest cities.
The scheme, which was completed in 1933, was the first complex of its type built
in Europe. On account of its rational and self-contained design, this "Cité indus¬
trielle" is considered to be one of the first examples of twentieth-century urban
architecture. With its almost 1,600 housing units spread over some twelve blocks,
it is home to a low-income working class population of upwards of 4,000 people,
most of them elderly. The quality they have in common is that they have
remained loyal to the environment in which they live.
For the past four years, the estate has been undergoing rehabilitation by the
Lyons branch of the Ol'Cl II. M, the official agency for low-rent housing schemes.
Its inhabitants have made a point of ensuring that the work being done is a model
of its kind, not only to preserve the memory of the place where they live but to
project a new image, give it a fresh lease of life and add to its traditional reputa¬
tion as an area where people are welcoming and live together in harmony side-by-
side. One of the offshoots of the rehabilitation exercise has been the creation of
the Tony Gamier Urban Museum, which has been set up on the estate at the ins¬
tigation of a committee formed by the tenants and has been designed and built by
a team of painters and sculptors from Lyons, the "Cité de la Création". The
Museum has sixteen frescoes covering 4,000 square metres of wall-space and dis¬
playing extracts, in the form of plates and sketches, from some of the futuristic
urban designs which Tony Garnier produced between 1904 and 1917. These are
set out in an open-air concourse of novel design. The rehabilitation programme
also provides for a pedestrian precinct, a documentation centre on Tony Garnier's
work and a specimen apartment from the ninetccn-thirties.
In 1991, Unesco designated the Tony Gamier Urban Museum as a project
coming under the auspices of the World Decade for Cultural Development on
three grounds: the wealth of its architectural and artistic heritage; the originality
of the museum design; and the mobilization of the inhabitants of the quarter in
the bid to revive its ' culture".
Those involved in the project unanimously agreed to give it an international
dimension. For this purpose, six painters and sculptors from different geo-cultural
regions will be allowed a free hand to use six wall-surfaces that are still vacant for
frescoes on the theme of the "Cité idéale", in keeping with the far-sighted projec¬
tions of Tony Gamier. O
This aerial plan of a project by Tony Gamier has been painted on a wall
of a housing block in the Tony Gamier Urban Museum in Lyons (France). It illustrates two
major features of Garnier's work: the orthogonal and hierarchical organization of the road
system and the grouping of dwellings into rectangular blocks.
31
