Dossier
nu m
38
by France Bequette
continent in its own right,
covering an area larger than
Europe, Antarctica has long
been shrouded in mystery.
From the early years of the
last century, national flags
gradually came to be planted
-all over it, although it has
never been the scene of armed
conflict. Since then, eighteen States
have laid claim to varying portions
of the continent, which in 1940 was
divided into cake-like slices extend¬
ing outwards from the South Pole to
the surrounding ocean. However it
was not until 1958, thanks to the
combined efforts of explorers, air¬
craft and satellites, that Antarctica
was completely mapped.
This enormous landmass is cov¬
ered by an ice cap which is estimated
to be 2,500 metres thick and
accounts for roughly one-third of
the planet's freshwater reserves. In
1983, at the Soviet Vostok base in
the interior, a temperature of -89.6°C
was recorded, setting an all-time low
in an environment where cold is
constant, with temperatures ranging
from -36°C in January to -72°C in
July. The most extreme conditions
are associated with blizzards, fierce
'A few months from now we shall know
whether the international community has
the good sense to respecta continent where
the dawn is more beautiful than any¬
where else in the worldbut one which
already has a hole in its ozone layer'.
bitingwinds accompanied by snow¬
falls, which reduce visibility to zero
and make the cold unbearable.
Yet Antarctica has exerted great
fascination over people ever since
the American navigator John Davis
first set foot on the continent in
1821. Scientists and explorers of
extreme conditions followed in each
other's footsteps. International
Geophysical Year in 1957-1958 pro¬
vided the occasion for setting up
the first permanent scientific sta¬
tions. Some 2,000 people now occu¬
py all the year round forty-two bases
located on the continent or on the
offshore islands, while twenty-six
other bases are only occupied
during the southern summer.
Research being carried out covers
such broad subject areas as glacio-
logy, meteorology, the Earth's
magnetic field and the upper
atmosphere, but even so the conti¬
nent has by no means yielded all
its secrets.
About 140 million years ago, the
east of Antarctica was still at the
heart of an enormous continent,
known as Gondwanaland, formed
ofwhat are nowAfrica, South Amer¬
ica, India, Australia and New Zea¬
land. Gondwanaland had a tem¬
perate climate and was covered
with forests and inhabited by rep¬
tiles and amphibians, vestiges of
which dating back 200 million years
have been found. In 1982, American
scientists unearthed the fossil
remains ofa small, 40-million-year-
old marsupial that was an ancestor
of those now found in Australia,
thus showing that these territories
once formed a single landmass.
However, through the action of
what is known as plate tectonics,
rift faults started to appear and
these were gradually widened by
movements of the Earth's crust.
Antarctica came to be isolated from
the rest in the ice-bound ocean of
the South Pole, where its tempera¬
ture fell and its forests gave way to
everlasting snow. It is still not
known exactly when the different
parts of Gondwanaland started to
break away or what the shape of the
continents was at that time.
HEAT UNDER THE ICE
In the south of Antarctica, Mt.
Erebus, on Ross Island, is the conti¬
nent's only still active volcano. Not
far from Erebus, there are "oases",
or dry valleys, which have been
given that name because there has
not been a single drop ofprecipita¬
tion for at least two million years.
The ice has retreated and the snow
is melted by the the heat of the Sun's
rays. These rock-strewn deserts
have been used by the US National
Aeronatics and Space Administra¬
tion (NASA) to test equipment for
the exploration ofMars, whose sur¬
face features are similar. Lake
Vanda, which is situated in the
middle ofone of these desert areas
and which, in the everlasting cold, is
almost always covered by a thick
layer of ice, displays one peculiar
feature, in that the temperature of
the water at its lower levels may rise
to as high as 25°C. This is because
the ice crystals act like optical fibres
and transmit the sunlight to the bot¬
tom of the lake, heating up the
motionless water.
What we know aboutAntarctica is
based on information gathered by
some fifty expeditions that have
explored the continent in the last
150 years or so. The actual name
Antarctica was coined by the Greek
philosopherAristotle, who held the
view that, in order to offset the
known mass of the northern hemi¬
sphere under the constellation of
the Great Bear (Arktos), there was
bound to be an equivalent mass in
the south, whence Antarktikos.
When one of Magellan's ships was
returning from its circumnaviga¬
tion of the world, demonstrating
that the Earth was round, its crew
thought that they had caught sight
of an unknown land, which was
thereafter shown on maps as terra

australis incognita, although its
contours were a matter of conjec¬
ture. Explorers like Kerguelen, Cook,
Weddell, Dumont d'Urville, Ross,
Charcot, Amundsen, Scott, Shack-
leton and Byrd endured untold suf¬
fering, and sometimes even went
ficient quantity for their exploitation
to be a profitable proposition.
Ever since the beginning ofthe cen¬
tury, the extreme fragility of the
Antarctic environment has given rise
to a series of Commissions, Treaties
and Conventions, such as the
for the development of mineral
resources to be prohibited and for a
Conference to be held in fifty years'
time, with a view to making, ifneces¬
sary, changes to the status ofthe conti¬
nent or even abolishing that special
status. A few months from now, we
Left, a huge tabular iceberg
off the Coast of Adélie Land,
Antarctica.
Below, acting like optical fibres,
surface ice crystals transmit
sunlight to the bottom of Lake
Vanda.
to their deaths, in order to find out
more about the continent.
A PRECIOUS NATURAL
RESERVE
Plant life on the continent consists
only of lichens, mosses and a few
flowering species, and terrestrial ani¬
mal life oftiny invertebrates, but there
is an intensive marine life. Plankton
and krill provide food for 120 fish spe¬
cies, which are particularlyabundant
during the summermonths, and also
for seals and whales. Nineteen sea-
bird species live in harmony with
seven species offlightless swimming
birds belonging to the large penguin
family. However, the source of
wealth posing the greatest threat to
the ecology ofAntarctica lies beneath
the surface ofland and sea. Although
less than 1 per cent of the continent
has been prospected, deposits ofcoal,
iron, copper, gold, titanium, uranium
and cobalt have been identified. Off¬
shore drilling has also revealed the
existence ofhydrocarbons. However,
it is impossible to state with certainty
that these minerals are present in suf-
Washington Treaty, the Wellington
Convention and the Madrid Proto¬
col. Their purpose is to protect plant
life, as well as whales, which are threat¬
enedwith extinction, and seals, which
are hunted for their fur. But they are
also designed to prevent overfishing.
From the environmental standpoint,
the scientific bases are not entirely
free from blame. All kinds ofwaste, of
varying toxicity, are beginning to pile
up. The firstAmerican nuclear power
station installed on the continent
developed faults andhad to be trans¬
ported back to the United States,
along with tons of contaminated
earth. Aircraft landing strips disturb
the habitat of the Antarctic fauna.
Tourism, the "smokeless industry",
is increasing and is attracting 9,000
visitors a year.
In 1991, the Madrid Protocol, which
has already been signed by thirty-
nine States, was left open for signature
for a period ofone year. The Protocol
forms an additional instrument to the
Washington Treaty. Its originality lies
in the fact that it includes a morato¬
rium providing forAntarctica to be a
natural reserve ofscience and peace,
shall knowwhether the international
communityhas the good sense to res¬
pect a continent where the dawn is
more beautiful than anywhere else
in the world but one which already
has a hole in its ozone layer.
; *S
FRANCE BEQUETTE is a Franco-American journalist specializing in
environmental questions. Since 1985 she has been associated with the
WANAD-UNESCO training programmeforAfrican news agency
journalists. She has played a leadingpart in the preparation ofthis
Greenwatch section.
