Launching the Environmental
Revolution by Lester Brown
WITH some 10,000 official delegates
from 150 countries and up to
20,000 concerned citizens and
activists scheduled to participate in a parallel
Global Forum, the Earth Summit being held
this June in Rio de Janeiro will be the largest
United Nations conference ever held. It will
dwarf its predecessor, the UN meeting in
Stockholm twenty years ago that officially
launched the international environmental
movement.
As part of their preparation for the meet¬
ing, governments have produced reports on
the state of the environment in their respec¬
tive countries. Most of these reports focus on
national achievements a reduction in air
pollution here or a successful reforestation
programme there. But overall, global environ¬
mental trends are not reassuring. The health
of the planet has deteriorated dangerously
during the twenty years since Stockholm.
As a result, our world faces potentially
convulsive change. The question is, in what
direction will it take us? Will the change come
from strong worldwide initiatives that reverse
the degradation of the planet and restore hope
for the future, or will it come from continuing
environmental deterioration that leads to eco¬
nomic decline and social instability?
A CHANGE WITHOUT PRECEDENT
Muddling through will not work. Either we
turn things around quickly or the self-rein¬
forcing internal dynamic of the deterioration-
and-decline scenario will take over. The policy
decisions we make in the years immediately
ahead will determine whether our children live
in a world of development or decline.
44
There is no precedent for the change in
prospect. Building an environmentally sus¬
tainable future depends on restructuring the
global economy, major shifts in human
reproductive behaviour, and dramatic
changes in values and life-styles. Doing all
this quickly adds up to a revolution, one
defined by the need to restore and preserve
the Earth's environmental systems. If this
Environmental Revolution succeeds, it will
rank with the Agricultural and Industrial
Revolutions as one of the great economic
and social transformations in human history.
Like the Agricultural Revolution, it will
dramatically alter population trends. While
the former set the stage for enormous
increases in human numbers, this revolution
will succeed only if it stabilizes population
size, re-establishing a balance between
people and the natural systems on which
they depend. In contrast to the Industrial
Revolution, which was based on a shift to
fossil fuels, this new transformation will be
based on a shift away from fossil fuels.
The two earlier revolutions were driven
by technological advances the first by the
discovery of farming and the second by the
invention of the steam engine, which
converted energy into mechanical power.
The Environmental Revolution, while it will
obviously use new technologies, will be
driven primarily by the restructuring of the
This wall painting in Dakar (Senegal) was
executed as part of a spontaneous campaign
waged by young people to clean up and
embellish the city.
Mural with a message
In Port-au-Prince (Haiti).

global economy so that it does not destroy
its natural support systems.
The pace of the Environmental Revolu¬
tion will be far faster than that of its prede¬
cessors. The Agricultural Revolution began
some 10,000 years ago and the Industrial
Revolution has been under way for two cen¬
turies. But if the Environmental Revolution
is to succeed, it must be compressed into a
few decades.
Progress in the Agricultural Revolution
was measured almost exclusively in the
growth in food output that eventually
enabled farmers to produce a surplus that
could feed city-dwellers. Similarly, industrial
progress was gauged by success in expanding
the output of raw materials and manufac¬
tured goods. The Environmental Revolution
will be judged by whether it can shift the
world economy onto an environmentally
sustainable development path, one that leads
to greater economic security, healthier life¬
styles and a worldwide improvement in the
human condition.
Many still do not see the need for such
an economic and social transformation.
They see the Earth's deteriorating physical
condition as a peripheral matter that can be
dealt with by minor policy adjustments. But
twenty years of effort have failed to stem the
tide of environmental degradation. There is
now too much evidence on too many fronts
to take these issues lightly.
Planetary degradation
Already the planet's degradation is damaging
human health, slowing the growth in world
food production, and reversing economic
progress in dozens of countries. By the age
of ten, thousands of children living in
southern California's Los Angeles basin have
respiratory systems that are permanently
UNESCO IN ACTION
ENVIRONMENT
impaired by polluted air. Some 300,000
Soviet citizens are being treated for radiation
sickness. The accelerated depletion of the
stratospheric ozone layer in the northern
hemisphere will lead to an estimated addi¬
tional 200,000 skin-cancer fatalities over the
next half century in the United States alone.
Worldwide, millions of lives are at stake.
These examples, and countless others, show
that our health is closely linked to that of the
planet.
A scarcity of new cropland and fresh
water plus the negative effects of soil erosion,
45

nñfl
UNESCO IN ACTION
ENVIRONMENT
46
air pollution, and hotter summers on crop
yields is slowing growth of the world grain
harvest. Combined with continuing rapid
population growth, this has reversed the
steady rise in grain output per person that
the world had become accustomed to. Bet¬
ween 1950 and 1984, the historical peak year,
world grain production per person climbed
by nearly 40 per cent. Since then, it has fallen
roughly 1 per cent a year, with the drop
concentrated in poor countries. With food
imports in these nations restricted by rising
external debt, there are far more hungry
people today than ever before.
On the economic front, the signs are
equally ominous: soil erosion, deforestation
and overgrazing are adversely affecting pro¬
ductivity in the farming, forestry and live¬
stock sectors, slowing overall economic
growth in agriculturally based economies.
The World Bank reports that after three
decades of broad-based economic gains,
incomes fell during the 1980s in more than
forty developing countries. Collectively,
these nations contain more than 800 million
people almost three times the population
of North America and nearly one-sixth that
of the world. In Nigeria, the most populous
country in the ill-fated group, the incomes of
its 123 million people fell a painful 29 per
cent, exceeding the fall in US incomes during
the depression decade of the 1930s.
Anyone who thinks these environ¬
mental, agricultural and economic trends can
easily be reversed need only look at popula¬
tion projections. Those of us born before the
middle of this century have seen world
population double to five billion. We have
witnessed the environmental effects of
adding 2.5 billion people, especially in the
Third World. We can see the loss of tree
In Paris, a sinuous piece of wall art
signed by Dub.
cover, the devastation of grasslands, the soil
erosion, the crowding and poverty, the land
hunger and the water pollution associated
with this addition. But what if 4.7 billion
more people are added by 2050, over 90 per
cent of them in the Third World, as now
projected by United Nations demographers?
Lessons from the past
The decline in living conditions that was
once predicted by some ecologists from the
combination of continuing rapid population
growth, spreading environmental degrada¬
tion, and rising external debt has become a
reality for one-sixth of humanity. Moreover,
if a more comprehensive system of national
economic accounting were used one that
incorporated losses of natural capital, such as
topsoil and forests, the destruction of pro¬
ductive grasslands, the extinction of plant
and animal species, or the health costs of air
and water pollution, nuclear radiation, and
increased ultraviolet radiation it might well
show that most of humanity suffered a
decline in living conditions during the 1980s.
Today we study the archaeological sites
of civilizations that were undermined by
environmental deterioration. The wheat-
lands that made North Africa the granary of
the Roman Empire are now largely desert.
The early civilizations of the Tigris-
Euphrates Basin declined as the waterlog¬
ging and salting of irrigation systems slowly
shrank their food supply. And the collapse
of the Mayan civilization that flourished in
the Guatemalan lowlands from the third
century B.C. to the ninth century A.D. may
have been triggered by deforestation and soil
erosion.



Although the Environmental Revolution
has been described here largely in environ¬
mental and economic terms, it is in the most
fundamental sense a social revolution: the
product of changing values, of seeing our¬
selves again as a part of nature rather than
apart from nature, of recognizing our depen¬
dence on the Earth's natural systems and
resources and on the goods and services they
provide. L"J
LESTER BROWN,
of the United States, is the president of
Worldwatch Institute, a Washington-based non¬
profit research organization devoted to the
analysis of global problems. He is also editor-
in-chief of World Watch magazine and project
director of the annual book series State of the
World.
