T E R V I E W
MIKIS THEODORAKIS
describes A GREEK CHILDHOOD
No one who has heard the
wonderful bouzouki melodies
written by the Greek composer
Mikis Theodorakis for Zorba
the Greek or his theme music
for two other noted films, Z
and État de Siège, will ever
forget them. Theodorakis has
infused the soul and spirit of
the Greek people into all his
musical works. He is also a
militant who today, as a
member of his country's
parliament, continues a
struggle for freedom and
justice which began when he
joined the wartime resistance
as a teenager and has taken
him more than once to prison
or into exile. Here he looks
back on the circumstances
that gave rise to his musical
vocation and his political
commitment.
Tell us something about your early life.
I was born on 29 July 1925 on the island
of Chios, opposite the native village of my
mother on the mainland of Asia Minor, in
what is now Turkey. My father was from
Crete. He had volunteered to serve in the
first Balkan War, in which he was wounded,
and had then entered the civil service. When
the Greek army occupied Smyrna, he was
posted to the small town of Bourla, where he
met my mother. She came from a very poor
family. Her father was a farmer during the
winter and went out fishing in the summer.
Her brother, who had had an education,
later became a Director in the Ministry of
Economic Affairs. My family therefore came
from the lower middle class of government
officials who instilled a sense of discipline in
their children.
I was born after the military defeat
which Greece suffered following the Turkish
revolution of Kemal Ataturk. It was a real
tragedy for the country. I think that Greece
lost its soul when it lost Ionia. Greece and
Turkey have been in conflict with one ano¬
ther over long periods of their history. The
first Greek nationalist revolution was
directed against the Ottomans, in 1821. And
Crete remained under Turkish domination
until 1912.
Many of our relatives, on both my
father's and my mother's sides, were victims
of these confrontations and made great
sacrifices. My father used to say that our two
families had shed a river of blood. I therefore
grew up in an atmosphere of patriotic stories
and the stirring revolutionary songs known
as Rizitika, which had a very great influence
on me.
Even so, you have memories of a happy
childhood.
Yes. We had a country house, where we
were surrounded by aunts and uncles form¬
ing one big family. This house had also been
:''&4£5
the home and source of inspiration of a
famous naive painter, Theophilos. It was a
wonderful experience to live there in the
middle of the olive groves, the orange trees
and the flowers, overlooking the sea. I
remember that there was a boat which used
to sail past twice a week. The impression
which that white boat on the blue sea has left
on me is like a wound, like the mark of a scar
left by a moment of exhilaration. I really
believe that I have tried, in everything I have
composed, to recreate that beauty and redis¬
cover those images engraved in my memory
like a childhood dream.
I also remember evenings we spent with
my father, stretched out on the ground

gazing at the stars. He knew a lot about the
stars and he explained them to me and made
me follow them, telling me their names and
their history.
Another of those childhood memories
that leave an indelible mark on you came
from my uncle. Just before he was posted to
Alexandria as consul, he came back to the
village to get married and brought me a gram¬
ophone as a present, together with records of
Greek classical and popular music and of
jazz, which was then at its height. I was only
four years old and there I was discovering
music! We used to hold social evenings at
which young people danced the Charleston
and the foxtrot and I was put in charge of
the gramophone. Moments like those have
meant a lot to me throughout my life!
My uncle also gave me a set of record¬
ings of operatic arias, which for a long time
made me afraid of opera. I think that this
was probably because, for a child of my age,
there was something frightening about the
voices of those famous tenors and prima
donnas. I was sixty before I made up my
mind to tackle opera. The music I heard on
that gramophone in my childhood certainly
contributed to developing my tastes for a
long time to come.
What sort ofchild were youf
I had some crazy ideas. I wanted to fly
like a bird. I climbed a tree and flung myself
into the air and almost broke my neck. Then
I did it again, because I was sure that I would
be able to fly. One day, I wanted to take off
from the top of a three-metre-high wall,
because I thought that I would be able to fly
down to the beach below. I was just about to
jump when my grandfather suddenly came
out of nowhere and tried to catch me and
stop me from hurting myself. I fell on top of
him and he lost his balance. I broke my
wrist, but the old man broke his leg. There
was utter panic all around me. Everybody
was obsessed with my wrist, but nobody
bothered about my grandfather. He was very
embittered, and started to refuse his food. It

was this, coupled with the after-effects of his
broken leg, that eventually ruined his health.
He died not long afterwards. That was the
first time I had seen a dead person and I
didn't realize what it was all about.
How did your musical vocation come to
youf
The period from 1928 to 1930 was a very
stormy one in Greece. There was one
government after another, which meant that
civil servants didn't have a very easy time of
it. My father was from Crete and was there¬
fore a liberal and a supporter of Venizelos.
He was not only my father's idol, but was
actually a relative. When he became prime
minister, my father was appointed Vice-
Governor of Epirus. It was a very poor and
backward region, where the children were
dirty and went barefoot. I was the only child
to have a pair of shoes, but I was so ashamed
that I used to take them off. Then Venizelos
was deposed and my father was transferred
to a less highly rated and above all less well
paid post in Cephalonia, which was very
hard for us.
The cultural atmosphere in Cephalonia
was completely different from that in
Epirus. The island had never been occupied
by the Ottomans and the influence of the
Venetians, and later of the British, could still
be perceived, even in the way people spoke.
The music played on the island was more
Western in style. It was there that I heard a
philharmonic orchestra for the first time. It
used to play on the main square and when¬
ever I went by I was transfixed, spellbound
with admiration. I was very impressed with
the conductor. When I asked my mother
what he was doing, her reply was: "That
man is suffering". For me too that music
meant suffering.
I was still at primary school when the
Metropolitan of Cephalonia came to inspect
my class and asked the other children and
me to sing the national anthem, so that he
could judge what our voices were like. After
that, twenty of us were chosen to sing can¬
ticles in a small local church on Good
Friday. The tunes were very old and beau¬
tiful two of them were in modal form and
one was tonal. I joined the church choir just
to be able to keep on hearing them. About
ten years ago, I used those three canticles in
my third symphony, in memory of those
times I shall never forget.
After Cephalonia, we were sent to
Patras, which was a more affluent middle-
class town, although it was not such a pretty
place. It was there, when I was buying some
books, that I found out what a musical
score was. My father explained to me that
that was how music was written, and gave
me my first lesson. There was a very good
choir at school, conducted by a teacher
who was also a violinist. Every morning
we used to sing a hymn by Haydn, with a
solo part which I must have sung well,
since the teacher regularly invited people
to come and listen to it. One day, he
offered me a violin, which I bought from
him. I then went to the academy of music
square. I was already very tall and thin and
people tended to look at me, with my lanky
frame, as if I was a bit of an oddity. In the
end, I shut myself up in the house and, as a
result, I made considerable progress with my
music. In the house opposite, there was a
beautiful girl with green eyes and I fell
madly in love with her. All alone in my
room, I watched the girl, who couldn't see
me, and composed a large number of songs
on my violin. I taught them to my mother,
who had a beautiful voice and sang well. In
Opposite page,
Anthony Quinn dancing a
sirtakl in a famous scene
from the film
Zorba the Greek, based on
the novel by Nikos
Kazantzakis, with music by
Mikis Theodorakis (left).
in Patras, but the violin teacher there used to
hit me every time I played a false note. Even¬
tually I left and went on studying by myself.
As a result, when I was about twelve, I
wrote my first songs to the words of classical
poems I took from my schoolbooks. The
melodies are beautiful, perhaps the most
beautiful I have ever written. There are
about seventy of them altogether and I plan
to publish them. I shall dedicate them to
schoolchildren, since they were written
when I was a schoolchild myself.
We left Patras for a poorer town further
south. It was summer and in the afternoons
everybody strolled about on the main
the evenings, after supper, when my father
asked us what we had been doing during the
day, we used to sing our songs for him. He
in turn started singing and later on my
brother joined in, so that we formed a family
quartet which I accompanied on the guitar
or violin, while also singing myself. My
father began to invite his friends, along with
the prefects and sub-prefects and a whole
small world of civil servants, to come and
listen to us. It was like having a job, since I
had to prepare a concert every evening for
my father's guests.
The following year, we changed towns
yet again. I was more and more on my own

and I spent a lot of time reading. My father
had a library of more than 1,600 books,
which followed us wherever we went.
Later on, in Tripolis, I started to learn
the piano and harmony. We couldn't afford
to buy a piano and there were only three in
the entire town. I practised the scales on the
piano of a rich American, who allowed me
to study at his house on Sunday mornings
when people were at mass. But I had to stop
playing as soon as he got back. For the first
time in my life, I felt a sense of hatred for
rich people who could afford a piano but
who didn't use it, whereas I really needed a
piano but was deprived of the opportunity.
If I became a Marxist, it was because of that
piano, which to my eyes was the embodi¬
ment of social injustice. I eventually hired a
harmonium, which I found very useful. But
all these setbacks taught me to write music
from memory, without any instruments, and
I was therefore later able to go on com¬
posing in exile and prison
Where and when didyou decide to devote
yourself to musicf
At Tripolis, in the Péloponnèse, which
was a poor region where life was very hard.
Many people emigrated to the United States
or went to seek their fortunes in Athens. I
decided to become a musician, although I
was fairly good at mathematics and liked
handling abstractions. My parents and my
maths teacher hoped that I would go in for a
glamorous profession, like architecture.
However, I went on studying classical music
and composing. I started writing piano
pieces at a time when I knew a girl who had
a piano and played Schumann and Bee¬
thoven. We used to give concerts to which
we invited the town's leading citizens. This
was during the occupation, when our only
diversions were poetry and philosophy. We
translated classical authors such as Aristotle,
Plato and Homer into modern Greek. There
was also the cinema, which only showed
German films, although we sometimes got to
see splendid musical films instead of military
propaganda. For example, I saw German
films which ended with the finale from Bee¬
thoven's ninth symphony, which had an
absolutely stunning effect on me. I was so
shaken that I actually fell ill and ran a high
temperature. In the end, I told my father and
the maths teacher that all I was interested in
was music.
In 1942, my father went to see the
director of the Athens conservatory with my
music. The director asked to meet me and I
went to his home, where we had a talk and
he listened to me play the piano. The upshot
was that he offered me a scholarship to the
conservatory, which I was due to enter in
1943. But I am jumping the gun. Before that,
there was another important stage in my life,
when I joined the resistance and discovered
Marxism.
It was wartime. We were deeply reli¬
gious and fervent worshippers. The love of
Christ, Christian charity and religious feel¬
ing catered for a real need when we had to
face up to the violence surrounding us and
«*-^
image of a hideous monster for me. But
when I started talking to these people and
learnt that they had been the first to rise
against the occupying forces, it made me
think. When I came out of prison, I joined
the resistance.
I was entrusted with the first resistance
cell at school. I had to explain my ideas and
justify the proposals I put forward. I there¬
fore had to read about Marxism and brief
myself on the ideology with which we were
going to fight the enemy.
the ugliness of the world at that time. Read¬
ing the Gospel was itself a form of resis¬
tance, but it was not enough. We had to do
something. We had to react. On 25 March
1942, we organized a demonstration against
the Italians in Tripolis. The National Libera¬
tion Front, which had been set up in Athens
and was communist-inspired, sent represen¬
tatives to help us. During the demonstra¬
tion, we were surrounded by the Italians. I
got into a fight and apparently struck an Ita¬
lian officer. Along with other demonstra¬
tors, I was arrested and beaten and was
taken to a barracks, where we were tortured
in an attempt to force us to reveal the names
of our leaders. I was then thrown into
prison, where I met the first resistance
fighters, who were communists. I was then a
member of the nationalist youth movement
formed by Metaxas and we abhorred com¬
munism. The very word conjured up the
Was this a sudden change of attitude of
yours? By that time, your only interest was
music, yet there you were becoming a
member of thepolitical resistance.
No, the change was not all that sudden. It
is true that I was still interested in music, but
we were spurred on by deeply held patriotic
feelings. We suffered terribly during the
occupation. The country was divided bet¬
ween the Germans, the Italians and the Bul¬
garians. There was talk of torture and the
population was reduced to famine. The Ger¬
mans surrounded Athens for four months
and 300,000 people died of hunger. My
family had always been very nationalistic
and it was only natural, therefore, that I
should join the resistance.
At that period, I gave a public concert,
attended by Italian officers, who were sur¬
prised to find a young musician and com¬
poser in front of them. From then onwards,

Thera, Greece.
I became something of a celebrity among the
occupation authorities, since Tripolis was a
small town where everybody knew every¬
body else. The head of the Italian garrison
was a terrifying colonel whose excesses put
the fear of death in us. One evening, when
people were taking their evening stroll on
the main square, he suddenly came up to me,
took me by the shoulder and started singing
La donna è mobile! People looked at us in
amazement. Then, all of a sudden, his mood
changed and he pushed me all the way to the
hospital that was requisitioned for Italian
soldiers and had me searched. Since they
found nothing on me, he ordered me to
report to his office the next morning. When
I entered, he got up, gave a military salute
and said: "I hail the patriot and hate the
communist!" He then told me that the
Italians were due to withdraw from the town
on the following day and hand it over to the
Germans, who had demanded a list of
twenty resistance fighters to be executed. So
in order to save my life he had to arrest me
and send me to Athens! That's how I came
to leave for Athens. Only a few days later,
the colonel was killed in battle.
In 1944, 1 was arrested by the Gestapo.
Then the Germans pulled out and there was a
breathing-space which the communist
patriotic front used to its advantage. After
that, the British arrived and were at one time
in favour of the formation of a government of
national unity under Papandreou, but soon
urged confrontation with the communists.
Papandreou was caught between two
fires and eventually resigned, whereupon we
organized a demonstration against the Bri¬
tish in Athens, in the course of which the
police killed seventy demontrators in
Constitution Square. The partisans then rose
up in mass against the British, who had come
with heavy weapons and warships. The com¬
munist party was reluctant to put its most
seasoned fighters in the front line and with¬
drew them from Athens. Instead, we reserv¬
ists, who were students in the daytime and
soldiers after lectures had ended, were sent
into action. Even so, we managed to resist
for thirty-three days, after which the British
occupied the country.
The party, which was still quite strong,
continued to organize demonstrations for
two more years. Then the communists fell
into the trap of reacting to provocation and
civil war broke out. A fresh army composed
of 70,000 militants, including 15,000 women,
was mobilized. This was a well-trained army
set up with the help of the countries of Eas¬
tern Europe. Its strength surprised the natio¬
nalists and it managed to take control of
almost the whole of Greece! Then the Amer¬
icans landed with a full-scale battle-fleet,
rebuilt the national army and supplied it
with an exceptional array of equipment and
facilities. They hunted down the partisans,
made massive arrests and deported whole
villages to unpopulated islands, whereupon
Yugoslavia closed its borders to the fleeing
partisans, who took refuge in Albania, Cze¬
choslovakia, Bulgaria, Romania and even the
Soviet Union.
I was arrested for the first time in 1947.
Then there was a change of government and
I was granted an amnesty. I returned to
Athens, but had immediately to go into
hiding. I was arrested again and sent into
exile on the island of Ikaria, interned on
Macronisos with other political prisoners,
taken to a military unit and tortured for
several days before being sent to hospital,
and then brought back to Macronisos. At
the end of the war, I was just like a ghost,
walking on crutches.
Even so, you continued to compose during
this turbulentperiod?
I think that it was during these difficult
years that I wrote my most important
works. I also recopied the scores of the great
classical composers and studied them from
beginning to end. This was how I analysed
Beethoven's nine symphonies. I don't think
that anybody has ever composed anything
quite so all-encompassing. My own compo¬
sitions were confiscated at Macronisos, but I
had committed them to memory and was
able to reconstitute them afterwards.
In 1949, I was able to return to my
father's village in Crete. It was a horrifying
experience: all my cousins who had been in
the national army were there and they, like
me, had been wounded. Some of them had
had arms or legs amputated. We belonged to
the same family, yet we had torn each other
apart and had all lost out in the end. It was a
lesson I would never forget. In a sense, it
marked the end of my childhood. O
