Who should foot the M//?
by Jean-Francois Nys
"Every sport has a specific
image with which the
sponsor becomes
associated. . . ." Below,
French navigator Florence
Arthaud, winner of the Route
du Rhum transatlantic race
in 1990.
WHEN a major sporting event is due to
take place, especially if it is to be tele¬
vised, businesses scramble for every
possible inch of space on which to inscribe
their company logo the surrounds of the
arena itself, the bodywork of cars, the players'
shirts and even the flooring of indoor sports
halls. Only the Olympic Games are free from
this kind of advertising, but even there the offi¬
cial sponsors are authorized to use the
Olympic emblem (the five rings representing
five continents), an authorization which costs
them dear.
What is true for the Olympic Games holds
good for all sports. In order to cope with ever-
increasing outlays (salaries, administrative
costs), the clubs and organizers of competitions
are obliged to seek out sponsors or patrons.
Many companies respond eagerly to this invita¬
tion. Thus sponsorship of professional football
in France, which represented less than 1 per
cent of receipts in 1970, brought in nearly a
quarter of them in 1991.
14
By identifying itself with the image that a
sport creates and with the emotion, enthusiasm,
passion even, that it generates, a company
consolidates its position and role in society,
motivates its personnel, improves its reputation
and reinforces or modifies its image in the
public eye. Semiological studies in this field tell
us that every sport has a specific image with
which the sponsor becomes associated. Sailing,
for example, symbolizes space, the lure of the
open sea and controlled skills; fencing evokes
nobility, tradition, precision; while motor-
racing symbolizes virility, dynamism, authenti¬
city and pushing oneself beyond the limit.
In Europe, the money expended on sports
sponsorship amounts to more than 20 billion
francs. In the United States it is over $2.5 bil¬
lion. However, this source of financing is not
stable. It is not the primary function of busi¬
nesses to promote the development of sports,
except for those that exploit the market
directly, such as the makers of sports goods or
equipment and the sporting press. Most com¬
panies are prepared to invest in sponsorship
only insofar as it helps them to get their mes¬
sage across. Here sport finds itself in competi¬
tion with other interests such as cultural activi¬
ties, conservation of the environment, the great
humanitarian causes and scientific research.
Furthermore, a company's expenditure on this
form of communication will vary with chang¬
ing circumstances. It would be hazardous to
base a sports policy on such uncertain
resources.
The money for sport does not derive solely
from the private sector from players, specta¬
tors, the media and sponsors. State and other
public organizations contribute to a greater or
lesser degree to the financing of sport, in pro¬
portions which vary according to the country's
economic structure. In the former USSR, the
state assumed almost the entire charge, while in
the United States sport is a matter for the pri¬
vate sector. In France, public money expended
on sport amounted to 32 billion francs in
1990 as much as that contributed by private
companies and individuals.
This peculiarity of the French sports system
has evoked in the European Parliament the
question of the legitimacy of subsidies granted
to sports clubs by public organizations, with
some members of the Parliament regarding
such subsidies as an unwarranted interference
in the free play of competition.
Rather than seek an answer to this specific
question, one could, perhaps, broaden the
debate to consideration of the overall economic
basis of sport. If it is thought to be a private
matter, its management and financing should
be left to the private sector, and market forces
will prevail. Competition then becomes the
order of the day, with the various sporting
federations competing to dominate the market
for control of a particular sport and the clubs
competing to recruit players, to sell sporting

Jumping with a motorized
parachute in Kenya.
events and to capture the imagination of the
public.
If, on the contrary, sport is seen as a collec¬
tive benefit requiring public sector control,
then it will be up to the state and the commu¬
nity to provide the necessary facilities, pay the
coaches and athletes, and make sport available
to all.
JEAN-FRANÇOIS NYS,
of France, is a lecturer at the
University of Limoges and a
researcher at the University's
centre of sports law and
economics. He is the author
of many works on sport,
including La santé:
consommation ou
investissement? (1980;
"Health: consumption or
investment?") and, with W.
Andreff, Économie du sport
(1986; "The Economics of
Sport") and Le sport et la
télévision (1987; "Sport and
Television").
If a strict market logic prevails, there is a
danger that inequalities will be created and that
access to sporting activities will be denied or
reduced for the less favoured members of
society. It is therefore appropriate for the public
authorities to intervene to mitigate the dysfunc-
tioning of the market, just as they should
control excesses such as doping and violence. O 15
