Sounding the alarm by Maria Cherkasova
IVhen a Russian Journalist invited her readers to take part
in a survey on the environment, many of them told a grim story
of eco/og/ca/ disaster and despair
A year ago I asked readers of Znanie-sila, a
popular science journal for which I write an eco¬
logical column, to reply to an environmental
survey. In all the twenty years I have spent
working on the magazine, I have never received
so much mail. Letters poured in from all over
Russia and also from other republics, or states as
they now are. They came from men and women
of very different ages and professional back¬
grounds. But it was the women who wrote the
most detailed accounts, marked by the strongest
emotions.
When I collected all the letters together and
absorbed what the participants in this long¬
distance Round Table had to say, I was appalled
by the mass of terrifying information that had
come through my mail-box.
Take the case of Zoïa Islamova, who wrote
to me from the town of Kasli-5, in the Chelya¬
binsk region of the southern Urals. Zoïa had been
the victim of a nuclear disaster that took place
long before Chernobyl, an explosion that
occurred on 29 September 1957 in the nuclear
waste storage facility of the Mai'ak chemical com¬
plex, and led to the release of almost 20 million
curies of radioactivity.
"Nobody told us what had blown up," Zoïa
wrote, "and we were not allowed to discuss it.
The neighbouring villages were evacuated. People
who refused to leave were forcibly expelled and
their houses were burned down, even though set¬
ting fire to the buildings was the last thing that
should have been done. We only learned exactly
what had happened in 1989, when it began to be
talked about in the newspapers and on television.
The rumour was that they were going to evacuate
our town too, but that would have cost the state
so much that they decided to leave us where we
were, like laboratory guinea-pigs. . . .
"The places where traces of radioactivity
could still be detected were turned into protected
zones. But people who didn't know what had
happened used to go there to collect mushrooms
or berries. There were signs all over the place
indicating that they were protected zones, but
there was no mention of radioactivity."
Zoïa fell seriously ill not long after the acci¬
dent. Her husband, who was also affected, is now
an invalid. "There is a lot of sickness in our
town," she went on, "bronchial asthma, allergies,
skin conditions, problems with joints and the
digestive tract. We were never measured for levels
of radioactive exposure, and doctors refuse to
make the connection with the 1957 explosion.
But we all think it is the cause of our problems.
We no longer trust anyone or anything. Life is
terrifying. . . ."
The southern Urals area is the only region
of the world to have suffered three nuclear
Hiroshima, a painting by
10-year-old Jolja Stepanenko
from the Chernobyl region.
19

catastrophes. Even before the 1957 explosion,
radioactive waste was being dumped directly into
the River Techa. A partial evacuation took place
when people started falling ill, but others are still
living on the river bank. In the spring of 1967
there was a new disaster. A violent wind carried
radioactive particles from the dried-up banks of
Lake Karachai, which served as an open dump
for nuclear waste. Almost a million people
suffered to some extent from the radiation.
The southern Urals region is a monstrous
radioactive dustbin. Besides the billion curies of
radioactivity that have already accumulated there,
especially in the open-air reservoirs, there are
also deposits of irradiated material stored in
containers that are ageing rapidly. These deposits
contain plutonium. Nobody is safe from another
catastrophe.
Faced by such a terrible prospect, people have
naturally not remained idle. One of the most
active has been Natalia Mironova, a deputy of the
Chelyabinsk regional council, who runs the
movement to promote nuclear safety. She is con¬
vinced that the world should learn the truth
about the Maïak explosion, a disaster comparable
in importance with Chernobyl despite the fact
that it has been carefully hushed up.
'I want to shout!'
But the Urals is not the only region that can be
compared with Chernobyl, to judge from this
letter from Semipalatinsk, a city in what is now
the state of Kazakhstan: "I don't just want to say
it, I want to shout it out loud!" wrote S.
Maïdanov, an electrician. "Nowadays there is a
lot of talk about Chernobyl. It was a terrible dis¬
aster. But we have been living with a similar one
since 1949! Until the signing of the nuclear test
ban treaty, there were tests here both on the
ground and in the air. Only the Ministry of
Defence knows how many Hiroshimas there
have been in our region. The hydrogen bomb was
tested here. And all that over a.forty-year period,
100 kilometres from the city. How many lives
has it cost us over the years, how many shattered
hopes?
"I don't know the figures for infant mortality
in the region, but you only have to go to a
cemetery to get an idea. Similarly, there is no
need to check the statistics on childhood illness.
Just go to the paediatricians' surgery and chat
with the long queues of mothers whose eyes are
worn out with crying. I have more than once
heard doctors say that children here suffer from
a very high percentage of blood ailments. Many
are born with physical and mental deformities.
On the ecological map, our region should be
painted black."
Unfortunately, there are only too many such
black spots on the map, and they keep on
spreading. In my survey, I asked readers to
appraise the ecological situation of their own
_ _ regions. Out of a hundred letters chosen at
¿A3 random, nineteen correspondents judged the
*.
-m * M i
..
V *
Rusting boats on the dried-up
bed of the Aral Sea, which
has lost 40 per cent of its
surface area since 1960
because of massive irrigation
of the cotton fields on its
shores. The local fishing
industry is now virtually
ruined.
situation to be catastrophic; forty-three described
it as serious; twenty-five as unsatisfactory; twelve
as satisfactory; one as good. So two-thirds of my
correspondents live in conditions that could be
described as difficult at best. Most of them inhabit
the great industrial conurbations of the Volga
basin, the Ukraine, central Russia, the Urals or
Siberia. And all, without exception, think that
the situation is getting worseeven those who
describe it as already catastrophic, which might
seem to suggest that things could not be much
worse!
I also asked readers to state what caused them
most concern. "The forests! The fields! The
rivers! The blue sky! Life!" answered V. Sergeev,
a schoolboy from the city of Nizhnekamsk.
Health was the greatest concern of those who
wrote to me, and particularly children's health,
which preoccupied all the women. Even though
the medical authorities refuse to make the con¬
nection between the state of the environment and
health, no-one is fooled.
"The condition of the atmosphere is
alarming," wrote one anonymous correspondent
from Dzerzhinsk, a heavy-chemicals industrial

» * :
*<*.
*#
« * V*
- -. *
"
« *
t
*
centre near the Volga. "The town is full of asth¬
matics and people with lung infections. My son
suffers from chronic bronchitis and asthma. The
water is just as bad. It affects the teeth and
kidneys. My daughter has been ill since early
childhood. Her teeth are completely black. One
person in two suffers from allergies."
She went on to draw a terrible conclusion:
"I can't stop wondering where it will all end. I
also feel that childless women are less to blame
than I am, for having condemned two to live
exposed and defenceless in this filthy swamp. The
children are sick, losing their hair, dying. If their
mother works in a chemical plant, they are poi¬
soned even in the womb. People just give up, they
all think there's nothing more they can do. . . ."
Many letters came from the Volga area. What
was once Russia's great river is now disfigured
by gigantic dams and transformed into a sewer
for military and industrial waste. "We don't
bathe in the Volga any more," wrote F.
Babicheva, who lives near Volgograd; "we don't
eat fish from it, and at night, the air around it
is not fit to breathe. It is particularly bad on
holidays, when no-one is around and the factories
dispose of polluting wastes. In summer, when it
rains, the leaves on the trees turn black, the vines
lose their leaves, cucumbers and tomatoes shrivel
up. It's not water that falls from the sky but
acid." From Volgograd itself, E. Sokhina, a
geographer, added: "We are seeing here a signifi¬
cant increase in the number of malignant
growths. This is a stark index of the quality of
the water, of the atmosphere, of foodstuffs and
of genetic modifications."
'Each year there are 5,000
more cancer cases'
There were also many letters from Siberia. V.
Kleinina, a lecturer at the Tomsk Polytechnic
Institute, wrote that "This catastrophic situation
is a result of the industrialization of the war years,
of ill-thought-out decisions by the authorities, of
the incapacity and irresponsibility of our rulers.
The city was founded in 1604 on the banks of
the Tom, a river that used to be renowned for
the abundance and beauty of its fish-stocked
waters. Now it might just as well be called the
Carbolic Acid. Cancers, stomach problems and
kidney ailments have all increased by leaps and
bounds." It is the same story in Vladivostok,
according to a doctor who reported that "each
year there are 5,000 more cancer cases".
Every letter described the same ecological
problems, and told the same grim story of misery
and despair. Only the name of the town or vil¬
lage changes. It is worth quoting one more wit¬
ness, however. "I'm seventeen ... I have to live
here and bring up my children. I'm frightened
for the next generation: what will be left for it?"
The words are those of Natasha Chernikova, who
lives in a small town in the Ukraine and dreams
of becoming a doctor.
I was in the Ukraine for the fifth anniversary
of the Chernobyl disaster, in April 1991. 1 visited
Zitomir, one of the regions which suffered the
most from radiation. Our guide was Inna Smir-
nova, who is involved with the aid organization
that groups together the various local associations
protecting the rights of the residents of the
affected districts and who devotes her time to
bringing visitors from all parts of the world to
the sites, so they can see the results of the dis¬
aster with their own eyes and understand what
happened.
She took us to Narodichi, a large village full
of flower gardens but a place where no-one can
live any more. In the centre of the village, now
almost abandoned, there is a new type of monu¬
ment: the scorched trunk of a huge fir-tree deco¬
rated with a black cross, a peal of bells on a
wooden frame, black tombstones. Only the
stones do not bear people's names but the names
of dead towns and villages, wiped out for ever
by radiation.
In the Narodichi area alone, 13,000 people
about half the populationhave been evacuated.
I recently received an article written by a doctor
from the district. In 1990 the mortality rate was 21

22
twice the birth rate. Of the twenty-two subdivi¬
sions of the Zitomir administrative region, only
four have seen their population grow, and those
only slightly. In all the others, the number of
deaths has exceeded the births. Zitomir is
experiencing a long death-agony. And the story
is much the same in many other regions, not all
of them necessarily affected by radiation.
Arousing the survival instinct
What can we women do in face of such a threat?
First of all, we must do all we can to sound the
alarm and wake the dormant survival instinct of
the human race, first and foremost among the
representatives of the stronger sex that hold
power, and yet seem singularly powerless. Sadly,
convincing evidence of this fact was provided on
14 March 1990, during a stormy session of the
Third Extraordinary Congress of Deputies of the
USSR. The subject at issue was the Constitutional
Law defining the role of the President of the
Soviet Union. A. A. Zakharenko, the head of a
school in the Ukraine, made an emotional speech
to the assembly. "I would ask the Praesidium and
the Congress to pay the closest possible attention
to my proposal," he said, referring to his sugges¬
tion that the performance of the President of the
USSR should be evaluated annually on the basis
of such criteria as the health and longevity of the
population, which constitute qualitative and
quantitative parameters of the community's
legacy to the next generation. Two-thirds of the
deputies voted against the amendment, which was
rejected.
My own belief is that ecology will ultimately
determine the future of the democratic changes
in my country. Everything will eventually boil
down to the question of whether we manage to
survive physically and safeguard the health of our
children. We cannot afford, as is often suggested,
to concentrate on solving our economic problems
before even thinking about ecological problems.
The two are closely linked, and the situation is
so critical that we may react too late.
This is what we women must first understand
if we are to obtain rapid and effective action from
the new institutions of government. We must
demand that the country should move immedi¬
ately to a path of peaceful development, and reject
colossal military expenditure, atomic bombs and
other even more sophisticated weapons, the arms
trade, the priority given to heavy industry ever
since Bolshevik days, and huge, destructive
projects.
Instead let us insist on the rapid adoption of
a survival strategy that would give priority to
physical and moral health and to the safeguard
of the natural and cultural bases of life. For
myself, I would include as a basic part of this
strategy the abandoning of nuclear energy, an
enormous and tragic error on the part of
humanity. Then, too, we must ensure that the
wise Ukrainian deputy's criteria for presidential
evaluation are put into practice. It would also
doubtless be sensible to create special power
structuresand why not a Women's Parlia¬
ment?to defend the rights of women and chil¬
dren and to propose an alternative, crucial for
humanity's future, to the male military and tech¬
nocratic model that has brought the world to the
edge of the abyss.
My country's misfortune is that of all
humanity, which suffers from the same sicknesses
and the same ecological catastrophes. It is just that
for us the processes have been speeded up by
historical circumstances and have reached their
logical conclusion here sooner than anywhere
else. But some people have still not understood
that message. Maybe it was to make us listen to
reason that the Chernobyl bell tolled.
Chimneys belch smoke from a
paper factory at Bratsk in
Siberia, part of a lumber
industry complex.
MARIA CHERKASOVA,
a Russian journalist and
biologist specializing in
environmental problems, is
also director of the Centre of
Independent Ecological
Programmes of the Socio-
Ecological Union in Moscow.
She has published more than a
hundred articles and books.
