The musk
On the stage of an open-air
theatre in Rangoon, a
gorgeously-costumed woman
performs an introductory Nat
dance in front of the drums
and gongs of an orchestral
ensemble, the hsaing-waing.

of Myanmar by Khin Mya Kyu
1he music of Burmanow officially
known as the Union of Myanmaris close in
spirit to those of the Southeast Asian civiliza¬
tions of Thailand, Laos and Cambodia. The
Indian influence is less perceptible here than
in the nation's mythology and religious beliefs,
or than in such other arts as the shadow-
theatre and dance-drama.
The most complete Burmese instrumental
ensemble is the hsaing-waing, which consists
basically of a set of from eight to twenty-one
drums suspended by leather thongs on a cir¬
cular rattan frame, and of a circular array of
gongs. In addition there may be anything from
seven to twelve other instruments, among
them oboes, bamboo clap-sticks, hand-
cymbals, flutes and mouth organs, bells, xylo
phones and zithers. As in all the countries of
the region, however, drums and gongs
predominate. In traditional orchestras, they
come in many shapes and forms: double-
headed drums struck with wooden sticks,
double-headed horizontal drums played by
hand, single-headed pottery drums. The gongs
may be flat or bulbous, suspended or sup¬
ported on wooden frames. Most of these
instruments, including the drums, produce an
unvarying sound. For that reason, they nor¬
mally come in pairs, one for sharp tones and
the other for flat.
Burmese musical practice, in which the
notes are identified in descending order,
resembles that of other Southeast Asian coun¬
tries: the octave is divided, theoretically, into
seven equal intervals. Whatever mode is used
to play a melody, the structure of the scale
remains the same.
Improvization plays an important part in
traditional Burmese music. Whereas in most
parts of the world the instruments of the
orchestra are meant to be played in unison,
in the traditional Burmese orchestra,
instrumentalists start from a common melody
but are free to play whatever variations they
like, provided they join up with the ensemble
from time to time. Sometimes the results
could be called "heterophonic", but they do
not lack harmony for all that.
In Myanmar, as in the rest of Asia, music
is closely linked to the performing arts,
notably plays, puppet-shows, shadow theatre,
dance-drama and opera. In drama, the Indian
influence is preponderant. All the characters,
whether heroes or gods, originate in the
Ramayana or Mahabharata epics, or in the
Jataka, narratives relating episodes from the
Buddha's previous incarnations. Performances,
which often take place in the open air, may
last for several hours, sometimes even for days.
Ancient instruments,
modern rhythms
Burmese music has not escaped the contagion
of Western pop, which is widely broadcast by
the media. Some musicians have tried to create
a synthesis by adapting Burmese lyrics to
Western rhythms or by performing translated
French and English songs to a Burmese
backing. This so-called "new music" is a
hybrid genre whose artistic value is at best
uncertain. But it is popular with the young,
and the influence of radio, television and
cinema will eventually establish its grip.
Yet Myanmar remains the land of 100,000
pagodas, for each village has at least one
monastery and a pagoda. The chimes of bells
and metal gongs, carried on the wind, are
relayed from community to community in an
uninterrupted chain. This music at least will
long remain an irreplaceable feature of the
Burmese landscape.
KHIN MYA KYU, formerly head of the French
Department at the Institute of Foreign Languages
in Rangoon, is currently a staff member in
UNESCO's Office of Public Information. She has
published several works on the art and culture of
her country, including Shingyan ou Fêtes de Vean en
Birmanie (1990), and has collaborated on a French-
Burmese dictionary that currently runs to 14
volumes. 49
