RETHINKING THE ROLE OF THE TEACHER
A newpartnership
by Jacques Hallak
TEACHERS once belonged to a self-confi¬
dent, prestigious profession, strong in
numbers and highly thought of by the
general public. But since the early 1980s, when
education came to the forefront as one of the
major preoccupations of our time, two signifi¬
cant trends have led to the very bases of the
profession being called into question.
The first of these trends is the lowering of
the quality of education. A combination of
demographic, social and economic factors led
to accelerating growth in the school popula¬
tion. This in turn led to a massive recruitment
of teaching staff the 1970 world total of 14.6
million primary teachers and 9.3 million second¬
ary teachers rose to 22.7 million and 17.7 mil¬
lion respectively in 1989. In many countries,
this recruitment was carried out with very
limited resources and qualified candidates were
not always to be found. As a result the quality
of education deteriorated and the standing of
teachers was lowered.
This increase in numbers meant that the
Television
as teacher.

A university lecture at
the Sorbonne, Paris.
Watercolour by
Madeleine Ochsé (c. 1930).
JACQUES HALLAK,
French economist of
Lebanese origin, is director of
Unesco's International
Institute for Educational
Planning. Before taking up
this post he was a member of
the staff of the French
Finance Ministry, taught at
various French universities
(including Paris, Caen and
Nanterre), became a senior
programme planning officer in
Unesco's Bureau of Studies
and Programming and then
went on to join the World
Bank as an economist.
profession had to accept candidates who were
less and less well prepared and its traditional
prestige was further devalued by the introduc¬
tion of a host of new grades for teachers (often
given excessively grandiose titles, or none at all)
which in many cases bore little relationship to
the existing hierarchical structure. These
external pressures effectively destroyed the
normal staff renewal process and contributed
further to the devaluation of the profession's
image.
Low salaries paid to teachers owing to eco¬
nomic difficulties are an additional element
contributing to the crisis. In several countries,
teachers' pay is over fifty per cent less than that
of other professions requiring a similar level of
training. Clearly, this makes it difficult to
attract and retain the best qualified and most
motivated personnel. If, owing to inadequate
resources, working conditions are also difficult
(classrooms crowded, ill-equipped and not
properly maintained, absence or shortage of
teaching materials, as is often the case in the
developing countries) or relations with pupils
are strained, then a further serious deterioration
in the quality of education is inevitable, with all
the harmful effects on pupils this may entail.
The second significant trend is of a different
nature. One of the major characteristics of our
day is the accelerating advance of science and
technology. Information and communication
services of every kind have become part of our
daily lives, depriving teachers of their former
monopoly position as the sole source of know¬
ledge. Suddenly, education is no longer the
concern of specialists alone. It has become an
object of political debate on which parents,
parties and groups of all kinds demand their
say. The work of the teacher is now subject to
increasingly critical appraisal. At the same time,
there is no longer a general consensus in society
and among children and their families as to the
nature and utility of the knowledge being
transmitted. This more critical attitude is due to
social change and to competition from the
media as a new source of information, expe¬
rience and values.
This holds true especially for the industria¬
lized countries and for the urban areas of the
developing world. Queried and criticized as
transmitters of knowledge, teachers now find a
new and impossible task thrust upon them
that of helping their pupils to interpret often
contradictory information received from a
multiplicity of sources over which, as teachers,
they have no control. The teaching process has
thus become less a matter of transmitting an
accepted, well-defined body of knowledge than
of an often haphazard attempt to bring some
kind of order to a jumbled intake of piecemeal
information.
In these circumstances, it is hardly
surprising that there is a growing tendency for
teachers, from the primary level upwards, to
give up the struggle. The typical teacher in
North America, in Europe and in a growing
number of developing countries, now sides
with his or her pupils. Unable to retain their
former status and position and with no
alternative position to assume, teachers have no
means of maintaining the necessary balance
between knowledge and authority. Yet this
balance is vital not only to social intercourse
and the development of the individual, but also
to the definition of the place and role of
knowledge within a society. The school is, par
excellence, the place where questions such as
these should be handled. Teachers' new, more
cautious approach to their pupils is not merely
a symptom of their uncase, it is a determinant
factor in the deterioration of the educational
situation and in the increasingly mediocre
achievement of education and training.
How can those responsible for education
services meet this challenge? To my mind, only
by adopting wide-ranging, long-term measures
aimed at making quality the central goal of 41

42
educational policy and re-thinking the basic
concepts of education and training.
If quality is to be reinstated as the primary
goal, this will require a redistribution of
resources so as to establish a more balanced
distribution of funds between the financing of
an expansion of the number of pupils and stu¬
dents enrolled in schools and universities and
the resources made available to improve the
conditions of schooling through the acquisition
of appropriate teaching materials, the renova¬
tion of the existing facilities for the introduction
into the system of newly-qualified teachers, a
better utilization of external information
sources and training and, above all, the improve¬
ment of teachers' material conditions. In some
countries, bringing teachers' pay up to a suitable
level would imply not only a doubling of their
salaries but also provision of an improved career
structure. Despite their cost, these measures are
essential if we really want to attract and keep
the best candidates. But even this would not be
enough. Two further measures should be imple¬
mented the introduction of incentive pay¬
ments to encourage good professional perfor¬
mance and a vast programme of refresher
courses involving training that is more coherent
and better adapted to what society expects of
the teacher and the school.
There is also a need for a new philosophy of
education and training. The old vision of the
profession of teacher which involved individual
skills being rewarded in the manner of the other
liberal professions is now outmoded. In the
face of greater competition from a much wider
range of sources of knowledge, the job of the
teacher is more and more coming to be seen as
being that of a participant in a wider, general
process having specific responsibilities within the
framework of an organized division of tasks
between the various sources of knowledge. It is
no longer an individualistic profession. Recruited
both for his learning and for his social and
professional experience, the teacher becomes a
partner in the pedagogical team, in the widest


sense of the term, sharing in the training and
educational process.
The way to prevent the spread of these uneasy
feelings of disarray, dysfunction and disillusion is
to move towards a démystification of the status of
the teaching profession. Teachers no longer have
a monopoly of knowledge and they must be pre¬
pared, as is the rule in any other occupation, to
submit to assessment of their performance and to
recognize that the quality of their work can affect
both their salaries and their careers.
If teachers can accept this new status, if they
can accept that there are many dimensions to
social life, that they are but one source of know¬
ledge among many others, that they should be
responsible for and submit to evaluation of the
quality of the services they provide, they will be
better paid, more highly respected and better
equipped to take their proper place in the world
of work. O

