Music out of doors by François Bensignor
Barrel-organ players in late
19th-century Germany.
HE is below my window now, at noon.
With the coming of the fine weather he
has returned to his old haunts, like the
swallows. He takes up his pitch at the cross¬
roads in the sunlight, cranks the handle of his
barrel-organ and sings the songs of old Paris,
songs of the Commune and the people and
love affairs that go wrong. I find myself
almost unconsciously singing along with the
choruses, as if I had always known them. But
in fact who does still remember these old
songs now, if not some inner voice or this ana¬
chronistic street musician?
Down there on the pavement, people arc
wrapped up in their own problems. Few stop.
Some smile as they pass by; others walk on
with their heads down, scowling. The singer is
unfazed. He just puts another perforated strip
in the machine and goes on singing. Some¬
times he is off key, but never mind. . . . Cars
pass, office workers head for lunch, gangs of
children form and disperse. Sometimes
someone even stops to put a coin in the cup
fixed to the barrel-organ.
But in the age of the Walkman, the street
musician is playing not so much for the
money as to keep alive a culture attacked on
every side by the modern world of property
developers and traffic jams. His long hair and
red scarf, the ragamuffin's cap pulled down
over one eye, may look like fancy dress, but
they are really a way of letting passers-by
35

36
know that Paris still belongs to the people
who live in it. For the old street-songs are part
of its soul, and that soul will never die as long
as the melodies of the past can still be heard.
From street-singer to rap artist
In the old days when the wireless was just a
hobbyist's plaything, street-singers served as
loudspeakers, popularizing the latest songs
and selling the sheet music that went with
them. At home after Sunday dinner, families
learned the tunes by heart. Paris used to sing.
In Jamaica, the sound systems of the 1950s
and '60s served a similar commercial function.
Perched on trucks parked strategically at cross¬
roads, in markets or shopping streets, they
boomed out the latest hits. A disc jockey would
improvise a sales pitch over the microphone to
the.beat of an instrumental number. Although
the original intention was to sell records, several
musical techniques grew incidentally out of this
custom, notably "toasting" improvised
rhythmic monologues spoken over the instru¬
mental sections of a record and talkovers, in
which the disc jockey completely reworked the
track, substituting his own rhythmically
stressed words in place of the lyrics of the ori¬
ginal recording. Toasting demanded the skills of
the fairgound barker or street hawker; talkovers
were spoken art, rhythm turned into music.
These two Jamaican inventions served as
models for "rap", today's street music par
excellence. Like other musicians before them,
rappers developed their art in the street before
they had access to production facilities and
commercial outlets. In New York, in the
Bronx and Harlem, the first rappers began in
the mid-1970s to organize "block parties" in
the streets for the inhabitants of blocks of flats.
A sound system would be installed on the
pavement or maybe in the window of an apart¬
ment. Disc jockeys challenged one another
over the turntables, rappers competed in verbal
virtuosity, dancers devised wild movements,
graffiti artists brought colour to dirty walls.
Urban soundscapes
Shut up in a club, street music loses its special
identity. In a recording studio, even when
simply relayed by microphone, it has to pass
through the Caudine Forks of electronics,
which rob it of some of its vitality. Street
music can never really be replicated, for it is
an art of the moment, inseparable from every¬
thing that is going on around it at the time of
its creation. It needs space.
Some groups have found ways of integra¬
ting this urban dimension into their music.
Anybody who has attended one of Urban
Sax's performances will recall how this troupe
of saxophonists, dehumanized behind their
white masks, literally take over the venue in
which they are appearing. They have played
from gondolas in Venice, slid down from the
roof of the town hall of Groningen in the
Netherlands, taken possession of a square in
Stockholm and conjured up strange water
effects for the Neptune Fountain in the park
of the Palace of Versailles.
Their strategy is that of the spider weaving
its web. Groups of saxophonists move among
the crowd, playing repeated phrases in har¬
mony with one another. The audience is
wrapped up in a strange world in which
sounds come from far and near, some so close
as to brush up against the listener. As the per¬
formance continues, the spectators' sense of
musical space becomes more precise. However
well they may know the spot where the per¬
formance is taking place, it soon starts to feel
unfamiliar. Its volumes stretch or become
fixed. The music makes the street breathe,
gives it body.
Before the development of this kind of
modern participation art, brass bands, parades
and traditional processions (themselves often
sources of inspiration for artists) provided as
they still do a similar sort of social theatre
for the cities. In this case, however, the sur¬
rounding architecture shapes the soundscape
more than the movement of the sound-source.
For example, the atmosphere of a Puerto-
Rican carnival coming down Fifth Avenue in
New York between two rows of skyscrapers
is very different from that of a festival of poly¬
phonic vocal music in the pedestrian precinct
of the old walled town of Bonifacio in Cor¬
sica. Even though the participants may share
the same enthusiasm, the architectural sur¬
roundings profoundly modify the effect pro¬
duced on the audience.
In the first case, the diffusion of the sound
along the immense straight avenues creates a
Members of the Abron
people of Côte d'Ivoire take
part in the yam festival.

Urban Sax hold a concert in
Paris, 1985.
feeling of evanescence, a fleeting vision that
disappears as soon as the spectator leaves the
parade. The event is just one of thousands that
have no connection with one another. The
sound is channeled between icily reflecting
glass façades running in parallel lines that look
as though they should meet at infinity.
In the Corsican festival, on the other hand,
everything contributes to an intense sense of
communion: the narrow streets, the stone
paving, the carved wooden doors, even the intri¬
cate web of houses and passages surrounded by
its ring of fortifications. Carried by the wind,
the sound of the chants penetrates every nook
and cranny of this labyrinth, to such good effect
that no-one can ignore the event, which
becomes the whole community's business.
The wandering voice
The melodies of the sevillanas that accompany
Andalusian pilgrims each year just before
Whitsun on the long road towards the Virgin
of El Rocío move with the procession out of
the city streets to the countryside beyond.
There they mix with birdsong, the squeaking
of the wheels of the decorated ox-carts, the
clatter of horses bearing costumed cavaliers
with their girls riding pillion behind them, the
murmur of streams heading seaward through
the sands of the Guadalquivir delta. The street
turns first into the open road, then becomes a
pathway, then a track. The music is the more
profound for it. It has a faraway lilt that
recalls the music of nomads.
I should like to recall here an incident
engraved on my memory as the most poignant
musical experience I have ever had. I was tra¬
velling in Afghanistan at the time. The local
bus I was riding had stopped for the night,
and along with the other passengers I had got
off to find something to eat. The road lay
along the rocky Tarnak valley. The sun had
gone down behind a barrier of low, eroded
hills stretching far away in the west. We tra¬
vellers made do with a simple meal eaten in
the open air on a large paved terrace sur¬
rounded by a low wall and lit by a few light-
bulbs. After I had gulped down my food, I
decided to go and stretch my legs.
Away from the electric lighting, I began to
appreciate the wonderful clearness of the
night. A man spoke to me as I strolled by. He

FRANÇOIS BENSIGNOR
is a French journalist who
specializes in music. The
author of Sons d'Afrique
(Marabout, Paris 1988), he
was general editor of a guide
to music in the French-
speaking world, Sans visa
(CIR, Paris 1991), a second,
enlarged edition of which will
be published this year. He
was also general editor of
and a contributor to Scènes
de musique en ville
(CENAM/CIR, Paris 1991).
He is a founder of the Paris-
based association "Zone
Franche", which seeks to
encourage and promote
forms of music produced in
the French-speaking world.
The Festival of Music in full
cry on a Paris square, 198S.
was squatting down in the Afghan manner. I
offered him a cigarette, an easy way to com¬
municate when you don't speak the language.
From his linen coat and staff, I took him for a
shepherd. Once he had taken a last puff on the
cigarette, he suddenly started to sing. His
voice rent the silence of the night, rising with
such extraordinary strength and beauty that it
seemed to fill the vaults of the heavens and
echo in their pure, ultramarine heights,
encrusted with thousands of stars.
No song I had ever heard had affected me
so profoundly. The melody carried a message
of salvation and benediction from the whole
nomad race for one little foreigner brought by
chance to those arid lands. It said more than
any book or any speech about the shepherd's
way of life and his cosmic rapport with
nature. I will always treasure that unique
moment of intense communication with those
proud men of the high plateaux.
An inseparable companion
A simple refrain carried on the wind can
express the essence of an entire way of life.
How many masterpieces have flowed from the
flutes of goatherds or camel-drivers to vanish
into thin air? Music born in the dust of the
mountain trails is ephemeral. Yet it is also the
truest music, the closest to life.
If you ask musicians how they composed
their finest pieces, many will tell you that they
got their inspiration while walking. Some fill
their pockets with scraps of paper on which
they scribble phrases and fragments of melody
as they come into their heads. Others, more
up-to-date, never go anywhere without dicta¬
phones, which are even more direct and
convenient than paper for capturing ideas,
moods or just evocative sounds.
Walkers know that, when they stride out
to the rhythm of their breathing, it never takes
long for some tune or other to fall in step with
them in their mind. The swelling of the lungs
easily transforms itself into the skirl of bag¬
pipes leading Scottish highlanders over the
moors to some glorious encounter with des¬
tiny. Or maybe the rhythm of the strides sug¬
gests the bala of a griot giving heart to Bam¬
bara warriors marching out to do battle in the
savannah. For there is no moment of African
life that does not have its own music: even
beyond life, there is a music for death and to
sustain the soul in its extraterrestrial wande¬
ring. Music floats down the river with the
canoe, fertilizes the fields with the cultivators,
bobs on the water with the fishing-boats,
speaks through the forest spirits. Everywhere
men, women and masked dancers caper to its
rhythm.
Can one still talk of it as street music,
when it is the voice of the street itself, even
down to the vocal intonations that shape the



music of the tongue the people speak? Here
music is part and parcel of a whole way of life.
It carries within it memory and knowledge,
reality and myth. It is society's cement, the
inseparable companion of the human race.
38
