Egypt: a national ession
by Samir Gharib
Above, watching a television
serial in an Aswan butcher's
shop.
HERE in Egypt television has a powerful
hold over people's minds. It is an ins¬
trument of leisure, of information
and to a very limited extent of culture. It
does not stop people reading newspapers or
books, going to the cinema or theatre or watch¬
ing videos. But these activities are occasional,
irregular and ultimately of secondary impor¬
tance, while television is a permanent and ubi¬
quitous fixture.
There must be a number of interrelated rea
sons for such an ascendancy, with economic,
political and cultural factors all coming into
play. But no-one has tried to analyse these rea¬
sons rigorously, using statistical data and
making comparisons with other societies similar
to our own. Maybe people prefer not to know.
What is certain, however, is that television is one
of the main subjects of conversation, at school,
in offices, at home and in the street, as well as
being written about in all the newspapers.
No serious study has been made of the 33

Contrasting scenes from
Egyptian TV serials: below,
Ra'afat El Haggan;
opposite page,
Woullda'l Hoda.
influence this strange despot exercises in
Egypt or, to be more precise, of the whole
bundle of contradictory effects it has on people
of different age groups, social classes and cul¬
tural backgrounds. An opportunity to appre¬
ciate the diversity of attitudes television ins¬
pires arose recently when a girl was raped in
public in one of Cairo's most crowded squares.
This unprecedented event provoked a spate of
comments on the role of television, ranging
from the widely-held view that the media are
responsible for such acts of licence to passio¬
nate vindications of the media on the grounds
that they perform an essential role in revealing
the undercurrents of society.
Television is doubtless at one and the same
time cause and effect, both a reflection and an
accelerator of the erratic behaviour patterns of
a fragmented and rapidly changing society
which, like so many in the Third World today,
is in need of fixed landmarks. If in this context
television sometimes seems like a rudderless
ship, it is because society itself has no driving
force capable of steering it in a definite direc¬
tion or of giving it a coherent orientation.
Serials that bring a nation
to a standstill
It might be said that the fundamental objective
of television is to persuade the maximum
number of people to watch it for the maximum
amount of time. And how effectively serials and
series do that! I do not think that I have ever
seen any other country so totally dominated by
these shows, some, it is true, Egyptian-made
but the majority American. Each episode, each
programme, is a talking-point for everyone,
young and old alike.
34
Do American soap operas arouse the same
enthusiasm when they are shown in Europe? I
think not, and for a reason that seems obvious
to me. In Europe it is possible to meet people
like those who appear on the screen. Their life¬
styles and the social roles they play are easily
imaginable in the West. In Egypt, however,
they are inconceivable, and that explains their
immense success. They take us out of ourselves.
There is a paradox here. American series
and soap operas are full of images and attitudes
that no Egyptian production would dare to
present for it would be immediately censored
if it did. Why should something be permissible
in an American production that is illicit in an
Egyptian one? It is not for nothing that I spoke
earlier of a rudderless ship.
Many Egyptian women take American small-
screen heroines as their models, imitating their
style of dressing, talking and even thinking. As a
result, relatively little-known actresses can
become veritable idols here. A lady named Dona
Miles received a welcome at the Cairo film
festival in December 1991 that was substantially
warmer than that accorded to much better-
known film stars.
This is not surprising in Egypt, where an
extraordinary ritual takes place when it is time
for a serial to begin. All the members of the
family stop whatever they have been doing and
sit glued to the screen. This ritual is not confined
to those with time on their hands. If you want to
leave the free-trade zone in Port Said while a
serial is on, then forget it. You won't be able to
get through customs until the end of the episode.
Last year the studio of a well-known
painter, Mustapha Al-Razaz, burned to the
ground, and all his paintings and his library
were reduced to ashes. No-one thought of
going to his aid. The fire had started one eve¬
ning in Ramadan, just at the moment when a
popular serial was beginning.
The nights of Ramadan
I should explain that Ramadan, the month of
fasting, is the one above all others in which
television reigns supreme. This is partly
because people have more time on their hands
than during the rest of the year, but also
because cinemas and theatres close down and
other public cultural activities come to a halt.
During Ramadan people go on a kind of televi¬
sion binge. Besides the normal shows, special
serials running from the first to the last day of
the month are produced each year and are
eagerly awaited by millions of viewers. The

SAMIR GHARIB
is an Egyptian journalist and
art critic. He is the author of
many articles and books on
the arts, including a study on
surrealism in Egypt,
published in 1986.
stories may be modern or adaptations from
The Thousand and One Nights.
Above all, there are the immensely popular
game-shows (fawazir), featuring singing and
dancing, which are forbidden in nightclubs and
theatres during Ramadan. The game-shows are
sponsored by firms that offer substantial prizes
to winning contestants, but their main purpose
is to provide a small-screen platform for the
stars of show business. Many still remember
the appearances of Nelly and Sherihan, who
during Ramadan staged on television the shows
they were not allowed to produce in the
theatre.
At other times of the year serials are the
main dish in the daily television diet. The two
principal channels each show two serials, one
Egyptian, the other foreign. They have become
part of the Egyptian way of life, familiar fea¬
tures of every Egyptian's landscape. If you are
arranging to meet someone, for example, you
might decide to do so "after the Arabic serial."
Your interlocutor will understand.
In the course of the year about twenty
serials are broadcast, each running for an ave¬
rage of ten forty-five-minute episodes. That
means that the leading actors are on screen for
almost eight hours. Some, of course, continue
for much longer than that. Layali al-Helmiya
has already notched up more than 100 episodes
and is not yet finished. The heroes of this serial
have so far appeared for more than seventy-five
hours on screen in a show whose unprece¬
dented success can no doubt be explained by
the fact that it is a historical chronicle covering
the last four decades in Egypt and features
characters and situations with which everyone
can identify (see page 36).
Ra'afat El Haggan, based on a novel by
Saleh Morsi, has also been exceptionally durable.
Its hero is an Egyptian secret agent, and its
success draws both on American espionage
films and on Egyptian patriotic sentiment.
Most of the serials, however, deal with
social problems. In fact all the arts, including
cinema and theatre as well as television, have
for some years past tended to focus on social
and political matters. This widespread pheno¬
menon reflects a new state of mind. What is
involved is not, strictly speaking, social criti¬
cism in the sense of an analysis of past or pre¬
sent failings suggesting future solutions. Rather
the programmes fix viewers' attention on situa¬
tions with which they can easily identify but
whose interest is purely anecdotal. As such,
they are deliberately kept from being anything
more than entertainment without instructional
value. What a pity! EJ 35

Layali al-Helmiya
or Dallas-on-the-Nile
M AYAU al-Helmiya ("Al-Helmiya Nights")
J is Egypt's most popular serial. Set in a
UM working-class district of Cairo, it takes
place against a backdrop of the events that have
marked the nation's history over the past half-
century. The main character is a "pasha" or aris¬
tocrat called Selim El-Badry, who is married to
a greedy and overbearing society belle named
Nazek Hanem. Tired of her caprices, he falls in
love with a local girl, whom he decides to take as
his second wife. Enraged, Nazek Hanem
demands a divorce and sets out to get her own
back.
Her revenge is to marry Soliman Ghanem, a
self-made omda (village mayor) who is the
pasha's rival. Although she despises Ghanem,
she bears him a daughter, Zohra. Meanwhile
the pasha's young wife dies while giving birth
to a son, Ali. Nazek Hanem at once leaves the
omda and goes back to Selim. She packs her
daughter, an unpleasant reminder of her second
marriage, off to an orphanage.
All this takes place at the time of the anti-
colonial struggle, and among the various other
characters involved is a revolutionary patriot,
Taha Samahi, who in spite of his convictions is
obliged to marry a girl of his own social class.
The couple have a son, Nagui. Soon after, Taha
is killed in a demonstration. Nagui is brought
up by his mother and becomes a magistrate of
integrity and a man of principle like his father.
The pace of events quickens with the
coming to power of Nasser, who imposes
socialism on the country and nationalizes
industries and the fortunes of the rich. Nazek
Hanem divorces Selim once more, and he then
marries a princess from the entourage of ex-
King Farouk. Fleeing the country, he sets up
house in Paris with his new wife, leaving his
son Ali, now grown up, to finish his studies at
the Polytechnic in Cairo. Unlike his father, Ali
is a fervent revolutionary and is imprisoned
several times for his views. Meanwhile Zohra
has been reunited with her father, the omda
Soliman Ghanem, and is now a journalist. She
shares a romantic idyll with Ali, but then settles
for security by secretly marrying the editor-in-
chief of her newspaper.
The military defeat of 1967 rocks Egyptian
society and leaves a mood of bitterness that
endures until the moral victory of 1973 restores
the nation's optimism. These events are
reflected in the lives of the people of al-Hel¬
miya. Zohra gets a divorce. Selim, the former
pasha, comes back to Egypt, encouraged by
Sadat's "open-door" policy. He builds an
industrial and financial empire, but his marriage
to Nourhan is on the rocks. His son Ali, faced
with the ruin of his political and romantic
hopes, also devotes himself to the pursuit of
money and power.
Meanwhile the omda has been investing in
new markets and, at the age of sixty, has
secretly married a young servant. She turns out
to be only interested in his money and he soon
repudiates her. Nazek Hanem is as scheming as
ever and continues to get what she wants,
taking to corruption quite as enthusiastically as
her new husband, Mazen, the unscrupulous
owner of a large hospital complex. Zohra,
returning from Paris where she had gone to
forget the failure of her marriage, becomes an
accomplished business woman and attempts to
win back Ali.
The assassination of Sadat brings an end to
an era marked by the growth of the black
market, currency speculation and the malversa¬
tion of public funds. The Mubarak years that
follow witness the triumph of industrialization
and construction.
Layali al-Helmiya has an eventful future
ahead of it.
36
