I POLAND I A DIFFICULT
by WadyslawAdamski TRANSITION
New Age Pyramid (1989), a
work by the Czechoslovak
sculptor Pavel Homolka.
(Cast glass and foamed
silicate mould.)
THE spectacular breakdown of state socia¬
lism in eastern Europe has, for the first
time since the end of the Second World
War, given the people of the region an oppor¬
tunity to freely choose their way of life and
build anew their social, economic and political
institutions. It should not, however, be taken
for granted that this new opportunity will
automatically result in a truly democratic and
pluralistic social order.
When Poland and Hungary regained their
sovereignty, the first nations of the region to do
so, the new governments proclaimed their dedi¬
cation to the free-market economy and political
democracy. The other countries soon followed
this pattern. But this was merely the first step;
there is still a long way to go. It is certain that
further progress will be difficult, since the newly
constituted governments will have to implement
their democratic creed in extremely unfavour¬
able circumstances. The new authorities, which
'^Síí*
have inherited ruined economies and need to
impose harsh austerity policies, will inevitably
have to cope with recurring waves of populist
discontent, thereby risking the loss of their posi¬
tions in free elections.
In the long run, however, the most crucial
task is that of restructuring basic economic and
social institutions. This means that new owners
must be found for state enterprises and that the
institutions of civil society, hitherto virtually
non-existent, will have to be created from
scratch. And all these goals must be achieved
quickly, in societies almost totally deprived of a
modern business and middle class, not to men¬
tion competent managers, political leaders and
organizers of civic institutions independent of
the state.
The question of which sections of society
will support or oppose the reforms is crucial. In
Poland, the Solidarity movement was nurtured
by the sense of deprivation and anger felt by
state employees when they compared their
own situation with that of those they regarded
as being unjustly privileged the representa¬
tives of power. This feeling was reinforced by
the obvious discrepancies between the actual
situation and the ideological principle of the
system, which maintained that rewards should
be distributed according to "work and social
usefulness".
The alliance of the Polish working class and
the proletarianized intelligentsia, embodied in
the Solidarity movement, was strong enough to
paralyse the Party's ability to exercise its
monopoly on power. At the same time, the
strength of the alliance was limited. It expressed
itself mainly in negative ways such as by boy¬
cotting the government's decisions and forcing
it to make concessions.
What lessons can be drawn from this? What
are the possibilities of transforming the social
behaviour that helped to demolish state socia¬
lism into positive action in a context of demo¬
cratic institutions?
The best way to approach this question is to
look at privatization strategies. How much pri¬
vatization do we really need and at what speed
should it be implemented? Most important of
all, what role in this process should be played
by those who contributed to the breakdown of
totalitarianism? 33

WLADYSLAW ADAMSKI,
Polish sociologist, ¡s a
member of his country's
Academy of Sciences and
Director of the philosophical
and sociological journal
Sisyphus.
It seems to me that any attempt to solve
these problems requires linking them to their
structural background. Prospects for the devel¬
opment of civil society and political democracy
in Poland depend on how well we understand
the type of social conflict that emerged between
Solidarity and the former Party-State appa¬
ratus. This conflict, seen at the time as a clear-
cut dichotomy between "us" and "them", still
affects the post-communist governments.
Negotiation of the Gdansk
agreements between
representatives of the Polish
government and, at right,
Lech Walesa, the strike
leader at the Lenin shipyard
(31 August 1980).
A REVOLUTION
FROM BELOW
The main reason for this seems to be the failure
of new governments to absorb discontented
workers into the process of reform. There is
growing support from the public and from
skilled workers for free-market and efficiency-
oriented policies. Most state employees, on the
other hand, still express an attachment to
"social justice" or egalitarian principles.
These tendencies show how far the standards
and values of the old system have been eroded.
And paradoxically, those most responsible for its
collapse have been the very people whose social
advancement it favoured. Thus, from its begin¬
nings in the 1940s, the system contained within it
the seeds of its own downfall.
Workers and intellectuals began to behave
unpredictably as the system of pay and perqui¬
sites began to break down. As the old order
collapsed, the economy began spontaneously to
adjust to the requirements of the market. The
Polish Round Table negotiations of February-
April 1989, and especially Solidarity's victory
in the election of June 1989, might have been
expected to carry this process further.
However, it soon became clear that in the tran¬
sition period governments were encountering
apathy and even resistance. The hostility was
more pronounced among state employees than
among the former nomenklatura.
The new situation raises fresh problems. In
creating a democratic system in Poland, what
role should be played respectively by sponta¬
neous movements and by political action
undertaken by those in power? Should we
expect the revolution to take place from below
or from above? Basing my analysis on the
Polish experience, I would suggest that the
most likely way of achieving a change in the
system is neither from above nor from below
alone, but through a mixture of the two.
A real revolution from below took place in
Poland. What has happened to it since Solida¬
rity's victory? Has the spontaneous movement
exhausted its potential? Should the working-
class rebels now be disregarded and ignored? I
do not think so, even if the alliance between
workers and intellectuals has weakened consid¬
erably since many of Solidarity's leaders entered
the state political institutions. The workers, who
carried out the revolution, should not be ignored
as a force for democratic change. The problem is
finding a way of transforming their experience
in a protest movement into constructive partici¬
pation in the process of social reconstruction. If
no solution is found, these powerful social
forces will either openly oppose or, at the very
least, boycott the rebuilding of Polish society.
a
34
