jJfÀ u
The environmental challenge
by Ronald Lee
How far can the world's ecosystem support continuing population growth?
22
RONALD LEE,
of the United States, is
professor of demography and
economics at the University of
California at Berkeley. A past
President of the Population
Association of America, he has
received the Mindel Shepps
Award for outstanding
research in mathematical
demography and demographic
methods. He has co-edited
several books on population
and economic development,
including Population and
Economic Development: Issues
and Evidence (Wisconsin,
1987) and Population, Food
and Rural Development
(Oxford, 1988).
A HE population of the world has multiplied by
a factor of seven since 1750, tripled since 1900
and doubled since 1950. Its rate of growth acceler¬
ated throughout this century, peaking in the
mid-1960s at 2.1 per cent per year and then
declining to the current rate of 1.7 per cent per
year. The rapid population growth since World
War II, unprecedented in recorded history, caused
grave concern and controversy about the ability
of the global economy and ecology to sustain the
increased numbers.
Classical economists like Thomas Malthus
(1766-1834) believed that, as growing population
made land increasingly scarce, rising food prices
would eventually choke off further economic and
demographic growth and that this would lead to
what they termed the "stationary state". For
them, natural resource constraints were at the
heart of the problem. Yet while the classical
economists stressed the central role of land in the
economy, the importance of land has dwindled
in the modern world. The share of the labour
force in agriculture is declining in most areas and
the possibilities for increasing the output from
a given amount of land, through increased inputs
of fertilizer, pesticides, new seed varieties, irriga¬
tion and better training, appear very great.
By the 1980s, policy-makers were in a state
of confusion. Was population growth good or
bad? Did it matter at all? Would expenditure on

family-planning programmes lead to more rapid
economic development?
This uncertainty led to systematic attempts
to assess our knowledge, including major projects
by the World Bank and the United States
National Academy of Sciences. In the mid-1980s,
these assessments revealed a surprising degree of
agreement among economists. While few of them
accepted the view that population growth was
good for development, the consensus was that it
mattered less than had previously been thought.
Earlier studies, it was believed, had failed to
appreciate the flexibility of the economic system.
Sounding the alarm
While economists were playing down the effects
of population growth, ecologists and environ¬
mentalists like Paul Ehrlich and Garrett Hardin
were sounding the population alarm. They
pointed out that the biosphere provided essen¬
tial inputs to economic activity and warned that
its limits and fragility placed bounds on sus¬
tainable levels of economic activity and that these
bounds had already been overstepped. The global
economy was consuming ecological capital with
careless extravagance rather than living off the
interest.
Ehrlich and Hardin had been expressing these
views since the 1960s at least and their views were
incorporated into a systems analysis model in the
Club of Rome report "The Limits to Growth".
This report, which attracted worldwide attention
in the early 1970s, came to the conclusion that
global collapse was imminent and inevitable
unless fundamental changes were made and that
catastrophe was inherent in the structure of socio¬
economic and ecological relationships.
Social scientists soon rejected the Club of
Rome approach in favour of careful analysis of
each relationship. In the 1980s, however, a flood
of environmental problems added new urgency
to the ecologists' position. Hot summers,
drought, acid rain, polluted waters, famine and
holes in the ozone layer seemed to confirm their
predictions, leading to heightened concern about
population growth.
Ecologists, however, had presented a broad
array of reasons to end or reverse population
growth; some of these were less solid than others.
Many of the older ideas about the economic con¬
sequences of population growth were again put
forward. These were unconvincing since they
were not supported by the more recent research.
Ecologists had also been issuing warnings about
the impending exhaustion of minerals, but
economists such as Julian Simon countered by
showing that the real prices of most minerals had
been falling historically, not rising, and that the
total costs of natural resources had not been rising
as a share of national output. Petroleum prices
had also tended to fall, if increases caused by
OPEC are excluded. In 1980, Simon wagered
Ehrlich that mineral prices would decline in real
terms during the following decade. In 1990 Simon
won this well-publicized bet and collected his
money. The historical record illustrates the sub¬
stitution of more abundant resources for scarce
ones in response to relative price changes. It
exemplifies flexible economies responding to
incentives communicated through market prices.
Some of the ecologists' other claims have also
appeared to be premature or exaggerated. For
example, real food prices have historically fallen
and per capita food production has increased. The
incidence of famines has diminished, not
increased, and modern famines often arise from
wars or mistaken policies rather than from defi¬
ciencies of agricultural production due to popu¬
lation growth.
"The tragedy
of the commons"
Yet many of the ecologists' most important
warnings appear correct, particularly those con¬
cerning renewable resourcesair, water, fisheries,
land, forest cover, the ozone layer and species
diversity. These resources can sustain a certain
level of use without diminution, but over-use
leads to their damage or destruction. Further¬
more, most of them lie outside the market
Opposite page, improved rice
strains growing at the
International Rice Research
Institute (Philippines). High-
yield, fast-growing hybrids
that are resistant to disease
have made a major
contribution to Asia's "green
revolution".
Below, destroying agricultural
surpluses in France.

economy and may be used cost free. This means
that economic agentsindividuals or firmscan



benefit from cheap disposal of pollutants without
bearing the costs of environmental degradation,
the costs being passed on to society as a whole.
As a result, economic incentives encourage over¬
use. The automatic signalling mechanism of
market prices is impotent and price changes serve
neither as an incentive nor as a signal of increasing
scarcity.
For some resources, such as forest cover,
there is little incentive even for national policies,
because the costs of policies are borne locally
while the benefits are shared globally. Hardin
called this type of problem "the tragedy of the
commons", and the name has stuck. Although
traditional communities with common property
resources have typically managed them effec¬
tively, these arrangements are vulnerable to the
forces of economic development. In any event,
modern environmental problems transcend local
communities, nations and even continents.
Damaging over-use of renewable resources is
intensified by population growth. Although, in
principle, over-use can be prevented by
appropriate policies and institutional arrange¬
ments, in practice this has been difficult to
achieve. The situation is complicated because
population is only one of several contributory
factors. Per capita income growth and changing
technologies, for example, also play important
roles, but in a given situation it is difficult to
assess how much is due to their influence and
how much is due to population growth.
Nevertheless, whether renewable resources are
well managed or not, population growth means
that less of their services will be available to each
individual.
Worries about population growth have thus
come full circlefrom the classical concern for
limited land, to emphasis on physical capital, to
more recent emphasis on human capital and the
ameliorative influence of competitive markets
and back once again to the natural constraints.
This time, however, the concern is for renewable
resources, most of which fall outside the market.
For some, the urgency of population control on
ecological grounds is obvious. Others remain
sceptical. Research on links between population
growth and the environment is under way, and
there is hope for a better understanding of these
links in coming years.
Because many of the ecological costs of popu¬
lation growth are global, the ecological incentives
to restrain population for national gain may be
weak. This is another tragedy of the commons,
which can only be removed by international
collaboration.
Sacks of seed are delivered to
a group of Tuareg, to help
combat desert advance in the
Sahel.
24
