INTERVIEW R I B U T E
ATAHUALPA YUPANQUI
talks to Manuel Osorio
"We walk upon this earth, and
when we are very tired we find
refuge beneath it." A wandering
minstrel who sang of nature and
of humankind and loved the
freedom of the open road, the
Argentine musician and poet
Atahualpa Yupanqui died in
Paris a few days after granting
us this interview. His real name
was Hector Roberto Chavero.
His mother was Basque and his
father was of Indian origin. He
signed his poems and songs-
some one thousand five hundred
in all"Atahualpa Yupanqui", in
tribute to the last two Indian
chiefs to fight against the
conquistadores. Inspired by his
fervent love of the Indians and
peoples of South America, his
works have achieved
international recognition. His
singing voice, with its simple
directness and nostalgic
overtones, is the voice of a man
who has faced the often harsh
realities of his native soil
revealing his interior life and
vision to the peoples of all
countries.
Your name has become a legend in Latin
America and your songs, music andpoems
the pure expression of Latin-American cul¬
tural intermingling have become an inte¬
gral part of the tradition of the continent.
How did you come to compose this vast and
exceptionally beautiful range ofworks?
- I was born of this lineage, of the deep
mainstream of South American tradition.
Neither the indigenous peoples nor the
Quechua language are foreign to me. My
family is also very much of the same stamp
and stems from this same lineage. As an ado¬
lescent, when the time came for me to
choose what I wanted to do, since I was too
poor to study my first love, medicine, I
began strumming away on the guitar. At first
I viewed this as no more than a temporary
occupation. At fourteen I wrote my first
poems, which I signed "Atahualpa", not rea¬
lizing that in so doing I had sealed my fate.
At nineteen I composed my first serious
song, Caminito del Indio ("The Path of the
Indian"), and went to the capital for the first
time. Naturally, nobody paid any attention
to me and I was unable to give a single
recital, so, for a while, I accompanied other
singers on my guitar. Then one day I decided
to set off for the interior, to the mountains
and the pampas, to the provinces of Entre
Ríos, Córdoba and Tucumán, where the gau¬
chos and the peasants live. Later I went on to
Bolivia and Peru. There I found other grist
for my mill Peruvian melodies and laments
and Bolivian songs. On my return to
Tucumán, having got to know our lands, I
found the people ready to listen to me.
You have always been a great wanderer.
Was it from your journeyings, from your
contact with the people and from your
appreciation of their deepest feelings that
your songs were bomf
- 1 have teen a wanderer all my life, keeping
my eyes open and my ears cocked. In this
way I got to know all sorts and conditions of
men. If I happened to come across a rich
señor who hacía good library, I would make
friends with him and was thus able to read
books that I would never have been able to
buy. It is the same in every country the
poor cannot afford to buy books. I bor¬
rowed those señors' books, I read them,
copied them and noted down references and
quotations which I carefully preserved, buil¬
ding up for myself a "borrowed" culture.
The open road was my university where I
graduated in solitude and my tutor was
experience. I roamed the length and breadth
of our America, from the banks of the
Apure, in Venezuela, to the mountains of'
Colombia and throughout Chile, from
Iquique, in the north, to Punta Arenas, in
the south. In each country I went from
village to village, visiting the taverns and
studying the people, their way of life, their
songs, the food they eat, their traditions,
their festivities, their sorrows and their

funeral wakes, everything. In my jour-
neyings across America, I always tried to put
myself in other people's shoes, tempering
my curiosity with discretion. I can certainly
say that I know America in all its aspects and
on the human scale, as seen from below, on
foot or on horseback.
You were not restricted by national, ethnic
or cultural boundaries?
- These I have crossed with the same love of
the land, with the same respect for human
dignity and with no sense of shame at having
the look of an Indian, something that in
many parts of our continent people try to
hide, thus denying their roots and their
ancestry, instead of taking pride in them as
part of our being and of our culture.
I have roamed the continent as though it
were one huge country with here and there a
milestone stating "this region is called Peru",
or "Bolivia", or "Ecuador". These markers
have been the cause of many a conflict
among politicians, but they are of no
concern to people like me. The open road,
poverty,' the air we breathe, a well-roasted
joint followed by a piece of pumpkin,
Nature, our ancient myths, the native
wisdom of the people these are the things
that concern us. My grandfather used to tell
me that the white herons that I saw on the
pampas were born when the moonlight
settled between the rushes on the waters of
the lake. This is how I learned everything I
know from the people, from their songs.
This was how I learned the meaning of life
and death and to see what lay hidden behind
reality and behind the secretive ways of the
people. My education was based on a mix¬
ture of tradition and legend.
What can music and poetry contribute to
society?
- 1 think that music and poetry can help the
world and encourage harmony between
men, since neither are linked to a specific
organization or any kind of political project
or plan. By their very nature they are
concerned with human values as a global
whole. When politicians claim to subscribe
to these values, they succeed only in being
restrictive and divisive. As one who knew
nothing of the seamy side of life I used to
believe that the great names in the fields of

politics, economics and culture were men of
great honour, erudition and dignity. When I
learned that they were almost invariably
unscrupulous hypocrites, my illusions vani¬
shed instantly.
We live in a confused world in which
extremist attitudes hold sway. Fortunately,
there are always some clear-minded people
who carry the torch of cultural progress and
mutual understanding. In spite of every¬
thing, hope dissipates the darkest shadows.
The task will be difficult because the times
we live in are more complex than ever
before, yet full of unimagined opportunities.
' I have always thought of music and poetry
as being ideal means of encouraging frater¬
nity among human beings. "Love one an¬
other" was not just a clever remark or an
advertising slogan; it was the expression of a
profound human aspiration, pronounced
some two thousand years ago, which people,
unfortunately, seem to have lost sight of.
You once declared that all cultures were
linked and that they aliform part of Culture
with a capital "C".
- 1 believe that Culture, like Civilization, is a
single entity and that there is no such thing
as "modern culture" as opposed to "yes¬
terday's culture". There are stages, moments
and levels of culture that develop within a
single Culture that is the heritage of all man¬
kind. When relations between nations and
cultures deteriorate, are obstructed, or suffer
setbacks, Culture languishes and tends to
disappear. Culture with a capital "C"
consists of an aggregate of values that exalts
mankind from within and which embraces
the whole vast world.
What is the artist's mission in all this?
- Mine, at any rate, is to produce simple
couplets and the purest melodies I can and
thus to embody a fragment of the world, to
portray human beings as they weep, love
and contemplate the world and other human
beings. I am sad when I see their sorrows,
angry when I see them exploited, happy
when I see them dancing, when their eyes
shine with hope, or even just because it is
Sunday and the weather is fine. My task is to
live with my eyes open.
Taken as a whole, your music and poetry
offers aüne example ofuncompromising art,
born of cultural and ethnic intermingling,
which makes no concessions to fashion.
- Thirty years ago, I wrote these words
about this intermingling from -which deve¬
loped our music and our instruments:
"When the America of the Indians opened
its belly to give birth to the mestizo, the soul
of the Andean people witnessed also the
birth of a mestizo instrument the charango
(a guitar). It had taut steel strings, a short
finger-board and a sound-box fashioned
from the shell of the armadillo of the cor¬
dillera the quirquincho and cemented in
place with clay from the mountain-tops, a
mixture of clay dust and sulphur. Its pegs
were made of applewood or tamarind and,
according to its place of origin and the skill
of the maker, it had eight, ten or twelve
strings. Like the mestizo who plucks it, the
charango expresses itself in Spanish, but
thinks and experiences its deepest emotions
in Quechua, in the language ofsilence and of
the untamed wind, of daybreak and of linger¬
ing twilight. As the sun sets on the colonial
era, its golden tints light up the mountain-
tops where Pacha mama (Mother Earth)
dwells, calling to her copper-skinned chil¬
dren: 'Runachay, ama conkaichu!' ('My
Indian son, do not forget me')."
I do not create my works; first I live
them and then I express them. I first lived
my poems, my songs, my books, one by
one, through all their stages. I do not sing or
write to please the public. I take great care
not to lapse into clichés about the pictu¬
resque Indian, with his poncho and strange
expressions. My father came from a very old
family, from a people from the remote
mountains of Santiago del Estero, from the
forests of the Quechua. This is why I have
such an affinity with the Indians and am so
attracted by their language and traditions. I
am bilingual with a rather good mastery of
Quechua. It is a very poetic language, but
you won't hear me singing in Quechua just
to put on an "original" performance. I
would rather die first. There are some things
that demand great respect. One should not
get involved in that kind of shoddy business.
In my songs I prefer to capture for the
peasant the profound truths of his nights and
days, his sorrows, his defiance, his overall
experience of life, but I have avoided beco¬
ming an "expert" or a "professional specia¬
list" in the songs and poetry of our region.
You have also always devoted much atten¬
tion to Spanish as spoken in Latin America
- I have always been interested in the Spa¬
nish language and have been an avid reader
of Cervantes. In Latin America we speak an
ancient form of Spanish on to which has
been grafted a wealth of specific American¬
isms. There is a tendency to make the arbi¬
trary judgement that the language of the
dominant classes is pure and perfect, whereas
the idioms and dialects of the underdogs are
somehow impure and imperfect. In Latin
America we have succeeded in incorporating
our history, our way of being, our persona¬
lity, the way we feel things, into the Spanish
we speak here and, in so doing, we have
enriched it. From a single speech form we
have created our own language which
reflects a specific reality.
Revealing this reality is also the task of
the artist. When I was a boy at school, on the
first days of winter we went out to the play¬
ground, in the sunlight, and sang "Sur le
pont d'Avignon, on y danse, on y danse". I
sang this old French round song in the
middle of the pampas, even though I had
never seen the sea or a city and had not the
remotest idea what France was. Much later,
when I discovered that geography encom¬
passed a great deal more than the country¬
side around the River Plate, I wondered why
in my country there was no song about the
tree that I saw every day on my way to and
from school. We were denied the tree, the
countryside, that would have enabled us to
grow up to become men in touch with reality.
One ofthe great failings of our school books
was that they taught us some very lovely
songs, but songs that were of no concern to
us. A pretty piece of deception. Since then I
have written a number of round songs for
children in the hope that they will recognize
within them their own countryside and their
own reality, and will retain their love of the
land when they grow up.
You have always remained insulatedfrom
that fascination with the exotic, stereotyped
view of Latin America which is becoming
the fashion in France and the rest ofEurope,
a fashion that feeds on a certain feeling of
guilt with regard to the Third World.
- I have never been an adept of the protest
song, which has indeed become fashionable
in France and elsewhere. To be a profes¬
sional singer of protest songs involves lying
to the world, even though the lies may be
appealing. There are other elements in life
besides the superficialities of politics. If you
want to make known the current problems
of the Third World, the intolerable situation,
in which it is placed and which dishonours
all men, you will have to go back to the past,
to the ancestors, hear the deep-rooted melo¬
dies and learn the life of the wheatfields, the
maizefields, the work-gangs and the mare
treading the corn to separate it from the
chaff. From that vantage point you can write
songs that will record and transmit the cul-

Atahualpa Yupanqui (1908-1992).
twenty years and all my archives are here. I
have always continued to write and I have a
dozen or so books to my name. They are not
all about Latin America, for I have always
been interested in other countries and other
peoples. A few years ago I published a book
in Madrid entitled Del algarrobo al cerezo
("From the Carob to the Cherry Tree"),
from the Carob tree of my native land to the
cherry tree of Japan. It arose from my first
visit to Japan in 1968 and records my first
impressions of a country I have visited
several times since. During my first visit I
adopted the Socratic method of discovery. I
was continually asking questions: "Who's
statue is this?" "What is the name of that
mountain?" "Where does the wind come
from?" "Which is the sturdiest tree?" "What
are your traditions?" In this way I learned
that in Japan there are many religions, inclu¬
ding that of the Ainu people of the Soporo
region, which I studied in some detail. In
another of my books, I took the liberty of
reproaching the great French writer of
fables, La Fontaine, of having lied to me
when I was a boy with his story of the ant
and the grasshopper. La Fontaine extols the
merits of the hard-working, provident ant,
who survives the winter, but condemns the
grasshopper, who does nothing but sing and
disappears when winter comes. But have you
ever heard of anybody going to buy pesti¬
cide to get rid of grasshoppers? So where
does the truth lie? The virtues of the indus¬
trious ant are vaunted but everybody tries to
get rid of him. I had the feeling that I had
been told a lie and that fables for children
did not tell the truth.
tural roots of our peoples rather than mere
imprecations, calls for vengeance, hatred and
blood, which blind us to these deeper values.
Otherwise, the listener will feel cheated, that
something is lacking, because there has been
no real communication. I prefer an artist to
tell me the whole story and present me with
a complete picture of the reality of a situa¬
tion. I am convinced of this. This is what the
listener wants to know: "Where do you
come from?" "Tell me about your mother,
your family and your neighbours." "Tell me
about the beauty of your homeland before it
was so shamefully despoiled." "Well then,
do you still feel the pain of losing it?" "Of
course you do! So tell me about it and I will
listen to you with respect. But if you only
want to weep and cry out for vengeance,
without trying to understand, go away and
hide; for it is more manly to hide away and
mourn one's sorrows than to make a show
of them for a big fee." Knowing my origins,
you can imagine how impatient I become
with all these passing fashions, with all these
"isms" which insist that artists should act as
standard-bearers for this or that cause. This
is a pity, but, with me at least, it does not
work. I am not interested in being in fashion.
I seek another path, that of true friendship
with the people and loyal relationships bet¬
ween different nations and cultures. Secta¬
rian attitudes must not be allowed to limit
our horizons.
At the age of eighty-three are you still
composing songs ana writing?
- I have published almost a thousand songs
and I still have a few in reserve, many of
them complete with music. While I have
breath, and if I am given the time, I hope to
sing them one day. If not, someone else will
sing them. I have lived in Paris for nearly
You have lived in Paris for many years now.
Has your relationship with France and the
French always been cordial, open and har¬
monious?
I have always had a very cordial relationship
with the French based firmly on mutual res¬
pect. I never tried to teach them Quechua
and I have never learned to speak French
very well. In all the time that I have been
here I have not attempted to make Indians
out of them, nor have I succeeded in beco¬
ming French. One thing is certain, we have
remained on good terms because we have
remained who we are. I contribute what I
have my songs, a touch of atmosphere, of
colour, the sufferings and the hopes of my
native land, that immense continent we
know as Latin America. And this is how
men come together and, little by little, in
spite of all the obstacles, discover the uni¬
versal links which secretly unite them. D
