CARLOS FUENTES
talks to Fernando Ainsa
p
\
^
V
77ie Mexican writer Carlos Fuentes is one of the leading
figures in contemporary Latin American literature.
In his novels and short stories, pre-Hlspanlc myths mingle
with recent history to define the Mexican Identity.
One theme of his work, especially topical in a year which marks
the 500th anniversary of the meeting of the Old World and
the New, is the complex relationship between his country and Spain.
In a premonitory article published in 1982,
you speculated as to whether Europe and
Latin America could unite their efforts to
escape the double hegemony which then split
the world in two. It was a question of
inventing a "multipolar" world in which no
one would be anyone else's satellite and in
which each one of us could contribute to the
shaping of a polycultural, multiform,
civilizing ethos.
In the 1950s, while we were still students,
the people of my generation felt that we were
trapped, useless and sterile, between two blocs,
two superpowers, two mutually exclusive
ideologies. Each demanded total loyalty,
sacrificing the diversity and multiplicity of all
those countries and cultures that refused to
make an unqualified choice between com¬
munism and capitalism, between the Soviet
Union and the United States.
The cold war was no joke in Latin
America. In the name of the conflicting ideol¬
ogies and in face of the attitudes of the two
powers, many political and cultural opportu¬
nities were lost. The first visible manifestation
of the Cold War in Latin America was the
foreign intervention in Guatemala in 1954.
You will recall that Guatemala had just
had two successive democratically elected
governmentsthose of Arevalo and Arbenz.
That experiment was brusquely brought to an
end, to be followed by thirty years of geno¬
cide, repression and of democracy spurned.
Many other countries experienced similar
dramas, not to mention those that were sub¬
ject to various kinds of pressures or in which
dictatorial régimes were shored up.
The end of the cold war left not only
Latin America, but also Africa and Asia, in
an enormous political and even worse cultural
mess. The Third World had not been given
the chance to make its voice heard or to con¬
tribute to a world richer than that of the
"either or" choice between Moscow and
Washington.
This is why the emergence of
"multipolarity"which many Mexicans of
8

fe kve to àfeni od cultivate life au tk vim tkt wh it woéwhik-ârt id he,
soliàrity dû culture,
my generation had been seeking for nearly
forty yearswas a cause for rejoicing, even if
our joy was muted. We have just witnessed
the collapse of political theories and economic
systems that never had much to do with our
real problems, but we are well aware that the
transition from bipolar manichaeism to
pluralism will not be easy. After the euphoria
of the fall of the Berlin wall and of the rigid
communist dictatorships of eastern Europe,
we are beginning to appreciate the scale of the
perils that threaten us and of the obstacles
blocking the passage from bipolarity to mul-
tipolarity.
Are we not now seeing a resurgence of
ethnic nationalism and ofselfassertiveness by
minorities rather than the emergence ofa mul¬
tipolar world?
I never expected the birth of the multipolar
world to be anything other than difficult. It
was always going to be hard to impose cul¬
tural diversity as a value capable of bringing
new political realities into being. Basically, we
are all hunched over the blank pages of the
twenty-first century wondering fearfully
whether there has really been a twentieth cen¬
tury rather than an unnatural prolongation of
the nineteenth century, with its ideological
conflicts, its exaggerated nationalisms and its
illusions of progress.
The twentieth century believed in the
promise of human perfectibility through
progress and through absolute liberty,
including the liberty to do evil. It has been
a century of scientific enlightenment and of
political gloom, of the universal reign of tech¬
nology, but also of violence and ideological
crisis.
Was this a crisis of ideologies or rather of
a certain conception of the State?
To my mind the concept of the Nation-
State, which has dominated the world of
politics since 1917, is being seriously ques¬
tioned. In Latin America, we have the
enormous advantage that nation and culture
coincide, which is far from being the case in
the Soviet Union, in Canada, in Ireland or
even in France and Spain, where there is a cer¬
tain mismatch between the idea of the nation
and its cultural expression.
In America, we have learned how to create
a "polyculture" in each State, a multiracial
society which may have problems of its own
but which does not call into question the co¬
existence of several cultures within the same
nation. Our American nations are founded
upon racial mixing, and that rests on integra¬
tion, not exclusion. Whenever we have been
tempted to practice exclusion, we have failed;
and each time we have practiced integration,
we have been the richer for it. This is the fun¬
damental logic of our cultural experience,
which, ever since the sixteenth century, has
been one of openness to external influences.
Our capacity for integration comes to us
from our Iberian roots, from that peninsula
where Christian, Muslim and Jewish cultures
coexisted and which has experienced so many
invasions and conquests. It is a remarkable
coincidence that the very year, 1492, in which
Spain's historic image as a nation of welcome
was dimmed by the exclusion of the Jews and
the conquest of the kingdom of Granada, was
also that of the discovery of America. On 12
October 1492, the first contacts with pre-
Columbian civilizations opened up the
prospect of new intermixings of unexpected
richness.
Without wishing to minimize the crimes
committed against the indigenous populations,
I believe that what ultimately prevailed was
the tendency towards racial mixing and cul¬
tural interaction, so much so that nation and
culture are now one and the same and mutu¬
ally reinforce one another.
In Latin America, we have succeeded, after
a fashion, in conceiving and creating a world
in which values, far from being stifled by the
clash of opposites, are given new life through
lively communication and recognition of the
multicultural reality. Values cannot be dis¬
sociated from the social context which gave
rise to them. Respect for and knowledge and
acceptance of these values imply respect for
and knowledge and acceptance of what is
"different", of those who are different, even
if they appear to reject us. These "others",
those who reject us, enrich and mould us by
enabling us to be receptive to whatever is not
"us". The moulding of one by the other, the
transformation of our individual egos through
contact with all that is alien and different, is
part of the exciting challenge presented by the
multipolar, ethnically-mixed world towards
which we are inevitably heading.
But did not bipolarity also provide a form
ofprotection for many Third World countries,
a situation that enabled them to maintain a
presence on the world stage and to protect
themselves from one great power by seeking
support from the other? Today, especially in
Latin America, there seems to be a sense of
confusion at being thrown back on one's own
resources in this way, even though some see
the positive side ofthings and are pleased that
the Third World can finally take responsi¬
bility for its own problems and attempt to
solve them itself.
Yes indeed, but this applies not only to the
Third World; the same could be said about the
Soviet Union, for example, and even about the
United States, both of which find themselves
obliged to look more closely at their own
internal problems instead of working out
global strategies for others.
For our part, we Latin Americans must
put our own house in order, or as they say
back home, "scratch ourselves with our own
fingers". We are the only ones who can resolve
our problems. We must stop flagellating our¬
selves and casting ourselves as the eternal
victims of history. I personally have no feeling
of being a victim. I believe that we can, quite
independently, affirm our personality in the
political and economic fields just as we have
already done in cultural matters.
I am in no way underestimating the
problems connected with currencies, foreign

trade and debt, but it seems to me that there
is a whole series of basic problems relating to
agriculture, food provision and education that
we can solve by ourselves. A country that
cannot feed and educate itself from its own
resources is in no condition to make the great
leap forward we expect in the twenty-first cen¬
tury. The essential thing is to educate our
people and, above all, to feed them.
We have been victims of a gigantic mis¬
understanding. We thought that the industries
of the nineteenth century with their factories
and smoke-stacks were an earnest of
prosperity and the path to progress. All that
has been made obsolete by the rise of the auto¬
mated, high-tech, services economy, while we,
at- least in some countries, are still trying to
construct vast industrial complexes belching
out smoke and soot.
We must begin by tackling local
problemsbuilding that first school, first
hospital, first roadand proceed modestly,
patiently, step by step.
We cannot go on fooling ourselves, telling
ourselves that solutions will come from out¬
side. If we do, we shall fail, as happened at the
end of the nineteenth century, when we opted
for a liberal solution based exclusively on for¬
eign trade. The result was that a minority got
rich with no benefit for the majority. Here
and there, the democratic efforts of clear-
thinking politicians, such as José Batlle y
Ordonez, in Uruguay, and Lázaro Cárdenas,
in Mexico, helped to clean up the economy
and to bring about a partial redistribution of
wealth. Almost everywhere else, however, the
gap between the rich and the poor merely got
wider. We must not fall back into the vicious
circle of the errors of the past; and this is what
is likely to happen if we do not get to the root
of our own internal problems.
Do you think that the process of reducing
the contradictions and antagonisms in Latin
America is at last getting under way?
We are seeing a radical change in the struc¬
tures of our societies. We inherited centralized
structures that in some cases went back to the
pre-Columbian empires, survived the Con¬
quest and lasted on into the republics. Today,
however, I see developing a movement that
comes from the grass roots and the margins
of society and which is now overtaking the
vertical structures and institutions of the
pastthe Church, the State and the Army. In
other words, civil society is preparing to take
charge of our history and of civil society as
a whole. It is this society that creates and
transmits culture. Culture is the strongest,
most valid and most durable of our posses¬
sions, the one best able to withstand crises and
which has remained intact throughout the
present crisis.
In this sense, culture, as a response to life's
problems, is alive and well in Latin America,
from Mexico to Tierra del Fuego. By culture
I mean a way of living, thinking, dreaming,
struggling, loving, singing, dressing, furnishing
and decorating the home, remembering. All
this is very much alive and, in my view, has
a positive role to play in the context of the
multipolar world in which we shall henceforth
be living.
In welcoming the arrival of a multipolar
world, are you no longer afraid of the
"Balkanization" of Latin America?
The nations of our continent have their
own internal logic and cultural continuity
going for them. As I mentioned earlier, nation
and culture coincide in all of them, even those
countries with the ethnic diversity of Mexico,
for example. That is because their cultures
have managed to integrate the indigenous con¬
tribution or, in the case of Cuba, that of the
Black world. This cultural pluralism, which
exists in Mexico just as it does in Ecuador or
Venezuela, means that there is little danger of
the kind of separatist implosion to be seen in
the Soviet Union, in Czechoslovakia or
Yugoslavia. I do not think one can talk of
"Balkanization" in our situation. It is just not
a Latin American problem.
Our own form of "Balkanization" is of
a different kind. It comes into play when it
is a question of going beyond the concept of
the nation to create supra-national regional
groupings. This is an area in which we have
failed.
We have had neither the imagination nor
the political will to transform our common
cultural ties into political union. The contrast
between the cultural unity and the political
and economic disunity of Latin America is dis¬
turbing, because it represents a failure, a void.
We have been unable to achieve union because
we have too often sought or imposed develop¬
ment models that bear little relationship to our
cultural realities.
What is lacking is the will to bridge the
gap between our continent's cultural cohesive-
ness and some form of political union and eco¬
nomic co-operation, and thus to transform our
rich cultural affinities into an equally fertile
political and economic unity.
Remember what José Martí said: "The
country that only does business with one
other country is headed for slavery." We have
to open up contacts with everyonewith the
United States, the European Community, the
countries of the Pacific and amongst ourselves.
We must develop integrated free-trade zones,
as Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil have done
with Mercosur. There is also the reactivation
of the Andean Pact, the first steps towards a
common market linking the United States,
Canada and Mexico, and the Central
American countries' attempts at union. Great
opportunities for action exist both within and
outside the region and for providing openings
amongst ourselves and to the world.
To turn to your work as a writer, your sto¬
ries are strongly marked by the myths ofMex¬
ican history. While these myths have given
the country its identity, is it not possible that
their cultural weight may stand in the way
of desirable progress and jeopardize the
changes that society must inevitably make?
The myths are hardly obstacles to develop¬
ment, since once they have been transformed
into literature they become ideal instruments
for the essential task of reinventing the past.
This is the task of the novelist, whereas that
of the historian is to make a faithful recon¬
struction of it. The novelist takes it upon him¬
self to reinvent in depth a world that must
come alive again, for the future only exists if
the past does also.
True myths are living things that evolve,
contradict and jostle each other. Dynamic
rather than inert, myths influence each other,
and their contradictions reflect the contradic¬
tions of the real world.
My purpose has always been to bring the
pre-Columbian myths into confrontation with
the realities of contemporary Mexico. The past
is alive, it is all around us. It is not just by
chance that the remains of the Great Aztec
temple were found midway between those
two symbolic monuments of Mexico City, the
Cathedral and the Presidential Palace. A whole
culture, a whole way of life is present there
and in the traces of sacrificial blood as well.
One cannot understand Mexico without
10

knowing something of its past. This, no doubt,
holds true for other countries. In the absence
of myths, countries like Argentina, where
indigenous cultures have had little influence,
have found ways of inventing myths. In this
area, a dialectical, open approach is necessary.
It is clear that the void of the past must
be filled. We have to fill in the gaps, the
yawning hiatuses in a history that has not been
told, assimilated and handed down. In Latin
America people have often sought to fill these
gaps with dreams of utopia. In so doing, they
are resorting to imagination to create the past,
in order better to handle the present and the
future. As UNESCO's Director-General,
Federico Mayor, once put it: "We have to be
capable of imagining the past if we are to be
able to have a clear vision of the future."
This year, 1992, we shall be celebrating
thefive-hundredth anniversary ofthe meeting
of two worlds.
This will not be a matter for celebration,
but for reflection, and we should avoid falling
into the excesses of criticism or hyperbole to
which summary consideration of this anniver¬
sary could lead us. The past should not be seen
either as a succession of crimes or as a para¬
dise lost. It has to be recognized that we and
all that we have achieved over the past 500
years are the outcome of that brutal
encounter. There was a clash of cultures, but
the catastrophe of the Conquest gave birth to
us Amerindians. In a sense we have jointly
forged the culture that now unites us.
We are the product of intermixing and of
the Spanish language that most of us speak.
We come from a Catholic culture, but one
impregnated with religious syncretism, rich in
Indian and African influences, that cannot be
understood stripped of its indigenous, and
later Black, masks. As the Mexican poet
Ramón López Velarde put it: "We bear the
face of the Occident, tinged with the tint of
Moor and Aztec", and, I would add, of Jew
and African, Roman and Greek.
The indigenous culture of the Americas
has not disappeared, any more than it has tri¬
umphed. Let us say that it has survived to
become an integral part of what José Lezama
Lima calls the "Counter-Conquest"the
Indian and African response to the European
grip on America. The racial purity of the con¬
quistadors lasted no longer than the first night
of love between a Spaniard and an Indian
woman. It is this intimate contact between
men and women that distinguishes the Iberian
conquest from other colonial régimes that did
not experience ethnic mixing.
That is why there is no reason to lock our
gaze on the initial disaster of the discovery and
the Conquest, as some historians would have
us do. Instead we should be asking questions
about our identity, about who we are, and
trying to come up with the answers.
We cannot turn our backs on the culture
we have forged over 500 years without
renouncing all cultural activity for the coming
500 years. That is why I think that 1992
should be less a year of celebration than of
reflection on what we have been able to
achieve, so that we can go forward rather than
isten to the siren voices of extremism.
A final question, what will happen after
1992? -
The coming years will present great
problems, some of them on a planetary scale
(I am thinking of the environment), and others
stemming from the clash of unfamiliar cultures
and from the tide of migration (of manpower,
of peoples) from South to North and from
East to West. I am less concerned about con¬
frontations between nations than about cul¬
tural problems arising from fear of what seems
alien .
I believe that the next millennium will
fully justify the existence of UNESCO and of
the world's other cultural organizations. It is
within them that the great enigmas of
knowledge may be resolved. Will we one day
learn how to harmonize science, politics and
moral values and to achieve this without exag¬
gerated idealism or resort to criminal violence?
Will we be able to break out of the vicious
circle of illusion and disillusion, of progress
and violence, and replace it by a more com¬
prehensive view of humanity, one I am
tempted to call "the tragic vision"?
Happiness and history rarely coincide. We
must be wary, but not give up the fight
altogether. We have to defend and cultivate
life and the values that make it worthwhile-
art and love, solidarity and culture. Just
because we do not know if we shall succeed
is no reason for not trying.
11
