by France Bequette
24
The very word "nuclear" tends
to give people the shivers. It
brings up memories of the
atomic bomb and the tragedy of
Hiroshima. Since 1986, it has
also been associated with the
Chernobyl disaster. Because nuclear
powerwas first used for military pur¬
poses, it was long surrounded by an
atmosphere of secrecy which ham¬
pered communication about its civi¬
lian applications. To counter the
negative image of nuclear energy,
authorities promoted it as "clean",
and were later at a loss when atten¬
tion was drawn to the growing prob¬
lem of nuclear waste. Environ¬
mentalists became extremely
alarmed and stagedviolent demon¬
strations whenever the construction
of a nuclear plant was announced.
Despite their protests, 530 plants
have been built worldwide, 112 in
the United States, 57 in France and
46 in the former Soviet Union (the
planet's three most "nuclear" coun¬
tries). In addition, 84 more plants
are under construction or at the
planning stage and 17 have been
ordered. It is therefore important to
know whether this type ofenergy is
compatible with the quality of life
we expect from the future.
Energy generation and consump¬
tion have become indicators of de¬
velopment and symbols ofprosperity.
In order to run factories and cars,
and to light and heat houses, we have
coal, gas and oil, the so-called non¬
renewable fossil fuels. Dams are used
to produce hydro-electricity. The
use of firewood to produce energy
has practically disappeared, except
in the poorest countries.
According to figures provided
by the French Atomic Energy
Commission, humankind is thought
to have used 350 billion tonnes of
coal equivalent between 1850 and
1970. Taking into account the
constant increase in consumption,
projections indicate that coal reserves
are sufficient for another 300 years.
The projections for natural gas and oil
are shorter a mere 50 years. To get
an idea ofour appetite for energy, it
is instructive to consider that, if
energy consumed by humankind
during the Roman empire is repre
sented by a factor of 1 , the equivalent
figure for the early 1 800s would be 3;
today it would be 500. And demand
is constantly increasing. In France,
for instance, about 1 1 million fami¬
lies own one car, and more than 4.5
million have two or more.
After the two "oil shocks" of 1973
and 1979, there was a noticeable
but short-lived reduction in energy
demand. According to a recent report
on the greenhouse effect and its cli¬
matic consequences produced by
the French Academy of Sciences,
"Since the turn of the century, world
economic activity has increased
twentyfold. Industrial production
has increased 50 times and the
consumption of fossil fuels by30	
The expected doubling of world
population in the next 50 years
should have a much higher multi¬
plier effect on economic activity.
World production will have to
increase between five and ten times
to meet the legitimate needs and
aspirations of the Earth's 10 billion
inhabitants. This might seem to be
economic expansion on a colossal
scale and indeed it is. Yet it is
nothing more than the expression of
a continuing annual economic
growth rate of 3.2 to 4.7 per cent,
which is barely enough to reduce the
level ofpoverty in the ThirdWorld."
Energy production often involves
a breakdown of matter, emitting
potentially toxic gases or producing
solid wastes. Ever since the scien¬
tific community began to study the
greenhouse effect, combustion pro¬
ducing carbon dioxide (CO2) has
been under attack. The CO2 emitted
into the atmosphere absorbs solar
radiation and traps it, like the win¬
dows of a greenhouse, increasing
the surface temperature ofthe Earth.
CO2 is not the only greenhouse gas.
Methane, low altitude ozone,
nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulphur
dioxide (SO2) and chlorofluorocar-
bons (CFCs) all contribute to the
greenhouse effect. The consequence
of the greenhouse effect, according
to the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), could be a 1.5°
to 4°C rise in the temperature of the
planet, leading to climatic changes
and higher ocean levels.
A solar power
plant in California
(U.S.A.).
One way ofcombatting the green¬
house effect is to reduce fossil fuel
combustion. This is an important
point in the case made by defenders
ofnuclear energy. They claim that, at
least from a strictly environmental
point ofview, a nuclear plant is clean,
in the sense that it emits no green¬
house gases. The French electric uti¬
lity, Électricité de France, points out
that "Since 1980, whereas electricity
consumption increased by 50 per
cent, the substitution of nuclear
energy for coal and fuel has made it
possible to reduce CO2 emissions by
40 per cent, NOx emissions by 75 per
cent and SO2 emissions by 70 per
cent". The French Academy of
Sciences quotes a May 1990 report
published by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change establi¬
shed by the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) and UNEP,
which states that greenhouse-gas
emissions would have to be reduced
by at least 50 per cent to stabilize
atmospheric concentrations at their
1985 levels. In principle, this is pos¬
sible: "Ifall the industrialized coun¬
tries (OECD and East-European
countries) had the same energy effi¬
ciency rate (Gross Domestic
Product/ final energy consumption)
and the same proportion of nuclear
power in their energy production
mix as France, global CO2 emissions
would be less than 40 per cent of
what they are today." In tonnes of
carbon consumed per inhabitant per
year, comparative emissions for the
following countries or regions are:
France and Japan, 1.9; United
Kingdom, 2.8; Germany, 3.2; Eastern

Europe, close to 4; United States,
more than 5.
Does this mean that the "all
nuclear" energy option should be
promoted? Although this is some¬
times recommended, as a solution
"it would run up against obstacles
both financial (because of the capital
intensive nature of electricity pro¬
duced bynuclear power), and socio¬
political: reservations about nuclear
energy have not disappeared, and
the considerable impact of the
Chernobyl accident invites caution."
The Swedish example is signifi¬
cant here. Sweden's 12 nuclear
plants provided 45.9 per cent of the
country's electricity in 1990, and 51.6
per cent in 1991. In 1980, after a
referendum, the Swedish parliament
declared a moratorium, underwhich
all plants would be phased out
within 30 years, that is, by 2010.
When the first two groups of plants
are closed, the country will have an
energy shortfall of three billion KwH,
and energy conservation will not be
to make up the difference. By the
time all the plants are closed, the
figure will be 66 billion KwH. Noted
for their respect for the environment,
the Swedes only accept natural gas
and hydro-electric power, and even
here problems arise because public
opinion opposes the construction
of dams on the last important uns¬
poiled sites. Natural gas combustion
emits CO2 and methane.
Switzerland provides another illus¬
tration of the dilemma. Engineers
proposing to dig out a second
conduit for the Grande Dixence dam
in the Valais canton are being
opposed by representatives of the
Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF),
who are worried about what will
happen to the mass of rocks ex¬
tracted from the hole.
The problem of waste
So, is nuclear power the answer?
It's not that simple. For one thing,
various public and private organi¬
zations have found that radioacti¬
vity around nuclear plants has
increased, officially by 1 per cent.
Furthermore, environmentalists
claim that there has been a radioac¬
tive build-up in the food chain from
plankton to big fish due to the liquid
emissions from nuclear plants.
Furthermore, the transportation of
uranium ore and its transformation
into fuel are risky.
The most serious question raised,
however, has to do with nuclear
wastes. These are of three kinds.
TypeA, ofconsiderable volume but
only mildly radioactive, includes the
gloves and the lab-coats of plant,
The core of the
nuclear power
plant at
Gravelines In
northern France.
hospital and laboratory employees,
filters, mud and tools. It is "short¬
lived", which means it must be
monitored for 300 years. Type B is
material contaminated through
contact with nuclear fuel. It will be
radioactive for some 10,000 to 20,000
years. Type C is the most dangerous;
it includes material such as nep¬
tunium, which remains radioactive
for a million years.
What should be done with nuclear
waste? According to geologist Claude
Guillemin, a correponding member
of the French Academy of Sciences,
type A waste does not present any
problem: "We geologists work in the
very long term and feel we must take
responsibility for the distant future.
Soulaines (in the Aube department
in France) is an ideal spot. A land¬
locked island, it is isolated, observed
and protected, and sits on a sub¬
stratum we know well." Waste is
sealed in containers made of metal
or concrete that are carefully inven¬
toried. According to Armand
Foussat, executive director of the
Agence nationale française pour la
gestion des déchets radioactifs,
France's agency for radioactive waste
management, the United States,
Mexico, Japan, Korea, Taiwan and
Spain have all adopted this model.
Type B wastes can be treated in the
same way as those of type A, once the
most dangerous elements have been
removed.
The real problem lies with the
third category. "The radioactivity of
wastes of type C is Dantesque,"
continues Claude Guillemin.
"Should we stock them in the ocean
sediments? If we did, there would
be a risk that they would re-emerge,
still very radioactive, through under¬
water fissures or volcanoes. Should
we send them into orbit around the
Sun? If we did there would be the
risk of an accident. Why not store
them temporarilyon the Earth's sur¬
face in "super Soulaines" for at least
a hundred years. Thatwould leave us
time to increase our knowledge of
the respective qualities of granite,
clay, salt or schist before thinking of
burying them deep underground."
Promoting one kind of energy
rather than another involves making
choices about the kind ofsocietywe
want to live in. In the meantime we
can make a start by conserving as
much energy as we can.
FRANCEBEQUETTE is a Franco-Americanjournalistspe¬
cializing in environmental questions. Since 1985 she has
been associated with the WANAD-Unesco training pro¬
grammeforAfrican news-agencyjournalists.
