UNESCO'S FIRST 45 YEARS
by Michel Conil Lacoste
mi
General policy
The Second World Congress of UNESCO
Clubs sets up a World Federation of UNESCO
Clubs and Associations.
The ABC ofCopyright is published. It will later
be translated and published in many languages.
Education
In the framework of the International Year
of Disabled Persons, UNESCO and the Spanish
government organize at Torremolinos (Spain) a
World Congress on Actions and Strategies for
Education, Prevention and Integration of the
handicapped. UNESCO later helps to implement
in the field of education the World Action
Programme launched as part of the UN Decade
of Disabled Persons (1983-1992).
Exact and natural sciences
A conference and an exhibition are held in
Paris to mark the tenth anniversary of the Man
and the Biosphere programme.
The protection of Venice and its lagoon are
discussed at a scientific gathering.
Culture
An exhibition and a seminar organized in Paris
in collaboration with the Organization of the
Islamic Conference celebrate the commencement
of the 15th century of the Hegira.
An international symposium marks the 100th
anniversary of the birth of the theologian,
philosopher and palaeontologist Teilhard de
Chardin.
A working group is set up to study the prepa¬
ration of a General History of the Caribbean.
A meeting of experts on Celtic cultures takes
place in Dublin.
With UNESCO support, Barbados hosts the
4th Caribbean Festival of Creative Arts.
Community radio,
a short-cut to development
Communication
With technical assistance from UNESCO, a
citizens-band FM radio station goes on the air
from Homa Bay (Kenya). Other, similar stations
will be opened at Guirandurokotte (Sri Lanka)
in 1984, and on the Pacific island of Niue in 1986,
the latter utilizing solar power.
The Asian News Network, a consortium of
press agencies, is set up in Kuala Lumpur.
Events
The centenary of the birth of Pablo Picasso
is celebrated at UNESCO's Paris headquarters.
Joan Miró designs a commemorative medal,
I Above, dancers perform at a gala evening in
honour of Bolshol star Galina Ulanova held at
UNESCO headquarters on 16 November 1981 for
the benefit of handicapped children.
Below, a medal designed by Joan Miró and
produced to commemorate the centenary of the
birth of Pablo Picasso.
offering the original design to UNESCO through
the International Association of Art, of which
he is honorary president.
A gala evening is held as a tribute to Bolshoi
star dancer Galina Ulanova, for the benefit of
UNESCO's programme for handicapped
children.
1
General policy
Meeting in extraordinary session, the General
Conference adopts a Medium-Term Plan for
1984-1989 that incorporates 14 major
programmes predicated on an updated analysis
of world problems. The 14th programme marks
a new departure by grouping together for the first
time all UNESCO's activities to improve the
status of women.
UNESCO now has 158 Member States.
Culture
In Mexico City, the World Conference on
Cultural Policies sums up and renews current
thinking on cultural problems in the modern
world. It adopts the Mexico Declaration on Cul¬
tural Policy and recommends a World Decade
for Cultural Development, stressing the interac¬
tion between culture and development.

Social sciences
Communication
A World Congress on Books is held in London
and adopts a sixfold plan of action that is later
confirmed at the 1983 General Conference.
UNESCO signs an agreement with the Arab
Gulf Programme for United Nations Develop¬
ment Organizations (AGFUND) on a $2-million
trust fund for the development of communica¬
tions in Africa.
The Pan African News Agency (PANA) is
established in Dakar with the assistance of
UNESCO, under a programme of support for
regional news agencies that also extends to Latin
America and the Arab countries. Financial
backing for PANA comes from AGFUND, from
the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and from UNESCO via the Interna¬
tional Programme for the Development of Com¬
munication (IPDC). Other agencies are supported
by a fund in trust established by the Federal
Republic of Germany.
Events
Allen Ginsberg, Breyten Breytenbach, Kazuko
Shiraishi, Sony Labou Tan'si, Thiago de Mello,
Lawrence Ferlinghetti, Andrei Voznesenski and
other poets contribute to "War on War", a poetry
gala held at UNESCO headquarters to celebrate
the 34th anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.
A forum of Asian writers, organized in co¬
operation with the Asian Federation of UNESCO
Clubs and Associations, meets in Tokyo to discuss
"Cultural Identity". Participants include Ai Qing
(China), Yasushi Inoue (Japan) and Faiz Ahmad
Faiz (Pakistan).
im
Participants in "War on War", a poetry evening
held at UNESCO on 10 December 1982 to mark
the 24th anniversary of the Declaration of Human
Rights. From left to right: Andrei Voznesenski,
Jean-Jacques Lebel, Michèle Lalonde, Catherine
Ringer, Mahmoud Darwish, Jean-Pierre Faye and
Jean Metellus.
UNESCO, U.S. Secretary of State George P.
Shultz announces his country's intention to with¬
draw from the Organization.
Education
An Intergovernmental Conference on Educa¬
tion for International Understanding, Co¬
operation and Peace and Education Relating to
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, with
a view to Developing a Climate of Opinion
Favourable to the Strengthening of Security and
Disarmament is held in Paris.
An international congress to mark the thir¬
tieth anniversary of UNESCO's Associated
Schools project is held in Sofia (Bulgaria).
M A Round Table is held in Paris to mark the
100th anniversary of the birth of the philosopher
Karl Jaspers.
Culture
The latest catalogue of the UNESCO Collec¬
tion of Representative Works, UNESCO's
literary translations programme, lists more than
900 works from 90 different literatures; the
authors published include 11 Nobel Prizewinners.
The main aim of the programme is the transla¬
tion of classics of world literature into widely-
used languages, notably French and English.
Examples from the catalogue include Cao Zhan's
Dream of the Red Chamber translated from
Chinese into French, Speculative Hymns of the
Veda rendered into French from the original San¬
skrit, a selection of Octavio Paz's poems trans¬
lated into English, and an anthology of Hun¬
garian poetry translated into Spanish. Con¬
versely, Shakespeare and Hemingway have been
translated into Indonesian, Plato and Goethe into
Tamil and Cervantes into Hindi.
Restoration work at Borobudur (Indonesia) is
completed, bringing to an end the most impor¬
tant programme of its kind since the interna¬
tional campaign to save the monuments of
Nubia.
Communication
A first meeting of experts on Co-operation
among Regional Communication Training Insti¬
tutions is held in Paris.
As part of World Communications Year,
UNESCO supports an experimental exchange of
television news transmissions by satellite
involving 25 countries in Africa, Asia and the
Arab world.
General policy
In a letter to the Director-General of The temple of Borobudur (Indonesia), which was restored under UNESCO auspices.

| A fine harvest Is reaped from Improved
varieties of wild cranberry, a species protected
in the South Atlantic Coastal Plain Biosphere Reserve, USA.
The McLuhan Teleglobe Canada Award is
created under UNESCO's patronage. Offered
every two years, it aims to reward works or
actions of individuals or groups that "have con¬
tributed in an exceptional manner to furthering
a better understanding of the influence exerted
by communications media and technology on
society in general and in particular on its cultural,
artistic and scientific activities".
Events
At the inaugural session of the 22nd session
of the General Conference, François Mitterrand,
President of the host country, states: "Thus we
find UNESCO returning to its original source
of inspiration: to build in spite of storms; to build
a world in which hope will find its place".
King Juan Carlos I of Spain and Nelson
Mandela (imprisoned at the time) share the first
Simón Bolívar Prize. Established jointly by
UNESCO and Venezuela on the basis of a
Venezuelan fund, the award seeks to honour
those who, in the spirit of Simón Bolívar, "have
made an outstanding contribution to the
freedom, independence and dignity of peoples
and to the strengthening of solidarity among
nations, or who have fostered their development
or facilitated the quest for a new international
economic, social and cultural order".
Three empty chairs
M
General policy
UNESCO's regular budget for 1984-85
amounts to $374 million (about two-thirds the
price of a nuclear aircraft-carrier), of which
38% is allocated to education. Extra-budgetary
resources for the same biennium amount to $231
million. The budget for 1981-1983 had been $430
million.
The Executive Board establishes a Temporary
Committee to recommend ways of improving
the functioning of the Organization. The
Director-General sets up four consultative
working-groups to study staff management,
budgeting, evaluation techniques and public
information, and a fifth to conduct a critical anal¬
ysis of the programme.
In December, a year after giving notice of its
intention to do so, the United States withdraws
from UNESCO.
The United Kingdom and Singapore give notice
of their intention to leave the Organization.
Education
Campaigning for Literacy, a report prepared
for UNESCO by the International Council for
Adult Education, is published. It describes and
evaluates literacy campaigns in eight countries.
The "African languagesHorizon 2000"
project is introduced as part of a ten-year plan
to promote African languages, particularly in
education, communication and social life.
1984-85: As part of the "Education for All"
programme, a Major Project in the Field of Edu¬
cation in Latin America and the Caribbean and
a Regional Programme for the Eradication of
Illiteracy in Africa are launched.
The Action Plan for Biosphere Reserves is
adopted. Biosphere reserves are zones designated
under the Man and the Biosphere programme
for the conservation of the plant and animal
genetic heritage, for research into human use of
ecosystems, for recording environmental change
and for education and training. In 1984 there are
252 Reserves in 66 countries.
Culture
The first meeting of the editorial committee
preparing a General History ofLatin America is
held in Buenos Aires in the former home of the
noted Argentine woman of letters Victoria
Ocampo, who had generously bequeathed the
building to UNESCO.
A meeting of experts is held in Rio de Janeiro
to discuss the preservation and development of
handicrafts in the modern world.
The 5th International Congress of Southeast
European Studies is held.
Communication
With the co-operation of France and the
Friedrich Eben Foundation (Fed. Rep. of Ger¬
many), a mission is sent to the Pacific to prepare
the first sub-regional project for the training of
radio broadcasters and technicians.
im
General policy
The 23rd session of the General Conference
is held in Sofia (Bulgaria). In his opening speech,
the President of the Conference, Nikolai
Todorov (Bulgaria), states that "UNESCO has
held firm. It has stood firm while moving with
and adapting to the times, but without ever
denying that which constitutes at once its basis
and its ultimate purpose."
For the 1986-87 biennium, the General Con¬
ference votes a budget of $307 million, later
reduced to $289 million after the withdrawal of
the United Kingdom and Singapore from
UNESCO.
The General Conference takes note of the for¬
mation of UNESCO support groups in Spain,
India, the U.S.A., the United Kingdom, France,
Latin America and Africa, and invites the inter¬
national community to intensify its activity in
this respect.
In his closing address to the 23rd session, the
Director-General refers to "the irreplaceable role
which the intellectual and scientific communi¬
ties play on behalf of UNESCO", and appeals
to them "to find their rightful place again within
UNESCO, in accordance with the intentions of
the Organization's founding fathers". In an
earlier speech, he had recalled that the original
idea of UNESCO's founders had been that the
intellectual community should form one of the
three roots that fortify "the forum for human
communications that is UNESCO", the other
two being the political realities of Member States
and the dedication and competence of an inter¬
national secretariat.
The withdrawal of the United Kingdom and
Singapore from UNESCO takes effect.
A study of UNESCO's work entitled
UNESCO on the eve ofits fortieth anniversary is
published.
Education
Although there are still 889 million illiterates
in the world, the rate of illiteracy in proportion
to world population has fallen from 37.1% in
1970 to 27.7% in 1985.
Two joint UNESCO/IAU (International
Association of Universities) programmes are
launched: an international inventory of research

projects on the problems of higher education, and
a series of studies on the impact of satellite tech¬
nology on university teaching and research.
Exact and natural sciences
An Intergovernmental Informatics Programme
is launched to improve access to information
technology in countries that do not possess such
technology.
Social sciences
As part of International Youth Year, the
World Congress on Youth is held in Barcelona
in July.
Consecutive Round Tables are held on al-
Ghazali, the great Muslim theologian and
philosopher, and on Maimonides, Aristotelian
philosopher and Talmudic scholar.
Culture
The 15th UNESCO travelling exhibition of
reproductions of works of art is devoted to Slavic
art. Its two successors will be devoted to Budd¬
hist and Celtic art respectively.
Communication
Awarded for the first time, the IPDC-
UNESCO Prize for Rural Communication goes
to India's "Kheda" project, which uses traditional
forms of cultural expression to create audio-visual
An award-winning entry In an International
competition for young architects organized by
UNESCO on the theme "Tomorrow's Habitat".
Winning projects were exhibited at the
international exhibition held at Tsukuba (Japan)
In 1985,	
programmes and also relies on advanced telecom¬
munications satellite technology.
A Symposium on the Cultural, Social and Eco¬
nomic Impact of the New Communication Tech¬
nologies is held in Rome.
Events
UNESCO organizes a worldwide competition
for young architects on the theme of
"Tomorrow's Habitat" in the framework of an
international exhibition held at Tsukuba in Japan.
UNESCO in troubled waters
m
General policy
Following budgetary cuts resulting from the
withdrawal of the United States, the United
Kingdom and Singapore, 800 posts are abolished
or "put in reserve" in the UNESCO Secretariat.
With half a dozen exceptions, the staff members
affected are redeployed within the Secretariat.
Meeting in Addis Ababa, the 22nd summit
conference of the Organization of African Unity
pays tribute to the Director-General and hopes
he may continue to serve the cause of interna¬
tional co-operation at the head of UNESCO.
The 8th summit conference of the Non-
aligned Countries movement affirms its total sup¬
port for UNESCO.
The amount received by UNESCO up to 1986
from AGFUND is almost $15 million, benefiting
30 projects in Africa, Latin America, the Carib¬
bean, Asia and the Arab countries.
Following the People's Republic of China
(1985), the Republic of the Maldives becomes the
90th state to ratify the World Heritage Conven¬
tion. 216 sites on 5 continents now feature on
the World Heritage List.
During the two years 1984-85, UNESCO car¬
ried out an estimated one thousand operational
projects, organized 838 instructional and
refresher courses attended by 30,000 specialists,
devoted almost $30 million to its major scien¬
tific programmes, contributed to the education
of 3,000 young people and launched or continued
20 international campaigns for the safeguard of
historic monuments and sites.
Since its creation, UNESCO has published
more than 7,000 titles, covering all its fields of
competence, in 70 languages and 150 countries.
Education
StCClO
ai^^ .L
GUATEMALA
»» "l
uHiwi«'"'
PMUTALU»
The Regional Programme for the Universali-
zation and Renewal of Primary Education and
the Eradication of Adult Illiteracy in Asia and
the Pacific is prepared.
Exact and natural sciences
The Intergovernmental Committee for the
Intergovernmental Informatics Programme holds
its first session.
Social sciences
UNESCO's contributions to the International
Year of Peace include a Yearbook on Peace and
Conflict Studies, which lists studies produced
throughout the world on the educational, scien¬
tific and cultural factors favourable to peace, and
the 7th edition of the World Directory of Peace
Research and Training Institutions. Other activi¬
ties targeted primarily at young people make use
of the network of UNESCO Associated Schools
and UNESCO Clubs.
Culture
The United Nations Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC) transmits to the UN
UNESCO's projected action programme for the
possible proclamation by the General Assembly
of the United Nations at its 41st session of a
World Decade for Cultural Development, under
the joint 'auspices of the UN and UNESCO. The
launch is scheduled for 1988.
The 48th congress of PEN International is
held in New York with the participation of
UNESCO.
Events
Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber, Andrew
Young, Abdus Salam, Mahdi Elmandjra, Kobo
Abe and others take part in a Round Table on
"The Future of International Co-operation: Per¬
spectives for the 21st Century", held in Tokyo.
UNESCO's 40th anniversary is celebrated
worldwide. In London it coincides with the offi¬
cial founding of a "Friends of UNESCO" group.
Ceremonies are also held in the United States,
notably organized by "Americans for the
Universality of UNESCO". At Paris head¬
quarters, the World Federation of UNESCO
Clubs and Associations organizes an "Open
Door on the UNESCO Movement" involving
some 250 representatives of UNESCO Clubs and
Associated Schools from 40 countries.
Communication
UNESCO's problems attract widespread
media attention. Partly as a result of misunder¬
standings, controversy continues about
UNESCO's position regarding communications.
It dies down three years later with the abandon¬
ment of the concept of a "New World Informa¬
tion and Communication Order".
TO BE CONTINUED
