Two great
traditions
by Wang Bin
Attempting to understand the
European Christian tradition of
thought is a complex and
challenging experience for the
Chinese mind
Above, Confucius
(c. 551-479 BC).
18th-century Chinese
water-colour.
Above right, the birth of
Eve, as depicted in The Book
of Birds, a 12th-century
illuminated manuscript.
THIS article endeavours to answer a
difficult question: How does Christianity
differ (beyond purely religious differ¬
ences) from the Chinese tradition? Focusing
on collective thought patterns, I shall attempt
to explore a number of non-religious pheno¬
mena that are deeply rooted in Christian doc¬
trines but are notably absent from Chinese
intellectual life. It is these phenomena, the
article will argue, that not only differentiate
Western culture from Chinese culture, but also
illuminate the contributions Christianity has
made historically to the general development of
the human mind.
A transcendent deity emerges when the
potential believer separates himself or herself 61

St. Francis, detail of a fresco
by CImabue (1240) in the
church of St. Francis at
Assisi, Italy
mentally from the external world and attempts
to establish a system of interpretation capable
of affording a final answer to all the mysteries
represented by nature. What impresses a Chi¬
nese reader of the Bible is not so much the
image of God as His relationship to human¬
kind. The notion of "covenant" is particularly
difficult for the Chinese mind to grasp. Ac¬
cording to Genesis, man, created by God, sepa¬
rates himself from God through the Fall and
devotes life-long strivings to an attempt to be
reunited with God in another world. The cove-
62
Wang Bin, Professor of
Language and Culture at the
University of Canton, has
published several
comparative analytical
studies of Chinese, Japanese
and European culture. His
recent works include Italian
Cappuccino and a Chinese
Tea Drinker: An Encounter of
Two Imaginations (1990).
nant between God and man not only holds out
the hope of achieving that ambition but pre¬
supposes a separation of man mentally from
the Truth, the Good and Beauty, the whole
external world pertaining to or created by God.
As for visible cosmic nature, God encourages
man to subjugate it by exercising "dominion
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the
air, and over every living thing that moves
upon the Earth" (Genesis 1:28).
Stripped of its doctrinal content, the cove¬
nant reveals a deep-rooted thought pattern
whose archetype can be traced back to ancient
Greece and serves as a unique link between the
pagan tradition and contemporary intellectual
life. The characteristic features of this pattern
are, on the one hand, the detachment of man
(the observer) from the external world (the
observed), and on the other a constant effort to
achieve the final yet impossible recombination.
Ultimately, man is separated from himself as an
object of study. No revolution in the West has
ever altered this basic thought pattern.
The Chinese counterpart to this thought pat¬
tern is its precise opposite. In defining man's
relationship to the universe, Confucius, Lao
Tzu and his modern critics share a single frame¬
work: that of man in the universe. The term
"universe" refers mainly to cosmic nature in
Taoism and to society in Confucianism. (The
former finds its fullest expression in artistic
creation while the latter has its roots in Chinese
political-moral doctrines.) The man-in-the-uni-
verse thought pattern has survived many gen¬
erations of revolutionary change. The overlap¬
ping shadows of Confucius and Lao Tzu still
guide the thought processes of the Chinese
intelligentsia and circumscribe their imagination.
Transcendency
versus immanency
When the Chinese and the Western traditions
meet, the Chinese mind tends to appreciate the
Greeks and to reject Christianity, disregarding
the intellectual process which made the transi¬
tion from paganism to Christianity possible.
To the modern Chinese, passages in the Bible
that encourage the conquest of nature might be
acceptable. But the results of the separation
described above go much further than the
exploitation of cosmic nature and do not form
part of the Chinese mental landscape. They
include: a persistent quest for the ontological
meaning of human existence; a way of veri¬
fying the truth, divine or scientific, which in
the historical continuum encompasses not
merely modern individualism but a deep
Christian sense of the individual's soul
identified only with God; man's challenge to
the Almighty (as in the story of Job); the for¬
mula "I think, therefore I am"; the progress
from equality before God to equality before
the law; a contractual tradition that binds two
separate parts: God and man, a King and his
subjects, a state and its citizens; and so on. To
understand these ideas, the Chinese mind has
to adapt to a new perspective.
In addition to a mental state preoccupied
with the separation of man from God, a sense
of transcendency is indispensable to Christian
faith. Without it, it would be impossible to
conceive of reunion in the other world.
As a concept imported from the West, trans¬
cendency is frequently used by Chinese scholars
as well as Western sinologists to describe Taoism.
This conceptual misplacement, a common phe¬
nomenon in contemporary Chinese intellectual

r
"An Ascetic in Meditation".
Painting on silk of the Yuan
period (13th century).
:*St.
life, neglects the basic fact that Chinese "trans¬
cendency", restricted as it is to the "man-in-
the-universe" framework, is totally different
from what is meant by transcendency in its
strict Western sense.
Christian transcendency takes the indivi¬
dual (his soul) as the point of departure as well
as the final goal of fulfilment. It rises above
objects which reveal themselves to experience
and moves towards God or the absolute truth
in the other world. It focuses on the fulfilment
of the individual and points to the infinite. Chi¬
nese "transcendency", on the other hand,
requires the individual to transcend himself so
as to merge into nature or society. When there
is perfect harmony between man' and the uni¬
verse, the absolute truth can be grasped
through sense-perception and intuitive reason.
To the Chinese mind, the truth is here and to
the Christian mind, the truth is there. The two
truths are incommensurable, though they may
agree on some specific points.
The most obvious manifestation of this dif¬
ference is to be found in theoretical reflection
on artistic creation. From Plato on, classical
theories of art and literature attribute the
source of inspiration to the divine or the super¬
natural. In modern times some theorists have
seen inspiration as originating in the irrational
self (the emotions or the subconscious) as
opposed to the rational self, thus postulating a
microcosm within human nature of the separa¬
tion of man from God. Both these ideas involve
a transcendent movement from one opposite
towards the other. Modernism seeks pure truth
in life, a truth which, it maintains, has been pol¬
luted and distorted by civilized society. But it
remains a truth which is always there, not here.
All this contrasts sharply with the way in
which the Chinese understand inspiration. In
ancient Chinese, there is no such term as inspi¬
ration because such an idea is totally absent
from Chinese spiritual and intellectual life.
However, classical Chinese theories of art and
literature do describe a mental state in which
the artist suddenly finds himself confronted
with a spiritual spark triggered off as a result of
the inexplicable harmonization between the
artist and his object to be expressed.
Scholars of comparative literature who lack
philosophical insight have simplified this situa¬
tion and wrongly described it by attaching to it
another Western label, "expressionism" or
"empathy". Chinese expressionism, if we must
adopt this term, emphasizes a constant reci¬
procal movement and recognition between
subject and object within a shared space, the
universe. It is two in one. As for the source of
inspiration, the difference might be summa¬
rized as inspiration out of ontological transcen¬
dency versus inspiration out of cosmological
immanence.
63

64
To illustrate this difference, let us imagine
two classical pictures: a Western figure painting
and a Chinese wash painting. In the latter, the
landscape often occupies almost the whole
space with one or several figures relegated into
obscurity. A Western connoisseur might
misunderstand the overall arrangement as a
suppression of individuality. On the other
hand, the nimbus around the head of a beau¬
tiful medieval or Renaissance figure often
puzzles the Chinese mind. The setting is beau¬
tiful, so is the figure. But what is the point of
that small halo, a visual cliché? A readily found
explanation is Western superstition. If only
both sides would understand that appreciation
of different mysteries demands different pers¬
pectives as well as different imaginations!
However, from the Chinese point of view, the
challenge of Christian transcendency is more
than an image of unfamiliar beauty.
The relevance of Christian transcendency to
the general orientation of Western philosophy
and modern intellectual life cannot be overesti¬
mated. Kant, in his Critique of Pure Reason,
where he is concerned with modern epistemo-
logy or scientific knowledge, denies transcen- .
dent knowledge, that is, knowledge which goes
beyond the limit of experience. Such know¬
ledge belongs to the noumenon, the thing-in-
itself, or, to use the Christian expression, God.
But in his Critique of Practical Reason, Kant
tells us that moral thought and in particular
considerations about human freedom demand
reference to a noumenal self. Hence a famous
Kantian principle of man as the end, never only
as the means. It is on this transcendent specula¬
tion that modern liberal thinkers have built
various arguments about the freedom of the
individual which constitute the starting point
of Western political philosophy. Can we
understand this Kantian "categorical impera¬
tive" without a sense of transcendency? Is it
not true that Christian transcendency has in the
past two thousand years cultivated an intellec¬
tual atmosphere whose impact upon modern
society transcends religion itself?
The relevance of transcendency to the
natural sciences is equally important. Always
pointing to the infinite, it acts as a force which
constantly drives human imagination and cre¬
ativity forward. It is said that the Chinese mind
is capable of creating or absorbing new tech¬
nology but is not so efficient in creating or
internalizing new science. I would not go as far
as that, but history has proved that the remark
is not without foundation. It takes transcen¬
dency as well as abstraction to make a scientific
mind. Unfortunately, in everyday Chinese
conversation and in the mass media, science
and technology are not differentiated. This
matches another confusion: the equation of
religion and superstition.
What is versus what-ought-to-be
When we discuss the Western tradition, we
Chinese are often confronted with a seemingly
inexplicable dichotomy between the moral man
and the intellectual man, a distinction first
made by Matthew Arnold who referred to the
two elements involved as, respectively, "the
forces of Hebraism and Hellenism". This gives
the misleading impression that the Greek mind
is concerned with "What-Is" while the Chris¬
tian mind, like that of Confucius, is oriented
towards "What-Ought-To-Be". I would argue
that What-Is is characteristic of both the Greek
and the Christian traditions.
Like Aristotle's "substance", God as a cate¬
gory is characterized by three priorities: know¬
ledge priority God is the Absolute truth or
the subject and purpose of understanding;

definition priority God is the definition or the
subject in terms of logic while all the others are
predicates; and time priority God is the Being
independent of and determinant of all other
beings. Without this combination of epistemo-
logy, logic and ontology as a prerequisite,
Christian love and good works are meaningless.
Modern Chinese intellectuals feel sympathy
for Christian charity and works but many of
them reject god as a term imagined through
superstition. In the past ten years or so many of
them have talked loudly about the importance
of "transforming the traditional thought pat¬
tern", but what they mean by "thought pattern"
has turned out to be economic, political or
moral ideas. While they have been busy intro¬
ducing Western ideas to replace Chinese ones,
they have actually paid little attention to the
Zen
(8 cm x 66 cm, 1991).
Mixed media on canvas by
the French artist
Jean-Pierre Bourquin.
thought pattern which supports those ideas.
Thus we have a coin with two sides: Cathayan
centricity on one side and wholesale Westerni¬
zation on the other. This is the inevitable result
of a three-thousand-year long tradition in which
epistemology has yet to come to maturity.
Doubtless, Christianity also experienced
domination by What-Ought-To-Be. For more
than a thousand years, the spirit of the Church
ruled the Western mind. It monopolized the
interpretation of the Bible and institutionalized
the Christian world into a hierarchy of terror.
The Reformation was of profound significance
in that it removed the Church as the mediator
between God and man. When man confronts
directly what he believes, he is free to pursue
What-Is. Without this spiritual and intellectual
liberation, the capitalist spirit and Protestant
ethics could not have made a new world. Max
Weber should have added two significant
points to his analysis of the rise of Protestan¬
tism. Firstly, that the re-establishment of What-
Is is predetermined by the separation of man
from God, which not only gives rise to a reli¬
gious revolution but nurtures modern episte¬
mology which, in turn, challenges that religion.
Secondly, that any faith or ideal, no matter how
perfect it is, will inevitably decline in popula¬
rity if it is institutionalized into an interpreta-
tional hierarchy in order to control freedom of
thought. The second point is more than a
matter of thought pattern. Its far-reaching
significance is a powerful challenge to any type
of authoritarian institution.
The universal
The above argument presents Christianity as a
challenge to the Chinese mind. It does not
imply that Christianity or the West are uni¬
versal. If they were it would be impossible to
explain Chinese prosperity in the past and its
predictable possibility in the future. What,
then, is the universal? It seems to be a mis¬
leading and even dangerous question, similar to
"What is God?" or "What is the absolute
truth?" A more acceptable formulation is that
of unity in diversity. Unity does not mean
conformity, nor does diversity mean the
coexistence of independent but discrete ele¬
ments. How can unity in diversity be achieved?
I see it as a kind of challenge. It is a mutual
exposure to new dimensions and perspectives, a
constant discovery of complementary factors in
otherness and, finally, a rediscovery of oneself.
It is a dialectical movement towards reciprocal
recognition of different traditions and thought
patterns. Even if there is no contact for the time
being, the challenge remains. Our task is to
turn potentiality into actuality. The process is
endless. It is in this sense that I take Christia¬
nity as a challenge to the Chinese mind. O 65
