THE UNESCO COURIER DECEMBER 1992
EDITORIAL
Groundsforhope
by France Bequette
1f\(\Ç\will be remembered as the year of the Earth Summit at
MM/fiio. But all the talk ofgreat global threats and the major
V v rj Resolutions (which will often be hard to implement) that
were adopted should not eclipse the more modest projects, those
that work, but are rarely mentioned.
Some of these activities have been initiated by Unesco. This is
the case, for example, of projects for the establishment of news
agencies in West Africa (WANAD), Central Africa (CANAD) and
Southern and Eastern Africa (SENEAD) which, among other
things, have offered manyjournalists the opportunity ofacquiring
knowledge and understanding ofenvironmental issues. Other pro¬
jects are the result of individual initiatives. This, for instance, was
how the PIRATTES project took shape (see page 26). A young salt-
marsh workerfrom Brittany, France, on holiday in Benin, explained
how back where he lived, in Guérande, salt is extracted from sea-
water by the Sun and the wind. In Benin, ocean-salt production
depended on fire. The women there walked long distances to find
the mangrove wood they needed to boil brine down to salt.
Chopping down the mangroves, however, was destroying fish
spawning grounds and adversely affectingfishing. Later, salt-wor¬
kers from Brittany and Benin began working together, and today
fifty salt basins of the kind used in the Breton salt-marshes are in
operation. Next year, there will be twice as many, and the Breton
salt-workers, who have been taking turns to work in Benin, will
stop coming (they have already received similar requests from
Guinea and Niger).
On the other side of the Atlantic, a number of Puerto Ricans,
spurred on by a deep love of their country, set up a Conservation
Trust for the island. Their initiative came just in time. Pollution
due to waste, speculative building and the tourist industry had
begun to appear. By purchasing hundreds of hectares in the most
interesting areas, the Trust is now protecting hundreds ofanimal
and plant species, some ofthem unique.
These, and many other intelligent efforts conducted worldwide,
certainly give groundsfor hope.
^"«-ift
Dossier
by France Bequette
The salt of the
Earth: Sun, wind, and
fire
Rico saves
its treasures
30 Voices from the past
The brother and sister
who became thunder
and lightning
Alegendofthe
Caribou Eskimos
23
y.-:

World
The 1989 Basel Convention designed to control the
cross-border movement and disposal of hazardous
wastes came into force on 5 May 1992. The Convention
stipulates that the importing country must be provided
with detailed information on the nature of the wastes
and be in a position to treat them. Such is the case in
France, which at Saint-Vulbas, in the Ain department,
has a plant, the only one of its kind in the world, that can
destroy PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) without caus¬
ing any pollution, thanks to a 1,200°C incinerator. The
environmental organization Greenpeace brought pres¬
sure to bear on the French government to prevent PCBs
imported from Australia for destruction in this faci¬
lity. But if borders are closed and each state is obliged
to build such expensive, high-tech plants, is there not
a risk that more toxic wates will be illegally dumped in
natural sites?
24
Toxic waste sites are more often
found among poor communities
than in affluent districts. Most of
the 4,000 residents of Williams¬
burg, a working-class neighbour¬
hood in the northeastern part of
Brooklyn, are from the Caribbean
and Central America. A report by
the Community Environmental
Health Center at New York's
Hunter College revealed that at
least twenty-eight sites in the
Williamsburg area stored danger¬
ous, often "extremely danger¬
ous", toxic wastes. Four years
ago, a number of high school and
college students got together and
organized an action group which
they called "The Toxic Avengers".
They discovered an empty lot lit¬
tered with drums oozing toxic
liquids and called in environmen¬
tal agencies to clean it up. Since
then, the group has continued its
battle and undertaken commu¬
nity-awareness actions, teaching
that combating pollution should
be a priority just like fighting
drugs and crime.
For the past thirty years, the
World Food Programme (WFP)
has been one of the world's largest
sources of funding for activities in
developing countries aimed at
reversing environmental degrada¬
tion and increasing agricultural
productivity in sustainable ways.
In 1991 WFP, which was set up
in 1961 by the United Nations
and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), undertook a review
of its environmental activities. The
11
review points out that environ¬
mentally sustainable development
must also be economically and
socially sustainable. In other
words it must be based on the
willingness of local people to parti¬
cipate in development activities in
a way that allows for them to be
sustained once external resources
are no longer provided.
Forfurther information,
please contact WFP, Via Cristoforo
Colombo 426, 00145 Rome, Italy.

During the night of 21 to 22
August 1986, Lake Nyos, located on
the volcanic rim in western
Cameroon, disgorged a vast cloud of
toxic gas which took the lives of
about 1,700 people and thousands
of cattle. Two years earlier, on 16
August 1984, a similar disaster had
taken place 100 kilometres away at
Lake Monoun, causing thirty-seven
deaths. In 1987, on Unesco's initia¬
tive, more than 200 research work¬
ers and experts met for a conference
in Yaounde, Cameroon, to try to
understand the causes of these inci¬
dents. Had there been a sudden
total or partial degasification of the
water? If so, was this due to a land¬
slide, a rockslip, a violent wind or to
an upwelling ofdeep water? Or had
a volcanic disturbance released the
gases from a subsurface reservoir?A
team from the University ofSavoy,
France, is working on a project to
bring the remaining water- trapped
gas to the surface through a system
of pipes. The quantities involved
are estimated to be 250 million
cubic metres for Lake Nyos, and 9.4
million for Lake Monoun. To avoid
another disaster, experts have set
up a buoy equipped with a satel¬
lite-transmission device, a seismic
monitoring system and meteoro¬
logical measurement platforms. In
addition, 4,000 people have been
relocated at a safe distance from
the two lakes.
If
The Brazilian state ofSäo Paulo has only been able to
conserve three per cent of its natural vegetation cover,
and erosion has caused the loss of 200 million tonnes
of soil. Such sorry figures have led to a programme for
the restoration of gallery forests in the lacare Pepira
basin, under the direction ofCarlos loly of the University
of Campinas. In recent decades, sugar-cane fields,
orange groves, grazing land, leisure areas and hydro¬
electric dam sites have made inroads into gallery forests
along the lacare Pepina river and its tributaries. So far,
250 hectares have been reforested with the help of
landowners and municipal authorities.
A remarkable book, Environ¬
mental Educationfor Our Common
Future, has just been published
jointly by the United Nations
Environment Programme, Unesco
and Norway. Designed as a hand¬
book for teachers throughout
Europe from kindergarten to secon¬
dary school, it reports, in Part I, on
the current ecological state of the
planet. Part II presents examples of
environmental education projects
in schools all over Europe, illus¬
trated with figures and photo¬
graphs. The handbook is a source of
useful and innovative educational
suggestions for all teachers, what¬
ever subject they teach. It is avail¬
able from Unesco, in English only.
\ro , ¡mental Education
for Our Common FuU
t^VI
25





Voicesfrom thepast
mjmmm raid
«111 MIS
30
* From Intellectual
culture ofthe
Caribou Eskimos:
Iglulik and Caribou
Eskimo texts, by
Knud Rasmussen,
Copenhagen, 1930.
nn he Inuit (widely known as
Eskimos) live widely dispersed
in the Arctic regions ofAlaska,
. Greenland and Canada, but
are united by language and
culture. Their literature,
transmitted by the oral tradition,
and their remarkable plastic art,
bear witness to a profound
harmony between the people and
their environment.
The text on this page has been taken from
Compagnons du Soleil ("Companions of the Sun"),
an anthology of writing on the relationship
between humankind and nature co-published by
Umesco, Editions de la Découverte (Paris) and the
Fondation pour le progrès de l'Homme. The
anthology, which appeared in November 1992, was
prepared under the general editorship ofJoseph
Ki-Zerbo, in collaboration with Marie-Josèphe
Beaud-Gambier.
In the earliest times, there were no thieves
among mankind; but then one day it happened
during a songfestival, that a brother and sister
were left alone in a house, and here theyfound a
caribou skin with the hair off, and aftrestone.
These they stole, but hardly had they stolen them
when a greatfear oftheirfellows came upon
them.
"What shall we do to get awayfrom everyone?"
said one.
"Let us turn into caribou," said the other.
"Then people will kill us."
"Let us turn into foxes."
And so they went through all animals in turn,
and always they were afraid people would kill
them. But then one said:
"Let us turn into thunder and lightning, and
then people will not be able to catch us. "
And so they turned into thunder and lightning
and went up into the sky. When there is thunder
and lightning now, it is because one of them
rattles the dry caribou skin, while the other
strikes sparks from thefirestone.
(As told byAnarquil G.)
