IN August 1990, American video enthusiasts
who had been discontented with the media's
position at the time of the armed interven¬
tions on the island of Grenada and in Panama
got together to find a way of putting their point
of view across in case war broke out in the
Gulf. As the months went by, and conflict
became inevitable, they managed to find the
necessary resources to produce and broadcast a
series of four half-hour programmes. The Gulf
Crisis TV project was born.
As their means were limited to about
$25,000, they appealed to anyone who had
visual material relating to the circumstances sur¬
rounding the crisis to help them. By mid-
December, they had collected some 200 videos
from which they took the material for four edu¬
cational programmes. Reflecting diverse points
of view, the programmes sketched the historical
background of the United States engagement in
the Middle East and analysed the links between
the oil and arms industries. They also covered
the activities of pacifist groups.
The individuals in charge of the project then
set their imaginations to work to find ways of
getting the programmes shown. They staged
mobile screenings from the back of a truck in
city squares and supermarket parking lots, and
copied the material onto thousands of videos
that were shown in art galleries, museums and
colleges, and were also passed on from hand to
hand.
Finally, thanks to the backing of anti-war
groups, Gulf Crisis TV's programmes were
shown on the Public Broadcasting System (PBS)
network, which beamed them by satellite to the
nation's major cities. In the first two weeks of
January they attracted an audience the pro¬
gramme-makers could hardly have expected on
such a cheap budget, coming second in the Los
Angeles audience ratings. Later they were broad¬
cast by Channel Four in the United Kingdom,
and then in some fifteen other countries.
"Hand-made" television
Gulf Crisis TV did not start from scratch. It
built on the ten-year experience of Paper Tiger
TV, which puts out a weekly analysis of a
media event such as an exhibition, a television
series or an item from the written press. Start¬
ing in 1981 with an in-depth analysis of The
New York Times, Paper Tiger has since put
together more than 400 broadcasts on subjects
as diverse as the passionate reactions to the TV
series Dynasty, and media treatment of the
Baby M case, in which a surrogate mother
refused to hand over her child to the prospective
parents.
Paper Tiger is one of 200 weekly series
transmitted by New York's public cable televi¬
sion, which is reserved for local productions
and whose only selection criterion is "First



Alternative
television in
America
With the help of
satellite and
cable
transmission,
small
independent
programme-
makers are
making their
voices heard
1
I
; j
I
NATHALIE MAG NAN
is a French writer and
television producer who has
helped to organize
exhibitions on experimental
and independent video
production for museums in
France and the United
States.
by Nathalie Magnan
come, first served". As a result, Paper Tiger is
transmitted along with programmes on astrol¬
ogy and broadcasts for teenagers, ethnic minor¬
ities, women's organizations and the Boy
Scouts of America.
On schedule each week, the attention of
channel-hoppers is caught by the programme's
unusual set, painted in comic-strip style. The
broadcast goes out live, since the "Tigers"
artists, film editors, critics, teachers and stu¬
dents of television, all of them unpaid have
neither the time, energy or money to put it out
later in a taped version. It is "hand-made" tele¬
vision, incorporating long shots of the studio
so as to demystify the process of production.
The low cost of the programme is indicated in
the credits; it rarely comes to more than $300.
Financial backing comes mainly from public
subsidies, but as the backlist of programmes
grows, video rental is gradually becoming more
important.
High tech and cheap video
The Gulf Crisis TV Project also drew on the
experience of Deep Dish, a group that for the
past five years has been distributing the work
of independent directors in the United States
and Canada. A central computer selects repre¬
sentative segments from their videos and
assembles them into a series of short, thirty-
minute films on such subjects as ecology, Aids,
censorship or civil rights. The titles of the
videos are listed in the closing credits alongside
the names and addresses of their distributors,
and a complete catalogue is available on
request. Beamed up to a satellite, the pro¬
grammes are then picked up by public broad¬
casting channels and universities. So high tech¬
nology links up with low-budget video to
make more voices heard and to nourish the
multicultural trend that emerged in the United
States in the 1980s.
By their methods of production and distri¬
bution, these experiments in alternative televi¬
sion hold out the prospect of a more accessible
media horizon, opening not on some Orwellian
vision of a global village but instead on a kind
of democracy of the image in which people can
decide for themselves how they are represented
in the media. O 13
