This article is one of
a series in which the
Director-General of
Unesco sets out his
thinking on matters of
current concern.

AFTER R I O
A global partnership
i^^OURAGE is when you have choices," declared the
\#American journalist Terry Anderson emerging from
four years of terrible captivity. We have a choice. But do we
have the courage? This was the great underlying question at
the United Nations Conference on the Environment and
Development that took place at Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) from
3 to 14 June. Are we capable or not of establishing new prio¬
rities, of making arms reductions in favour of human devel¬
opment and aid to the most deprived countries, of pur¬
suing in the face of all obstacles and set patterns the path
from a civilization of war to a civilization of peace?
Five hundred years after the first encounter between
Two Worlds, we are finally discovering that the world and
humanity are one. We are realizing that the precious
resources of this Earth do not exist to be appropriated and
exploited without regard to the balance of nature or the
interests of others. Everywhere the understanding is dawn¬
ing that our common future depends on the establishment
of a new worldwide approach to development, on a new
relationship with the environment and our fellow human
beings. Our task is to translate this growing awareness into
a solemn compact of nations and into a personal commit¬
ment by all the inhabitants of the planet. No one can
remain a mere spectator; we must all become actors. Our
task is no longer to record history, but to write it. For it is
through our actual behaviour that history is written,
notably that of a more equitable future for humanity.
A CULTURE OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
We must lay the foundations for a culture of sustainable
development rooted in a new ecological economics and for
a global partnership dedicated to ensuring the well-being of
all the world's inhabitants and safeguarding the future habi-
tability of our planet. Our generation bears a unique ethical
responsibility since its choices will determine the fate of all
future generations. As the main contractors of the environ¬
mental debt, the industrialized countries should be the chief
contributors to making good the damage to the environ¬
ment and should take measures to help the less well-
endowed countries achieve sustainable human develop¬
ment. In the face of potentially irreversible damage to
global life-support systems, we must act now in order not
to compromise the rights of generations to come. This is the
challenge that confronts us.
Such a challenge calls for an alliance between govern¬
ments, international organizations, non-governmental orga¬
nizations of all kinds, scientific and professional communi¬
ties and individual citizens. The United Nations will have a
vital role to play as co-ordinator and co-implementer of the
measures adopted at Rio. Within the overall United
Nations effort, UNESCO has a broad and substantial contri¬
bution to make as the specialized agency responsible for
education, science, culture and communication.
Education at all levels, formal and non-formal, will be
essential in moving, through increased knowledge and
improved capacity-building, towards sustainable develop¬
ment. Reducing population growth, improving urban and
rural living conditions and increasing economic growth all
depend on access to knowledge and on the transfer and
sharing of knowledge. Educational, informational and
awareness-building activities particularly at the grassroots
level will encompass such areas as environment and devel¬
opment, global issues, women's role in development, family
planning and child care.
Science, of course, will be of the essence. It is more vital
than ever that political leaders have access to hard scientific
data for decision-making and that scientists and politicians
should work closely together. The measures adopted at Rio
will have to go hand in hand with continuous scientific
assessment of problems, likely future developments and
possible solutions. Systematic long-term monitoring of the
state of the environment and the state of human develop¬
ment will be essential. UNESCO, with its constitutional res¬
ponsibility for mobilizing the scientific community and for
providing scientific and technical assistance to governments,
has a major role to play here.
Culture must not be neglected in this programme. Sus¬
tainable development means human development one
expressive of the rich diversity of cultures and individuals.
The activities of the World Decade for Cultural Develop¬
ment and the independent World Commission on Culture
and Development will have an important contribution to
make to the implementation of the conclusions of the Rio
Conference.
The complex, interrelated problems of environment and
development call for solutions based on interdisciplinary and
intersectoral approaches. UNESCO's wide mandate makes
it particularly well placed to test and promote integrated
approaches in this sphere. It is likewise called upon to lend
its voice to those that have no voice: the most deprived, the
most ignorant, the most isolated and above all the
unborn.
A MORAL CONTRACT
The Conference could not resolve the problems confront¬
ing us at one stroke. It has, however, marked the start of a
"global change" in attitudes to environment and develop¬
ment and to the related issues of poverty, illiteracy, disease
and overpopulation. It has fashioned a moral contract
strong enough to prevail against powerful economic inter¬
ests of many kinds, so as to enable present generations to
repair the harm that has been done and to ensure that future
generations enjoy the right of all human beings to be born
"free and equal". From now on we shall all be accountable
for our action or our failure to act; and this accountability
will rest on a new system of accountancy, transcending
economism.
Will we have the courage to open up a new path for the
future of the human species? Will we have the wisdom to
agree to pay the price of peace as we have been willing at
what cost! to pay the price of war? Yes, if the most devel¬
oped countries set about curbing their consumption, parti¬
cularly of the superfluous kind. Yes, if sharing takes place
particularly the sharing of knowledge. Yes, if the developing
countries fix their national priorities according to their own
criteria but in keeping with the principles of human devel¬
opment. Yes, above all, if it is understood on all sides that
external aid can do no more than initiate a process and that
all of us, rich and poor, will only become what we ourselves
have been capable of creating. Q
