Which model of democracy? by klbie Sacfis
A distinèuished lawyer and anti-apartheid campaigner reflects on the democratic choices
facing a non-racial South Africa
lYAoDELS are enticing. Simplicity is difficult.
Democracy grows and withers in all conti¬
nents, and nothing is gained by giving it a
geographical genesis. We fight for it where we are,
because it embodies the values we wish for our¬
selves, and not because we want to prove to
anyone how good or civilized we are, or how
worthy of aid.
It is for this reason that we in the South
African anti-apartheid struggle resist the lure to
say that we wish to install Western democracy in
our country. We acknowledge without difficulty
that the very word democracy has a Western
origin, and that many of the institutions of
democracy, such as periodic elections and the
multi-party system, and much of its theorization,
first emerged in Western countries. We are also
not unaware of the fact that the West is so rich,
well-armed and confident that prudence, if not
opportunism, would suggest that we engage in
the closest mimicry possible.
Yet much as we may like an idea, we may
reject the wrapping within which it is presented.
It is not a question of complexes or shallow pride,
but of principle, of what is meant by democracy
and how it is achieved in any part of the world.
The relationship of the West with our conti¬
nent has in fact been far from democratic. First,
African people were denied their physical
autonomy through the slave trade and then had
their legal personality negated by colonialism.
More recently in South Africa the whole
panoply of racist laws which made up the system
of apartheid emanated from a certain type of
Western institution. The West might have trans¬
ported railroads and the ballot to South Africa. It
also brought hanging, the pass laws. States of
Emergency and detention without trial, all sanc¬
tioned by Parliament and enforced by courts. At
the international level, with the honourable
exception of the Nordic countries, the Western
countries traded with apartheid and largely turned
their backs on those fighting for democracy.
In my lifetime, white-on-white violence in
Europe has exceeded by far both in scope and
savagery anything practiced by Africans against
Africans in Africa; only four European countries
have escaped military dictatorship or military
occupation in the past half century. South Africa
also has a long history of white on white violence,
including the Anglo-Boer War, the 1922 miners'
strike, the actions of pro-fascist groups in the 1930s,
during the Second World War, and recently again.
The ideas of democracy, peace and respect for
human rights thus do not belong to any conti¬
nent, and certainly not to any racial group. In
South Africa, it was not people from Europe who
fought most consistently for what is called
Western Democracy, but people of African and
Leapin' to People's Culture, a
print by the South African
artist Tiki Phungula.
23

24
Asian origin. While the notion of racial dictator¬
ship in more or less benign form was being
extolled by white South Africans, the idea 


of non-
racial democracy was kept alive in the prisons,
the underground and exile by blacks. In the light
of our history, nothing is gained by affixing the
label Western to the word Democracy.
Does rejection of use of the term Western
Democracy mean that we favour the formulation
African Democracy? Not at all. We oppose
Eurocentrism with universalism, rather than with
any concept of African exceptionalism. On the
whole, African democrats are not comfortable
with the term African democracy. It is, of course,
always necessary to emphasize that our country
is South Africa and not South Europe. The sup¬
pression or marginalization of African languages,
culture and history permeates every aspect of
public and private life. In that sense, we have to
Africanize, or better still, to South Africanize our
society and its institutions.
Yet the term African democracy has been
used to deny African people their individual
rights as citizens and their fundamental freedoms
as human beings. The eminently good African
tradition of talking a matter through courteously
and reasonably until consensus binding upon all
is reached, has very often been turned around to
justify the imposed consensus of one-person rule.
Trade unions, political parties and other non¬
governmental organizations set up to advance the
interests of the ordinary working people of Africa
are outlawed on the grounds that they are sup¬
posedly un-African. Persons declare themselves
to be President for life, on the model of an
African king, though their rule has been legiti¬
mated neither by traditional royal lineage, nor
by elections.
Any departure from internationally accepted
standards of fair treatment is justified on the
grounds that Africa is different and there is no
shortage of Europeans and North Americans
willing to back dictators arguing that democracy
is not for our part of the world. In our country,
the greatest believers in special systems of African
democracy have not been the African people,
who overwhelmingly demanded universally
accepted rights and freedoms, but the whites, who
used the notion to impose corrupt Bantustan
leaders on the majority.
Millions of victims
of State neglect
The model of liberal democracy, on the other
hand, has the virtue of being based on a concept
rather than a continent. It emphasizes the aspects
of personal freedom and political pluralism that
are fundamental to democracy in any land, and
places heavy emphasis on secure legal mechanisms
to prevent abuses by the State. Yet in South
Africa oppression takes the form not just of State
interference but of State neglect. Millions die of
malnutrition and tuberculosis, and go without
homes and schools, because in the eyes of the
"The South Africans":
portraits of a people by
photographer Guy Hobbs.
Government as blacks they simply do not count.
Political freedoms are empty and precarious if not
associated with a dignified existence for all.
It is for this reason that we say we do not
want freedom without bread, nor do we want
bread without freedom, but rather, we want
freedom, and we want bread.
Our fear is that many people who have either
been bitterly anti-liberal all their lives, or who
at best were only timidly liberal when it really
mattered, will now seize upon liberal notions as
a justification for what will amount to the privati¬
zation of misery. It is one thing to say that the
State should not try to do what it does badly,
namely produce and market goods, or to declare

that It should not attempt to monopolize com¬
pletely the provision of public utilities and social
services. It is quite another to imply that the State
has no role at all to play in achieving equity and
fairness in South Africa.
Social democracyfor and against
It is in this connection that social democracy has
special appeal. Our understanding 


of social
democracy is that it combines personal freedom
and an active role for the market, with the
guaranteeing of minimum rights of humane exis¬
tence for all. Public authorities have an impor¬
tant responsibility for ensuring generalized access
to health, education and housing. At the same
time there are legal and public-opinion
mechanisms for seeing to it that the State does
not become too intrusive.
Yet impressive though the record of countries
regarded as social-democratic might be, they
simply do not provide ctmstitutional models
which respond to all the many problems facing
us in South Africa. Most o\ these countries have
an ancient history of nationhood, if not of state¬
hood; we in South Africa have an insecure 25

history of statehood, and none at all 


of nation¬
hood. Many of these countries happen to have
monarchs as Heads of State, and Prime Ministers
as Heads of Government; and, though we are
undoubtedly not short of would-be Prime
Ministers, we do not, as far as I am aware, even
have pretenders to a throne.
Thus we need to make provision for the elec¬
tion of a President as Head of State, and, possibly,
as Head of Government. For this technical
reason, but for more substantive motives as well,
we are moving away from a parliamentary-based
concept of democracy to a constitutionally-based
one. Parliament will continue to function as the
central expression of the popular will, but it will
exercise its powers within the framework of a
nationally-agreed compact of fundamental rights
and freedoms embodied in a judicially-supervised
Bill of Rights.
None of this is incompatible with social
democracy, yet the reality is that constitutions
tend to play a relatively small role in the public
life oí the Social Democratic countries. In South
Africa, the constitution will be a central docu¬
ment, serving both as a symbol and as a guarantor
of freedom and security. Attractive though social
democracy will continue to be as a political
programme, its value as the foundation of a new
constitution will be more limited.
Religious movements
and the State
There are many countries in Europe and Latin
America where Christian Democracy has
received considerable support. In South Africa the
concept is so remote that we do not even know
what it is. Three-quarters of all South Africans
regard themselves as Christians. Christianity is
more than a religion, it has influenced the whole
culture of our country. Yet important though
Christianity is both to public and private life, any
opportunistic attempt at this stage to establish
exclusively Christian parties, and certainly any
move to create constitutional privileges for Chris¬
tianity, would be strongly resisted, and most
vigorously by Christians themselves.
The fact is that there is no predominant
Christian church, nor any distinctive political
allegiance of Christians. The Dutch Reformed
Church has long had an important role because
of its association with the National Pany Govern¬
ment, but it is divided, and is a minority church
in the country as a whole. There are millions of
Anglicans, Catholics and Methodists, an even
larger number of members of independent
African churches, and a growing body of pen-
tecostals and evangelicals, all with divided polit¬
ical loyalties. Equally important, there are
hundreds of thousands of Muslims, Jews and
Hindus who would expect the same religious
rights and freedoms as Christians.
Attempts made in previous years to run edu-
- cation on what were called Christian National
^O lines have brought the notion of Chrrstian domi
nation of public life into disrepute. What is likely
is a phase of active co-operation between the reli¬
gious organizations and the State to achieve the
objectives of the new Constitution, with the reli¬
gious bodies retaining their right to bear witness
and criticize the actions of the State. In the mean¬
while Christians will be found in all the parties,
as will non-Christians.
Until fairly recently, there was extensive
backing amongst large sections of the anti-
apartheid forces for the model of People's
Democracy, The argument was twofold. In the
first place it was contended that racist power was
so intransigent and authoritarian that the only wav
to destroy it and guarantee rights to the people
was through opposing it with the massed forces
of people's power. Secondly, it was felt by many
that liberal or social democracy converted the
general population into passive recipients of rights
who only became active in quinquennial bursts
of electoral activity; representative democrac}'
was important, it was argued, but it had to be
supplemented by participatory democracy.
Today the notion of popular empowerment
places less emphasis on the coercive capacity of
the community, and more on the acquisition of
skills, self-confidence and material means to
enable communities to make effective decisions
and take charge of their own destinies. More is
said about people's rights and less about people's
power.
The concept of democracy in itself involves
government of the people, for the people, by the
people. It is not necessary to say we want people's
government of the people's people, for the
people's people, of the people's people.
A plant nurtured by the sufferings
and struggles of people everywhere
Accordingly, without identifying ourselves solely
with any of the proffered models of democracy,
we draw in different ways on each one of them,
and prefer to speak simply not of Western, or
African, or Liberal, or Christian, or Social or
People's Democracy, but simply of . . .
democracy.
Democracy in South Africa will look at the
rich and varied experience of Western countries
in overcoming the rich and varied forms of
absolutism and tyranny which Western countries
have thrown up over the centuries. It will pay
special attention to the institutional mechanisms
which have been created to guarantee basic rights,
as well as to ways and means of encouraging a
rights culture in society as a whole.
It will seek to ensure that in terms of lan¬
guage, symbols and personality it has a character
that roots it in Africa, The fact that religion plays
a big role in South African life will find
appropriate acknowledgment in the Constitution,
without creating a State religion or giving anv
religion preference t)ver others; the hymn Nknsi
Sikclcle lAjrika, God Bless Africa, has airead)'
become a major force for national unity.
ALBIE SACHS,
South African lawyer and
writer, is a member of the
Constitutional Committee of
the African National Congress
He IS a professor at the
University of the Western Cape
and at the University of Cape
Town, and Director of the
South African Constitution
Studies Centre of the Institute
for Commonwealth Studies at
the University of London
Notable among his published
works are The Jail Diary of
Albie Sachs and Protecting
Human Rights in a New South
Africa This text was prepared
as a contribution to a
Workshop on issues of human
rights for a post-apartheid
South Africa which was
organized at Banjul, The
Gambia (18-21 June 1991),
UNESCO and the African
Commission on Human and
People's Rights
by

The institutional arrangements 


of the
democratic State will owe much to the tenets of
Liberal Democracy, while mechanisms to ensure
basic rights of nutrition, housing, health and edu¬
cation will be influenced by Social Democracy.
People's Democrac}' will live on not as a form
of institutionalized power but as active civic
involvement in the processes of transformation.
Above all, democracy in South Africa has to
be anti-apartheid in character. It is for this reason
that we speak of non-racial democracy. Our hope
IS that much as we draw on the experience of
other countries in building democracy, so we
make our own special contribution.
The first shall be the last, and the last shall
be the first. We in Si^uth Africa are attempting
three great historical and constitutional processes
in one:
collective self-determination, in overcoming the
effects of colonial-type domination, and creating
a single multi-lingual, multi-faith and pluri-
political nation;
individual self-determination, in guaranteeing
personal rights and freed(mis to all who live m
our country;
minimum rights of social welfare and a decent
existence for all.
Where do these ideas come from? They come
from ourselves and our own struggles.
People establish the concept of justice in their
imaginations and their hearts when they fight
against injustice. The laws and the constitution
then seek tt) confirm and institutionalize
the rights which have been gained in battle.
But in fighting for dem'ocracy in South Africa,
we gladly take inspiration and learn from
the experience of other persons who have fought
for freedom in other continents and at other
times.
Perhaps the most significant political accom¬
plishment of our epoch at an international level
has been the universalization of the ideas of
democracy and human rights. Democracy does
not belong to any part of the world, even less
to any race. We all draw on it, we all contribute
towards it. It may be likened to a single giant
plant with roots in all the regions of the world,
nurtured by the sufferings of people everywhere.
The world has helped the anti-apartheid struggle;
the anti-apartheid struggle helps the world.
Black South Africans singing
the anthem "God Bless
Africa".
27
