Simón Rodríguez,
portrait by an unknown
artist (c. 1828).
VISION FOR LATIN AMERICA



Simón Rodríguez, champion ofmass education
TUTOR of Simón Bolívar, the Liberator,
and written off by his critics as an eccen¬
tric, Simón Rodríguez is considered by
many as the pioneer of mass education in Latin
America. He was born in Caracas, Venezuela,
in 1771, and as a young man he came into
contact with the educational ideas of Rousseau
and of other luminaries of the Enlightenment.
He died at Amotape, Peru, in 1854.
Following the abortive insurrection by the
Venezuelan patriots Manuel Gual and José
by Jorge López Palma
María España against the Spanish authorities,
Rodriguez was obliged to leave the country.
After first taking refuge in Philadelphia, he
went to Europe in 1801, where he lived, mainly
in France, until 1822, when he returned to
South America. During his travels he enriched
his knowledge in a variety of fields, studying
topography and observing and noting down
everything he saw, learning languages and
translating French literary works before dis¬
covering his vocation as an educationist. 21

Simón Bolívar in 1802.
Spanish miniature.
22
JORGE LOPEZ PALMA,
essayist and sociologist, ¡s a
professor and director of
research at the Social
Science Faculty of the
University of the East,
Venezuela. His published
work includes: Simón
Rodríguez; utopía y
socialismo ("Simón
Rodríguez; socialism and
utopia").
Shortly after his return to America, in 1823,
he attempted, with the aid of Bolivar, to set up
a model school in Bogotá. Called the Casa de
Industria Pública, It was intended for poor
orphaned, or illegitimate children, who were to
be taught the basic elements of writing,
grammar and arithmetic, as well as the basic
elements of a trade. This initiative and the
desire to extend the benefits of education to
sections of society traditionally excluded from
it roused the opposition of the conservative
upper classes of Bogotá. It was not until the
end of the nineteenth century that Jean Bosco
succeeded in putting this Rousseau-inspired
idea into practice.
Despite this setback, Rodriguez was not
discouraged and, in 1825, he attempted a
similar experiment at Chuquisaca (now Sucre)
in Bolivia.
This involved a Plan for Mass Education
based on mixed schooling for boys and girls,
who were both housed and fed. The boys were
trained as masons, carpenters and blacksmiths,
since, according to Rodriguez, stone, wood and
metals were the basic components of all the
most indispensable objects. The girls received
training "suited to their sex", but with the
innovative proviso that, to the extent that they
were physically capable of it, they could under¬
take tne same tasks as the boys. In addition to
this theoretical and practical craft training, all
the pupils were given moral, civic and religious
instruction by specialist teachers.
Another important innovation was that the
workshop/school offered employment to those
parents of pupils who were capable of work; to
those unable to work payments were made
from the funds accumulated from the work
carried out by their children. Initially the
capital required had to be provided by the
government, but it was intended that, thanks to
the work carried out by the pupils, the school
would eventually become financially self-
supporting. When the school was running on a
permanent basis, the pupils would not nor¬
mally be boarders, but those who wanted to
could stay overnight, as could those parents
employed by the school. The Plan envisaged
the creation of workshop/schools in each of the
departments of the Bolivian Republic, but the
Eifot school at Chuquisaca was the only one to
ecome operative and it functioned only for a
short period.
Bogotá and Chuquisaca were thus the only
attempts at creating "social schools" personally
undertaken by Rodriguez.
An educational visionary
After Bolivar's fall from power, Simón Rodri¬
guez devoted himself to his work as an educa¬
tional theorist, publishing a series of works
including Sociedades Americanas en 1828.
Cómo serán y cómo podrían ser en los siglos
venideros (1828, "American societies in 1828;
their probable evolution and future pros¬
pects"); El Libertador del mediodía de America
y sus compañeros de armas defendidos po'r un
amigo de la causa social (1830, "A defence of
the Liberator of South America and his com¬
rades-in-arms by an upholder of the social
cause"), Luces y virtudes sociales (1840,
"Enlightenment and social values") and
Consejos de amigo, dados al Colegio de Laca-
tunga (1845, "Friendly advice addressed to the
College of Lacatunga").
In 1845, Rodriguez drew up a set of regula¬
tions for the primary school of the College of
Saint Vincent de Lacatunga, in Ecuador.
Among other recommendations in this innova¬
tive text, Rodriguez proposed mixed classes,
with Whites and Indians being taught side by
side, and a bilingual education, the dead lan¬
guages being replaced by Quechua. Twenty
years after his setback at Chuquisaca, Rodri¬
guez was well aware that Latin-American
governments were not at all interested in edu¬
cation for the masses, so he advised the setting
up within the College of a number of work¬
shops, including a smithy and pottery, glass¬
ware, masonry and carpentry workshops. He
also made a recommendation to the Ecuadorian
Congress that a special tax should be imposed
to finance the creation of schools and to pay
teachers' salaries. The regulations drawn up by
Rodriguez for the College of Lacatunga were
still in force at the end of the World War II.



Simón Rodríguez always saw education as a
means of achieving lasting social change in the
youthful Latin-American republics. In his
view, it was essential to turn out culturally-
transformed men and women, if their recently
acquired independence and political emancipa¬
tion were to be consolidated. He had learned
from the great thinkers of the Enlightenment
that education was the key to cultural transfor¬
mation and renewal.
In view of the economic difficulties faced
by Latin-American countries of the time,
Rodriguez' "social schools" were a Utopian
vision. Those elements of society that should
have supported him clearly lacked the material
means to do so. This is why the name of Simón
Rodríguez has not gone down in history
alongside those of other great educational
reformers such as Saint-Simon, Owen and
Fourier. Nevertheless, many of his ideas retain
their freshness and originality and remain
astonishingly relevant even today. O
