by Jean d'Ormesson
UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
44
VJleaming in the sunlight, looking out
imperiously from its rock to . the island-
studded Adriatic, enclosedby on all sides by
ramparts, Dubrovnik is perhaps the most fas-
' cinating and certainly one of the most beau¬
tiful cities in the world. If there is any place
on Earth where culture, light, a beautiful set¬
ting and all the riches of art and history are
concentrated in a small space, it is in
Dubrovnik, which has been included by
UNESCO on its World Heritage List along
with other remarkable monuments and sites
from every region and culture.
Look at a photograph, preferably one
taken from the air, or even better study a
model of the Old City of Dubrovnik. What
is immediately striking is the homogeneity,
unity and harmony of the site. Surrounded by
ramparts that have survived intact, flanked by
a tiny old port protected by bastions,
Dubrovnik appears as a tightly-woven fabric
of houses of light-coloured stone, dominated
here and there by towers, palaces, churches
and cloisters.
Art in Dubrovnik is closely linked to
nature, and both are linked to freedom.
Nature means first and" foremost the sea: the
Mediterranean, or to be more precise the Adri¬
atic. Across it lie the Italian towns of Bari,
Brindisi (where Virgil died), Ancona, and
Ravenna, with its mosaics and its churches
built by Justinian, Emperor of Constan¬
tinople, and by Theodoric, King of the
Ostrogoths. Above all there is Venice,
Dubrovnik's model and rival.
On the Dubrovnik side, the Adriatic is a
string of islands with enchanting names
Lokrum, Mljet, Korkula, Hvareach one
more verdant, more beautiful and more mys¬
terious than the next. To the south lies Mon¬
tenegro and the breathtakingly beautiful Gulf
of Kotor, formerly the Gulf of Cattaro, where
the mountains plunge sheer into the sea. For
mountains are as omnipresent here as the sea.
High hills, many of them covered in forest,
dominate the port of Dubrovnik on every
side. Nowhere has nature, under a pure-blue
sky and a generous Sun, provided art with a
more precious setting.
But it is to people and their genius that
the city owes the greater part of its grandeur
and its beauty. Art, beauty, freedom and talent
made their appearance here very early, the
result, as so often, of the shock from the

meeting of two cultures. Early in the seventh
century, Slav tribes took control of an ancient
colony of the Greek city of Epidaurus on the
Dalmatian coast, attached in Roman times to
the province of Illyricum. The colony's
Greco-Roman inhabitants sought shelter a
little further to the north, on a small island
called Ragusium or Ragusa. On the mainland
opposite, a Slav tribe settled in the midst of
oak grovesDuhrava.
Centuries later, the narrow arm of the sea
separating the Greek and Latin city from the
Slav settlement was filled in, and over-it was
built the fine straight boulevard known as the
Placa, or Stradun, which you can make out
on any photograph of Dubrovnik to this day,
crossing the town from one side to the other
and bordered by churches and palaces. The
destinies of Ragusa and Dubrovnik had
become one.
The pupil and rival of Venice
The Placa is the centre of a city that was devoted
for centuries to maritime trade and to art, and
has managed despite the cold winds of history
to preserve both its unique character and its
independence. Established on the border
between the former Western and Eastern
Empires, Dubrovnik gradually filled with
palaces and monuments which seem to follow
a rigorously ordered plan. Venice, which took
over suzerainty of Dubrovnik from Constan¬
tinople in 1204, was to exercise a considerable
influence on it. In fact Dubrovnik, long con¬
sidered the "Athens of the Southern Slavs"
for its humanists, philosophers, poets,
mathematicians and artists, was both a bold
and brilliant pupil of Venice and also its rival.
The Clock Tower rises at the other end



of the Placa. It forms the centrepiece of the
square that groups Dubrovnik's masterpieces,
foremost among them the Sponza Palace,
whose façade is decorated with a gallery sup¬
ported by pillars forming half a dozen
supremely elegant arches. The baroque
Church of St. Blaise faces the palace. In front
of it stands the column of Roland, erected in
1418legend has it that the nephew of
Charlemagne landed at Ragusa with a
Frankish fleet despatched by the emperor to
fight the Saracens.
Perhaps the most beautiful of all
Dubrovnik's monuments is the Rector's
Palace, just a stone's throw away. First built
in the twelfth century, then damaged by a vio¬
lent earthquake that destroyed much of the
town, it was rebuilt as a dwelling for the city's
Rector. A new office-holder was elected to the
Opposite page, the old city of Dubrovnik,
which was struck by shellfire
on 6 December 1991 (above).
post each month. The incumbent was not
allowed to leave the building in the course of
his term of duty. Hence the Latin inscription
on its façade: Obliti privatorum publica curate
("Forget your private affairs and look after the
public good").
Situated on the edge of the Ottoman
Empire, just as Venice, until the start of the
thirteenth century, had been located on that
of the Byzantine Empire, Dubrovnik accumu¬
lated masterpieces as the centuries passed by:
rare and precious objects, rich fabrics, vases,
sculptures, paintings by Titian and Raphael,
Tintoretto and Tiepolo. Technical and social
progress combined with the cult of art and tra¬
dition. As early as 1347, Ragusa had a hospice
for old people. Torture was abolished in 1416.
So was the slave trade (which has left an echo
in Venice in the Riva degli Schiavoni, which
runs along the lagoon from the Piazzetta to
the environs of the Arsenal). Public'education
attained a high level early on.
In the midst of the triumph of humanism
and the cult of progress, tradition remained
strong. In the Church of the Franciscans, there 45

46
is a fifteenth-century painting of St. Blaise,
patron saint of the city. In his hand he holds
a model of Dubrovnik. And in spite of the
centuries that have passed, the wars, the fires
and the earthquakes, the city still looks very
much today as it did then, half a millennium
ago.
Fear stalks the streets
Yet Dubrovnik has undergone many trials, few
of them crueller than that it endures today.
The town has been under siege for 'several
months. Water is in short supply. Provisions
only arrive in small quantities via the new
port, some kilometres away from the Old
City. Shells have fallen throughout the city,
starting fires in the outer suburbs and causing
damage in the Old City. Fear stalks the streets
of Venice's rival.
Many other peoples throughout the
world, who cannot boast Dalmatia's history
or art treasures, doubtless suffer as much or
worse. And the life of men, women and chil¬
dren is as precious in one place as in another.
Yet history has endowed Dubrovnik with a
special status. It is a small piece of the past that
has survived into the present, a fragment of
beauty that lightens the world. And people
need beauty just as they need bread and love.
Throughout its brilliant history, among all the
ups and downs of fortune, Ragusa has not only
Built over the channel
that once separated
the Greco-Roman
island of Ragusium
from the Slav coastal
settlement of Dubrava,
the street known as
the Placa cuts through
the heart of
Dubrovnik's old city.
The bell-tower of the
Franciscan Church
rises in the
background.



embodied the highest artistic values, but has
also defended its independence, served the
cause of humanity and, within the limits of
its physical and spiritual resources, been in the
vanguard of progress and human rights.
UNESCO's task is very difficult in the
trials being experienced by Dubrovnik today.
It is impossible for an international organiza¬
tion in which Yugoslavia has long played an
important role to take sides in a fratricidal war.
But for all those who believe in the fun¬
damental principles of UNESCO, it is equally
unthinkable to remain inactive or indifferent
to the risk of seeing a cultural treasure des¬
troyed. All people of goodwill must mobilize
to save Dubrovnik. More, they must work to
bring the war to an end and to help reconcile
adversaries who may be separated by their pas¬
sions but whom history and geography con¬
strain to live together.
JEAN D'ORMESSON, French writer, is Secretary
General of the International Council for
Philosophy and Humanistic Studies and Editor of
Diogenes, an international review of the human
sciences published with the aid of UNESCO. A
member of the French Academy since 1973, he is
the author of many essays and novels, a number of
which have been published in English, including
The Glory of the Empire (New York, 1974) and At
God's Pleasure (New York, 1977). He visited
Dubrovnik while it was under siege in December
1991 on board the Ranee, a French vessel engaged
on a humanitarian mission.
UNESCO AND
THE DUBROVNIK
EMERGENCY
In addition to the Old City of Dubrovnik. eight
other sites in Yugoslavia are included on
UNESCO's World Heritage List: Stari Ras and the
monastery of Sopocani; the historic centre of
Split, with the Palace of Diocletian; Plitvice Lakes
National Park; the regions of Ohrid and Kotor;
Durmitor National Park; Studenica monastery;
and the Skocjan caves. These sites are covered
by two international conventions, both ratified
by Yugoslavia: the Convention for the Protection
of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Con¬
flict (1954), and the Convention concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural
Heritage (1972).
Since September 1991, Mr. Federico Mayor,
the Director-General of UNESCO, has made
repeated and urgent appeals for the protection
of Dubrovnik's historic Old City and of other
World Heritage sites threatened by the fighting
in Croatia. On 28 October, in response to the
mounting danger, he sent a personal represen¬
tative to Dubrovnik to remind the authorities con¬
cerned of their obligations under the two Con¬
ventions. He made a number of appeals for the
parties involved to begin negotiations for a
peaceful resolution of their differences.
UNESCO's General Conference, meeting in Paris,
called for the withdrawal of hostile forces from
Dubrovnik, "whose splendour belongs to all
humanity".
On 28 November, two UNESCO observers
arrived in Dubrovnik, with instructions to record
the damage done to the Old City and to keep the
Director-General informed of the situation on a
daily basis. Up to that time, the Old City had been
largely spared by the fighting, but on 6
December the historic centre was severely
damaged by heavy artillery fire.
The UNESCO observers examined the
damage on site then, from their shelter, reported
by telephone on the extent of the damage: some
buildings were seriously damaged, others were
on fire. Among the buildings affected were the
Pile gate, the Dominican monastery, the Church
of St. Blaise, the Sponza Palace, the Serbian
church and the Rupe Museum. The Director-
General expressed his "consternation and
outrage", and solemnly demanded in the name
of international law that all hostile action against
the city should cease at a time when "the flags
of the United Nations are flying over [its] historic
quarters."
In December 1991, the World Heritage Com¬
mittee representing 123 States Parties to the
World Heritage Convention, including Yugoslavia,
felt compelled, "considering the emergency sit¬
uation of the Old City of Dubrovnik ... to inscribe
it on the List of World Heritage in Danger in order
to encourage special measures to be taken for
its preservation."
A new observer mission was sent to the city
on 17 January 1992 to draw up an inventory of
the damage and to gather the information
needed to draw up a plan for its restoration.
UNESCO is proposing to create a fund for the
safeguard of Dubrovnik, with $200,000 being
allocated for the most urgent tasks. It is also
planning to launch an international fund-raising
campaign for the restoration of cultural monu¬
ments damaged by the war in Yugoslavia.
