Reconciling
societies and the



groups that
compose them
must be a priority
for modern
democracy
COMMUNITIES AT THE
CROSSROADS by Elizabeth Picard
Above, Basque separatists
stage a demonstration in
Guernica (1992).
I
N the half-century following the Second
World War, the nation-state came to be
regarded with approval by every political
system and every ideology. In the name of mod¬
ernization in the West, of socialism in the countries
of the Eastern bloc and of development in the
Third World, it was expected to guarantee the
happiness of individuals as citizens, and of peoples
as societies. At a time of globalization and cultural
secularization, it seemed inconceivable that vio¬
lence could again rear its head on the basis of
community divisions, as it had in the past.
Today the state appears to have broken down
in many parts of the world. It has failed to guar¬
antee either security or social justice, and it has
been unable to prevent either international wars
or, to an even greater extent, civil wars like those
now ravaging Northern Ireland, Sri Lanka and
Somalia. In the past two decades, many states
have, through short-sightedness or self-interest,
been slow to respond to the new demands of
underprivileged peripheral groups.
In such situations people often respond by
replacing their loyalty to the state with loyalty
to a community. The community concerned
may take one of many forms. It may be a family
community of people who trace their genealogy
back to a common ancestor, real or mythical; a
local community people living in the same
valley, perhaps; a cultural community of peoples
sharing the same customs, values and above all
language; a racial community a group con¬
vinced that it is physically different from those
around it, despite the prevalence of ethnic inter¬
mingling; a religious community of members of
the same sect or faith.
At this point the community's objective to
be prosperous, to be free, and to defend itself
enters into competition with that of the nation-
state. If the state is stable and its institutions are
legitimate, it will be in a position to negotiate
with dissatisfied communities and to convert their
demands into political interests. If it is authori¬
tarian, it will repress what it sees as insubordina¬
tion or a threat of secession. If it is weak, itwill col-
lapse in the turmoil of rivalries between
communities. It may also be taken over by one of
its constituent communities at the expense of the
others. In that case, economic paralysis and for¬
eign intervention often intensify the internal crisis
and hasten the transition to armed hostilities.
As one observes the awakening of commu¬
nities in different parts of the world and sees
how armed force is being used to decisive effect
by small groups, one is bound to ask a number of
questions. Do these new community loyalties 19

directed against the state not themselves reflect an
aspiration to construct a state? Can such a state
be viable, based as it must be on the principle of
protective exclusion? What excesses may the
logic of group uniformity lead to? Is there not a
danger that the reaction, today so common,
against the excessive uniformity of the nation-
state may lead to a rejection of politics, under¬
stood as community management, in favour of
widespread tribal warfare?
THE OUEST FOR SECURITY
All over the world, retreat into the community-
group is closely linked to the quest for security.
"There can be no intensely felt sense of identity
without some perception of danger," writes the
French philosopher Pierre-André Taguieff in La
force du préjugé (1987). Since in the eyes of the
community-group the state has lost what Max
Weber called its monopoly of legitimate vio¬
lence, the only recognized form of security
becomes that of the "armed tribe". Arms flow in,
sent by sympathetic groups, procured by external
powers eager to acquire influence, or bought on
a world market awash with weaponry.
Amid the enthusiasm and emotion of collec¬
tive mobilization, volunteers form local militias
which soon, because of the economic crisis, take
on paid recruits for whom war is the only source
of income, the only means of feeding their fam¬
ilies. On the fringe of the militias, local gangs
take advantage of civil disorder to terrorize the
population and hold it to ransom. The militias
enforce their law on political parties and on civil
society. Within each community warlords take the
lead in mobilizing the group and are the main
architects of the "invention" of its identity.
Under their leadership, organizing the defence
of the community becomes the cement that binds
the community together. "We need a war to bring
us together and give us a common identity," said
the leader of a proscribed Northern Ireland para¬
military group in 1992. The militia sets out to
dominate a piece of territory and control access
to it, then to make it homogeneous by forcing
people to move out and by perpetrating mas¬
sacres. For if the horror of "ethnic cleansing"
has reared its head again fifty years after the col-
20
lapse of Nazism, obsession with the security of
the community causes forced and massive exo¬
duses of groups whose rights within a given piece
of territory are just as firmly based in history
(or myth) as those of their persecutors. Attempts
to preserve the security of the community by
expulsions create a sense of injustice in another
community nearby.
The militia builds walls and barricades, trans¬
forming zones of contact with other communi¬
ties into an impassable no-man's-land. Direct
contact and mixing between the different popu¬
lations come to an end and are replaced by ideo¬



logical relationships as communities are caught in
the toils of mutually hostile propaganda.
This process whereby militias, without any
precise military or political objectives, turn their
communities into fortresses has come to be
known as Lebanonization, after the pointless
and destructive conflicts that tore Lebanese
society apart for more than fifteen years (1975-
1990). Once the break with the other communi¬
ties has been made, the violence of the militias is
soon turned on their own people. The prevailing
view is that internal treason or defection is even
more dangerous than the external threat. The
militia will use all kinds of intimidation and coer¬
cion, from shows of force to taxation and con¬
scription, from admonition to kidnapping and
murder, to repress any sign of deviation and any
move towards co-operation between communi¬
ties or any questioning of the single-minded atti¬
tude its power is based on. By stirring up fear and
encouraging the community to retreat into itself,
coercion replaces consensus as society's motive
force and takes the place of the law at the heart of
the collective conscience.
INVENTING A COMMON IDENTITY
Use of force is the hallmark of the process of
community consolidation, but it is by no means its
only characteristic. The group's new leaders also
go in for social engineering, creating public services
and social support funds exclusively reserved for
members of the community. The arms trade, often
linked to drug trafficking, provides the militias
with illicit funds to keep their supporters on their
side. But it is principally by robbing the state
(controlling customs receipts) or by taking its
place (taxing business and trade and distributing
necessities) that the militias acquire usurped legit¬
imacy in the eyes of the people.
The warlords use terror and the redistribution
of society's wealth to begin a more ambitious
and in the long term more revolutionary process,
the definition of a specific identity for the group.
They base this definition on some form of dif¬
ference, objective or subjective, which has hith¬
erto been no more important within the state
than regional, professional or class distinctions.
From now on, however, all these factors will

*
fade into insignificance beside one fundamental
distinction: that between Protestants and
Catholics in Northern Ireland, that between
Muslims and Christians in Lebanon, that between
Basques and Spaniards, or between Kurds and
Turks, or that which divides the different clans of
Somalia, even though they are all Sunni Mus¬
lims speaking the Somali language.
Led by its new chiefs, the community sets
out to explore its new identity, which it enriches
and transforms by drawing on a stock of shared



symbols, myths and images that command loy
alty. Communities that are fighting for the con¬
trol of territory appeal to history, in other words
to their conflicting collective memories in which
each sees itself as the victim of a hated adver¬
sary. They invoke religion, but take from religion
only dogmatic certainties conducive to intoler¬
ance. They manipulate dubious notions of col¬
lective psychology that all tend to "prove" their
own moral and cultural superiority over the
groups around them.
Intellectuals, universities and clerical bodies are
called on to help; sophisticated communications
Fleeing the fighting in war-
torn Beirut.
21

Crowds attend the funeral
of a civil rights
demonstrator killed in
1971 in Londonderry,
Northern Ireland.
22
ELIZABETH PICARD,
a French specialist in the Arab
countries of the Middle East, is
engaged in research at the
Centre for International
Studies and Research of the
National Foundation for
Political Sciences (Paris). Her
publications include Liban, Etat
de discorde (Paris, 1988) and
(as general editor) La Question
kurde (Brussels, 1991).
and crowd-manipulation techniques are set in
motion. Young people are a particular target for
the business of identity-construction. Several
studies in Lebanon and Northern Ireland have
shown how receptive they can be to the language
used to construct a sectarian frame of mind and
how they become increasingly indifferent to
democratic values. If the frustrations of the com¬
munity generated the initial tensions, inter-com¬
munity warfare in its turn helps to sharpen the
sense of difference, to increase the gap between
groups and to make it impossible for them to
coexist within a single state.
But as the anthropologist Benedict Anderson
has pointed out, a community that is "invented"
in this way (in a dual sense of being both discov¬
ered and created) can never be other than an
"imaginary community" that is essentially no
more legitimate than the "national" community
it rejects, from which it wants to secede or whose
place it wishes to take. For the logic of commu¬
nity identity and security is ultimately national¬
istic; it seeks to establish a state for the commu¬
nity. It is obvious that this logic, if it goes
unchecked, must lead to a proliferation of ever-
smaller states, since each sub-group in turn can
invoke its own "distinctness", in a process that
ultimately ends up at the level of the individual
human being.
A NEW RULE OF LAW
Disturbed by the claims of the communities
within it, the modern state oscillates between



two temptations. The first is to forcibly repress
the demands of the communities and to pro¬
claim itself the only guarantor of the security of
all. In the name of national unity, territorial
integrity, the equality of its citizens and a non-par¬
tisan secularism, the state can use its powerful
resources to reject the demands of communi¬
ties it may even go as far as genocide to ensure
that order prevails. Contrariwise, there is now a
big temptation to respond to community
demands by questioning the very nature of those
states that were constructed more or less artifi¬
cially after the two World Wars. Czechoslovakia,
for example, has sadly but calmly decided to split
into two. Yugoslavia, on the other hand, is giving
a new and dramatic meaning to the word "Balka¬
nization": not only are the republics separating
from one another, but within each one the so-
called "confederated" regions, held together by
loose ties, are also splitting apart. Thousands of
kilometres away in Somalia, eight "clan regions"
aspire to separate from one another.
Even if they have the merit of guaranteeing the
security of the communities involved (and this is
by no means certain), can such divisions make
sense in a world of ultra-rapid communications
and industrial gigantism? Will these regions not
lack the redistributive resources necessary to
promote economic growth and social mobility in
such limited areas?
Without returning to the age of Empires,
whether Ottoman, Russian or Austro-Hun-
garian, the modern state must respond to the
new militancy of its constituent communities,
and to their legitimate quest for security. It must
do so by inventing what the French philosopher
and sociologist Raymond Aron called a "peace
through law" that would guarantee justice both
for the state as a whole and for its parts, and
respect the claims of both reason and the emo¬
tions. The problem is one of reconciling nation¬
alist demands with the exercise of democracy.
Before it can be solved, progress will have to be
made in international law (particularly with
regard to the formulation of community and
minority rights) and in constitutional law (with
regard to definitions of decentralization, associ¬
ation and devolution).
At a time when international organizations
and communities of states are becoming more
important, the nation, and therefore the state,
no longer holds a monopoly on democracy. For
this reason alone it should find a way of accom¬
modating local aspirations.
