BITTERSWEET
A friend asked me:
"What is loveV
J replied: "Love is a confection
whose juke is sweet and
whose crust is bitter."
From The Arabian Nights



Jorge Enrique Mourn
Letter to a lovelorn girl
I am writing this, my sweet, to help you get
over this latest heart-break of yours. Each
time you had one before, you told me it
was the worst and would be the last. Now you're
suffering again and once more, of course, you
wish you were dead. You won't believe me if I
gently repeat that the pain doesn't last, but
remember what you said when I spoke to you
about the way people feci when their heart is
broken for the first time: there won't be another
time, you snapped back, because I shall never
fall in love again as if that were possible, as if
love were not the only cure for love. . . .
Every time you fall in love the same thing
happens, but what you haven't yet understood
is that "everlasting" love doesn't last long, for the
simple reason that we are always changing. Today
we are not quite the same person we were 43

44
yesterday, and except in the case of friendship,
which endures without vows or promises, it
would be too much to expect to go on loving the
same person in the same old way through so
many changes from day to day. We would per¬
haps do better to follow the example set by
someone more realistic about his fellow-crea¬
tures and about the instability of feelings, the
man who promised his bride-to-be to love her "as
eternally as possible".
People often fail to understand, or else they
forget, that love means a constant longing for
the physical presence of the loved one, and that
once he or she is present the longing, like a slight
pain, disappears something that often happens
in marriage. The unacknowledged reason why we
* experienced that element of pain was that we
were afraid someone else would deprive us of the
loved one's presence.
I know, or at least I suppose, that women
love in a different way, more tenaciously, more
obsessively, as if dedicated to one single task and
no other. I knew a girl your age whose dream was
to get to know Paris but who, on her very first
visit, gave up wandering the streets, sitting out¬
side cafés, watching the Seine go by or visiting
museums, just to sit at home by the telephone "in
case he rings". Something you men are incapable
of, she used to say.
We are incapable of a lot of other things too
not that we don't feel love, or feel it less strongly.
Incapable, for instance, of giving ourselves up, in
an almost mystical way, to such a full-time fixa¬
tion, to that fruitless turning over and over in the
mind of a single problem, that overpowering
obsession, incapable of dropping everything else,
to the point, sometimes, of forgetting our other
activities or even our duties. Love is one of the
mainstays of our lives but perhaps rightly or
wrongly not the only one for us.
I also believe that no-one, man or woman, in
the world is worth such suffering, such agony,
such a crushing blow to what had only the day
before been a normal, healthy human being.
Sometimes it takes no more than a letter, a phone
call or a cancelled date.
It may be just a word left unspoken or a word
that, although wrapped up in a roundabout
phrase, nevertheless means goodbye, since there
is always a leave-taking involved when one person
leaves another for someone else which is most
painful of all or for another country, which is
like taking a new lover, or it may simply be that
the affair has bogged down in boredom.
Nicolas Bouvier* speaks of the gratitude he
owes to every woman who has left him. Each
made way for another, and he draws this simple
conclusion from a certain number of failed love
affairs: for every separation there is a specific
cause have you looked for the reason in your
own case, so as to benefit from it?
Ifwe accustomed ourselves to the idea that the
other person could die tomorrow learning to
cope with loss in advance, which is, I believe,
enriching and salutary in any relationship we
would immediately feel more respect for one
another, we would refrain from saying things
that cannot be taken back. Isn't it incredible that
love should rest upon mere words, which can
just as easily break and destroy it?
I know for sure that the reason why you are
suffering now just as much as you suffered before
is that the one you love is not with you, but I also
know that absence can smooth over difficulties,
can even make those obstacles that appear when
you are together vanish into thin air. Absence is
a sleight of hand, a conjuring trick that, if it goes
on long enough, can even turn your invincible
love, which now seems stronger than yourself,
into "just one of those things", a minor incident
that is already past and almost done with. So
much so that when two parted lovers meet
again as in the tangos of Gardel they wonder
how they could have been so carried away and
feel ashamed of having been so blind. Growing
older a day at a time prevents us from seeing the
changes taking place in ourselves, but sooner or
later blind Cupid opens his eyes and learns to see.
Everyone is receptive to love poems and love
songs, a world of inexhaustible riches but at the
same time monotonous. However profound their
imagery and whatever their verbal felicities, they
are all alike, in the same way that love stories, in
spite of their differences, are all alike, but they
seldom sing of requited, lasting love. Not because,
as Aragon says, there is no happy love. It must
exist somewhere, but it seems unable to survive
the passage of time. Most of these songs and
poems prefer to dwell upon, and bemoan, for-
JORGE ENRIQUE
ADOUM,
Ecuadorian poet and novelist
His most recent published
work ¡s £/ tiempo y las palabras
(Libresa publishers, Quito,
1992).

*'
r>
1
gotten, star-crossed loves, love destroyed by
over-indulgence or lack of money, fleeting or
unattainable love. You won't believe me, but I
have even known girls who found something
beautiful about "love-sickness" and who went in
for those passionate epistolary affairs that are so
good for Post Office business.
I am not saying this to console you: I really
believe we have not yet learned how to love.
When people talk about dislike, hatred, anger,
resentment or revenge, we know exactly where
we are, but that enormous word "love" rings
hollow. We cram into the empty space all sorts of
feelings and intentions that have nothing to do
with it or even contradict it: the desire for pro¬
tection or togetherness; the will to dominate (the
demands made on women by living together
often end up type-casting them in the role of
mother-cum-sccretary, if not of housemaid too);
a distorted sense of ownership, equating women
with beasts of burden; the pleasure of playing to
an audience; a taste for ostentation or for keeping
up appearances; a longing for company when
you have only the cat to talk to in the middle of
the night; or else the need for someone to share
our troubles with and to hold out a helping hand
when we stumble.
What I mean is that we are still living in the
past, in a bygone time when women were god¬
desses or priestesses, slaves or prostitutes, idolized
or despised, whereas true love is a relationship
between equals. If we make an effort like when
we were in school and needed good marks at the
end of the year to go up into the next class
and if we try, simply and unassumingly, to build
the framework of married life in long, slow stages,
as carefully as if we were building a house of
cards, then perhaps we shall, in a few thousand
years' time, learn to love without introducing
qualifications, or at least without leaving scars,
without causing pain, without denying one's
»
own or another person's right to live his or her
own life, without heaping reproaches on each
other, without inflicting so many sacrifices, sup¬
posedly freely accepted, on one another.
Stricken with this love-sickness that you think
is incurable when in fact it just comes and goes
rapidly like a fever you are perhaps unaware,
my little girl, that we all suffer from it, that none
of us can get over it and we don't want to. It's like
when the sea catches you unawares, choking
you, stinging your eyes and bruising you
inwardly. Or if you prefer it's like when you
breast the waves, striking out into them in spite
of the warning they have just given you, swim¬
ming further and further out until one wave
stronger than the rest swamps you and hurts
you. That's the way it will be as long as the sea is
the sea.
Each time you will emerge enriched by the
experience. From each of these men, and from
yourself too, you will draw some lesson that will
help you cope better with your next love which
will, you'll see, again be the "only" one and "for
ever", like the one before. Alas, I shan't be there
for you to tell the story to, for you to cry on an
old man's shoulder, for me to try to console you
by stroking your hair or hopefully to cheer you
up by talking nonsense.
So all I can do now is to plant a kiss on your
little wounded heart; for it is your heart, your
pride, that is wounded, not your soul.
;1 Nicolas Bouvier,
contemporary Swiss writer.
Author of L'Usage du
monde, and other works. 45
