To check the
spread of nuclear
weapons, we must
stop thinking that
they are
synonymous with
security



The bomb or peace
by Jasjit Singh
Above, Illumination of
Peace, papier collé by the
Indian artist V. Balu.
CHANGES in the global political architec¬
ture during the past few years have led to
a number of agreements to reduce nuclear
weapons. The threat of a nuclear war and global
holocaust has receded. On the other hand, the
unmasking of the nuclear weapon programme
pursued by Iraq for many years, unknown and
undetected in spite of regular inspections by
the International Atomic Energy Authority,
has generated renewed concern about nuclear
proliferation.
Proliferation means different things to dif¬
ferent people. The five acknowledged nuclear
weapon states the United States, the former
USSR, China, France and the United Kingdom,
sec the problem essentially as one arising out of 35

Uniforms for sale in a
Moscow street.
the spread of nuclear weapons to other states: in
other words, "horizontal" proliferation. Most
other states sec the problem as far more com¬
plex, although no consensus view exists. The fact
that 1 57 states are now parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Prolifcration of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
which was signed in 1968 is an indication of this
widespread concern. It also highlights the com¬
mitment of the five nuclear weapon states to total
nuclear disarmament and reflects the expecta¬
tions of the non-nuclear weapon states that this
commitment will be honoured at an early date.
The real problem is that for more than forty-
36
five years the world has been led to believe that
nuclear weapons have kept the peace in Europe.
The United States and NATO justified their
nuclear weapons strategy as necessary for their
security against the perceived threat of the Soviet
Union's massive conventional forces and, later, the
combination of nuclear and conventional forces.
There is no way of testing this proposition, but its
logic has appealed to many other states and their
decision-makers.
A very large number of states do not have the
means to acquire nuclear capability, or lack suf¬
ficiently strong security incentives to do so.
Others have been coupled in the past to the
nuclear weapons of the two superpowers. But a
powerful logic in favour of acquiring nuclear
weapons for their own security has been oper¬
ating in many states, which have been swayed by
the rationale of nuclear deterrence. In such situ¬
ations a "ripple effect" takes place as other, neigh¬
bouring countries feel obliged to acquire nuclear
weapons in their turn.
Besides the security incentive, nuclear
weapons have acquired a certain aura in the inter¬
national system. The five permanent members of
the United Nations Security Council are nuclear
weapon states, and there have been many inci¬
dents in which a state has used nuclear weapons
as an instrument of policy to coerce others. These
and other factors create incentives for prolifera¬
tion, which is a source of instability.
There is no intrinsic reason to suggest that
only the states of the North can act in a rcspon-

*&£&
War/Peace (1989), a
collage by the American
artist Pat Horner.
sible manner, although unfortunately the debate
normally implies this. China, a major state of
the South, has possessed nuclear weapons for
the past twenty-five years. But an increase in the
numbers of those who control nuclear weapons
inevitably carries serious risks, not least those
arising from miscalculation and accident. There
is thus no reason to disagree with the prevalent
view in the North that any increase in the number
of nuclear weapon states is destabilizing. How¬
ever the problem cannot be resolved by
addressing the question of horizontal prolifera¬
tion alone.
FLAWS IN THE
NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY
The NPT is the only non-proliferation regime
that has so far been established. The general view,
especially in the South, is that the Treaty is dis¬
criminatory, but this is only a small part of the
problem. NPT has failed to meet its own stated
objectives, especially when judged against three
critical yardsticks sound principles, efficiency,
and security interests. The number of warheads
proliferated from less than 12,000 in 1968 to
55,000 twenty years later. The twin objectives
of non-proliferation and disarmament set out in
the NPT have not been met. This makes it nec¬
essary to establish a more viable non-proliferation
regime for the twenty-first century.
The NPT has also given nuclear weapons a
certain legitimacy, while at the same time tending
to provide a false sense of security. States which
adhere to the Treaty as non-nuclear weapon states
are believed to be such, although the reality may
be different, as Iraq's example shows. South
Africa clandestinely built up a stockpile of at
least six nuclear weapons. It joined the NPT in
July 1991; its denuclearization will remain under
question. North Korea signed the NPT in 1985
but is pursuing a weapon-related programme.
Iran is a party to the Treaty but is suspected by
some of having a weapon-related programme.
THE COLLAPSE
OF THE USSR
The disintegration of the USSR has led to
unprecedented risks of nuclear proliferation,
opening three major areas of concern.
Firstly, there is widespread uncertainty about
the extent of control being exercised over nuclear
weapons. On 21 December 1991 the leaders of
eleven former Soviet republics signed the Alma
Ata Accord in which it was agreed that deci¬
sions about the use of the strategic nuclear forces
of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) would be made by the Russian president
"with the agreement" of the leaders of Ukraine,
Belarus and Kazakhstan and after "consulta¬
tion" with other Commonwealth leaders. Actual
control of the "nuclear button" is believed to
rest with Marshal E. Shaposhnikov, the com¬
mander of CIS Strategic Deterrence Forces, and
President Boris Yeltsin. The system docs not
have the reliability of NATO in the sense that
there arc no institutionalized political controls 37

It is becoming feasible to
construct a world without
chemical weapons, and
to go from there to a
nuclear-weapon-free world
is only a few steps down
the same path.
Soviet leader Mikhail
Gorbachev and President
George Bush of the United
States sign understandings
on nuclear arms cuts at the
White House on 1 June
1990.
between Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Kaza¬
khstan. Nor can the stability of these states be
taken for granted. Russia has been resisting mul¬
tilateral controls even on the processes of dis¬
mantling nuclear weapons.
Secondly, it is hard to predict the effects of
Russia's domestic crisis on the mechanisms for
controlling nuclear weapons within the country.
In the former Soviet Union, control over nuclear
weapons was maintained through a balance of
tensions between three mutually reinforcing pil¬
lars of the power structure the Communist
Party, the KGB and the military. Today the Com-
munist Party is disbanded, and a stable political
framework has yet to be firmly established. The
KGB, which traditionally controlled the nuclear
warheads, has undergone a fundamental trans¬
formation. The military has been severely affected
by the dissolution of the USSR and the social and
economic problems this has caused. It was gen¬
erally believed that Soviet theatre military com¬
manders possessed delegated authority to use
nuclear weapons in their jurisdiction. There is
little to suggest that this has changed. In the West
concern has focussed essentially on the fate of
strategic weapons in the former Soviet Union, but
nearly 17,000 non-strategic nuclear warheads
constitute a more serious danger. Control over
these weapons has inevitably been far more dif¬
fused and uncertain.
Thirdly, the continuing social and economic
crisis in the former USSR has increased the risk
of leakage of nuclear weapon technology and
know-how. A nuclear brain drain could rein¬
force clandestine weapons programmes. New
trends in ethno-religious nationalism may provide
further incentives to nuclear proliferation.
THE DANGERS
OF PROLIFERATION
It was the transformation of political relations
between the United States and the Soviet Union
that made real progress possible in nuclear arms
reductions, rendering START itself obsolete even
before it was signed. Political relations, rather
than weapons per se, are the critical factor in
international security.
The biggest problem with nuclear weapons
may be described as one of asymmetry of capa¬
bilities. Asymmetry creates greater complexities
and uncertainties in multi-polar situations where
nuclear weapons of one state have implications for
a number of others. Inevitably asymmetry
increases with the increase in the number of
nuclear weapon states, creating instability and
providing a powerful incentive for proliferation.
Instability and proliferation, therefore, arc
closely linked. Broadly speaking, stability can
be enhanced only through one of two diametri¬
cally opposite methods global nuclearization by
extensive horizontal proliferation which could
keep the peace on the so-called European model
of nuclear deterrence, or denuclearization through
38

Glossary
CFE Treaty: The Conventional Armed Forces
in Europe Treaty, signed on 19 November
1990, came into force on 9 November
1992. Sets ceilings on treaty-limited ("con¬
ventional" or non-nuclear) equipment in
the Atlantic-to-the-Urals zone. 29 states
parties, including the former Soviet republics
since 1992.
CSCE: Conference on Security and Co-oper¬
ation in Europe. Began to meet in 1973 as
a forum for matters relating to security,
human rights and economic and scientific
co-operation in Europe. 51 member states
(all the European states plus the United
States and Canada and the former Soviet
republics).
IAEA: International Atomic Energy Agency.
Established in 1957 by the UN to promote
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and to
ensure that nuclear activities are not used
to further any military purpose, it has 1 13
member states.
ICBM: Intercontinental ballistic missile
(range in excess of 5,500 km). IRBM: Inter¬
mediate-range ballistic missile (range of
from 1,000 up to and including 5,500 km).
NATO: North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Established by a Treaty signed by 12 states
in Washington on 4 April 1949, it now has
16 members: Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Por¬
tugal. Spain, Turkey, the United Kingdom
and the United States. (France and Spain
are not in the integrated military structures
of NATO).
NPT: Treaty on the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons, signed on 1 July 1968;
came into force on 5 March 1970. It pro¬
hibits nuclear weapon states from trans¬
ferring to other states nuclear weapons or the
means of manufacturing or acquiring them.
156 states are parties to the Treaty.
SALT: Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. Nego¬
tiations between the United States and the
USSR which sought to limit the strategic
nuclear forces of both sides and resulted in
two treaties. The SALT I Agreements and the
ABM Treaty limiting the development,
testing and deployment of Anti-Ballistic
Missile Systems were signed in 1972. The
SALT II Treaty was signed in 1979 but never
ratified.
START: Strategic Arms Reduction Talks.
US-Soviet treaty, signed on 31 July 1991,
which reduces US and Soviet offensive
strategic nuclear weapons. In view of the
new political situation in Eastern Europe, a
protocol was signed at Lisbon on 23 May
1992 by the United States, Belarus, Kaza¬
khstan, Russia and Ukraine.
TNF: Theatre or tactical nuclear forces (also
called non-strategic nuclear forces). Nuclear
weapons with ranges of up to and including
5,500 km. The US-Soviet Intermediate-
range nuclear forces (INF) Treaty of 1987
obliged the United States and the USSR to
destroy all land-based missiles with a range
of 500-5,500 km (intermediate range and
shorter-range) and their launchers by June
1991.
UN: United Nations Organization. Interna¬
tional organization established in June 1945
by the San Francisco Treaty in succession to
the League of Nations, which was officially
dissolved in July 1947. It seeks to maintain
world security and peace and works on
behalf of international co-operation for eco¬
nomic and social progress and respect for
human rights. Its principal organs are the
General Assembly (where each of the 183
member states has one vote), the Security
Council (five permanent members: China,
France, Russia, the United Kingdom and the
United States, plus ten members elected for
two years), the Secretariat, the Economic
and Social Council (54 members elected by
the General Assembly for three years), and
the International Court of Justice.
WTO: The Warsaw Treaty Organization, or
Warsaw Pact, was established in 1955 by a
treaty of friendship and mutual assistance
between 8 countries: Albania, Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic
Republic, Hungary, Poland, Rumania and
the USSR. Dissolved on 1 July 1991.
Sources: United Nations, Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI)
JASJIT SINGH,
of India, is director of the
Institute for Defence Studies
and Analyses in New Delhi.
A member of India's
National Security Advisory
Board, he is the author of
several works on defence,
including Air Power in
Modern Warfare.
complete and global nuclear disarmament. It is
obvious which one would be the better option.
Denuclearization has traditionally been con¬
sidered too idealistic on the grounds that nuclear
weapons cannot be disinvented, and in theory the
problem of the rogue state and violations would
always remain. However, the Chemical Weapons
Convention now awaiting approval by the United
Nations General Assembly is quite relevant here
and could be taken as a model for dealing with the
threat of nuclear weapons. One of the most pos¬
itive results of the end of the Cold War, this Con¬
vention is based on the principles of universality
and comprehensiveness and includes provisions
for extensive verification and routine inspection.
This is particularly important since chemical
weapons arc easier to manufacture than nuclear
weapons, and even the less developed states of the
South have some access to technology and
resources to develop them because of the exten¬
sive and expanding chemical industry. Violations
of non-proliferation agreements concerning
nuclear weapons would thus be far easier to
check than those concerning chemical weapons.
It is becoming feasible to construct a world
without chemical weapons, and to go from there
to a nuclear-weapon-free world is only a few
steps down the same path. Denuclearization,
however, will have to be dealt with on the con¬
ceptual as well as the physical level. The problem
with nuclear weapons is that belief systems have
been built up to support the idea that they are
usable and indeed almost indispensable to inter¬
national security. If the dangers of proliferation
are to be addressed on a durable basis, steps must
be taken to counter these ideas. The real dan¬
gers of nuclear proliferation stem from nuclear
fundamentalism.
Nuclear fundamentalism needs to be tackled
at the conceptual level. This is why 138 states,
mostly of the South, have been regularly voting
at the UN since 1978 for a convention to outlaw
the use and threat of use of nuclear weapons.
This would be the most powerful method of
delegitimizing nuclear weapons and eroding
the concept of their utility. At the same time,
methods of maintaining national security need
re-examination.
In defence of their sovereignty nation-states
have traditionally sought to enhance their own
security at the cost of the security of other states.
Nuclear weapons, of course, represent an extreme
example of this process. The result is a competi¬
tive security framework that seeks to create and
exploit vulnerability in other states. This approach
should be replaced by a move towards a co-oper¬
ative security framework in which the security of
each side becomes of equal importance, the two
sides make allowances for each other's minimum
needs, and co-operate not to raise each other's
levels of insecurity. This would represent a com¬
prehensive model of collective security. 39
