INTERVIEW



MICHEL SERRES
talks to
François-Bernard Huyghe
Michel Serres of the Académie Française is an educator and
philosopher whose interests range from science and literature to
painting and environmental issues and whose self-proclaimed purpose
is to establish "the link between the sciences, law and religion". He
believes strongly that the philosopher should play a part in the life of
the community and is a member of Unesco's Ad hoc Forum of
Reflection, which is seeking to strengthen worldwide intellectual co¬
operation in identifying and responding to the new challenges facing
humanity. He is the author of some twenty books including Le Contrat
naturel (1990) and Le Tiers-Instruit (1991). His most recent works are
Eclaircissements (Editions François Bourin, Paris, 1992), a book of
conversations with Bruno Latour, and La Légende des Anges
(Flammarion, Paris, 1993).
FRANÇOIS-BERNARD HUYGHE
is a French writer and journalist.
One ofyour books is entitled Le con¬
trat naturel (The Natural Contract). Does
this mean man can make a contract with
Mother Nature?
Mother Nature does not appear in my
book. What I describe is a new shift, from
earth with a small "e", denoting earth as
one of the elements or the earth of farming,
to Earth with a capital "E", meaning the
planet, and hence a shift from a local per¬
ception to a global conception. We have
been witnessing the emergence of such a
global conception, from the technological,
human and scientific points of view, for
the past twenty years, which is why I
examine both meanings of the word
"earth" and hardly ever use the word
"Nature".
This idea of a new globality is perhaps
best symbolized by a photograph taken
from space, which arouses a feeling that just
about everyone who has seen it must have
shared. It shows the whole planet as seen
by a human eye. This new perception is an
event in the history of mankind. Owing to
this globalization of the way the Earth as
an object the planet is perceived, and by
a kind of recoil effect, the unity of
humanity is being gradually constructed.
Societies can only come into being if they
have an object in common; this object, the
globalized Earth, is new, and new bonds are
thus being established between humanity
and the planet.
The "natural contract" (which has
echoes of Rousseau's "social contract")
applies to this emerging bond. The idea of
standing in a legal relationship with the
entire planet was foreign to previous gen¬
erations, but just as human societies cannot
be conceived of without the social con¬
tract, the construction of the globality and
unity of the human race cannot be con¬
ceived of without the idea of a natural con¬
tract. The Enlightenment philosophers had

already worked out a concept of the human
Universal and natural law, but no-one
before our times could have imagined this
construction of the global. The natural
contract is thus not a metaphor to describe
our relationship with the Earth, but a full¬
blown philosophical concept.
Does it not relate back to to the dis¬
covery of laws the laws governing our
survival, for example?
No law, in the legal world itself or in the
philosophy of law, comes into being unless
it is preceded by a contract. Contracts are
a prerequisite for all laws. But the same
word is used to denote laws in the physical
sciences and the laws we humans enact,
and until now these two sets did not inter¬
sect. The natural contract establishes a rela¬
tionship between the exact and the human
sciences, between the two kinds of laws.
Do you know of a single philosopher
worthy of the name who has not at some
time been forced to think anew about sci¬
ence and the law, and about the relationship
between the two kinds of laws that govern
them? The whole problem of Western phi¬
losophy resides in this relationship or
linkage.
The philosopher's job is to describe
the conditions that have to be met in order
for laws to be made, not to describe the
content of those laws. It is to think about
the nature of the bonds on which duties are
grounded. In the case of the social con¬
tract, the bonds are between human beings
only, while physical laws relate exclusively
to links between objects. What is the rela¬
tionship between these two kinds of bond?
A link must be forged between
humanity, now in the process of becoming
one, and this new object, planet Earth.
This relationship, which entails new duties,
is what I call the natural contract. We can
discuss the duties when cases come to
court. We have already seen lawsuits
involving the users of a national park and
the park itselfwhich thus becomes a legal
entity possessing rights. As cases like these
are tried, and judicial precedents are set, the
duties involved will gradually be estab¬
lished. The law did not cover these areas. It
therefore has to be thought through, first
in philosophical terms, then in legal and,
lastly, political terms.
Should the Earth be viewed as a "sub¬
ject", an entitypossessing rights?
That is the main problem facing the
philosopher. How can an object become a

What steps can be taken against the development ofa universal culture
that only expresses a single force?
subject? All advances in law have consisted
of taking things that had been objects and
turning them into subjects. Slaves, who
were objects, became subjects before the
law, and the same is happening with chil¬
dren and embryos. Every time law makes
progress, it turns objects into subjects in
this way. The planet was an object and I am
suggesting it be made a subject. This inno¬
vation has met with a certain amount of
resistance, but in philosophy one must
learn to challenge generally accepted ideas
and be ready to accept that an issue has
taken on a new form.
Have atomic weapons helped the idea
ofglobality to emerge?
The shift from the local to the global
did indeed begin some time ago. The
atomic bomb has been what I have called
a "world object", in other words a tech¬
nological object one of whose dimensions
is world-wide in scale. It was one step on
the road from the local to the global. Today
we have the means to assess this relation¬
ship between the local and the global and
express it in equations. Climatological
models are another example.
Cross-fertilization is another ofyour
concepts.
Education today produces scientists
who, generally speaking, are ignorant out¬
side their own fields, and cultured people
who know nothing about science. Most
of today's problems stem from the separa
tion between these two groups. Both have
become decision-makers but they no
longer understand each other. The latter
enact human laws without bearing in mind
the existence of objects and of science,
while the former discover and apply nat¬
ural laws without taking human beings
into account. This is where I first used the
idea of cross-fertilization imagine, as
Plato did, a sociologist familiar with natural
science or a politician well versed in
physics. The idea of cross-fertilization
means first of all devising an education
system that does not separate the exact
sciences and the humanities in a foolish,
dangerous way.
It then occurred to me that cross-fertil¬
ization was the global concept underlying all
learning processes. If you start to learn
physics, your life and your world are going
to change. You become crossbred by the
very fact of learning. That's why I started my
book on education (Le Tiers-Instruit) with
a portrait, describing how I learned to write
with my right hand even though I was left-
handed. Left- or right-handed people will
always be physically and intellectually hémi¬
plégie half their body is paralysed. If you
know how to use both hands your body is
whole. The crossbreed I'm talking about is
this monster a human being who can
use his or her right and left hands at the
same time, reborn at the point where the
two sides meet.
We experience this a little when we
learn to speak another language. It is as if
a second person were entering us to beget
a third, by cross-fertilization. The hybrid
offspring is what I call the tiers-instruit, the
"educated third party".
Traditionally, culture is viewed as
something that makes an individual
"blossom ". Is there a relationship between
your own idea of culture and this long-
established metaphor?
I'm not really fond of the word "culture"
which, like "nature", is one of those words
that always cause aguments. But to con¬
tinue with the metaphor let's say that cross¬
breeding is similar to a graft. When some¬
thing is learned, a third person is produced
from the rootstock into which the scion is
inserted.
Are you advocating aform oflearning
that would go on making us forever
someone else, helping us each to become, in
our own way, the "educated thirdperson "
that we unknowingly carry around inside
us?
We must accept and acknowledge this
"someone else", who keeps company with
us and takes us to meet a second person.
The moment you acknowledge otherness,
learning has this modifying effect. It is not
a matter of developing a philosophy of the
Other. The Other is the second person.
We are talking about the educated third
person begotten by the encounter between
the self and the other.
There are thousands of books on

*
teaching that have never served any pur¬
pose other than to enable inspectors to
terrorize teachers. No amount of teacher
training can provide you with specific
details about the individual pupils in such-
and-such a class at such-and-such a time of
day, and so the more specific the textbook,
the more illusory it is.
As far as teaching is concerned, giving
practical instructions advising teachers
to get their pupils to read the newspapers,
for instance often amounts to giving
abstract instructions. The reality consists of
particular cases and particular types of
pupil. Generally speaking, educational
theory is middle-of-the-road, neither spe¬
cific nor abstract. It is much less useful
than it claims to be or is thought to be.
The issue I am interested in is, what are the
necessary conditions for learning?
You are a member ofa UNESCO Forum
which is concerned with getting to grips
with specifics and recommending solu¬
tions.
In Le contrat naturel I take note of
something that happened, perhaps, after
the founding of UNESCO: the construc¬
tion of a human unity that, for many rea¬
sons, objective reasons in particular, could
probably not have been foreseen in the
late 1940s. The specific advice I give the
Forum will take this rise of the global into
account.
We are currently witnessing an irre¬
sistibly growing trend towards the global.
Unfortunately this trend is increasingly
monopolized by the most powerful, whose
might is right. That which is universal is
warped when it is taken over by a single
power, and we are increasingly under the
sway of a single culture.
What specific steps can be taken against
the development of a universal culture that
only expresses a single force? That is the
question.
H The media have a tendency to look
uponphilosophers as oracles, asking them
for their ideas about how to save the world
and their views on all kinds of current
events. What do you feel about this?
It's true that the media ask philosophers
all sorts of questions on a host of topics. Per¬
sonally, I never answer such questions
because I don't think my ideas on all kinds
of topics are necessarily useful. I only
answer questions about topics dealt with in
my books or about things like the Forum
you mentioned. In all other cases I keep
out of the media because my mind is not all-
embracing. Furthermore, I never engage in
polemics. Polemics is the enemy of every
form of invention. Those who do not invent
have no right to be considered as intellec¬
tuals or philosophers. Polemics is an unmit¬
igated obstacle to the invention of concepts.
Philosophers are not "competent" in
the sense of being experts, but they have a
very specific task, which is to produce
ideas. I would rather produce in my field
and refuse to answer questions outside it.
I'd never write a book attacking another
book. On the contrary, if I see someone
come up with a new concept I'm as happy
about it as if I had thought it up myself. A
new concept is something very rare and
very fragile. It must be protected like a
newborn child. It will bear fruit later, per¬
haps in fifty years.
