UNESCO IN ACTION
NEWSBRIEFS...
42
SAVIMG CAMBODIA'S DANCE
TRADITION
Em Theay, Head Teacher of Cambodia's
National Dance Company in Phnom
Penh, is one of the last surviving
keepers of Cambodia's sacred dance
traditions. These traditions, which she
preserved during three and a half years
of forced labour in the countryside
between 1975 and 1979, may die out
unless they are properly recorded. She
and her pupil Sok Chea are the main
characters in The Tenth Dancer, a
documentary by the Australian film¬
maker Sally Ingleton which shows the
preparation for the Buong Suong, a
sacred dance traditionally performed in
Cambodia at the New Year. The film
was made with assistance from
Unesco's International Fund for the
Promotion of Culture and other
international bodies.
FAMILY PHOTOS
A total of 1 32 prizes were awarded in a
photo contest on the theme of the
family, organized by UNESCO and the
Asian Cultural Centre for Unesco
(ACCU), when the jury met in Tokyo in
April. The prize-winning photos were
selected from among 9, 1 1 7 entries from
133 countries. The three Grand Prix
went to: Chen Anding (China) for Blood
Relation (Prize of the Director-General
of Unesco); Knud Nielsen (Denmark)
for Football (Prize of the President of
ACCU); and Miguel Cruz (Dominican
Republic) for Hope (Prize of the World
Decade for Cultural Development).
Each of the three will receive $5,000
and a Nikon F4 AF camera at a
presentation ceremony to be held at
Unesco Headquarters in November.
MAN AND THE BIOSPHERE
Two new volumes have been issued in
English in Unesco's "Man and the
Biosphere" series. The first. Decision
support systems for the management of
grazing lands, describes applications of
the software known as "decision
support systems" (DSS), containing
databases, ecological system simulators
and economic analysis programmes, and
shows how this software can be used in
technologically less advanced countries.
The second volume, The world's
savannas Economic driving forces,
ecological constraints and policy options for
sustainable land use, examines the
economic, ecological and political forces
affecting tropical savannas and makes
policy suggestions for the future. The
two volumes are available by mail order
from Unesco Publications, Sales
Division, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75352
Paris 07 SP, France. The price of 380
French francs per volume includes
postage by surface mail.
'AN INDIA CALLED AMERICA*
"In what way did the Encounter of Two
Worlds contribute to transforming my
culture or that of my people?" This was
the theme of an international literary
contest organized by UNESCO in
connection with the five-hundredth
anniversary (1492-1992) of the
Encounter of Two Worlds and co-
sponsored by the municipal authorities
of Saint-Malo (France) and the French
association Etonnants Voyageurs. Over
1 50 works were submitted from some
40 countries. On 20 May a jury of
internationally-known writers awarded
the first prize, worth $10,000, to a 42-
year-old Portuguese writer, José Jorge
Letria, for his essay Uma India chamada
América ("An India called America"). A
second prize, worth $3,000, went to
Andre Neumann from Germany, and
five other prizes went to writers from
Colombia, Gambia, France, Ecuador and
Mexico.
WOMEN AND SOCIETY
Four short documentary films on the
theme of women and development
show by means of authentic case-
studies how Latin American peasant
women have acquired knowledge and
skills relevant to their environment and
taken economic and commercial
initiatives. The films, lasting five minutes
each, were co-produced by Unesco, the
United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) and the Secretariat
of the Convenio Andrés Bello (SECAB).
They are available from Alejandro
Alfonzo, Unesco, Foch 265, Apartado
17.07.8998, Quito, Ecuador; Tel. (593-2)
562 327; Fax. (593-2) 504 435.
A NETWORK OF LIBRARIES
To counter the dearth of books and
periodicals imposed by lack of funds on
university libraries in the developing
countries, Unesco's International
Institute for Educational Planning (HEP)
has begun to establish a network of
depository libraries and documentation
centres in those countries. The HEP is
targeting those resource centres
particularly concerned with educational
planning; more than a hundred have
already been selected. It is hoped that
200 depository libraries will be in place
by 1995, with the largest concentration
in Africa, followed by Asia, Latin
America and the Arab States.
CONMENTARY
by
Federico
Mayor
This article is one
of a series in which
the Director-General
of Unesco sets out
his thinking on matters
of current concern

HUMAN RIGHTS ARE
UNIVERSAL
HUMAN rights have established themselves as the eth¬
ical foundation of an emergent world civilization. I
should like to underline the role played by the United
Nations system in this process, from its initiation to current
efforts to promote preventive measures of all kinds.
Yet so much more remains for all of us to do. The recent
relaxation of ideological tensions within the world commu¬
nity aroused great expectations for the wider observance of
human rights. However, the hatreds and brutal conflicts that have
erupted in many parts of the world, particularly in the aftermath
of the Cold War, have underscored how deep the roots of intol¬
erance are. The recrudescence of racism and xenophobia and
massive violations of human rights based on ethnic and cultural
difference give a particular urgency to the continuing task of
combating intolerance and promoting respect for fundamental
human rights.
Article 28 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
stipulates that "Everyone is entitled to a social and interna¬
tional order in which the rights and freedoms set forth in this
Declaration can be fully realized". While we do not know the
answer to the question "What weight of poverty can the wings
of freedom bear?", we know the question to be most perti¬
nent. Human rights and freedoms are indivisible, and indi¬
vidual freedom flourishes more readily where the servitudes of
poverty and ignorance have been abolished. By the same token,
respect for human rights and dignity is an essential leaven of
authentic development.
EDUCATION AND TRAINING
Education is one of the most powerful means available to us for
promoting human rights. It is the firmest foundation for a
human rights culture, rooted both in attitudes and values and in
specific knowledge. UNESCO has already carried out a wide
range of activities in this field, namely: the preparation of study
programmes, textbooks and teaching aids; the training of edu¬
cators, journalists and professional groups interested in human
rights; dissemination of the corresponding information through
the Associated Schools Project; implementation of the Rec¬
ommendation concerning Education for International Under¬
standing, Co-operation and Peace and Education relating to
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; the award every two
years of the UNESCO Prize for the Teaching of Human Rights;
and more recently, the establishment of UNESCO chairs on
human rights education. The ultimate aim is to establish a new
and wide-ranging system for teaching these rights, extending
from the earliest stages of education to university level, not
forgetting non-formal education and catering for the whole
population, especially children, minorities and the disabled,
whose rights are still all too frequently left out of account and
require greater protection.
The end of the Cold War has afforded fresh opportunities
for broadening the scope of human rights education by adding
to it the essential dimension of democracy. Democracy is the
only context in which human rights can be exercised and
respected. Education for democracy is predicated on the
premise that, although there cannot be one single model for
democracy, there is a set of universally recognized values and
principles without which true democracy cannot be built.
AN ETHICAL TRUTH
In the matter of the protection and observance of human
rights, wc have a practical task to perform. We must secure
more effective and more universal support for the international
instruments adopted in this field by the United Nations, the
International Labour Organisation, UNESCO and other insti¬
tutions.
This practical, effective universality, which we are striving
to achieve, will be merely the reflection and corollary of that
other universality, which underpins it. I am talking about
moral universality: in other words that of the values enshrined
in that landmark text whose forty-fifth anniversary we celebrate
this year. The universality of human rights: this says so much,
and yet so little. Arc we truly aware of the ethical truth
expressed in this one phrase? That each and every human
being has the same rights? Do we truly understand that each
individual is both a unique being and the epitome of the
species? Do we recognize in our way of life and behaviour the
implications of the fact that human rights form part of the
common heritage of humanity?
These rights arc common to us all because they belong to
each person. There is no group or country that can claim to be
the sole custodian of a universal heritage. They are universal
because they transcend cultural differences. It may, of course,
be objected that they cannot be applied uniformly to all cul¬
tures, but it cannot be denied that the values in whose name
these rights arc invoked correspond to aspirations inherent in
human nature and are therefore well and truly universal.
Human rights arc also universal because, although each person
is unique, there is but one human species.
At the dawn of the third millennium, the concept of human
rights interactive, inseparable and indivisible belongs in a
context that encompasses economic, social and cultural rights,
civil and political rights, the right to a wholesome environment,
the right to human and sustainable development, and even
the rights of future generations. We should welcome this con¬
tinuing process of expansion.
These rights have a collective dimension in the sense that
they may be claimed by individuals if the individual is a
member of a group. In this connection, now more than ever
before, since this year we are celebrating the International
Year of the World's Indigenous People, the voice of those
people must be able to be heard, to be heeded, and to be part
of a democratic polyphony in which all the components
respect one another.
43
