Africa:
the healer's
art
by Aime'Murie Kaufmani
30
PSYCHOANALYSIS is not a matter merely of
explaining or elucidating what is wrong
in people's relationships with their con¬
temporaries and those around them. It is also a
therapeutic procedure in which, for the psy¬
choanalyst, it is inconceivable to act against a
patient's wishes, and above all to know more
than the patient about his or her own case. The
psychoanalyst's ethics, in other words, are
based on a kind of renunciation of knowledge.
When a patient comes to seek help to enable
him or her to live a better life, the analyst
knows no more than the patient, but waits to
be enlightened by what he or she has to say.
The psychoanalyst's desire to know engenders
a similar desire in the patient: and this enables
the patient, rather than waiting for a recipe for
improvement, to dismantle the pathological
mechanisms at work in him or her in order to
alleviate the problems caused by his or her
relationship to reality. In short, psychoanalysis
is a theory which uses the patient's own words
to provide for this or that neurotic symptom
an explanation which is by definition indi¬
vidual and personal.
What first strikes a psychoanalyst in Africa
is the predominant place occupied by talking.
Traditional therapies there are all based on
something which contrary to the claims of
some European ethnopsychiatrists is not
mere verbal conditioning designed to make a
deviant subject conform to a codified social
norm, but a form of verbalization that takes
individual account of the patient's problem and
its cause.
Nevertheless there is an essential difference
between Africa and Europe. Illness in Africa is
due to an external force, the supernatural
intervention of a jinn, a zaar or a rah following
an offence committed against it or some other
deity. So before any treatment you have to
know which deity is concerned, what the
offence was, and how to make it good.
An anthropomorphic vase
produced by potters
of the Bena Kanioka people
(Zaire).
Many European psychiatrists think that
once a subject's symptoms have been identi¬
fied, all that has to be done is to recondition
him or her. Each symptom calls for an appro¬
priate medicinal treatment or a stay in an insti¬
tution which will put everything back to
rights. European psychiatrists with experience
of psychoanalysis are, like traditional African
healers, sceptical about this approach because
it bypasses the truth, the root cause concealed
within each patient, and merely papers over
the cracks which reopen at the first opportu¬
nity. Whenever we have talked to traditional
African practitioners and to Western psychia¬
trists, we have been struck by this emphasis on
uncovering the cause, on talking, which allows
a person's symbolic landmarks to be put back

in place and completely reorganized so as to
make him or her a place in society again.
CONSCIENTIOUS HEALERS
I shall give two examples of traditional African
therapy. The first concerns a Pygmy healer
who was approached by a woman who since
her husband's death had been subject to fits of
delirium and hallucination in which he had
appeared to her and enjoined her to look after
the house, to make the land he had farmed
more productive, and make sure that the chil¬
dren did not squander his legacy. These
episodes were accompanied by intense distress
and agitation, which cut the woman off from
the world so much so that she neglected her
children, one of whom died as a result. Letting
this child die, and allowing her legacy to waste
away, was obviously the disaster of her life.
The Pygmy healer who saw this woman
was thus faced with a case of pathological
bereavement. A European psychiatrist would
have looked no further, and would have rec¬
ommended treatment with neuroleptic anti¬
depressant drugs which would have "got rid of
the symptom". But the Pygmy healer was not
satisfied with this sort of rough and ready
approach. It took him several weeks to find
out what the problem was. During his long ill¬
ness, the patient's husband had asked her to go
into the forest and gather herbs that might
cure him, but pleading shortage of time or
money as an excuse the woman had shirked
doing so, and after her husband's death this
made her feel (with some justification) respon¬
sible for his demise. This unconfessed guilt
could resurface only in the form of demoniac
possession, in which her husband came and
reminded her of himself. Once her fault was
brought out into the open, she was able through
a ritual ceremony to reduce it to its due propor¬
tions and make amends for it, and she was soon
rid of the hallucinatory bereavement symptoms.
The second example has to do with the
treatment of a case of male sterility. A man
came to a healer complaining of persistent
sterility. From unions with several women he
had begotten no offspring, although when they
had left him the women had soon managed to
procreate. The healer was not content merely to
prescribe his patient the simples that would
solve the sterility problem. He suspected a psy¬
chogenic cause and investigated the matter with
him. Some weeks later he uncovered the nub of
the matter. The patient admitted that he had
met women without the approval of his father,
who had several times laid a curse upon him.
The healer then sent for the father, got the story
out of him and arranged a reconciliation which
was made possible by putting the son's fault
into perspective. Soon afterwards the son mar¬
ried with his father's agreement, and nine
months later a child the first of many was
born of this union.
Here the patient's relationship to the cause
of his problem is easy to spot behind the trivial
and treatable symptom. It was only by talking
it out that the healer managed to reconstitute
the symbolic course of events that led to the
disaster a procedure very close to psycho¬
analysis. A psychoanalyst is not someone who
knows what is subconsciously brewing behind
a symptom; he is someone who through his
ignorance allows a patient to elucidate what is
THE SYMBOLISM
OF PAYMENT
Now let us consider the nature of analytical
treatment. In Europe it is generally considered
that analysis is for those who can afford to pay
for it. Freud himself always emphasized that
treatment through talking could not begin to
work until some form of payment had been
made. Payment serves a twofold purpose. It
reflects the individual nature of the service
asked of the analyst, not so much because he is
treating the patient which is after all his
job as because the treatment requires him to
put aside his subjective self and subordinate it
to a desire for knowledge which will enable
the patient to cure himself. Thus in a pyscho-
In Burkina Faso, cowrie
shells help a healer to
diagnose the causes of an
illness.
analytical relationship the payment is the price
paid to the analyst for sacrificing though not
forgetting his subjectivity. Secondly the pay¬
ment has a loss function. Money paid out is
money lost, and in an analytical treatment this
means forfeiting the pathological comfort that
may be associated with certain symptoms.
In Africa economic problems are always
invoked in order to argue that people with
nothing obviously cannot be expected to pay.
This is to overlook the symbolic dimension of
payment, which Freud again emphasized when
he urged his pupils to open psychoanalysis to
all classes of society. After all, there are plenty
of other ways of paying apart from money,
such as paying with one's time, through ser¬
vices rendered. Freud used to ask his patients 31

A healer and his patients in
Dakar (Senegal).
to do a variety of things, such as bibliograph¬
ical research, for him. This was taken into
account when it came to paying for treatment.
Traditional practitioners in Africa also
believe that patients should pay, and that some
part of their goods (and of the morbid comfort
linked to their symptoms) should be lost. In
some African countries psychoanalysis seems
to have become acclimatized quite naturally, as
regards both recognition of the patient's indi¬
viduality and also the need to get payment
from him or her.
On the other hand a psychoanalyst has no
chance of operating in Africa, of following a
patient step by step in his or her search for the
truth, unless he is thoroughly conversant with
the local culture not from reading textbooks
of ethnology but directly, as a result of being
steeped in the cultural environment. Hence it
seems essential to train therapists who can be at
home on the interface between two forms of
knowledge: knowledge of the unconscious
mind, which evolves a new theory about each
patient's relationship with the world, and
knowledge of the individual's relationships with
his or her parents and family, society, the neigh¬
bourhood and the deity relationships which
vary according to ethnic group, culture and
period.
Though the mechanisms people use in
order to come to terms with reality are the
same everywhere, they may be expressed in
totally different ways. Superficially there is
nothing in common between the way in which
a European family organizes its mourning
after the death of a child and the way in which
African parents who have lost several children
contrive to protect an unborn infant from the
awful sequence of continual journeys back and
forth across the river of life. Ignorance of all
these mechanisms lays a European psychoana¬
lyst open to mistaken interpretations; and this
is a pitfall into which many technical assistance
psychiatrists have fallen. After reading a few
books and meeting a few people, they have
thought they understood how their patients'
minds worked. They might, for example, have
regarded a liver complaint in a Hausa man as a
trivial hypochondriac symptom, whereas in
fact it represented a fundamental assault on the
seat of his courage and virility.
AFRICAN WISDOM
The important thing in Africa is to relate psy¬
choanalysis to all aspects of the culture, to all
the accumulated wisdom of an area not yet
overtaken by acculturation, where people still
understand what the basis of their life is and
which family and cultural landmarks they can
hold on to. This interface between two types of
knowledge should produce an approach to psy¬
chology consistent with the African idea of
taking responsibility, and also with an analytical
ethos which presupposes that the patient is a
32

ANNE-MARIE KAUFMANT
is a French psychiatrist and
psychoanalyst. She is a co-
founder of a research group
concerned with the
application of
psychoanalysis to psychiatry
in French-speaking Africa,
where she has contributed
to films about traditional
mental health care. In Dakar,
Cotonou and Paris she
directs seminars on
concepts of psychoanalysis
and the function of speech
in African cultures.
responsible being. This would enable Africans,
like our European patients (and those of us
psychoanalysts who have ourselves trodden
that road) to have access to an understanding
which is enhanced by taking account both of
Africans' culture and of their individuality.
European psychiatry seems to me to have
failed by attempting to make generalizations
about mental disorders and to use them as
guidelines for explaining the African mind.
After listening to it with ironical patience,
Africans have retained their profound beliefs
intact, convinced that the way in which people
experience the power of speech is chosen by
them and enables them to react to their envi¬
ronment in the way that is most tolerable for
them. Psychoanalysis in Europe has been and
always will be subversive because it puts the
patient before the sacrosanct interests of
society. But in Africa we have a continent in
which this subversion is skilfully moulded to fit
in with a wise and ancient culture, which still
believes that technological civilization has no
chance of crushing the individual.
A sacred baobab tree in
Senegal.
33
