A world steeped in music
by Isabelle Leymarie
ODERNlTY', in the most usual
sense of the word, encompasses
the world of today. It conjures up
a picture of a perpetually moving technolog¬
ical universe stemming from the Industrial Rev¬
olution, in which humanity is a slave to
machinery and feels anxious and cut off from
Nature and its own roots. WH. Auden empha¬
sized a more positive aspect of the modern age
when he defined it as born of "the transforma¬
tion of a closed society of tradition and inheri¬
tance into an open society of fashion and
choice".
In this modern world, which is both unstable
and alienating and makes a multitude of
demands, there is more music about than ever
before. In the street, in buses and on trains,
more and more people arc wearing headsets to
enjoy their favourite type of music, turned in on
themselves and announcing their refusal to com¬
municate with others. A non-stop flow of music
pours from radio and television stations, and can
be heard in restaurants, supermarkets, airports,
hairdressers' and other shops, dentists' waiting
rooms and post offices. Music is a component
part of films; concerts and music festivals are
proliferating internationally; and now some
bars in the West are starting to import karaoke
from Japan a device which enables the man in
the street to sing familiar songs to a pre-recorded
backing while the lyrics appear on a screen.
Thus music is ubiquitous, and listening to it
in its most varied forms is continually on the
increase. "Early music and non-European music
have never been so widespread," writes Paul-
Louis Simon. "Guillaume de Machaut, Mozart
and Ravi Shankar fill our auditory world; our
ears arc flooded with jazz, pop, disco music
and all kinds of songs; all these art forms arc
there for us to choose from, and form an integral
part of the art of our time."
The musicologist Jean-Paul Holstein points
out that music today is characterized by high
technology, internationalism and democratiza¬
tion. High technology in this context means
that composers use more and more complex
forms of expression, that instrumentalists display
increasing virtuosity, and that people listen to
music through the intermediary of more and
more sophisticated technology. Modern tech¬
niques such as mixing, dubbing, playback and
electronic distortion in the form of wawa,
reverb, fuzz and echoplex open the way to new
sound possibilities, but however advanced they
may be, they eliminate contact with the original
acoustic sound. Doris Rossiaud, a fine pianist
who performed with the Orchestre Suisse
Romande, refused to make recordings because
she regarded all the ways of correcting errors in
the studio with multiple takes and mixing as
forms of trickery.
As for Holstein's other two points, inter¬
nationalism here refers to the proliferation of
means of transport and communication, and to
the creation of new professions, especially in the
media, publishing and advertising, aimed at
publicizing and promoting various kinds of
music. Democratization is linked to popular¬
ization, the market economy, the emergence of
a wide audience and the requirements of hit¬
parades.
CROSS-FERTILIZATION AND
STANDARDIZATION
On the current music scene two trends are
asserting themselves in tandem: on the one hand
an urge to merge with and communicate with
other cultures, apparent in "world music", a
mélange of musics from different countries, and
on the other the increasing standardization of
commercial music, dominated by American and
English pop. As non-Western musics arc
absorbed by Western culture, the exotic becomes
commonplace and loses its character, and oppor¬
tunities for escape become more limited. The
various "ethnic" musics get cut off from their
social and religious context and become dehu¬
manized by excessive use of synthesizers (which
reproduce the sound of certain traditional instru¬
ments, but do not capture their subtleties) and
electronic "drum machines".
Mechanized and rendered insipid, the
Japanese shamisen and the Mandingo balafon
now serve only to add a semblance of tone

Recording a work for
clarinet and tape recorder
at the Institut de
Recherche et de
Coordination Acoustique-
Musique (IRCAM) in Paris.
New computer technology
adjusts the sound of the
recorded track to the
instrumentalist's tone and
phrasing as he plays.
colour to these new mixes. Then there is "fla¬
menco rock", an unholy mixture of guitar and
rhythm section, robbed of all duende, the pas¬
sion that gives Gypsy music its harsh beauty.
North African rai merges into reggae, reggae
into rap, and rap itself, with the "sampling"
technique made popular by young black Amer¬
ican disc-jockeys, which involves borrowing a
fragment from one piece and inserting it, collage-
style, into another, leads to mangling and the
production of rag-bag medleys. Musical
hybridization is more fashionable than ever,
and the media are all too ready to propagate it.
But while musical mixtures, like all contacts
between cultures, are positive, rewarding and
even essential for cultural growth, they can only
work for mutually compatible musics. A par¬
ticularly successful example is Latin jazz, a blend
of American jazz and Afro-Latin rhythm and
percussion that is flourishing in the United
States. It works because jazz and the black
musics of Latin America and the West Indies
have the same European and African roots. Fur¬
thermore, for osmosis to take place between
two or more musical traditions, a long ripening
process is usually required, such as the "cre-
olization" that, beginning in the West Indies,
Latin America and New Orleans in the early
seventeenth century, gave rise to such original
styles as jazz, rumba, mambo, calypso, the
beguine, samba and bossa nova, each with its
own rules and instrumentation.
The abandonment of tradition and the cul¬
tural legacy gives rise to continual changes and
inventions. Creativity may thereby be stimu¬
lated, but most commonly, where pop music is
concerned (now "popular" in name only, since
it is no longer rooted in a real tradition), the con¬
sumer society requires the continual production
of novelties which at once become outdated
and the frantic race to make "hits". These factors
disturb less commercially successful artists
unable to swim against the tide of fashion, and
also subject listeners to the diktats of the record
companies, for which sales considerations often
take precedence over quality.
The continual broadcasting of music as a
consumer product also leads to listener lazi¬
ness. Listening becomes passive rather than
active, and background music can even bring on
nervous fatigue. We arc reduced to hearing
instead of listening. Many employees working
in premises where the radio is always on end up
by simply blanking out the background noise in
order to escape the assault on their ears.
Pop music, now a common denominator
for the young, has nevertheless (despite its close
links with the consumer society) often been bit¬
terly critical of the violence and excesses of the
modern world. "You've never done nothing

A karaoke session in
Tokyo.
but build to destroy," proclaimed Bob Dylan in
"Masters of War". Jamaican reggae condemns
"Babylon" as the emblem of the decadent
modern city, in which hatred and corruption
are rife; and Michael Jackson, the very symbol
of commercial success, took on a redemptive
mission by proclaiming himself the messenger
of divine love.
MODERNITY
AND
CONTEMPORARY MUSIC
It is interesting to note that though we speak of
modern art, modern architecture and modern
furniture, we say contemporary music. The
latter uses a wide variety of musical techniques:
modal, serial, contingent, polytonal and atonal
languages, the use of stridency and of apparently
non-musical noises (pioneered by Eric Satie's
Parade), of unconventional and increasingly
graphic systems of notation, and of computers
and other electro-acoustic equipment
(IRCAM the Institut de Recherche et de
Coordination Acoustique-Musique in France
and the music departments of Columbia and
Princeton universities in the United States are
specialists in this field). Contemporary music
uses acoustic instruments to provide a repertoire
of unusual sound effects (for instance, John
Cage's prepared piano,1 Vinko Globokar's trom
bone pieces, flautists singing into their instru¬
ments, violins slapped and scraped, and the
ways in which the human voice is used in the
work of Giacinto Scelsi). So-called "happen¬
ings" such as Cage's Silence also enrich the
world of sound.
Contemporary music is still regarded by
many as "experimental", and people sometimes
find it confusing, but it has not yet been going
long enough to allow the necessary perspective
view. Moreover, now that patronage has ended,
present-day composers arc increasingly isolated
and find themselves in a precarious position.
Few of their works now arc commissioned
pieces with a specific social function, written for
the church, the court, ballet, opera or as pure
divertissement, or governed by a cosmogonie or
philosophical system. At the same time com¬
posers enjoy greater freedom and independence
now that they are no longer subject to the whims
of a patron.
Far from being popular, contemporary music
still attracts only a limited audience. But the
European tradition makes a hierarchical dis¬
tinction (often artificial and pernicious) between
so-called "art music", which is placed on a
pedestal, and other types of music. This is not the
case elsewhere. In Cuba, for instance, the various
musical genres are closely linked a phenom¬
enon that predates the rise of Fidel Castro 57

thus vitalizing music in general. It is not unusual
for a member of a symphony orchestra to play
in an Afro-Cuban group in the evening and
then go on to improvise late at night with a jazz
outfit without doing any harm to his reputa¬
tion, rather the contrary. Several Cuban com¬
posers, such as Ernesto Lecuona, Gilberto
Valdés, Gonzalo Roig and Emilio Grenet have
written many works for the popular repertoire
and have taken legitimate pride in them.
THE QUEST FOR
AN AESTHETIC
In the field of aesthetics the idea of modernity
means something different. By and large, for
most people, it suggests skyscrapers and con¬
crete buildings, the advent of black cars, the
pure lines of 1920s dress fashions, rectilinear
furniture, Picasso. This aesthetic, perceived as the
obverse of classicism, romanticism, the ancient
world and other canons, is entirely relative.
Indeed, it has had its day. In the visual arts
people now talk about "post-modernism", and
in the world of jazz, following the excesses of
1960s free jazz, about "neo-classicism" exem¬
plified by musicians such as Wynton Marsalis,
the Harper brothers and Terence Blanchard.
Some architects like Philip Johnson, Gwathmcy
& Siegel and Mario Buotta are now opting for
softer, rounder shapes. Fashions in dress arc
also reverting to earlier styles.
The idea of modernity is far from being con¬
temporary. Some composers in the early decades
of this century, such as Charles Ives, Henry
Cowell, Edgard Várese, Carl Ruggles, Dane
Rudhyar, Ruth Crawford and Adolph Weiss,
were termed "ultra-modern" in the United
States in their day.
It is interesting to note that for these com¬
posers being modern meant, in music, following
only one's imperious inner drives, not outdated
canons. "Music written in the manner of another
century," said Várese, "is the result of culture,
and desirable and comfortable as culture may be,
an artist should not lie down in it." He added: "I
don't care about reaching the public as much as
I care about reaching certain musical-acoustical
phenomena, in other words, to disturb the
atmosphere because, after all, sound is only an
atmospheric disturbance!" Whereas until the
romantic period music was regarded as the man¬
ifestation of divine order, it later became the
expression of the composer's emotions and inner
life. The composer would break free, gain his
independence and impose his own laws, but at
the same time he would cut himself off from the
organic world to which he belonged.
In literature, the idea of modernity made its
appearance with Baudelaire, who in his essay on
the painter in the modern world exhorted critics
and art-lovers to discover the beauty of things
that possess "the essential quality of being the
TK>
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American
musicologist whose study on
salsa and Latin jazz (La Salsa et
le Latin jazz) was published
earlier this year by PUF, Paris.
She Is currently working on a
study on the black music of
Latin America and the West
Indies, scheduled for
publication in 1994.
present", and by due appreciation of that beauty
to renew their links with the universal. In
painting, it coincides with Manet's Déjeuner
sur l'herbe, exhibited at the Salon des Refusés in
1863. With this work Manet claimed the painter's
prerogative of painting a picture for his own
aesthetic delectation, without bothering about
representation or allegory but only following his
own personal urges, in other words of pro¬
ducing "art for art's sake". In this sense
Kandinsky's credo could be that of many twen¬
tieth-century musicians: "The artist must be
blind to 'recognized' shape, just as he must be
deaf to the teachings and desires of his age. His
eye must be open upon his own inner life, and
his ear always pricked for the voice of inner
necessity. Then he will be able to use all methods
with impunity, even those which arc forbidden."
Schoenberg, the precursor of contemporary
music, also had a mystical approach. Beauty,
according to him, stems from the search for
truth, but a truth linked both to aesthetic
absolutes and to the composer's inner tempera¬
ment: "Beauty begins to appear when the non-
creator becomes aware of its absence. It does not
exist before, because the artist has no need of it:
for him the truth is enough. . . . And yet beauty

A concert by the rock
group Genesis in New York
in 1986.
gives itself to the artist even though he has not
sought it, having endeavoured only to find the
truth."
Some years later Elliott Carter opened up
new horizons for American music, and his
experimentation foreshadowed that of present-
day composers. His work, wrote Martin
Boykan, "is of importance to the postwar gen¬
eration not only because of its artistic power, but
also because it provides a moral lesson, because
it reminds the composer that it is his task
painful, perhaps, but inescapable to choose his
language freshly for each work, and to choose
from the whole range of musical possibilities."
Though fashion imposes new benchmarks
and new conventions, fashion and modernity are
ultimately opposed, and modernity (in the
artistic sense of the term) runs counter to
fashion. Being modern means freeing onself
from codes and conventions, whilst remaining
fully of one's time, from which there is no
escape. As Elliott Carter said, it means "choosing
one's language freshly for each work." As
regards music, "modern" composers must turn
away from traditional artistic categories and
find their own voice; and "modern" listeners
should stop making judgements on the basis of
outdated criteria and should greet new work
with flexibility.
As the car becomes more receptive, percep¬
tion becomes more acute and differing degrees
of listening develop. As with painting, about
which no-one talks more understandingly than
painters, so the professional musician, attuned
to harmonic niceties, counterpoint and phrasing
and the subtleties of rhythm, appreciates music
more profoundly than the amateur whose
instinctive understanding, however intense and
sensuous, operates at a more impressionistic
and superficial level.
So many different types of music can be
heard today that each of us must create our own
way of listening. This profusion makes life par¬
ticularly hard for the composer, who sometimes
gets lost in a maze of styles and methods. But in
the modern world, saturated as it is with sound,
the pleasure of a true musical discovery is all the
more wonderful in that it is getting rare. "I love
what never was," cried Odilon Redon, inviting
us with this piece of wordplay to continue
exploring the byways of discovery.
1 .A piano transformed into a percussion instrument by the
insertion ofvarious objects between the strings. Editor
