A defence ofthe intellect
byAldous Huxley
The International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation, Unesco's
forerunner, held a meeting on "the
future ofthe European mind" in
Parisfrom 16-18 October 1933 at
which Aldous Huxley inveighed
against the degradation of
contemporary thought. Thefamous
British novelist, who had recently
publishedBrwe New World (1932),
passionatelyyet humorously
defended the intellectual values
threatened by the extension ofmass
culture. He spoke in French, the
language in which, as he said, "the
mind and rational goodwill ofthe
age ofVoltairefound expression and
travelledfrom one end ofEurope to
the other."
+ 1
We are here to discuss the cur¬
rent state of the European
mind and how to preserve
what has been achieved by it. A look at
contemporary intellectual life (I am
speaking of the life of the masses, not of the
elites) brings out two extremely impor¬
tant facts: firstly, that intelligence and its
instrument, logic, are generally denigrated;
and secondly, that what I may call the con¬
temporary lifestyle is remarkably vulgar
and crude. Improving the lifestyle is desir¬
able in itself. We appreciate intuitively that
beauty is superior to ugliness. The reaf¬
firmation of intellectual values is desir¬
able in itself, but also and especially
because it is only in the name of intellec¬
tual values such as truth and justice
that the countries of Europe can reach
agreement. People only make sacrifices
and as Mr. Benda so rightly said yesterday,
sacrifices must be made for things they
believe in and to which they attribute
supreme value.
Anti-intellectualism is already an old
movement, and it shows itself in various
forms Bergsonism, Freudianism and
Watson's behaviourism. There is no point in
summarizing these doctrines, since
everyone here is quite familiar with them.
What interests us is to find out why anti-
intellectualism has enjoyed and still enjoys
such great popularity, and secondly how it
can be combated. The reasons for its pop¬
ularity are, unfortunately, all too obvious. It
flatters men's passions, particularly lazi¬
ness: it is so difficult to reason, so easy to
trust to instinct and intuition. If it were a
matter of laziness the harm would not be
very serious. But anti-intellectualism also
flatters more dangerous passions. It is
admirably well adapted to justifying the
complex ofhatreds and vanities that is the
very essence of nationalism. National-
Socialist philosophy, for example, continu¬
ally speaks of "particular truths" as opposed
to the mundane objective truths of intel¬
lectuals. Then there are Nordic instincts,
the infallible intuitions of blond men.
How can we combat anti-intellectu¬
alism? How can we reinforce that faith in
Aldous Huxley (1894-1963).
reason without which the political unity of
Europe cannot be achieved? First ofall there
is logic. All anti-intellectual doctrines are
self-destructive. For example, you may say
with Freud that all intellectual construc¬
tions are merely rationalizations of con¬
scious or unconscious desires. Very well.
But your own anti-intellectualist doctrine is
one of these intellectual constructions. You
find yourself on the horns of a dilemma:
either your doctrine is true, in which case it
represents no more than the expression of
a repressed, probably sexual, desire, and
has no objective meaning, or it has an
objective meaning, in which case it is false.
Unfortunately logic has very little influ¬
ence with the masses. The masses need to
be spoken to in terms of absolute
authority, as Jehovah spoke to the
Israelites, or in parables, that is in terms of
art. Children and the feeble-minded and
unfortunately there are many of those
are the only people who can be spoken to
with authority, and that authority must
first be possessed. The various national
educational systems are not under our
control, and we are not demagogues or
rabble-rousers. So the only way we can
influence people's minds is by persua¬
sion that is, by art. Logic destroys anti-
intellectualism. But the masses only accept
this logic when it is embodied in a work of
art. Unfortunately works of art cannot be
produced to order, as Napoleon and the
Bolsheviks painfully discovered. All we
can do is hope. An intellectual artist may
appear and then again he may not. It is
not within our power to create him. We
can organize everything, except art.
BAD LITERATURE IN INDUSTRIAL
QUANTITIES
I now come to the second observation we
have made in examining the modern
world. Our times are anti-intellectualist;

V
they are also vulgar. The contemporary
lifestyle is frankly disgusting. We live on a
diet ofPonson du Terrail and Paul de Kock.
The quite specific vulgarity ofour era shows
itself in the quite specific vulgarity of our
popular art, which is also the cause of it. As
nearly always happens, the movement is
circular and vicious. What are the causes of
this vulgarity? They are partly economic
and demographic, partly intellectual and
aesthetic. Industrial development and the
development ofvirgin territory in the New
World have led to a sudden expansion of
Europe's population, which has more than
doubled in one century. Next comes pri¬
mary education for all. An enormous poten¬
tial readership has been created, forwhom
entrepreneurs have set up a new industry
the reading matter industry. Now this
reading matter could only be and will only
be ofvery poor quality. Why? It is a matter
of arithmetic. The number ofwriters with
artistic talent is always very limited. So it fol¬
lows that at any time the bulk of contem¬
porary literature has always been bad. Now
the amount ofliterature produced annually
has grown faster than the population. There
are twice as many ofus today as there were
at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
But the number of printed words we con¬
sume each year is at least fifty if not a
hundred times greater than the number
consumed by our great-grandparents.
Hence it follows that the percentage ofbad
literature in the total must be higher than
ever. Europeans have got into the habit of
reading all the time. It is a vice, like smoking
cigarettes or rather, perhaps, like smoking
opium or taking to cocaine; for this litera¬
ture, which is almost all bad, is a mental
substitute for narcotic and hallucinatory
drugs. Europe is being fed stuffed, one
might say with tenth-rate literature.
This is completely new. In the past,
people were only familiar directly or indi¬
rectly with a few books, but they were of
very high quality. English people, for
instance, until quite recently grew up with
the Bible and Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress,
both of unmatched purity and nobility of
style. Nowadays, they grow up with the
Daily Express, magazines and detective
stories. Universal education has had the
lamentable result that instead of occa¬
sionally reading masterpieces people con¬
tinually read rubbish.
There is another very alarming phe
nomenon: language itself is being cor¬
rupted by advertisers. The disease is not as
far advanced in France as in America and
England, where advertising has already
tainted a great many of the noblest words.
For example, the word "service" crops up
again and again in English-language
advertising. People talk about the manu¬
facture of pills and canned foods as they
once used to talk about the work of Saint
Francis ofAssisi. A man sells you a can of
beans with a 20 per cent net profit. Fine.
But it is unacceptable that he should talk
to you with clerical unction about the "ser¬
vice" in the Christian sense of the word
he has done you. The same thing has hap¬
pened to many other words. Beauty, Grace,
Adventure, Virile, Romantic a whole
vocabulary of splendid words has been
used in advertising and thus made sus¬
pect. It is reaching the point where people
cannot hear these words without imme¬
diately reacting with cynicism. It is very dif¬
ficult to separate words from the things
they signify; and when words are tainted as
they are every day, the values are tainted
also. Every language is a vehicle for the
best traditions of the race: ifyou ruin this
vehicle, as advertisers are doing, you
destroy these traditions.
THE CATERWAULING
OF POPULAR MUSIC
What has happened in the realm of litera¬
ture has happened also in that ofpopular
music. But here the invention of talking
machines rather than primary education
has created a big audience of listeners. (It
is, by the way, the invention of the rotary
press that has led to the current growth
of the literature industry.) Listening matter
is needed for this huge audience: it is man¬
ufactured, and inevitably it is ofvery poor
quality. But in the case of popular music
things are complicated by aesthetic mat¬
ters. For the last 130 years musicians have
greatly developed the technical means
used to express their feelings. Beethoven
created a whole repertoire of technical
means to express the passions means
unknown to even his most brilliant pre¬
decessors. The enrichment of musical
technique progressed throughout the
nineteenth century. Berlioz, Wagner, Verdi,
the Russians, Debussy all contributed
new means of expression to the common
Text selected and presented
by Edgardo Canton
stock. Naturally the feelings these com¬
posers aimed to express did not always
have the purity and nobility that charac¬
terize Beethoven's. Wagner, especially, gave
music the power to express and with
great power ofartistic persuasion things
that are fundamentally despicable. Popular
composers have learned their craft from
the great artists. Thanks to Beethoven,
Berlioz, Wagner, Rimski-Korsakov and
Debussy, they are now in a position to
express with gripping power the basest
emotionsthe most abject sentimentality,
the most animal sexuality and the most
frenetic collective joy. . . .
The disease is not completely curable,
but I believe it can be mitigated, firstly
through education. We pay too little atten¬
tion to the development of taste and a crit¬
ical faculty; or ifwe try to develop them, we
always choose remote, outdated exam¬
ples. If I had to teach young people the
art of telling beauty from ugliness, the real
from the imitation, I would try to choose
my examples from the contemporary
world. I would focus their critical facul¬
ties on politicians' speeches and on adver¬
tising. I would get them to hear the dif¬
ferences in quality between a piece ofjazz
and one of Beethoven's late quartets. I
would get them to read some detective
story, and then Crime and Punishmentor
The Possessed.
So much forwhat can be organized. But
there are also forces that cannot be orga¬
nized, and this brings us back again to art.
If fine art remains pure, all is not lost. There
will always be an elite to respond to the
appeal of this art, to let itself be shaped by
it, to experience its style. Artists have an
enormous responsibility. It is for them,
especially now that organized religions have
lost their power, to undertake the task of
restating, revivifying and preserving spiri¬
tual values. If they compromise with the
world, in the Christian sense of the word,
they lose not only their artistic souls but
also the souls of a whole potential elite. ^ ¡*
