Jerome Choryn
Behind the silver screen
JEROME CHARYN
is an American writer. His
most recent published work is
The New Mystery (1 993).
THE United States of North America is
the first "modern" nation. It grew out
of a romantic ideal of liberty . . . along
very narrow lines. Those who rebelled against
the British crown in 1775 called themselves the
Sons of Liberty. They were farmers and lawyers
and rich grocers all of them owned property,
and all of them were white. But it didn't matter.
The idea of liberty began to spread. The farmers
and lawyers couldn't squirrel it away like some
unwanted shopping list. The nation had ter¬
rible conflicts and terrible wars over who could
have this-liberty and who couldn't.

But the myth of liberty was much more
powerful than any narrow, self-defining law.
And with that myth came the notion of romantic
love. A free man in a free nation could also con¬
sider a new kind of love. If marriages had been
mostly arranged, and codified like any other
law, then that code would have to allow for a
little leeway. And it's no accident that a new
principality should spring up in a place called
California, in the first years of our century. That
principality is Hollywood, the land of love. It
could only have happened in the United States.
Other nations have had film capitals, devoted to
stars and fabricated cities, but those capitals
never had the same enchantment, the same aura
of royalty and romance.
And suppose Hollywood was a little foolish.
If it invented myths that were mostly fake, who
cared? It created a "college" of beautiful faces
that could cast beautiful shadows all around
the globe. It invented the movie goddess, who
lived only for romance. Rita Hayworth. Marilyn
Monroe. Rita married Orson Welles and Prince
Aly Khan, and Marilyn fell in love with Joe
DiMaggio, the crown prince of baseball. Both
Above,
a scene from The Lady
from Shanghai ( 1 947) with
its two stars. Orson
Welles, who also directed
the film, and Rita
Hayworth.
Below,
the hero of Batman (1989),
a film by Tim Burton.
goddesses' fairyland lives fell apart. Rita lost
her memory and all her mates. Marilyn killed
herself. But no other nation could have pro¬
duced such sad and powerful figures of love. Rita
and Marilyn had obscure, unromantic begin¬
nings no one is born a movie star, not even in



the United States. But they invented their screen
personalities out of America's own perverse
clay, which can be molded into anything at all.
Love and fame are America's real religion. Rita
and Marilyn sacrificed themselves for us so that
we could devour them, like the love cannibals
that we are.
Men and women worshipped Marilyn. And
while most of us lived out mundane lives as
fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, we dreamed
of that night-time religion, that world of
romance, which was much more devouring than
family business or blood.
Our psyches have always been split. We
came out of nothing. We invented ourselves.
We were new men and women in a New World.
We saved our pennies, we bartered, we built
little monuments, but that was never enough. We
needed someone like Marilyn to inhabit that
warm, wet, dark side of ourselves, the side that
said no to the American ideal of success.
Love is dangerous. Love is cruel. Its god¬
desses are crazy and fragile. But it's like a terrible
hunger we have our "fix", our food. I fell prey
to this food as much as anyone else. It didn't
matter where you lived. All ghettos and suburbs
were the same. America was homogeneous in
this regard. I fell in love at the movies. Where
else? The movie theatres bound all of us into one
enormous nation. I was born in 1937. By the end
of World War II I'd gone from romance to
romance, on the screen and off. I loved Elizabeth
Taylor and Gene Tierney and the wondrous
blond creatures in my second-grade class. I had
41

Marilyn Monroe
in Howard Hawks'
Gentlemen prefer blondes
(I9S4).
tummy aches. I sweated. I blinked. Like any
other cavalier, I was ready to die for love.
It's almost fifty years since I discovered my
first movie. Rita and Marilyn are gone. So has
Tierney. Liz Taylor seems to live at that suf¬
fering edge where love goddesses have to go. Of
course things are different now. The Aids epi¬
demic has turned the very idea of love into a
phantom self. Love is more than dangerous.
Love is death	
There's another phantom in our psyches.
Nam. The conflict in Viet Nam did more to
undermine the usual American myths than 200
years of American «orchistory. The land of the free
and the home of the brave was involved in a crazy
quicksand, a war that was as much hallucination
as anything else. The American GI, who'd become
a mythological figure, "Kilroy", the guy who
went anywhere, who helped liberate Europe,
who dispensed chocolate bars, who smiled
without malice, who had an innocent, sexual
charm, had suddenly become the murderer of
women and children in a land where nobody
really wanted him, fighting for some ideal that
made no sense. The GI was forever lost, and love
went out the window in the United States.
The whole country seemed to suffer a ner-
42
vous collapse. Sexuality meant guns and war¬
ships. Kilroy had travelled too far. he was now
an intruder, an unwelcome guest. And what
surfaced in the 1980s was an entire generation of
greed. Junk bonds. Buyouts on Wall Street. And
a new figure: the billionaire. He's young. He's
white. He buys art. He traffics in culture. He
isn't really mean. He romances money. That is
the love of his life.
A DARK KNIGHT IN SEARCH
OF HIS SOUL
The chief emblem of the 1980s wasn't E.T. or
Indiana Jones. It wasn't Ronald Reagan. It
wasn't Mickey Mouse. It was Batman. Created
in the 1930s, along with Dick Tracy, Mandrake
the Magician, the Phantom, and Smilin' Jack,
Batman was a reclusive millionaire . . . and a
modern masked knight. Bruce Wayne. He had
a boy assistant, Robin, and a Batmobile. His
nemesis was the clown prince of evil, called the
Joker. Batman was a 1 930s Robin Hood, with a
new Sherwood Forest: Gotham City, where
crime itself was a comic-book character, with its
own lively pull. Batman had a mechanical, wing¬
like cape and wondrous protruding ears.
But on the screen, in 1989, Batman was just
another billionaire. He looked like a bullethead,
an ice-blue phallus. At least his enemy, the Joker,
could laugh. Batman was a dark knight in search
of his psyche and his soul. He might have had a
girlfriend (Kim Basinger as photojournalist
Vicki Vale), but he was really loveless and alone,
like America itself.
Batman is white America: the world out¬
side his own particular castle is invisible to him.
He believes in some holy grail of the good, but
his mask is one more blinker. He sees nothing.
He feels nothing. He is nothing. The moguls of
Hollywood wouldn't even allow him to have his
boy assistant, fearing that Robin might conta¬
minate Batman, give him an ambiguous sexu¬
ality. But the moguls needn't have worried.
Batman has no sex other than his own bullet-
head.
And the crisis most of us have inherited
from Nam is an anaesthetized America in search
of itself and its sexuality. Marilyn remains our
one enduring goddess, both near to us and
remote. Will we be able to look into the void, see
the hollow core of our culture, its dance of
death, and redefine who the hell we are? Or
will we continue to be a nation of Bruce Waynes,
wearing some kind of loveless mask into eter¬
nity? I wonder. Pß
