The star system
by ñertholó Riese
In their quest to foretell the future, Mayan priests and
astronomers entered the realm of pure mathematics
Head of a priest emerging
from the mouth of a
serpent. Architectural
detail in the Mayan Puuc
style (7th to I Oth
centuries) from Uxmal
(Yucatán, Mexico).
22
BERTHOLD RIESE,
of Germany, is a specialist in
the field of Amerindian
civilizations. His work Maya-
Kalender und Astronomie (The
Mayan Calendar and
Astronomy) appeared In
Altamerikanistik (Early
American Studies), edited by
Ulrich Köhler and published by
Dietrich Reimer Verlag, Berlin,
1988.
SEVERAL million Indians living in Guatemala,
southern Mexico and Belize today still speak
one of the thirty or so Mayan languages,
including Mam, Quiche, Cakchiquel, Kekchi and
Myathan. A well-developed and broadly similar
numerical system exists in all of these tongues.
Centuries of colonization and, more impor¬
tantly, the introduction of the market economy
have led to the gradual replacement of vernac¬
ular names for numerals by words borrowed
from Spanish. Higher numerals have disap¬
peared from general use and today even the pri¬
mary numbers are being forgotten.
Numbers in everyday use
Archaeological excavations have yielded little
information on how numerals were used in the
economy of pre-Columbian America. We do
know, however, that the Mayas' numerical
system was initially based on counting on the
fingers and toes. In Quiche, for example, the
word for the number twenty, huvinak, literally
means "a whole person". This method of
counting is also reflected in the decimal divisions.
The word for 11 is hulahuh or hun (one) plus
lahuh (ten). These numbers were probably used
in much the same way as we use numbers for
counting today, with one difference. The Mayan
languages use words known as "classifiers" to
describe objects being counted, denoting
whether they are round, elongated, stackable,
solid or liquid food, etc. For example, a Yucatec
would not say, "Here is a cigarette", but "Here
is one {hun) long, cylindrical object {dzit) called
a cigarette {chamal)".
I Calendars
The conventional solar year
The Mayan calendar was based on the 365-day
solar year, which the Mayas had inherited from
the earlier civilizations of the Zapotees (at Monte
Alban) and the Olmecs (at La Venta and Tres
Zapotes). The length of this calendar year never
varied and was divided using the vigesimal
system of numeration into eighteen months of
twenty days each. The remaining five days were
added at the end of the year. Each month had a
name, which does not seem to have been related
to the seasons or to any particular festivals.
Most of them were handed down by tradition
and perhaps even borrowed from other lan¬
guages and cultures. They do not seem to have
had any meaning other than their calendar func¬
tion, not unlike our own months whose original
Roman meanings few people know today.
Each day was designated by a number from
0 to 1 9 which was placed in front of the name of
the month, and from 0 to 4 in the case of the
final, shorter month. It was therefore possible to
identify each day of the year, as in our own cal¬
endar. The years followed each other without
interruption and there were no leap years.
The diviner's
calendar
Guatemala's Quiche, Ixil and Mam Indians still
use a traditional 260-day calendar to predict
the future. Why 260 days? In interviews with
Guatemalan diviners in Chichicastenango and
Momstenango, German ethnologist Leonhard
Schultze Jena found that the number of days in
the year matches the length of human preg¬
nancy. Whatever its origin may be, the vigesimal
system made it possible for early Mayan math¬
ematicians to break this 260-day year down
into thirteen months of twenty days each. Each
calendar day was identified by attaching a
number from one to thirteen to one of the
twenty names of the vigesimal cycle, which
referred to animals, natural forces and tradi-

tional or abstract concepts whose meanings are
unknown today.
Like the solar calendar, the diviner's calendar is
cyclical. The last day of one cycle is automatically
followed by the first day of the next and so on.
The calendar round
Permutation of the 260-day calendar with the
365-day calendar gives a cycle of 52 years in
which each day bears a different name derived
from elements taken from the other two systems.
This major cycle of 1 8,980 days 52 solar years
of 365 days each or 73 divination years of 260
days each is known as the "calendar round"
and was the largest time-measuring unit for
most of the Mesoamerican peoples during late
pre-Columbian times. Unlike the Mixtees and
Aztecs, the Mayas were familiar with different
systems and used other units for measuring
longer periods of time, but they were an excep¬
tion among the great pre-Columbian cultures.
Hieroglyphics
As we have seen, the calendar days were identified
by names, some of which designated numbers.
That is how Indian diviners still express them in
their own languages. The pre-Hispanic Mayas
could also write all the days of the year, of the
divination calendar and the calendar round in
Carved glyphs and
calendar dates on a
7th-century Mayan
limestone stele at
Palenque (Mexico).
hieroglyphic script. Four hieroglyphic books or
codices from that time have survived, and are
today conserved in Paris, Dresden, Madrid and
Mexico City.
Countless stone inscriptions, a few wall paint¬
ings and many painted clay pots and sherds are
other sources of information about this highly
original writing system.
The simplest way of writing numbers
between 0 and 19 consisted of using dots for
units and lines for fives in an additive system
(figure 1). For higher numbers an additional
symbol for 20 was used. A positional system was
used to write numbers higher than 40, with an
extra symbol equivalent to our zero identifying
the unoccupied places (see photo page 24). Each
place represents a power of 20, until the third
place in which a factor of 18 is used. Thus, the
order of positional values was as follows: first
place, 20° (=1), second place, 20' (=20), third
place, 18 x 20' (=360), fourth place 18x202
(=7,200), fifth place 18x203 (=144,000) and so on.
Counting the days
At an early stage, certainly no later than the
beginning of the Christian era, the Central Amer¬
ican Indians invented a new way of calculating
time: the day number {"cuenta larga", or "long



count"). This system, which is independent of the
calendar cycles described above, consists of 23

Below, detail from a Mayan
manuscript conserved in
Dresden (Germany). The
columns of numbers to left
and right of the female
figure designate the length
of lunar half-years. Above
the figure the sign for zero
(in red) appears twice.
numbering the days continuously from a more
or less mythical date far in the past. This
extremely accurate dating system has proved
to be of invaluable assistance to modern
researchers, ever since scholars in the early twen¬
tieth century succeeded in correlating it with our
own calendar. Its primary aim was to help the
Mayas codify major historic dates concerning
their rulers or deities.
Other calendar cycles
The Mayas of the classical period used other
cycles for historical, divinatory and speculative
purposes. For example, a cycle of days or nights
devoted to nine deities is known from hiero¬
glyphs G j -G9 Furthermore, the combination
of short 7, 9 and 13-day cycles, each of which
designated a category of gods, was used to come
up with a complex divination cycle of 819 days.
Astronomy
The astronomy of the Mayas was not limited to
observation of the stars and approximate pre¬
dictions of the movements of the heavenly
bodies. Using their sophisticated numerical sys¬
tems and various tabular calculations in con¬
junction with the hieroglyphic script, Mayan
astronomers were able to perform complex cal¬
culations with figures running into millions.
Their efforts were focused primarily on the
sun and the moon. Different year lengths were
used for different sorts of calculations. Nor¬
mally they took the conventional 3 65 -day year
as a basis. However, years with a length of 364
1 to© -cp.9tffiß$ü
* " ~ # 	,	 ""
:
I.
' iO-'HO-lCA
I <P:\IOUO\tena m
»' J^t&A 8. *t
¿¿.{¿à W*tS) « «« «r>
24 m
days are also encountered, as are years of 365 V4
days, similar to our own Julian calendar.
The moon played a prominent role in stone
inscriptions, which often begin with a day
number followed by the phase of the moon and
the day's position in a calendar of six lunar
months (see photo below left).
Mayan astronomers also calculated the syn¬
odic period of the planet Venus, and the figure
of 584 days at which they arrived is astonishingly
close to the modern astronomic value. But they
went still further. A set of tables in the Dresden
Maya codex cites correction factors to allow
for the fractional deviations from this value,
which can only be observed after decades and
even centuries. Researchers also suspect that
the Mayas were familiar with the synodic period
of other planets, such as Mars and Jupiter, but
this has not been proved conclusively.
A springboard into pure
mathemathics
For the Maya, all the calendar and astronomic
cycles and systems were ultimately used for div¬
ination and religious or speculative purposes.
Their calendar experts constantly strove to estab¬
lish a relationship between the cycles by permu¬
tation, using the lowest common multiple and
other methods, to predict the future and connect
the present with historical dates. In this way they
could also learn something about the destiny of
their clients the ruler and private individuals.
These practical goals often served as a spring¬
board for complex calculations and research
which transcended their original purpose. For
example, some of their calculations were pro¬
jected so far into the past or future that the pri¬



mary purpose must have been to quench the
calendar priests' own thirst for knowledge and
desire to explore the limits of their mathematical
system. It is therefore reasonable to assert that
the Mayas, like the Babylonians, Greeks, Arabs
and Indians before and after them, had entered
the realm of pure mathematics.
12
10 13
3 7 II
4 8
figure /
Mayan system of writing
numbers from I to 1 3
using dots and lines.
