The liquid of the gods
by Camille Talkeu
Tounounga
Awealth of symbolic meanings source of
all life, purifying substance, regenerating
element is attached to water in Black
African traditions.
In the creation myths of the Dogon of Mali,
water is a divine green seed that impregnates the
Earth so that it brings forth twin green beings, half
man, half serpent. Also according to Dogon
mythology, impregnation presupposes that oil,
the male seed, combines in the womb with the
moisture of the vagina in a helix symbolizing the
creative vibration.
Like their Bambara neighbours, the Dogon go
further and assimilate water, the fertilizing seed,
Venerated for its
divine qualities since
the time of the
Pharaohs, water is
still invested with a
rich symbolism in
black Africa today

The cross device on the
masks worn by these
Dogon villagers of Mali is a
symbolic representation of
Amma, the supreme god
of a cosmogony in which
water plays a vital part.



to light and to the gift of speech, the creating
Word. "Dry" water and "dry" words express
the idea of thought, the idea of potentiality, both
among humans and among the gods. Genesis
occurred when the supreme celestial god Amma
created in his likeness Nommo, the god of "wet"
water. In music, oil symbolizes the melody and
rhythm is represented by water, the word.
For these peoples, and in many countries of
sub-Saharan Africa, water, the life principle, is
closely involved in the rites accompanying child¬
birth. When the afterbirth is expelled, proving that
the child has indeed been born, one of the mid-
wives takes a mouthful of water and sprays it
gently over the baby. The cool touch of the water
makes it cry out it has "officially" received the
gift of speech.
Invested with divine properties throughout
Africa since the time of the Pharaohs, water plays
its part in the fertility of the fields and of all living
beings and all things, but in addition each kind of
water rain, spring, river, pond, lake, sea, dew,
water collected in a hollow tree has a particular
significance. According to the Bantu, creation
took place in a great whirlpool or in a bed of
reeds, somewhere to the East. The Fali of
Cameroon associate water, the uterine element,
with fish. Among the Bamileke of western
Cameroon, fathers bless their daughters on their
wedding day with water in which leaves oîfefe,
a kind of spinach symbolizing gentleness and
harmony, have been steeped.
CLEANSING
AND HEALING
Purification, indissociable from initiation rites,
cleanses the initiates of previous impurities, drives
away evil forces and protects them. Among the
Bambara, at the end of the initiation ceremony,
the chief of the kore, the initiates' society, sprays
a mouthful of water over the neophytes. They are
then washed, first in the meeting-place of the
kore by a former initiate, with water from the vil¬
lage's sacred pond, then a second time at the vil¬
lage's holy well.
The bellies of young Sara girls in Chad are also
cleansed with water taken from a gourd and
sprayed from their mothers' mouths, while Zulu
girls, after being kept in seclusion for some weeks,
take a ritual bath in the river and wash off the red
clay with which they have daubed themselves.
Water, the abode of the spirits, plays a part in
the voodoo ceremonies of Benin, Togo and
Nigeria. It is a pervasive presence in Haiti, where
voodoo, practised both publicly and in the family,
is a way of rediscovering an identity that was
profoundly disturbed when the ancestors of
today's islanders were uprooted from Africa.
Haitians believe that they can reconquer that
mythical Africa whence all the spirits come, by
way of subterranean waters that constitute a
world of their own and teem with human activ¬
ities of every kind. This is why magical proper¬
ties are attributed to springs, rivers and waterfalls,
and why water is poured out before the altar at the
beginning of ceremonies, in order to summon up
spirits from the underworld.
Water may also be at the root of the tem¬
poral and religious power exercised by groups of
initiates, usually secret societies, which by super¬
natural means assume the magical attributes of
water spirits. One such organization is to be
found among the Duala, a people inhabiting
the coastal region of Cameroon, who have a
water ancestor, thejengu, represented in bygone
days as a black man with long hair, bulging eyes
and splayed feet and more recently as a long¬
haired white woman. Thejengu confers wealth on
men and fertility on women. It may take human
form, manifesting its power by miracles and
prophecies and acting as a counterbalance to the
authority of the chiefs. Until the German colo¬
nization of this part of Africa, thejengu played an
important political role among the Duala;
revered as an ancestor, a jengu could marry into
the nobility. Even today the jengu retains thera¬
peutic powers, for although the old beliefs have
all but disappeared from public life, they still
survive in the context of illness and healing, in the
form of invocations, states of possession or trance,
and prayers.
PRAYERS
AND PETITIONS
Water is a precious substance and when it is in
short supply disasters may occur. The peasant's life
depends on the rains. If they come late or not at all,
or if they are too abundant, he performs again
and again the rituals and invocations of which
the fabric of rural civilization is woven. Many
myths explain the origin of these practices.
According to the Diola of west Africa, in the
beginning there were two divinities, Amontong,
the god of drought, and Montogari, the rain god.
They owned great flocks and lived together until
one day they quarreled and came to blows. While
they were fighting, Amontong's wives sent off
their children with dried skins tied to ropes. Drag¬
ging the skins behind them, the children raised lots
of dust, which became clouds, and the noise made
by the skins became thunder. The gods discharged
their shotguns at them, creating lightning. Then
the children of Montogari took what remained of
the dust and made rain. B
CAMILLE TALKEU TOUNOUNGA
is a sociologist and anthropologist from Cameroon whose
most recent publications are Islam et négritude, Le
nomadisme en Afrique, l'exemple des Peuls and Symbolique des
masques en Afrique noire (all 1 993). 39
