Santísima Trinidad, memories of
slavery and sugar by Edouard ea^y
74
Three hundred and eighty kilometres
south-east of Havana on Cuba's
southern coast, a jewel of colonial
architecture lies far from the bustle of the
modern world. Backing onto the El Escam-
bray massif, whose foothills, the Gua-
muhaya, take their name from the region's
former indigenous people, the town of
Santísima Trinidad has not many more
than 30,000 inhabitants. Its narrow cob¬
bled streets are flanked by eighteenth- and
nineteenth-century churches and palaces,
and by houses adorned with wooden-
railed balconies and wrought-iron grilles
through which magnificent, Andalusian-
style garden courtyards can be glimpsed.
Every now and then a horse-drawn cart
with squeaking wheels emerges from a
side-street. Further on a mule laden with
jars of drinking water ambles along. No
cars or motorcycles disturb the town's
timeless peace.
Memories of the past of Santísima
Trinidad, which was included on Unesco's
World Heritage List in 1988, are concen¬
trated around the Plaza Mayor. Here, giant
palm-trees adorn the square-shaped cen¬
tral garden where young and old come to
sit as evening falls. Overlooking the Plaza
are the Convent of San Francisco, the
church of the Santísima Trinidad and a
number of noble houses.
The most imposing of these houses is
that which once belonged to Nicolás de La
Cruz y Brunei, the owner ofsugar planta¬
tions and hundreds of slaves, who in 1836
was made a count by the King of Spain.
The ochre-walled palace was built
between 1740 and 1808. Its ground floor
gives onto an inner patio considered to
be one of the most beautiful of its kind in
Cuba. The first floor, which now houses the
Romantic Museum, has a cedarwood
ceiling and furniture of precious local
wood. Chandeliers of Bohemian glass,
Sèvres vases, Spanish and Dutch porce¬
lain and French clocks decorate the
boudoirs and salons. There is even a
marble bath and two splendid spittoons
that were imported from England. The
Brunet Palace, which was restored a few
years ago, is a monument to the wealth of
the great families of Trinidad in the late
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
AN ARISTOCRACY OF SUGAR
Trinidad is the third oldest town in Cuba.
It was founded in 1514 by Diego Velazquez,
who had just completed the conquest of
the island, the Caribbean's largest. He knew
that there were gold mines in a nearby
valley, and as a result built a small fort and
half a dozen houses a fewkilometres from
the coast. Fifty metres from the Plaza
Mayor stands thejigüe, a great tree planted
the day the city was founded, on the spot
where the first Mass was celebrated. A
commemorative plaque honours the
memory of Bartolomé de Las Casas, an
ardent champion of the indigenous inhab¬
itants who were massacred or reduced to
slavery by the conquistadors.
After suffering on several occasions from

the depredations of the pirates and cor¬
sairs who scoured the Caribbean, Trinidad
relapsed into tropical languor. Far from
Havana, the seat of the island's governors
and the crossroads of the main lines of
communication, it turned away from the
outside world and lived for two and a half
centuries on its sparse crops and the valu¬
able timber grown nearby. In August 1762,
it was abruptly awakened from its torpor
when, after a two-month siege, the British
seized the port of Havana, imposing on
Cuba free trade with the rest of the world.
In the eleven months during which the
island was occupied, a thousand ships
unloaded tons of merchandise and hun¬
dreds ofAfrican slaves.
After the British withdrew (accepting
Florida in exchange), the Creoles
Spaniards born in Cuba soon realized
that free trade favoured their interests
against those of the government in Madrid.
The successful sugar-cane producers
extended their estates beyond the
provinces of Havana and Matanzas,
forming the nucleus of the sacarocracia,
the sugar aristocracywhose influence was
to be crucial in shaping the island's history.
Their ambitions were furthered by the
arrival in 1791 of large numbers ofrefugees
from Haiti, where plantations and
refineries had been burned down by thou¬
sands of slaves under the leadership of
Toussaint L'Ouverture. This unexpected
influx of labour at Cuba's eastern tip and in
the Trinidad region gave a boost to the
economy.
Determined to win from the British and
French colonies the monopoly of sugar
exports to Europe, the owners of the
Cuban plantations began to organize
themselves. Five leading planters, who
between them owned dozens ofrefineries,
took control of the slave trade, thereby
enabling themselves to increase produc¬
tion. The slaves led a wretched life on the
ingenios, vast estates that gradually spread
over the island at the expense of the forests
and their rare species of trees. Theyworked
sixteen hours a day, with only one small
meal around midday. The day began and
ended with prayers signalled by the plan¬
tation bell, which was also used to sound
the alarm ifa slave escaped or a fire broke
out. The forty-five-metre-high Iznaga
Tower, the only surviving monument from
this era, still marks the entrance to one of
the great plantations of the San Luis Valley,
outside Trinidad. It has been completely
restored and is now topped by an obser¬
vation post and a belfry with fluted
columns.
On the estate known as the Santísima
Trinidad most Cuban ingenios had
names associated with the Christian reli¬
gion Esteban José Santa Cruz de Oviedo
prided himself on possessing the largest
criadero de criollos (literally, "negro stock-
farm"). There, penned like cattle, the chil
dren of slaves were prepared for the work
they would have to start at the age of
twelve. Their mothers were only allowed to
see them once every ten days. Don
Esteban exchanged or sold them at will.
His wife was sterile, but he had twenty-
six mulatto children. As a good father, he
sent his offspring to study in New York.
The six best students were rewarded with
a trip to Paris.
AN ILLUSTRIOUS GUEST
By the end of the eighteenth century, the
wealth of the plantations enabled
Trinidad's planters to build themselves
magnificent homes. The Padrón family
residence, at the corner of Desengaño
Street, today houses a Museum ofArchae¬
ology, and the Municipal History Museum
occupies the former home of the Justo
German Cantero family. Trinidad's patri¬
cian families have left traces of their
grandeur all over the town. Devoutly
Catholic, they contributed generously to
the building ofchurches and convents. In
the convent of St. Francis of Assisi, an
IUI
UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
Opposite page, the Plaza Mayor, Trinidad
(Cuba).
Below left, a paved street In the Old Town.
Below, the Brunet Palace.
unusual museum recalls memories of
bandit-hunting and the struggle waged
by the people of Trinidad against both
internal and external enemies.
Trinidad is proud to count among its
guests Alexander von Humboldt, the cel¬
ebrated German naturalist and explorer,
who spent forty-eight hours there on his
first visit to Cuba, between December 1800
and March 1801. After leaving the port of
Batabano, on the south coast, the boat in
which he was travelling was forced to put
in at the mouth of the River Guaurabo,
half a dozen kilometres from Trinidad, in
order to take on drinking water. The gov¬
ernor of the region, a nephew of the
astronomer Antonio Ulloa, welcomed
Humboldt with all the respect due to such
a distinguished figure, and the rich planter
Antonio Padrón gave a reception in his
honour that was attended byTrinidad high
society. Humboldt gives a detailed account
ofhis stay in his correspondence, notably
describing an ascent ofPopa hill, where an
eighteenth-century church still stands, in
order to calculate its height with surveying
instruments.
Impressed by the welcome he received
from the leading families of Trinidad
and this despite his well-known distaste for
slavery Humboldt resumed his sea-
journey on the night of 15 March 1801. As
he left, a local priest and occasional poet
declaimed a sonnet from the quayside in
honour of the Orinoco delta, where the
illustrious scholar who recorded the
anecdote in his "Political Essay on the
Island of Cuba", republished in Havana in
1960 had first set foot on American soil.
Cubans, or at least the inhabitants of
Trinidad, regard him as the second des¬
cubridor (discoverer) of the island, after
Christopher Columbus.
EDOUARD BAILBY is a French journalist who
has been a correspondent with the weekly
(.'Express and a press officer in UNESCO's Office of
Public Information. He is the author of a guide to
Cuba (Cuide de Cuba, Arthaud, Paris, 6th edition,
1993) and a study on Oscar Niemeyer scheduled
for publication later this year.
75
