  
No modern story can be read in any order. have . a is. 4 
written a story which is loose-leafed and can be 2 / 
shuffled, like a deck of cards, to prove that I a Lp / 
am not modern. Being modern is not particularly 
Today, which is a day that never ends, I invented 
Mason Line. Mason Line is a thirty-five-year-old 
Englishman. I see him within the confines of a 
hotel room somewhere, waiting for something 
agreeable. You cannot move forwards. And you 
cannot move backwards. Stories have to move 
forwards and backwards, otherwise they get 
stuck, like porridge. Being modern is like looking 
at a photograph of yourself and saying, “Yes! I 
am living now! I mean just now!” But “now” 
happens so fast that, by the time you have said 
it, a whole crowd of “nows” has passed by, 
leaving you behind, wondering where they all 
went. 
to happen, the perfect reductio ad absurdum of 
Modern Man. He is, in fact, its antithesis, an 
anachronistic object trapped in time and space, 
a hapless collection of ideas and emotions kept, 
for the moment, in a state of suspension. Did 
God create Man, or did Man create God? And 
why is it that people always want their fiction 
disguised as fact? 
1 am enjoying today’s incarnation. Being Mason 
Line provides a welcome break from yesterday, 
or the day before that (when I was obliged ro per- 
form an heroic act, saving the life of a Japanese 
tourist who had slipped on the steps of the Eiffel 
Tower). Yes, today is a good day, comparatively 
speaking. Something must have happened to 
Simon Lane for him to have turned me into this 
mild-mannered person, currently relaxing on a 
hotel bed somewhere in Paris. 
It says in my dictionary that the derivation of the 
word “modern” is “modo”, for which the def- 
inition “just now” is offered. Just now I am 
writing. Just now I am smoking a cigarette. Just 
now I can see a snow flake falling onto 
someone’s head. There isa “now” and there isa 
“just now”, which is “now’s” closest relative. 
What happens to all the “just nows”? Where do 
they all go? Do they fall into the wake which 
each of us makes when we move forwards, 
pacing one tired foot ahead of another and never 
daring to look back? Or are they just the inci- 
dental litter of literature, life’s punctuation marks, 
the commas, colons and full stops which so 
clearly define our movements?

 I can see Mason Line getting out of the bath and 
rubbing a towel across his body, the shadow of 
the towel drying the walls of the bathroom. 
Mason looks at the bath water as it disappears 
down the plug hole, taking the shadow that was 
him when he was in the bath along with it, and, 
The shadow of Mason Line differs from all other 
shadows, just as Mason Line differs from all 
other people. Yes, even in relation to shadows, it 
as he does so, he imagines his slippery alter ego 
passing through the sewers of Paris and out into 
the Seine River, fighting against the current asit 
is dragged out to sea. 
  
Mason Line has been in the bathroom for fifteen 
minutes, which is exactly one ninety-sixth of his 
existence, a small enough fraction, but still a 
long time to spend in the bathroom. His shadow 
gets up from the bed and slips under the door in 
order to see what be is up to. Hello, Mason! Are 
you ready to come back into the bedroom and 
resume your existence as a fictional character? Or 
would you like another five minutes? Mason 
Line is lying in the bath, thinking of nothing in 
particular. He does not respond to this ques- 
tioning, so bis shadow rejoins him, attaching 
itself to the nape of his neck so that its head falls, 
like a sheet of water, over the edge of the bath, 
its hand moving, transparently, over the soap 
dish and onto the linoleum floor. Now it can 
bear Mason's thoughts. “I will simply think, and 
my thoughts will be recorded for the benefit of all, 
proof of the independence of the spirit!” 
is different, for sometimes, when the mood takes 
it, or when, perhaps, it becomes disinterested in 
Mason’s bebaviour or actions, it detaches itself 
from him. A few minutes ago, for example, 
Mason elected to go to the bathroom, so the 
shadow stayed where it was, lying prone on the 
bed, its limbs foreshortened and multiplied by the 
conflicting beams of light cast within the room. 
Even fictional characters, like fictional shadows, 
bave a right to a little privacy, I suppose. In 
many ways, they live charmed lives: they are 
perfect lovers, they are rarely short of money 
(akways in possession of exactly the right change 
upon exiting taxi cabs) and they have bladders of 
Herculean retentive power. But who knows 
what goes on inside their beads, what it is that 
actually drives them when alone, separated from 
those who created them? 
ST — IMON LANE 
is a British writer B 
whos 
Stilt Life with Books wil] he revel Published later this year by ride Works Publishing New ork. His first nove| was Published in Frenc h tr; i as Le Velleur (Christin 
stian 
Bourgois, Paris, | 992). 6 |

Anything written which is not modern should 
be done in any order. This is what I have decided, 
so that there will be no ambiguity. I have not yet 
written this story, but I am now imagining that 
I have written it. I have finished the story, cor- 
rected its mistakes and am just about to send it 
off to Unesco. Before I do so, I turn the story 
into the deck of cards I mentioned “just now” 
and shuffle the deck thoroughly. Then I put the 
deck of stories into an envelope, step out into the 
street and drop the envelope into a letter box. 
Even as I do so, I imagine the order of the cards 
changing, so that within a matter of moments my 
story has changed into something quite dif- 
ferent. 
  
It is quite possible, mused Mason Line, for an 
object to be imbued with magic: a fountain pen, 
empty of ink and useless to the hand, exquisite to 
the eye; a book, a thin volume, its pages still 
uncut, virgin thoughts awaiting the reader’ 

knife; or even my shadow, lying beside me on this 
foreign bed. The book contains no words, but if 
I hold it up to the light, I can see something 
inside, a voice silenced with time, the distant 
sadness of some forlorn hero. The pen is not 
empty, after all, its barrel is filled, it is just that the 
ink is invisible; and only by speaking the lan- 
guage of negatives can one hope to understand its 
message. 
The room in which Mason Line 1s seated is, of 
course, one of a chain of rooms, in a row of 
hotels dotted like stars in the universe, light 
years from one another, yet quite close from a 
distance, so that if one were to place one’s index 
finger in front of one’s eye and close the other 
tightly, one would be able, quite easily, to block 
out a dozen or so of them. Mason checks into the 
hotel at midnight, into the room I have reserved 
for him. He will leave the following midnight, as 
somebody else, another character from another 
story I have yet to invent. Some people will 
think of him as an imposter, a spy or an actor, 
perhaps, rehearsing some future impersonation. 
Others, especially the man at reception, will 
assume he is simply disguising himself so as to 
avoid paying the bill. 
At other times, should I have got out of bed on 
the wrong side, I might be more circumspect, 
investing my diurnal incarnations with qualities 
designed to deliberately hinder them through 
life’s progress, which is to say that microcosmic 
span of existence corresponding to the passage 
of the sun from east to west, or from one side of 
the hotel (Mason's side) to the other. Tam not a 
moralist, I care not one whit for conventional 
notions of good or bad, I just have my own 
way of doing things, an incontrovertible logic, 
which would shatter into a thousand pieces if 1 
ever tried to understand it. 
I am an imposter, thought Mason, a reincarna- 
tion, the ninth life, or the nine-hundredth. 1 
know I am different from everyone else. The 
mere fact that I am me sets me apart. I am like 
my shadow, I can do magical things: I can slip 
through space, I can be an inch thick or a mile 
long. When the sun moves towards the horizon, 
everyone can see me, I am stretched along the 
quat, squashed and trampled upon by passing 
tourists. At other times, in the quiet stillness of 
night, I become invisible, I can go wheresoever 
I wish, unnoticed, ignored. It is then that I feel 
my vocation, for I know that I can see without 
being seen. But I must be careful! Should there 
be a full moon, it may well be that I become con- 
spicuous again! 
I am an object, a magical object, a apher, thought 
Mason. I will not write, tap words on a screen, as 
I would were I my author, Simon Lane. Instead, 
I will simply think, and my thoughts will be 
recorded for the benefit of all, proof of the inde- 
pendence of the spirit. I do not necessarily resent 
being a fictional character, the figment of an 
alien imagination, subject to the whims and fan- 
cies of an inebriate scribbler from Albion, but I 
feel I should set some form of example for the 
others, for that cowering multitude, immortal- 
ized, frozen within the pulp of literature. 
I can invent and dispose of characters with great 
alacrity. Its, after all, my profession, or hobby, 
rather, for I see myself as an amateur, nothing 
more, nothing less. Sometimes, I am generous, 
I permit my creations to live in luxury, so that 
they never have to work. I give them credit 
cards, I allow them to sit quietly in a state of 
indolence, fed on a perpetual diet of Belon oys- 
ters and Burgundy wine. I only do this, however, 
if they succeed in evolving from the potentiali- 
ties with which I first endow them.


Today, which is the day that never ends, I invent 
Mason Line. Mason Line is a non-descript char- 
acter with a tendency towards introspection. 
. As a fictional character, he is capable of thinking 
in a linear fashion. I like Mason. I have created 
him so that I can write about him and, by writing 
about him, find out who he is. We have never 
met, but we have a relationship which is litte 
short of perfect. I know everything there is to 
know about him and he knows absolutely 
nothing whatsoever about me. We never argue. 
We keep ourselves to ourselves. Familiarity, 
which we know to cause contempt, has never 
reared its ugly head. 
The sun is setting, The day, which is Mason’s life, 
is nearly over; and the person who checked into 
the hotel has vanished. Within the room, there 

is no sign of his passing. Perhaps the man never 
existed at all, perhaps it was just me? But who am 
L, if Simon Lane is someone else? I put a cigarette 
to my mouth and light its tip with a match held 
shakily in my fingers. Is that really my hand, the 
same one which, but a moment ago, grasped 
the fountain pen, filled with invisible ink? I turn 
my hand over and inspect its palm. I cannot 
now make out the lines of destiny printed upon 
it. So I cannot tell whether or not it really is my 
hand. As opposed to someone else’s, that is. 
  
Because I am a reincarnation, because I am dif- 
ferent, I can see into the ltves of others, those who 
start out by being strangers but who might, 
eventually, become me. Yesterday, I was the 
protagonist in a sordid fable, inserted into the 
pages of a paperback hidden under the bed of a 
hotel room. Today, I am Mason Line, one of a 
pair of twins, the other half of which is a mis- 
chievous shadow. And tomorrow? Tomorrow 
rarely comes, but if it does, perhaps I shall be an 
old man, eighty-five instead of thirty-five, I shall 
feel pain in my limbs and lead in my heart. I shall 
move more slowly then and my thoughts will 
move in sympathy. 
Somewhere, behind the screen of my con- 
sciousness, lies a tale, infamous and exotic. But 
all T have to go on so far are a few, unrelated clues. 
I have Mason Line in the hotel room. And I 
have his shadow, taking a bath with him. Two 
men in a bath. What else? Well, there’s nothing 
in the room, no luggage, no trivia, no revelatory 
knick-knacks, just me, the third man, watching 
and waiting for something to happen. I am the 
observer, the invisible clement. Where, then, is 
Simon Lane, if I have become the narrator of this 
tale?   
