One world
3y Alain Touraine
The Universe: a Thousand
Billion Galaxies
(1980-1990), a
photomontage
(100 x 100 cm) by the
Russian painter George
Kuzmin.
THE idea that the predominant trend is
towards progress and universalism, with
counter-currents running back towards
religion and the irrational, is one that often seems
to be taken for granted.
This view is far removed from reality. As con¬
cerns the West, there is another way of looking at
things that seems to me much closer to the mark.
The idea of progress was uppermost in the minds
of certain intellectuals and statesmen for a century,
but from 1870 onwards it was no longer dis¬
cussed. The history of the West has been some¬
thing quite different. Pushing paradox to its
limits, I would even go so far as to say that if ever
there was a time when people believed in progress,
it was in the Middle Ages.
Modernity dismisses the idea of a general
movement embracing nature, society and the M. I

Eyeing Out (1 993),
a "collograph" or collage
print by the Finnish artist
Raija Patchett.
individual. These are becoming separate, distinct
areas, and I think that political and cultural life in
the West has been a matter of managing the rela¬
tionships between them. On the one hand, the
idea of progress has been shattered and sup¬
planted by that of economic growth, and, on the
other, an idea which is completely foreign to the
very concept of progress has emerged, the idea of
democracy, linked to that of individualism. None
of the great eighteenth-century exponents of
progress, including Rousseau as well as Voltaire,
came out officially and openly in favour of
democracy, quite the reverse. In fact, the concept
of the nation, which first appeared in Germany,
is the dominant concept of the twentieth century.
In other words, the history of the West docs
not chronicle the universal triumph of reason
but the process of learning how to manage the
relationship between economic growth what we
may call practical reason and the ideas of nation
and freedom.



This great current, previously moving in the
direction of integration, is now moving, world¬
wide, in that of disintegration. We have the
impression of living at a time when, to use exprès-
11
sions that are almost slogans, markets, tribes and
individual consciousnesses are living in separate
worlds. Society as such no longer exists. This is
important. Any solution that calls for the world
to be rebuilt around the individual, around the
economy or around cultures, is destined to fail
and can only end in disaster. In the world of
today, the objectivity of markets is completely dis¬
sociated from the plurality of individual con¬
sciousnesses and cultures.
The West, and many other parts of the world,
must now think how to live in accordance with
several principles at the same time. The distin¬
guishing feature of Western modernity is, I repeat,
not the universalism of progress, but the combi¬
nation of the universalism of reason, the partic¬
ularity of nations stronger, of course, in more
recently-built nations such as Italy and Ger¬
many and the universality of human rights, in
other words, the combination of individualism
and democracy.
I believe that this is the heart of the matter: not,
above all, to argue the case for the universal
against that of the particular, but to argue in
favour of the need for a society, a country, a
group of countries or the entire world to combine
several principles. The desire to make societies
one-dimensional ethnically pure, dedicated to
the rationale of the market or even entirely
devoted to individual interests is the funda¬
mental danger today. In every part of the world,
learning how to combine several principles is
essential.
In my view it is crucial that these problems
should be discussed in the context of one single
world. I believe it has become dangerous to talk
about "the third world", "the first world" and
"the second world". It is dangerous to think even
that a North-South divide exists. This is a mis¬
representation. Today the same issues arise in
both in differing proportions. Instead of saying
that reason resides in the North, with all its flaws,
while particularism reigns in the countries of the
South, we should, I think, be stating this problem
of combinations in the same terms for every part
of the world; otherwise, there will be a head-on
confrontation between those who argue that
reason should be given priority and those who
maintain that priority should be given to plu¬
rality and cultural diversity.
ALAIN TOURAINE,
French sociologist, is director of studies and director of the
Centre for Sociological Analysis and Intervention (CADIS)
at the School of Advanced Studies in Social Sciences, Paris.
Among his works published in English are Return of the Actor
(1985) and The Voice and the Eye: The Analysis of Social
Movements (1981).
