Wanted: a new philosophy
by Jean Klein
Despite all the
progress that has
been made, the
principle of
deterrence still
carries too much
weight in current
disarmament
negotiations
12
JEAN KLEIN,
of France, is a research
director at his country's
National Centre for Scientific
Research and professor of
law at the University of Paris
1. The author of many
articles in specialized
journals, he is attached to
France's Institute of
International Relations
(IFRI) where he is currently
studying problems of
international security and
disarmament.
SINCE the end of the Second World War,
the question of disarmament has been
permanently on the agenda of the United
Nations General Assembly, and the major mili¬
tary powers have engaged in endless debate about
it. Nevertheless, all the efforts of the interna¬
tional community towards this goal have pro¬
duced only modest results, and it is only in the
course of the last decade that the member states
of the two alliances that constituted the American
and the Soviet camps have embarked on the path
of authentic disarmament. This trend has been
confirmed since the collapse of the communist
regimes in the countries of central and eastern
Europe and the dissolution of the Warsaw Treaty
Organization (WTO) or Warsaw Pact, while the
Gulf War underlined the risks of an uncontrolled
spread of conventional and nuclear weapons in
various zones of conflict.
Speculation is thus rife as to the chances of,
and the suitable pace for, a disarmament process
that would at last make it possible to overcome
the divisions inherited from the past and reinforce
international security while "diverting to arma¬
ments only the minimum of the world's eco¬
nomic and human resources". For some, the
"disarmament race" is irreversible, and nuclear
weapons are doomed to wither away once secu¬
rity can be guaranteed at less risk within the
framework of a collective organization. Others
are more sceptical and believe that cutbacks in
military expenditure and the reduction of armed
forces and weaponry stem not so much from a
new political vision as from structural adjust¬
ments determined by economic and social factors
in the wealthy societies. The fact is that, apart
from the Washington Treaty of 1987, the other
disarmament agreements (CFE, START) are not
yet in force, and their implementation raises all
kinds of difficulties. So it is well to be prudent in
assessing the chances for disarmament in the new
international context.
AN IMMEDIATE ACTION
PROGRAMME
Today, the threat that the armies of the Warsaw
Pact represented for the West has vanished, tac¬
tical nuclear weapons have almost entirely dis¬
appeared from the European continent, and the
new strategic concept of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) gives pride of
place to arms control and disarmament within the
framework of "co-operative security". It is there¬
fore essential that the 1990 Treaty on Conven
tional Forces in Europe (CFE) should come into
effect as rapidly as possible. The arrangement
concluded in Tashkent in May 1992 on the
sharing of arms quotas between eight countries of
the former USSR that are directly concerned
augurs well for their willingness to make it work.
Building on what has been achieved, the partic¬
ipating states of the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) will next try to
reinforce stability in Europe and in certain "fron¬
tier zones". The drive for stability will entail the
adoption of new measures intended both to
ensure greater transparency in military activities
and to reduce the level of armed forces to a min¬
imum corresponding to legitimate security needs
or maintain them at that level. A programme of

immediate action was approved at the end of the
Helsinki summit conference in Finland, on 10
July 1992.
Meanwhile, the momentum triggered by the
START (Strategic Arms Reduction Talks) Treaty
has been kept up and even accelerated. After the
withdrawal and even the destruction of a sizeable
number of tactical nuclear weapons, land-based
and deployed on surface ships or in submarines,
both Russians and Americans have put a stop to
the production of fissionable materials for mili¬
tary purposes. In June 1992 they also agreed in
principle to drastically reduce their strategic
weapons and to eliminate ground-to-ground
missiles with multiple warheads by the year 2003.
It should be noted that the control of nuclear
weapons is still the exclusive preserve of these two
protagonists and that they are pressing forward
rapidly to attain their goals with the least delay.
They have, for instance, harmonized unilateral
declarations on both sides relating to the with¬
drawal and destruction of tactical nuclear
weapons, and the additional protocol to the
START Treaty ofJune 1992 was negotiated in less
than six months.
All the same, political friction still raises some
doubts as regards the actual process of disarma¬
ment. It has to be admitted that the dismantling
of tactical nuclear weapons and the storage of
the resultant fissionable material from them pose
delicate technical problems which can only be
resolved with the help of the Western powers. The
same is true of the implementation of the START
agreement: in the best-case hypothesis, it will
take more than ten years before the level of arma¬
ments reaches the agreed final total of 3,000/3,500
nuclear warheads. In any case, it would be mis¬
leading to present these moves as the result of a
deliberate policy aimed at ending the old
dilemmas of deterrence and promoting a world
free from nuclear weapons. When the process
ends, Russians and Americans will still possess an
imposing strategic arsenal, and it is probable that
the logic of deterrence based on retaining "suffi¬
cient" if not minimal capability will continue to
govern their mutual relations.
MEASURES FOR
NON-PROLIFERATION
Disarmament implies global action, and it is essen¬
tial to reinforce the effectiveness of the United
Nations in this field. This was the conclusion
In Arkansas (United States)
workers dislodge equipment
in an underground
cableway while dismantling
a Titan II intercontinental
ballistic missile and
deactivating its silo.
13

Apart from the Washington
Treaty of 1987, the other
disarmament agreements
are not yet in force.
Untitled acrylic painting on
canvas by the Lebanese
artist Samir Khaddaje.
reached by members of the Security Council at a
meeting held on 31 January 1992 at the Heads of
State or Government level to examine current
aspects of "the maintenance of international peace
and security". On that occasion, stress was placed
on the need to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, to regulate the
transfer of conventional arms and to control by
peaceful means "any problems concerning these
matters threatening or disrupting the mainte¬
nance of regional and global stability."
Measures have already been taken to consol-
14
idate and extend beyond 1995 the system set up
by the Treaty on the Non-Poliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), and there are plans to make
more resources available to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and enlarge its
fields of competence so that it can fulfil its mon¬
itoring role. Moreover, the export of sensitive
technology is being subjected to ever stricter sur¬
veillance, and an International Centre of Science
and Technology has been created, with the sup¬
port of the West, aimed at dissuading scientists
and engineers working in the arms industry of the
former USSR from lending their skills to "pro¬
liferating" states.
In the field of conventional weapons, the five
permanent members of the Security Council
have defined a code of conduct, but this seems to
have been scarcely respected, to judge by the
transfers of arms that have taken place in certain
sensitive areas. On the other hand, multilateral
negotiations aimed at banning the production
and stockpiling of chemical weapons and ulti¬
mately eliminating them altogether have entered
a decisive phase, and it is hoped that an agreement
will be concluded shortly.
A WORLD
PERSPECTIVE
While the end of the Cold War and the new rela¬
tionship that has emerged between the former
adversaries have called into question the tradi¬
tional approach to arms control, it is still regarded
as one of the best means of reducing interna¬
tional tension, preventing conflicts and facili¬
tating the peaceful settlement of differences.
Neither the Americans nor the Russians have
any intention of thus repudiating the gains made
during several decades of concerted action to
avert the perils of the nuclear age; on the contrary,
they are determined to keep on their present
course and even to aim for more ambitious objec¬
tives than those they have already set themselves.
It remains to be seen whether the nuclear dis¬
armament on which they have agreed can be sat¬
isfactorily implemented, given the current situa¬
tion in the states that resulted from the
dismemberment of the USSR and considering
the difficulties already encountered by those
bodies responsible for verifying precisely whether
the commitments entered into are being respected.
In Europe, the reduction of conventional
forces has been viewed from the start as an essen¬
tially political process. The aim was not so much
to perpetuate the status quo by adjusting the mil-
itary balance between NATO and the WTO as to
encourage the emergence of a new security system
based on dialogue, co-operation and the mainte¬
nance of a purely defensive capability. The situ¬
ation thus gradually changed from antagonism to
peaceful coexistence before shifting to co-oper¬
ation within the framework of the CSCE, and
now the way has been paved for true disarma¬
ment by the adoption of confidence-building
measures.

A Kuwait oil well set ablaze
during the 1991 Gulf War.
Whilst this model cannot be replicated else¬
where as it stands, it should serve as an inspiration
for putting a stop to the conventional arms race
in unstable regions of the planet. Since the end of
the Gulf War, various proposals on comparable
lines have been put forward for bringing about
peace in the Middle East. However, the success of
such an enterprise presupposes that attempts to
achieve a balance of forces at the lowest level in
a regional framework will respect the right of
every state to security and will not be dictated by
outside powers.
Moreover, arms control has to be seen in a
world perspective, and it is vital to reaffirm the
specific role that the UN Security Council must
play in this respect. It may also be necessary to try
to work out a global disarmament programme
closely linked with a plan for collective security.
The tenth. special session of the UN General
Assembly made recommendations to this effect,
but they have not yielded results so far. Today,
such an exercise would help clarify just what is at
stake in disarmament, and would serve as a per¬
manent reminder to member states of the
supreme importance of the enterprise in which
they arc engaged. IS
