j. M. G. Le C/éz/o
From France, with love
22
IN the night I call your name, Oriya my wife,
and you, Samira, Jámila and Ali, my dear
children. I have begun with your name, and
it is with your name that I shall end, Oriya my
wife, because you are the woman I love more than
anything in the world. When I left Tata three
years ago, when I left all I had loved and known
since my birth, my parents' home, I had nothing
to take away with me. We were so poor that I had
to leave. I took what was most precious to me:
your names, yours above all, Oriya. It is a very
sweet name, I repeat it every day and every night.
Your name gives me strength, it makes me work,
it bestows a blessing on me.
Oriya, your name stirs me and fills me with
happiness whenever I utter it. It is deep within me,
it has entered the innermost part of my body,
sometimes it feels as if I have been hearing it all my
life. Every evening, when I come back tired from
Guiglione's building site, I enter the room in the
Rue d'Italie which I share with Malik, the
Tunisian, and I stretch out on the mattress. I no
longer hear the sound of the television set, I do
not see the blue light flickering in the room, nor
those meaningless images, those images that you,
Oriya, will never be part of. Malik watches tele¬
vision until he drops off to sleep. He does not talk,
he watches everything sport, films, quizzes,
talk-shows, everything I sometimes think he is
going to go mad.
I close my eyes as I lie on the mattress by the
window, and you, Oriya, appear before me. Malik
cannot see you. I am the only person who can see
you in this poky room, because your name is
written deep within me and because I am waiting
for the day when I can be with you again. Your
name is written in a very long sentence, a never-
ending sentence that is moving slowly towards

you, towards the other side of the world where
you are waiting for me. So I can see you.
I am so far from you all, in this city, in this
room. Up here under the roof, it is cold in winter
and stifling in summer. Our mattresses are laid out
on the floor. Malik has the mattress near the
door, and mine is near the window. In the middle
there is Slimane's mattress. A week ago Slimane,
Malik's brother, was crushed by a wall that had
not been shored up properly on the site. He lost
his right arm. He will not be able to work again.
When he gets out of hospital, he will go back to
his wife and children in Tunisia. Malik at least
talked about that, then went on watching televi¬
sion, his face full of anger. I could not help won¬
dering what you would say, Oriya, if the same
thing happened to me, if I came back home
maimed. What would our children say?
I like sleeping by the window. On spring
mornings I can guess what the weather is going
to be like. I can hear the swifts screeching. It is
almost as if I can see a little of the light of Tata, the
light that you see with your eyes, Oriya.
Tata. I like saying that name too. It's a name
that makes the people here laugh. They do not
understand it. I lower my voice apologetically

when 1 say it because they find it funny, to let
them know that I cannot do anything about it. It
is a very sweet name, a name like yours, Oriya,
which gives me life and strength. I also say to
myself the familiar names of the villages and the
markets. They are like the names of my family.
Souk lleta, Tazart, El Khcmis, Aiggo, Imitck. I say
them with my eyes shut, and I am close to you,
Oriya, even if my hands cannot touch you, even
if I do not eat your bread or drink your water.
I can see your smile, I can hear the murmur of
your voice in my ear, as you sing a lullaby to
our son, whom I have not yet seen. I can see the
sparkle of your eyes held captive by your kohl-
paintcd eyelids, I can smell the scent of your hair
as you comb it in the morning sun in the women's
courtyard. I can see you just as I used to do when
I peeped at you through the curtains of the
window in the men's chamber.
The seasons have come and gone, far from
you, Oriya, far from you, my children. In win¬
tertime, it is so cold on the building sites that
only the memory of you, Oriya, and the memory
of your voice and your eyes keep me alive. For
you I lay row upon row of twenty-centimctrc-
thick breeze blocks, I pour concrete over rusty 23

A Tunisian palm-grove.
24
J.M.G. LE CLEZIO,
French writer, recently
published Pawana (Gallimard,
Paris, 1992).
rods, I drive screws into ceiling joists, I smooth
plaster on walls. My name is Abdelhak, my
father's name is Rebbo, and my mother is
Khadidja. Guiglione, our boss, can never
remember my name, or does not want to. He
calls me Ahmed. All the labourers on the site are
called Ahmed. What does it matter? It is for you
I heave the shovel, for you I tip the cement and
build breeze-block walls. Day after day, month
after month I build walls, I smooth plaster. I have
built more houses than all the families of Tata
would need. I have built whole towns. When I
have saved up enough money, I shall return, Oriya,
and we shall never again be far from each other.
The sun burns my body, the cold sears my
skin, and my arms and legs are breaking from the
weight of shovelful after shovelful. I am used to
it now. When I came to this city three years ago,
I was still as frail and tender as a child. By evening
I would be so tired and so lonely that I would lie
on the floor and let the tears pour from my eyes.
I lived in a dormitory with blacks and Tunisians
above a bar, and the neon lights made a bloody
stain on the window. There was the noise of cars
in the street, the voices of drunken men quar¬
relling, of women screaming. There were no chil¬
dren, there was no sweetness. It was then that I
began to call your name, Oriya, and the names of
each of my children, and the name of Tata.
It was then that the memory of the day I met
you came back to me, Oriya my wife, in the
great palm grove by the river, the day of the fes¬
tival when you were part of the procession of
young girls who came to carry the pollen to the
date-palm flowers.
The air was light, I remember it well, and the
golden dust floated heavenwards. The valley
resounded with singing. As the procession passed
in front of me, I saw you, Oriya, and the sparkle
of your eyes entered me, never to re-emerge. I
knew you were my wife.
In the grey and white winter of the building
sites, in this city so far away from you, the memory
of that day is ever-present. It is that memory that
gives me strength, that carries my shovel, that lifts
the heavy loads of cement and plaster.
Even when there is a great silence, even when
there is no smile and no word, just Guiglione's
orders carrying across the site, and the noise of
drills, disk-cutters and jackhammers, and the .
squeak of pulleys hoisting up yet more cement,
yet more plaster, even when there are empty
Sundays on the dusty boulevards, the lonely,
childless, fear-stalked esplanades where evil men
look out for victims, the memory of that day in
the valley of date palms is always with me. It is
you I see, Oriya. You are wearing your finery,
your face and hands are covered with golden
pollen, and the sparkle in your eyes enters my
eyes, for the rest of our days. 9ß
