Thepainted caves of
MogOO byJosé Serra-Vega
UNESCO IN ACTION
HERITAGE
With its paths shaded by slender
poplars and its cool, swift-
flowing streams, the oasis of
Dunhuang is an island of greenery in an
otherwise arid landscape on the edge of
the Gobi and Takla Makan deserts in
China's Gansu province. Some twenty- five
kilometres to the southeast are the famous
Mogao caves 492 temples and sanctu¬
aries hewn into a 1,600-metre-Iong stretch
of a sheer cliff overlooking the Dachuan
river. They are a unique record of a period
when Buddhist culture in China was at its
height, and the Tang dynasty, which
reigned from 618 to 907, was at the apogee
of its power. In 1987 they were placed on
Unesco's World Heritage List.
The area's history is closely associated
with the first Chinese raids against the
nomads of central Asia at a time when the
struggle to control trade routes and the
Hexi corridor sparked endless clashes
between the emperors of China and
nomadic tribes of Huns, Mongols and
Turks.
A long section of the Great Wall
defended the empire's northern border.
Around 117 B.C. this line of fortifications
housed two garrisons, one ofwhich, based
at Dunhuang, was for several centuries
the last bastion of Chinese civilization at
the empire's westernmost frontier. Beyond
stretched an immense salt desert so hot
that camels were provided with patches of
leather to protect their knees from being
scorched by the sand when they knelt
down.
A CULTURAL CROSSROADS
The two busiest roads plied by merchants
travelling from the West to China followed
the lines of oases that stretched to the
north and south of central Asia. One fol¬
lowed the course ofthe Tarim river on the
edge of the Takla Makan desert; the other
ran through the oases fed by melting ice
from the Kunlun mountain range. Both
converged on Dunhuang.
Dunhuang is strategically situated at
an intersection of the Silk Roads which
from the time of the Han dynasty (206
B.C-220 A.D.) brought China into contact
with the Indo-Iranian civilizations and
Mediterranean Europe. For more than a
thousand years it was a busy frontier post
and trading settlement where caravans
came and went. It was also an active Bud¬
dhist centre.
At Dunhuang travellers wearied by the
harsh climate and attacks by desert looters
Below left, the entry to the Mogao caves.
Below right, inside Cave 296 (Northern
Chou dynasty), whose decoration is inspired
by the ¡ataka, narrations of former
incarnations of the Buddha.
found a garrison to protect them, com¬
fortable taverns and hospitable young
women. They could deposit or borrow
money and hire camels for the 1,700-kilo¬
metre trip to the capital of the empire.
There were warehouses where they could
store their merchandise and many
craftsmen were ready to serve them. Pay¬
ment could be made in gold, currency,
textiles or grain. Debtors were penalized
with high interest rates and, in serious
cases, confiscation of their property.
A RELIGIOUS MICROCOSM
Cut off from the rest of the empire for long
periods of time, Dunhuang was a cos¬
mopolitan enclave thronged with way¬
farers of diverse origins and callings. The
intensity of its economic life was matched
by the religious activities of the monks
and missionaries who gathered there
Buddhists, Manichaeans, Nestorians and
Muslims.
Buddhism originated in India during
the fifth century B.C. and reached China
during the Han dynasty. But Buddhist cul¬
ture, thought and art only began to spread
extensively throughout central Asia when
it was encouraged by the rulers of the
Kushan empire during the first four cen¬
turies of the Christian era. The Mogao
caves are just one link albeit the most
famous in a long chain ofBuddhist cave-
46

temples stretching from Afghanistan to
the heart of China.
According to an inscription deciphered
at Dunhuang, the first cave may have been
hewn on the orders of a monk named
Luzun in 361 A.D. almost a century
before Buddhism was recognized as
China's official religion in 444 A.D. This
was the first step in the construction of
the huge cave-temple complex, a task that
took nearly a thousand years (from the
fifth to the fourteenth centuries).
Throughout this period, missionary
monks who journeyed along the Silk Roads
from India to convert China to Buddhism
would meet Chinese monks and pilgrims
travelling in the opposite direction, seeking
the roots of their religion in India. To avoid
the Himalayas the pilgrims had to make a
long and dangerous detour through a vast
expanse ofunsafe or hostile territory. They
trekked westward across the deserts and
high plateaux of Tian Shan, the Pamirs
and the Hindu Kush before reaching the
Ganges valley. After purifying themselves
in the river's sacred waters at Benares and
visiting the site of the Buddha's Enlight¬
enment at Bodh Gaya, the travellers would
study Sanskrit and learn about the mys¬
teries of Buddhist thought before setting
out on their return journey laden with
relics and holy books.
A TREASURE TROVE OF BUDDHIST ART
The Mogao caves bear witness to a number
of important episodes in the history of
central Asia. The Tang dynasty's powerful
grip on the Silk Roads during the seventh
century is reflected in colossal statues of
the Buddha and in frescoes illustrating
transcendental doctrines. Tantric themes
began to appear when the site was occu¬
pied by Tibetans between 790 and 851,
increasing in number after the conquest of
Gansu by the Tangut and the proliferation
of lamaistic sects under the Western Hsia
dynasty, which ruled from 1036 to 1227.
This ensemble ofstatues and paintings
deeply rooted in the events of Chinese
history is also a treasure trove of a thou¬
sand years of Buddhist art. Each temple is
entered through a chapel leading to a wide
corridor. The lofty roofs are conical. Mag¬
nificent frescoes depict the birth, life and
death of the Buddha and his successive
incarnations; impressive processions of
bodhisattvas and other Buddhist saints;
dancing angels and magicians; disciples
and believers; palaces and monasteries in
the midst of awe-inspiring landscapes;
dragons, elephants, wild beasts and bou¬
quets and garlands of flowers.
The caves are covered by some 45,000
square metres of splendid frescoes and
house over 2,400 painted statues of out¬
standing refinement and beauty.
A portrait of King Uygur,
the principal donor of Cave 409 (Western
Hsia dynasty), shows him holding a
perfume-burner as he steps forward to pay
tribute to Buddha.
The paintings and sculptures display
' an elegant blend of Hindu, Persian, Indo-
Hellenic and Greco-Roman influences
combined with characteristic features of
Chinese art, which are prevalent in the
treatment of architecture, landscape,
clothing, facial expressions and women's
hair styles.
The thousand or so caves must have
been a spectacular site at the height of their
splendour during the late seventh and early
eighth centuries. Some were perhaps the
work of private individuals, but most of
them must have been financed by pow¬
erful political clans whose exploits are com¬
memorated by carved stelae. Others were
made by Buddhist communities dedicated
to the worship of the household god and
other divinities, to providing aid after nat¬
ural disasters, and to the organization of
spring banquets, funerals and cultural activ¬
ities ofvarious kinds.
Invasions, the turbulent history of
medieval China and natural wear-and-
tear have taken their toll of the temples.
Looting and profanation were only halted
in recent times. The effigies of the Buddha
were coated with soot and smoke when
troops of the White Russian army
retreating from Siberia spent the winter
of 1920 in the caves. Considering the van¬
dalism they have suffered, it is a miracle
that nearly half of them have survived.
Since 1949, the Dunhuang Cultural Relics
Research Institute has been engaged in on-
site conservation, research and analysis,
and the only invaders have been tourists.
In the late nineteenth century the dis¬
asters and strife that engulfed China
brought a flood of refugees to Dunhuang.
In 1900 a Taoist monk named Wang Yuan
Lu (Wang Gulu) attempted to restore one
of the Mogao temples with his own slender
resources, discovering in the process a
walled-up hiding place where monks had
hidden some 30,000 manuscripts and
relics when the site was invaded by the
Xiasinl036.
The British explorer Sir Aurel Stein
(1862-1943) heard of the discovery while
on an expedition to the Takla Makan oases
and in 1907 he visited Dunhuang and
studied the documents with mounting
excitement. The earliest text was a treatise
on Buddhist canon law translated by Xuan
Zhang, the most famous of the Buddhist
pilgrims who visited India during the sev¬
enth century. With it were fifth-century
scrolls written in Brahmi script, Tibetan
religious texts, paintings on silk and reli¬
gious banners. To general indifference,
3,000 scrolls and 6,000 manuscripts,
objects and paintings made their way to
the British Museum in London.
Aurel Stein was the first of a long line of
visitors to the caves. The French sinologist
Paul Pelliot examined some 20,000 old
documents by candlelight at the incredible
rate of a thousand per day until over¬
whelmed by fatigue and by dust from the
ancient manuscripts. He discovered
Tibetan manuscripts preserved between
two boards knotted together, Buddhist
poems, folktales, accounting ledgers and
other texts in Chinese, Sogdian, Uighur,
Khotanese, Kushan, Sanskrit, Hebrew and
Syriac. Some 4,000 of these documents
were removed to the Guimet Museum in
Paris.
When they heard of the interest for¬
eigners were showing in the Chinese her¬
itage, the authorities in Beijing ordered
10,000 documents to be brought to the
capital, but they were transported in such
unsatisfactory conditions that many of
them were lost en route. Others reap¬
peared in Berlin, Saint Petersburg and
Kyoto. Shortly afterwards, the market was
flooded with copies produced in Tianjin.
This extraordinary collection, now dis¬
persed, is vital evidence of the history of
Asia and especially of the spread of Bud¬
dhism in China under the Tang dynasty.
The documents and the cave-temples
where they were found are also the most
spectacular illustration of the cultural and
artistic exchanges that took place along
the Silk Roads.
JOSE SERRA-VEGA,
a Peruvian engineer and former staff member of
the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP), has worked in the Indian sub-continent
on technologies geared to environmental
conservation. 47
