D 0 C U M E N
A LETTER
FROM
FREUD TO
EINSTEIN
Is there a way of freeing humankind from the threat of war? Can
human aggression be channeled to help protect people against
the impulses of hatred and destruction?
These questions were put to Sigmund Freud in an anxious
letter from Albert Einstein dated 30 July 1932, when Fascist and
Nazi violence was spreading in Europe. The father of
psychoanalysis, whom Einstein described as an "expert in the
lore of human instincts", replied two months later, spelling out
his thoughts on the psychical foundations of behaviour and
defining possible ways in which the conflicts rending humanity
could be brought to a halt.
Their correspondence was published in 1933, under the title
Why War?, by Unesco's precursor, the International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation. With a number of other exchanges
between leading thinkers of the day, it constitutes one of the
most remarkable initiatives taken by the League of Nations
(whose mission was taken over by the United Nations
Organization in 1946) to preserve the spirit of peace at a time
when it was increasingly under threat. Sixty years on, this little-
known document has lost none of its interest or validity.
Salient extracts from Einstein's letter appeared in the May
1985 issue of the Unesco Courier entitled Forty Years After,
commemorating the end of World War II. Now for the first time
we publish Sigmund Freud's reply, in slightly abridged form.
Sigmund Freud
(1856-1939), photographed on 20 July 1932.

Albert Einstein (1879-1955).



Why war?
by Sigmund Freud
You begin with the relations between Might
and Right, and this is assuredly the proper
starting-point for our enquiry. But, for the
term "might", I would substitute a tougher
and more telling word: "violence". In right
and violence we have today an obvious
antinomy. It is easy to prove that one has
evolved from the other. . . .
Conflicts of interest between man and
man are resolved, in principle, by recourse to
violence. It is the same in the animal kingdom,
from which man cannot claim exclusion; nev¬
ertheless men are also prone to conflicts of
opinion, touching, on occasion, the loftiest
peaks of abstract thought, which seem to call
for settlement by quite another method. This
refinement is, however, a late development.
To start with, brute force was the factor
which, in small communities, decided points
of ownership and the question of which man's
will was to prevail. Very soon physical force
was implemented, then replaced, by the use
of various adjuncts; he proved the victor
whose weapon was the better, or handled the
more skilfully.
Now, for the first time, with the coming
Translated into English by Stuart Gilbert
of weapons, superior brains began to oust
brute force, but the object of the conflict
remained the same: one party was to be con¬
strained, by the injury done him or impair¬
ment of his strength, to retract a claim or a
refusal. This end is most effectively gained
when the opponent is definitively put out of
action in other words, is killed.
This procedure has two advantages; the
enemy cannot renew hostilities, and, sec¬
ondly, his fate deters others from following
his example. Moreover, the slaughter of a foe
gratifies an instinctive craving a point to
which we shall revert hereafter. However,
another consideration may be set off against
this will to kill: the possibility of using an
enemy for servile tasks if his spirit be broken
and his life spared. Here violence finds an
outlet not in slaughter but in subjugation.
Hence springs the practice of giving quarter;
but the victor, having from now on to reckon
with the craving for revenge that rankles in his
victim, forfeits to some extent his personal
security.
From violence to law
... We know that in the course of evolution
this state of things was modified, a path was
traced that led away from violence to law.
But what was this path? Surely it issued from
a single verity; that the superiority of one
strong man can be overborne by an alliance of
many weaklings, that l'union fait la force.
Brute force is overcome by union, the allied
might of scattered units makes good its right
against the isolated giant.
Thus we may define "right" (i.e. law) as
the might of a community. Yet it, too, is
nothing else than violence, quick to attack
whatever individual stands in its path, and it
employs the selfsame methods, follows like
ends, with but one difference; it is the com¬
munal, not individual, violence that has its
way.
But, for the transition from crude vio¬
lence to the reign of law, a certain psycho¬
logical condition must first obtain. The union
of the majority must be stable and enduring.
If its sole raison d'être be the discomfiture of
some overweening individual and, after his
downfall, it be dissolved, it leads to nothing.
Some other man, trusting to his superior
power, will seek to reinstate the rule of vio¬
lence and the cycle will repeat itself unend¬
ingly.
Thus the union of the people must be
permanent and well-organized; it must enact
rules to meet the risk of possible revolts;
must set up machinery ensuring that its
rules the laws are observed and that such
acts of violence as the laws demand are duly
carried out. This recognition of a community

Here and on pages 46-47: postcards sent by Freud to
the International Institute of Intellectual
Co-operation in 1933 to acknowledge receipt
of Why War?
of interests engenders among the members of
the group a sentiment of unity and fraternal
solidarity which constitutes its real strength.
. . . Now the position is simple enough so
long as the community consists of a number of
equipollent individuals. The laws of such a
group can determine to what extent the indi¬
vidual must forfeit his personal freedom, the
right of using personal force as an instrument
of violence, to ensure the safety of the group.
But such a combination is only theoret¬
ically possible; in practice the situation is
always complicated by the fact that, from the
outset, the group includes elements of unequal
power, men and women, elders and children,
and, very soon, as a result of war and conquest,
victors and the vanquished i.e. masters and
slaves as well. From this time on the
common law takes notice of these inequalities
of power, laws are made by and for the rulers,
giving the servile classes fewer rights.
Thenceforward there exist within the
state two factors making for legal instability,
but legislative evolution, too: first, the
attempts by members of the ruling class to set
themselves above the law's restrictions and,
secondly, the constant struggle of the ruled to
extend their rights and see each gain
embodied in the code, replacing legal dis¬
abilities by equal laws for all.
The second of these tendencies will be
particularly marked when there takes place a
positive mutation of the balance of power
within the community, the frequent outcome
of certain historical conditions. In such cases
the laws may gradually be adjusted to the
changed conditions or (as more usually
ensues) the ruling class is loath to reckon
with the new developments, the result being
insurrections and civil wars, a period when
law is in abeyance and force once more the
arbiter, followed by a new regime of law.
There is another factor of constitutional
change, which operates in a wholly pacific
manner, viz: the cultural evolution of the
mass of the community; this factor, however,
is of a different order and can only be dealt
with later.
A supreme authority
Thus we see that, even within the group itself,
the exercise of violence cannot be avoided
when conflicting interests are at stake. But the
common needs and habits of men who live in
fellowship under the same sky favour a
speedy issue of such conflicts and, this being
so, the possibilities of peaceful solutions make
steady progress. Yet the most casual glance at
world history will show an unending series of
conflicts between one community and
another or a group of others, between large
and smaller units, between cities, countries,
races, tribes and kingdoms, almost all of
which were settled by the ordeal of war. Such
wars end either in pillage or in conquest and
its fruits, the downfall of the loser.
No single all-embracing judgement can be
passed on these wars of aggrandisement.
Some, like the war between the Mongols and
the Turks, have led to unmitigated misery;
others, however, have furthered the transition
from violence to law, since they brought
larger units into being, within whose limits a
recourse to violence was banned and a new
regime determined all disputes. Thus the
Roman conquests brought that boon, the
pax Romana, to the Mediterranean lands.
The French kings' lust for aggrandisement
created a new France, flourishing in peace
and unity. Paradoxical as it sounds, we must
admit that warfare well might serve to pave
the way to that unbroken peace we so desire,
for it is war that brings vast units into being,
within whose frontiers all warfare is pro¬
scribed by a strong central power. In practice,

however, this end is not attained, for as a rule
the fruits of victory are but short-lived, the
newly-created unit falls asunder once again,
generally because there can be no true cohe¬
sion between the parts that violence has
welded. Hitherto, moreover, such conquests
have only led to aggregations which, for all
their magnitude, had limits, and disputes
between these units could be resolved only by
recourse to arms. For humanity at large the
sole result of all these military enterprises
was that, instead of frequent not to say inces¬
sant little wars, they had now to face great
wars which, for all they came less often, were
so much the more destructive.
Regarding the world of today, the same
conclusion holds good, and you, too, have
reached it, though by a shorter path. There is
but one sure way of ending war and that is the
establishment, by common consent, of a cen¬
tral control which shall have the last word in
every conflict of interests. For this, two things
are needed: first, the creation of such a
supreme court of judicature; secondly, its
investment with adequate executive force.
Unless this second requirement be fulfilled,
the first is unavailing. Obviously the League
of Nations, acting as a Supreme Court, fulfils
the first condition; it does not fulfil the
second. It has no force at its disposal and can
only get it if the members of the new body, its
constituent nations, furnish it. And, as things
are, this is a forlorn hope.
Still, we should be taking a very short¬
sighted view of the League of Nations were
we to ignore the fact that here is an experi-
^ \
... "3-J
C 	 y
*,. V
_ /-
Vi
ment the like of which has rarely been
attempted in the course of history, and never
before on such a scale. It is an attempt to
acquire the authority (in other words, coer¬
cive influence), which hitherto reposed exclu¬
sively on the possession of power, by calling
into play certain idealistic attitudes of mind.
We have seen that there are two factors of
cohesion in a community: violent compul¬
sions and ties of sentiment ("identifications",
in technical parlance) between the members
of the group. If one of these factors becomes
inoperative, the other may still suffice to hold
the group together. Obviously such notions
as these can only be significant when they are
the expression of a deeply rooted sense of
unity, shared by all. It is necessary, there¬
fore, to gauge the efficacy of such sentiments.
History tells us that, on occasion, they have
been effective. For example, the Panhellenic
conception, the Greeks' awareness of supe¬
riority over their barbarian neighbours, which
found expression in the Amphictyonies, the
Oracles and Games, was strong enough to
humanize the methods of warfare as between
Greeks, though inevitably it failed to pre¬
vent conflicts between different elements of
the Hellenic race or even to deter a city or
group of cities from joining forces with their
racial foe, the Persians, for the discomfiture
of a rival. The solidarity of Christendom in
the Renaissance age was no more effective,
despite its vast authority, in hindering
Christian nations, large and small alike, from
calling in the Sultan to their aid. And, in our
times, we look in vain for some such uni¬
fying notion whose authority would be
unquestioned. It is all too clear that the
nationalistic ideas, paramount today in every
country, operate in quite a contrary direction.
Some there are who hold that the Bolshevist
conceptions may make an end of war, but, as
things are, that goal lies very far away and,
perhaps, could only be attained after a spell of
brutal internecine warfare. Thus it would
seem that any effort to replace brute force by
the might of an ideal is, under present con¬
ditions, doomed to fail. Our logic is at fault
CONTINUED PAGE 46

DOCUMENT: A LETTER FROM FREUD TO EINSTEIN ic-nti-«.d hM poS. 7,
if we ignore the fact that right is founded on
brute force and even today needs violence
to maintain it.
Life force and death instinct
I now can comment on another of your state¬
ments. You are amazed that it is so easy to
infect men with the war-fever, and you sur¬
mise that man has in him an active instinct for
hatred and destruction, amenable to such
stimulations. I entirely agree with you. I
believe in the existence of this instinct and
have been recently at pains to study its man¬
ifestations.
In this connexion may I set out a fragment
of that knowledge of the instincts, which we
psychoanalysts, after so many tentative essays
and gropings in the dark, have compassed?
We assume that human instincts are of two
kinds: those that conserve and unify, which
we call "erotic" (in the meaning Plato gives to
Eros in his Symposium), or else "sexual"
(explicitly extending the popular connota¬
tions of "sex"); and, secondly, the instincts to
destroy and kill, which we assimilate as the
aggressive or destructive instincts.
These are, as you perceive, the well-known
opposites, Love and Hate, transformed into
theoretical entities; they are, perhaps, another
aspect of those eternal polarities, attraction
and repulsion, which fall within your province.
But we must be chary of passing overhastily to
the notions of good and evil. Each of these
instincts is every whit as indispensable as its
opposite and all the phenomena of life derive
from their activity, whether they work in con¬
cert or in opposition.
It seems that an instinct of either category
can operate but rarely in isolation; it is always
blended ("alloyed", as we say) with a cer¬
tain dosage of its opposite, which modifies its
aim or even, in certain circumstances, is a



prime condition of its attainment. Thus the
instinct of self-preservation is certainly of an
erotic nature, but to gain its ends this very
instinct necessitates aggressive action. In the
same way the love-instinct, when directed
to a specific object, calls for an admixture of
the acquisitive instinct if it is to enter into
effective possession of that object. It is the dif¬
ficulty of isolating the two kinds of instinct in
their manifestations that has so long pre¬
vented us from recognizing them.
If you will travel with me a little further
on this road, you will find that human affairs
are complicated in yet another way. Only
exceptionally does an action follow on the
stimulus of a single instinct. ... As a rule
several motives of similar composition concur
to bring about the act	
When a nation is summoned to engage in
war, a whole gamut of human motives may
respond to this appeal; high and low motives,
some openly avowed, others slurred over. The
lust for aggression and destruction is certainly
included; the innumerable cruelties of history
and man's daily life confirm its prevalence and
strength. The stimulation of these destructive
impulses by appeals to idealism and the erotic
instinct naturally facilitates their release.
Musing on the atrocities recorded on history's
page, we feel that the ideal motive has often
served as a camouflage for the lust of destruc¬
tion; sometimes, as with the cruelties of the
Inquisition, it seems that, while the ideal
motives occupied the foreground of con¬
sciousness, they drew their strength from the
destructive instincts submerged in the uncon¬
scious. Both interpretations are feasible.
... I would like to dwell a little longer on
this destructive instinct which is seldom given
the attention that its importance warrants.
With the least of speculative efforts we are led
to conclude that this instinct functions in

*>v> ffifa
every living being, striving to work its ruin
and reduce life to its primal state of inert
matter. Indeed it might well be called the
"death-instinct"; whereas the erotic instincts
vouch for the struggle to live on. The death
instinct becomes an impulse to destruction
when, with the aid of certain organs, it directs
its action outwards, against external objects.
The living being, that is to say, defends its own
existence by destroying foreign bodies.
But, in one of its activities, the death
instinct is operative within the living being
and we have sought to trace back a number of
normal and pathological phenomena to this
introversion of the destructive instinct. We
have even committed the heresy of explaining
the origin of human conscience by some such
"turning inward" of the aggressive impulse.
Obviously when this internal tendency oper¬
ates on too large a scale, it is no trivial matter,
rather a positively morbid state of things;
whereas the diversion of the destructive
impulse towards the external world must
have beneficial effects. Here is then the bio¬
logical justification for all those vile, perni¬
cious propensities which we now are com¬
bating. We can but own that they are really
more akin to nature than this our stand
against them, which, in fact, remains to be
accounted for. . . .
The upshot of these observations, as
bearing on the subject in hand, is that there is
no likelihood of our being able to suppress
humanity's aggressive tendencies. In some
happy corners of the earth, they say, where
nature brings forth abundantly whatever man
f\.i
.J U
/u -
desires, there flourish races whose lives go
gently by, unknowing of aggression or con¬
straint. This I can hardly credit; I would like
further details about these happy folk	
From our "mythology" of the instincts
we may easily deduce a formula for an indirect
method of eliminating war. If the propensity
for war be due to the destructive instinct, we
have always its counter-agent, Eros, to our
hand. All that produces ties of sentiment
between man and man must serve us as war's
antidote.
These ties are of two kinds. First, such
relations as those towards a beloved object,
void though they be of sexual intent. The
psychoanalyst need feel no compunction in
mentioning "love" in this connexion; reli¬
gion uses the same language: Love thy neigh¬
bour as thyself. A pious injunction easy to
enounce, but hard to carry out! The other
bond of sentiment is by way of identification.
All that brings out the significant resem¬
blances between men calls into play this
feeling of community, identification, whereon
is founded, in large measure, the whole edi¬
fice of human society.
In your strictures on the abuse of
authority I find another suggestion for an
indirect attack on the war-impulse. That men
are divided into leaders and the led is but
another manifestation of their inborn and
irremediable inequality. The second class
constitutes the vast majority; they need a
high command to make decisions for them, to
which decisions they usually bow without
demur. In this context we would point out
. that men should be at greater pains than
heretofore to form a superior class of inde¬
pendent thinkers, unamenable to intimidation
and fervent in the quest for truth, whose
function it would be to guide the masses
dependent on their lead. There is no need to
point out how little the rule of politicians
and the Church's ban on liberty of thought
encourage such a new creation.
The ideal conditions would obviously be
found in a community where every man sub¬
ordinated his instinctive life to the dictates of
47

Freud with his grandson.
reason. Nothing less than this could bring
about so thorough and so durable a union
between men, even if this involved the sev¬



erance of mutual ties of sentiment. But surely
such a hope is utterly Utopian, as things are.
The other indirect methods of preventing
war are certainly more feasible, but entail no
quick results. They conjure up an ugly picture
of mills that grind so slowly that, before the
flour is ready, men are dead of hunger.
. . . But why do we, you and I and many
another, protest so vehemently against war,
instead of just accepting it as another of life's
odious importunities? For it seems a natural
thing enough, biologically sound and practi¬
cally unavoidable. I trust you will not be
shocked by my raising such a question. For
the better conduct of an inquiry it may be
well to don a mask of feigned aloofness.
The answer to my query may run as fol¬
lows: Because every man has a right over his
own life and war destroys lives that were full
of promise; it forces the individual into situ¬
ations that shame his manhood, obliging him
to murder fellow men, against his will; it rav¬
ages material amenities, the fruits of human
toil, and much besides. Moreover wars, as
now conducted, afford no scope for acts of
heroism according to the old ideals and, given
the high perfection of modern arms, war
today would mean the sheer extermination of
one of the combatants, if not of both.
This is so true, so obvious, that we can but
wonder why the conduct of war is not banned
by general consent/Doubtless either of the
points I have just made is open to debate. It
may be asked if the community, in its turn,
cannot claim a right over the individual lives
of its members. Moreover, all forms of war
cannot be indiscriminately condemned; so
long as there are nations and empires, each
prepared callously to exterminate its rival,
all alike must be equipped for war. But we
will not dwell on any of these problems; they
lie outside the debate to which you have
invited me.
I pass on to another point, the basis, as it
strikes me, of our common hatred of war. It
is this: we cannot do otherwise than hate it.
Pacifists we are, since our organic nature
wills us thus to be. Hence it comes easy to us
to find arguments that justify our standpoint.
This point, however, calls for elucida¬
tion. Here is the way in which I see it. The
cultural development of mankind (some, I
know, prefer to call it civilization) has been in
progress since immemorial antiquity. To this
phenomenon we owe all that is best in our
composition, but also much that makes for
human suffering. Its origins and causes are
obscure, its issue is uncertain, but some of its
characteristics are easy to perceive	
The psychic changes which accompany
this process of cultural change are striking,
and not to be gainsaid. They consist in the
progressive rejection of instinctive ends and
a scaling down of instinctive reactions.
Sensations which delighted our forefathers
have become neutral or unbearable to us;
and, if our ethical and aesthetic ideals have
undergone a change, the causes of this are
ultimately organic.
On the psychological side two of the
most important phenomena of culture are,
firstly, a strengthening of the intellect, which
tends to master our instinctive life, and, sec¬
ondly, an introversion of the aggressive
impulse, with all its consequent benefits and
perils. Now war runs most emphatically
counter to the psychic disposition imposed on
us by the growth of culture; we are therefore
bound to resent war, to find it utterly intol¬
erable. With pacifists like us it is not merely
an intellectual and affective repulsion, but a
constitutional intolerance, an idiosyncrasy
in its most drastic form. And it would seem
that the aesthetic ignominies of warfare play
almost as large a part in this repugnance as
war's atrocities.
How long have we to wait before the rest
of men turn pacifist? Impossible to say, and
yet perhaps our hope that these two factors
man's cultural disposition and a well-founded
dread of the form that future wars will take
may serve to put an end to war in the near,
future, is not chimerical. But by what ways or
by-ways this will come about, we cannot
guess. Meanwhile we may rest on the assur¬
ance that whatever makes for cultural devel¬
opment is working also against war. ...
48
