Nino SM
Miss Savitri and her shadow
HAROUN, who is editor of a magazine in
Paris, wants me to write an article on
love in India. He phoned me from Paris
this morning with his proposal. The call arrived in
the office of the Chief Librarian, since I have no
direct line, and caused considerable consterna¬
tion. You can imagine that the Central Secretariat
Library, where I work, tucked away in a wing of
Shastri Bhavan, hedged in by all manner of
Government offices, a branch of the Central
Telephone Exchange, the Regional Passport
Office, and so on, is not accustomed to receiving
calls from Paris, capital of the fashionable world,
dream of callow youth and the heart's breath of
beautiful women. At least three colleagues rushed
in separately to inform me that Haroun from
Paris would call again. One remembered that I had
just come back from a course at the Institute of
Journalism in Paris. A librarian trying to shed
his skin, to emerge as a journalist poised at the edge
of a turning world. Waiting to jump on, with you
of course. Everything arrives and begins with
you. I would never have got to Paris if you hadn't
used your considerable influence.
"Haroun, how wonderful to hear from you! "
The line was as clear as if I was talking to him
from my little studio in the Rue du Bac, which I
gave up forever last month.
He wants me to write an article on love in
India for an issue of his magazine dedicated to
love. It was too expensive to argue that it was a
similar degradation everywhere, that it didn't
have much to do with particular countries. He
spoke of cultural differences, offered me 300 dol¬
lars and his renewed friendship. I could almost see
him, lights gleaming in his brown eyes, smoothing
his frizzy, steel-grey hair with soft, small fin¬
gers, their nails carefully manicured.
Normally such an article would not be diffi¬
cult to write. I'm very well read for an assistant
librarian, and now I've done this course in Paris.
I could write about the great temples of Konarak
and Khajuraho, where sculptures in holy stone
depict the cavorting of beautiful men and women,
their legs wrapped around each other, curved
breasts, slim waists, large organs, heavy thighs
holding the pleasures of love-success, all offered
to the sun-god in the ordinary routine of life,
37

38
NINASIBAL,
Indian novelist, recently
published The Secret Life of
Gußar Mal and other stories
(1993).
flesh and spirit mixing easily, so deliciously, in the
sixty-five love-postures of the Kama Sutra, as
they strain towards the highest pleasure of all, the
release of enlightenment, of Nirvana. That's what
each eye is fixed on, no matter that they had
worked their way through the anguish and
delirious delight of finely-differentiated love-
making.
"Or you know, Haroun, I could write about
Moghul paintings, Pahari miniatures, porno¬
graphic illustrations from the Kashmiri kings'
courts of three centuries ago. We have a highly
developed branch of love-painting, illustrating the
great Indian love stories, Sohni-Mahiwal, Laila-
Majnu, Heer-Ranjha. No?"
We're obsessed with love, anyhow, like every¬
body else. We think about it all the time, we
dream about it, like a tree waiting to fall.
I got the idea that he didn't want any of the
usual stuff. "Foreigners slip too easily into the
Kama Sutra and all that," he said. "Surely there's
something more recent." Just like a good editor,
laconic, looking at the floor or into the green
distance, smiling like an archangel when you
present something good. You're supposed to
understand the meaning sticking to both sides of
the word. Especially with an editor in Paris.
Everybody in the library believes that Paris is the
most beautiful city in the world. It is one month
since I returned, again into your arms my dear
where else? but Paris is still so much with me.
For example, when I go out with my sandwiches
at lunch-time, to the lawns beside Rajpath. You
know it well. One day you will ride in state up
this great central road of the city, slowly up the
low hill leading to Rashtrapati Bhavan, abode of
our President, with its grand cupola, and be
sworn in as Minister in this or that cabinet. Have
patience, you are still young, you have time.
Who knows this better than I, who sleep with you
at night from time to time, whenever you will
allow me?
Behind the splendid wings of the Presidential
Above and preceding page,
the Indian film actress
Zeenat Aman
residence are the Moghul Gardens, laid out in
straight lines, held in by rigid flower borders.
Until three years ago, before terrorist activity
overtook all our privileges, we ordinary mortals
could buy tickets and enter there when summer
flowers were at the peak of their bloom. It is
indeed a pity that you and I can never walk in gar¬
dens together. I like that very much. To pass
under fruit-laden trees with your beloved, to sit
with spreading green grass like velvet under your
bare feet, the smell of rich earth coming up from
burrowing fingers. Gardens are very much in
the tradition of love in our country. Perhaps even
the Moghul Gardens were conceived originally
for dalliance. Courtly love-scenes in our classics
were always set in gardens, with cheerful eyes
peeping from behind bushes at the entwined
lovers, and a small group of musicians playing
from a distant pagoda, open on all sides to the
winds, which carried the sweet sounds of flutes
and sitars through the caressing air.
IDEAS FOR A MAIDEN SPEECH
But the other beautiful gardens of Delhi are
public, open to anyone who can buy a ticket, a
small fraction of what it costs to see an Amitabh
movie. I understand perfectly, you cannot afford
to be seen walking with me in a public place. It is
exactly what the newspapermen are looking for.
A photograph on the first page of the Indian
Express, perhaps, captioned "Miss Savitri Behn
walking in Buddha Jayanti Park with 'a friend'."
They might even get a picture of me draped
around your beautiful body, gazing at you with
my usual adoration. Everybody knows that the
Buddha Jayanti Park is for lovers. Especially the
policemen. They leer through the bushes, waiting
for the right moment to jump out, fondle a breast
or two, extract some money, confused notes
changing hands in horrid shadows. Then they
drag off a deeply mortified, protesting couple,
their sweet kisses and touching all forgotten, a dis-

tant golden haze suddenly crumpled in the
clutches of the law, to the police station, to pay a
huge fine, or alternatively spend a night in prison
for indecent exposure, separately of course
whoever heard of housing men and women
together in jail?



This must not ever happen to Miss Savitri. It
would ruin her political career forever, destroy all
chances of eventually marrying a rich busi¬
nessman who would fund her campaigns in the
countryside. I would, my love, rather spend
thousands of lunch-times alone on the lawns
beside Rajpath, trailing between vendors of
banana chips and channa-bhatura, stalls of pens
and Rexine purses, or float off to watch street
plays on dowry-deaths and oppression of the
tribals, or attend a demonstration in the Boat
Club against the destruction of the environment,
or the dismissal of the BJP Government in
Himachal rather than allow the faintest whiff of
scandal to touch your career or your life. Not, of
course, that you would ever give me the chance
of compromising you. I am constantly admiring
your firm will, clear mind and determination.
They must stand you in good stead in the polit¬
ical milieu you have chosen.
We are not very busy in the library. There's no
money coming in this year for fresh purchases.
The country's economy is fragile, we are tight¬
ening our belts. You know of course the extent of
our foreign debt. Perhaps you should make your
maiden speech in Parliament on this point. They
will think you are intelligent. Devastating com¬
bination, an attractive, intelligent new woman
MP. Anyway, I have plenty of time. The library
is not highly frequented, though it is thrust in the
heart of official Delhi. By Pandit Nehru him¬
self. He planned for its easy access to babus and
clerks, petty functionaries located in crowded
offices on either side of Rajpath. They come into
consult the CCS. leave manuals or annotated
Service Rules, published by Jain Book Agency.
There's a lot of time to think about this article.
Quite often since coming back I suffer from
claustrophobia, hemmed in by stacks of dusty
books. The usual question, like a snake, nudges
with its blunt head: where do I go from here? At
such points I retreat immediately with my lunch
packet to the Boat Club lawns and dream of you,
and how it will be when we meet. Though this
does not happen often, now. You pass a cool,
gentle hand through my hair and explain the
responsibilities of a new Member, though
Parliament hasn't opened yet. Why must I trail
after you, a slug with brown flesh, leaving a silver
trail in your grass?
PAYMENT IN ADVANCE
Today Haroun's call drew my attention to this
question of "Love in India". Why should it be dif¬
ferent from anywhere else? It is the same torture
and humiliation, I suppose. But hearing his voice
makes me think of my time in Paris. It was the
first time I had been away from you since we met
three years ago, and you captured my heart, drew
me into your net, swept up the bits and pieces of
me into a paper bag which you carry in your
hand like a magician's reticule. You jangle it in the
air if I make the smallest movement to stray. And
you take payment in advance. I paid heavily for
Paris. I was faithful to you all the time I was
there. Perhaps we are stupid about love, in India,
or incompetent. I never seem to reach the wide,
aching arch of equality, perfect, blissful, like in
Moghul architecture. You can see it in Humayun's

Radha and Krishna. The
passionate love of the god
Krishna's consort Radha,
the wife of a cowherd, is a
popular theme in Indian
art and literature.
(Early 19th-century Indian
miniature). 39

40
Tomb. With that arch, you can hold up a heavy
dome, inlaid with marble and mother-of-pearl.
Once, shortly before I left Paris, I was waiting
for a train at the Saint Michel metro. I had just
seen Hiroshima mon amour in a small movie hall
at the corner of the Place Saint Michel. You
emerge and see in front of you the Seine, and
just beyond, the high flying buttresses of the
Cathedral of Notre Dame. It had been on the
insistence of Stella, Haroun's friend, a most beau¬
tiful and vivacious young lady, devoted to the
novelist Marguerite Duras. Read her books, she
has a wonderful style, read L'Amant. Stella gave
me a copy.
A SCENE IN THE METRO
There were not many people on the platform. A
man of indeterminate age with an untidy beard
and crumpled clothing sat slumped in a corner,
leaning against a high rubbish bin, looking at
nothing in particular, not even at an old bottle of
Evian, the small size, its label long since ripped
away, half-full of a colourless liquid which could
of course have been water. A long line of empty
red plastic chairs led away from him.
A large, broad man strolled slowly up and
down the platform. His exterior was smoothly
shaped by an expressionless face, shiny hair, and
hands in trouser pockets which opened the wings
of a prosperous overcoat to the wide stretch of a
green sweater. He stopped momentarily before
the seated figure, held out a crumpled note, then
continued his stroll at the same even pace. The
face of the drunk opened with surprise, delight.
I didn't even ask, the heavens opened and
dropped this gift. His hands shook slightly as
he opened out the note. A coupon cut from a
magazine. He looked towards his benefactor,
already steps away, shook his fist, mumbled
wretched, incoherent phrases. The other did not
stop, turn or change his pace. A woman in a red
leather coat, seeing everything, laughed shyly
with her companion and watched the "pursuit".
Because the drunk had launched himself from
' his seat, a pile of rags left behind still bore the
imprint of his frail shape. He proceeded jerkily,
still mumbling, at a quickening pace behind the
broad black back Why, why did he do this? I
didn't ask him for anything, how dare he while
a smooth stroll took the benefactor to the bottom
of the stairs and then, like a wave, swept him up
to the exit. He had not once looked back or
changed pace. We waited for the drunk to make
a last dash, launch himself in a dirty, weightless
ball into the middle ofthat solid back. His move¬
ment dissipated. He threw the worthless paper
violently on the rail tracks, where it floated
without effect, and spat a loud gargling stream of
phlegm. A few drops reached the distant suede
shoes of the curvaceous lady, who stamped her
feet angrily. 9ß

