Making something out ofnothing
by Pierre-Sylvain Fiiliozot
By inventing the zero, India became the
birthplace of modern arithmetic
Kushan coin with
inscription in the ancient
Indian brâhmî script (first
century A.D.).
ÍN India mathematics has not always been
linked to writing. The earliest surviving
written document dates from the third cen¬
tury B.C., but India certainly had an advanced
civilization many centuries before that, and sci¬
entific knowledge formed part of it. Most
knowledge was transmitted orally. This ancient
learning preserved in human memory makes
up the corpus of the great religious texts known
as the Vedas, which incidentally contain evi¬
dence of mathematical knowledge. The Vedas
arc written in an archaic form of Sanskrit. Like
all Indo-European languages, Sanskrit has dec¬
imal numerals and individual names for the nine
units, as well as for ten, a hundred, a thousand
and higher powers of ten (figure 2, page 33).
30
figure /
Numeral signs and their
values as attested by the
Nâneghât inscriptions (first
century B.C.).
Numerals Value Numerals Value
Or - 12 - J
1 or - 1Z
Thi 1700 Tot Z1,000
"Mcd? 189 - 1.
ex q 17 TH 60,000
TcxT u,ooo "Rx- MOO/
T * 1,000 M- 101
oc r 1Z TrM 1,100
- 1 M 100
T°"r¥W 14,4-00 M- Jul
TV 6,00ti TcM- 1,101
I T7H- 1, 101
I M- JOl
1 T = jpoz
JH 100 T- 1001
The names of the tens are derived from those
of the units, somewhat modified and with the
addition of a suffix. Examples are vimqati 20,
trimcat 30, catvârimçat 40. The other numerals
are formed from these components. The names
for the hundreds, thousands and so on consist of
a unit name followed by çata or sahasra. Dve
gate (dual), for example, means 200, and trini-
sahasrani (plural), 3,000.
In Sanskrit grammar the qualifier in a com¬
pound word precedes the qualified. In the case
of compound numerals the number of the higher
order is regarded as qualified by the lower.
Eleven, for example, is ten qualified by the addi¬
tion of one, giving the compound ekâ-daça,
and similarly dvâ-daça is 12, trayas-trimgat 33
and so on. The number is divided into compo¬
nents, with the smallest coming first. Units are
followed by tens and so on.
si The advent of writing
We do not know when, how or by whom
writing was introduced into India. All we know
is that as early as the third century B.C. two
scripts were in use. One, called kharoshtî, was
derived from Aramaic. It was used in the
extreme northwest of the sub-continent, but
soon fell into disuse. The other, known as
brâhmî, seems to have originated in India itself.
It is the forerunner of all the scripts now in use
in the Indian sub-continent and in southeast
Asia. The earliest records (from between the.
third century B.C. and the third century A.D.)
of figures transcribed into this script reveal a
notation system that corresponds fairly closely
to the pronunciation system.
There is one sign for each digit, and so there
are nine signs for the nine units, an entirely dif¬
ferent sign for each of the tens (10, 20, etc.),
another sign for 100 and yet another for 1,000.
Compound numbers are represented by com-

An Indian merchant does
his accounts in Ajmer
(Rajasthan).
binations of symbols. The brâhmî script reads
from left to right, and combinations of signs
are written in that direction, starting with the
highest value. Here there is a difference between
the written and the spoken language. The scribe
starts with the highest component, whereas the
speaker starts with the lowest. For example, the
number 13 is pronounced trayo-daga, or "three-
ten", but is written "ten-three".
Combinations of components arc usually
produced by juxtaposing signs, in some cases by
ligatures. Whereas there are different signs for
each of the tens, for the hundreds there is just the
sign for 100 plus the sign for the number of
hundreds, and likewise with the thousands.
At this stage wc cannot yet speak of posi¬
tional notation. There is a juxtaposition of the
numeral signs which when added together give
the desired number. This is exactly in keeping
with the structure of the language (figure 1).
I The zero and positional
numeration
In the decimal positional system of numeration
the tens, hundreds and thousands arc not rep¬
resented by different signs but by the same digit
signs placed in different positions. Only then
docs position become significant. It alone shows
which are the tens, which the hundreds and
which the thousands. Such a system needs only
ten signs, the digits from 1 to 9 and a zero or
at least a blank space.
There is no satisfactory documentary evi¬
dence as to how and in what exact period this
system was discovered in India, and how it
developed. The earliest reference to a place-
value notation is a literary one. Vasumitra, a
Buddhist writer and leading figure at a great
religious council convened by King Kanishka
(who reigned over the whole of north and north¬
west India at the end of the first or the beginning
of the second century A.D.), maintained in a
book on Buddhist doctrine that if a substance
that exists in all three time dimensions (past,
present and future) is regarded as something
different every time it enters a new state, this
change is due to the alterity of the state, not to ¡J I

^$?M?k+.Wt^Jfyffis& é^Û
*&*
$$ R* *-* &*j i nA&M-y&KTg'y&i.«^ *
32
its own alterity. He illustrated this idea by
speaking of a marker which in the units position
counts as a unit but in the hundreds position
counts as a hundred. He did not specify the
nature of the marker.
This may be a reference to a kind of abacus.
The marker might have been an object that
could be placed in a column or square, where its
position gave it the value of a power of ten. Or
it could be a mark in the sand, in the case of sums
written on the ground. Indian accountants are
known to have liked the simplicity of this
method. In some parts of southern India village
astrologers can still be seen doing calculations by
placing cowrie shells in columns drawn in the
sand. Whatever the form of the abacus, Vasum-
itra's reference implies the existence of a notation
that took account of positional value.
The same is true of the zero, the use of which
in India is known from literary references pre¬
dating the earliest written examples. The zero
forms part of the positional system of numera¬
tion. Originally it seems to have been a gap in a
column resulting from the absence of a figure or
marker in the space reserved for an order of the
power of ten. This is shown by the use of one of
the words meaning empty, çûnya or kha. The
word kha occurs in a treatise on metrics by Pin-
gala, in which he sets forth a rule for turning
binary numbers into decimal numbers. Pin-
gala's dates are unknown, but quotations from
his works are found from the third century
Charter dating from 596
A.D. The last three signs
on the last line represent
the figures 346.
PIERRE-SYLVAIN
FILLIOZAT,
of France, is a specialist in
Indian studies. He is a director
of studies at the Ecole Pratique
des Hautes Etudes in Paris.
A.D. onwards, and so he must have lived earlier
than that.
That a dot came to be used to indicate an
empty space wc know from a Sanskrit story¬
teller, Subandhu, who probably lived in the
sixth century A.D. To denote the zero Subandhu
used the compound noun cûnya-bindu, literally
"empty point", in other words a dot indicating
an empty space in a column.
The zero itself appears in a deed of gift,
carved on copper plates, from King Deven-
dravarman of Kalinga (Orissa, in eastern India).
The document is dated in letters and figures :
"samvacchara-gatam trir-âgîte (100) 83 shra-
vane masi dine vimgati 20 utkîrnnam", liter¬
ally "carved a hundred and eighty-three years
(100) 83 (having passed) the twenty day 20 in the
month of Shravand"'. The number 183 is written
as three signs, the sign for a hundred and then the
figures 8 and 3. The number 20 is written with
the figure 2 and a zero in the form of a small
circle. The period specified in this document
began in 498 A.D., so that it dates from the year
681 A.D.
Positional notation, and the zero in the form
of a big dot or small circle, are found in inscrip¬
tions in southeast Asia, at Sambor (Cambodia)
and Kota Kapur (Malaysia), where the earliest
records go back to the seventh century A.D.
The scripts used in these countries are all derived
from Indian scripts, and their system of writing
numbers is undoubtedly the Indian system. All

Below, numerals written in
devanâgarî (script used for
Sanskrit, Hindi and other
Indo-Aryan languages) in a
"magic square" painted on
a wall in Ujjain (Madhya
Pradesh, India).
these documents show that by the late seventh
century the positional system and the zero were
in general use not only in India but in all the
countries to which Indian civilization had spread
as well.
Notation using nine digits and a zero seems
to have quickly taken the lead for inscriptions,
but it never completely superseded the old
system, which survived until recently in manu¬
scripts, and in southern India even in early twen¬
tieth-century printed books.
Words standing for numerals
A mixed notation, in which features of the old
system are combined with or alternate with
characteristics of positional notation, was also
known and used in India. In this system number
names are replaced by words with numerical
connotations. For example, two is replaced by
"eyes", "arms", "wings" or "twins", four by
"oceans" (there being four oceans in Indian
geographical mythology), ten by "fingers",
thirty-two by "teeth", hundred by "human life¬
span", zero by "empty space", and so on. These
words are arranged as they would be in speech,
so that in a compound number the lowest
numerals come first. In other words, the order
is opposite to that used in writing. For instance,
the number 4,320,000 is pronounced khaca-
tushka-rada-arnavâh, which literally means
"tetrad of empty spaces-teeth-oceans", or 0
0
Figure 2. Number names in Sanskrit
çata
sahasra
ayuta
niyuta
prayuta
100
1 000
10 000
100 000
1 000 000
eka 1
dvi
tri
catur
pañca
2
3
4
5
shat 6 arbuda 10 000 000
sapta
ashtan
nava
7
8
nyarbuda
samudra
100 000 000
1 000 000 000
10 000 000 000
100 000 000 000
000 000 000 000
9 madhya
anta
parârdha
daça 10
This example is taken from the Sûrya-sid-
dhânta, an astronomical text which takes
account of data observable in the fourth century
A.D. It is one of the earliest records of this
mixed notation, which enjoyed great popularity
throughout the history of Sanskrit literature.
Even among mathematicians and astronomers it
seems to have been the preferred method of
expressing numbers. Its advantage was that it
allowed variation of vocabulary. Sanskrit has
ten or so common words for eyes, whereas there
is no synonym for the number 2. Sanskrit tech¬
nical and scientific literature was usually written
in verse, so that authors needed to command a
wide vocabulary in order to find words to fit the
requirements of prosody.
It would be a mistake to regard this mixed
notation as a transitional stage between the old
oral system and the pure positional system. It
was an artificial method adopted by authors
who were familiar with both systems and used
them in their writings.
Economy and lightness
In 662 A.D. a Syriac writer, Severus Sebokt,
wishing to show that the Greeks had no
monopoly on science, referred to the inven¬
tiveness of Indian scholars. The only one of
their mathematical skills that he mentioned was
their system of reckoning using nine digits.
Severus Sebokt's comment points to the greatest
advantage of this system, its economy. By
reducing the symbols needed for the notation of
all numbers to ten nine digits and a zero
the system achieves the ideal of economy and
efficiency. Indian intellectuals were well aware
of the advantages of economy. They had a tech¬
nical term for it laghava or "lightness" and
have cultivated it since Antiquity in various
fields of thought. 33
