In fat of growing
pollution, astronomers
(allforprotettionofthe
spaie environment
The extrtt^errestmupmliyard
D
URING the 1970s, when scientists first
started to draw attention to the possible
dangers of debris in space, the general
reaction was to dismiss their warnings as
unduly alarmist. Outer space, it was said, was
so vast that a collision or close encounter of
two objects in space was so improbable as to be
verging on the impossible.
This basic notion of the limitless vastness of
space was so tenacious and so ingrained that
the continuous growth of activities in space was
ignored and some quite bizarre "uses" of space
were suggested. These included the disposal of
nuclear waste by sending it into high orbit and
the positioning in space of huge reflectors to
by Howard Brabyn
beam sunlight to the Earth so as to warm the
polar regions, keep shipping lanes free of ice,
prevent frost at night and to provide illumina¬
tion for large cities.
Fortunately, none of these projects came to
fruition, but the launching of weather, commu¬
nications, mapping, navigational, military and
space exploration satellites continued apace.
Dr. Walter Flury, Secretary of the Space Debris
Working Group, estimates that there are about
7,000 trackable objects currently in orbit
around the Earth. "Of these," he says, "fewer
than about 400 are operational satellites. The
remainder are abandoned satellites (21 per
cent), upper stages (16 per cent), fragments of 41

42
satellites and upper stages (45 per cent), and
mission-related objects, such as lens covers,
separation bolts or clamp-bands (12 per cent)."
Already, on a number of occasions, space¬
craft have had to make emergency manoeuvres
to avoid collisions. In September 1991, the
Space Shuttle Discovery had to take action to
avoid the rocket body of Cosmos 955 and in
November 1991 the Space Shuttle Atlantis had
to dodge space debris of more than a ton.
Experts say that even a pea-sized fragment
traveUing at orbital speed (about five kilometres
a second) could shatter a $100-million satellite.
Low-orbiting satellites whose remote-sens¬
ing radar systems are powered by nuclear
reactors, such as the Soviet RORSAT (Radar
Ocean Reconnaissance Satellite) series, repre¬
sent a further potential hazard. Because they
are launched into very low orbit, the resistance
of the upper reaches of the Earth's atmosphere
and the pull of Earth gravity mean that the
satellites eventually fall back to Earth.
Theoretically, as one of these satellites
comes to the end of its operational life, the
reactor is separated from the main body and
dispatched into a higher orbit, where it should
remain. On occasions, however, the boosting
system has been known' to fail. In 1978, for
example, the reactor aboard Cosmos 974 re¬
entered the atmosphere with the satellite. The
nuclear fuel core enclosed within the reactor
was not vaporized when the satellite re-entered
and a large quantity of radioactive debris was
scattered over the Great Slave Lake area of
Canada.
Other threats exist. According to the
experts' calculations, there is one chance in a
hundred that, during its seventeen-year design
life, the Hubble Space Telescope will be severe¬
ly damaged by a collision with a large piece of
debris. This is a barely acceptable risk in view
of the fact that, at a cost of some $1.5 billion, it
is the most expensive scientific instrument ever
made.
THE VANISHING
NIGHT SKY
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was car¬
ried into orbit on 24 April 1990 by the Space
Shuttle Discovery. It was designed to view the
cosmos with a resolution ten times better than
would be possible from any Earth-based tele¬
scope, for the Earth's atmosphere obscures
optical astronomers' view of the universe
through ground-based optical telescopes and
blocks some ultraviolet and other forms of
electromagnetic radiation.
Air pollution has aggravated the problem.
This was why England's Royal Observatory
was established in 1675, at Greenwich, then
well outside the city of London. However, it
was the introduction of electric light at the turn
of this century that finally eliminated cities as
places from which the night sky could be
The Arecibo Observatory,
Puerto Rico, houses one of
the world's largest single-
unit radio telescopes. Like
other radio-astronomy
observatories, it is
increasingly threatened by
electronic interference of all
kinds.
HOWARD BRABYN
is a Paris-based British writer
and journalist with a special
interest in the popularization
of science. He was formerly
editor in charge of the English
edition of the Unesco Courier.
enjoyed, much less studied, and the spill of
street lighting directed uselessly upwards
became yet another urban pollutant.
The combination of air pollution and urban
sky glow, mostly due to badly sited and de¬
signed lighting, has led many of the world's
most famous observatories to close down or to
seek remote sites for their optical telescopes.
Both Europeans and Americans have installed
their southern hemisphere telescopes in the
Andes and in northern Chile, where the wea¬
ther is very dry, the air is clear and steady and
the areas selected are sparsely populated. To
study the skies of the northern hemisphere,
astronomers from America and from several
other countries now occupy the summit of
Mauna Kea, a volcano in the Hawaian chain of
islands, which they claim is the highest, darkest
and finest site in the world.
"This may be true," says David Malin of the
Anglo-Australian Observatory, "but neither
the fringes of the Atacama desert nor the
summit of a Hawaian volcano are comfortable
places to live or work. Their deliberate remote¬
ness makes them expensive to construct and
operate and access to them is not easy."
QUIET PLEASE,
WE ARE LISTENING
TO THE STARS
If optical astronomers are the eyes of the
world, radio astronomers are its ears. To op¬
erate effectively, radio astronomers need quiet
skies as they seek to capture cosmic whispers.
Today, however, that search is taking place in a
rising cacophony of interference.
The radiation studied by radio astronomers is
exceedingly weak. As Paul Vanden Bout of the
US National Radio Astronomy Observatory, at
Charlottesville, Virginia, has pointed out: "All
the radio energy ever gathered by all the radio
telescopes that have ever been built would not
keep a one-watt light bulb illuminated for one

thousandth of a second. . . . The problem of
interference has become acute because the con¬
tinuing development of technology has both
enabled radio astronomers to achieve ever higher
sensitivity to weak signals and, at the same time,
spawned a flood of governntent, commercial and
consumer applications."
We owe much of our knowledge about the
universe beyond the Earth's surface to radio
astronomy. From the Sun and Moon, to plan¬
ets, comets and asteroids, to stars, mascrs and
pulsars, to galaxies, quasars and the remnant
radiation of the Big Bang itself, radio astronomy
provides information vital to our understand¬
ing of the cosmos.
In addition to its importance as a window
on the universe, radio astronomy provides
practical benefits for society, including the tra¬
ditional astronomical role in time-keeping and
navigation, technology development and
science education. But the pursuit of radio
astronomy is critically dependent on freedom
from interference from artificial sources of
radio emission.
In 1959, radio astronomy was recognized
as an official "service" by the international
regulatory system that controls the use of the
spectrum. With that recognition came some
protection primary use of a few bands and
the sharing of others. These bands are what
might be called "radio spectrum wilderness
preserves".
Full consideration and attention should also
be given to existing regulations governing the
far side of the Moon as a radio quiet reserve.
There is already one such reserve on Earth
the National Radio Quiet Zone (NRQZ) in the
eastern United States. Its existence has pre¬
served the excellence of the Green Bank, West
Virginia, National Radio Astronomy Observa¬
tory site for radio astronomy.
Paul Vanden Bout predicts that eventually
radio astronomers will be driven to using extra¬



terrestrial sites for their telescopes. Although
use of the Moon as an observatory site would
imply construction and operating costs far
beyond the current level of national expendi¬
ture for astronomy, distant generations will be
grateful for what might well become the only
spot relatively close to the Earth from which
they would be able to study the universe at
radio wavelengths.
"Radio astronomy," says Paul Vanden
Bout, "is a fragile and threatened link between
human beings and the universe at large. Recog¬
nizing its importance and placing it on the
environmental agenda is a first step toward its
preservation. Failure to do this will lead slowly
but inevitably to the loss of our ability to hear
the whispers of the cosmos, leaving us to
contemplate our own electronic babble."
A number of a.stronomcrs attended a meeting held at
Unf.SCO Headquarters in Paris from 30 June to 2 July 1992
ti) discuss Adverse Environmental Impacts on Astronomy.
The meeting was jointly organized by the International
Astronomical Union, the International Council of Scien¬
tific Unions, and Unfscxj.
Astronomers are being
forced to seek remote sites
to avoid air pollution and
urban sl<y glow. Below, the
observatory at the summit of
Mauna Kea, the "White
IVIountain" of the island of
Hawaii.
