The talking cure
by Chawki Aiouri
I sent my soul through the Invisible,
Some letter ofthat After-life to spell:
And by and by my Soul return d to me,
And answered 'I myselfam Heav'n and Hell'.
The Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyam, LXVI
(translation: Edward Fitzgerald)
34
CHAWKI AZOURI
is a Lebanese
psychoanalyst. He is a
member of the Centre de
Formation et de Recherche
Psychanalytiques in Paris
where, since the Centre's
foundation in 1982, he has
directed a research seminar
on paranoia, institutions and
the transmission of
psychoanalysis. He teaches
at the faculty of medicine at
Créteil (France) and is the
author of J'ai réussi là où le
paranoïaque a échoué
(Denoël, Paris, 1991) and La
Psychanalyse (Flash
Marabout, Paris, 1992).
SOME years ago, Dr. C., a Parisian hypnosis
specialist under whom I was working as a
psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, asked me
to help him by interpreting for a Libyan patient
of his whose left arm and leg were paralysed.
The patient had left Libya more than a year
earlier and had been shunted from one hospital
to another all over Europe. He had undergone
the most searching examinations, all of which
had ruled out any possible organic causes for
his illness. He was eventually diagnosed as suf¬
fering from hysteria and was sent to Paris for
hypnosis treatment.
The patient, who was twenty-eight years of
age and spoke virtually nothing but Arabic, was
delighted at being able to talk in his mother
tongue to a therapist who understood it. With
his few words of English, he had managed to
start conversing with Dr. C., who had already
given him one hypnosis session before we met.
I had three long conversations with him, during
which he told me his story. On the day after his
second hypnosis session, the patient was
extremely agitated and told us that he had
woken up during the night in great pain: he had
felt acute cramp his left big toe and had been
able to move his foot for the first time in a year.
The young man gradually recovered the
use of his left foot, which had lost 50 per cent
of its muscle volume. At the end of two weeks,
he was walking with the aid of a stick. In the
meantime, Dr. C. continued his hypnosis ses¬
sions and I continued to have conversations
with the patient. Two months after he had
arrived in Paris, the patient was cured and
returned to his own country, where he was ini¬
tially welcomed like somebody who had been
saved by a miracle.
A FATHER'S CURSE
It is worth going deeper into the story of this
young man and his social and cultural back¬
ground. Before he fell ill, he had had two
major conflicts with his father, one over his
own marriage and the other over the marriage
of his sister.
In a bid to oblige him to marry a cousin
against his will, the patient's father had secretly
given him a love potion that would also make
him obey his father's wishes. Under the effects
of this magic draught, the young man went
through the marriage ceremony in a trance¬
like state. "I was happy," he said, "but it was as
if someone else was getting married." As soon
as the effects of the potion wore off, he sepa¬
rated from his wife, but the same stratagem
was again used to force him to go back to her.
The father kept on interfering in order to make
sure that he stayed with his wife. In the end,
the father uttered a threat whose unconscious
impact on the son he failed to realize. What he
said was: "If you leave your wife again, I shall
leave your mother."
The father had wanted the patient's sister to
marry his nephew, the brother of the patient's
wife. The conflict had then taken a dramatic
turn. The sister had been mercilessly thrashed
in front of the whole village and had thrown
herself out of a window. The patient had tried
to come between her and their father who, on
seeing his authority challenged, had cried: "She
is not your daughter. Get out! You are no
longer my son."
In revenge, the rejected suitor, who was
both the patient's cousin and his brother-in-
law, took away the patient's wife and four chil¬
dren. The patient's in-laws took him to court
and accused him of having driven his wife and
children from the family home. The case
dragged on for some eighteen months, during
which time scarcely any heed was paid to the
patient's word and good faith. He was sen¬
tenced to pay over two-thirds of his earnings
to his former wife, just when he was about to
undergo surgery on an artificial plate that had
been placed in his collar-bone two years earlier
following a car accident.
When he came round from the anaesthetic,
the poor man was paralysed down one side.
The doctors' opinion was that this was due to
a lesion in the nervous system of the brachial
plexus. Since there were no suitable facilities
available in Libya, he was sent to Europe for
treatment at the state's expense.
THE POWER OF MEDICINE
This story is particularly interesting on
account of the extraordinary combination of
personal and cultural factors at work. Together
they conferred on the patient's symptoms a
fascination that even the celebrated Professor
Charcot would have acknowledged, in a con¬
text where psychoanalysis does not exist and
where hysteria is branded as malingering.
The failure of leading specialists to cure the
patient strengthened his conviction that the doc-
tors did not understand him. He was therefore
on the lookout for a magic solution or the inter¬
vention of an all-powerful figure. His meeting
with Dr. C. was accordingly preordained: the
hypnosis treatment reminded him of the spell¬
like practices to which he had been subjected by
his father. The patient saw a parallel between the
hypnotic trance and the effects of the potion,
and even the effects of the anaesthetic after
which he had become partly paralysed.

As a result of being listened to, he was able
to shed light on the relationship which he had
established with his symptom. He remembered
that the day after his sister had been beaten and
gagged by their father and he had released her
against the patriarch's wishes, he woke up with
bruises on his wrist and ankles, at the same



places where the bonds had left marks on his
sister's body. Simply talking about this to some¬
body who realized its symbolic importance
made it possible for him to recognize that the
marks represented his participation in, and
identification with, his sister's suffering.
Similarly, emphasizing the importance of
the words spoken by his father "She is not
your daughter. . . . You are no longer my son. .
. . If you leave your wife again, I shall leave
your mother" prompted him, without any
interpretation from me, to establish a relation¬
ship between them and the disappearance of
sexual desire after he had become paralysed.
Those words awoke in him the horror of
incest which he had repressed until then. He
took his father's words "She is not your
daughter" to mean that it was not he, the son,
who had conceived her with the mother, while
"You are no longer my son", meant "I release
you from the taboo of incest of which I, your
father, was the guarantor and by threatening to
leave your mother I make possible."
As soon as the court declared that he was
divorced, his father's threats took on an
cdipal significance and the patient woke up
from the anaesthetic suffering from a hyster¬
ical hemiplegia and a loss of all sexual desire.
Hence listening to the patient was instru¬
mental in bringing out a subject which had
hitherto only been expressed through massive
and serious symptoms. During our last con¬
versations, he said to me: "Nobody has ever
listened to me as you have done. When I get
back home, I should like to change jobs and
learn to do yours."
However, when he did go home, he was
again faced with the incomprehension of the
medical profession which, recalling the diag¬
nosis of hysteria made by the European spe¬
cialists before he was sent to Paris, looked
upon him as a malingerer, a good-for-nothing
and a coward who did not want to work. He
was even ordered to repay the costs incurred
as a result of his "so-called" illness.
He was compelled to start working again
when he had barely recovered. He developed
other symptoms, and had to be operated on
again. In a manner of speaking, he had to
undergo further physical ordeals against his
own will in order to prove his good faith and
the legitimacy of his suffering.
A hysterical fit as depicted
in a late-19th-century
medical engraving.
35
