UNESCO'S PROGRANNE FOR 1004-1005:
SOLIDARITY
Mounting intolerance
and inequality are
dividing the world. In
response, Federico
Mayor, Director-
General of Unesco,
calls for a sustainable
global approach,
based on the values of
solidarity and sharing.
It is in this direction
that the Organization
will be moving in
44 1994-1995.
UNITED WE STAND
ALTHOUGH huge threatening clouds
hang over the dawn of the third
millennium, humanity has at its dis¬
posal the means to make the changes
required. Though yearning for equality
encounters inexorably growing dispari¬
ties, and strivings towards fraternity
founder upon individual self-interest, we
can win through if only we are clear¬
sighted, resolute and bold enough to effect
a radical change of course.
More wars are being fought today than
at any time in the last fifty years. In the past
decade, people fleeing death, destruction,
and even deliberate policies of plunder and
extermination, have swollen the ranks of
the world's refugees from ten to twenty
million. At the same time, there have never
been so many negotiated solutions and
processes of reconciliation, under the aegis
of the United Nations in particular.
Although the danger of a nuclear holo¬
caust may have virtually disappeared, more
and more countries possess nuclear
weapons, and new tensions are developing
in a number of places. For all its harmful
effects, the polarization of international
relations brought about by the East-West
conflict did at least keep in check the war¬
like impulses of those who tried to escape
from its grip. The very subjection imposed
by the totalitarian regimes served to
restrain the hatreds and fanaticism that,
with the collapse of those regimes, are now
bursting their banks. Differences, cultural,
racial and ethnic, lead more and more often
to a hostility that may result in exclusion or
even, in extreme cases, extermination.
At the same time, the disparity in the
resources available to people to provide for
their needs is growing: superabundant for a
few, they are, for an ever greater number,
increasingly, pathetically inadequate. While
global figures may, for instance, show a
steady growth in living standards and school
attendance or a fall in mortality rates, such
overall improvements conceal a widening
gap between the extremes.
About 1 .3 billion people in the world
today live below the poverty line, with no
chance of feeding themselves adequately.
They include nearly all the 30,000 children
who die every day directly or indirectly
from malnutrition, most of the one billion
people who cannot read or write and almost
all the 300 million children who are deprived
of schooling. On the other hand, the income
of the richest fifth of the world's population
is 150 times greater than that of the poorest
fifth, and this disparity has actually doubled
in the last thirty years.
The present pattern of development is all
awry. Even as the North-South gap widens,
international trade is organized in such a
way that it deprives developing countries of
$500 billion a year ten times more than
they receive in foreign aid. Since the mid-
eighties, debt repayments by the poor coun¬
tries have exceeded the amounts they receive
from the rich lender-countries, and the dif¬
ference is increasing every year. Inequality
is growing in the developed countries too.
The existence of "two nations" within
almost every country is becoming as
inescapable a fact as the existence, in the
world as a whole, of "two-track" societies.
A further harmful effect of the present
pattern of development is that it depends
on overexploitation of natural resources
and at the same time causes damage to
those resources it does not exhaust. Defor¬
estation, the excessive depletion of the
ozone layer and the steady erosion of our
bio-genetic heritage prove that our ways of
living and producing have now brought
us up against a physical threshold.
WALLS OF ILLUSION
This threshold is all the more real in that
population growth is increasing our impact
on the environment. The world's popula-

AND SHARING
tion is growing by 254,000 a day. At this
rate, by the year 2030, it will have reached
at least ten billion, compared with just
under six billion today. About 95 per cent
of this increase could be in developing
countries, with the highest growth rates
in the poorest of them. Along with all their
other problems, these countries would
thus have to cope with increasing pressure
of population on an increasingly despoiled
environment. How could the population of
these countries agree to stay put?
No wall would be high enough to stop
them emigrating en masse to the sparsely
populated, fabulously rich countries whose
streets they imagine to be paved with gold.
UNESCO:
THE STRUCTURE
Unesco comprises three bodies: the Gen¬
eral Conference of Member States, the
Executive Board and the Secretariat.
The General Conference, which is
sovereign, "shall determine the policies
and main line of work of the Organiza¬
tion". Meeting usually in the latter half of
every second year, the representatives of
all Member States currently I 75 fol¬
lowing the principle of one vote per
country, finalize the Organization's pro¬
grammes and the amount and break¬
down of its "regular budget", decide on
Conventions and Recommendations,
elect members of the Executive Board
and, as is the case this year, appoint the
Director-General.
The Executive Board, representing
all the Member States between sessions
of the General Conference, has 5 I mem¬
bers who meet twice yearly to prepare
the agenda of the General Conference
and recommendations to be submitted to
it. The Board is, above all, responsible for
the execution of the programme adopted
by the Conference, and can take any mea¬
sures necessary to this effect.
The Secretariat is Unesco's execu¬
tive branch. Under the authority of the
Director-General, who is elected for a
period of six years, the staff implements
the adopted programme and provides
the General Conference and the Execu¬
tive Board with all necessary elements
for the successful accomplishment of their
work.
It is easy to sec how such influxes of immi¬
grants could fuel reactions of xenophobia
and exclusion, if those reactions persist.
I have used the words "would" and
"could" because I am convinced that wc
will act in time, using our immense talents
to prevent such developments and pro¬
vide each people with the means to become
the master of its fate.
Just as it is hard to sec the wood for the
trees, so the Berlin Wall concealed the real
priorities, the hidden threats, and the new
solutions. Before the Wall fell, the East-
West dichotomy hid many facts from sight,
brought to a standstill all thinking that did
not proceed therefrom, shaped patterns of
development and governance and exer¬
cised a disproportionate influence on inter¬
national relations. We lived in a sort of
blind tranquillity, where thought was
benumbed and action to face the great
challenges of our time was paralysed.
So there is no call for nostalgia. The
collapse of the totalitarian regimes has cre¬
ated openings for a freedom which, though
fragile, is at last attainable. With the increase
in the number, scale and speed of the flows
of people, goods, capital, ideas, knowl¬
edge and information, the unification of the
world (the famous "global village") seems
irreversible, yet the world is becoming
more and more divided as inequalities grow
and differencesalthough they contain
the answers to a good many of our prob¬
lems tend to be seen as threats. United
but not uniform. The irreversible process
of globalization now underway is incom¬
patible with a narrow attitude of self-
preservation. We have no choice but to
organize that process equitably.
A NEW ATTITUDE
It has to start with a new attitude towards
others. The differences between us must be
accepted, and we must show tolerance for
others and respect for their freedom and
dignity. In pursuance of new approaches to
development, poverty must be combattcd by
practising the virtues of solidarity, sharing
and the sense of fraternity which, according
to André Malraux, is alone capable of putting
an end to inequality. To think and act in the
short term and at the local, or national or
even regional levels is becoming ludicrous.
While action must continue to be adapted to
local situations, both its basis and its effects
must be seen in the context of a long-term,
general, global vision.
The transition from an age-old culture
of war to a culture of peace requires the
participation of all, their weapons being
common objectives and agreement on
essentials. The challenges of the past were
met with force; those of the future will be
met with intelligence. This transition calls
for a change of outlook, combining intel¬
lectual adventurousness with perseverance
in the way of sustainable action. How
many failures are the result of short-lived
convictions, of meeting violence with vio¬
lence! Whatever the affront, non-violence
must be the universal basis of response.
The complexity of reality must also be
accepted: simplification is neither rigorous
nor useful, and a pluridisciplinary approach
is the only way forward to precise under¬
standing and effective action.
With this in mind, the activities that
Unesco is to carry out in 1994-1995 will
have three main objectives: the promotion
of a culture of peace and tolerance; the
establishment of a type of development
that has human beings as both its agents
and its beneficiaries; and the preservation
of the environment and the rational man¬
agement of resources. These activities will
be particularly aimed at populations and
groups that arc in distress: women, the
least developed countries and Africa.
To achieve these aims, Unesco has nei¬
ther battalions nor substantial financial
resources at its disposal. The means it
employs are of a different kind: building up
the intellectual and moral solidarity of
mankind so as adapting the words of
UNESCO's Constitution to construct the
defences of peace in the minds of men. Its
purpose is indeed to combine and conjoin the
creative capacities of all the world's educators,
scientists, researchers, artists and journal¬
ists, to pave the way to a world where
everyone can at last learn to coexist and
share. TT^
