Rimbaud's quest
by Sami Na'ir
i
68
IMBAUD's quest, which he described as a
"fabulous opera", radicalized and trans-
1 formed the great modernist anguish which
originated with Baudelaire. In Rimbaud and
Baudelaire modernity found its most illustrious
representatives and perhaps its harshest critics.
Through their deliberate efforts to transcend
themselves, they both experienced the feeling of
time's fundamental newness, of its endless accel¬
eration and of the wounds it inflicts and
through the brilliant success of their testimony
they also demonstrated time's ambiguity.
What else do they have in common? Both
felt that the modern age fundamentally shifts the
boundaries of the sacred. What Baudelaire com¬
plained of was the disappearance of aura the
halo of spirituality that hovered over human
beings and objects beneath the weight of a
growing materialism and dehumanization of the
relations between peoples, the spirit of calculation,
and the horrifying philosophy of positivism the
iron heel crushing fragile humanity. As for Rim¬
baud, he dreamed even in youth of escape from
tedium the anonymity and tedium of an age
in which everything was reduced to statistics.
Escape from his home town of Charleville to
Paris, from Paris to the Orient, from the Orient
to Nothingness.
At the very start of his quest he called for
revolt in the name of art and defined creation as
the profanation of all the modern age holds
sacred. "One must be absolutely modern," he
wrote in the collection of prose-poems entitled
Une Saison en Enfer.
Absolutely modem! Whatever can this mean?
Not simply this is the poet's cry, let's not forget
desanctifying all kinds of knowledge, power and
belief. But also, and especially, life itself:
Seen enough. The vision has been
encountered in every air.
Had enough. The noise oftowns. . . .
Known enough. The halts of life	
("Départ", Illuminations)
The problem of modernity is thus revealed: it
paralyzes itself with its own complacency. All too
often are we reminded, as though his youthful
flashes of genius had been nothing but a kind of
bolt from the blue, that Rimbaud was terribly
afflicted by the evil genius of time. But by

x
ia
Left, Etude pour Rimbaud
(1978), ballpoint pen
heightened with gouache
by Ernest Pignon Ernest,
after a painting by Henri
Fantin-Latour.
Opposite page, Rimbaud as
sketched by the French
poet Paul Verlaine in 1 872.
SAMI NAIR
is a French philosopher who is
professor of political science at
the University of Lausanne
(Switzerland). Among his
published works are an essay
on immigration in France, Le
Regard des vainqueurs. Essai sur
les enjeux français de
l'immigration (Paris, 1992).
choosing flight and renouncing art, was he not
simply, in an all-too-human fashion, running
away from the vast abyss his vision had opened
up before him?
For even as a youth, already in flight "from
every moral law", he grasped with disconcerting
lucidity the poetic revolution he bore within
himself. In his famous letter to Paul Demeny in
May 1871, returning to a theme that he had
already raised in his correspondence with Georges
Izambard, he wrote:
I sayyou have to be a visionary, make yourself
a visionary.
A poet makes himself a visionary through a
long, boundless and systematized disorganization
o/all the senses. Allforms oflove, ofsuffering, of
madness	 Unspeakable torment. . . , where he
becomes among all men the great invalid, the
great criminal, the great accursed and the
supreme Scientist! For he attains the unknown!
. . . and if, demented, he finally loses the under¬
standing ofhis visions, he will at least have seen
them! So what ifhe is destroyed on his ecstaticflight
through things unheard-of, unnameable. . .
By disorganization of the senses, Rimbaud
means neither decadent behaviour nor degen¬
erate values. He wants to go further: to set aside
standards and conventions in order to perceive the
Unknown. To penetrate the Unknown is to
become Wise, to discover the duality of Being, the

Une Saison en Enfer (1 989),
a 2.5-metre-high wooden
sculpture by Luc Simon.
principle of Good and Evil, of their felicitous
and infinite combination.
This passage to the other side of existence, the
other side of a self-satisfied modernity, is made at
the cost of a true cathartic experience governed by
madness and disease, sacrilege and malediction.
The poet perceives what the run-of-the-mill imag¬
ination cannot conceive of: "If," writes Rimbaud,
"what he brings from down there has form, he
gives it form; if it is formless, he makes it formless. "
Here we see the poet both as a "stealer of fire" and
as the creator of a new "language". Art must over¬
turn and transcend the boundaries of the known,
the familiar, the visible of possession and power.
"The poet," Rimbaud adds, "should define the
amount of unknown awakening in his time in the
universal soul	"
The poet, then, is on the other side ofTime. He
is not within Time, he is ahead of it. To be
absolutely modern is to see the world's time from
ahead. Poets are citizens of this new time; they
dwell in it in their innermost selves because they
are bringers of fire the fire that consumes what
exists. The poet seeks, not to annihilate, but to
become that "not too discontented citizen of a
metropolis considered modern because every
70
known taste has been avoided	" ("Ville", Illu¬
minations)
While Baudelaire takes his contemporaries'
anguish as a starting-point the better to immure
himself within it, Rimbaud attacks the surfeit
oozing from every pore of society. He is on the
side of a "ferocious philosophy" which says "let
the rest of the world go to hell". It is hardly sur¬
prising that the surrealists found in him a kindred
spirit. What if one aspect of modernity should be
the overthrow of the modern, the rejection of
what exists at a given moment? What if being
modern entails making a virtue of Negation, as the
Stoics did of pain? Steering a course for the
unknown, attempting the leap to the other side of
the precipice:
/ am an inventor ofvery different meritfrom
all those who have preceded me. . . . I am dedi¬
cated to a new confusion	 / expect to turn into
a very troublesome madman.
("Vies", Illuminations)
This may sound pretentious. But what should
we expect poets to do? Recite the litany of our
mediocrity, to glorify it? Turn their attention
from the present towards the past? This is Hei¬
degger's thesis: that poets, discoverers of Being,
and therefore of the very Source, make an inquiry
into the deepest resources of language, and hence
that their attention is fixed on the past.
This may well be true for the German romantic
poets like Hölderlin, and perhaps even for the
nineteenth-century French romantics who
regarded the return to the source the journey to
the Orient as an initiation test for the conquest
of Truth and Beauty. But nothing of this sort
applies to Rimbaud. His revolutionary modernity
is entirely directed towards the future: he chal¬



lenges romanticism in the name of a radically
individualist libertarianism. This modernity of
Rimbaud's is no acquiescent passivity before the
disruptive force of science and technology, but
rather a quality of soul, a state of subjectivity, a kind
of spirituality, what is meant by the German word
Stimmung. Even more, it is opening towards the
elsewhere, getting an edge on the sacred, greeting
the breath of genius: "Let us know how to hail him
and see him, . . . follow his vision, his breath, his
body, his light." ("Génie", Illuminations)
Perhaps we are incapable of greeting in this
way; perhaps we are too cautious to understand
the poet's fire. But the artist, in moments of hap¬
piness which is to say in the states of rapture
which accompany true creation greets the
Unknown and presents it to us as an offering. The
face of the young Rimbaud is emblematic of this
experience. That is why it is so unforgettably,
outrageously beautiful.
There is a contemporary artist with the Bib¬
lical name of Luc Simon whose entire work is a
testimony to this Rimbaldian beauty. Rimbaud on
the walls of Paris in 1968, or astride the ruins of
another wall, now happily destroyed, in Berlin in
1989 Rimbaud the poet of our hopes and our
suffering, as youthful as adolescence, novelty,
Rimbaud eternally seeking "truth in a soul and a
body". ("Adieu", Une Saison en Enfer).
