Assuming responsibility
by André Brink
Running Man, a
"geometric" photographic
sequence produced
in 1886 by the French
scientist and photographer
Etienne Jules Marey.
FIRST of all we must be clear about what we
mean by the words "progress", "North"
and "South". ("North" of what? "South"
of what? The problem of positioning becomes
crucial here; and the suggestion of tidy objec¬
tivity north and south of an immovable neu¬
tral equator has fallen into disrepute since
Copernicus).
Progress is a combination of motion and
direction, from one point to another. Before
anything else, we should clear our vocabulary to
make sure North and South agree on starting
points and (temporary) goals. All too often in the
past the starting point has been implied to be
wherever the South finds itself at a given
moment; and the goal the position occupied by
the North. At the very least, it seems to me that
the guideline should be what Camus said about
freedom and justice: accepting that neither is
attainable in an absolute form, at least one knows
that in any situation it is possible to aspire to
more freedom and more justice.
What sort of progress?
But having clarified the principle, we still need
to define the context of the progress we have in
mind. Are we talking about technology, eco¬
nomics, social behaviour, judicial systems, or
politics? Again, the vantage point would deter¬
mine everything. It is easy to predict which
position will be assumed by those in the North
who interpret the collapse of Marxism as, ipso
facto, the vindication of capitalism. And the
very notion of "universalism" is suspect from the
moment the question of "whose universalism?"
is posed.
Are we talking about aesthetic progress? If
we are, then surely the great Northern (here
identical with Western) tradition of symmetries
and masterpieces, of the pursuit of excellence, of
the beautiful, of the whole, appears to serve, if
not as a consummation devoutly to be wished,
then at least as a time-honoured and thoroughly
proven point of departure. But the South African
experience places it under a question mark, if not
under threat of erasure. How "valid" is a tradi¬
tion that originated in ancient Greece among
those individuals who had the leisure to indulge
in aesthetics because they had enough slaves to
take care of their manual work?
This dangerous division between "higher"
and "menial" pursuits is itself open to ques¬
tion. (And yet it has "validity"! Who would be
so rash as to discard all its products, from Homer
and Sophocles via Chaucer and Ronsard and
Michelangelo and Shakespeare and Rembrandt
and Mozart and Tolstoy and countless others?)
The point is that the moment "validity" enters
into the discussion it invites, once again, the
question, "Validity for whom?", which sub¬
verts all aspirations towards the objective and the
universal. It is so easy for such matters to be

Dawn,
a detail from the tomb of
Lorenzo de' Medici
sculpted by Michelangelo
in about 1521.
drawn into the games of power that preoccupy
our world. And of one thing I am sure I
hope! and that is that when we speak of
progress it is not progress in increasing the effi¬
ciencies of power we have in mind. (The oppo¬
site may be closer to our intentions: the curtail¬
ment of power; the minimizing of power in
order to maximize freedom and justice and the
pursuit of truth.)
As a writer, my concern would primarily
be with progress of a cultural kind, or within a
cultural context; and for the purposes of speci¬



fication I would focus on those impulses of cul¬
ture involved in the production ofmeaning and
the definition of morality, of ethical responsi¬
bility. Assuming once again, with Camus, the
absence of objective or absolute value systems,
certainly, in respect both of significance and of
morality, it would be possible to strive for an
increase, and an enhancement, in any given con¬
text, social or otherwise.
Surely, actions, projects or products can con¬
stantly be improved in terms of their "load" of
meaning or their moral "validity" to or for an
increasing number of individuals (and in their
impact on each individual). The problem of a
defining instance may appear to remain: who
"decides" on what will make a given cultural
achievement more morally acceptable, or more
significant? And once again the danger of an
imposition of criteria from outside or above is only
too real. (But perhaps "value" may precisely be 37

38
ANDRE BRINK,
South African writer, is
Professor of Modern Literature
at Rhodes University,
Grahamstown, South Africa.
His most recent books are
Adamastor ( 1 993), An Act of
Terror ( 1 99 1 ) and Stores of
Emergency (1988).
determined in terms of the dangers to be faced
in the process, the risks to be taken, the odds to
be surmounted, the boundaries to be tran¬
scended.) To me, the advantage of such a view
lies in the way it minimizes the opportunities for
such an imposition, as each individual would be
encouraged to evaluate her or his own experi¬
ence (cultural or otherwise). And surely this
would be an ideal ingredient of true democ¬
racy. It makes the individual experience the
starting point of cultural progress: yet that expe¬
rience remains at all times fully inserted within



social interchange and collective responsibility.
Obviously this goes far beyond, but need not
exclude, the conceptions of culture presently
encountered in much of the world: culture as the
"organization of leisure" in the North; culture
as combat and "conscientization" in the South.
That dangerous animal,
the intellectual
We know that, at least since Julien Benda's La
Trahison des clercs, the term "intellectual" is
itself at risk. We know Camus's warning that
"The intellectual is a dangerous animal that
easily commits treason." But who still conceives
of that species as the lonely, aloof, disinterested
creature who judges human events, in an ivory
tower of dispassionate sanity, in terms of a tran¬
scendental Good or Evil? We know that the
much-vaunted "free agent" of the Age of Reason
is a fiction: we are all subject to the tussle and
play of ideologies, even when we least suspect it;
and at least we have learned this much from
Marxism, that we accept our involvement
even our implication in our social context and
in history.
But this does not remove our responsibility.
This, to me, is the key to the intellectual's
role, both within the general processes of change
in which all individuals and societies are engaged,
and in the specific convulsions of transition our
world is experiencing in this particular /zw de
siècle: that of responsibility. Responsibility to the
individual conscience as much as to the social
collective; responsibility to history (that is, not
only to the present, but to past and future);
responsibility towards those values which guar¬
antee the compass of our humanity: freedom,
truth, justice. And it also means a responsibility
against whatever threatens to diminish that
humanity, which would include a responsibility
against ideology, against dogma. The intellectual,
today, is no longer only the one who says,
"J'accuse!", but the one who affirms, "J'assume
ma responsabilité".
At the very least this assumption of respon¬
sibility by the intellectual towards the processes
of progress would imply the elimination (in
oneself; in one's society) of mentalities and atti¬
tudes resulting from our adherence, for too
long, to the divisions of Empire and Barbar¬
ians, West and East, North and South: in the
North, the belief in superiority and in centrism;
in the South, the victim mentality, which makes
it too easy always to blame others for all predica¬
ments and problems. Once again, both these
attitudes are demonstrated quite spectacularly in
South Africa today; but once again the virtue of
this demonstration is its applicability to most of
the world's societies, in one form or another
ranging from ethnic jokes to genocide.
The lure of power
In the exercise of this responsibility the greatest
danger is, once again, the lure of power. In the
old South Africa, the white minority dictated its
master narratives and used its control of the
media and the means of cultural production to
help maintain its political control. There are
signs, in the transitional South Africa, of cultural
commissars trying to impose their ideological
position (curiously and anachronistically Stal¬
inist in many respects) on others in order to
turn the tables on the "opposition". Even if it is
not hard to understand the justification of such
a démarche, it goes without saying that this
simply perpetuates the principle of binarity
which was the undoing of the ancien regime.
The intellectual notably the intellectual in
her or his manifestation as writer should
clearly distinguish between two separate possible
roles to be played: first, as writer, in which the
act of creating itself predominates, with its
emphasis on individual experience and the indi¬
vidual conscience, the individual responsibility
towards excellence (this is the context within
which Marquez characterized the writer as rev¬
olutionary in terms of "writing as well as he
can"); second, as "vedette", which is the conse¬
quence of the first. (As a result of writing well
whatever that is perceived to be in a given situ¬
ation she or he acquires notoriety, which can
be used as a base for influencing the cultural/
social/political debate.) It is imperative to dis¬
tinguish between the two.
The first role holds only the danger of with¬
drawal; but that, it seems to me, is a danger
society has to accept as a given; it is the price to
be paid for the possibility (never the guarantee)
of cultural quality. For it is simply not possible
to "program" writing or any cultural activity
for that matter; the whole value of the indi¬
vidual in society is vested in this. And in South
Africa it is significant that, after decades of
"struggle literature" (much of it, I should point
out, remarkably good by any standards) the
African National Congress itself is turning more

and more towards this aspect of individual
unpredictability and responsibility in cultural
activity.
The second function of the writer as "cul¬
tural worker" holds the real danger of involve¬
ment in power strategies. It cannot be shirked, and
it cannot be denied. The nature of our media-
informed world is such that tremendous poten¬
tial power is lodged within this function. For
that very reason, once again, one's basic appeal is



to responsibility in respect of each of the social
and moral forces I have outlined earlier.
Ultimately, then, the differences we impose
on our categorization of North and South are
both confirmed and transcended within the
processes of cultural progress. Through the cre¬
ative exploration of our different situations we
affirm our common humanity; through our
dedication to mutual excellence, we foster a
mutual respect; through our involvement in
humanity we create space for the individual;
through our assumption of responsibility we
allow each other to assume our full worth as
members of the human family. Progress is the
same for all, and never the same; it demands
awareness of difference and diversity as a starting
point, yet it never fails to affirm that as women
and men of South and North we are all as weak
as the weakest among us, as strong as the
strongest. I am, we are; we are, I am.
Untitled collage
(1992, 160 x 120 cm)
by the French artist
Pascal Lièvre.
39
