The inauguration of Aurovllle on 28 February
1968. During the ceremony, people from over
50 countries threw handfuls of soil from their
own homelands into a lotus-shaped urn
containing the city's charter.



Auroville, the fulfilment
by Lolfallah Soliman
46
LOTFALLAH SOLIMAN,
Egyptian writer and journalist, is the author of a
history of Palestine, Pour une histoire profane
de la Palestine, published by Editions de la
Découverte, Paris, 1989
The illustrations on pages 48 and 49 and on
the back cover are by the French photographer
Dominique Darr.
ON a February day in 1968, some
5,000 people from many countries
gathered on a remote plateau in
south India for the inauguration ofAuroville.
In a gesture of unity, young people from
each delegation placed a handful of earth
from their country in an inaugural urn
containing the charter of the new city.
Auroville takes its name from the Indian
mystic and philosopher Sri Aurobindo
(1872-1950) whose works and ideas inspired
its creation. /Jso known as "the city of dawn"
and "the city the Earth needs", it is this year
celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of
its foundation.
Its story actually begins much earlier,
with the meeting shortíy before the First
World War between Sri Aurobindo and Mira
Alfassa, an artist and visionary from France.
Together they worked in India for "a new
creation, beginning with a model town and
ending with a perfect worid". After the philo¬
sopher's death in Í95Ü, Mira Alfassa, who
had become known as "the Mother", con¬
tinued the realization of the dream she
shared with Sri Aurobindo.
THE DREAM
"There should be somewhere on Earth a
place which no nation could claim as its
own, where all human beings of goodwill

itt
ofa dream
who have a sincere aspiration could live
freely as citizens of the world and obey one
single authority that of the supreme truth; a
place of peace, concord and harmony,
where all the fighting instincts of man would
be used exclusively to conquer the causes of
his sufferings and miseries, to surmount his
weaknesses and ignorance, to triumph over
his limitations and incapacides; a place
where the needs of the spirit and concern
for progress would take precedence over the
satisfaction of desires and passions, the
search for pleasure and material enjoyment.
"In this place, children would be able to
grow and develop integrally without losing
contact with their souls; education would be
given not for passing examinations or obtain¬
ing certificates and posts but to enrich
existing faculties and bring forth new ones.
In this place, tides and positions would be
replaced by opportunities to serve and orga¬
nize; the bodily needs of everyone would be
equally provided for, and intellectual, moral
and spiritual superiority would be expressed
in the general organization not by an
increase in the pleasures and powers of life
but by increased duties and responsibilities.
Beauty in all its artistic forms, painting,
sculpture, music, literature, would be
equally accessible to all; the ability to share
in the joy it brings would be limited only by
the capacities of each one and not by social
and financial position.
"For in this ideal place money would no
longer be the sovereign lord; individual
worth would have a far greater importance
tlian that of material wealth and social stand¬
ing. There, work would not be a way of earn¬
ing one's living but a means of expressing
oneself and of developing one's capacities
and possibilities while being of service to the
community as a whole, which, for its own
part, would provide for each individual's
subsistence and sphere of action.
"In short, it would be a place where 47

human relationships, which are normally
based almost exclusively on competition
and strife, would be replaced by relation¬
ships of emulation in doing well, of collabo¬
ration and real brotherhood."
The Mother wrote these words in 1954.
Construction plans began to take shape in
the early 1960s, and in 1965 the Mother
issued her first public message in which she
stated that "Auroville wants to be a universal
town where men and women of all countries
are able to live in peace and progressive har¬
mony, above all creeds, all politics and all
nationalities. The purpose of Auroville is to
realize human unity."
The site chosen for Auroville is a dozen
kilometres northeast of Pondicherry and five
kilometres from the sea. It is located on the
Coromandel coastal plain and extends over
an area of some 20 square kilometres. At the
outset the site was nothing more than a bare
wasteland. One of the first Aurovillians, Alan
Lithman, remembers: "A merciless Sun beat
down upon this wretched piece of earth,
bleaching it bone white or a brittie terra¬
cotta. A once-living earth was dying. We
reached the edge of a canyon whose fingers
gouged through the landscape. My friend
pointed across the ravine to the barren
plateau beyond, where a few palmyra trees
shimmered like phantoms in the heat waves.
'There it is,' he said. 'Auroville'. I looked and
saw nothing but a vacant landscape that slid
into the Bay of Bengal. How could I possibly
live here? How could anyone?"
Thanks to years of hard work, this place
where 700 people from some twenty-five
countries now live permanently slowly began
to come to life again. "Looking back across
the threshold ofthat canyon I crossed twenty
years ago," says Alan Lithman, "I see . . .
forests and grasslands filled with flowers and
the birds and other wildlife that had disap¬
peared. I see what can be done with hardly
any means or resources and under the most
impossible conditions. ... 1 see what can be
done by the power of simply doing it. And as
1 turn toward the starkly contrasting land¬
scape behind me, I see all that is yet to be
done."
But no one person can claim the credit
for this "miracle". It was possible simply
because of people working together the
illiterate villager and the university pro¬
fessor, the scientist and the housewife, and
afl those who have volunteered to take part
in this adventure. The local people contrib¬
ute in many ways. Through its Village Action
network, Auroville is involved in programmes
for "co-evolution".
THE IDEAL OF
UNENDING EDUCATION'
Meenakshi, an award-winning Tamil poet,
lives in Auroville and helps in co-ordinating
village relations and educational and cultural
programmes. "Many of the Indian residents
ofAuroville are young Tamils who have come
because of contacts through work, sports
or school," he says. Meenakshi feels that
for them Auroville represents a "new order,
a freedom to learn and become when
compared to the social oppression of the
villages."
The ideal of "unending education" is
actively pursued. Depti, from the Punjab, is
a teacher at the "Last School" who has been
involved in bringing some of India's finest
artists to perform at Auroville. "They all
identify with the inner reality of Auroville
and respond positively to the atmosphere of
Aurovillians practise organic farming
(below left). In the last 20 years over
2 million seedlings have been sown in tree
plantations at Auroville.
Below right, a lesson at "Last School",
Auroville's high school.
freedom and beauty that exists here," she
says. "1 have discovered a deeper Indianness
since coming to Auroville, as the process of
finding oneself here sometimes accentuates
one's national characteristics before one
goes beyond them. Finally you become an
Aurovillian, and Auroville is an inner pursuit
that has nothing to do with an external per¬
sonality h is a pursuit of the soul and the
soul knows no nationality. I believe it is the
destiny of Auroville and India to be linked."
She recalls a remark once made in the
Indian Parliament to the effect that Auroville
is "an arrow shot into the future".
In 1969, Indira Gandhi, then Prime
Minister of India, warmly greeted the cre¬
ation of Auroville, and during its session of
October-November f970, Unesco's General
Conference noted that Auroville was prepar¬
ing to become "an instrument of education
capable of meeting the formidable demands
of our age, linking East and West in a new
relationship".
After the Mother's death in f973, Auro¬
ville went through a critical period. The par¬
ticipants in this "laboratory" of humanity
had to develop the inner strength to make
Auroville work. In 1980, a decision of the
Supreme Court of India enabled the resi¬
dents of Auroville to continue working
unimpeded on behalf of their ideáis. An Act
of Pariiament voted in f 988 created an Auro¬
ville Foundation with an international ad¬
visory council to ensure that the ideals of
Auroville are safeguarded.
During the 1980s, institutes for educa¬
tional and scientific research were estab¬
lished, and afforestation and erosion control
programmes continued. Advances in the
design and manufacture of renewable
energy systems, notably windmills and
biogas systems, have proved successful.
There has been intense activity in the pro¬
vision of cost-effective housing, where there
48

has been progress in the use and production
of stabilized earth block technology.
At the beginning of the f 990s, the work
accomplished over the previous twenty years
can be clearly seen, with some of the infra¬
structure and many community services in
place and the giant sphere of the Matri-
mandir, the "soul" of Auroville, nearing com¬
pletion. Viewed from the outside, this "Dwel¬
ling Place of the Mother" (the meaning of
"Matrimandir" in Sanskrit) or "Pavilion of
Divine Love" is a flattened sphere 36 metres
in diameter. Two spiral steel ramps give access
to the immense circular inner chamber, mea¬
suring 24 metres in diameter by 16 metres in
height, witii its twelve white marble-clad wall
panels and rhythmically-spaced columns
topped by a conical roof. At floor level, right in
the middle of this meditation chamber, a fine
crystal globe picks up the reflection of the
Sun's rays funnelled down from a tracker
heliostat on the roof of the Matrimandir. A
lake and twelve flower gardens will be created
around the Matrimandir
Is it a religion? When she described her
vision of the Matrimandir in 1970, the
Mother flrmly insisted that it was not. There
would be "A fixed day or time for the visitors,"
she added, "and the rest of the time only for
those who are serious, serious and sincere,
who want to learn to concentrate. No fixed
meditations, but they should stay there in
silence, in silence and concentration. A place
for trying to find one's consciousness."
In a tormented worid	
The heart of Auroville. At right, the spherical
Matrimandir; left background, the great
banyan tree which grows at the geographical
centre of Auroville; in foreground, the
amphitheatre, with seating capacity for
3,000.
The charter ofAuroville
1. 


Auroville belongs to nobody in particular. Auroville belongs to humanity
as a whole. But to live in Auroville one must be a willing servitor of the
Divine Consciousness.
2. Auroville will be the place of an unending education, of constant pro¬
gress, and a youth that never ages.
.3. Auroville wants to be the bridge between the past and the future. Taking
advantage of all discoveries from without and from within, Aurovllle will
boldly spring towards future realizations.
4. Aurovllle will be a site of material and spiritual researches for a living
embodiment of an actual hluman Unity.
For further information about Aurovilie, please contact A.V.i. UK, Canigou, Cot L^ne,
Cliidliani, W. Sussex, P.O. 18 8SP United Kingdom (Tel: 243 57 40 99),
or A.V.l. USA, 3112 O Street, Suite 13, P.O. Box 162 489, Sacramento, Calif. 95 816-2489
USA (Tel: 1 916 452 4013). 49
