A
stors.
LTHOUGH more logical, if more humdrum, explanations hove been
propounded to explain why human beings first stood on their hind legs, it
is a pleasing conjecture that then, as now, they were reaching for the
However this may be, even the earliest human societies looked to the stars
in their attempts to explain the origin and the nature of the universe. Almost all
the natural phenomena that dominated their lives appeared to emanate from
the heavens. The wind, rain and snows, the thunder and lightning and the
storms that threatened their survival, the Sun which ripened the fruit they
gathered or parched the Earth and laid it waste all these were clearly
manifestations of inexplicable higher powers that were in turn benevolent and
malicious. These powers appear to hove given human beings one gift to
compensate for their comparative lack of the instincts that guide other
animals that hallmark of humanity, the gift of curiosity
Generations of strivings have brought us much closer to an understonding of
the origins and nature of the universe.
On 23 April last year it was onnounced that the NASA satellite COBE (Cosmic
Background Explorer) had confirmed the Big Bang theory of the origin of the
universe by discovering ripples in the radiation from the fireball of creation.
In developing the Big Bang theory, astronomers hod to turn for help to
particle physicists. Astronomers are mainly concerned with trying to understand
the large-scale structure of the universe and are accustomed to thinking in terms
of light years'; particle physicists, on the other hand, ore concerned with the
structure of matter and the fundamental lows of nature at very small distances'.
Thus the first fractions of a second of the birth of the universe have become the
point of encounter of the infinitely great and the infinitesimally small.
This is 0 supreme example of the working method of the human mind, which
in all spheres has a propensity to work from the particular to the universal.
The same principle con be seen at work in the adventure of space
exploration. Satellites in their hundreds circle the globe, sending bock data on
everything from ocean currents and wove formations to crop prospects,
deforestation, sources of fresh water and mineral deposits. For the very first
time we hove at our disposal o synoptic view of the world we inhabit.
But knowledge con be destructive as well as constructive; it can both serve
and alienate humanity, protect nature as well as ploy havoc with it. It was long
thought that space was exempt from these contradictions, that it was too vast to
be in any way affected by human action. We ore now beginning to realize that
this is not the case.
Since the launching of the first Sputnik in 1957, one new satellite, on
average, has been launched every two or three days, the vast majority of them
being communication satellites of one kind or another Quietly almost
imperceptibly we hove witnessed the dawning of the "Communication Age". At
the same time, the first threats hove begun to appear.
The most obvious threat comes from the vast amount of debris from spent
satellites, the upper stages of rocket launchers and other sundry bric-à-brac of
space exploration, it has been estimated that tens of thousands of objects small
but capable of damaging a spacecraft are now in orbit round the Earth.
Equally serious is the threat to both optical and radio ostronomy resulting
from the ever-increasing amounts of light emonating from our big cities and
radio interference from communication satellites and ground sources of all
kinds.
Astronomers' growing colls for the preservation of "wilderness areas" in the
radio spectrum and light restricted zones for the preservation of the night sky
must be heeded if we are to probe further into the mysteries of space.
After gazing skywards for so long, humankind is now setting out to conquer
space. Shall we be capable of learning from the mistakes we hove mode in our
own little world, so thot we con explore the infinities of space with serenity?
Saturn and two of Its moons photogiaptied by the
Voyager l probe on 3 November 1980 from a distance
of 13 million hiiometres.
1 . A light yeor is the distance that light, which travels at 300,000 kilometres per second, traverses in
one year. Editor
2. Of the order of 0.0000000000001 centimetres or smaller. Editor
