THE SIREN SONG OF
SlM-l)ETERNIi\ATIOi\
When empires
disintegrate, the logic
of self-determination
can be exploited by
extreme nationalist
ideologies, with
terrible consequences
¡X
'ATIONALISM ... is nothing without the
creation of nation-states, and a world of
such states, fitting the present ethnic-
linguistic criteria of nationality, is not a feasible
prospect today. . . . Only a handful of fanatics
would, it is safe to say, regard this achievement of
national/communal self-determination as more
than marginally better than an acutely unsatis¬
factory status quo."
So wrote the British historian Eric Hobs-
bawm in 1990, in his book Nations and Nation¬
alism since 1780. His prognosis is not untypical
of the views held by most observers on the eve of
the implosion of the Soviet empire. Almost invari¬
ably, speculation about the impending transfor¬
mations of Soviet communism stopped short of
"Balkanization" as a plausible scenario. Rational
choice arguments pointed to the senselessness
of trading "an unsatisfactory status quo" for the
uncertainties of ethno-regional self-determina¬
tion. On the left, much the same conclusion was
reached by advocates of the "proletarians have no
fatherland" thesis. But perhaps the most preva¬
lent assumption was that the collapse of com¬
munism necessarily implied the advent of "free-
market democracy", thus creating the very
inducements needed for the maintenance of
multinational state systems.
by René Lemarchand
Almost totally left out of the accounting was
the alternative scenario of crisis and anarchy now
unfolding in much of East and Central Europe.
In one state after another, from Georgia to Azer¬
baijan and from Tajikistan to Moldova, the ten¬
sions between human rights and newly acquired
national sovereignties have reached alarming pro¬
portions, with formerly oppressed minorities
A group of menhiMike
sculptures adorned with
symbolic mosaic
decorations mark the spot
where Georgia, Armenia
and Azerbaijan meet.

asserting themselves as the principal vectors of
oppression and violence. Conversely, in most of
these states, the once dominant Russian majority
has been fragmented into embattled ethnic
minorities, up against chronic violence (as in
Moldova, Georgia and Tajikistan) and systematic
political discrimination (as in the Baltic
Republics).
The parallel with the massive re-ordering of
political loyalties that followed in the wake of
European decolonization can hardly go unno¬
ticed. Just as the impending withdrawal of colo¬
nial controls from much of Africa and Asia stim¬
ulated the rise of a host of nationalist and
ethno-regional movements, the advent of pere-
stroika has had a similarly catalytic effect on the
crystallization of ethnic claims and counter¬
claims. In Eastern Europe as in much of Africa
and Asia the logic of self-determination carries
within itself the seeds of seemingly endless con¬
flicts. As more and more ethnic groups seek to
reclassify themselves as potential nations, others
strenuously resist incorporation in the name of
their own claims to self-determination.
ETHNIC MANIPULATION



The violence that has accompanied the redrawing
of state boundaries bears ample testimony to the
threat posed to human rights and democracy by
the excesses of self-determination. Where group
rights defined in terms of assumed blood ties
and ethnicity are held up as a normative standard
against individual rights, there can be no basis for
democracy. The same is true of situations where
the claims of the majority are exercised to sup¬
press the rights of minorities. Implicit in such slo¬
gans as "Georgia for the Georgians", "Sri Lanka
for the Sinhalese" or "India for the Hindus" is the
denial of the hallowed notion that the test of a
democracy lies in its treatment of minorities.
Right, a refugee camp at
Korem, Ethiopia (1985).
Below, refugees in
Thailand.
SO
Nowhere in the world does territorial sover¬
eignty coincide with ethnic identity. The bound¬
aries of the successor states of the Austro-Hun-
garian, Ottoman and Soviet empires are no less
artificial than the lines drawn by European col¬
onizers around their imperial domains in the last
century. Even in the case of so-called "ethnic
cleansing", new patterns of fragmentation are
bound to emerge behind the façade of shared
cultural commonalities.
"Ethnic cleansing": what the horribly anti¬
septic metaphor conveys is a definition of the
"other" as a vector of social contamination. The
intent, in short, is to give moral justification to the
physical suppression of culturally distinct com¬
munities. Whether defined in terms of religion,
language or other cultural traits, real or assumed,
ethnic minorities often end up being the prime

targets of ethnic cleansing. The most important
point, however, is that in almost every instance the
"other" is being redefined, recontextualized, and
in the process almost dehumanized. The Holo¬
caust is an extreme example of how the dehu-
manization of an entire group of people helps jus¬
tify its physical annihilation. A strikingly similar
phenomenon lies behind the genocidal killings in
Bosnia, where Muslims are now being reduced to
a sub-human category by certain ideologues, and
treated as such.
Politicized ethnicity does not invariably trans¬
late into genocidal violence; yet it always involves
a measure of political manipulation. Contrary
to what is often assumed, ethnic nationalism does
not just emerge full-blown from the mists of his¬
tory. It is the product of complex social and eco¬
nomic forces often set in motion under the aegis
of the colonial state. The critical factor, however,
is the part played by ethnic entrepreneurs in



stimulating the awakening of a collective self-
awareness.
If ethno-nationalism is first and foremost
manipulated nationalism, in this process histor¬
ical memory plays a crucial role. It mixes facts
with fiction, it squeezes reality into symbolic
frames and invests the past with new meanings.
"Imagined communities" thus take on a reality of
their own. The ties that bind are not blood ties or
kinship ties but what Paul Veyne calls "l'imagi¬
nation constituante". It is sadly ironic that some
of the worst examples of ethnic killings should
have happened among communities that are cul¬
turally almost indistinguishable, and which for
centuries had lived in peace with each other.
The devastating effects of selective memory as 31

a form of political manipulation are nowhere
more evident than in the exalted brand of ethnic
chauvinism exhibited by the extremists who set
themselves the task of "cleansing" Bosnia of
Muslim and Croat elements. While the first are
seen as a living reminder of Turkish domination,
and are collectively referred to as Turks even
though none are able to speak a word of Turkish,
the second are collectively identified with the
horrors of the Nazi-installed Croatian fascist
state during the Second World War. Totally oblit¬
erated from the collective consciousness is the fact
that Serbs, Croats and Muslims lived at peace
with each other for centuries prior to the Second
World War. This is where the resistance of the
people of Sarajevo carries a powerful demon¬
stration effect: it demonstrates that communi¬
ties of mixed origins can indeed live in harmony.
The funeral of a victim of
violence in south Ossetia
(1991).
ESCALATING VIOLENCE
Again, to see in the savage bloodletting in Ayo-
dhya and elsewhere in India nothing more than
an age-old antagonism between Hindus and Mus¬
lims misses the point. Rather than a religious
confrontation between mosque and temple, what
is at issue here is a conflict of nationalist ideolo¬
gies activated through the symbolic manipulation
of Ram and Babur, the first identified with the
most potent of all gods in the Hindu pantheon,
the second with an alien, Turkic-Mongol con¬
queror. In the contemporary discourse of Hindu
fundamentalists the myth of Ram encapsulated
in the ubiquitous slogan of "Jai Sri Ram!" ("Hail
to the Lord Ram!") emerges as a powerful
symbol of cultural identity and a rallying-cry
against the Moghul conquerors. Behind the threat
posed to the survival of Muslim communities
also lies a major challenge to the spirit of tolerance
and mutual respect embedded in what was once
known as the "Hindustani culture" the fragile
fusion of Hindu and Muslim influences which
also formed a major ingredient of the Nehru
brand of liberal Indian nationalism.



The claims embodied in the principle of self-
determination are made all the more explosive by
the external dimensions of ethnic strife. Where
cultural affinities transcend the domestic arena
and serve as poles of attraction for the interven¬
tion of outside forces, or as a pretext for retalia¬
tion against minorities in neighbouring states,
successful conflict resolution becomes very dif¬
ficult indeed. Domestic conflict inevitably triggers
inter-state ethnic conflict; each feeds on the other,
thus generating a nightmarish sequence of inter¬
locking violence.
To recognize the primacy of ethnic particu¬
larity is to acknowledge the rights of minorities.
In looking for ways of protecting these rights
we need to rethink the responsibilities of the
international community. As has now become
dramatically clear, the threats posed to minorities
through the "excesses of self-determination"
carry implications that go far beyond the bound¬
aries of existing state systems. The massive exodus
of refugee populations into neighbouring areas
imperils their political stability, generates fresh
outbursts of xenophobic violence and imposes
insuperable burdens on their economies.
Although the tasks ahead are daunting, the time
has come to invest the United Nations security
system with a new mandate, one that would not
simply reaffirm the rights of minorities but stip¬
ulate the rules and criteria under which the use of
force can be internationally sanctioned and
brought into effect. ^
3^
w
mi
* J* **
^^^^^^^^^^1 Bkfc» si 5
rq*Kr ç ¿EMHftl/^^^^^*1
RENE LEMARCHAND,
a Franco-American university
teacher, is professor of
political science at the
University of Florida. He is the
author of several books on
Africa, including Rwanda and
Burundi (Pall Mall Press,
London, 1 970) and Qadhofi's
Policies in Africa (Indiana
University Press, 1990).
