H
.71«^* -IT*»
mmbf v,jF..; '..fl^KÄ1
Underground
water is an
important,
little-known
ond fragile
resource
Above, digging a well
in Burkina Faso.
A hidden
Qsset
by Jean Margat
UNDERGROUND water was for centuries the
great unknown of the water cycle. Despite
the intuitive insights of a small number of
geniuses, from the Greek Anaxagoras and the
Roman Vitruvius to Leonardo da Vinci, it long
remained the stuff of myth and imagination.
Until the time of Descartes, people thought it
came from the sea and somehow made its way up
to mountain springs, desalinating itself en route.
Its place in the circulation of the Earth's water was
not understood until the seventeenth century.
And we have only recently learned how to mea¬
sure its volume and flow.
REGULATING THE FLOW OF
STREAMS AND RIVERS
Virtually all terrestrial freshwater resources in
liquid form are underground. The 10 million bil¬
lion cubic metres of underground water represent
more than a hundred times the amount con¬
tained in all the world's lakes and rivers at any
given time. And even though it is less than the 28
million billion cubic metres contained in the
Earth's ice masses, subterranean water is more
evenly distributed on every continent. 15

16
Underground water is not stagnant. Although
it flows very slowly, its mass in motion makes an
appreciable contribution to the general circulation
of water. Almost a third of the flow of the Earth's
running water circulates underground for short or
long distances. The global volume is of the order
of 12 thousand billion cubic metres annually.
Subterranean water is linked to surface water
through countless springs and other forms of dis¬
charge. Without its unseen flow, which is wide¬
spread and regular even if rarely observed except
by speleologists, there would be neither springs
nor permanent rivers. The underground reserves
are the great regulators of surface streamflow.
Underground water is distributed in as orga¬
nized a fashion as surface water, in aquifers that
vary both in size and in the complexity of their
structures. Sometimes these serve as conduits,
sometimes essentially as reservoirs. Every conti¬
nent possesses major aquifers whose size rivals
that of the great river basins, containing billions
of cubic metres of fresh water, sometimes as
much as one or two thousand metres down.
In spite of progress in the knowledge and
skills of the hydrogeologists who study and con¬
trol it, underground water still means little to the
public at large, and even to many engineers and
administrators responsible for the management of
water resources. The air of mystery surrounding
it has encouraged the survival of water-divining,
the belief in which is still deeply implanted in
many cultures. Underground water is rarely
thought of as a communal resource, like rivers, and
its legal status is accordingly often different from
that of surface waters, whether standing or
flowing, which generally fall into the public
domain. Property rights to underground water
resources are generally linked to ownership of
the land above them, and laws pertaining to water
usually take little account of the continuity of
ground and surface water. The degree to which
human activities affect subterranean reserves is
either underestimated or ignored.
DRAWING
ON THE RESERVES
Yet underground water has been used and
exploited by humankind for thousands of years.
Through the ages, in every part of the world,
people have devised different ways of tapping
it, using energy sources as diverse as animal
labour, wind and solar power and the hydraulic
techniques employed in artesian wells.
Examples of the exploitation of underground
water resources include Iran's famous qanats,
galleries hollowed out over the course of the
centuries that, laid end to end, would stretch for
400,000 kilometres, the distance from the Earth
to the Moon; the 600,000 wells that irrigate the
Ho Pei plain in China; the 5,000 wells of Aus-
The Aven du Grelot, a
natural well in a limestone
region of southern France.

tralia's Great Artesian Basin, which produced 6
billion cubic metres of water in 1980; and the
150 billion cubic metres of water pumped each
year in India (a world record). Between 1940
and 1980 500 billion cubic metres were drawn
from the Ogallala aquifer to irrigate the High
Plains of the American Midwest, where 170,000
wells are currently in use. Thousands of modern
wells provide water for the villages of the African
Sahel. Two billion cubic metres will be extracted
annually from the fossil-water reserves of the
Libyan desert to feed the "Great Artificial River".
Underground water has many advantages as a
source of supply. It can be easily tapped over wide
areas using installations that require small-scale
investment rather than the heavy outlay needed, for
example, to build dams to control surface water. It
is a permanent resource that is relatively insensi¬
tive to climatic factors such as drought. In addition,
the quality of the water is generally better and
more consistent than that of surface water, making
it suitable for human consumption.
Around the world today, about 60 per cent of
drinking water, 15 per cent of household supplies
and 20 per cent of irrigation resources come from
beneath the ground. In most of the world's arid
lands, subterranean reserves constitute the prin¬
cipal water supply source. In addition, they con¬
stitute at least 20 per cent, and often more than 30
per cent, of all the water used in most industrial¬
ized countries. About 600-700 billion tonnes are
now tapped annually a greater tonnage than
for any other mined mineral.
THE RISKS OF
OVER-EXPLOITATION
There is a big gap between what people know
about underground water and the use they make
of it, and this accounts for much that is wrong
with the way it is exploited.
It is an often-undervalued resource that could
be more efficiently used during periods of
drought. On the other hand, it is sometimes used
to excess, and such overexploitation can be
harmful in many ways. It is important to realize
that underground and surface water resources
are not independent of one another, for ground¬
water helps regulate surface streamflow a role
that could be amplified by using it, for example,
to artificially refill storage basins that are in
danger of silting up. Considerable though they
are, however, freshwater reserves are not renew¬
able within a human lifespan, and so can only be
exploited for a limited time. Their use does not
allow for sustainable development.
The massive deposits of fossil water that exist
in several arid regions are vital resources, even if
only some of the water can be extracted, since by
the rules that govern any kind of mining opera¬
tion the intensity of production must control its 17

duration. In many countries these resources have
been exploited since the nineteenth century and
have already produced billions of cubic metres of
water 35 billion in Australia over 90 years,
about 15 billion in the Algerian and Tunisian
Sahara in 30 years, 200 billion in Arizona in 60
years, the same figure in 40 years in the American
Midwest provoking sizeable falls in the water
table, sometimes of 100 metres or more. Similar,
more recent but fast-growing developments now
provide the bulk of several Arab countries' needs,
providing 75 per cent of Saudi Arabia's water
supply and 85 per cent of that of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.
But there is a time limit to the mining ofunder¬
ground water: it can only go on for a few decades,
a century at most. It therefore becomes necessary
either to look for alternative sources for when
the water runs out, or else to plan for the trans¬
formation of the activities that depend upon it.
Finally, most aquifers are exploited by many
different parties for different and sometimes
incompatible purposes. And like many river
basins, they frequently extend across several
regions or even countries. If conflicts are to be
forestalled, there must be co-operation between
the communities and nations concerned.
THE POLLUTION
TIME-BOMB
The pollution of underground water reserves is
even more pernicious than that of surface water,
in that it is less immediately apparent and is often
diffuse and cumulative. It also lasts much longer.
Even local sources of contamination can make
their effects felt over great distances and consid¬
erable periods of time sometimes several gen¬
erations because the affected water is stored in
the soil and is only renewed very gradually.
The principal threat to groundwater comes
from harmful substances introduced into the
natural environment. This may happen deliber¬
ately through excessive use of fertilizers and
pesticides in agriculture, or sometimes even
through the dumping of dirty or waste water in
cesspools or unintentionally, by rainwater
leaching materials from badly-sealed urban or
industrial landfills, for example, or as a result of
leaking sewers or reservoirs or following spillage
of dangerous products such as hydrocarbons
during transport. These forms of pollution, which
stem ultimately from negligence or ignorance,
have repercussions on the quality of springs and
river tributaries. They pose a threat to surface-
water resources and aquatic ecosystems.
From both an economic and an environ¬
mental point of view, prevention is by far the
best way to fight pollution and preserve the
quality of underground water. Attitudes will
have to change and efforts will have to be made
not only by water consumers but perhaps to an
even greater extent by all land-users, whether
public or private, who must be made more aware
of the consequences of their acts.
The Earth's water
18
JEAN MARGAT
is a French hydrogeologist
who headed the Office of
Geological and Mining
Research in Orleans (France).
His published works include a
dictionary of hydrogeology
(1977) and (as a co-author)
Introduction à l'économie
générale de l'eau (1981). He ¡s
currently preparing for FAO a
methodological guide to the
evaluation of water resources.
oceans and seas
(97.2%)
glaciers and ice-caps
(2.15%)
underground water (0.625%)
lakes and rivers (0.0091%)
atmosphere (0.001%)
