ü
ZEINA ÁRIDA,
of Lebanon, is preparing a
thesis on women in the plays
of Henry de Montherlant.



Don Juan and the
quest for the absolute
byZeinaArida
DONJUAN first saw the light of day in 1630,
when Baroque theatre was in full flower
and behind the rigid morality of Spanish
society there lurked a sometimes unbridled liber¬
tinism. In El burlador de Sevilla (The seducer of
Seville), Tirso de Molina created the character and
traced the outlines of his destiny. The hero of this
drama, the irresistible womanizer, took on a life of
his own that has lasted nearly four centuries, going
on from one literary incarnation to another, from
author to author, as if belonging to all and to none.
A born libertine, Don Juan moves from one
amorous adventure to another, exploiting his social
rank to deceive women. Living only for the
moment, he opts for time rather than eternity, for
change rather than immutability. In this world of the
fleeting instant, libertinism in love is a natural con¬
sequence of the instability of all things: any man
who follows the devices and desires of his heart
becomes inconstant in love. Inconstancy, the refusal
to worship at the shrine of the one and only love,
becomes a duty. Not only does Don Juan feel no
attachment to any woman, the attachment felt by
any woman for him would be a burden to him.
Faithfulness to beauty is the only form of fidelity
possible in love.
Tormented and forever unsatisfied, Donjuán
is at the same time an angst-ridden figure. Some
would have it that he is not seeking love or ten¬
derness but trying to assuage a desire that is impos
sible to satisfy and hence is constantly rekindled.
His desires come up against the limitations of sated
lust, and the whole world becomes the playground
for his amorous propensities. As Molière's Dom
Juan puts it, "I would there were other worlds so
I could extend to them my amorous conquests."
The seducer needs obstacles. Seduction means
overcoming obstacles: the harder the woman is to
get, the more desirable she is. It thus comes about
that, in Pascal's words, he prefers the combat to the
victory. Once his victim surrenders, he loses interest
and spurns her.
In nineteenth-century Romanticism, the
wanton, cynical libertine was to give way to the
seeker after the Ewig-Weibliehe, the Eternal
Feminine, the sister-soul on whom his heart will be
set. Behind the staggering record of the seducer's
winning streak the "thousand and three" women
of Mozart's Don Giovanni there lies a quest for the
absolute. Don Juan becomes a Faust-figure, and
his infidelity, according to Alfred de Musset,
becomes "a craving for the infinite in the pleasure
of the senses".
Inconstant though he may be, he is nevertheless
always sincere. In each instance he is in love, and for
the short moment he loves a woman she becomes
the one and only, until he moves on to the next. Don
Juan does not betray love, love always eludes him,
perhaps because he has never encountered the
amourfou so dear to André Breton.
Of Don Juan's many attributes, it is to that of
the hungry hunter, the pleasure-seeker, that the
modern age is most drawn. Some writers, such as
Henry de Montherlant, have imagined him in dis¬
illusioned old age, pushing the depiction to the
limits of caricature: "The Don Juans of old were
damned souls; this one is sex-obsessed, and thus
very much of our time." m
