The forgotten ones
by Tassoum L Douai
;
Women are
frica's front-
line troops in
e struggle for
survival against
drought, famine
and war. They
also have to
ight for
(cognition of
eir crucial role
in economic
velopment
ft
SETTING drinking water is a simple matter
of turning on a tap in the countries of the
North, but it involves a veritable assault
course for most Africans African women, to be
more precise, since in addition to looking after the
home and the children, cooking the meals and
tending the crops, women are also burdened with
this arduous task, which often means having to
walk miles to fetch the precious liquid.
Africa is a continent of climatic contrasts,
arid in some parts, rainy on either side of the
Equator, and for twenty years or so it has suffered
from disturbances in the normal weather pat¬
terns that have had disastrous effects, particu¬
larly in such regions as the Sahel. The Sahel
receives very little rain, and the impact of inade¬
quate rainfall is direct. Wells and streams run
dry, crops and cattle die off, villagers abandon the
land for the towns, malnutrition follows, infant
mortality increases and outbreaks of water-borne
diseases reappear. No reference to water in the
African context would be complete without a

mention of river blindness, bilharzia, viral
hepatitis, cholera and malaria.
Although the Sahel is the region worst
affected, the Horn of Africa and southern Africa
have also been ravaged by drought since 1991.
Southern Africa is facing an unprecedented food-
supply emergency. South Africa, traditionally
an exporting country that kept its less fortunate
neighbours supplied with cereals, is set to import
grain in large quantities. Cereal production in
the ten countries of the Southern African Devel¬
opment Co-ordination Conference (SADCC),
which stood at twelve million tonnes on average,
slumped this year by half, and eighteen million
people face famine.
THE POOR RELATIONS OF
DEVELOPMENT
Women are the first casualties of drought, famine
and war. They have to struggle to keep life going
in this nightmare world of ruin and desolation.
Poverty drives the menfolk away to neighbouring
countries or to swell the ranks of the urban
unemployed, leaving women to cope alone with
immense responsibilities. Deprived of traditional
forms of support, they need new sources of
income to ensure the survival of their families and
communities, but illiteracy and lack of training
invariably oblige them to seek employment in the
informal sector.
Above, harvesting blue
algae in Chad.
Left, a woman carries
water in Mali.
Their already precarious health situation has
been further undermined, largely by frequent
childbearing and chronic malnutrition. Their
working hours (according to some estimates,
women work on average 2,490 hours a year, as
against 1,400 for men) have been made even
longer by current shortages, which oblige them
to go farther and farther afield in search of water
and firewood not forgetting the long treks they
have to make with sick children to the few clinics
that exist, where they have to wait for hours as
they do at the well.
The efforts made and the aid provided during
the 1 980s as part of the United Nations Interna¬
tional Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation
Decade, have, it is true, started to bear fruit. Sub¬
stantial resources have been mobilized for this
battle, and a number of hydraulic schemes aimed
at alleviating women's drudgery have been
launched. The results have been uneven, but the
lessons learned from the projects that have failed
will certainly enable beneficial readjustments to
be made in the future.
Despite this, and despite the fact that they
are the most productive members of African
society, women remain the poor relations of the
economy, the outcasts of development schemes.
They are acknowledged to have duties but seldom
recognized as having rights. Due recognition
should be accorded to the importance of their
social and economic role, and they should be
helped, by means of literacy teaching and training,
to find paid employment, so that Africa can at last
make progress towards "sustainable develop¬
ment with a human face", fl 41
/m

42
TASSOUM L. DOUAL
is a Chadian economist who is
currently preparing a doctoral
thesis on the socio-economic
changes and the situation of
women in Chad during the
civil war. Among her
publications in English is
"Chad: Civil War and
Development Prospects",
which appeared in Voices from
Africa, published by the United
Nations Non-Governmental
Liaison Service, Geneva, 1991.
Pumps of contention
CHAD is one country where women have to
contend with both water scarcity and inse¬
curity. The government, with the help of a few
financial backers, installed water pumps in two
northern regions, Guéra and Ouaddai, where
drought is endemic. Attitudes being what they
are, however, women were kept out of the man¬
agement side of things. During public meetings,
they maintained a disapproving silence or merely
acquiesced politely. In the village of Mangalmé,
they refused even to attend, saying they were
not involved in "your pump business". After
long discussions, they plucked up courage to
say even though the men were present that it
was up to those to whom the pump belonged to
answer questions. It emerged from further dis¬
cussion that the management committee, com¬
posed entirely of men, had been giving preference
to water-sellers and herdsmen, obliging the
women to go on drawing the water for household
needs from the traditional wells. The wells were,
however, from five to fifteen kilometres away
from the village, and the women had to make the
long journey weighed down with heavy water-
jars attached to each end of a pole.
As for hygiene, we found out that in all the vil¬
lages where there were pumps the runoff channel
had been blocked to make a drinking-trough.
The livestock drank stagnant water from it, or
even out of the recipients that were being filled.
When asked if their health had improved since
they had drinking water, many of the women
sarcastically replied that they were not doctors so
they couldn't tell.
In another village, the men told us how satis¬
fied they were. "Look," they said, "our women¬
folk have grown bigger and more beautiful since
the pump was installed. It's great to see them
getting some rest. Let's hope it continues that
way, because it seems the pumps often break
down in other places." As regards these break¬
downs, Mariam, a fifty-year-old woman, told
us: "We have a great deal to put up with. It's
really very hard to have to go ten to fifteen kilo¬
metres to fetch water. Night-time is for sleeping
but we have to go and fetch water. Our daughters
don't even have time to grow because we trail
them around with us to teach them to put up with
suffering. Thanks anyway for the pump, but if
you really want to help us, show us how to repair
it, then we'll be able to get it going again ourselves
instead of having to go and look for a repairman
forty-five kilometres away, often only to find
he's left for the town. All the repairmen we've had
left sooner or later. There's no work here, you
know, so all the men leave." No expert could
have put women's needs more clearly.
Water-supply schemes should help encourage
the rural population to become self-sufficient in
food production and slow down the drift to the
towns. The installation of pumps in the villages
has not, however, given a boost to fruit and
vegetable growing and has not created new
sources of income. The reason is that this aspect
of the matter was not taken into consideration
Queuing for water in
the Sudan.

by the people behind the schemes; raising aware¬
ness and getting the local population to partic¬
ipate especially women, who after all are the
main intended beneficiaries are not high
among their priorities. Yet as long as women
continue to be left out of economic and social
development, it will be difficult to achieve any
progress in the villages. _
Miracle algae
BARKADROUSSO is a little country town in the
Kanem region of west central Chad. Its pop¬
ulation is about 800, mostly women. The Kanem
region used to be good cattle country, but drought
has decimated the herds and made life very diffi¬
cult. All the able-bodied men have gone, leaving
behind the women, children and the elderly.
Achta is one of these women. Aged about forty,
she lives alone with her six children. Seven years
ago her husband left to work in Libya, like so
many other men. It is five years since he last
came back. "God be with him," she murmurs,
"we're still alive, thanks be to God and the dihé."
The dihé is the only form of wealth that the
women of Barkadrousso possess. It is a blue alga,
invisible to the naked eye, that grows in profusion
in the natron-rich ponds of certain wadis. Very
high in protein content 15 grams are the equiv¬
alent of 100 grams of meat in mineral salts and
vitamins, it is the staple food of the local popula¬
tion, cooked as a thick soup or made into a sauce.
On the day of the harvest, a hundred or so
women gather around the pond with their con¬
tainers. Many have their daughters with them.
When the signal is given, they collect as much dihé
as they can. Half of them have come more than fifty
kilometres to Barkadrousso for the purpose.
At one time, most of the streams in the Kanem
produced dihé, which the women sold, dried, at
the market in Mao, seventy kilometres away.
With the proceeds they bought tea, sugar and
clothes. Nowadays the market traders gather the
algae themselves. Achta says: "All the wadis
around here have dried up. Ours is the only one
left. God has been good to us. I don't hear from
my husband any more. A lot of women are in the
same situation. I'm old, but look at those two over
there. They only have two children each and
their husbands have been gone five years. It's a
good job we have dihé, otherwise what would
become of USÍ
For these women, the blue algae have taken
the place of husbands, parents and livestock.
They provide their only source of income; they
are mother's milk to their children. "Our children
are not thin, thanks to the dihé, but look at the
next village!" It is true that the children in
Barkadrousso show no signs of malnutrition,
unlike those in the neighbouring villages.
A plan drawn up by the Chadian authori¬
ties, and warmly welcomed by the womenfolk,
aimed to replenish the dried-up wadis and pro¬
duce algae to feed the local population. Three
nongovernmental organizations from the devel¬
oped countries were ready to provide funding for
the project, but owing to the almost permanent
insecurity that reigns in the region, it has yet to be
implemented. 43
