They could have done so much,
but dared to do so little...'
I am convinced that in the years ahead it is going to
be essential to be able to train fully-fledged citizens,
who will feel that unless they are participating in
the life of their community they do not exist. And in
order to exist, in order to exercise their responsibilities
as citizens, they will need access to knowledge. Edu¬
cation is not only instilling knowledge, but awakening
the immense creative potential that lies within each of
us, enabling all of us to develop our capacities to the full,
the better to contribute to the societies in which we live.
With regard to the dissemination of scientific and
technical knowledge, it is borne in on me every day
how sadly scientific information is lacking in the deci¬
sion-making process. Far too many decisions with
far-reaching consequences in the domains of energy
and the environment, for example are influenced by
the emotions. It is our responsibility to provide deci¬
sion-makers with absolutely reliable data enabling
them to reach objective conclusions.
I also feel that there are two ideas that we should
push as hard as we can to have accepted and applied.
The first is linked to lifelong education: the educa¬
tional process can no longer be defined as the acquisi¬
tion of knowledge which precedes entry into the
working world. It is and will of necessity become
increasingly a protean process extending over an
entire lifetime and covering a variety of activities.
The second concept is that of educational partnership.
When we think of education, we think of the state.
However, the responsibility for education is not the
state's alone; it is incumbent upon civil society at all its
levels and in all its structures. For it is only by making
the whole of society aware of its duty to take up the chal¬
lenge of education that we will be able to lay a firm
foundation for the training of fully-fledged citizens.
At this point, a word about higher education. To my
mind, this level of education has too long been con¬
sidered a luxury, and thus passed over by the developing
countries in favour of basic education, which has
attracted all the attention. It is true that higher educa¬
tion is only available to a privileged group of young
people: 92 per cent of the world's eighteen- to twenty-
three-year-olds do not have access to it. All the more
reason to be extremely demanding of those who do!
Society should make these young elites realize that
they are already part of the social fabric, and have
responsibilities to shoulder. At university, they must
learn to take the initiative, and begin to place their
imaginations and energies in the service of the trans¬
formations that this new era is demanding of all mem¬
bers of the community.
Finally, I should like to underscore the importance
of education in enhancing mutual understanding and
promoting co-operation between peoples. In a world
where distances are shrinking and differences abound,
there is nothing to be gained by locking the door and
withdrawing into oneself. The best way to survive,
and at the same time add a new dimension to one's life,
is to learn to live with others, and to listen to what they
have to say. Tolerance does not mean "tolerating"
others, but getting to know, understand, respect, and
why not? admire them.
What is needed most today, what young people
and particularly teenagers who are about to complete
their secondary studies are demanding of us more or
less explicitly, is guidance to help them chart their
course. Unless we supply them with this without delay,
we risk witnessing major social upheavals. We must
take action, even at the risk of making mistakes. The
worst of all would be to do nothing in the face of the
intolerable.
We are not prepared to rise to all the challenges of
the future poverty, population, the environment,
ethnic coexistence because we are still working with
the tools of the past. We must remedy this situation as
quickly as possible, so that our grandchildren will not
speak of us with Camus' terrible words: "They could
have done so much, but dared to do so little " h
73
