46
REACHING THE
HISSING MILLIONS
by Cilla Ungerth Jolis
In Croatia, 200,000 children displaced
by civil strife have no access to
schooling. In Somalia, where war has
destroyed virtually all schools, 99 per cent
ofboys and girls are deprived ofeducation.
In Cambodia, most of the country's young
are ill prepared to help reconstruct their
country because they cannot even write
their names. In Mali, 68 per cent of men
and women are illiterate. In many other
countries, education is underfunded, ill-
equipped and given low priority.
When Victor Ordonez, Unesco's
director for basic education, prepared the
draft programme for 1994-1995, he faced
the following dilemma: on the one hand,
there are some 948 million illiterate adults
in the world and almost 130 million
children with no schooling; and on the
other, UNnsco's budget is lower than
that of a medium-sized university in an
industrialized country. Under such con
ditions, what can Unesco do to make a
real difference?
A CATALYST
The new programme, which concen¬
trates on a few large-impact actions, has
two main goals: to provide basic education
to those children and adults who have no
access to it, while at the same time
boosting its quality and relevance. One
approach is to act as a catalyst. Thus
Member States will be able to draw largely
on the report to be submitted at the end of
1995 by the International Commission on
Education for the 21st Century, headed
by Jacques Delors.
"Even if our budget is a drop in the
ocean, Unesco can maximize its impact by
helping governments to act," says Mr.
Ordonez. "They are, after all, responsible for
the education of their citizens." A third of
the budget (almost $200 million) has been
earmarked for advisory services and other
activities to help Member States frame poli¬
cies and programmes, especially to assist
eastern European and central Asian coun¬
tries rebuild their education systems.
Another emphasis is closer co-opera¬
tion with a range ofpartners in the follow-
up to the World Conference on Education
for All held in 1990. At this gathering of
governments, international agencies, pro¬
fessional bodies and non-governmental
organizations, 155 governments com¬
mitted themselves to education for all
before the year 2000.
One example of inter-agency collabo¬
ration is a new project focused on nine of
the world's most populous countries:
Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Egypt, Mexico,
India, Indonesia, Nigeria and Pakistan,
which account for half the world's popu¬
lation, 72 per cent of the world's illiterates
and over half of out-of-school young
people. "By targeting our action on these
countries," says Mr. Ordonez, "we can
make a spectacular change in the world
situation." As part of the project, a Summit
of leaders of these countries will be orga
nized by Unesco and other UN agencies in
December.
Other target groups are the least devel¬
oped countries in Africa, the Arab states
and east Asia. "We will take an especially
hard look at legislation, policies and pro¬
grammes which help or hinder education
for women and girls," says Mr. Ordonez.
For example, a task force ofwomen will be
set up to plot action in support of basic
education in this area. Other target groups
are young children among refugees or with
special learning needs, young people in
urban slums, and cultural minorities and
remote populations.
The new "Scheme of Humanitarian
Assistance for Refugee Education"
(SHARE) responds to the needs of the 88
per cent of refugee children who receive no
schooling. It goes beyond the urgent but
short-term goal of providing shelter, food
and medicines, to develop a coherent
policy of refugee education in co-opera¬
tion with local and national authorities.
After initial experiences in Cambodia,
Somalia andAfghanistan, SHARE activities
are now underway in Slovenia and Croatia.
But placing more children in school
and more adults in literacy classes does
little good ifwhat they learn there is irrel¬
evant to their lives. That is why Unesco is
also focusing on the content and process
ofbasic education, with stress on boosting
the effectiveness of teachers and instruc¬
tors, school management, the measure¬
ment of learning outcomes, and the devel¬
opment of a prototype curriculum for the
first four years of primary education.
"Because too few children get more than
four years' schooling," says Mr. Ordonez,
"it is crucial that they learn something
essential there to survive in life. The three
R's, yes, but also health, nutrition and the
preservation of the environment."
So despite the great need and limited
resources, Unesco is, in the words of
Director-General Federico Mayor, "deeply
committed to making the right to educa¬
tion an everyday reality, not a remote
promise."
