Modern
times,
new
approaches
by Aya Wassef
WE are confronted nowadays with an
endless stream of new products and
ideas new brands of detergent, new
biscuit flavours, the latest issue of the news¬
paper, new economic and social policies, a new
world order and we might be tempted to think
that if something is new then it is by definition
modern, that the very word new is enough to
give the cachet of modernity to anything it is
used to describe. Newness today would thus
seem to be a kind of short cut to modernity,
rather than standing in an obvious or causal
relationship to it.
The widespread use of the word new is
symptomatic of both a state of affairs and a
state of mind. New things have always been
made, but the emphasis on newness as a selling
point has not always existed, still less the craze
for new things. Common sense long decreed
that a new object was one that had not been
tried and tested, that it was not necessarily sound
and might even be dangerous.
THE NEW IS DEAD,
LONG LIVE THE NEWt
Today's perception of newness is very different.
A thing must be new in order to be acknowl¬
edged as modern. Novelty is the price of moder¬
nity whence the paradox of a so-called
"modern" or even "post-modern" society that
still seems, through its frantic quest for nov¬
elty, to be in search of its own modernity.
The European pioneers of Modernism sig¬
nalled that they were breaking with tradition by
ascribing an intrinsic value to newness. This
choice of the new as a symbolic value was an
invitation to take a leap in the dark, to run the
risk of destabilizing generally accepted ideas,
but whereas for these intellectuals and artists
modernity signified a break with the past, within
our modernized society newness has gone its
own way.
Modernity has gone hand in hand with sci¬
entific progress and discovery, industrializa¬
tion, mass production, the consumer society,
the growth of the media and their increasing
influence on culture. With the development of
branches of trade and industry based on new
products, newness has come to be accepted as a
fact of life. It has lost its originality and its rev¬
olutionary connotations as the symbol of a
break with tradition, its sense of being ahead of
its time. It has lost its modernity. The consumer
society demands a rapid turnover of new prod¬
ucts, making sure that what's new today is obso¬
lete tomorrow. The opposite of new is no longer
old, but old-fashioned, yesterday's novelty that
has fallen out of favour. This is an ephemeral
form of newness, greeted with fanfares simply
Above, at a tribal meeting
in Papua New Guinea a
participant sports an outfit
made of tin cans.
Opposite page, M.L
horizontale V (1969), a
collage by the Polish-born
artist Roman Cieslewicz
based on Leonardo da
Vinci's Mona Lisa.
AYA WASSEF,
an Egyptian essayist, is a
consultant with a Paris
communications agency.
tú

A worker at a factory
producing computer chips
in Silicon Valley, California
(U.S.A.).
because for a fleeting moment it is new. The
new, the supreme triumph of the present over
the past, has become the ultimate expression of
a modernity that has reached fever pitch.
A NEW LOOK
AT THE OLD
Thus emptied of its substance, the new has
become the vector of the dominant values of
our societies. Through constant media expo¬
sure, it has taken over the media. A new product
is more efficient, nouvelle cuisine is healthier, a
new computer is more user-friendly, a new
lifestyle is more environment-friendly, new tele¬
vision is more interactive. Consumer goods are
marketed by associating them with the appeal of
qualities such as efficiency, environmental aware¬
ness, conviviality and comfort. They offer each
individual a slice of modernity and people buy
them in order to claim the values enshrined in
them in other words, to be modern.
A value considered modern in a society here
and now is not, however, necessarily so regarded
elsewhere and at a different time. In a space-time
relationship that has been radically affected by
^*.l iwi II
II* I _ y*Y**' 	 ->-,-'.. ' "tLj ^Tl.
14
faster and ever more sophisticated means of
communication, modernity seems to play tricks
with history and geography. When something
modern originating in the Western industrial
nations the so-called "North" is exported
to the "South" there is a certain time-lag, so
that what is modern in the South is a thing of the
past in the North.
Conversely, what is traditional in the South
is modern in the North. In the "developing"
countries, newness and modernity are often
associated with the acquisition of objects, of
products from the West, which itself went
through this phase some time ago. Modernity in
the industrialized countries, on the other hand,
is often related to a new way of looking at some¬
thing that already exists; paradoxical as it may
seem, "going back to one's roots", rediscov¬
ering in the present the values of the past, is
thus a modern phenomenon.
Significantly, "naturalness" is one of the key
values in a form of modernity that promotes
respect for the natural environment, ecology,
wellbeing, and the health-giving properties of
organically-grown foods and of natural medicine
based on ancient traditions. Naturalness as such
is not new; it is the appeal that it holds for us
today, as a significant new value, that makes it
modern.
THE LOGIC
OF THE NEW



This new approach to what already exists is dis¬
tinctively modern: it is the logic of the new the
process whereby something new is created from
what went before rather than newness in itself,
that is modern.
The artist who synthesizes images out of
images of the real world reduced to digital form
in a computer, the architect who turns a railway
station into a museum, the fashion stylist who
borrows sophisticated materials from the space
industry to create a garment, the designer who
fashions a piece of furniture from recycled mate¬
rial all these are creating something new by a
process of diverting and reshaping, by bor¬
rowing, reassembling and changing meanings.
These are the defining characteristics of an atti¬
tude, today considered modern, in a society
that has broken loose from any kind of histor¬
ical perspective and settled into a continuous
present: new things are wrought from old, dis¬
tant things are brought to our own doorstep, and
everything is seen throught the prism of moder¬
nity this is the logic of the new.
The logic of the new is a logic of retrieving
and reassembling. It scorns the passage of the
years, bringing together in space things that are
far apart in time. The logic of the new is indeed
distinctively modern.
