The long struggle
to provide
international
protection for
minorities
A PROTECTIVE FKAMI!WORK
by Janusz Symonides
44
JANUSZ SYMONIDES,
an internationally known
Polish lawyer, has been
Director of UNESCO's Division
of Human Rights and Peace
since 1989. He is the author of
more than 350 publications
(including 17 books), on
human rights, international
control, the law of the sea, the
protection of the environment,
international security, and the
theory of international
relations.
INTERNATIONAL regulations concerning the
protection of minorities go back to 1555
when, for the first time, the Peace of Augs¬
burg provided for the protection of religious
minorities. Later the Treaty of Westphalia in 1 648
and the Polish-Russian Conventions of 1767 and
1775 guaranteed rights of dissidents in Poland,
while the Vienna Treaty of 1815 gave religious
minorities not only freedom of faith but also cer¬
tain civil rights. Again, relatively far-reaching
obligations concerning the protection and equality
of all subjects were imposed on Turkey and the
Balkan States in 1 878 by the Treaty of Berlin.
The struggle of various national and religious
minorities to establish their independence in
Central and Eastern Europe was a prominent
factor in the First World War. Post-war treaties
provided for the protection of racial, religious or
linguistic minorities in these newly independent
states. The League of Nations was to supervise
imposed obligations, and violations were subject
to action by the League.
The United Nations Secretariat in 1947 took
the view that the League of Nations minority
system had ceased to exist, and favoured a new,
universal and individualistic conception of human
rights. United Nations action and standard-set¬
ting instruments were at that time dominated by
the individualistic concept of non-discrimina¬
tion and equality. The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights did not mention the "protection
of minorities", though during the debate pro¬
posals in this respect were presented. They were
rejected because of a fear that they might create
incentives for separatist tendencies and move
ments. In consequence, the Universal Declaration
contains only general clauses prohibiting dis¬
crimination.
The concept of protection of persons
belonging to minorities but not that of minori¬
ties themselves was accepted in the Interna¬
tional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
which declares: "In those States in which ethnic,
religious or linguistic minorities exist, persons
belonging to such minorities should not be denied
the right, in community with the other mem¬
bers of their group, to enjoy their own culture, to
profess and practise their own religion, or to use
their own language".
Similarly, the UNESCO Convention Against
Discrimination in Education (1960) takes into
account the right of persons belonging to minori¬
ties: ". . . It is essential to recognize the right of
members of national minorities to carry on their
own educational activities, including the main¬
tenance of schools and, depending on the educa¬
tional policy of each state, the use or the teaching
of their own language".
Among UNESCO Declarations, two are of
special importance for the recognition of the col-'
lective rights of minorities: the Declaration on
Race and Racial Prejudice (1978) which provides
that "All individuals and groups have the right to
be different, to consider themselves as different
and to be regarded as such", and the Declaration
of the Principles of International Cultural Co¬
operation stipulating that: "1. Each culture has a
dignity and value which must be respected and
preserved. 2. Every people has the right and the
duty to develop its culture".

The protection of minority rights has been
particularly advanced in the European region
within the Conference on Security and Cooper¬
ation in Europe (CSCE) process. The Helsinki
Final Act adopted in 1975 proclaimed that: "The
participating States on whose territory national
minorities exist will respect the right of persons
belonging to such minorities to equality before
the law, will afford the full opportunity for the
actual enjoyment of human rights and funda¬
mental freedoms and will, in this manner, protect
their legitimate interests in this sphere". This
formulation was in line with the concept still
prevailing in the 1970s that the elimination of
any discrimination, guarantees of equality before
the law, and the full enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms satisfy all claims that
persons belonging to minorities may present.
The Concluding Document of the Madrid
follow-up meeting, adopted in 1983, stressed the
importance of constant progress in ensuring the
respect for an actual enjoyment of the rights of
persons belonging to national minorities. A step
forward was made during the Vienna follow-up
meeting. In a new international atmosphere, at the
time of perestroïka and the elimination of ideo¬
logical controversies between East and West, the
Vienna Concluding Document, adopted in 1989,
imposed on participating states the duty of cre¬
ating conditions for the promotion of the ethnic,
cultural, linguistic and religious identity of
national minorities on their territory.
The 1990 Copenhagen meeting of the Con¬
ference on the Human Dimension of the CSCE
assumed that questions concerning national
minorities can only be solved within the frame¬
work of democratic policies based on the exis¬
tence of a state of law, effective judicial control of
government, pluralism and tolerance.
The Charter of Paris adopted by the CSCE
Summit Meeting on 21 November 1990 con
firmed that the ethnic, cultural, linguistic and
religious identity of national minorities should be
protected and conditions for the promotion of
that identity should be created.
In 1992, during the CSCE follow-up meeting
in Helsinki, a decision was taken to nominate a
High Commissioner for National Minorities.
The High Commissioner has no competence to
ajudicate but only to provide "early warning"
and, as appropriate, "early actions" at the earliest
possible stage in regard to tensions involving
national minority issues which have, in his
opinion, the potential to develop into a conflict
within the CSCE area, affecting peace, stability or
relations between participating states.
On 18 December 1992, the General Assembly
of the United Nations adopted the Declaration on
the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or
Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities. The
Declaration formulates the obligation of states to
protect the existence and identity of minorities
within their respective territories. Among the
rights of persons belonging to minorities, it lists:
the right to enjoy their own culture; to profess and
practise their own religion; to use their own lan¬
guage; to participate effectively in cultural, reli¬
gious, social, economic and public life, as well as
in the decision-making process concerning the
minority to which they belong; to establish and
monitor their own associations; to establish and
maintain without any discrimination free and
peaceful contacts with other members of their
group or other citizens of other states to whom
they are related by national or ethnic, religious or
linguistic ties.
The importance of this Declaration can hardly
be overestimated. It is the first comprehensive,
universal standard-setting instrument dealing
with the rights of persons belonging to minori¬
ties, and as such it will influence state practice and
national legislation. g
Opposite page and right:
wall paintings in support of
human rights adorn the
outer walls of the old
prison in Durban (South
Africa). They were
produced by members of
the Natal Visual Arts
Organization.
45
