Portobelo, a bridge
between two oceans
byJosé Serra-Vega UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
Ramparts and watchtower
of the fort of San Lorenzo.
In November 1502, during his fourth
and last voyage in search ofgold and
a passage to the Empire of the Great
Khan, Christopher Columbus took refuge
from Caribbean storms in a bay in what is
now Panama. As he wrote to the Spanish
monarchs, it was with a fleet of "leaking
ships, tattered sails, lost anchors and rig¬
ging, and very sick crews" that he arrived
in this bay which he named Portobelo
(fine harbour) because of its beauty and its
naturally protected site.
However a century was to elapse before
its favoured geographical situation made
Portobelo one of the great trading centres
between the Spanish colonies and the
home country.
A mercantile Odyssey
The fabulous riches ofPeru were brought
by sea from El Callao, the port ofLima, as far
as the Pacific shore of Panama. They were
then unloaded and carried overland to
Nombre de Dios, on the Caribbean shore,
where they were embarked for the perilous
transatlantic voyage to Seville.
At the end of the sixteenth century, the
Spaniards abandoned Nombre de Dios
ruined by the incursions of the Indians
and of the English pirate Francis Drake
for the new settlement of San Felipe de
Portobelo, hidden in the bay discovered by
Columbus. Surrounded by mountains and
forests, the new port was both easy to
defend and blessed with a beach onto
which ships could be hauled for repair.
Sanitary conditions at Portobelo left
much to be desired. Many of the 400 or
500 men from each fleet of ships sent out
from Seville died of malaria or dysentery in
the months following their arrival, espe¬
cially when they encountered the stifling
humidity of July and August.
There were violent rainstorms from
May to June, then again from July to 45

46
Inside the ramparts of Portobelo.
November, interrupted by a brief fine spell,
"the little summer of St. John." The set¬
tlers complained of the intolerable din
made by millions of toads and countless
monkeys living in the surrounding forests.
Occasionally a jaguar ventured into the
streets of the town and killed a pig, a dog
or a child. Snakebites were an everp resent
hazard, but the inhabitants wore trusty
amulets with which to protect themselves.
Armadas and mules
Every year an armada of some three or
four big galleons and a few small sailing
ships left El Callao on the 1,340-mile
voyage to Panama city, loaded with mer¬
chandise that had reached Lima by way of
Arequipa and Arica.
The land journey ofabout 100 kilometres
between Panama and Portobelo was highly
dangerous. After two days on muleback,
the convoy would arrive at Venta las Cruces,
where it divided in two. The first team
would embark on the muddy waters of the
Chagres river, infested with mosquitoes
and other insects, sailing in flat-bottomed
boats rowed by about twenty black oarsmen
or in pirogues hollowed from the trunks of
giant trees, each ofwhich could carry up to
two tons. Part of the cargo would have to be
jettisoned, ruined by the sun or the torren¬
tial rains, before it reached the shark-
infested estuary, which was defended by
the great fort of San Lorenzo. The convoy
then continued its journey along the coast
to Portobelo.
The other part of the precious cargo,
particularly the gold and silver, went over¬
land. The steep and narrow trail some¬
times disappeared altogether under the
luxuriant tropical vegetation. The trav¬
ellers walked in Indian file, with the team
leader keeping a strict eye on the mule¬
teers, who were regarded as potential trai¬
tors. There was also danger from maroons,
fugitive blacks who lived in the forests and
lurked near the towns waiting to carry off
the womenfolk when they came to draw
water or wash their linen beside the river.
They also served as informers and guides
for the English who coveted the Spanish
gold.
On the other side of the Atlantic, the
fleet which at regular intervals left the
River Guadalquivir in Andalusia for South
America also divided into two parts. One
set course for the Spanish Main (present-
day Colombia and Panama) and the other
for New Spain (Mexico).
The flagships were heavy galleons
whose task was to bring back to Spain the
precious metals of America. They were
armed with powerful cannon to beat off
attacks, whether from officially declared
enemies such as the ships of the Dutch
West India Company or freebooters such
as the pirates of Jamaica or Tortuga Island.
Their first landfall was Cartagena, a strong¬
hold commanding the Caribbean, from
which a tender sailed away at once to the
isthmus of Panama, carrying mail for the
Viceroy of Peru.
The Atlantic squadron usually reached
Portobelo in July-August or in December-
January, after a voyage of some seventy-five
days, driven by the tradewinds. To avoid
the September hurricanes, they had to
leave Seville by 20 August at the latest.
The forts and the Fair
In the seventeenth century, Portobelo
was protected by three forts: San Felipe de
Todofierro, whose 100 men and twelve
cannon guarded the entrance to the bay;
Santiago de la Gloria, which had a garrison
of 200 men equipped with thirty-two pieces

of artillery; and San Jerónimo, which stood
on a promontory overlooking the sea and
the port. In fact these were defences in
name only, for the humidity spoiled both
gunpowder and fuses. The soldiers, few in
number and poorly trained, could put up
little opposition to pirate attacks.
The Duke of la Palata, Viceroy of Peru,
had had the forts built by a noted Italian
engineer, Gianbattista Antonelli. The phys¬
ical labour was provided by English pris¬
oners, who were subjected to the humili¬
ation of being treated as slaves.
The town of Portobelo itself consisted of
two squares, a parish church and two con¬
vents, one of which served at times as a
hospital, a big stone-built customs-house
and about 100 houses made ofwood. Out¬
side the town lay the "Guinea suburb," a
district reserved for blacks, slaves or
freedmen, but this did not prevent the Euro¬
peans from visiting them during the fair.
The Portobelo fair, a great annual event
lasting forty-five days, transformed the
town into a gigantic market which had no
equal at that time, where goods from met¬
ropolitan Spain were traded against the
riches of the New World.
The sailors who came to Portobelo for
the fair set up in the square a vast tent
made of sails stitched together, under
which they piled up their merchandise,
each item bearing the name of its owner.
The town filled with Lima merchants, the
"Peruvian uncles" (as the Spaniards who
had returned to Spain from Peru were
called), and the agents of Spanish busi¬
ness houses on their way to Lima.
Spain sent cloth, carpets, metal tools,
paper, wine, arms and ammunition; the
prices were fixed by a commission repre¬
senting the authorities and the traders.
America offered cacao, quinine wood,
emeralds, vicuña wool, copper and bezoar
stones. Silver ingots were piled up inside
the customs-house and even at the road¬
side. If the chroniclers are to be believed,
there were neither brawls nor thefts.
The Portobelo fair ceased to be held in
the middle of the seventeenth century,
but it was long remembered with nostalgia
by the Panamanian bourgeoisie for the
influx of wealth that it brought.
Capture and decline
This short-lived influx of wealth
inevitably aroused the envy of the Dutch,
the English and the French. As early as
January 1596, the famous Elizabethan buc¬
caneer Francis Drake had tried to seize
Nombre de Dios, but died from an attack
of dysentery and was buried at sea.
In 1668 Henry Morgan, a Welsh gen¬
tleman turned pirate, set his sights on Por¬
tobelo. As was the custom, a pact was con¬
cluded between the members of his
expedition. Each sailor would receive one
share of the booty, the craftsmen (car¬
penters, blacksmiths, the surgeon and so
on) a little more than one share each, the
cabin-boys a half share, the captains two
shares and the commander-in-chief
Morgan himselffive shares. There was
also a system of awards and fines for
courage or cowardice, and compensation
for the loss of an arm or a leg.
Besides Englishmen, the expedition
included Dutch, Italians, Portuguese,
French, Africans, mulattos, and even a
Spaniard from Córdoba. A mixed bag of
ruined planters and ruffians from the back-
streets of European cities, they were nev¬
ertheless well-armed with excellent French
muskets and well-sharpened cutlasses.
Portobelo was easily captured after a
night landing and less than half a day of
sporadic fighting. The fortifications, with
their faulty cannon and powderless mus¬
kets, proved useless. The pirates, who lost
only eighteen men, locked up the towns¬
folk in the church, and celebrated their
triumph with wine and with women who
were dragged to the festivities against their
will. Then they began roasting the resi¬
dents' feet to force them to disclose where
they had hidden their savings. Portobelo's
wealthy traders eventually had to pay
100,000 pesos to avoid having the forts
demolished as a reprisal because the royal
treasury was virtually empty.
In 1739, the English Admiral Edward
UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
Vernon with just six ships in turn seized
the wretched town, and shortly afterwards
Spain terminated Portobelo's monopoly
of trade with the homeland as part of a
general move to liberalize colonial trade.
In any case, in order to avoid pirates, the
Spaniards now preferred the land route
from Lima to Buenos Aires or even the
long sea-voyage round Cape Horn. Por¬
tobelo slowly declined in importance and
became forgotten.
Today Portobelo is no more than a vil¬
lage with a few hundred inhabitants, slum¬
bering in the shadow of its ancient forts. Its
great pride is its miraculous statue of the
Black Christ, sculpted from a hardwood so
heavy that it does not float. Each year on 21
October, the statue is brought out from
the main church and carried in a religious
procession.
EZZE aHaaaHiB
JOSE SERRA-VEGA,
a Peruvian engineer and former staff member
of the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP), has worked in the Indian
subcontinent on technologies geared to
environmental conservation.
