Remofe msing
from weaiber hretastíng to agrialture, fishing
to edmation, tbe sotellite is a versatile tool for
development
mmmmRma
by Kiran Karnik
The S.H.A.R. (Sriharikota
High Altitude Range) Centre,
India's largest satellite
launching site.
ANY people regard technology as an
esoteric luxury reserved for the rich,
I developed countries. Nothing could be
further from the truth. Space technology, for
example, can make an immense contribution to
development, as can be seen from its applica¬
tions in India.
Developing countries are short of many
things: capital, food, land, skilled human
power. To help them to make the best use of
the resources that they do have and to locate
new ones, few technologies can match the
speed and reliability of satellite remote sensing.
The view from space sometimes indicates
features not detectable from the ground. An
example from India is the use of remote sensing
to locate groundwater. Reeling after two years
of severe drought, the states of Gujarat and
Rajasthan in western India faced a serious short¬
age of drinking water, especially in rural areas.
As part of the National Drinking Water Mis¬
sion, images taken by the US Landsat and
India's IRS-IA satellites were combined with
other data to identify promising sites in the
vicinity of drought-stricken villages.
The results were astounding. Use of scien¬
tific source-finding techniques (including
remote sensing) took the success ratio (drilling
that yielded water) to 90 per cent compared to
about 45 per cent using conventional tech¬
niques. Remote sensing has since been used to
locate prospective groundwater sites within a
radius of 1.6 kilometres of all villages that face
water scarcity. It is also helping in the more
important area of "harvesting" water by pin¬
pointing the most appropriate location for
15


16
Schooling by satellite.
Direct broadcasting by
satellite has been used in
India for twenty years.
check-dams and percolation tanks. This will
help to recharge groundwater and also reduce
wasteful water and soil run-off.
Deforestation is becoming an increasingly
serious problem in many developing countries
faced with adverse, and worsening, land to
population ratios. Satellite remote sensing can
help to determine ob|ectively the extent of
forest cover and to monitor change. In India,
for example, it established that the forest cover
was substantially less than was being claimed
and drew attention to the urgent need for affor¬
estation. As a result of this and a satellite-
based survey which indicated that about 30 per
cent of the country's area was wasteland, India
launched a major wastelands development pro¬
gramme in 1985.
STORMWATCH FROM SPACE


Indian fishermen are also reaping the benefits
of remote sensing from satellites. By analysing
satellite-derived data on sea-surface tempera¬
tures and other information, it is possible to
predict areas where the fish catch will be richer.
Fishermen in India's coastal areas eagerly await
the broadcasts that guide them to the best
fishing grounds.
With equal interest, and some trepidation,
Indian fishermen look out for information
about storms. Today they arc among the bene¬
ficiaries of a disaster warning system that has
been set up, on an experimental basis, on the
cyclone-prone East coast. One hundred special
disaster-warning stations (DWS) have been
created and linked to a central station at Delhi
via satellite. News about impending storms or
cyclones is sent via satellite directlv from Delhi
to DWS receivers. A siren is automatically acti
vated in villages likely to be affected, followed
by an audio warning and instructions about
what action to take. This satellite-based system
has proved to be more reliable than conven¬
tional communications.
For fishermen at sea, an Emergency Loca¬
tion Beacon is already available and an indige¬
nous version is being designed in India. In case
of a shipwreck, this will send a signal to be
picked up by a number of satellites, which will
relay it to a ground station. This station will be
able to calculate the precise location from
where the signal originated, so that rescue
teams can be directed there. Thanks to space
technology, headlines like "100 Fishermen Mis¬
sing" may one day be a thing of the past.
WEATHER FORECASTING
FOR FARMERS
In India, as in most developing countries, agri¬
culture is still largely dependent on the rains,
and accurate forecasts arc of crucial importance
in agriculture-dependent economies. Space
technology has revolutionized weather fore¬
casting and is contributing to better understand¬
ing of the global climate. Satellites play a crucial
role in collecting the data that are required.
India's INSAT 1 relays meteorological data
from a hundred remote, unmanned stations to
the central processing facility. It also takes pic¬
tures of the cloud-cover every half hour and
transmits them to a central station. Data from
other satellites and from conventional sources
are also available. Cyclones and storms are
tracked, and warnings sent out. INSAT "weath¬
er photographs" taken from 35,000 kilometres
above the Earth arc now a daily staple on
Indian TV. To make his weather forecast, the
KIRAN KARNIK,
of India, is director of the
Development and Educational
Communication Unit of the
Indian Space Research
Organization (iSRO). He was
involved in the conception
and development of India's
domestic satellite system,
INSAT, and played a major
role in the Indo-US Satellite
Instructional Television
Experiment (SITE). He was
responsible for the Kheda
Communications Project, a
unique experiment in local
developmental television,
which won the first Unesco-
International Programme for
the Development of
Communication (iPDC) prize
for rural communication.

Drawing irrigation water by
oxen In Rajasthan, India.
Remote sensing from
India's IRS satellites helps
to locate groundwater near
drought-stricken villages.
farmer continues to gaze at the sky for rain
clouds, but he also scans the satellite weather
photograph on TV.
But how to get the TV picture whether it
is the weather forecast, a new agricultural prac¬
tice or some song-and-dance entertainment to
the farmer, the villager, living in remote and
inaccessible parts of the country? Here again,
in developing countries with poorly developed
communications infrastructure, the best and
sometimes the only solution seems to be
space technology. Satellite-delivered TV (either
redistributed by a transmitter or a cable system,
or received directly through a small parabolic
antenna) is now fairly commonplace. Yet, to
the isolated village community, the little
antenna pulling the signal from the distant
satellite is a wondrous creation that is at once a
textbook, a newspaper, an instruction manual
and a fun-film: an invisible link that binds them
to the rest of humanity. A satellite-based radio
and TV network not only provides tremendous
cover, it is also cost effective, quick and reliable.
The INSAT system, which links all the
radio and TV transmitters in the country and
also has high-power quasi-direct-broadcast
channels, is also providing critical support to
education (at primary, secondary and tertiary
levels, to adults and continuing education) and
to health care.
All communications satellites provide sub¬
stantial capacity for telephony. In India, satel¬
lite communication makes it possible for a
person in a 


remote area in the northeast or
from one of the islands in the Bay of Bengal to
call a relative or a friend in one of the cities in
India or even abroad. Satellite communication
has abolished the concept of distance. With this
technology, it is as quick, easy and cheap to
communicate with a distant metropolis as with
a neighbouring community. Nowhere does this
mean more than in a poor, isolated village in a
developing country.
Remote sensing is also being used in India
for a variety of other applications, including
monitoring water and atmospheric pollution;
estimating crop acreage and yields; snow-melt
studies that help to predict the water inflow
into the reservoirs of North India, enabling
appropriate decisions to be made about
hydroelectric power generation and release of
water for irrigation; mineral prospecting; moni¬
toring urban growth so as to help in town-
planning decisions; recommending the ideal
alignment for canals and highways; studying
wildlife habitats; identifying suitable sites for
inland and brackish water fisheries.
Information is a prized resource, and one
that has traditionally been scarce in developing
countries. Now, through remote-sensing
satellites, a country can regularly and cost-
effectively gather information on all its crucial
natural resources. Combining the many inputs
from remote sensing and from other sources,
an ambitious National Natural Resources
Management System has been set up in India.
Technological advances very often tend to
widen the gap between developed and develop¬
ing countries. Space technology, however, is an
exception. It can turn the very backwardness of
a developing country to advantage by helping it
to "leapfrog" from obsolete systems to the most
cost-effective space-based one, without having
to invest in all the intermediate stages.
*