INTERVIEW
UMBERTO ECO
talks to
François-Bernard Huyghe
The Italian semiotician
Umberto Eco became known
to a worldwide audience
through his best-selling novel
The Name of the Rose
(1980), a murder mystery set
in medieval times which was
later adapted into a popular
film. This success has
tended to overshadow his
thinking on questions of
communication and other
social issues as developed in
such books as The Role of
the Reader and A Theory of
Semiotics. In this Unesco
Courier interview he
discusses the wider
significance of his work.
You are a semiologist. You study systems
of signs. What relevance does semiology
have for ordinary people? Can any prac¬
tical conclusions be drawnfrom work such
as yours?
I regard myself as a philosopher rather
than a semiologist, but general semiotics
could be said to have become the most
important branch of philosophy. Semiolo-
gists are perhaps more needed today than
ever before. We are living at the end of a
period of bipolarization; things seemed
simpler before, inasmuch as semiologists
from either of the two ideological camps
appeared intent on analysing and criticizing
the other's system, whereas now so many
cultures, so many languages and types of
discourse are clamouring for attention,
sometimes peacefully but sometimes by
force of arms, that it seems to me more
than ever necessary to compare and contrast
the various communication systems or
world-views. This is where semiology
comes in. I am not so credulous as to think
that semiology can bring peace to the
world, or that the Republic of Philoso¬
phers could ever be established. But semi¬
otics can play a role in education and civics;
it can, for instance, inculcate a certain sense
of relativity, of diversity and tolerance.
Work needs to be done among the
young, from a very early age, three or four
onwards, if only to teach them that there are
different languages, so that they grasp the
idea of diversity, to show them, for example,
that in different languages there are many
different names for a rabbit, and that those
who call a rabbit by some other name are
not necessarily barbarians. Since semiology
is concerned with all cultural systems and
not only languages, it could help to teach
children that there are other ways of
dressing, other eating habits, in other words
different forms of ritual behaviour in dif¬
ferent societies, each of which is mean¬
ingful within a given society.
That would be one way of teaching tol¬
erance and understanding. If future gener¬
ations of children could look upon dif¬
ferent systems with the same tolerance as
semiologists, we would have made extra¬
ordinary progress!
Having said that, enabling people to
understand each other better is not neces¬
sarily a panacea for the ills of the world.
Aspirin does not cure all ailments, but there
is no harm in sending some to places where
there is an epidemic of malaria.
I do not believe, either, that a shared lan¬
guage or culture necessarily means a broth¬
erhood of man: some of the worst con¬
flicts of the last 200 years have been civil
wars between people speaking the same
language.
Nevertheless, the mere idea ofa certain
cultural relativism unfailingly stirs up con¬
troversy. Where do you stand in the debate
that, rightly or wrongly, sets "cultural rel¬
ativism " against "universalism "?
Cultural relativism argues that our
understanding of the world takes various

Semiotics can
inculcate a certain
sense of relativity,
of diversity and
tolerance.
forms, from language to religion, and that
they lack a common basis of comparison.
Taking this argument to extremes, one
would have to conclude, for example, that
there was no possible way of translating a
concept expressed in the language of Hopi
Indians into English, or vice versa. That
would be absolute cultural relativism. As
Thomas Kuhn said about scientific para¬
digms, they may be incompatible but that
does not mean they cannot be compared
one with another. The Ptolemaic and
Copernican systems are indeed incompat¬
ible, but it is possible to compare them, to
show their complete independence of one
another, but also to understand how the
transition from one to the other came
about. The concepts of Moon or Earth are
not totally different in the two systems,
even though the two systems had different
ideas about their movements. The semio-
logical approach, that of cultural anthro
pology or any other approach that pays
heed to the diversity of cultures proceeds by
comparison. It looks for points where com¬
parisons can be made; it does not shut sys¬
tems off in totally different compartments,
but seeks out common ground between
them, and if it does not find any it respects
their differences. In my view there is no
unresolvable contradiction between cul¬
tural relativism and universalism.
To take another example, different lan¬
guages employ different categories to sig¬
nify even such simple things as wood. Eng¬
lish may use the word "timber" to
distinguish the construction material from
"wood" in the sense of woodland, but
French uses the same word "bois" in both
senses. Translation is possible all the same;
it bases itself on the possibility that two
different languages have a meeting-point; it

I obviously cannot tolerate human
sacrifice being practised in my own
country, but if I am told to go and
invade or colonize a country to stop
it being practised there I find myself
in a predicament.
is an operation whereby the target lan¬
guage tries to keep as much of the source
language as possible and transpose it into its
own terms. To translate from German into
French, I need to know German and to
grasp precisely where the two languages
differ. In that sense, there is nothing more
universal than translation.
Holism absolute cultural relativism
would have us conclude that translation is
impossible, and that there is no way of
enunciating atomic physics in a jungle lan¬
guage or of expressing the problems of
jungle-dwellers in Western languages.
A totally different mistake, but one of
equal gravity, would be to think that in
language there are such things as discover¬
able universals, and that the diversity of
languages could thereby be reduced to a
single language. If there are any universal
categories, they are such distinctions or
opposites as "up" and "down" or ideas
connected with our bodies like those of
being hungry or being full. There is no
need to look much further to find how
many things, including the concepts of
good and evil, differ even between peoples
that are relatively close to each other, but it
is still possible to compare two concepts of
good and evil and see what they have in
common.
We could take for our guidance the
metaphor of translation as an image
standing for a tolerant world outlook. In
purely theoretical terms, translation should
not be possible, and yet people do talk to
one another and translate or interpret one
another's words. In the abstract, by
sophistry, the impossibility of movement or
anything else can be proved, but in real life
people live and move about.
To my way of thinking, an organization
such as UNESCO should neither promote
cultural diversity to the point where the
cultures concerned can no longer compre¬
hend one another, nor claim to assert uni¬
versal values equally valid the world over.
The essential thing is to bring cultures into
contact. Any given culture is, generally
speaking, capable of "translating" another
into its own terms. Even if there are bound
to be inaccuracies, mistakes and distor¬
tions, it is better than total ignorance.
The same goes even for closely related
languages like Italian and Spanish. All Ital¬
ians think they can more or less under
stand Spanish and vice versa, but there are
misleading cognates in the two languages,
expressions that look alike but mean the
opposite of each other. Although this means
one has to be on the lookout for possible
mistakes and misunderstandings, it does
not, in practice, stop an Italian and a
Spaniard understanding one another rea¬
sonably well.
Understanding each other or under¬
standing the diversity of cultures is one
thing, hut making value judgements is
something else. Isn't there some point at
which, even if one has grasped the idea
that concepts ofgood and evil vary from
system to system, one has to exercise one's
own judgement as to good and evil?
This is one of the most serious prob¬
lems. Somebody once asked me if I looked
at such problems through the eyes of a
sociologist or of a moralist. My normal
answer is that if I have to study a culture
where cannibalism is practised, I do so with
a sociologist's eye, trying to understand
how it is that this culture views cannibalism
with approval, but as regards my own con¬
duct, the moralist in me tells me that eating
people is wrong. The problem arises when
cultures come into contact. Suppose that
some lost jungle tribe of cannibals emi¬
grated to this country. Should we, out of
respect for their culture, allow them to
practise cannibalism here or should we
forbid it because it is against the law here?
Situations like these have to be solved on

a case-by-case basis, by deciding where to set
the limits of toleration. If a certain culture
requires girls to wear the chador, I see no
reason to forbid it, since it does not violate
my own ethical principles. If a culture, as
happens with certain religious sects, bans
blood transfusions for sick children, there
starts to be a problem because the law in this
country says one must help a person in
danger. Cannibalism should be banned
because it violates our value system; we
have to tell the cannibal, "If you come here
you have to comply with certain rules."
Limits to what is tolerable have to be set, but
there are things that are truly "intolerable"
racism, cannibalism, murder and so on.
I obviously cannot tolerate human sac¬
rifice being practised in my own country,
but if I am told to go and invade or colonize
a country to stop it being practised there I
find myself in a predicament. The justifi¬
cation given for colonialism was this idea
that we should go to other people's coun¬
tries and "teach them right from wrong".
Problems like these have to be solved
case by case, and are often harrowing. In
Italy, for instance, one such question has
arisen over population groups that practise
. ritual infibulation. When they come to our
country, a difficulty arises because we con¬
sider infibulation an intolerable practice.
Some people have suggested there could
be special clinics where the infibulation
required by their customs could be carried
out. For myself, I consider infibulation to
border on the intolerable. But where is the
borderline between tolerable and intoler¬
able? That is the really difficult question.
There can be no hard-and-fast answer,
otherwise we would end up invading the
whole world from pole to pole just because
such and such a group might have customs
that are unacceptable by our standards.
These are questions that have to be dealt
with, sometimes painfully, case by case.
We have seen that "cultural relativism"
is a controversial subject, but there is
another controversy, almost its mirror
image, over a certain form of "global cul¬
ture" or "mass culture" disseminated by
the media and the so-called "cultural indus¬
tries". It has long been criticized by various
intellectuals, but your views are, are they
not, more optimistic than the opinions of
those you have dubbed "apocalyptic"?
As long ago as the 1960s I criticized intel¬
lectuals who reject mass culture from the
outside without taking the trouble to look
into it, and I stressed that we could make
positive use of these mass media. I am rather
more pessimistic now than I was then,
because anyone can see, for example, how
the ratings war has brought television pro¬
grammes down to their lowest common
denominator in terms of quality; but this is
like acknowledging that translation is pos¬
sible and then ignoring the reality that 80 per
cent of translations are appalling because
they have been done in a hurry, because
translators are badly paid and so on.
Let's not forget that mass culture can
also mean the use of new technologies for
distance education at university level. We
tend to equate mass culture with its most
obvious, most commercial outlets such as

The function of poets,
thinkers and philosophers is
to be attentive to what is going on
and bring it to other people's
attention so that they in turn can
think about it.
some forms of television; but mass culture
also represents an opportunity for easier
access to culture and education, through
diskettes, CD-ROM and suchlike, so why
not imagine UNESCO helping to set up a
vast mass communication system using radio
and television for educational purposes?
The main burden of my criticism in the
1950s and 1960s remains valid to the extent
that the intellectual community still in many
cases protests about the negative aspects of
mass culture without really involving itself
in an effort to correct them. You still find
people who say that we live in a civilization
of the image and that the printed word is on
its way out. That is wrong: mass culture
has resulted in an increase in the output of
printed matter and has given a boost to the
reading habit.
Some "apocalyptic" views are uncalled
for, but that does not prevent our observing
that television and the press are caught in a
downward commercial spiral of sensation¬
alism, making up bogus news items and
engineering sensational happenings. Mass
culture has, however, also taught children to
show greater respect for trees and has helped
to create greater environmental awareness.
There are positive sides to what the
media are doing, the growing awareness of
the nuclear threat for instance. I remember
that when we were trying to carry out anti-
nuclear propaganda in the 1960s with
demonstrations, books and so on, people
turned a deaf ear. They didn't even know
what radioactivity was and didn't want to
know. Thirty years on, thanks to films, tele¬
vision and the press, they all have a better
understanding of the nuclear menace. It is
through the mass media that people in some
countries have gained a better idea of the
dangers of pollution.
Both aspects have to be looked at: tele¬
vision can be conducive to extremes of vul¬
garity, abuse, inanity and so forth, but at the
same time it can raise public awareness of
atmospheric pollution, soften up resistance
to traffic control measures, for instance,
or persuade people to be careful how they
dispose of rubbish. These are realities that
must be faced, in the knowledge that some
new technology may be invented
tomorrow that may change the nature of
communications.
That said, some innovations that started
out positive may have become negative.
Mass car ownership seemed a good thing at
first but now road traffic needs to be kept
in check. What is needed is to avoid any
preconceptions while remaining vigilant.
Why are intellectuals more and more
often called on to show the way?
In a sense, this has been the case for thou¬
sands of years, since societies have always
needed to assign to certain of their mem¬
bers, priests or philosophers for example,
the role of discussing values.
It is possible, in the abstract, to imagine
a world in which each individual is by turns
a hunter, a fisherman, a thinker and so on,
but for the time being, as long as society is
made up of people most of whom cannot
devote themselves to this question of values,
there have to be "Indian reservations"
where society continues to support people
whom it requires to fulfil this role. The
problem is that they need to be regarded
not as oracles but as channels through
which the discussion about values gets to
the others. This is the function of poets,
thinkers and philosophers, to be attentive
to what is going on and bring it to other
people's attention so that they in turn can
think about it. This role we assign to intel¬
lectuals is, I think, almost a physiological
function that the body politic cannot do
without. Regarding intellectuals as oracles,
on the other hand, is more like a social dis¬
ease. Here again it is a question of moder¬
ation. As far as I am concerned, I do not
regard it as any part of my mission to be
consulted as an oracle, which is why I avoid
giving interviews. O
8
