Fifty trillion watts of
electricity were produced by
the Saturn machine (above)
during tests to simulate
space attacks by radiation-
producing weapons at a
Strategic Defense Initiative
("Star Wars") test site at
Sandia (United States).
BAHGAT ELNADI AND ADEL RIFAAT

Making disarmament work
by Dominique David
What can be done
to reduce swollen
arms budgets?
THE arguments in favour of disarmament
have always been based on three main
assumptions: that a) it is immoral to accu¬
mulate stocks of weapons; b) this build-up is a
threat to peace, and c) the economic cost is
reflected in artificial or misdirected development.
The moral argument has always been put for¬
ward strongly against chemical weapons and,
after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, also against
nuclear weapons. The industrial production of
arms has permitted long-drawn-out wars and
enabled unprecedented violence to be unleashed.
The cost of modern weaponry is hard to sustain
and has literally devastated the economies of
some countries.
However, these simple facts have not sufficed
to win full acceptance for the concept of general
disarmament. That idea was widely endorsed in the
1950s. It gave way in the 1960s to the more real¬
istic, but at the same time more limited, notion of
arms control. The major nuclear powers negoti¬
ated to reach agreement on certain rules of coex¬
istence and on the development of their respective
arsenals. The aim was no longer to disarm or even
to freeze the growth of arms stockpiles, but to
impose a framework on that growth in areas where
the powers were willing to engage in discussions
with each other. At no time did the American
and Soviet stockpiles of nuclear weapons grow
more rapidly than during the Strategic Arms Lim¬
itation Talks (SALT) in the 1970s.
The changes which took place in the late 1980s,
especially in the former USSR., enabled real agree¬
ments on the withdrawal and destruction of

IO
What justification
can there be for
the image of rich
countries which
believe nuclear
weapons are good
for themselves but
unacceptable for
others?
weapons to be negotiated and concluded. How¬
ever, the optimism soon faded. The 1987 US-
Soviet Treaty on the Elimination of Interme¬
diate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles, the 1990
Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe
(CFE) and the 1991 START 1 Treaty1 on strategic
missiles only concerned limited quantities of
weaponry. Moreover, the application of these
treaties is fraught with uncertainty following the
break-up of the Eastern bloc. Last but not least,
the vast area of the South is not covered by any
global or regional disarmament process.
POLITICAL OBSTACLES
Hopes of disarmament are thwarted by countless
difficulties and objections, particularly of apolit¬
ical nature. The creation of armed forces and
industries to guarantee self-sufficiency in the pro¬
curement of military hardware and the adaptation
of these resources to technical progress, are priv¬
ileges of national independence. The period of
decolonization which began at the end of the
Second World War naturally led to considerable
growth in conventional arsenals belonging to the
new sovereign states. Agreements encompassing
the Third World might be viewed by some of
these countries as intolerable limitations on their
sovereignty. How can these countries be pre¬
vented from thinking that the Western nations
only discover the dangers of weaponry when they
have no prospect of effecting new sales? What
justification can there be for the image of rich
countries which believe nuclear weapons are good
for themselves, but unacceptable for others?
Moreover, translating the concept of disar¬
mament into law is a very complicated business.
Treaties leading to a general ban on weapons are
very difficult to draw up and even more difficult
to implement and enforce. Regional agreements
are more effective but presuppose the settlement
of existing conflicts and the opening of a sincere
political dialogue between the countries of a par¬
ticular region.
In Europe, one of the main obstacles to the
disarmament process at present resides in the
disappearance of the states that were to nego¬
tiate and apply these accords. The break-up of the
Warsaw Treaty Organization (WTO), the frag¬
mentation of the former USSR and the weakening
of certain countries, illustrate the scale of the
problems to be solved. What is more, no one
can predict what the situation will be in a few
years' time. To date, only one of the agreements
negotiated in recent years has been put into effect.
Despite the rapidity of political change in Europe,
the arms stockpiles there today are not much
different from those of a decade or so ago.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC HURDLES
In the past fifteen years, some Third World coun¬
tries have made a breakthrough into the arms
trade. Arms exports have now become an impor¬
tant sector of their economy. The proliferation of
local conflicts has broadened some markets, in
particular the market for light weapons requiring
medium level technology. The new exporting
countries are well placed to supply these markets.
The saturation of some traditional markets of the
Western countries therefore does not imply that a
global reduction has already taken place in world¬
wide arms production and in the arms trade or
even that such a reduction is now under way.
In Europe, countries like Russia and the former
Czechoslovakia soon realized that economic and
social considerations simply made it impossible for
them to close down their arms production facili¬
ties in Russia, this is the only sector of the
economy that seems able to remain self-financing
in convertible currency hence the sale of arms by
some countries of the former Warsaw Treaty on
the markets of the South at knockdown prices.
This is the key problem because it involves the rad¬
ical conversion of an economy structured around
military production. This trend seems impossible
to reverse in the short term.
DOMINIQUE DAVID,
of France, holds a post of
special responsibility under
the director of France's
Institute of International
Relations (IFRI), and is a
professor at the Saint-Cyr
Special Military School. He
is the author of Conflits,
puissances et stratégies en
Europe (Conflicts, Powers
and Strategies in Europe),
Brussels, 1992.

In the countries of the North, the arms
industry is often a guarantee of their presence in
the race to develop high technology. The Strategic
Defense Initiative (the famous "Star Wars")
launched by the Reagan administration in 1983
was a striking example of this phenomenon. The
will to disarm, indissociable from a reduction of
exports, is therefore obstructed by the need to
safeguard systems of high value research which
cannot readily be transferred or converted to
other sectors. Some observers even fear that
stockpiling in quantitative terms may be replaced
by technological sophistication, which would of
course be a way of circumventing the very con¬
cept of disarmament.
RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES
Although progress towards a world with smaller
arms stockpiles is politically, economically and
technically hard to achieve, there can be no doubt
that it is a strategic imperative. First of all, no the¬
oretical definition of an optimum quantity of arms
can be adduced. Neither the "militarist" theory
"the more weapons there arc, the safer things arc",
nor the "pacifist" theory, "the less weapons there
arc, the safer things are" holds water. Specific
cases must be examined. But the world situation
today gives cause for permanent anxiety.
In the North, the stocks of American and cx-
Sovict nuclear arms no longer reflect any logic of
strategic conflict. Although these weapons were
strictly controlled by the political powers of yes¬
terday and arc still under relatively firm control
today, we can have no certainty about the future.
The hypothesis of a rapid deterioration of the sit¬
uation also applies to conventional weapons. The
European arsenals are over-endowed: are they
now destined to be spread still more widely, to
follow the fragmentation of communities and so
nourish interminable conflicts? After escaping
from the gravitational pull which used to be
exerted on them by the East-West conflictual
system that has ceased to exist, these weapons
may well now be used in local conflicts or escape
beyond the frontiers of Europe to regions which
arc already overarmed.
In the South, the concept of proliferation is
often perceived as an idea of the North: in other
words, arms proliferation is seen as beginning
where its control by the rich countries ends. Be
that as it may, the quantities of weaponry and the
factors which make for destabilization arc
increasing in many places throughout the world.
In the aftermath of the Gulf War, technologies
whose effectiveness was demonstrated in this
theatre have been marketed widely. The great
post-Soviet sell-off has resulted in the rapid
transfer of vast amounts of weaponry. What is
more, these traditional suppliers have been joined
by many Third World manufacturers. Supply is
thus increasing, but so too is demand. Some latent
conflicts which had hitherto been held in check
by the Moscow-Washington relationship arc
now able to break out freely.
Even if it docs not at present reflect the true
situation, the image of a North united in
upholding its wealth and military might (an image
Details from War (1955,
opposite page) and Peace
(1956, above), two murals
by the Brazilian artist
Candido Portinari. They
adorn the delegates' lobby
of the General Assembly
building at United Nations
Headquarters in New York.
1. Strategic Arms Reduction
T.ilks (see glossary on page 39)
to which the Gulf War lent credibility) could
encourage some countries of the South to acquire
weapons in the face of what they perceive as at
best a system of exclusion and at worst a threat.
Unfortunately, this conjunction of factors seems
to point at one and the same time to a prolifera¬
tion of conflicts and to an increase in their level
of technological sophistication.
REGIONAL NEGOTIATIONS AND
AGREEMENTS
Disarmament is less than ever a spontaneous
process. In addition to the traditional economic
arguments after all, capital gains from arms
exports can never be anything other than tempo¬
rary and the moral and political arguments, there
are now pressing strategic and security consider¬
ations. The time has come for a global reduction of
stocks and the regulation of weapons transfers.
But a combination of many factors is needed
to bring about the success of bilateral or multi¬
lateral negotiations and the implementation of the
resulting treaties. The most important of these fac¬
tors, such as adequate political cohesion, do not
always exist today to a sufficient degree for pro¬
nouncements to be made about the future with
any certainty. Moreover, disarmament is not a
meaningful concept in isolation: it is the reflection
and the product of a thaw in relations and of
political trust. Conversely, arms stockpiling is
the expression of tension and closed attitudes.
Such attitudes are particularly redoubtable today.
The changes that have taken place in the past
five years are both an opportunity and a threat. Are
political leaders sufficiently aware of these risks to
place the need for disarmament in the forefront of
their preoccupations? If they are not, loose cannon
may soon pose a serious threat to our future. I I
