BOOKS OF THE WORLD
by Calum Wise
JULIO CORTÁZAR,
A LITERARY ACUPUNCTURIST
"There was a time when I thought a lot
about axolotls. I went to see them in the
aquarium of the Botanical Garden and
spent hours just looking at them, watching
their immobility, their obscure move¬
ments. And now I am an axolotl." This
short paragraph, the opening passage of
one of Julio Cortázar's best-known short
stories, beautifully captures their narra¬
tive flow, in the course ofwhich a transition
occurs, concealed by subtle shifts of lan¬
guage, from one world to another.
From a starting point firmly set within
a familiar context, the reader is irresistibly
drawn, by a sequence of commonplace
details that accumulate until they gradually
change the original setting, towards some
completely different destination along an
apparently uneventful route. It is rather as
if, setting off from home in a precise direc¬
tion and with a particular goal in view, you
arrive in a totally unfamiliar place.
But to discuss Cortázar's work only in
terms of transgressing the rules of narra¬
tive and scrapping the conventions would
be to overlook this author's greatest
achievement: the creation of a multi¬
dimensional universe in which all the bar¬
riers are down, where there are only influ¬
ences and gentle transitions, from life to
death, from childhood to maturity, from
bachelorhood to marriage all of them
cleavages that, in our everyday world,
demand complex rites of passage but
which Cortázar condenses to a few gentle
and terribly intelligent words.
Born in Brussels in 1914, a school
teacher in Argentina, settled in Paris 1 952,
naturalized French 1981, translator for
Uni:sco, admirer of the French surrealist
writer Alfred Jarry, died 1984these are
the bald facts. The rest is literature in
other words, immersion in a universe
where the geometry of time and of the
way the world is organized obeys much
more complex, flexible and shifting laws
than those that govern our daily life.
This weighty 1,000-page volumein
which all Cortázar's stories are gathered
together between the same covers for the
first time includes, besides some novellas
hitherto unpublished in French from a
collection called Final del Juego, (1956;
1964), a collection of short stories unpub-
Julio Cortázar (1914-1984).
lished even in Spanish, In. otra orilla. These
twelve stories, written between the end of
the 1930s and 1945, are pure as the icy
peaks of the Andes and scalpel-sharp. A
few will remind some readers of certain
early episodes in the US television series
Twilight Zone, and all of them carry the
emotional overload that was to make all his
later writings so powerful.
Over time, Cortázar's texts became
more complex. The narrative structures
pile up and intermingle. Some could serve
as the literary embodiments of the Dutch
artist M.C. Escher's visual paradoxes
("Sobremesa" for example). Cortázar's
humour, present just below the surface,
fluctuates between irony, the absurd, and
a casual cynicism that he handles rather in
the manner of Dino Risi (in Historias de
cwnopios y defamas, 1962, for example).
Sometimes, however, it blows up into a
storm of frightening and devastating force,
like some wild scene carefully constructed
by Fellini and Pasolini together, as in Los
ménades, which describes a concert of
classical music where, in essence, nothing
happens beyond what the reader is
capable of imagining.
Demolishing reality
The French critic Jacqueline Outin has
written that "one of the problems that
most preoccupies Cortázar is that of time:
he wants to destroy conventional notions
about it. . . ." The best example of this
occurs in "The man who lies in wait," an
internalized account of the downfall of a
diabolically gifted cannabis-smoking jazz
saxophonist, who breaks off in the middle
of the best recording sessions to accuse
the other musicians of playing something
that he "has already played tomorrow."
More than merely exploring a theme or a
problem, Cortázar here shows his writer's
hand for an instant and half-admits that
his gigantic scheme is nothing less than
that of demolishing reality. With a nuanccd
style and sensitivity much more subtle
than the science-fiction of Philip Dick but
showing the same keen intelligence (born
of a hyper-acute awareness of the sur¬
rounding world) so keen that it can some¬
times transfix us without our noticing, he
pierces the flesh of the West at certain sen¬
sitive points in a kind of literary acupunc¬
ture of modern mythology, opening up
intriguing and dizzying perspectives on
the flaws in our universe.
In metaphysics as in syntax, in the
writing as in the subject matter, Cortázar
is an experimenter. This relationship
between author and text, which has the
effect of placing the reader on the stage
while the writer remains in the wings, is
neatly and precisely illustrated in a very
short story called "Continuidad de los par¬
ques", a flamboyant and, to the protag¬
onist, fatal demonstration of Cortázar's
ability to twist a story around on itself, to
wring the neck ofall logical reasoning and
to replace it by an apparent irrationality. In
this trompe-l'oeil of a tale the reader
passes at lightning speed from the story
proper into the story within the story,
which finally replaces the story and thus
becomes defacto the story itself.
This entire volume has about it a terrible
feeling of latent anguish, an elusive under¬
current running through every story the
muffled and ceaseless murmur of a nearby
river from which the damp can be felt rising
yet which remains always out of sight,
hidden by exuberant literary vegetation. In
"Relato con un fondo de agua," the vision
the narrator has of his own corpse drifting
gently by under the sparkling radiance of
tropical moonlight is very revealing of the
writer's fears ofan underlying despair that,
like the thinner used in tempera painting,
tinges all his work. Even more revealing is
his highly ambiguous way of dealing with
childhood, a recurrent theme in Cortázar
and one which, of all his themes, undoubt¬
edly benefits the most from his peerless
style. Mario Vargas Llosa has described that
style as follows: "A style which marvellously
imitates the spoken word, the fluid casual-
ness ofdaily conversation, the spontaneous
expression, without embellishment or pre¬
tension, of the man in the street. Of course,
it's all an illusion. . . . The language of
Cortázar is itself a fiction, magnificently
wrought, an artifice so effective that it seems
natural, a way of speaking that is drawn
from life	"
To enter the world of Cortázar is what
it must be like to travel weightless in space: 49

BOOKS OF THE WORLD
so radically are one's perceptions over¬
turned that one is left for a while disori¬
ented. He and James Joyce must be the
only writers who could spurn the struc¬
tural limits of language and thus convey to
the reader the vision ofa certain field of lit¬
erary and human expression where the
rational becomes no more than a special
aspect of the fantastic.
(This volume forms part of the Unesco
Collection of Representative Works).
Julio Cortázar: Nouvelles (1945-1982)
Edition intégrale. Translated into French
from Spanish by Laure Guille-Bataillon and
by Françoise Campo-Timal and Françoise
Rosset. Preface by Mario Vargas Llosa
(translated by Albert Bensoussan).
Gallimard, Paris, 1993. 1036 pp., 290 French
francs ISBN 2-07-072913-3.
RETRACING THE SILK AND
SPICE ROUTES
The general term Silk and Spice Routes
covers the many trade routes which, from
the first century B.C. onwards, linked the
Orient and the West by a chain of posts
where goods were bought, sold and
bartered.
Flexible and ever-changing, these itin¬
eraries were influenced by fluctuating
political circumstances as well as by the
terrain, in both cases taking the line of
least resistance. For more than fifteen cen¬
turies, empires rose and fell along their
way, causing only temporary and minor
detours. Thus from Changan (Xi'an), the
ancient capital of the Chinese Empire, as
far as Kashgar, the 8,000-kilometre Silk
Route passed south of the Gobi Desert;
then, after crossing the Pamir mountain
range ("the Roofof the World"), it divided
into two. Depending on the political and
trading situation at the time, it either
turned northwest towards the Aral Sea
then back down to eventually reach Con¬
stantinople (Istanbul) after crossing the
Black Sea; or it swung south of the Caspian
Sea and crossed Iran, Mesopotamia and
the Anatolian Plain on its way to Venice
and Genoa via Constantinople.
The Spice Route was even longer, a
sea-passage of more than 15,000 kilome¬
tres around the entire Asian continent.
Sailing south from P'anyu (Canton)
through the Yellow Sea, merchant ships
steered their winding way by Borneo,
Sumatra and Malaysia, then hugged the
Chola and Malabar coasts of India before
heading up the Gulf or rounding the Ara¬
bian Peninsula to the Red Sea in order to
gain access overland to the Silk Route and
the Mediterranean.
These long and often dangerous jour¬
neys through many lands and cultures can
be relived in the space ofsome fifty pages
in these two books, each abundantly illus¬
trated with maps, photographs, engrav¬
ings and drawings accompanying descrip¬
tions of the civilizations met with on the
way. Mainly intended for young people,
the stories they tell guide the reader
through the history and geography of the
subject. Each stage of the journey is
described in short instructive chapters in
which great events are skilfully blended
in with anecdotes, human touches that
bring the subject to life. Well furnished
with cross-references from one to the
other, the two books are written in a clear,
simple style and offer a broad overview of
these two great trade routes, so very dif¬
ferent yet so inseparable from each other,
which are still in use to this day, though
updated to modern requirements.
A preface by Federico Mayor, Director-
General of Unesco, begins by recounting
the Chinese legend ofthe discovery ofsilk,
and each book includes at the back a glos¬
sary of unfamiliar names and words as
well as a "Spice Routes time chart" and
an index. These attractive little volumes
form part of the "Integral Study of the Silk
Roads: Roads of Dialogue" project which
Unesco launched in 1987.
THE SILK AND SPICE ROUTES
Exploration by Land, by Paul Strathern.
Belitha Press/UNESCO, 1993, 50 pp.,
72 French francs. ISBN I 85561 160 0 or
(ISBN Unesco) 92 3 102761 I.
Exploration by Sea, by Struan Reid.
Belitha Press/UNESCO, 1993, 50 pp.,
72Frs. ISBN I 85561 161 9 or
(ISBN Unesco) 92 3 102762 X
