a
The spare parts syndrome
by Bernard Teo
Above, a liver transplant
operation in a Paris
hospital.
BERNARD TEO,
of the Republic of Singapore,
has been teaching moral
theology and bioethics at the
Yarra Theological Union in
Melbourne (Australia) since
1991.
NE of the marvels of modern medicine is its
ability to repair people's lost or impaired
bodily functions with artificial devices
such as the pace-maker, the hearing aid, pow¬
ered limb prostheses and the dialysis machine.
Organ transplantation represents a further step
along this ingenious path. For patients suffering
from vital organ diseases, organ transplantation
may offer the only hope of survival.
The capacity to repair human beings brings
out the best in us. Unless we take care, however,
it may also bring out the worst our capacity to
fragment ourselves and our communities, and
our propensity to exploit and to dehumanize.
Provided that there is a scrupulous regard
for ethics in transplantation, the repairable human
can be a powerful symbol of our shared humanity,
adaptability and global interdependence, for suc¬
cess in organ transplantation would be impossible
without national and international co-operation
and exchange. To take one example, the devel
opment and widespread use of powerful
immunosuppressives, which are crucial to the
success of any transplant programme, are possible
only because of international collaboration and
a sense of compassion for the sick.
Organ transplantation differs from other
kinds of health care in that it depends upon full
participation by the community. A government
may legislate ethically sound transplant policies
and commit sufficient resources to ensure the
success of a transplant programme, but its efforts
will be doomed to failure if the public is unwilling
to donate organs and provide support.
Many countries have adopted policies to
ensure fair public access to donated organs, in
recognition of a demand that factors such as ability
to pay, race, gender, social status or religious beliefs
should not be barriers to anyone who really needs
a transplant. If a transplant programme is per¬
ceived by the public as denigrating a person's
humanity, or as introducing values that divide the 31

Community, public goodwill and support in the
form of donated organs may come to a halt.
However, there is a great danger that trans¬
plant technology may encourage the objec-
tivization of the human being into a mere col¬
lection of body parts, subject to exploitation for
consumerist and utilitarian purposes.
Proposals to allow commerce in human body
parts constitute a fundamental attack on human
dignity and identity. To turn human body parts
into exchangeable commodities is to alienate a
person from his or her bodily life and under¬
mine human dignity and identity. The humani¬
tarian and communitarian foundation of organ
transplantation would be corrupted by such a
consumerist approach.
Trade in human body parts would also frag¬
ment the community, since it would transform
communal relationships into those of contractual
buying and selling; the poor would be exploited
while the wealthy would be able to buy their
way onto the priority list of transplant candi¬
dates. It would also undermine international
goodwill. It is well known that wealthy transplant
candidates from richer countries are in a position
to purchase organs from the poor in poorer coun¬
tries, often under exploitative conditions, and
that the poor are brought to the wealthier coun¬
tries to complete the commercial transactions.
Such practices not only shift the problems of
wealthier nations onto poorer ones, but also strip
the poor of their dignity by turning them into
commodities. There is an urgent need for inter¬
national co-operation to deal with these problems.
Governments should make policies to control
the situation, and impose penalties on their
nationals who cross international boundaries to
purchase organs from the poor. Those involved
in transplant programmes should also screen
patients and organ donors more thoroughly
before beginning any procedure.
Above all, the repairable human may reflect
an extremely myopic view of life: an aggressive
preoccupation with the preservation of our bodily
life, regardless of the financial and human costs,
points to an inability or refusal to confront the
reality of human mortality and to address the
question of whether the full meaning of human
existence may not be more than the preserva¬
tion of life as we know it.
Automating artificial limbs
in Haifa (Israel).
32
