Marcel Jousse, theorist of gesture
TUE French thinker Marcel Jousse (1886-
1961) was a pupil of the neurologist Pierre
Janet and the noted sociologists Lucien
Lévy-Bruhl and Marcel Mauss. In 1924 he published
Le Style oral rythmique et mnémotechnique chez les
verbo-moteurs,' a work that provided the basis for a
new approach to the study of oral literature.
Born to an illiterate peasant family in the Sarthc,
an area of France in which oral traditions were
still very much alive, Jousse studied Latin, Greek,
Hebrew and Aramaic as a young man. He was
ordained to the priesthood in 1912, and entered the
Jesuit novitiate in the following year.
While lecturing at the School of Anthropology
in Paris from 1932 to 1950, he carried out experi¬
mental research into the origins of gesture and
language, and devised a terminology of his own to
express his concepts.
Joussc's studies, which centred on his belief in
the historical reality ofJesus, focused largely on the
world of the Bible. His "gestural anthropology",
which predated Claude Lévi-Strauss's revolu¬
tionary 1958 work L'Anthropologie structurale
("Structural Anthropology"), was based on three
fundamental laws: rhythmic imitation, formula-
dependence and bilateralism.
Jousse believed that the human mind and body
arc linked, forming a single, composite being, and
that the universe in which the individual exists is a
place of continuous interaction. Taking as his
-
starting point Aristotle's statement that "Man is the
most imitative of creatures; it is through imitation
that he acquires knowledge",2 Jousse elaborated a
comprehensive "mechanism" of rhythmic imita¬
tive gestures copied by human beings from their sur¬
roundings. Of this concept of rhythmic imitation, he
wrote that people are "Naturally imitative, make
themselves a mirror of the real world around them
and echo its interactions. Mimicking gesture, they
seek to express themselves in a spontaneous and
universal language of gesture. When they mimic
sound . . . the oral language they utter is of an ethnic
and particularized nature."1
Jousse went on to discuss the link between cor¬
poral and oral expression, insofar as simple lan¬
guage structures follow the same pattern as the law
of rhythmic imitation. Herein lies the root of
thought. This physical link between thought and
action is the basis of a process of stereotyping of ges¬
tures and abstraction of verbal combinations that
underlies the development of language, mentalities
and cultures. This process is formula-dependence:
"Human gestures, whether conscious or uncon¬
scious, tend to be repeated, and naturally lead to a
form of stereotyping that facilitates expression."4
The premise of Jousse's third law, bilateralism,
is the symmetrical structure of the human body
which, he believed, shapes all forms of human
expression, mental and physical. "And human
beings were to divide up the world as their bilateral
structure dictated," he wrote. "They created a
'right' and a 'left', an 'in front' and a 'behind', an
'above' and a 'below'. With themselves, the people
responsible for the division, in the centre."5
Marcel Jousse's investigations have been influ¬
ential, particularly in the field of cthnolinguistics,
and have opened up new lines of scientific enquiry.
Although overshadowed for a time by the rise of
structuralism in the human sciences, his work is
attracting renewed attention, notably through its
application to anthropology and in education.
1 The Oral Style, translated by Edgard Sicnacrt and
Richard Whitakcr. Garland Publishing, Inc., New York
and London, 1990.
2 Aristotle, The Poetics, IV, 2.
3 Marcel Jousse, L'Anthropologie du geste, Gallimard
publishers, Paris, p. 43.
4 Op. cit., p. 329.
5 Op. cit., p. 203. 19
