Editorial by Federico Mayor
WHATis a minority? Does a group become a minority simply by virtue of regarding itself
as one? Can any and every minority invoke the right to self-determination? Is it con¬
ceivable that the map of the world could ever be redrawn to conform with ethnic cri¬
teria? Are there any general principles for ensuring peaceful coexistence between majorities and
minorities? These are some of the questions raised in the following pages, in an issue of the
UNESCO Courier which does not claim to be an exhaustive treatment of the problem but an
attempt to investigate its complexity. For myself, I should particularly like to emphasize the
worldwide dimension of this question, because it throws light both on its most topical aspects and
on conditions for a long-term solution.
The context in which the issue of minorities arises today is indeed very closely related to the gen¬
eral characteristics of the age. It is no longer a context of sealed frontiers and isolated regions but
one of an integrated global system in which the links of interdependence in finance, technology and
communications are growing closer each day. Political, industrial or military decisions made at one
end of the world very rapidly have an impact at the other. Because of the scale of production units
and the pressures of international competition, regional economic groupings are imposing increasing
constraints upon individual countries, to the detriment of their national preferences. Certain role
models, symbols and tastes in clothing and food are being propagated worldwide by the mass media.
As a reaction against this trend towards globalizationwhich is accompanied by growing inequal¬
ities between the different world regions people everywhere are seeking to defend themselves against
encroaching uniformity and dehumanization. Individuals and communities alike are thereby
voicing their desire to exist, to use their powers of creation, to play an active part in national and
international life. Where there is no peaceful and democratic context in which these aspirations can
find an effective outlet, extremist, demagogic, xenophobic and even racist ideas begin to spread, trans¬
forming the legitimate desire to affirm identity into an aggressive attitude, tending towards isola¬
tionism and exclusion and accompanied by a rejection of universal values, disregard for the rights
and liberties of the person, and a refusal to seek common ground or to teach the values of tolerance.
The problem of minorities today is a specific instance of this general phenomenon: the global¬
ization not only of economic networks but also of humanist values means that no feasible solution
can be based on the establishment of ethnic, national or religious frontiers. Minorities whether
they be cultural communities within a nation or entire regions confronting a centre of industrially
developed power are destined to achieve fulfilment as part of a general democratization of public
life, both within each state and worldwide.
The lives of peoples, large and small, today come within the scope of a balance that needs to be
established between rights and duties in relation to humankind as a whole, but this balance will only
be accepted by all if it commands the allegiance of all, and this in turn presupposes absolute
respect for the freedom and dignity of minorities failure to respect them has so often been the jus¬
tification for breakaway movements.
Culture is clearly a crucial area of self-fulfilment, the realm in which the particular genius of a
people or an individual finds freest expression provided, however, that it is something other than
a memory of the past, looking back towards a mythical identity, provided that it becomes a
memory looking towards the future, receptive to others, deriving continual, never-ending enrich¬
ment from inner and outer sources.
Minorities and majorities alike, we are all called upon to choose between competing pasts and
a common future, between withdrawal into old totalitarian modes that stifle the individual and tear
the world apart, and the challenge of freedom for each and every one of us, the challenge of a human
race finally reconciled with itself. B 9
