N T E R V I E W
OLIVER STONE
talks to Mahmoud Hussein
and Régis Debray
One of America's leading film-makers, Oliver Stone
has won several Oscars for best film and best
director. He has made many big hits, including
Scarface (1983), Platoon (1986), Wall Street (1987)
and JFK (1992). He follows political and social
developments in the United States closely and
describes them uncompromisingly. Here he talks
about his commitment and the conditions under
which film directors operate.
You have made severalfilms dealing
with very sensitive matters. That is not
easy. In the movie business, it isn't a
question of wanting to do something
then going and doing it, is it?
No, it's never easy, because the stu¬
dios want to make money. That's always
the issue with movies like this: if you
take on a large subject that's contro¬
versial, you're going to upset a certain
group of people. That doesn't generally
help the movie; people think it does,
but many people stay away if there's
controversy.
That wasn't the case with Platoon,
your film about the Viet Nam War,
was it?
Platoon caught the national mood
when it came out. President Reagan
was about to invade Nicaragua, there
was a feeling we were going to be drawn
into another war, and there was a gen¬
uine curiosity, eighteen or twenty years
after the event, about the Viet Nam war.
People were getting tired of Reagan.
The Oliver North trial had just hap¬
pened in 1986, and opinion was begin¬
ning to turn against the militarization of
the country. So I think the timing of
the movie was just right.
Was there an autobiographical ele¬
ment in thefilm?
Platoon is based pretty much on my
own experiences in Viet Nam. I was in

Oliver Stone (holding script)
with Kevin Costner during the
filming ofJFK ( 1 992).
the 25th Infantry and the 1st Cavalry.
It was not straight autobiography, I
fictionalized the story and ran charac¬
ters together.
You don't see much when you're in
combat, but I felt that every platoon
that I was in was divided into the
people who were more sensitive to the
Vietnamese and the people who were
insensitive to what we were doing in
Viet Nam. There was a moral division
inside each combat unit. I thought the
same about America when I got home.
It was very divided between what they
called the hawks and the doves. Most
people were neutral, but there were
strong opinions on both sides. I fought
with my father, with my family. I felt
very alienated. I tried to deal with those
feelings in a film I made about coming
home, Born on the Fourth ofJuly.
We often hear from the American
film industry that cinema is entertain¬
ment. When Hollywood turns to his¬
tory, accuracy is hardly the main con¬
cern. How do youfeelabout this? Must
entertainment comefirst?
That's two different questions. I
agree that movies are entertainment. A
good movie has to grip you. Most
people don't want to sit for two hours
in the dark watching a documentary, so
you have to introduce the element of
tension, the thriller element. I think
I've been able to deal with relatively
serious subjects in my movies and
make them intriguing, so that people
want to see them. There are a million
films made, in Europe or even in
America, that, let's face it, nobody
wants to see. They don't want to see
life down on the farm if there's nothing
to hook their attention. You know, the
sun comes up, the sun goes down, the
farmer washes his laundry. . . . But if
the farmer has a daughter and aha!
she gets involved with some rich guy,
then the complications start, that's
when the audience gets interested.
Let's look a little further into what
you call the thriller element. Is it always
simply a matter ofgoodguy versus bad
guy, or can it be more complicated than
that?
Good movies play with your idea of
who the villain is. You think some
character is the bad guy but he's not.
The good guy turns out to be the vil¬
lain. So movies are not that simplistic.
In Alfred Hitchcock's films you rarely
know who is going to do what to
whom. In Vertigo, is the woman bad or
good? In Notorious, is Cary Grant bad
or good? We play with identity in
movies.
I have to agree that the film business
has notoriously bungled history. It's
famous for it. We've made heroes of
some very hollow people, no question

A scene from Salvador
(1986).
about it. We would have made films
about Senator Joe McCarthy if he
hadn't been found out. J. Edgar Hoover
was a hero in my country until recently.
But history is always being changed
and rewritten. Shakespeare made a vil¬
lain out of Richard III and history says
he was essentially a good king. Why
blame Hollywood? Historians them¬
selves should be held to account,
because we are always re-examining
history. A historian like Arthur
Schlesinger reinvents American his¬
tory to his liking, making a hero of
President Andrew Jackson, for
example. George Washington has been
reinterpreted several times. Thomas
Jefferson has been reinterpreted as a
slave-owner, a good guy, a bad guy.
Abe Lincoln's the only one I know
who seems pretty much to have gotten
away with it in American history.
You say that history is reinterpreted
every few years in America, but one
thing that doesn't change is the pre¬
sentation of Mafiosi and gangsters
as heroes in American films. Why is
there thisperversion ofthe idea ofthe
hero?
The glorification of the Mafia in our
country is sick. As great as Coppola's
two Godfather films are, they are, I
believe, historically wrong in
attributing this degree of power to the
Mafiosi when they are really a bunch of
thugs who have done much to corrupt
the country via organized labour, busi¬
ness the liquor business, Las Vegas,
the jukebox business kickbacks for
politicians, and so on. Gangsterism in
our country goes back before the
Italian Mafia, back to Boss Tweed, the
Irish Mafia, the ugly Mafia that existed
in the time of George Washington.
There were all kinds of gangsterism in
American life. To glorify it as we have
done is, as you say, a perversion.
But why do American audiences
respond to these films?
I think it's because we were revolu¬
tionaries, because we were mostly out¬
casts from Europe, because we have a
tough-guy strain. We don't like being
shoved around by authority, which is
not a bad quality in some ways. We
admired Bogart and Cagney, but they

Television footage used in
JFK, with Martin Luther King
in the centre.
were sentimental gangsters, movie
gangsters.
When you made JFK, for example,
didyou think of it as a militant film?
Yes, in a sense. I didn't give the
Warren Commission's version of events
because it had been defended for years
by the establishment and the media. I
touched a very sensitive nerve in JFK
when I attacked the media, saying that
the cover-up was not only the work of
certain people in government but was
propagated by the media, who accepted
the story without doing any home¬
work and they didn't do any.
The power of the media is, I think,
one of the biggest problems in my
country. The newsrooms of CBS,
NBC, ABC, Newsweek, Time, the
New York Times there are fifteen or
twenty of them and they all think alike,
they plug the same agenda over and
over again. When Clinton came into
office, they forced this young man to
consider the agenda their way. They
force the issue by putting tremendous
pressure on somebody new who may
want to address the situation in a new
way. I think this is a distorting effect of
the First Amendment, whose authors
couldn't have guessed how strong the
media would become in the electronic
era. I don't know the solution. You
have to have freedom of speech, but it's
reached insane proportions when it's
really control of speech, not freedom.
Why is there this consensus among the
twenty or so centres ofpower in the
media?
I can't tell you where it starts, but
there's a decision that certain things will
be on the agenda, that they will make
those things the issue of the day or of
the month. One time it may be home-
lessness or taxes, another time it will
be why the military must be supported
in Iraq or whatever. As I.F. Stone said,
the press are like blackbirds, they all
take off from the telephone wire at the
same time and when one comes back,
they all come back. We're living in an
Alice-in-Wonderland society where
from one month to the next we stagger
from one issue to another. We are told
what is important for that month. I
resent that.
I went to Viet Nam as a result of a
media onslaught that convinced us we
had to prevent it from being the next
domino to fall to communism. The
media messed this country up terribly
with that one. With the Kennedy
murder, they all lined up behind the
idea of the lone gunman firing three
crazy bullets and killing the President,
although there is little factual evidence.
Why exactly didyou make JFK?
I think Kennedy was killed for polit¬
ical reasons, to remove him from power.
First of all because, as of 1963, there
was a significant change in his policies
and the way he viewed the world. He
made a deal with Khrushchev; the two
of them signed the Nuclear Test Ban
Treaty in 1963. He was talking to Castro
behind the establishment's back. He
had signed a memo to pull out of Viet
Nam. This is not speculation: the doc¬
ument exists, he signed it, it's called the
National Security Action Memo¬
randum 263. Only recently Robert
McNamara finally admitted that
Kennedy was going to pull out of Viet
Nam.

There was a significant accelera¬
tion of intention when Lyndon
Johnson took over. On the very day
Kennedy was buried, as I showed in
the movie, Johnson called an emer¬
gency meeting with General Maxwell
Taylor and the Joint Chiefs of Staff to
push the Viet Nam agenda. There was
a meeting in Honolulu the day that
Kennedy was killed about the subject
of Viet Nam. It's a fascinating story,
what went on the last two or three
days before he was killed.
Didyou have free access to all the
archives?
The archives in America are like they
are in Russia, they're opened but by
the time the public gets to know of
them they've been reviewed and cen¬
sored by the bureaucratic process. A
new legislation was passed, that the film
helped create, opening up the Kennedy
files. Anything that might endanger
national security has to be reviewed by
a special board of people appointed by
the President.
I'm sure that Kennedy, if he had
lived, would have ended the Cold War
with Khrushchev in the late 'sixties, in
his second term. It's interesting that
very shortly after Kennedy was killed,
Khrushchev was ousted. I think there's
a linkage between the fates of the two
men. That's why I think the subject is of
such importance, not just to American
history but to world history in the
twentieth century.
M JFK is a mixture ofstockshots andfic¬
tion. Were some ofthe stockshots infact
staged?
We staged most of it. There are some
genuine stockshots in the beginning,
but not as many as people think. The
autopsy sequence, for example, was all
staged except for one very clear shot
of Kennedy at the end. You'll see that
his face was intact, which is interesting
because if he had been shot from behind
the face would have been blown away.
The docudrama element the inter¬
linking offact and fiction gives the
film its aesthetic impact. But perhaps
that mixture raises a moralproblem too.
I've heard that criticism. My answer
is, it's a war. You ripped off this country,
you told this story no holds barred,
you fought dirty and I'm fighting you
the same way, I steal things left, right
and centre. Yes, I was militant.
Left, Born on the Fourth ofJuly (1989),
starring Tom Cruise. Opposite page,
a scene from Platoon (1 986).

What difference did thefilm make?
All films find their way into the
country's subconscious in the end. I
think what it changed was trust in the
government. Around twenty million
Americans saw it. And I don't think
any young kid now will buy the story
that Lee Harvey Oswald was a lone
gunman. The papers don't say that so
much now. They think twice before
saying it.
Would it bepossible to make afilm in
the UnitedStates now about the Amer¬
ican attitude during the GulfWar, with
President Bush as hero or anti-hero ?
That's another Orwellian story. It's
not for me, it's for some other movie¬
maker. Someone said to me that the
Gulf War wasn't a war, it was a TV film.
Nobody got killed on our side and we
didn't even know there were all those
people killed on the other side. There
were six Time magazine cover stories
about the situation before the war
started, and by the end of it Saddam
Hussein looked like Hitler, complete
with the moustache. He was demo-
nized in the American consciousness,
made out to be a monster. We were
ready to go out and kill. It was a hor¬
rible time to live through because again
you saw the way patriotism came out."
You mention patriotism. In the
golden age ofcinema, Americans were
proud ofHollywood. Now foreigners
are buying into Hollywoodand maybe
in a few years they'll have bought
it out. What do you think of this
situation?
The film business is a land without
frontiers. You work for different people
in your lifetime, different producers,
people you never thought you would
team up with. JFK was made with
French, Israeli, German money. The
Italians put up money for The Doors,
the English for Salvador and Platoon.
That's what's good about the film busi¬
ness. All these international players like
to be in on the game.
You approve ofthat?
Of course it's a good thing. How else
would movies get made? They need an
enormous concentration of capital.

What about creative freedom? Are
you allowed it?
Only if you can get away with it. If
you make a film that makes money,
they like you. I just got by by the skin
of my teeth. Salvador missed out at
the box office, but Platoon was a hit,
and then I got carte blanche for the
next couple of films. They were both
successful, so then I was able to make
Born on the Fourth ofJuly, which also
did well. That gave me a little more
freedom, so then I decided to go for
JFK. They would never have let me
do JFK in the beginning, but they did
at that point of my career, and it
worked.
Why was Salvador not a success?
Politics. When it came out in early
1986, we were still in the grip of Rea-
ganism. The critics were not very kind.
The New York Times said it was a typ¬
ical Costa-Gavras kind of propaganda
effort. Yet most everything of that film
including American complicity has
emerged in the last ten years as a truth.
Do you sometimes feel like a latter-
day knight errant? Knights werepriv¬
ilegedpeople but they also had duties,
they were defending sacred values. Do
you feel both this privilege and this
duty?
That's very true. It's a special situa¬
tion. You must use your power well to
make films that are difficult to get made.
Otherwise you'll lose it.
Right now is a good time for me to
make difficult movies. I just finished
Heaven and Earth in Thailand and Viet
Nam. It's the story of thirtysome years
in the life of a Vietnamese peasant
woman. It was not an easy film to make.
Are you working especially for an
American audience, or do you feel the
world is your audience?
Most of my films have made more
money abroad than in America. JFK
made twice as much abroad. The films
are going well internationally. I feel I
need a world-view to understand my
own life better. I always think film¬
makers tend to underestimate the power
and intelligence of the audience's sub¬
conscious mind.
Not only that, maybe. Perhapspeople
want, at least sometimes, to be stirred by
noble causes?
JFK didn't make any commercial
sense. It was three hours long, it had lots
of dialogue and it was complicated. But
I said I'm going to make this movie, it
will bomb but I have to make it. I never
really thought it would be easily under¬
stood by medium range audiences. But
they did understand it. It was one of the
great experiences of my life. It proves
that people are more intelligent than
they're given credit for. Even if they
don't understand everything at first,
they're willing to sit there and see it a
second time, on video or something, to
fill in the gaps.
How do you explain the world¬
wide fascination with Hollywood
films and with American popular
culture in general?
The world is a satellite world now,
and America is on the cutting edge.
People like the music, they buy it; they
like the look, they buy the clothes; they
like the hamburgers	 Youth wants to
be free from the shackles of the adult
world and old ways of doing things.
It's more fun F-U-N And many Hol¬
lywood movies evoke the concept of
fun. They're light, they're entertaining.
t¡ I think that's the answer.
But not all Hollywood films have
had the same success	
Maybe they didn't have the right
lightness of being.
IO
