undertones
of war
kj Iran Colon«
Lying deep in the individual unconscious,
the seeds of conflict can be germinated
bypropaganda
WHY, in time of war, do a large number
of usually peace-loving and inoffen¬
sive people allow themselves to be
overcome by hatred and cause death and de¬
struction with terrifying determination and
anger?
Freudian pyschoanalytical theory locates
the source of this aggressiveness, which erupts
and becomes widespread above all during war¬
time, in the individual unconscious. The
unconscious may be compared to a kind of
Pandora's box where aggressive impulses which
originate at the time of a person's first contacts
with other people are repressed and confined.
Freud defined it as the place "where the germs
of all that is evil in the human soul are stored".
The regression to barbarity that manifests
itself in wartime is, then, made possible by the
presence of that barbarity in our unconscious.
Here Freudian thought tallies with Christian
demonology, whose basic postulate is neatly
encapsulated in this excellent phrase by the
Swiss writer Denis de Rougemont: "The enemy
is always within us."
Two main conclusions may be drawn from
this. First, people in wartime do not surrender
their individuality and become swamped by a
collective feeling of aggression whose psy¬
chical nature may differ from that of individual
psychology. It is true that the "normal" person
only takes part in the atrocities of war when
encouraged to do so by the massive participa¬
tion of other members of the community. But
such participation is in a personal capacity. The
person has an unconscious subjective motiva¬
tion for joining in. 21

If the origins of aggression are to be found
in the unconscious of each individual, it fol¬
lows that the disposition to make war is uni¬
versal. It does not spring from the innate cha¬
racter of any ethnic group or nation. As the
celebrated French psychoanalyst Marie Bona¬
parte remarked, "Any people, even one which
in time of security behaves in the most humane
manner, is capable of regressing to a state of
primal barbarity."
Thus people are sufficiently motivated to
make war by their unconscious aggression,
which seeks to discharge itself onto external
objects to avoid becoming a self-destructive
force. However, this aggression is not so much
the first cause of wars as their main weapon, or
rather the essential "natural resource" without
which a war economy cannot function.
Since this resource is of strategic impor¬
tance for the state, the latter has a fundamental
interest in controling and monopolizing it.
"Each citizen of a nation," wrote Freud in his
"Thoughts for the times on war and death"
(1915), "can in this war realize with horror . . .
that the state has forbidden the individual to
use injustice, not because it wishes to abolish
injustice, but because it wishes to have the
monopoly of it, like that of salt and tobacco."
Marie Bonaparte makes a comparison between
hatred and capital which follows the same
lines: "Hatred, in the heart of men, is a capital
that must be invested somewhere."
MYTHS
AND THE SUPEREGO
What procedures does the state use in wartime
to efficiently exploit its monopoly of its citizens'
aggression and to reap profit from its capital of
hatred? It should be said at once that these pro¬
cedures are full of contradiction and ambiguity.
It is not simply a question of lifting the ban on
pillage, torture and killing. Perhaps people have
always been, as Freud also pointed out,
"tempted to satisfy their need for aggression at
their neighbours' expense ... by martyrizing
and killing them. But opposition to this tempta¬
tion comes from the superego . . . which is the
psychical location of models and prohibitions."
The normal individual's superego must be
deceived before his or her repressed aggression
can be fully unleashed. It is not a matter of neut¬
ralizing or eliminating the pressure of moral
censorship, of anaesthetizing the superego, but
of increasing the pressure, of inflating the
superego. For a mobilized soldier, to kill in war
is not a licentious act, the satisfaction of a hidden
desire. It is a duty, a sacrifice, a heroic gesture.
By the same token, it is those who refuse to take
part in war who are regarded with the contempt
due to those who are criminally irresponsible
and think only of their own pleasure.
This apparent paradox stems from the pro¬
cess of identification, described by Freud as
"the assimilation of one ego to another, with
the result that the first ego behaves in some
respects like the second, imitates it and in a
sense accepts it within itself." The individual's
capacity to "receive within himself" someone
else is first exercised in the interiorization of the
paternal model, in other words in the form¬
ation of an ideal image through which the
person seeks self-affirmation.
This ambiguity also appears in the projec¬
tion of the child-father relationship onto the
social and political plane. In the child who
22
A Soviet monument to
military heroes.

This French patriotic
allegory painted at the
beginning of the First World
War echoes the famous
relief sculpture known as
the Départ des volontaires
de 1792 or La Marseillaise
on the Arc de Triomphe in
Paris. A bearded figure
representing a veteran of
the Franco-Prussian War of
1870-1871 is shown
leading a group of French
soldiers to the defence of
their native soil.
becomes an adult, writes Franco Fornari in his



Psychoanalysis of War, "the loyalty he feels
towards his leader, or the group personifying
his ideal, will be counterbalanced by the hatred
he feels for some other chief or some other
group. He is thereby disposed to make war. . . .
Another effect of the cleavage of the image of
the father into two figures is that the gods of
one people are the devils of another."
Individuals are motivated by their psycho¬
logical structure and the nature of their rela¬
tions with other members of society to trans¬
gress the prohibition to kill. If they are to
violate this law, as' they do in wartime, without
becoming criminals or madmen, recourse to
extreme violence must be presented in an
acceptable form.
There are two main ways of doing this.
First of all by endowing acts of war, and
notably the destruction of the enemy, with an
extraordinary, even sacred value. Victory in
arms becomes a matter of supreme impor¬
tance; on it depends the survival of the nation
and the physical existence of a people. Every¬
thing must be done to eliminate the danger of
defeat. Valiant soldiers must attack and kill the
foe as a sacred duty.
War always forced on us and thus defen¬
sive brings us into conflict with one or
several specific enemies. But it is also pre¬
sented as the continuation of earlier wars
which our ancestors waged against their ene¬
mies, and this gives a mythical dimension to
the current conflict. The ego participates in an 23

"us" which is present in the historical arena
but also belongs to a collective entity in Mo
tempore (at that time in the past). War provides
people with an opportunity to identify with
their ancestors, to experience great moments
when mythical heroes come to the fore.
In the same mythical perspective, the pres¬
tige of the leader (of the nation and/or the
army), which is psychologically speaking a
projection of love for the father, is increased
because he appears as the incarnation of the
founding hero of the community. "Charisma,"
notes the psychosociologist Serge Moscovici,
"has the characteristics of an evocation of the
past.
THE SNARES
OF PROPAGANDA
It is, then, not surprising to find this myth-
oriented line of thought in the tricks of war
propaganda. The "media war" currently being
waged on the territory of the former Yugo¬
slavia is an example of this. The aim of paint¬
ing the adversary as a "wild animal", a
"monster" or a "barbarian" is not merely to
humiliate him but to transform the destruction
of such an inhuman creature into an exploit
worthy of mythical heroes, of saviours of
humanity carrying out a duty imposed by the
highest moral authorities, that is in accord
with the superego.
This accord with the superego can also be
made in a totally different way by bana-
lization rather than dramatization, by using
war propaganda to make horror seem pleasant,
perhaps even amusing, but certainly unexcep¬
tionable. Euphemism is the instrument of this
type of propaganda, which has a number of
variants, as the Yugoslav conflict reveals. One
form glorifies outdoor life, physical effort,
comradeship, humour and singing around the
camp fire. Another takes up more or less the
same cheering refrain but concentrates on the
idea that war offers boys an opportunity to
prove their virility and achieve adult status.
And those who refuse the opportunity to
undergo the rite of passage into the ranks of
virile warriors are rebuked and ridiculed as
mother's pets.
Alternatively, war may be presented as a
highly rational and sophisticated operation, a
technological process controlled by profession¬
als, masters of the soldier's art. In this case,
the blood and terror of war simply do not
exist. There is no hatred, no killing, no suffer¬
ing. The adversary is "neutralized" but no
enthusiasm is shown. The ideal would be a war
without human losses, won or lost "on
points". There is nothing here to embarrass the
superego, and the individual can set out, reas¬
sured, for the battlefield, feeling that he has in
no way compromised his humanity. And so
the devil's work is done. B
24
Poster no. 3 (acrylic on
canvas, 1971) a painting on
the theme of revolution by
the Italian artist
Giangiacomo Spadari.
IVAN COLOVIC
¡s a researcher at the
Institute of Ethnography of
the Serbian Academy of
Sciences and Arts. He is a
co-founder of the journal
Migrations Littéraires
published by Editions du
Titre, Paris.
