Prometheus Bound ( 1 762), a
marble group by the
French sculptor Nicolas
Sébastien Adam.



Metaphors should be made at home
jy Daniel J. Boorstin
THE Western idea of progress, widespread
since the eighteenth century, had its roots
in two characteristically Western ideas and
experiences. First, the Judaeo-Christian belief in
a Creator God who had made the world new; and
second, the rise of experimental science and the
work of Galileo, Harvey, Newton and others,
who documented man's increasing ability to
know and control the world. These ideas and
experiences were at odds with the cyclical views
of history presumed by other world-religions,
and even in the classical Greek heritage. If God
could make the world ex nihilo, and man shared
the powers of that God, then making the new was
not only possible for man, it revealed his spark of
divinity.
The Western enthusiasm for the natural sci¬
ences was contagious, inspiring social sciences
which aimed to make new and better institu¬
tions. As scientific knowledge accumulated in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, it was
encouraged and shared by the European com¬
munity, with an increasing faith in its Utopian
possibilities. It was this faith which stirred the 13

14
beliefs of Jefferson and the American revolu¬
tionaries in the possibility of creating a new
nation in a New World, pursuing the idea of
human equality and rights to life, liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness. It also inspired the
beliefs of the French revolutionaries of 1789 in
their power to clean out the cobwebs of the Old
Regime, and make a new Republic dedicated to
Liberty, Equality, Fraternity and the rule of
Reason. The spectacular successes of European
industry in the nineteenth century the creation
of steam power and then electrical power, along
with the epochal insights of Adam Smith,
Auguste Comte, Charles Darwin, Karl Marx and
others, with improvement of transportation, the
growth of cities and the increase of wealth
reinforced the hope (in Tennyson's words) that it
would be possible to "Let the great world spin
forever down the ringing grooves of change."
Can such an idea, that grew from distinc¬
tively Western memory, experience, and imagi¬
nation, take root and flourish elsewhere? Can it
be credible in parts of the world that do not share
the Judaeo-Christian belief in a Creator God, a
God of Novelty, and in a Creator Man, Apostle
of Novelty? Can the idea of progress survive in
societies that lack the melodramatic Western tri¬
umphs of science and technology, that lack the
rising standards of living, and have not succeeded
in making viable societies by newly-drawn con¬
stitutions? Can peoples be expected to share the
intellectual product when they had not shared the
processes from which it came?
More basic, even, than the idea of progress in
Western thought is the notion of which Blaise
Pascal was the eloquent spokesman. "Man is but
a reed, the weakest in nature, but he is a thinking
reed." And, though the universe destroy man,
man is still nobler, for he is aware of the advan¬
tage the universe has over him. Man's greatness,
then, is in his consciousness, his awareness of
his place in the world, of what the world holds
and might hold for him, and what he might hold
for the world. That consciousness has led man in
the West to believe in progress. But where will
that consciousness properly lead men who have
lived in drastically different circumstances, with
contrasting histories ? While the idea of progress
may be a suitable and suggestive metaphor for
Western history, elsewhere, among peoples who
have no similar historical roots, it may express
nothing more than a bitter Utopian irony.
Finally, how does it benefit the world when
people freeze the metaphors of alien history into
ideology? For ideology itself is a contradiction
and denial of man's endless powers of novelty and
change which are suggested by the very idea of
progress. Would we not, perhaps, profit more
from the diversity of human experience if we
encouraged all peoples to make their own
metaphors?
DANIEL J. BOORSTIN
is a leading American historian
who was Librarian of Congress
from 1975 to 1987. His many
books include a trilogy, The
Americans, The Image and The
Discoverers. His latest work,
The Creators, a history of
human achievements in thé
arts, was published by Random
House in 1992.
