The origins
of the Yugoslav
state help
to explain its
eventual break-up
THE YUGOSLAV QUAGMIRE
by Paul Garde
Above,
It is not macabre ( 1 993),
oil on canvas by the British
artist Clare Avery, inspired
by the war in Bosnia.
T
PAUL GARDE,
a French linguist and specialist
in Slavonic studies, is a
professor emeritus of the
University of Provence who
previously taught at Yale,
Columbia and Geneva
Universities. He has written
extensively on comparative
Slavonic linguistics, the Russian
language and Russian
literature, and the languages
and cultures of the southern
Slavs. His most recent work is
Vie et mort de la Yougoslavie
(Paris, 1992).
I ^| HERE are no minorities in multinational
states such as the Switzerland and Belgium
of today, the Soviet Union of yesterday, and
the Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire and
the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia of earlier
times. In such cases state and nation do not nec¬
essarily coincide. The existence of several nations
within the state is taken for granted. No distinc¬
tion is made between majority and minorities.
Nor do minorities exist in the state-based
nation-state, in which the state is formed before
the emergence of the nation, which takes shape
within that pre-established mould. The two enti¬
ties thus automatically coincide. This is true of the
oldest states of Western Europe, such as France,
Great Britain, the Netherlands, Spain and Por¬
tugal, and also of the United States. The various
ethnic minorities which live in states of this
kind Bretons or Scots for example feel that
they belong not only to the state but also to the
nation French or British as the case may be.
A national minority can only exist in a nation-
based nation-state, in which the state is formed
after the nation becomes conscious of its existence
and with the avowed aim of modelling itself apos-
teriori on an already existing nation. Since the
frontiers of the two entities never entirely coin¬
cide, there are bound to be national minorities.
This is the situation throughout central Europe,
from Italy to Estonia, from Germany to Greece.
The creation of states of this type was one of
the great ambitions of the victors of the First
World War, and this is why the peace treaties of
1919 and the League of Nations drew up a body
of legislation on national minorities. The mem¬
bers of these minorities were to have the same
individual rights as other citizens and thus be
protected against any discriminatory measures.
They could also demand the recognition of col¬
lective rights concerning the use of their lan¬
guage, education and the protection of their cul¬
ture. But the instruments adopted between the
wars did not provide for them to be granted a
third possible type of freedom: that of territorial
autonomy.
These rights were poorly implemented in the
1920s and were later systematically flouted by fas¬
cist regimes. They were ignored altogether under
communism. Today they are back on the agenda.
THE IAN» OF THE
SOUTHERN SLAVS
In this respect the example of the Yugoslav or
southern Slav territory has been unique in this
century. What were the key stages in the forma¬
tion of this area?
Before 1914, the kingdom of Serbia was the
quintessence of the nation-based nation-state. It
was homogeneous until 1912 because the non-
Serbian (Turkish and Albanian) elements had
been expelled during the previous century. It
took in Albanian, Macedonian, Turkish and other
minorities during the Balkan Wars (1912-1913)
but without recognizing that they had any rights.
Between 1914 and 1941, having in the mean¬
time become Yugoslavia, the kingdom doubled in
area. Its subjects now included Croats, Slovenes, 39

Muslim Bosnians, Germans and Hungarians,
among others. And yet officially it remained a
nation-state thanks to the fiction of the "Yugoslav
nation" subdivided into three "tribes" (pleme):
Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (the other Yugoslav
nations did not count). Thus the state, in which
the Serbs were numerically preponderant (com¬
prising some 40 per cent of the population), was
supposed to consist of a "Yugoslav" majority
(some 85 per cent) and non-Slav minorities.
Between 1945 and 1991, Tito's Yugoslavia
abandoned the fiction of the "Yugoslav nation",
which the horrors of the Second World War had
brought to a bloody end, and officially became a
multinational state, recognizing six southern Slav
peoples as distinct nations: the Serbs, the Croats,
the Slovenes, the Macedonians, the Montene¬
grins and somewhat later the "Muslims"
(Bosnians). The unitary kingdom became a fed¬
eral republic. The Yugoslav communists thus
followed the example set a quarter of a century
earlier by the Soviets, who had transformed the
Russian empire, dominated by a single nation,
into a multinational federation, the USSR.
But Stalin had drawn the logical or at least
terminological conclusions from this change.
The Russian communists had championed the
rights of the various non-Russian peoples of the
empire, designated by the term "national
minority" (natsmen). In the USSR, majority and
minorities officially ceased to exist; there were
only large or small nations, all theoretically equal.
In Yugoslavia on the other hand, in spite of the
transition to a multinational state, the hierarchy
between "nation" (narod) and "minority" (man-
jina) was maintained. The former term was used
to designate the six southern Slav nations, while
the latter referred to the other non-southern-
Slav peoples, such as the Albanians, the Hun¬
garians, the Gypsies and the Turks. In 1963 the
term "minority", which was felt to be pejorative,
was replaced by that of "nationality" (narod-
nost), but the same ranking order continued to
exist. Official language referred to "nations and
nationalities", but a term encompassing the two
was never invented. The logic of the multina¬
tional state was not fully applied: some peoples
were more equal than others.
This hierarchy of peoples was paralleled by
a hierarchy of territories. The federation com¬
prised six republics; in other words there were
as many republics as there were "nations". Each
nation was thus "constitutive" of at least one
republic. Attached to the republic of Serbia,
however, there were also "autonomous
provinces", corresponding to the existence of
"minorities". These were Kosovo, where there
was an Albanian "minority" (sic) which
accounted for 68 per cent of the population in
1948 (90 per cent today), and Vojvodina, where
non-Serbs totalled 49 per cent of the population
in 1948 (43 per cent today).
The history of the federation was marked
from start to finish by hesitations over the status
of the autonomous provinces, especially Kosovo.
The provinces enjoyed very limited autonomy at
the outset, but this grew until in the last consti¬
tution adopted under Tito, that of 1974, it almost


equalled that of the republics, before being bru¬
tally suppressed in 1989-1990.
In 1991 the federation broke up into five
states, one remaining multinational (Bosnia) and
the other four being nation-states (Slovenia,
Croatia, Serbia-Montenegro, Macedonia). With
the exception of Slovenia (which is virtually
homogeneous), these states contain minorities.
The largest of these (each comprising over 300,000
persons) are the Serb minority in Croatia, the
Albanian and Hungarian minority in Serbia-
Montenegro, and the Albanian minority in Mace
donia. Bosnia, by virtue of its constitution, is the
common territory of three peoples: Muslims (44
per cent), Serbs (31 per cent) and Croats (17 per
cent).
THE STEAMROLLER
OF HIERARCHY
But the consequences of the hierarchy estab¬
lished in Tito's time between "nations" and
"minorities" can still be felt. Everything sug¬
gests that the Serbs regarded the status of "nation"
Bosnian Muslims executed
at the entry to their
village.


42
for themselves and that of "minority" for others
as a privilege to be enjoyed in perpetuity.
Their refusal to be a "minority" in Croatia led
to the outbreak of war against that country in the
summer of 1 99 1 and to the setting-up of a seat of
Serb power ("the Serb Republic of Krajina") on
at least one-quarter of Croat territory, as well as
to the expulsion of non-Serbs, representing about
half the population (200,000 to 300,000 persons).
In Bosnia, where there is no majority nation
and where their status as a "constitutive people"
is not disputed, the Serbs are afraid of being in the
minority (in the Parliamentary meaning of the
term) in face of a possible coalition of the other
two peoples, and also reject the independent
Bosnian state. This led to the war which they
unleashed in April 1992 in a bid to hive off and
create an ethnically pure "Serb Republic" in
Bosnia, covering two-thirds of the land area. The
outcome so far has been to create two million
refugees.
In Serbia on the other hand, the authorities
proclaim the rights of the "majority" vis-à-vis the
"minorities", and consequently the territorial
autonomy of Kosovo and Vojvodina, provinces
peopled by "minorities", has been suppressed.
Outside Serbia the rights of Serb minorities are
being defended to the point of secession, while
within Serbia itself the rights of non-Serb minori¬
ties are being whittled away to zero, if necessary
by forcible expulsion; in other words, the object
is to change the frontiers of Serbia wherever the
latter leave Serbs outside, but to preserve them
intact in cases where they include non-Serbs.
What aim can the international community set
itself in view of this strategy? The preservation of
existing frontiers is an absolute principle for want
of which the whole of Europe would again be
plunged into the nightmare of wars of conquest.
It must be saved from such a fate On the other
hand, the nation-based nation-state is a very
potent aspiration in this part of the world, and one
that it would be vain to oppose. In other words
there are bound to be minorities and they will
have to be protected.
The only valid aim would be to adopt an
international law on minorities that would guar¬
antee individual and collective rights to each and
every one of them, but not necessarily the right
to territorial autonomy, which only shifts the
problem by creating a minority within a minority.
There should be a long-term commitment on
the part of the United Nations to make sure that
this law is respected on the ground: This regime
should be applied wherever the problem arises,
not only where conflicts have already erupted.
Bosnia is the only existing multinational state in
central Europe, and should be protected as such.
Here too, the United Nations should make a
long-term commitment through some form of
mandate arrangement.
Some might say that this is a Utopian view. It
is true that the forces opposing such a solution
currently have the upper hand. But if action is
undertaken, there is no other aim it can pursue.
The only alternatives are expulsions, "ethnic
cleansing" and wars everywhere.
A football field
serves as a cemetery in
Sarajevo (Bosnia).
