CONHENTUff
by
Federico
Mayor
This article is one
of a series in which
the Director-General
of Unesco sets out
his thinking on matters
of current concern

CULTURE FIRST AND LAST
THE fundamental role of culture in development, in the
building of peace and democracy, and in the preservation
of the environment is now starting to appear in large let¬
ters at the top of the international list of priorities.
Culture used to be a flower. Then it grew into a tree. Now it
has become a fruit. What was yesterday a mere ornament is
today the very centre and soul of the human adventure. We
used to look upon it as an adjunct; we are coming to sec that it
is the heart of the matter. And so there is a need for a new
approach to development that will at last recognize the decisive
role of culture.
With the support of the United Nations, UNESCO has
created a World Commission on Culture and Development,
thereby responding to one of the major challenges of the twen¬
tieth century. The Commission's task will be to look closely at
the links between culture and development, and to prepare a
report on the global situation. This is something quite without
precedent: never before has the relationship between culture and
development been the subject of comprehensive, coordinated
study on a world scale.
Sceptics will say "if you want to bury a problem, set up a
committee!" Unesco and the United Nations are doing the
opposite. What is more, they arc following the example set by
the Brundtland Commission, which proved the blase and the
cynics wrong. It is largely thanks to the Brundtland Commis¬
sion that the need for sustainable development has gradually
become accepted, that it was roundly endorsed at the Rio
Summit and that no leading politician can now afford to ignore
the problems of environment and development.
The work of the new Commission will also be action-
oriented. Its recommendations are intended to serve as guide¬
lines for policies in every area where development and culture
meet. The task will not be easy. As everyone knows, it is hard
to define culture, perhaps because culture defines us rather than
the other way round. A leading philosopher of our time,
Jacques Derrida, who is taking part in the public hearings of
the Commission, has said that culture is the name we give to
the unfathomable enigma confronting those who peer into its
depths.
The task of the Commission is nonetheless important, indis¬
pensable even, firstly because much of the world today is suf¬
fering from the development crisis that certain far-sighted
thinkers such as Edgar Morin forecast fifteen years ago. Old
dogmas and ideas that were taken for granted, the conventional
wisdom about stages of growth, the notion of importing off-the-
peg development models all that has flown out of the window.
What we need now is a radical rethinking of development if we
are not to find ourselves entering the twenty-first century in a
state of disarray.
Secondly, it is quite clear that the relationship between cul¬
ture and development lies at the heart of the problem, and
equally clearly it is at the point where culture and develop¬
ment interact that we will find the beginnings of a solution. If cul¬
ture and development pull in different directions, as in Plato's
image of the team of horses, each will cause the other to fail. If
development collapses, culture itself is doomed to decline, or
worse still may be tempted to withdraw into seclusion and sink
into mindless violence. It is only when each community is at ease
with a specific system of values inseparable from its culture
and heritage that the linkage between the economic and cultural
aspects of development can be re-established.
If, on the other hand, we deceive ourselves into believing that
culture is the be-all and end-all of development, many dangers
lie ahead: the danger of the trivialization of culture through
the commercialization of images; of cultural erosion under the
onslaught of standardized models of development; of a sev¬
ering of the dialogue and interaction between cultures and of their
giving way to hatred and violence; of the triumph of tribe over
nation, the Pyrrhic victory of fanaticism over co-operation; of
the danger that closed minds will triumph over open ones, and
that the dead hand of conformity will stifle the spirit of creativity
and innovation. Contemplating the bloody revolutions of his age,
Victor Hugo spoke of "this grim readiness to die."
Dostoyevsky believed that beauty would be the salvation of
the world. Culture no more offers salvation than do education
or beauty, but it contributes to it, and I have every confidence that
the World Commission on Culture and Development, working
in complete independence, will help to ensure that the power of
culture will enlighten us and suggest to us ways of creating a world
where it will be better to live, a world with a greater sense of sol¬
idarity, a world more receptive to all that is best.
PEACEFUL SOLUTIONS
Far from getting in the way of development, culture is its source,
as history abundantly confirms, from ancient China to the
European Renaissance and the Enlightenment, from the Islam
of medieval times to the Japan of the Tokugawa and Meiji eras.
Culture is not an obstacle to development, to be negotiated or
destroyed; it is its opportunity and its stimulus. It is the main¬
spring, the horizon and the goal of all human transformation.
Without culture as its foundation and its goal, development
will go the way of all ephemeral creations, like a ghost town aban¬
doned after a gold rush. Culture is not just development's
"accession of soul": it is its very heart and soul, the heart and soul
that both South and North need to rediscover together by
drawing up the "cultural contract" of solidarity and sharing
which Javier Pérez de Cucllar, President of the new Commission,
has so well described.
It would be hard to imagine anyone better endowed than he
with the necessary skill, natural authority, breadth of vision,
moral standing, impartiality and readiness for dialogue that are
indispensable for such a task.
History mostly records the names of generals who won
battles but seldom preserves the names of those who excelled in
avoiding them. Javier Pérez de Cuéllar is a fortunate exception
to that rule. During his two terms of office as Secretary-General
of the United Nations, he was successful whenever the cards
he held allowed him to do so in extinguishing the fires of war
and lighting the lamps of peace. A man of harmony, he gave deci¬
sive impetus to the peaceful solution of many conflicts.
If one day we decide to stop recording the history of wars
and massacres and to write the history of peace an account of
how generosity, love, modesty, wisdom and the silent virtues
overcome cruelty, hatred, unbridled lusts and fascination with
death I am convinced that one of its finest chapters will be
devoted to Javier Pérez de Cuéllar. And I trust that chapter
will include a memorable account of his work at the head of the
World Commission on Culture and Development. H
41
