i - ' H I
d
¿*ÊaW%-*
f\s a result of
poverty,
population
growth,
urbanization and
pollution, water
management is
set to become
the most crucial
natural resource
issue facing the
developing world
THE days when water could be considered a
cheap and plentiful resource are virtually
over, and many parts of the developing
world are already facing a water crisis which is
likely to intensify significantly during the coming
decades. This crisis in the South is the direct
result of four interrelated phenomena.
First, since nearly all the easily available
sources of water have now been developed or are
in the process of development, the unit costs of
future projects are bound to rise. Meanwhile,
many developing countries are saddled with very
high levels of debt, and the amount of new invest¬
ment available, both internally and externally, is
limited. In addition, competition for available
funds is intense.
Second, current estimates indicate that by the
year 2050 world population is likely to double to
10.64 billion, of which developing countries will
contribute nearly 87 per cent, or 9.29 billion.
While there is no one-to-one relationship between
population and water requirements, it is clear
that with a substantial increase in population,


water requirements in the South are bound to
increase as well. Furthermore, past experience
indicates that as standards of living rise so do
per capita water requirements, and so if current
Crisis in the
South
by Asit K. Biswas
poverty-alleviation programmes succeed, these
requirements will increase further.
Third, as the impact of human activities
increases, water is being contaminated by more
and more waste products such as untreated or
partially-treated sewage, agricultural chemicals
and industrial effluents. Already many sources of
water near urban centres of developing coun¬
tries have been seriously affected.
The fourth major factor relates to the
increasing delays in implementing new water
projects that are likely in the coming decades
owing to higher costs and lack of funds. Social and
environmental factors will also significantly delay
project initiation time, certainly more than in
recent decades.
In the South there will be increasing pres¬
sure to make water management more efficient
than ever before. However, the amount of time
available for these improvements is likely to be
short certainly no more than a decade, or at
most two. While technological problems may
be comparatively easy to solve, political, institu¬
tional and social constraints are likely to be a
very different matter. They may, in fact, pose the
most difficult challenge for water management in
the South in the twenty-first century. 35

The Itaipú dam on the
Paraná River was built by
Paraguay and Brazil.
36
AS IT K. BISWAS,
Indian-born Canadian specialist
on water resources
development and
environmental management, is
the president of the
International Society for
Ecological Modelling, based in
Copenhagen (Denmark). A
former scientific advisor to
several United Nations
agencies and many
governments, he is the author
of a prolific body of work
which has been translated into
1 3 languages.
Here are some priority areas for action:
Raising theglobalprofile offreshwater issues.
Efficient water development and management
will require significantly more capital than the
countries of the South have access to at present.
Until water is placed squarely on the interna¬
tional and national agenda, the necessary funds
will not be forthcoming.



The conservation and efficient use of water
have only received lip-service so far. Since agri¬
culture is by far the largest user of water, efficient
irrigation management will undoubtedly be a
major conservation option in the future.
Although some progress has been made during
the past decade, the overall level of efficiency is
still far too low.
Considerable scope also exists for practising
water conservation in the domestic and industrial
sectors. In many towns and cities in developing
countries, more than half the treated water is lost
because of leakage. Design changes can signifi¬
cantly reduce water requirements in the industrial
sector.
Institutional strengthening and co-ordination.
Most water management institutions in the South
need considerable strengthening. In addition,
nearly all countries must substantially improve the
level of collaboration between institutions at
present water-related policies are developed in a
fragmented fashion. At the international level,
much better coordination is necessary between the
multilateral and bilateral assistance organizations.
Management of international water sources.
The only major sources of water that remain to
be developed are international in character, that
is they are shared by two or more countries.
Unless proper treaties are negotiated between
co-basin countries, international water bodies
are likely to be a fertile area of conflict in the
future.
Very few objective in-depth analyses of inter¬
national water bodies in developing countries
are currently available. To a great extent interna¬
tional organizations have deliberately steered
clear of the issue, mainly because it has been con¬
sidered to be politically sensitive.
Environmental considerations. The environ¬
mental aspects of water resource development
need more attention.
Research and training. Countries of the South
have to forge better links with one another on
research and training in water management. Cur¬
rently, there is very little South-South knowl¬
edge and technology transfer. For example, even
though countries like Egypt and India have many
common water problems, and the various insti¬
tutional, economic and technical constraints are
somewhat similar, Egyptian water professionals
have very little knowledge of Indian practices
and vice versa. Considerably more needs urgently
to be done in this area.
Equally, international organizations need to'
develop clear and cost-effective training strate¬
gies for water professionals of the South. Is it
preferable, for example, to bring them to France
or the United States for a two-week training pro¬
gramme, when the same amount of money could
provide more than a year's training at a good
Indian institution? Fundamental questions of this
type have yet to be asked, let alone answered
properly.
