fay to fa
mth infinity
by Nikolai
Rukavislinil(ov
4 Russian (osmonaut ponders tbe future of
(rewed spate flight
22
ON 12 April 1961, Yuri Gagarin, a car¬
penter's son from the town of Gzhatsk,
near Moscow, became the first man to
travel beyond the confines of the Earth. Since
then, some 250 Earthlings have ventured into
space and some have even walked on the
Moon.
Among these space travellers were some
who regarded space as little more than an
extension of an Earth-based laboratory, differ¬
ing only in that in space there is no gravity.
Others, however, found that their perception
of space and time co-ordinates was fundamen¬
tally changed and that, following the space
experience, they had to go through a process of
serious psychological adaptation.
From the very first contact with my own
"personal cosmos" I was overwhelmed by the
unexpected contrast between our own bright,
relatively small planet and the dark infinity of
cosmic space. I was struck by the thought that
down there was where the whole history of
humanity had unfolded; down there were the
states, the frontiers, the wars, the friendships,
the love, in short, all that human life contains.
How infinitesimal it seemed in comparison
with the awesome majesty of space.
THE WEAKEST LINK
My encounter with space has convinced me
that, as compared with the technological sys¬
tems of the space vessel, the human being is the
weakest, most delicate element on a space
flight. In the aftermath of International Space
Year (1992) it seems appropriate to reflect upon
the part people have to play in the continuing
exploration of space. The question that needs
to be answered is: "Are crewed space flights a
good or a bad thing? On balance, does the crew
of a spacecraft serve any useful purpose?"
History will judge who is right in the
quarrel that has divided cosmonauts, scientists
and space experts into two camps the "cos-
mophiles" and the "tcrraphiles". The "cosmo-
NIKOLAi RUKAVISHNIKOV,
a cosmonaut in the space
programme of the former
USSR, was the pilot aboard
the Soyuz 33 spacecraft
when It suffered a failure of
the main engine (see article).
He has a particular interest in
problems relating to human
Interactions with automatic
systems in spacecraft.

philes" are convinced that the future lies in
"satellite cities", in which, by the middle of the
twenty-first century, half the world's popula¬
tion will be living. The "terraphiles", however,
are equally convinced that, for a whole series of
reasons, humanity will remain upon Earth for
ever and that crewed flight into space will
cease.
The argument is at two levels the techno¬
logical plane and what might be called the psy¬
chological and philosophical plane.
What are the technological considerations
that limit the possibility and the desirabihty of
humans living in space? The prime considera¬
tion, as has already been mentioned, is the psy¬
chological and physical weakness of human
beings as compared with the power and
strength of technology.
The technical systems of a space vehicle can,
for example, function normally in the presence
of wide variations in temperature, to which
humans are extremely vulnerable. To ensure
Author Nikolai
Rukavishnikov (left
foreground) with two fellow
cosmonauts aboard
Soyuz 10.
On 25 July 1984,
Svetiana Savitskaya became
the first woman to walk in
space when she stepped
outside the Salyut 7 station
at a distance of more than
300 km from Earth.
human survival, a stable temperature of around
20°C is essential. The space vehicle must there¬
fore be equipped with a complicated system
capable of maintaining a constant temperature.
Technical systems can operate in an atmos¬
phere consisting of inert gases, at a variety of
pressures, or even in a vacuum, whereas
humans have to be supplied 


with an Earth-type
atmosphere with a specific oxygen content and
the right proportion of carbon dioxide and
water vapour at an atmospheric pressure vir¬
tually identical with that on Earth. Generally
speaking, technical systems require only a
supply of electricity to keep them going
whereas humans have to be provided with
a varied supply of food. Furthermore, when
they are running, systems only give off heat,
whereas humans have to be provided with
waste disposal facilities.
Finally, technical systems can function
under a wide range of acceleration stress from
zero gravity to several times the gravitational
acceleration of a body falling near the Earth;
for humans, special protective measures are
necessary to avoid damage to the organism, or
even death.
THE COSMONAUTS' CODE
In spite of all the efforts made by the construc¬
tors of space vehicles to ensure their reliability
and the battery of tests to which spacecraft are
subjected, it is obvious that today there is a
great risk attached to any space flight. As we
know, not all crews return.
The risk factor is very well understood, not
least by those setting out on a space flight.
Before take-off, the notion of danger engenders
a feeling of uncertainty and a certain psycholo¬
gical tension.
Sergei Korolev, the man who built the first
Soviet missiles and spacecraft, was very aware
of this. I remember the advice he gave to those
of us destined to become cosmonauts. He
insisted that going on a space flight was a
purely voluntary matter and that if any of us
were to find that we could not overcome our

psychological fears and were no., convinced
that we would succeed, all we had to do was to
admit this quite openly, right up 


to the very last
moments before take-off, and refuse to go.
Anyone doing so would be replaced and the
flight would be postponed. There would be no
recriminations and no blame would be attached
to anyone who did so.
In effect, Korolev was laying the founda¬
tions of the "cosmonauts' code". He believed
that human beings came first and that the post¬
ponement of a space flight was a small price to
pay compared with the danger, during a flight,
of having a cosmonaut paralysed with fear and
unable to function properly. Fortunately, the
history of space flight has no record of any
such refusal.
Nevertheless, a speed-up in the pulse rate, a
sign of psychological tension, is observed in all
cosmonauts just before take-off. If the flight
proceeds normally and all the equipment func¬
tions normally, this tension decreases gra¬
dually. But what happens when an unexpected
incident puts the crew's lives in jeopardy?
Everybody remembers the American
Apollo 13 flight during which an explosion
occurred in the spacecraft as it was heading for
the Moon and the nerve-shattering drama that
was played out on board. We remember the
courage of the crew and the heroic work of the
Command Centre through whose efforts
disaster was avoided. The crew survived and
returned to Earth, but the psychological cost
was great for them, their families, the staff of
the Command Centre, and the millions of tele¬
vision viewers who followed the operation
from beginning to end.
MY BRUSH WITH DEATH
I personally experienced a similar drama in
1979, when I was given command of a Soviet-
Bulgarian space crew. Georgi Ivanov and I set
off aboard the Soyuz 33 transport spacecraft
with the objective of docking with the Salyut 6
orbital space station and carrying out a number
of research tasks over a period of several days.
The flight began normally with no sign of
anything untoward happening, but when we
were within about two kilometres of the space
station, as the main engine was started up so
that we could manoeuvre, we heard a loud
bang at the rear of the spacecraft, which shud¬
dered violently, lost stability and began tumb¬
ling uncontrollably.
I won't go into the technical details of what
had happened; suffice it to say that there was a
serious failure of the main engine. Not only did
this make docking with the space station
impossible, it also meant that there was little
likelihood that our spacecraft could return to
Earth.
Georgi and I thought that only a miracle
could save us and the miracle occurred. Per¬
haps it was all due to the skill of the staff at the
Command Centre and the reliability of the
reserve engine, yet neither of us could get rid of
the notion that supernatural forces had come to
our aid. Somehow, throughout the seventeen
hours during which we remained in waiting
orbit, we felt that there would be no miracle for
us. They were not, I can assure you, the most
agreeable seventeen hours of my life.
There are those who maintain that the risk
factor will be reduced in the future and who
deplore the cold, "soulless" aspect of crewless
space flights. Yet cosmonauts continue to lose
their lives and the cost in suffering for their
families is enormous; under the circumstances
crewless flights seem infinitely preferable. It is
by no means certain that the risks will disap¬
pear. It is extremely difficult to guard against
radiation and the danger from meteorites and
even more difficult to guard against the threat
from the powerful gravitational pull of possible
"black holes".
THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS
OF PHYSICS
Life in a state of weightlessness is life at the
limit of human endurance. There is a sensation
of having been projected into an anti-world, of
having stepped through the looking-glass of the
laws of physics. You feel as though you are
walking on your hands and that your blood is
stagnant in your veins.
Many cosmonauts have experienced the
"position illusion" when they have the
impression that they have their backs to the
Above, cosmonauts at work
in the Mir space station
(left) and in the Soyuz T 6
spacecraft (right).
CONTINUED PAGE 33

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 24
ceiling, or that their heads are facing down¬
wards. The first experience of weightlessness is
always disagreeable, but after a few days the
adaptation process becomes less acute.
However, it does not stop. The longer you
remain in a weightless state, the more accust¬
omed you become to it until, finally, you
"absorb" weightlessness and feel perfectly at
ease. The terrible thing is, however, that this
adaptation to the weightless state is far from
being good for you. If a person is brought back
to Earth in this condition, this may eventually
result in his or her death.
Biologists are fully aware of this problem.
They know that the human organism must not
be allowed to become accustomed to and adapt
to conditions of weightlessness. To achieve this
a programme of physical exercises must be per¬
formed throughout the entire period spent in
space. Orbital space stations have to be pro¬
vided with special exercise rooms.
CHILDREN
OF THE EARTH
After more than thirty years' experience, we
can appreciate what it means psychologically to
be torn away from the Earth and from the rest
of humanity and to find oneself alone, face to
face 


with infinity. Nostalgia for the Earth
becomes practically the only psychological
support that remains. A stay of several months
in the sealed world of a space station is
undoubtedly an ordeal whose long-term effects
we are as yet unable to assess.
The "terraphiles" maintain that humans are
children of the Earth and cannot live beyond its
confines. Even those who favour crewed space
flights are now more circumspect in their opi¬
nions and no longer claim that the presence of
humans in space is entirely positive. However,
they maintain that often there is no alternative.
Unlike a robot, they say, a person can think
and react to unforeseen circumstances or phe¬
nomena. At present, a human being is the most
perfect of all robots and his or her hands are
capable of intricate work such as no automaton
could match. There are many examples of deli¬
cate repair work carried out by humans in the
course of space flights. Humans will have a
useful role to play in space so long as they
remain to some extent irreplaceable.
But perhaps we should limit the time
human beings stay in space. Perhaps we should
opt for space stations that would be visited
from time to time by crews who would remain
in them only for short periods, during which
they would carry out repairs and bring back
research findings and objects manufactured in
space.
My own view is that, today, we could
manage without crewed spaceflights. As far as
the future is concerned, I believe that a com-
Yuri Gagarin (1934-1968),
the first man in space,
during a visit to Unesco
Headquarters In 1963.
promise will be reached between those who
favour the "space without people" position and
those who maintain that "space colonies are the
only answer to the problems facing the Earth".
What if, as might well happen, one of our
space vehicles were to encounter some manifes¬
tation of extra-terrestrial intelligence during a
space flight from Earth? Clearly, only human
beings would be able to sense such a presence.
If we are to give precedence to crewed space
flights it will be in order to detect and listen to
the "intelligent voices" of the universe.
I feel that the era of crewed space flight,
which began some three decades ago, will
continue. Hundreds of men and women will
take the risks and bear the heavy workload for
the sake of the great adventure. The curiosity
inherent in human nature will take us further
and further towards the unknown.
33
