LUC FERRY
talks to Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat
Luc Ferry is a French philosopher,
educator and essayist. In this
interview he analyses the
ideological background of current
ecological thinking and, as a
supporter of an approach to the
environment based on democratic
ethics, defines his conception of
modern democracy in the light of
historical experience. Among his
published works in English are
Homo £stheticus and Heidegger
and Modernity (University of
Chicago Press). An English version
of his latest book, Le nouvel ordre
écologique, will also be published
by the University of Chicago Press.
Your latest book, Le Nouvel Ordre
Écologique ("'The New Ecological Order "J
has caused quite a stir. Is this because it
attempts to make a distinction between
"good" and "bad" ecology?
My book is about the debate within
ecology, which is largely concerned with two
fundamental philosophical problems. The
first is the problem of the rights of nature:
does nature have an intrinsic value, and if so,
what kind of value? The second is the
problem of the relationship between ecology
and the modern world: to what extent does
ecology question the basis of modern civi¬
lization? Very different attitudes to these two
questions have evolved within ecology, par¬
ticularly in the United States, Canada and
the countries of northern Europe. This is
what my book is about.
On the question of the rights of nature,
there are three basic positions in ecology
today. According to the first, nature has no
rights and no intrinsic value and our only
reason for protecting nature is because it con¬
stitutes our environment, that is to say the
periphery of a figure having the human race
at its centre. If we do not protect the envi¬
ronment, so the argument goes, we shall not
be able to provide the human race with the
conditions for a decent life; but the human
race remains the sole possessor of rights or, as
philosophers used to call it, the only "end in
itself". In the United States this is known as
the environmentalist position. It denies nature
any legal status and rejects the idea that nature
as such has any value.
The second position that of the utili¬
tarians concedes that nature does possess
some rights. It maintains that all creatures
that are capable of feeling pain or pleasure
should fall within the purview of the law. It
is often forgotten that utilitarianism is not a
selfish, individualistic doctrine but one whose
aim is to produce the greatest good for the
greatest number and the least possible suf¬
fering. If we accept this principle, say the
utilitarians, there is no reason why animals
should not be a subject of moral and legal
concern. This position, which has consider¬
able support in the United States and in
Australia, provides the sanction for the animal
liberation movement, as at present repre¬
sented by Peter Singer, which has almost
twenty million supporters in the Anglo-
Saxon countries.
The third position is that upheld by those
known in the United States as "deep ecolo¬
gists", who believe that the order of priorities
inherited from the humanist tradition should
be reversed. Instead of putting the human
species first, followed by animal, vegetable
and mineral, the deep ecologists maintain that
the biosphere or the Earth should come first,
followed by living species in general, with
human beings if there are any left in last
place. According to this approach the human
race is the most "antipathetic" species because

it alone is capable of turning against nature to
the extent of destroying it; it is the species
that is supremely antagonistic to nature, the
species that causes pollution and is, in ecol¬
ogists' eyes, the most open to criticism.
This viewpoint can be found, to a greater
or lesser degree, in the writings of philoso¬
phers such as Hans Jonas in the United States
and Michel Serres in France. The latter used
it as the basis for the idea of a "natural con¬
tract" a contract with nature, as against the
kind of social contract between human beings
that forms the basis of the Declaration of
the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1 789.
It is also the position set out by some ecolo¬
gists such as James Lovelock, who in his
book Gala depicts the Earth as a living
organism, and the biosphere as the only true
possessor of rights. It was with these currents
of thought in mind that I subtitled my book
"L'arbre, l'animal et l'homme" ("Trees, ani¬
mals and man"), precisely the order of pri¬
orities on which a new ecological order is
based.
These are, broadly speaking, the different
points of view relating to nature as a pos¬
sessor of rights. The position of the deep
ecologists in particular poses a real problem:
although in my opinion their point of view is
both indefensible and dangerous, since it rel¬
egates the human race to second or even
third place in the hierarchy of possessors of
rights, it does raise the valid question, which
is overlooked by the Cartesian tradition, as
to why we attribute a value to nature inde¬
pendently of our own interests.
So it is the thirdpoint ofview that implies
a radical critique of the modern world?
Yes, the linkage is both fairly simple and
rather deep. For those who adopt the third
viewpoint, which maintains that the rights of
nature should take priority and that the true
possessor of rights is the biosphere, the
modern world is heading in quite the wrong
direction. The deep ecologists often use the
image of a car travelling the wrong way along
a highway. It's no use slowing down, they say,
the car must make a U-turn immediately.
This image of the turn-around a revolu¬
tion in the etymological sense gives some
idea of the kind of revolution they want to
see, rather conservative, reactionary even,
since it means turning our backs on humanist
civilization.
This critique of the modern age in the
name of the rights of the biosphere has
recently been made in films like Dances with
Wolves and The Big Blue. It is an ideology that
informs certain trends within the Green par¬
ties of northern Europe and in organizations
like Greenpeace, which makes no bones about
defending anti-humanist or "supra-humanist"
values. Some people go so far as to say that
human expansion should be limited, by force
if necessary, to protect the environment.
All right. But don 't you think that to make
thispointby quotingNazi texts, asyou do in
your book, is going too far?
I should like to explain why I did this. In .
my opinion people do not always under¬
stand what Nazism really was. Many people
remember only the horror and barbarism of
Nazism, and of course this is perfectly nat- 1
ural, but the reason why the Nazi programme
held an attraction for 80 to 90 per cent of the
German people was because initially it had
something sufficiently profound and forceful
about it for it to gain the support of great
thinkers like Heidegger, Karl Schmitt, Alfred
Bäumler and many others, including some 40
to 50 per cent of biologists and doctors at
that time. There must have been something
else, apart from the cult of the leader, violence
and anti-Semitism. That something else was |
the German Romantic tradition, which '
expressed in a profound form extremely I
strong ecological preoccupations. Am I to j
blame if these ideas are found in Nazi laws I
adopted between 1933 and 1935 at Hitler's I
demand?
These laws took from the Pvomantics the
idea that nature must be considered as pos- ¡
sessing rights, as an entity to be protected,
quite independently of human interests, the
idea that we must rediscover a lost past, a
state of nature as it was before the coming of
civilization. Take, for example, the 1933 law
on the protection of animals, an extremely
detailed law that ran to almost 1 80 pages. It set
forth the important principle, which has been
adopted by today's deep ecologists, that ani¬
mals should be protected for their own sake.
This idea is hammered home again and again
in the German text. Until then the law had at
best only protected domestic animals from
cruelty inflicted on them in public, in other
words in the presence of human beings. In
France the philanthropic and humanist Loi
Grammont of 1850 had similar provisions,
although it did not protect wild animals, and
did not protect domestic animals from abuse
inflicted in private. The Nazi law, for the first
time in history a Belgian law around the
same time did the same thing protected wild
animals and prohibited cruelty to animals,

even in private. Clearly the aim was to protect
natural creatures for their own sake and not
insofar as they affect the interests or sensi¬
tivities of human beings.
Can we conclude then that this is a
coherent anti-humanist vision?
The fundamentalist version of deep ecology
does indeed imply a radical critique of the
humanist civilization inherited from the great
declarations of the rights of man. The decla¬
ration of 1789 in France and that of 1776 in
America are both manifestly anthropocen-
tric. In both of them, nature is secondary,
peripheral.
The German Romantic movement and
Nazi ecology both criticized modern
humanism in the name of a lost past, but it is
also possible to criticize modern humanism in
the name of a diametrically opposed ideal,
that of a radiant future. I am thinking here of
communist, Marxist societies or those advo¬
cating joint worker-management control, soci
eties which have claimed to solve ecological
problems by jointly or centrally planned
industrial and technological development.
What is really interesting about contem¬
porary ecology, as regards both Greenpeace
and the so-called deep ecologists, is that it
contains an explosive mixture of the two cri¬
tiques. Those ecologists who think of them¬
selves as revolutionaries mix together ideas
which I would describe as those of the far
right criticism of universalism, modern sci¬
ence and cosmopolitanism in the name of
local roots and the purity of the species
with extremely progressive ideas such as self-
management, the use of the referendum,
grass-roots initiatives, votes for foreigners,
and so on.
Because of this mixture of ideas it is
wrong to label these people "ecolo-fascists"
or "green Khmers", as some French papers
have been much too quick to do. True radi¬
cals are of the right and the left simultane¬
ously. There is ample scope for a study of
how European leftist ideas of the 1960s para¬
doxically borrowed from the differentialist
themes that were those of the counter-revo¬
lutionary right.
In your critique ofcertain currents within
ecology, you take your bearings from the
philosophy of human rights that was the
main subject ofyour earlier theoretical works.
Let us now widen our discussion and talk
about human rights. Perhaps it would be a
good idea to start by establishing to what
extent human rights are a specifically modern
concept.
Human rights are indeed different from
other rights, such as those that existed in
many ancient societies, or even from those
proclaimed by different religions. When we
talk about human rights we are not talking
about a greater or lesser degree of tolerance
but about a root-and-branch revolution that
makes the individual the basic value, reversing
the order of priorities as between human
beings and everything that hitherto took
precedence over them nature, religion or
the community.
By the Declaration of 1789, for the first
time in history, rights are created for and by
human beings. This represents a break with all
earlier conceptions of law, which rooted law
either in the natural order, as was the case in
Greek and Roman Antiquity, or in a theolog¬
ical universe, as during the Middle Ages in
Europe. The Declaration of 1789 initiated
political humanism in the sense that from then
on it would be human beings, acting in the light
of their interests, their reason and their will,
who enacted the law in those very specific
institutions known as national parliaments.
But let's hang on to this totally new idea
that human beings have rights because they
are human beings, not because they belong to
some national, ethnic, cultural or religious
community, but by virtue of their member¬
ship of the human race, of humanity.
We might call this abstract humanism,
because it regards humans as possessing rights
irrespective of the specific community to
which they belong. This, essentially, is what
distinguishes the legacy of the Enlightenment
as it is embodied in the Declaration of the
Rights of Man of 1789 on the one hand, and,
on the other hand, the counter-revolutionary
Romantic tradition, which rejected this form
of humanism in the name of the individual's
specific allegiances and proclaimed that
people belong to a community that enfolds
and protects them and confers these rights on
them. These are, obviously, fundamental
issues.
And the debate continues. Some people
still interpret the Declaration ofthe Rights of
Man and ofthe Citizen in terms ofa "right to
be different".
This is not, of course, the correct inter¬
pretation. It is on the contrary a counter¬
revolutionary interpretation, which main¬
tains that we have rights as creatures who
"differ" one from another, and that this dif¬
ference is mainly rooted in culture. This is

another very important idea. The Romantics
tell us that human beings owe their humanity
to culture, because it is culture that differen¬
tiates humans from animals, they are human
by virtue of belonging to a cultural commu¬
nity, a nation for example.
The revolutionaries accept that culture
distinguishes man from the animals, but they
differ from the Romantics in their definition
of culture. In their eyes culture is not an
objective datum which is imposed on man
rather like an extension of his original envi¬
ronment. It is not something obvious, not a
kind of inheritance or a "second nature".
Culture is what we build for ourselves. It is
not the same kind of thing as tradition, it is
something that is wrested away from nature.
Culture ushers in the reign of freedom by
wresting itself away from nature. With this
distinction you have the whole of revolu¬
tionary ideology in a nutshell. As Rabaut
Saint-Etienne said in a famous phrase, our his¬
tory is not our code. Democratic culture is a
culture built over and against whatever is
there in the first place nature in the strict
sense, or tradition, which is a second nature.
This is a key question. In the past half
century, which has been dominated by the
problems of decolonization, there has been
much confusion between these two defini¬
tions ofculture. For colonized societies it was
vital to stress the identity ofthe group, the cul¬
ture ofthe group, culture as an inheritance, as
a way ofstanding up to the colonialpower.
It is not hard to understand that the logic
of the right to be different was appropriate in
the first phase of the struggle, but later it
came to be perverted. It was appropriate at
first because it formed a basis for the defence
of cultural entities whose survival was threat¬
ened by colonial imperialism. What was
important at that stage was to defend some¬
thing that already existed, an area of identi¬
fication in which even traditions, even the
most conservative allegiances, could be useful.
There was a kind of instinct for survival at
work here something quite legitimate and
understandable.
But since the colonies achieved indepen¬
dence, this emphasis on distinctive identities
has led on to the present situation in which
individuals are corralled into groups and
these groups are corralled into what amount
to cultural ghettos, pitted against one another.
Basically, two historical perversions have fed
upon each other: universalism was perverted
into a colonialist, i.e. false, universalism, a
European specificity which claimed to be
universal, while the anti-colonial struggle,
which was initially legitimate, eventually led
to a new communalism, a new chauvinism,
the effect of which has been to close off again
the area of freedom partly opened by the vic¬
tory over colonialism.
Let's get back to the difference between the
human and the animal. In the eighteenth
century, the definition ofmodem humanism
focused on this question.
Absolutely. For the Enlightenment
philosophers who were behind the
Declaration of 1789, the distinguishing char¬
acteristic of animals was that they were ruled
by natural instincts. I think this distinction is
still valid in zoological and scientific terms.
Animals have no history. Animal societies
societies of ants, termites or bees have not
changed for thousands of years because their
lives and those of the individual animals
which constitute them are governed by invi¬
olable rules, the rules of nature and instinct.
The human race, on the other hand, is dis¬
tinguished by its ability to transcend the rule
of instinct, what the Enlightenment philoso¬
phers called freedom. By setting itself apart
from nature, the human race entered a
twofold process the process of historical
development and the process of universality.
Historical development means that when
a living species ceases to be governed by the
inviolable code of nature, it enters the realm
of perfectibility. Education teaching and
learning is a specifically human activity.
Children have to learn life skills, whereas
little tortoises and crocodiles are quite capable
of managing on their own. Education may
come from different sources from parents,
school or television but it is indispensable.
The great difference between humankind and
the animals is that humankind, precisely
because it is not governed by instinct, is
capable of transmitting one generation's her¬
itage to the next.
Even when animals have been trained by

human beings, they are incapable of teaching
others what they have been taught. A circus
animal will not give birth to another circus
animal but to an animal that will return at
once to the eternal laws of nature. The dif¬
ference between human beings and animals
lies in the historical process, and in the early
days of ethnology this posed a fundamental
problem: how to classify societies that were
labelled as "primitive" or "savage", since they
seemed to have no history? These societies
seemed to be ruled by something that resem¬
bled nature tradition. In my opinion this
problem remained unsolved until Lévi-
Strauss and contemporary Marxist anthro¬
pology appeared on the scene.
Universalism was the second consequence
of humankind's distancing itself from nature.
By wresting themselves free from their spe¬
cific situation, whether cultural, national, lin¬
guistic or biological the fact of being a man
or a woman human beings can enter the
sphere of universality, in other words they can
familiarize themselves with other cultures,
learn other languages, discover other forms of
art or politics than their own. In so doing
they recognize other human beings, no matter
what culture they belong to, as their fellows,
thereby discovering their common humanity.
The moment we put behind us the specific sit¬
uation from which we set out is the moment
when we attain humanity and move from
the particular to the general. Modern ethics,
the ethics of the French Revolution and the
Enlightenment, favours choosing the uni¬
versal by overcoming the dead weight of
one's specific initial situation.
Why is modern democracy unimaginable
without this attempt to distance ourselves
from nature and tradition and accede to the
universal?
Well, if you base democracy on discus¬
sion, if you think that in a democracy the
law should originate in debate founded on
rational argument rather than on a scriptural
authority or a patriarchal tradition, you must
realize the full implications of this. Rational
argument presupposes the ability of those
who take part in it to set aside their initial
positions. For example, if they talk about
abortion purely and simply from their points
of view as women or men, Catholics or
Muslims, they will never reach agreement:
there's no such thing as a universally valid
argument. If you want to legislate on racism,
you can't do it exclusively as a Black or an
Arab or a Jew, you have to be able to put
your case as a human being. At the root of
everything that is worthwhile in democracy
is the principle of liberty, which means dis¬
regarding the specific positions that are one's
starting point and acceding to the universal
through the use of reason.
Let's turn to democracy and its internal
contradictions, which each country has ulti¬
mately to resolve in its own way. Let's start
with the age-old debate about the two kinds
of rights, rights as freedoms and rights as
entitlements.
The former, which are sometimes called
"formal" rights, are by and large those of the
Declaration of 1789 freedom of opinion,
equality before the law, freedom of move¬
ment, the right to own property. They take us
back to the problems connected with the
limitations of state power. Limiting the
powers of the state is a central notion, the
basis of the tradition of political liberalism. At
the time of the French Revolution, there was
a need to impose limits on absolutism: all
the rights of 1 789 are limits on the legitimate
competence of the state. The right to own
property and the right to freedom of opinion
mean that the state has no right to take away
your property without good reason and no
right to impose an ideology or a religion
upon you. The right to security of the person
prohibits the state from sentencing a person
without trial, so these rights are primarily
political principles limiting state interven¬
tion rather than simple principles of tolerance.
The other type of rights entitlements
or "social" rights made their appearance
around the middle of the nineteenth century.
They relate to a totally different set of prob¬
lems, since they call for increased state inter¬
vention, particularly in social and economic
life. If you maintain that the citizens of a
state have the right to work, it follows that the
state must assume the responsibility of pro¬
viding them with work, which means
directing the economy to some extent. Here
the difference between the two types of rights
CONTINUED PAGE 49
8

* INTERVIEW * LUC FERRY talks to Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat (continued »om page »
begins to emerge. Democratic states should
aim to provide social benefits, but should
such benefits really be considered as rights?
If the answer is "yes", then we have a situa¬
tion in which the state will tend to absorb civil
society in order to respond to all its socio¬
economic needs. This is a very dangerous
process. That is why, in the post-war debates
at the United Nations about the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the question of
formal rights versus social rights was central
to a highly political confrontation between the
United States and Europe on the one hand and
the Soviet Union on the other.
What was at stake was not just a specific
political choice but an ideological choice. Do
we want to live in a liberal society that, while
it responds to demands for social justice,
does not treat them as rights, or do we make
social justice a fully-fledged right and give the
state the job of implementing it? If we do, it
means giving the state powers that become
exorbitant in every respect. In the former
Soviet Union, negligence at work could be
considered an anti-revolutionary act and lead
to years of internment. That is the perverse
logic of social rights.
There have ofcourse been attempts topro¬
duce a synthesis.
I think the republican idea has played a
very important role in trying to reconcile
these two types of rights by means of uni¬
versal suffrage. If, as happened during the
Third Republic in France, you establish uni¬
versal suffrage and encourage people to par¬
ticipate in political decisions, then you are
heading for the conciliatory logic of the wel¬
fare state. The framework of the liberal state,
strictly speaking, still exists, but the citizens
by voting call on this liberal state to pay
increased attention to social justice and to
intervene more actively in civil society. This
represents a big change. Here it is the citizens
who are telling the state what they want.
Roughly speaking, this is what has happened
in Western social democracies. We have never
moved away from a liberal political regime,
and yet there is continual state intervention to
promote social justice. Providing that the
right balance is struck between civil liberties
and intervention by the authorities, the wel¬
fare state seems to me unbeatable as a demo¬
cratic model.
Surely you 're not suggesting that it 's some
sort of magic wand! This is a particularly
important issue if you look at things from
the standpoint of the emerging democracies
of the South. They have other balances to
think about, such as those between the rights
ofthe individualand the expression ofcertain
collective values, between national decision¬
making authorities and the world market.
We could indeed look further into the three
tiers of democracy and the possible links
between them. The first tier is that of suf¬
frage, which may be direct or indirect, uni¬
versal or based on a property qualification; the
second is that of national representation
members of parliament, senators, Lords or
whatever; thirdly there is the tier responsible
for overseeing the rule of law constitutional
, courts and so on. Strange though it may seem,
no one has thought about improving these
three tiers, or even changing them completely.
Why have they stayed the same for centuries?
Europe, as well as the countries of the South,
should think about certain improvements in
their functioning and in the links between
them. If nothing is done, political institutions
and civil society will grow further and further
apart, with increasingly serious consequences.
The construction of a European system
has increased the risk of a major political crisis
that can only play into the hands of dema¬
gogues and nationalists, who will claim that .
they are closer to the people and their preoc¬
cupations than traditional politicians are. There
is a tendency for the various levels of democ¬
ratic representation to become increasingly
remote from individual citizens, whereas
democracy cannot exist unless citizens can
find their way around the political institu¬
tions. For a multitude of reasons, the citizens
of the various European countries have diffi¬
culty in finding their way around the European
institutions. Nobody in Italy or France or
Germany knows what the Council of Europe
or the European Parliament really is.
One ofthe strongpoints ofdemocracies has
been to stimulate sometimes radical criti¬
cism from within. How do you explain the
fact that they have become lethargic and
accepted this increasing remoteness without
reacting?
Unlike totalitarian states or traditional
societies, democracies are places where indi¬
viduals have the right to criticize the law and
the political establishment. But between the
wars, and especially after the Second World
War, European intellectuals and artists the
potential democrats, so to speak turned to
communism. There were historical reasons
for this. The struggle against Nazism, then
against colonialism, led intellectuals of the
Left to criticize fundamental Western values,
including formal democracy, which they
treated simply as an outgrowth of capitalism.
Much of this criticism of formal democracy
in the last seventy years was unfortunately
49

cast in the mould of communist, leftist,
Maoist or Trotskyist ideology, the main result
being to obscure the real questions instead of
bringing them into the open and helping to
find fresh solutions.
Even reformism was carried along by this
current and became trapped in communist
patterns of thought. In France, for example,
Léon Blum made a famous speech to the
Socialist Party Congress at Tours in 1920 in
which he declared that he was opposed to the
Bolsheviks as regards the means used to
achieve the dictatorship of the proletariat, but
not as regards the end itself. Caught up in the
communist eschatology, the reformist plat¬
form seemed no more than a diluted, flabby,
insipid and deodorized version of commu¬
nism. Things have changed in the last 'few
years, but there's a lot of catching-up to do.
In your view, what are the first questions
that reformism should address after over¬
coming this handicap f
It must take a fresh look at the three critiques
of democracy. Two of these come from out¬
side the Marxist view, which criticizes
democracy in the name of the radiant future,
and the generally speaking Romantic, fascist
view, based on the idea of the lost past. The
third critique comes from within the democ¬
racies themselves. It is based on their own
principles and their own promises,' and points
out the gap between those principles and the
reality.
Why does reformism seem so uninspiring
these days? I've given a lot of thought to the
question of reformulating reformism, anJT
have come to realize two things. One is that
the strength of leftist or communist Utopian
ideologies was due to the fact that they bor¬
rowed from religion not the politico-theo¬
logical elements Marxism rejected, not the
superstitious aspect of religion, but its claim to
possess the answer to the meaning of life.
Marxism claimed to express values-that tran¬
scended the life of any person living in the
here-and-now. What was splendid in the
Marxist utopiaor perhaps- one should say
utopias, in the plural was that one was
working for something higher than one's own
life, that the lives of individuals and the fate of
humanity as a whole touched at some point.
Unless there is a "here below" and a
"beyond", life has no meaning. If we do not
accept the existence of this dichotomy, we
can only ask elementary questions about the
meaning of life. If our acts only have meaning
in the context of some specific project, the
question of the meaning of this meaning can
never arise. The meaning of existence has to
transcend the partial, mundane meanings we
give to our daily lives. Marxism gave an
answer to this fundamental question, but
now it's lost. That's the first point. Reformism
must rediscover something of the same kind.
Paradoxically, though, it must also step
outside that framework and free itself from the
straitjacket of secularized religion. That's the
second point. To do so, it must set itself a so to
speak unending task, not the achievement of
an ultimate purpose like that of the Bolsheviks,
but a purpose that is always moving forward
and is never fully achieved, a purpose in line
with an approach-that has at last been secu¬
larized. We must find a new purpose in life, but
a secular purpose. In every field science,
education, culture, politics it is the rein¬
statement of the idea of progress within the
perspective of an endless task, the pursuit of
perfectibility and freedom, that can give án
ultimate meaning to all that we do.
When you come down to it, the biggest
paradox ofall is that theology, whether reli¬
gious or Marxist, should have an end.
Theology sees history in terms of the end of
history, just as a believer holds that after
death comes an end, admission into Paradise.
That's right. For Marxism, the coming of
communism is the end of history, whereas in
the secular perspective I am suggesting, it is the
idea of the endless nature of the task ahead that
gives meaning to existence. Once we know
that the task is endless, we also know for sure
that our present efforts are not vain. Continual
self-improvement is important because it never
goes to waste. To think of perfectibility as the
pathway to culture and culture as an ongoing
process of liberation, as an ongoing expansion
of human experience perhaps this is where
the essential meanings come together in a sec¬
ular universe.
