R H
Goethe, a mindfor the universal
The Committee on Arts and Letters ofthe
International Institute ofIntellectual Co¬
operation organized a symposium on
Goethe in Trankfurtfrom 12-14 May 1932
to mark the centenary ofthe German
poet's death.' The eighteen speakers,2 who
addressed topics as varied as the poet's
interests, all reached the same conclusion
in differing but consensual terms: the
versatile author o/Werther had a central
preoccupation which we have called a
concernfor universalitya continuing
urge to achieve harmony and reconcile
opposites, andjoy in the richness ofunity
in diversity.
Goethe visiting the Coliseum in Rome,
a painting by the German artist Jacob Philipp (1737-1807).
41
Texts selected and presented
by Edgardo Canton
(Í ^"^ [;iln from the summits of pure
reason," wrote Goethe, "the
whole of life seems to be a nasty
illness, and the world is like a madhouse."
That was a real writer's expression an
expression of pained impatience with
humanity, such as is often met with, more
often than is generally supposed, in
Goethe's works	
Goethe's works contain many passages
in which he complains of the pain inflicted
on him by nastiness and stupidity: there
are many more of these passages than
might be expected or than it would be fit¬
ting to quote, especially since we know
from the example of Goethe himself how
courtesy and kindliness can help in the
task of reconciliation. To use a stronger
and warmer word for this kindliness, we
may call it love. Goethe was aware that
intelligence and art without love amount
to very little, that they cannot exist without
it, and that intelligence cannot live with the
world or the world with it unless it pos¬
sesses love.
This love takes the form of consider-
ateness, tenderness, kindness and a desire
to treat others gently that is typical of
Goethe	
But here I want to mention a thought,
a tendency and an idea that make up the
main expression of the mind's love of life,
namely educational thought. Goethe was
a true educator, as witness the two great
monuments of his life, Faustand Wilhelm
Meister. The latter work in particular shows

V
by Thomas Mann, Georges Opresco andPaul Valéry
how the impulse that drove him to pen
his autobiography as a confession and
self-portrait became objective, was exter¬
nalized in the social and even the political
sphere, and so acquired educative value.
This impulse and this educative voca¬
tion were not, however, born of inner har¬
mony but were the result of the inner con¬
flicts that perturb the Ego, the discords it
contains, the difficulties it undergoes, and
the struggle with itself on which it has
embarked and which it needs to confess.
The poet-writer is an educator in the sense
that he expounds problems which are not
part of everyday life but which neverthe¬
less are apt to portray or express the ideas
of the human community. "When the par¬
ticular portrays the general", wrote Goethe,
"that is true symbolism." . . .
A writer may be defined as an edu¬
cator whose own education has followed
the strangest route; education in his or
Cover of a booklet containing the
proceedings of the symposium held by the
International Institute of Intellectual Co¬
operation in 1932 to mark the centenary of
Goethe's death.
EKTR£TI£SS
SUR GOETHE
i j'tOémm i« .-mentiré 4* t* m-rl
her case always goes hand in hand with the
fight against the self. The innermost being
and the outside world become confused in
this struggle against both the Ego and the
world, and a purely objective education by
a perfect teacher is but empty pedantry.
THOMAS MANN
Humanity looks at itself in [Goethe]
and knows no finer image of
itself. He is both a summit and a
frontier of the mind. And yet no-one was
as fond of the genius of the people, the
fresh, spontaneous work of humble peas¬
ants, as this god of the intellect	 He set
out to encompass the whole vast field of
folk literature, to make contact with the
most outstanding creations of the most
remote nations, those which history has
placed in exceptional circumstances or
which have lived far removed from all civ¬
ilizing influences	
The poet by no means commands all
the tongues from which he takes the
poems he translates; but even though he
does not know their exact meaning, his
instinct comes to his aid. Not under¬
standing a word of the original, and using
a translation sent him by a kind corre¬
spondent, he manages to render its
rhythm, its sonority and even its word
order in short, the essential shape of a
poem. It is for him an amusing and very
instructive game to see how ancient uni¬
versal themes are interpreted by the most
diverse nations	
For Goethe, folk poetry is only part of
a wider whole, and for all its beauty it has
no real value except insofar as it helps us
to understand this whole, establish its
laws and define its boundaries. . . . No-
one better than he has grasped its modest
beauty, the depth and force of its
emotion or the immediate freshness of its
feeling. . . But that was not the end of his
curiosity: he aimed to go further, to dis¬
cover in what sense a humble piece of
rustic verse is "poetry", in short, what
"poetry" consists ofand what the subject-
matter of poetry is	
For [Goethe] there is really only one
genuine, true poetry. It is exclusive nei¬
ther to the people nor to the nobility, no
more to kings than to peasants. Anyone
who feels himself a man in the full sense of
the word will practise it successfully. . . .
Imperceptibly, stage by stage, starting
with an interest in folk poetry, Goethe in
the last years of his life arrived at the
grandiose idea of humanity reconciled in
the worship of beauty, more mindful of
what unites the human family than ofwhat
divides it. Eckermann quotes a comment
by the poet dated 5 July 1827: "I cannot
think of a column or monument to the
memory of a remarkable man without
seeing it toppled and trampled under the
hooves of future warriors." This vision is
unforgettable, of regiments destroying and
dragging through the mire men's
reminders of the lofty deeds of the greatest
of them. Goethe the realist hated war. He
speaks of it not mawkishly, nor in its cruel,
distressing, blood-curdling aspect, but in
its absurdity. He sees only one cure: the
union of mankind through thought and
feeling, through learning and literature.
GEORGES OPRESCO
Some men give us an idea (or an illu¬
sion) of what the world, especially
Europe, could have become ifpolit¬
ical and intellectual power had intermin¬
gled, or at least had had less distinct rela¬
tionships	
I see some such men as appearing in 43

HIVES
44
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Others gave rise to the fire and splendour
of the Renaissance. The most recent, born
in the eighteenth century, took with them
when they passed away the last hopes of a
certain civilization founded primarily on
the myths of Beauty and Knowledge
both created or invented by the ancient
Greeks.
Goethe was one of these. I say at once
that I can see none after him. ... I was
thinking of trying to build up, starting from
him, the general idea ofwhat I call a "uni¬
versal" man not to be confused with a
"great" man. There are plenty ofgreat men;
they are not all universal men, and perhaps
not all "universal men" are "great men" in
the sense in which we use these terms.
... I thought that universal men would
be principally those individuals seemingly
relatively free of chronological, ethnic or
national peculiarities. There are some per¬
sonalities whom we can imagine being at
home in any age and among any people
and only accidentally belonging to the
race that is their own	
So Goethe is an example perhaps the
last to my knowledge of those men
whose mind and even whose character in
A letter written by Bela
Bartók on 30 April 1932
to the director of the
International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation.
In it he declines an
invitation to speak on
"Goethe and music" at
Frankfurt on the grounds
that he has not "studied
the question".
a sense call for a much wider formula than
the usual one by which other individuals
are constituted. A Goethe molecule is extra¬
ordinarily more of a compound than a
Sc/n'Wermolecule or a Byron molecule	
Had I looked for other types of this kind, I
would perhaps have had difficulty finding
any as representative as the one that sug¬
gested to me this appellation. As I have
said elsewhere, it is obvious that Napoleon
belongs to the same species, and that
Caesar isanothermemberofit	
Goethe effortlessly takes his unique,
unrivalled and commanding place in the
world of the intellect; and he occupies it so
manifestly or rather creates it, pre¬
scribing the conditions for it by his very
existence and so much as a matter of
course that the 1808 summons to and
meeting with Napoleon were bound to
happen, as though pre-ordained by some
conjunction of heavenly bodies: a sum¬
mons and a meeting that were almost too
devoutly to be wished, too clearly intended
to be a wonder, too obviously obeying the
command of poetic destiny. . . .
Goethe never forgot this interview, cer¬
tainly his greatest memory and the jewel in
the crown of his pride	
The empire that was built on intellect
in action and the empire of the intellect in
freedom beheld each other and talked
together for A MOMEN . . . and what a
moment! ... A moment which of its own
accord spoke the fatal words of the
covenant to the Emperor: STOP ME ... I
AM SO BEAUTIFUL. . . .
They talked of literature. Werther and
French tragedy served to pass the appro¬
priate time. But something quite different
was at stake	 Coquetry is essential for
such an interview. Both men set out to
appear at ease and smile as they see fit.
Here were two enchanters seeking to
charm each other. Napoleon made himself
emperor of the Mind, even of Letters.
Goethe felt himself portraying Mind itself.
Perhaps the Emperor has a more precise
awareness of the real essence ofhis power
than Goethe imagines.
Napoleon knew better than anyone
else that his power, more than all the
world's powers, was a strictly magical
power a power of Mind over minds an
aura.
He said to Goethe: You are a Man (or he
said of Goethe: There is a Man) . . . that is
to say, a measure ofall things, that is to
say, a being next to whom the others are
but sketches, fragments of men, hardly
men, since they are not the measure of all
things as we are, YOU AND I. There is in us,
Monsieur Goethe, a strange virtue ofabun¬
dance, and a fury, a destiny to do, to
become, to change, to leave nothing in
the world the same as it was before.
Goethe (and this is no longer my imag¬
ination) pondered, and thought of his
strange idea of the diabolical.
What a splendid Faust Part III Bona¬
parte would make!
PAUL VALÉRY
1. The three texts published here have been
extracted from the proceedings of the
symposium, which appeared in Untreuem sur
Goethe ("Conversations about Goethe"), League
of Nations, International Institute of Intellectual
Co-operation, Paris, 1932.
2. Karel Capek, A. Costa du Reis, Jules Destrée,
Henri Focillon, Julien Luchaire, Salvador de
Madariaga, Thomas Mann, Gilbert Murray, Ugo
Ojetti, Georges Opresco, Kagnar Gistberg,
Roberto Paribeni, Gonzague de Reynold, N. Roll-
Anker, Josef Strzygowski, Hélène Vacaresco, Paul
Valcrv, A.W. Waetzoldt.
