The third bank of the river
by Roberto DaMatta
Above, a participant in the
Parintins carnival (Brazil). T
I o reflect on modernity is necessarily to
deconstruct a myth. But what arc myths? It
took us a long time to see them as anything
other than the irrational outgrowth of primitive
minds, but wc now realize that they provide a
framework within which societies define their
values, that they are devices for taking control of
time, time that bears within itself the seeds of
death and oblivion. Myths, then, are stories that
seek to escape the grip of time. That is why
mythologies are disturbing. When, therefore, the
heralds of post-modernity proclaim that the age
of great stories is over, they do so in order that
they can themselves construct the great (and true)
story of all times . . .
Ultimately this is the dilemma that lies at
the root of our civilization: how to find stable
values in a world that chooses to be unstable,
how to reconcile individuals who regard them¬
selves as the repositories of rights, desires and ^

so
subjective feelings with collective institutions
that have to be stable and objective, that require
duties to be performed and that guarantee the
existence of individual choice?
If myths are stories that reject the linear
chronology of cumulative history, how can they
be reconciled with a civilization that claims to
have invented modernity and defines itself as the
product of a history that continually transforms
people and institutions?
To answer this question is to recognize that
there is no such thing as a society exclusively
based on the future or on movement. Modernity
may have exorcised many myths, but it has not
abolished myth-making. Repressed and re
labelled (with that all-purpose prefixpost-), myths
constantly reappear above all when the death of
God or, worse, the end of humankind, is
announced. For myths, like dreams, signal unre¬
solved problems. The generous Western ideals of
social justice, individual freedom and political
equality for all are clearly based on a mythology,
and this mythology, even in the developed coun¬
tries, is still grappling with many deviant phe¬
nomena racism, anti-semitism, political and
economic marginalization that haunt or chal¬
lenge it. Thus, alongside the egalitarian credo
that underlies the ideology of professional success
in modern Western society, counter-mytholo¬
gies have emerged to denounce the advantages

Modern Rio.
conferred by graduating from a great university,
by speaking English or French and, last but not
least, by being white!
Confronted with an enlightened, rationalist
and bourgeois West whose concept of time is
dominated by the idea of progress, other parts of
the world are obliged to make a synthesis between
the modern idea of a universal history centred on
utilitarian individualism and their own tradi¬
tional values, which hinge on personal loyalties to
the gods and to ancestors, families and friends. In
many parts of the world, and particularly in so-
called marginal or peripheral regions, a rap¬
prochement is taking place between bourgeois
mythology on the one hand, which refers to a
system in which the individual is the moral and
political centre of the universe, and, on the other
hand, stories based on very different premises.
The societies that survive this process are those
that invent mythologies combining these two
value-systems, previously regarded as incom¬
patible. This path has been followed by Japan and
by Asia in general, and, on an equally signifi¬
cant scale, by Latin America and particularly
Brazil.
EQUAL YET UNEQUAL
I have written that Brazilian society is struggling
to combine two mythologies. The first, taking its
inspiration from the modern tradition, considers
the individual as an autonomous moral entity
endowed with inalienable rights such as freedom
and equality. The second is based on a world -view
that denies individualism, distrusts progress and
rejects formal political equality. Whereas the first
of these mythologies leads to the modern concept
of representative democracy, the second reflects
a way of life in which personal relationships are
stronger than political institutions. Some see in
this way of life the imprint of an Iberian counter-
reformism which (by virtue of its myths, its
heroes and its forms of civilization) is a kind of
counterpoint in carnival dress to liberal individ¬
ualism, above all that form which flourishes in the
United States, which with its media, fast food,
tragic solitude and insurmountable ethnic, sexual,
age and occupation barriers is the paradigm of
modernity.
This convergence of mythologies clearly cre¬
ates a dilemma to which the Brazilian and,
more generally, Latin American solution lies in
a tendency to see all people as politically and
economically unequal but as morally of equal
worth. In this world we may be masters or slaves,
bosses or underlings; but face-to-face with death
we arc all equal. This paradoxical solution is an
attempt to reconcile modern cgalitarianism with
the inequality ingrained in traditional ways of
thought by recourse to an ethic of ambiguity.
Latin American mythologies adopt equality
as the framework of the legal and political system
and competition as the basis of the economic
system, without abandoning or curbing tradi¬
tional social practices based on inequality and
personal relations. As a result, the legal and polit¬
ical systems always seem to be either far ahead or
far behind what is really happening in society.
Here wc have a process of modernization
imposed from above by the state, which attempts
thereby to substitute itself for the creative forces
that gave the original system its spontaneity.
While modernity is based, socially and epis-
temologically, on the triumph of the individual,
it is also rooted in a system of rigid procedures,
valid for everyone, everywhere and in all

circumstances as if we were all really born
equal, as if we were all exempt from social oblig¬
ations and competed in reasonable conditions
of equality. Equality before the law conceals
inequality of social conditions. The so-called
"post-modern" mythology that relativizes and
fragments, reducing everything to the yuppy
nihilism of certain circles in Paris or in Berkeley,
can only function if certain conditions are met,
above all if a common denominator is attained, the
common denominator in question being an
almost blind obedience to the basic principles of
a universalist rationalism that structures the whole
system. But how can an egalitarian rationalism of
this sort be applied to traditionalist societies
based on the concept of difference?
A CAPRICIOUS
LIBERALISM
The result, in many cases, is a mythology that
believes in miracles, spirits and messiahs, that
invents a capricious and particularist liberalism in
which the laws of the market only work for the
powerful, and in which egalitarianism has been
wedded first to slavery, then to servility and a
system of patronage. From this arises a state that
is simultaneously large and small, strong and
weak, whose resources and spoils are diverted to
make sure that the poor are kept in their place, and
above all to increase the wealth of the rich. It is a
mythology that has reinvented Carnival, the fes¬
tival in which social roles are reversed without the
system being changed, and that has encouraged
delinquency founded on the morality of profit-
seeking, disculpating people and opening the
way to irresponsibility.
Here we have a collection of myths produced
from a kind of moral tinkering, a Frankensteinian
hotchpotch of institutions and practices taken
from here, there and everywhere, of moral rules
grouped under a double (or triple) ethic which
declares that everyone is equal before the law,
except for one's relatives and friends. Any refer¬
ence to universality in this context is made in
order to legitimize the market and profit, not to
protect the most fundamental rights.
But we must not disregard the generous and
constructive side of these trans-modern mytholo¬
gies, the side that wants everyone to be equal but
rejects the post-utilitarian equation between
equality and consumption, that wants freedom,
but not just to make money or to exploit the
masses marginalized by the media. In Brazil this
takes the form of a shrewd resistance to market
economics through the myth of a popular hero, the
brigand Pedro Malasarte. The stories featuring
this emblematic figure show how it is possible to
play the market against big money, and how the
rule of law that legitimizes exploitation of the
workforce can be turned against the boss. In these
trans-modern mythologies, morality is on the
side of a form of delinquency that compensates for
the inequalities resulting from the pressures of
the international market and of social elites.
*-.
A
mm .
'-*>
Right and opposite page
above, the adventures of
Pedro Malasarte, as
pictured by the illustrator
Teixeira Mendes.
Centre, labourers head for
work on a dam in Ceará
state (Brazil).
ROBERTO DAMATTA,
of Brazil, is the Edmund P.
Joyce Professor of
Anthropology and Senior
Fellow of the Kellogg Institute,
University of Notre Dame
(U.S.A.). Among his works
published in English are
Carnivals, Rogues and Heroes
(University of Notre Dame
Press) and A Divided World:
Apinayé Social Structure
(Harvard University Press).
' ¿?*Cr-Ji¿ ft . f.*üm- ' .
>w- '¿¿ms. >im*- s
<f&r*&*
r*JS,
9m

v I : V'-
£'.» * *í i
But the process of acculturation between the
modern and the traditional also has perverse
effects. In this twofold ethic, the possibility of
appealing alternatively to one system or the other
makes it difficult for individuals to know where
they stand. What I cannot do as a citizen I may be
able to do as a friend of the governor or a relative
of someone in authority. This is the dilemma
faced by communities in which the modern
nation-state is subjected to all kinds of external
and internal pressures and is confronted by social
expectations that have no outlet.
The mythologies of peripheral societies have
grown out of this dilemma. Hence our difficulties
with classic bourgeois heroes, those judicious
individuals who are always serious and who know
how to say yes or no. . . . Presented with a choice
but unable or unwilling to decide between the two
courses available to us, we prefer triangular situ¬
ations which blur distinctions and harmonize dif¬
ferent interests. This is why our mythology con¬
tains a certain number of truly trans-modern
characters such as Jorge Amados Doña Flor, who
chooses not to choose, or one of the heroes ofJoäo
Guimaracs Rosa, who decides to live on a magical
"third bank of the river" somewhere on the edge
of consciousness, from which he can always see
the other two banks and can appreciate the point
of view of everyone else, of all those who are par¬
alyzed by their tragic, yet nonetheless rich and
resilient, uncertainty. 53
