Wien «fíes run riot
Eruptions of big-city
violence in the West
are symptoms of a
malaise that needs
treatment in depth
by Ion i. D. IVaquanf
Los Angeles (1992).
OCTOBER 1990 in Vaulx-en-Velin, a quiet,
depressed working-class town in the
suburbs of Lyon, France: several hun¬
dred youths, many of them second-generation
immigrants from the Maghrib, take to the
streets and confront police after a neighbour¬
hood teenager dies in a motorcycle accident
caused by a patrol car. For three days, they
clash with law enforcement officials and riot
troops hastily dispatched by the government,
stoning police vans, ransacking stores and set¬
ting 200 cars on fire. When calm finally returns,
dozens of injured are counted, damage is esti¬
mated at some $120 million, and the country is
in shock. The long-simmering rage of the ban¬
lieues declining peripheral areas with high
densities of degraded public housing tops the
political agenda.
July 1992 in Bristol, England: a nearly
identical chain of events triggers several nights
of rioting on the Hartcliffe estate, a poor
industrial district on the southern edge of
town. Violence breaks out after two local men
joyriding on a stolen police motorcycle are
killed in a collision with an unmarked police
car. Later that night, some hundred youths go
on the rampage through the local shopping
centre. When police counter-attack, they are
showered with bricks and stones, steel balls,
scaffolding and petrol bombs. Over 500 elite
troops have to be called in to restore order to a
one-square-kilometre area temporarily turned
8

Vaulx-en-Velin, France
(1990).
urban guerrilla zone. Similar disturbances
break out that summer in Coventry, Man¬
chester, Salford, Blackburn and Birmingham.
April 1992 in Los Angeles: the acquittal of
four white police officers in the brutal video¬
taped beating of Rodney King, a defenceless
black motorist arrested after a car chase, sets
off an explosion of civil violence unmatched in
American history this century. In the black
ghetto of South Central, white motorists are
snatched out of their cars and beaten, stores
vandalized, police cars overturned and set
aflame. The Korean-owned licquor outlets,
swapmeets and markets that dot the area are
targeted for systematic destruction. So over¬
whelming is the eruption that neither firefighters
nor the police can prevent the torching of
thousands of buildings. Rioting promptly
mushrooms outwards as scenes of mass loot¬
ing multiply. A state of emergency is pro¬
claimed and 7,000 federal troops, including
1,200 Marines, are drafted in. Sniper fire and
shootings between rioters, police and store-
owners who take up arms to defend their
shops bring the death toll to forty-five. By the
end of the third day of upheaval, nearly 2,400
have suffered injury and 10,000 are under
arrest; a thousand families have lost their
homes and twenty thousand their jobs. Total
destruction is estimated at a staggering one bil¬
lion dollars.
These outbursts of collective violence are
but three drawn from a list of urban distur
bances too long to enumerate. For the past
decade has witnessed a spectacular increase in
public unrest and rioting at the heart of the
large cities of the First World. Most of the
disorders, big and small, that have shaken up
the French banlieues, the British inner cities
and the ghettos and barrios of America have
involved chiefly the youth of poor, segregated
and dilapidated urban neighbourhoods and
appear to have been fuelled by growing "racial"
tensions in and around these areas. Thus the
dominant interpretation in media accounts and
political debates has been that they are essen¬
tially "race riots" expressive of animosity
against, or between, the ethnic and/or immi¬
grant "minorities" of these countries.
There is much to support this view. The
Europe of the 1980s has indeed been swept by
a seemingly unstoppable wave of racist senti¬
ment. In France, long-covert "anti-Arab" hos¬
tility has burst out into the open and fuelled an
increase in racist assaults, and it has found its
political expression in the xenophobic popu¬
lism of the National Front. In the United
Kingdom, antagonism between black West
Indians, Asians and whites has flared up in
repeated street confrontations and grown
more acrimonious, so much so that public
unrest and violence are increasingly perceived
as essentially "black" problems. Meanwhile in
the United States a society-wide backlash
against the gains made by so-called minorities
(mainly African-Americans but also Latinos

Violence and counter-
violence: Los Angeles
(1992).
10
LOIC J. D. WACQUANT
is a French sociologist
affiliated with the Society of
Fellows of Harvard
University. He has conducted
extensive research on racial
inequality in the United
States and on comparative
urban poverty. His recent
publications include:
The Zone: le métier de
"hustler" dans le ghetto noir
américain (1992), and
"Redrawing the Urban Color
Line: The State of the
Ghetto in the 1980s" (in
C Calhoun, ed., Social
Theory and the Politics of
Identity, 1993). He is
currently writing a book
about the culture and
economics of professional
boxing.
and some Asian groups) in the wake of the
civil rights movement of the 1960s has led to a
sharp deterioration of race relations revealed
inter alia by an escalation in racially motivated
or "hate" crime, a generalized fear of black
males on the street, inter-ethnic incidents on
university campuses, and the blatant exploita¬
tion of anti-black feelings by some politicians.
Yet the urban riots of the 1980s are not a
simple extension of traditional uprisings such
as the United States has experienced through¬
out this century. A closer look at their ana¬
tomy suggests that these disorders have, in
varying proportions, combined two logics:
that of protest against racial injustice and that
of the poor rising against economic depriva¬
tion and widening social inequalities with the
most effective, if not the only, weapon at their
disposal, namely direct forcible disruption of
civil life.
The 1980s may be the decade of the slow
maturing of mixed riots mixed in terms of
their causes or goals as well as by virtue of
their multi-ethnic composition. For, contrary
to media portrayals, neither the French ban¬
lieues nor the British inner cities are solely or
even predominantly populated by immigrants,
and those who partook in unrest there were
more often than not recruited across ethnic
lines. Moreover, their demands are the
demands of working-class youths everywhere:
jobs, decent schools, affordable or improved
housing, access to public services, and fair
treatment by police. Similarly, in South-Cen¬
tral Los Angeles, the thousands who pilfered
merchandise from burning supermarkets and
mini-malls during the riot were far from being
all blacks: over half of the first 5,000 arrests
were Latinos and another 10 per cent whites.
The uprising was not exclusively an Afro-
American outcry against gross racial discrimi¬
nation; it was also a revolt against poverty,
hunger, and the severe material aggravation
brought on by economic recession and cut¬
backs in government programmes. As one of
the city's most astute observers puts it, "the
nation's first multiracial riot was as much'
about empty bellies and broken hearts as it
was about police batons and Rodney King."
VIOLENCE FROM ABOVE
It is tempting to view outbreaks of collective
violence "from below" as symptoms of moral
crisis, pathologies of the lower class, or as signs
of the impending societal breakdown of "law

and order". But close comparative analysis of
their timing, makeup and unfolding shows
that, far from being irrational, recent public
unrest by the urban poor of Europe and Amer¬
ica is a (socio)logical response to the massive
structural violence unleashed upon them by a
set of mutually reinforcing economic and poli¬
tical changes. These changes have resulted in a
polarization of classes which, combined with
racial and ethnic segregation, is producing a
dualization of the metropolis that threatens not
simply to marginalize the poor but to
condemn them to outright social and eco¬
nomic redundancy.
This violence "from above" has three main
components: mass unemployment bringing in
its wake pervasive material deprivation, relega¬
tion to decaying neighbourhoods, and height¬
ened stigmatization in public discourse, all of
which are the more deadly for occurring
against the backdrop of a general upswing in
inequality. Unlike previous phases of eco¬
nomic growth, the uneven expansion of the
1980s, when it occurred at all, failed to "lift all
boats" and instead led to a deepening schism
between rich and poor, and between those
stably employed in the core, middle-class sec¬
tors of the economy and uneducated indivi-
"The widening gulf between
rich and poor. ..." A Paris
street scene (1989).
duals trapped at the margins of an increasingly
insecure low-skill labour market.
For the residents of flagging working-class
areas, the reorganization of capitalist econo¬
mies visible in the shift from manufacturing to
education-intensive services, the impact of elec¬
tronic and automation technologies in factories
and offices, and the erosion of unions and the
reduction of government outlays in the areas of
welfare and low-income housing have translated
into unusually high rates of long-term jobless¬
ness and a regression of material conditions.
Simultaneously, advanced countries have had to
absorb a fresh influx (or the definitive settle¬
ment) of immigrants from the Third World who
are typically channelled into these very neigh¬
bourhoods where economic opportunities and
collective resources arc already diminishing.
Such spatial segregation intensifies hardship by
concentrating in degraded and isolated enclaves
downwardly-mobile families of the native work¬
ing class and immigrant populations of mixed
nationalities who are young, economically frag¬
ile and equally deprived of skills that are readily
marketable in the core of the new economy.
Such an accumulation of social ills explains
the oppressive atmosphere of drabness, ennui
and despair that pervades poor communities in
11

many large Western cities. Residents of these
cramped neighbourhoods feel that they and
their children have little future other than the
life of misery and exclusion to which they
seem consigned at present. Added to this is the
rage felt by poor urban youths as a result of
the cultural discrimination and stigmatization
imposed on residents of decaying urban areas.
Lastly there is the curse of being poor in the
midst of a rich society in which active participa¬
tion in the sphere of consumption has become a
sine qua non of social dignity a passport to
citizenship even among the most dispossessed.
As testified by the proliferation of "mugging"
in the British inner city, la dépouille (the strip¬
ping of fancy clothes under threat of force) in
the estates of the banlieue, and gold-chain
snatching and drug dealing on the streets of the
American ghetto, violence and crime are often
the only means that working-class youths with
no employment prospects have of acquiring the
money and the consumer goods indispensable
for acceding to a socially recognized existence.
THE DILEMMAS
OF POLICING
If direct forms of infra-political protest by way
of popular disruption of public order, direct
seizure of goods and destruction of property
have spread, it is also true that formal means of
pressure on the state have declined along with
the decomposition of traditional machineries
of political representation of the poor.
The widening gulf between rich and poor,
the growing self-closure of political elites, the
increasing distance between the lower class and
the dominant institutions of society all breed
distrust and disaffection. They converge to
Bangladesh, after the
destruction of the mosque
at Ayodhya in India (1992).
undermine the legitimacy of the social order. In
the vacuum created by the lack of political link¬
ages and the absence of legitimate mediations
between poor urban populations and a society
from which they feel excluded, it is no wonder
that relations with the police have become both
salient and bellicose, and that incidents with the
"forces of order" are invariably the detonator
of explosions of popular violence in the cities.
Trends in all countries converge to show that,
whenever the police come to be considered as
an alien force by the community, they become
unable to fulfil any role other than a purely
repressive one and can only add to further
disorder and violence.
Political responses to urban violence and to
the civil disruption it causes vary significantly
from country to country depending on
national ideologies of citizenship, state struc¬
tures and capacities, and political conjuncture.
They span a continuum between outright crim¬
inalization and repression at one end, and
politicization of the problem via the collective
renegotiation of social rights at the other.
The recent upsurge in popular violence at
the heart of advanced urban societies has deep
roots in the epochal transformation of their
economy, cities, and state policies. The govern¬
ments of rich nations have, to varying degrees,
been unable or unwilling to stem the growth
of inequality and to prevent the social and spa¬
tial cumulation of economic hardship, margi-
nality and stigmatization in deteriorating work¬
ing-class enclaves of the changing populace.
The continued conjugation of ethnic iniquity
and class exclusion in the same fragile areas
promises to produce more unrest and to pose a
daunting challenge to the very idea of citizen¬
ship in Western cities for years to come.
12
