Paul Valéry and Henri Focillon
Reaching the general conscience2
It thus appears that the Permanent
Committee on Arts and Letters may
be envisaged in two ways, that it has,
in a sense, a twofold purpose; its activity is
technical insofar as it seeks to establish
and organize relations, where none exist
and where the need makes itself felt,
between the literary and artistic institu¬
tions of different countries, but it must be
more general too; it seems difficult to prove
to the intellectual world that it is directly
concerned in the work of the League of
Nations if it is not given the opportunity to
discuss the problems which most pro¬
foundly affect intellectuals themselves; if
a way of bringing them together is not
found, in conditions that have yet to be
defined, to carry out real intellectual work,
to compare their ideas and make them
known through the publication of book¬
lets; if the research they are asked to carry
out is solely concerned with formal and
procedural matters and not with the sub¬
stance of problems	
The nature of the League of Nations is
to respond to an emergency. In our case
the emergency is the life of the mind. Let
us not pretend to ignore that it is threat¬
ened, directly by anxiety about the future
and the instability of political life, indi¬
rectly by the industrial system and the
crisis through which it is passing. Perhaps
it is possible to glimpse the future of intel¬
lectual life as taking place in select and
closed circles, privileged retreats, in con¬
ditions of solitude that will to some extent
guarantee its freedom. But the mind is
only fully itself if it is not lateral, if it is
involved in the world even if this may
be hazardous, if it tends towards a form of
leadership that is not muted and debated
but dazzling and accepted.
The French writer Paul Valéry
in 1937.
Every great age has consciously and
clearly set forth its definition of man, not
as a sum of fortunate and unfortunate
experiences, not as a collection of contin¬
gencies, but as a kind of ¡deal portrait set
up as an example and capable of inspiring
resemblance. History is thus a gallery of
half-authentic, half-painted portraits
which are all the more authentic because
they have been so influential. In this art in
reverse, the portrait is the model, and living
people are the copies. It is thus possible for
us to imagine ourselves, to the extent of
their respective efficiency, as Renaissance
man, the educated man of the seventeenth
century, the eighteenth-century philoso¬
pher, and several other exemplary types
closer to us in time. Some people will think
that the definition of man appropriate to
this historical period should be formu¬
lated by poets or philosophers who can
think it out and derive it from the facts. But
we see from the past that these vigorous
sketches are not the product of solitary
dreaming but are due to the collabora¬
tion, conscious or otherwise, of a large
number. Thus the French Encyclopaedists,
at a moment in European life when man,
transcending frontiers, was perhaps at his
most self-possessed since the pax Romana,
combined far less to compose a useful
repertory of the knowledge of their time
than to produce a certain doctrine and to
revise the definition that classical genius
had long given of itself.
No group at the present time could
reasonably claim to undertake such a task.
But men of goodwill certainly have the
right and possibly the resources to estab¬
lish consultations which could be useful,
after drawing up a kind of emergency list.
The essential question is that of educa¬
tion. Pedagogical programmes and
methods only concern us indirectly, but
the problem of the goal, from which all
others proceed, presents itself to us on all
sides. What do we wish man to be? On
what type do we wish him to be modelled?
What are the ministries of public instruc¬
tion aiming towards, in all the countries of
the world? 	
We also see that Europe has extended
to the universe, that it has made contact
with profoundly original and solid forms
of thought and life. To what extent is this
collaboration between races leading to a
revision of the old humanism? Can we dis¬
cern the outline of a new humanism in
which man in his diversity will find unan¬
imous reasons for thinking and acting? In
a world apparently governed by the spirit
of quantity is it possible to maintain the
spirit of quality? Is this a purely verbal
antinomy or is it a distinction of a more
decisive kind? And is this distinction
reducible or will it continue to bring into

. R C H I V E S
confrontation élites based on divergent
mystiques?
To all these problems the aims of
education, the new forms of humanism,
quantity and quality others may be
added, which also preoccupy the intellec¬
tual world, which directly and individually
interest its representatives and which they
feel the need to discuss among themselves.
It will be for the Committee to choose and
formulate them.
All these problems stem from the
activity and the competence of special¬
ists. But these general concerns which are
connected to the higher life of humanity,
which are its very conscience, should first
be evoked by men of mature reflection
before being considered in discussions
which they will organize, and being con¬
sidered from a technical point ofview. By
following this method we have an oppor¬
tunity to extend to a singular degree the
audience of intellectual co-operation and
reach the general conscience.
1 Report by Paul Valéry presented to the
International Committee on Intellectual
Co-operation, Geneva, 22 July 1930.
2 Suggestions from Paul Valéry and the art
historian Henri Focillon, made at the first
meeting of the Permanent Committee on Arts
and Letters (6-9 July 1931). Entitled "Les bases
de discussion", their text defines the role of the
Committee in the International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation.
Cover of a booklet containing the
proceedings of the first meeting of the
Permanent Committee on Arts and Letters
(1931).
46
PRCMIfK». SFS5ION <Iu COMITÉ PF.RMANtNT d*. LFTI RES rt ¿t* ARTS
Les Arts et les Lettres
Ir, la
lIujlscoJ Société des Nations
PROPOSITIONS
d' MM Pali. VAI.F.hl n Ilev., fi* lu «
D£0ATS ET DISCUSSIONS PAR
[W
hlRiL M'ik
4 ro-,i\ I>t Mis
j,,.., W1I1FI-
Ihipu rXW IM ON
r«..«» tnv\
J.*-. MWtlhlI)
' yi »nu
u <jji;m
r.iMKui oHifMii
hjoTRTO l'tKIlllM
iv»M. k i;j w
V »lui Jl"]| < NKFIi
Jnrp -l-lll/ll ]W."k
Supplbiv-ot Mt n* 7-ft du BuUctm de la Coopéitbvo IntiUecMcllr
IK5TITUT tKTERK*TIOm»L VE ÇOOpÉRfcTIOK IMTCLLEÇTUELLE
2. Ra* d* Mantpttuitr Patait-Royot Pari» I"
