UNESCO INACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
The High Atlas mountain chain once
divided Morocco into two distinct parts.
The area of ample rainfall, bountiful agri¬
culture and placid village life to the north
was called bled al-makhzan, the land of
imperial governance. To the south, a
rocky, sandy and sun-baked expanse
stretched into the Sahara. This was bled
al-siba, the land of disorder.
This geographical dichotomy did not
always hold, however, as the great four¬
teenth-century Arab thinker Ibn Khaldun
noted. Often called the father of modern
sociology, Ibn Khaldun saw fundamental
differences in the organizing principles
and cultural bases of city life and desert
life, but he also found ample evidence of
parallels, and indeed of a symbiotic rela¬
tionship of such intensity that the
unfolding of history itself depended on it.
As he saw it, the seeds of urban culture's



1
* a
Ait Ben Haddou, a desert-born
model for urban design
46
highest artistic and political achieve¬
ments, reached only through co-opera¬
tive enterprise, were buried somewhere
deep in the soul of the lone desert
horseman. Whenever nomads rode
together in bands of even five or ten
men, they incorporated a collective spirit
and a joint purpose pushing inexorably
towards a larger design.
The Moroccan desert is rich in exam¬
ples writ small of what were to be the
seeds of dynastic urban grandeur. The
southern oases along the lush green river
valleys are cultivated with the same
intensity and ingenuity as the north's fer¬
tile plains. Clan loyalties once radiated
from the southern strongholds of the
local saint in much the same way that
dynastic loyalties later spread from the
imperial cities of Meknes, Fez and Rabat.
Perhaps nowhere are these parallels
between desert and urban Moroccan cul¬
ture more striking than in a comparison
of Ait Ben Haddou, a hauntingly quiet
fortified farming village south of the High
Atlas, with the teeming, labyrinthine,
cacophonous kasbah of old Fez. Both are
on Unesco's World Heritage List, and one
can visit neither without recalling the
lessons taught by Ibn Khaldun.
ROOFTOP NOMADS
While Fez has a recorded history, a host
of founding dynasts known by name, and
precise construction dates for its earliest
architecture, we know little of Ait Ben
Haddou's Berber past. Its age as a human
settlement, we can safely assume, is less
than the geological age of the rock upon
which it is built, but its proximity to
known prehistoric sites in the Sahara
indicates quite plausibly that it is cen¬
turies, if not millennia, older than Fez.
But we do know that it, like Fez, rep¬
resents the acme of its own particular
school of high-density, multi-use, envi¬
ronmentally-adapted architecture and
town planning. Ait Ben Haddou's desert-
born model for urban design, applied
by Louis Werner
with such stunning success to the Fez
kasbah, dramatically illustrates Ibn
Khaldun's unified theory of civilization.
For in Ait Ben Haddou city and desert
living habits meet in unusual concord.
Densely-packed, multi-storey dwellings
create an utterly urban atmosphere, yet
their inhabitants still live something of a
nomadic existence. In response to
changing temperatures, they "migrate"
from room to room, from rooftops where
they sleep at night to ground-level cham¬
bers where they escape the midday heat, .
just as pastoralists move about in
response to climate-induced changes in
grazing and watering conditions.
Ait Ben Haddou is by no means
southern Morocco's only fortified village
constructed of stone, rammed earth,
adobe brick and mud plaster. The valleys
of the Dra, Dades, Gheria and Ziz rivers
and their tributaries are studded with
such settlements in all shapes and sizes.
One stretch of the Dades is in fact known
in the tourist guides as the "Route of the

Kasbahs". But the term "kasbah" leads to
a certain amount of confusion when
applied to the High Atlas and to pre-
Saharan oases. The word can lead the
unwary to imagine mistakenly the maze¬
like alleyways and dead-ends of the
imperial cities' enclosed palace
precincts, now converted to mixed com¬
mercial and domestic use.
More precisely, however, desert kas¬
bahs are the ex-residences of southern
Morocco's once-great ruling families
the Glaoui, the Goundafa and the
M'touggausually built to stand alone
on some imposing mountain spur. The
only true kasbah of this type that remains
largely intact is the Glaoui family's home
at Telouet.
CASTLES AND KASBAHS
To describe the full range of southern
Moroccan architecture, one needs to be
familiar with two Berber words, agadir
and tighremt, which refer respectively to
fortified granaries and the multi-towered
castles occupied by village headmen, as
well as with the Arabic words kelaa and
kasr, which refer to mountain citadel vil¬
lages and to walled oasis settlements.
The so-called "kasbah" of rural
Morocco is often in fact a tighremt, con¬
structed usually in the midst of the vil¬
lage. But since village housing is built
contiguously and shares party walls, it
becomes impossible over time to tell
where the tighremt ends and the kasr
begins. Separate construction thus takes
on the look of an organic whole.
Ait Ben Haddou has at least four
tighremt-lïke structures. Because the vil¬
lage is built for defensive purposes up the
flank of a steep hill, the fairly rectilinear
grid pattern of the typical kasr has here
been abandoned in favour of a more
fluid layout following the contour lines.
As a result it exhibits even more than the
usual amount of spatial disorientation.
The view looking down upon the
multi-level flat roofs from the ruined
hilltop agadir that overlooks Ait Ben
Haddou takes in the overall plan of the
village and the flow of its passageways.
From this perspective the settlement
calls to mind a géode, a geological forma¬
tion with which the region is rife, but a
convex rather than a concave geode, with
the massed, crystal-like cubic forms of its
architecture jutting up from the dull reg¬
ularity of the surrounding landscape.
Village housing displays a perfect
marriage of form, function, material and
climate. In view of the latitude and the
heat of the Sun, the ratio of habitable
volume to exposed exterior surface is
maximized by the networks of irregularly
oriented walls shadowing courtyards and
second-storey family quarters. Flat open
roofs provide ample work space and an
area where grain and dates can be spread
out to dry. Fresh animal fodder is con¬
served in the cooler, damper ground-
level store-rooms.
Sun-dried mud is an ideal building
material in zones of low humidity where
there are wide temperature fluctuations
between day and night. Exterior walls
heat slowly during the day, but radiate
interior warmth during chilly nights. By
morning, the high-ceilinged rooms have
fully cooled and are comfortable again
despite the mounting midday heat.
Ait Ben Haddou is constructed
mainly of monolithic walls of rammed
earth mud, straw, dung and gravel
tamped into rectangular wooden shut¬
tering and unbaked, handmade adobe
bricks. The thick monolithic units are
generally used for the lower levels and
outer walls, the bricks for upper walls,
stairways, partitions and the ever-pre¬
sent surface ornamentation.
Foundation walls for some of the
tighremfs twenty-metre towers are two
metres thick, tapering to just one brick's
width at the top. In a land where plumb
lines were unknown until recently, right
angles were considered not worth
striving for. Instead, the sloping look
gives the entire kasr a feeling of vertical
tension and momentum. Against the
backdrop of the High Atlas, this upward
have been abandoned by families who
prefer the new town's piped water and
electricity. Only six families remain today.
Above, towers of the fortified village of
Ait Ben Haddou.
Opposite page, the Ounila valley seen from
the village.
sweep makes the village appear to levi¬
tate from its hillside setting.
Because it lies in the Ounila river's
flood plain, not far from its confluence
with the Mellah, the village is bifurcated
by running water. To the east is old Ait
Ben Haddou, the village of mud brick
and high walls; on the Ounila's western
bank is the new town, built of cinder
block and concrete slab cubical too in
its own modern way, but so much the
poorer for it.
The new town looks as if it has been
hastily erected to serve the needs of the
busloads of tourists arriving on two-hour
visits. As such, it serves a necessary pur¬
pose. One hesitates to think how the old
village's increasingly delicate sociological
and physical condition could withstand
the tourist shock not to mention that
caused by the many Hollywood film
crews which have worked here if drink
stands and postcard shops had not been
set at a distance from the village proper.
Ait Ben Haddou's ancient half still
rests on shaky ground. Many of its homes
FACING THE FUTURE
In order to attract the old village's occu¬
pants back from the other side, a new
organization, the Centre for the Conserva¬
tion and Rehabilitation of the Architec¬
tural Heritage in the Atlas and Sub-Atlas
Zones [Centre de Conservation et de Réha¬
bilitation du Patrimoine Architectural des
Zones Atlasiques et Subatlasiques) has
undertaken a project to rebuild Ait Ben
Haddou's mosque and involve the com¬
munity in long-range planning.
The village needs to offer a balanced,
low-impact array of tourist services, but
also to maintain its traditional agricul¬
tural base. The problem is whether, as
the village leader puts it, the sheep
stabled in his kasbah's lower enclosure
are compatible with paying overnight
guests upstairs. As for the already aban¬
doned housing, how can mixed-use
stables, granaries and domestic quarters
be "retro-fitted" with the physical facili¬
ties electricity, plumbing, larger
rooms expected by both foreign
tourists and Moroccan home-owners
accustomed to more modern accommo¬
dation? This is the question that the
Centre's architects and sociologists are
now trying to answer.
When the Centre asked the new
town's residents what improvements
would be most likely to draw them back
to their original homes, the mosque's
repair was near the top of their list. And
since the project is now near completion,
time will tell if it will in itself be sufficient
to spark a revitalization. But since the
mosque is without question the village's
architectural and spiritual centrepiece, it
is fitting that it should be restored first.
Over the past few centuries Ait Ben
Haddou has survived flooding, siege and
drought. In the future it faces perhaps
even more daunting challenges heavy
tourist traffic, agricultural obsolescence
and physical abandonment. But there is
still hope. Its designation by Unesco as a
World Heritage site has brought it to the
attention of the wider world. And its
townspeople have taken a stand to pro¬
tect it from reckless change.
LOUIS WERNER,
an American journalist and film-maker, is a
contributing editor with Americas, the bi-monthly
magazine of the Organization of American States
(OAS).
47
