COMMENTARY
by
Federico
Mayor
This article is one of a
series in which the
Director-General of
Unescorecently elected
for a second term by the
Organization's General
Conferencesets out his
thinking on matters of
current concern

LISTEN FOR THE STIRRINGS OF NEW LIFP
THE closing years of the twentieth century mark a turning
point in history. Fault-lines are appearing in the old world
order, and as it breaks up it is as if history were subject to
the laws of plate tectonics.
We cannot stand idly by as passive witnesses to the rapid
changes whereby our world is adapting to economic, social,
and cultural upheavals of unprecedented scale. We have a duty
to find new ways of freeing the human race from the threats and
fears of this fin de siècle.
Of course, all this is nothing new the world has long known
the scourges of poverty and underdevelopment, illiteracy and
unequal access to health care, war and genocide, hunger and
malnutrition, massive indebtedness, unemployment, lack of
equal opportunities for women, the scandal of great wealth
alongside dire poverty, the population explosion and strife
between communities. I, for one, shall not sing the praises of the
1 960s and 1 970s. For the vast majority those were dark years in
which the voice of human suffering was smothered under the
heavy blanket of dictatorship and totalitariansim.
But today we are seeing the hope born of democratic revo¬
lution, in the East and in the South, being transformed into anx¬
iety and despair, as reality falls short of expectations, as human
aspirations are overwhelmed by the immensity of the problems
that lie ahead, as development founders in so many parts of the
world; and above all as the quest for happiness meets with failure
in the most developed countries, where tried and trusted proce¬
dures and mechanisms have ceased to be effective.
We must "invent" the future; we must find imaginative ways
of redistributing both work and leisure. We must learn to give of
ourselves. We must be prepared to make sacrifices in the search
for new strategies. We must find a better way to share our one
remaining unspoiled treasure our future.
In so-called "traditional" societies economic activity was
regarded as merely one aspect of a wider existence. It was part of
a daily routine conditioned by the rhythms of nature, faith and
social relations. Over the centuries the means of production
developed or were transformed slowly, in harmony with the
seasons and the environment, in concert with myths and customs.
Individual initiative formed an integral part of the collective
enterprise. Each member of the community was guided in his or
her behaviour by an understanding of the common culture and
standards of the group.
The first signs of the rapid disruption of this balance appeared
in Europe. With advances in science and technology and the
advent of industrialized society, a social system and methods of
production were developed that led increasingly to the separa¬
tion of the individual from the community, of culture from
nature, of work from leisure. Human beings were themselves
fragmented, with the growing specialization of productive labour.
By its progressive reduction of human relations to quantifiable
factors, the industrial revolution began a standardizing process
in which the natural differences between individuals were replaced
by a heightened potential for social conflict; in which human
beings could be treated as abstractions added and subtracted,
counted and manipulated. In short, spiritual and cultural values
no longer played a part in the material world.
No doubt the power and influence wielded over material
things by industrialized society derive in part from the logic of
this process whereby complex entities are systematically reduced
to simpler and simpler elements. Meanwhile, we have lost a
world vision, a feeling of respect for our neighbour and a sense
of community.
The gulf is not only between nations, but within nations. In the
developing countries, in fact, the polarization of society, something
virtually unknown in the past, is widening the gap between the
incomes of certain privileged classes and those of the rest. And so
it is that disparities arise in opportunities for education and par¬
ticipation in the cultural and political life of a country.
THE POET'S MESSAGE
Can we allow ourselves to remain unmoved by the mute con¬
frontation between the worlds of rich and poor? The American
philosopher Hannah Arendt wrote of a "culture crisis". But a cul¬
ture crisis is a social crisis, a crisis of the values on which society
is founded. Work is becoming increasingly scarce due to increases
in productivity. Unless it is shared it is hard to see how a culture
based on industrial activity could fail to be in crisis. Sharing can give
new meaning to the idea of development in industrial societies, by
endowing it with an educating and civilizing function to replace
the rigid concept of the three stages of life: youth, a time to learn;
maturity, a time to produce; old age, a time to rest and await
death. Tomorrow's culture must enrich all life's activities, at every
stage of life's journey.
In affluent societies the sense of life's possibilities has been lost
and must be found again. But how are we to grapple with the
misery confronting the poor countries of the world, in which the
gulf between rich and poor is even wider, even more unbridgeable,
where extreme poverty can block all hope of access to stability in
working life and to fulfilment as a human being? In these countries
access to forms of culture that depend on investment in science,
technology and education is usually out of the question.
Yunus Emre, the great Turkish poet of Anatolia, whose 750th
anniversary we celebrated last year, once wrote: "Our only enemy
is hostility itself. We bear a grudge against no-one. For us
humankind is indivisible." Across the centuries, it was a man of sci¬
ence, the anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss, who was to respond
to the poet's message of universality through a lesson in diversity
which he gave in a famous study prepared for UNESCO, Race and
History: "It is diversity itself which must be saved," he wrote, "not
the outward and visible form in which each period has clothed that
diversity, and which can never be preserved beyond the period
which gave it birth. We must therefore listen for the stirrings of new
life, foster latent potentialities, and encourage every natural incli¬
nation for collaboration which the future history of the world may
hold. . . . Tolerance is a dynamic attitude, consisting in the anti¬
cipation, understanding and promotion of what is struggling into
being. We can see the diversity of human cultures behind us,
around us and before us."
It is by grasping the two handles universality and diver¬
sity that make up the uniqueness of culture that we may remain
faithful to the message of the poet and the logic of the scientist.
41
