Hadrian ]$
by Anthony Allan
46
Above, a view of Hadrian's Wall (United
Kingdom), the barrier that defended the
northern frontier of Roman Britain. The
monument was placed on Unesco's World
Heritage List in 1987.
IT snakes for 117 kilometres across the
neck of England, from the River Tyne to
the Solway Firth, a fifty-six-kilometre-
long inlet of the Irish Sea that still marks the
border between England and Scotland.
Nowadays the frontier is an open one; only
roadside signs welcoming drivers to a new
country mark the passage from one land to the
other. But when Hadrian's Wall was built, in
the second century AD, the situation could
hardly have been more different.
Britain was then a congeries of mutually
hostile tribes, only partly subdued by the
legions of the Roman Empire. The wall was
constructed to draw a permanent line be¬
tween the conquered lands of the south, where
the pax Romana ran, and the turbulent lands
to the north that had not been drawn into the
Roman orbit.
The wall marked the northernmost frontier
of the Roman Empire, which stretched away to
the south and east as far as the Sahara Desert
and the sands of Arabia. The ribbon of stone



that still bisects this rolling, grey-and-green,
austerely beautiful northern landscape remains
the best-known and best-preserved of all the
empire's artificial frontiers. The strategic think¬
ing that lay behind it is succinctly summarized
in the only surviving Roman comment on its
construction, from an anonymous life of the
emperor Hadrian (AD 117-138): "It was he
who first built a wall, eighty miles long, to
divide the Romans from the barbarians".
Rome's interest in Britain had first been
aroused by Julius Caesar himself, who had
invaded the island in 55 BC, returning the fol¬
lowing year to accept the submission of the
local tribes. The invasion, involving a risky
sea-crossing, helped cement Caesar's reputa¬
tion as a military magician in Rome, where the
island had previously been regarded as semi-
legendary, an Ultima Thule about which
almost nothing was known. Although the vic¬
tory was not followed up and the legions left
after what amounted to little more than a
reconnaissance in force, the campaign won
Caesar a greater number of days of public
thanksgiving in the capital than had been
accorded him for the conquest of Gaul.
It was not until ninety-seven years later
that the Emperor Claudius, needing a military
triumph to shore up an insecure hold on
power, decided to complete what Caesar had
begun. Britain was invaded again in AD 43,
and this time the occupation was to be lasting.
Yet only the southern portion of Britain was
brought under Roman rule. Attempts were
subsequently made to subdue the entire island,
most notably by Cnaeus Julius Agricola,
father-in-law of the historian Tacitus, who
carried the Roman flag up to the highlands of
Scotland before being recalled to Rome in AD
84 or 85. At some point in the ensuing decades,
however, the legionary base he established in
Scotland was abandoned for reasons that his¬
tory does not record, and the Roman frontier
was pulled back to the Tyne-Solway line.
When Hadrian made the decision to build
the wall that bears his name, its exact siting was
largely determined by a chain of forts the so-

called Stanegate system that had already"
been established in the area by Agricola's men.
Its building marked an implicit limitation of
Rome's ambitions the entire island of Britain
would not be conquered. Once that decision
had been made, the lack of natural boundaries
in the rolling moorlands of northern England
made the erection of some permanent barrier
almost inevitable.
The wall was built by legionaries, which is
to say by a foreign army of occupation, for at
the time of its construction only Roman citi¬
zens could join the ranks. The legions were not
merely peerless military instruments, but also
employed surveyors, masons, carpenters, gla¬
ziers, engineersall the skills needed by colo¬
nizing forces.
In later centuries, however, the auxiliaries
employed to man the wall were very much
men of the region. The job often passed from
father to son, and whole communities abutting
the wall must have relied on sentry duty as
their main source of employment from gen¬
eration to generation.
In its final state, the Wall consisted of two
courses of dressed stone sandwiching a core of
rubble. The infill was usually bonded with
mortar, though clay was sometimes used when
locally available. The parapet's original gauge
of ten Roman feet almost three metres by
present-day measures was reduced in later
sections to two-and-a-half metres, which made
it just wide enough for two sentries to cross but
not large enough to serve as an effective fight¬
ing platform.
A DEFENSIVE SYSTEM
Although the building of the wall itself was an
extraordinary achievement, the defensive
system surrounding it required even greater
efforts. To the north the side from which
attacks were expected there was a ditch that
was on average about eight metres wide. The
earth removed in digging it was ramped ahead
of it to increase the drop for any would-be
attacker. On the wall's less-exposed southern
flank, a communications artery known locally
to this day as the Military Road was backed by
a rearward earthwork six metres wide and
three metres deepthe vallumthat clearly
delineated the military zone surrounding it.
More significantly still, the Wall system
incorporated a chain of sixteen garrison forts,
each capable of housing between 500 and 800
men. These were the guardians of the wall who
would respond to the sentry's alarum at the first
signs of trouble. In addition, fortlets known as
milecastles interrupted the fortifications at
intervals of one Roman mile roughly one-
and-a-half kilometres. Each contained twin
sets of guarded double doors the wall's access
points with barracks for guards in the walled
courtyard between them. And between mile
castles rose two observation towers, each about
six metres square, spaced with military preci¬
sion equidistantly from the towers and one
another. Each turret enclosed a single room, in
which a raised platform provided space for a
single sentry to set his bedding.
The planning of the wall reflected both
the strengths and weaknesses of off-site deci¬
sion-making. On the one hand, its construc¬
tion was a triumph of military efficiency; the
bulk of it went up extremely rapidly, pro¬
bably in less than a decade. On the other, the
rigorous logic of the layout allowed little room
for flexibility or adaptability to local condi¬
tions. To correspond rigorously to the mile
measure, some milecastles had gates that
opened onto steep drops, while others were
constructed on an inconvenient camber even
though flat land lay close by.
The frequency of these guarded gateways
meant that no traveller would have had to stray
more than half a mile off route to pass through
the wall, and this fact provides a clue to the
strategic thinking behind its construction. This
much-pierced line was no impregnable bul¬
wark, intended to repel attackers by its massive
strength. Rather, it was a physically defined
frontier line whose purpose was primarily
border control. Far from seeking to hide
behind its defences, the commanders who
built it would have viewed the number of
gates as an advantage, enabling them to deploy
their own troops rapidly at different points and
permitting unexpected sorties by units
manoeuvred into position under cover of the
curtain.
Ironically, the wall had barely been fin¬
ished when it was abandoned by its builders.
Within a decade of its completion, a new
Emperor, Antoninus Pius (AD 138-161),
decided once again to advance the Roman
front line into Scotland. A new turf-and-
timber construction went up 1 60 kilometres to
the north along the still narrower isthmus be¬
tween the estuaries of the rivers Forth and
Clyde. The forward frontier was held for little
more than two decades, however, and by the
160s Hadrian's Wall was back in commission
as the point at which the Empire stopped.
It was to remain so for the rest of the
Roman occupation of Britain. Though no
exact date can be fixed for its abandonment, it
seems not to have been long before 410, the
year in which the Emperor Honorius finally
told the people of Britain to look to their own
protection after the last of the legions had
been withdrawn.
In the three centuries during which it was
in use, the Wall proved less than infallible as a
defence against invaders. There were repeated
incursions by raiders from north of the border.
Yet for all that, the wall for the most part
served its builders' purpose well. The incur-
The Guardian of the Wall as depicted in a
1942 Prince Valiant comic strip drawn by
Harold R. Foster (1892-1982).
sions through it proved in each case to be
temporary, and the structure itself survived
with little more than local damage to show for
the fighting. As long as Rome had the resources
and the will to retain the colony of Britain, the
stone bulwark of the wall survived as its nor¬
thernmost shield. After the Roman withdrawal,
the wall faded from history.
The coming of the automobile age made
the wall easily accessible, and now its venerable
stones attract visitors from all over the world.
Tourism has caused some conservation wor¬
ries, but the main problems faced by the staff
of twenty-four permanently employed on its
upkeep are posed by an older enemy: the harsh
weather of the wild border region in which it
lies. With the wall's original coping long gone,
rain and rising damp saturate the stone, and the
frosts of winter cause uneven uplift that can
fracture the mortar sections that hold the core
together.
As so often in conservation matters, the
way ahead turns out to lie in looking back. The
cement infilling used since the 1 940s to consol¬
idate the core has proved brittle and friable,
and is now rarely employed. Instead, the wall's
conservers have taken their cue from the Roman



lime-kilns archaeologists have discovered along
the wall's length; natural lime flexes more than
concrete and so is better equipped to cope with
the asperities of the northern climate. With its
aid and a policy of careful supervision, there
now seems little reason why Hadrian's extra¬
ordinary defence should not endure for another
millennium.
ANTHONY ALLAN
is an English journalist and writer of children's
books. He was the editor of the 25-volume
Time-Life History of the World. 47
