Vlhere m Ihey now}0
Spatetrafî exploring the
solar system and beyond
(ome to seem like 'old
friends' to the stientists
who mtrol them
38
THK most glamorous and most risky
moment in the life of a spacecraft is "lift¬
off". The world holds its breath, then
tends to forget that the satellite exists . . . until it
sends back astonishing pictures of a planet, or
details of unexpected phenomena such as an
active volcano on a moon that was thought to
be dead.
Not so for the men and women who
control the orbits of, and flow of information
to and from, the satellites. They watch over
by Norman Longdon
their "children" with parental pride and defen¬
sive aggression. When the time comes, mainly
for economic reasons but also due to old age,
for the space equivalent of euthanasia (switch¬
ing off the contact), there arc genuine tears.
The story of some of these forgotten, or
nearly forgotten, space wanderers makes fascin¬
ating reading. Take for example Giotto, the
European Space Agency satellite that led the
international fleet of spacecraft that gave
humans their first look at the nucleus of a

comet, Halley's comet, in 1986. It crashed its
way through the clouds of dust and gas sur¬
rounding Halley, and confirmed the scientists'
belief that comets are "dirty snowballs". Rather
like Samson, Giotto had its eyes put out, for
the camera on board was disabled. Like
Samson, though, it had not lost all its strength,
and so it was put to sleep, hibernating as it
orbited the Sun.
GIOTTO,
A HIBERNATING SPACECRAFT
Four years later, in 1990, after circling the Sun
six times, Giotto was back close to the Earth.
Close in astronomical terms, that is, for it was
still over 22,000 kilometres away. From the
Earth, messages were sent to waken the space¬
craft. It is a staggering achievement that after
such a time lag, and such a journey, a spacecraft
less than three metres in height and weighing
under 600 kilos, could be identified and
brought back to life. Using the Earth's gravita¬
tional pull, Giotto's orbit was changed so that
it could encounter another comet known as
Grigg Skjellerup.
It was partly put back to sleep for a journey
of 1.8 billion kilometres. Wide awake in time
for its encounter with the second comet, it gave
the scientists fresh insight into comets, those
ancient mariners that have ploughed the seas of
space since the time of the solar system's ori¬
gins. After that, it still felt that it was capable of
meeting more comets, and let the controllers
know that it was fit and healthy. So, once again
Giotto has been put back to sleep. It is off on a
long, long journey before returning in July
1999 to within 220,000 kilometres of the Earth.
Already some scientists with really far-reaching
optimism are wondering whether it will be "all
systems go" for a further encounter in 2006.
A TWO-MILLION-YEAR-VOYAGE
TO A RED STAR
If Giotto's voyage seems a lonely trek, it is
nothing to that of Pioneer 10. What is so spe¬
cial about Pioneer 10? Two decades ago it was
sending us back pictures of Jupiter, especially
the Great Red Spot, and telling us about the
many moons circling the giant planet. In 1976 it
crossed Saturn's orbit, and in 1979, the orbit of
Uranus. By 1983, it was considered to have left
the solar system, and was hurtling through
space at 48,000 kilometres an hour. Where is it
heading? Towards a red star, Aldebaran. Even
at that speed it will take two million years for it
to reach the position of the star (which will
have moved on by then). As we do not yet
know enough about star motions, it has not
been possible to calculate its ultimate destina¬
tion. It carries a plaque that it is hoped will
indicate to any civilization that "finds" the space¬
craft where it came from and the nature of
human beings.
While Pioneer looks ever outwards, scien¬
tists are still probing the nature of our Sun.
Opposite page,
an image of Halley's comet
taken by the European
Space Agency's spacecraft
Giotto in 1986 at a distance
of about 13,000 kilometres.
Below,
a view of the US Skylab
space station in Earth orbit.
Between May and November
1973, three three-man crews
took turns to live and work
aboard Skylab. In July 1979
the space station re-entered
the Earth's atmosphere and
disintegrated.
Most of our knowledge has been gained from
satellites flying in or near to the ecliptic plane,
that is the saucer-like plane around the Sun in
which the planets orbit. We know nothing
directly of what happens at the poles of the
Sun. Ulysses, the aptly named European satel¬
lite, is on a long odyssey to find out more
about those polar regions. Unfortunately, we
do not have the ability to fire satellites straight
over the Sun. So the engineers have devised a
modern "sling shot" method using the- strong
gravitational field around Jupiter to whip
Ulysses into a polar orbit around the Sun.
Launched in October 1990, Ulysses reached
Jupiter in February 1992. The fly-by of Jupiter
was reached with an accuracy of two seconds!
Ulysses is continuing on its long journey, and
is 


now on one of the loneliest stretches of its
odyssey. In August 1992 it was at its furthest
point from the Earth, an amazing 938,488,610
kilometres. Its velocity relative to the Earth was
115,521 km/hr., and that relative to the Sun,
31,028 km/hr.
The satellite will from 26 June 1994 to 6
November 1994 pass over the south pole of the
Sun, and from 20 June 1995 to 30 September
1995 over the north pole. The scientists are not
sitting twiddling their thumbs as they wait for
these periods. The scientific data they are receiv¬
ing daily are keeping them very busy. Such is
the excellent state of the spacecraft and its pay-
load that its ability to make a second pass over
the poles cannot be discounted. The scientific
community would certainly welcome such a
possibility.
VOYAGER 2, THE UGLY DUCKLING
THAT TURNED INTO A SWAN
Voyager 2 is well named, for it has voyaged
long and hard since its launch in 1977. It began
39

40
life, like many a human, as a sickly child. It was
thought to have collided with its discarded pro¬
pulsion module, then its communication
system failed for six months. But like an ugly
duckling, it turned into a swan, beautiful in its
pictures of the Jupiter moons and the planet
itself. It sent back 15,000 pictures of Jupiter and
its five major satellites, including dramatic
views of seven erupting volcanoes during 1979.
On to Saturn, reached in 1981, and 18,000
images, especially of the famous rings around
the planet.
Back on Earth, and unknown to the space¬
craft, a battle was being fought in the United
States over the money needed to keep in touch
with Voyager 2. The battle was won while the
spacecraft was 2,900 million kilometres away,
approaching Uranus (the third largest planet in
the solar system). After eight years on its
journey. Voyager 2 arrived within seventy
seconds of its predicted time (a good model for
some railway systems on Earth).
Our knowledge of Uranus and its moons
owes much to Voyager 2. It was discovering
new moons with almost indecent haste, giving
scientists no time to react to one discovery
before it popped up with another startUng fact
or image. It showed, in images of Uranus itself,
a dark area around the south pole, which led to
speculation that the planet had been hit by an
object the size of the Earth: a collision of major
head-ache proportions. Distances can perhaps
be best described in terms of the Earth: thus
Uranus takes eighty-four Earth years to com¬
plete one orbit around the Sun.
The Giotto spacecraft during
pre-launch testing in 1984.
NORIVIAN LONGDON,
of the United Kingdom, is
Head of the European Space
Agency's Publication Division.
Voyager's work was not yet completed. On
it sailed to Neptune, out on the cold edges of
the solar system. If Uranus' travels around the
Sun are slow and majestic, 


they are almost
dynamic when set against Neptune's pon¬
derous movements. Neptune takes 165 Earth
years to complete one circle of the Sun. As
Neptune was only discovered in 1846, it has
not completed one "year" since its existence
was known to humans. Voyager continued to
startle the scientists. It found a third moon, and
then five more. Although the temperature on
the surface of Neptune is -215° Celsius, there
were winds up to 2,415 kilometres an hour
blowing. On the largest moon, Triton, active
volcanoes were found.
And so Voyager 2 joined the caravan of space¬
craft that have left the solar system. Its signals
will continue to reach Earth, even if no one will
be listening to them, until the year 2013. By
then it will be 106 times further away from the
Sun than the Earth is. It can look forward to
flying by the star Sirius in 358,000 years.
Of course many spacecraft are drawn back
into the atmosphere surrounding the Earth, or
other planets, there to burn up, and perhaps
flash briefly across some night sky. That hap¬
pened recently to a Pioneer-Venus spacecraft.
After fourteen years (thirteen more than
expected) of orbiting Venus, and sending back
more than ten triUion bits of data, it ran out of
fuel. Reporting to the press, the project
manager stated "We are saddened by the loss of
an old friend." To those whose work is
connected with space, the satellites are genuine¬
ly "alive" and members of the family.
WHAT OF THE FUTURE?
In times of recession and political upheaval,
space is not necessarily a prestigious subject;
not a vote-catcher in many countries. In all the
countries that make up the space community, a
much more quizzical look is thus being given at
the expenses inherent in space programmes.
Those nations (particularly Russia) that com¬
prised the USSR are looking to the West for
co-operative ventures, knowing that they are
unlikely to be able to afford space programmes
on the scale they have known previously.
The cold war elements of space pro¬
grammes do not have the political support they
once had, so that we are seeing moves to
continue on more peaceful lines some of the
developments associated with former military
demands. The political and economic implica¬
tions of the new situation have yet to be
worked out in terms of final agreements relat¬
ing to jointly designed and built spacecraft,
launcher services and shared facilities. There is
a strong political will for co-operative ventures,
but funding and allocation of contracts, tasks
and return on investment are the hard facts of
space as of other industrial enterprises.
