Henri Lopes
The love-child
I^M ^^^^^mm
I
am of mixed parentage, a "métis".
Nowadays, it is a fashionable thing to be.
I can remember a childhood quarrel I once
had. I knew that both right and reason were on
my side. Having run out of arguments, my "thor¬
oughbred" opponent retorted with a sneer that I
was a mwana makangu, a "love-child". In other
words I was illegitimate, a bastard.
I was dumbfounded. Surely, I thought, my
father and mother were united by the bonds of
matrimony. My mother explained that she and
my father were born out of wedlock. Her iden¬
tity card, like my father's, bore the words "father
unknown". After I had told her what had hap-

pened, she smiled, patted my head and told me
not to be so upset. It was all nonsense: the impor¬
tant thing was not to know where we came from
but where we were going.
Later on, I learnt that when the family trees of
love-children and ordinary children alike,
whether white, black, yellow, red, coffee-
coloured, albinos or pygmies, are traced back,
they apparently all spring from a common pair of
ancestors, who some people call Adam and Eve
and others monkeys, male and female, though
there are still people who have their doubts.
Later still, I came to understand that, in the
colonial setting, some people looked upon us as
being an embarrassment and others as a threat.
From the books I read, I finally realized that
the term "love-child", though proffered as an
insult, was actually a mark of nobility.
Books taught me that romance cannot be
contained within the framework of marriage,
and that this has been true from the time of
Tristan and Iseult, through Madame Bovary, right
up to Djamilia' and L'Amant.2
IRRESISTIBLE PASSION
My first example is that of Tristan, a Knight of the
Round Table, who is charged with escorting
Iseult, the betrothed of his uncle King Mark, and
who, inadvertently or in a moment of madness,
shares with her a magic potion that kindles in
them an irresistible passion. In short, it is the
story of a man who carries off a bride-to-be on the
eve of her wedding in order to save her from the
hell of a loveless marriage.
My second example is that of the children of
two rival families, the Montagues and Capulets,
who fall in love and are married in secret. But
Romeo has killed a Capulet and has to go into
exile. In order to escape a forced marriage, Juliet
takes a sleeping draught. Romeo thinks she is
dead and kills himself. When Juliet awakes, she
too kills herself. They are model lovers, but they
defy the law and betray their kinsfolk.
In both these examples, love means passion,
a violent outburst whose flames destroy all sense
of reason. The two protagonists prefer death to
the mediocrity of everyday life.
In Apollinaire 's poem Lorelei, the legendary
siren of the river Rhine sings:
My love has left for a far-offland
Let me die, for I have nothing left to love.
Thinking she sees her lover coming, she leans
out over the water, stumbles and falls in. Death is
the only fitting punishment for the unseemly
love of a sorceress.
Madame Bovary's love is that of a woman
taken in adultery. The novel's heroine dies for her
sins and its author was hauled before the courts
for going beyond the bounds of decency and
morality.
As the French poet Louis Aragon1 put it, love
is suffering:
My lovely love, my dearest love, heart¬
rending love 13


Above,
glass painting by the
Senegalese artist Gora
M'Bengue.
Below right, illustration to
Flaubert's novel Madame
Bovary by Pierre Brissaud
(early 20th century).

/ bear you within me like a wounded bird
There is no such thing as happiness in love"
And yet. . . .
In Mamadou and Binéta, our school reading
primer, I read over and over again the adven¬
tures of Samba who, by killing the "Guinarou",
rid his country, which sounded much like my
own village, of a giant crocodile that had to be
appeased by sacrificing young maidens to it.
The King came up to Samba and said to him:
" You, stranger, have killed the giant crocodile.
You are the bravest ofthe brave. Thanks to you,
we shall always havefresh water. What are your
desires? I shall grant your every wish. "
Samba had been told how the three maidens
had been brought to the crocodile and how the
King's daughter had shown no sign offear.
He then spoke up and said: "Samba has only one
thing to ask ofHis Majesty: the brave Samba seeks
the hand ofthe King's daughter in marriage. "
And so it came to pass. Samba had many chil¬
dren with his wife, and they were alias brave as
theirfather and their mother.
I was captivated by this story, which had been
adapted from a Fulbe Torodo legend. Since then,
I have realized that various versions of this same
story exist the world over in the folk memory,
constructed on the same pattern, with their mix¬
ture of magic, epic deeds and "courtly" love.
Courtly love is the thread that runs through
them and the end that crowns them. In this tale,



unlike the earlier examples I have quoted, love is
not an all-consuming, outlawed passion but is part
and parcel of the order of things and of society. It
is the prize awarded to the conquering heroes
through whose exploits society can continue to
live in the peace of the traditional order. Marriage
should be the beginning of the love story. In fact,
it leads into the end of the tale, which always
goes: "they were married and lived happily ever
after, and had lots of children."
Despite that, it is a long time since I felt
ashamed at being a mwana makangu, a love-
child.
Those who see beyond the confines of the
family circle are by nature allergic to the us-and-
them mentality, and yet I have to ask myself
whether I am not prompted by the reflexes of that
mentality when I rule that the people who live on
the other side of the river, who do not speak the
same language as me, who worship a different
god, whose skin colour, hair texture or shape of
nose are different from mine, are not my fellow
human beings but are barbarians, invaders and
enemies, the offspring of some other species.
Minds capable of being astonished that there
can actually be people like Montesquieu's Persians
are likely to be highly responsive to the ideas of
racism and xenophobia.
STRONGER
THAN FRONTIERS
Can there be said to be ideas about love that bear
the stamp of particular civilizations? The codes
people use to declare and show their love do
quite likely vary from one society to another or
from one group or community to another. Some
take a rather discreet form and are couched in fig¬
urative language, while others are more to the
point, but in all cases it is necessary to know the
proper form to follow, or else the suitor's
advances are liable to be spurned. A hint of emo¬
tion and a touch of poetry are always necessary
in such preliminaries.
If emotion makes the suitor stutter and
stammer, he can always try singing. The first two
words that people listening to Congolese music
learn are bolingo and motéma, love and heart. If
the beloved is not won over by singing, she can be
invited to dance. All folk dances the world over tell

a tale of seduction. The male does his courtship
display and the maiden starts by refusing.
Ways of loving have no doubt evolved
throughout history, especially as regards the rela¬
tionship between lovers. Love is a conquest in



which nothing can ever be taken for granted, but
ever since the beginnings of time the folk memory
has been a treasury of famous songs telling of the
power of love that bestrode national borders and
divisions of religion and race.
Love has nothing to do with the match¬
making between families and clans to which gen¬
erations of young people were subjected so as to
preserve the "purity" of tribes and the cohesion
of social classes. Some societies have been more
clearsighted and have drawn practical conclu¬
sions from this: in their wisdom, they have con¬
tinued to practise polygamy, which is a way of
paying lip service to propriety while offering
scope for passion. In their first marriage, men
yield to the law of the group and found a family
with a first wife (a "queen mother"?) who ensures
the continued survival of the group. But imme¬
diately after that, they are allowed the possibility
of having a favourite among their other wives, a
wife for whose heart and body they long with a
thirst that cannot be quenched in a thousand and
Shakespeare's Romeo and
¡uiiet, as depicted by the
Austrian painter Karl
Ludwig Prinz (early
twentieth century).
1. Chingiz Aitmatov,
Djamilia.
2. Marguerite Duras,
L'Amant.
3. Louis Aragon, La Diane
française, Seghers
publishers, Paris.
4. Paul Eluard, Les dessous
d'une vie ou La pyramide
humaine.
one nights or days or even years. Incidentally,
those societies would have been even wiser had
they thought of combining polygamy and
polyandry. But let us not judge the past with the
eyes and values of the present.
No, I am no longer ashamed of being a love-
child.
I am indeed eternally grateful for that moment
of passion enjoyed by an unknown grandfather
and a grandmother who was later to become the
wise woman of our tribe. As a result of their
temerity in flouting the accepted rules, I have
since the cradle held this truth, that humankind
is one, to be self-evident.
When a love like theirs is sparked off, it brings
to light affinities and sensibilities that transcend
their overt differences. It is love at first sight, but
stormy times lie ahead when two human beings,
in the face of all the hostility of family, society and
religion, proclaim that artificial boundaries are
nonsense and revel in the intermingling of blood
with blood. It is through this cross-fertilization
that the culture of the colonial subject colonizes
that of the colonial master and that the concept of
humankind supersedes that of race.
Love means elective affinities asserting them¬
selves over the solidarity of the group.
LIGHT IN DARKNESS
Although the mixed offspring of these love affairs
have to contend with difficulties and crises in
coming to terms with life, they are the tender
shoots that will later burst into flower, the living
image of men and women of the future.
There may be something significant in the
fact that the love extolled by Aragon, Eluard,
Neruda or Nicolas Guillen is never consum¬
mated in a communal wedding night, between
militants draped in the Red Flag and lying on a
Stakhanovite camp bed. Aragon sings of the love
of the Arab sovereign Boabdil, the Fou d'Eisa, and
Eluard of his love for Nusch, a love that gives him
the strength to believe even in the darkest hour of
the night:
Loving love. The truth is, the light blinds me.
I keep enough of it within me to watch over the
night, all night, every night.
All virgins are different. I always dream of
virgins.*
When the mob, in the name of morality and
God, wants to stone to death the woman taken in
adultery, Christ stays the hand of the Pharisees
and calls on him among them who is without
sin to cast the first stone.
Perhaps it is Jorge Amado who, in almost all
of his novels, has best expressed this deep-seated
link between love and the commingling of races,
both of which are vectors of universal values.
Such commingling, however, should not be taken
as a gift of the gods, but should be regarded as a
heritage, a rich lode to be mined, an opening of the
way to a new life that calls for vigilance, the
highest of standards and a readiness to act at all
times. 9ß 15
