A Western myth
by Régis Debray
ACCORDING to an old maxim, "Truth is one
and error manifold". Strictly from the point
of view of knowledge, it would be regret¬
table if North and South went their different
ways. Both of them would do better to try to
arrive at a correct and, therefore, shared under¬
standing of progress, the characteristic myth of
the early industrial age. Whether the idea of
"progress" is an elaborate figment of the imagi¬
nation or a conventional but illusory represen¬
tation of reality, it is eminently emblematic of
what used to be called "ideology".
The illusion comes from confusing two time-
schemes, the cumulative time of "scientific and
technological development", which is linear and
marked by constant innovation, and repetitive
time, which belongs to the world of politics and
symbols. In the former time-scheme, ever more
efficient solutions are found to quantifiable prob¬
lems. In the latter, each generation discovers, and
immediately forgets, that certain problems will
never be solved.
Human groups have often adopted a less flex¬
ible language or a cruder religion, or exchanged
democracy for dictatorship, but they have never
been known to go back from the plough to the
hoe, from wheels to sticks, or from aircraft to hot-
air balloons. Just as living things do not regress
(genetic combinations become progressively
more and more complex), so, in the medium and
long term, technology does not go into reverse.
Objects tend towards perfection, and tools and
skills are continually being improved under their

Portrait of a woman at her
toilet
(oil on canvas,
c. 1512-1515) by the
Venetian master Titian.
own momentum. This trend can be found
throughout history and all over the world, inde¬
pendent of ethnic factors. The relationship
between people and things is governed by a pre¬
dictable, though open-ended and non-program¬
mable, logic of progress.
Relationships between human beings clearly
obey other laws. The difference between "savage"
and "civilized" peoples has some discernible
meaning in the history of technology, but is
meaningless in the history of art, religions, lan¬
guages or forms of authority. Our command of
energy sources has increased a thousandfold since
the beginning of our era, but Martin Luther King
is not a thousand times greater a moral authority
than Jesus Christ. The computer represents an
advance on the abacus, but Andy Warhol is not
superior to Titian, nor is Husserl's philosophy
more "profound" than Plato's. The notion of
progress is without meaning in the symbolic,
intellectual, emotional or psychological realms. It
would be easy to show that it is equally mean¬
ingless in the realm of politics the wars of the
twentieth century have been more brutal and
bloody than those of the nineteenth, which were
already much deadlier than those of the eigh¬
teenth, and so on. In relation to the technological
and scientific ways and means of dealing with
objects or of human beings as objects, in the
field of medicine there is an objective and ver-
10
ifiable "before" and "after". In the forms of man's
domination over man, the only "before and after"
is purely subjective, and reversible.
Standard technology,
specific cultures
The noble advocates of progress who for two
centuries have lumped together technological
and political time, have been systematically
wrong in their forecasts. They predicted not
only that the railways would bring about world
peace and that electricity would lead to social
harmony and public education to the end of
religious superstitions, but also that the stan¬
dardization of technical objects would result in
that of cultures and religions. The emergence of
a human mega-race or, more accurately, the
superseding of the ethnically-based structuring
of human communities, was supposed to go
hand-in-hand with the emergence of the pro¬
ductive mega-system, or globalized industrial
production system. However, far from dis¬
solving in a converging, globalized, fast-
changing technological environment, ethnic
environments, territorially based and slow to
change, are turning inward, becoming more
intransigent, and proliferating. The globalization
trend is towards balkanization, each stage in
the movement towards technological and eco¬
nomic unity reactivating ethnic and cultural
diversity at a new level. The increasingly easy
flow of goods and information is paralleled by
an obsessive territorial neurosis. In a village that
is increasingly global and chauvinistic, feverish
migratory movements have as their counter¬
part a crisis-level siege mentality.
It is thus easy to imagine a principle of con¬
stancy at work in society, similar to the prin¬
ciple of stability posited for the psyche by
Freudian metapsychology, a constant relationship
between the factors of so-called progress and so-
called regression. The history of humanity is
recorded in a double-entry ledger. Each imbalance
brought about by a technological advance causes
an "ethnic" rebalancing, so that the present see¬
sawing between the trend towards world-wide
uniformity and demands for the right to be dif¬
ferent, between the "rational" and the "national",
between the economic imperative and religious
needs this whole dynamic of disequilibrium
could be interpreted as a zero-sum game, or
rather as an equation with variable but corre¬
lated values. This is pure speculation, of course.
In any case, let us admire the infinite superi¬
ority of the wisdom of Greek mythology over
our present-day economic myths. In the myth of
Protagoras, Zeus grants technical skills, or techne,
to the human race through Prometheus but is glad
to have kept the "art of administering public
life", or wisdom, to himself, out of man's reach.
The Enlightenment philosophers forgot this little
reservation.
The verifiable fact of scientific and techno¬
logical progress became a myth by being improp¬
erly transposed to the symbolic and political
realms, a transposition stemming from the late
encounter between religious messianism and

-*^^
industrial machinism, between a Judaeo-Chris¬
tian cultural tradition (progress as a secularized
form of Providence) and the initial industrial and
economic take-off of European societies. Out
of the chemical reaction between them came a
precipitate that settled out in France and England
at the end of the Age of Enlightenment, philo¬
sophically linked with the names of Turgot, Con-
dorcet and Comte. The nineteenth century saw
the new religion spread throughout the world, in
step with Western expansion, which of course was
at the same time military, political, economic and
mythological.
The end of an ideology
The metaphysicians of progress believed the indi¬
visibility of humanity to be the only subject of his¬
tory. For Condorcct the human spirit and for
Comte the human race are one, and the oneness of
all history proceeds from this world-wide homo¬
geneity. In north and south, east and west,
humanity marches in the same direction, and mere
Four Marilyns, a 1 962 work
by the American pop artist
Andy Warhol.
variations in speed are not enough to change that
direction or the order of events. In this view of the
world, the continents may not be in the same
time zone, but they all have the same watch and the
same calendar. The East must necessarily make up
lost time and join the West on its march a pos¬
tulate common to both market economists and
Marxists. The ideologies of progress therefore
predate ethnography, anthropology, positivism
and, a fortiori, the eulogizing of differences.
The choice between tradition and progress,
the closed and the open, may be a retrograde
legacy of nineteenth-century Europe. It is perhaps
because they cultivate their originality and his¬
torically exceptional character that the Japanese
so successfully absorb outside influences. At the
Seville Expo 92, the most efficiently performing
country on Earth was represented not by video
gadgetry but by a wooden Shinto temple. The
super-modern East is forging ahead of the modern
West because, in its symbolic structures, it has
already reached the stage of pine, while we are still
at that of fibrocement.
Nothing could be more pointless than, for
example, the rhetorical antithesis between "nation¬
alism" and "cosmopolitanism". It has been the
global tribes, formidably rooted in their indigenous
^identities and at the same time networking all
over the planet the Arabs of the Middle Ages, the
Jews of the Renaissance and the Enlightenment
and the British of the Industrial Revolution
who have always moved civilization forward.
Globally positive
The myth of progress continues to operate, in a
latent or residual way in the North, in a driving
and propulsive manner in the South. An idea
that has been to a greater or lesser extent mythol-
ogized but is accepted by all becomes an objec¬
tive social reality, to be treated as such, especially
since, in the Third World in particular, it still
plays a "globally positive" role. Just as contempt
for money is a privilege of the rich, scepticism
with regard to progress is the prerogative of those
who have historically benefitted from it. Political
redemption through technological progress is a
false idea that the poor and oppressed truly need
to cling to in order to face up to modernity and
its gruesome spectacle of injustices without
sinking into despair or delinquency.
The problem is that the. affluent West no
longer really believes in its ideals and myths of
redemption. After the collapse of socialism, we in
the North no longer look forward to a future
where a clean break with the past can improve our
lot. What we see ahead are not radical changes to
be carried out but improvements to be made
within the framework of the rational, democ¬
ratic state. This is called "managing". The hope
principle is defunct at its home base. Can it,
should it be extinguished worldwide?
Its extinction would put a cheap price on
human suffering. Doubling average life
expectancy in the span of a century, wiping out
diseases, lowering illiteracy rates and boosting
potential per capita energy consumption are ele¬
vating, worthy tasks that, though they do not I I

Way Ahead, a photo by
Eddie Sethna
hold the key to long-term human happiness or
usher in the classless society, at least have the
enormous merit of narrowing the gap between
the two hemispheres.
In the short run, it is clear that North and
South are instinctively nursing two opposing
attitudes towards History and hence towards
progress. Orphaned by the present, the "South",
unable to take refuge in a past that only evokes
worse conditions, turns its eyes towards the
future, which is identified with a better life.
Orphaned by the future, the North has refo-
cused on its present, which it no longer sees by the
light of Utopia but by that of the past, glorifying
memory above all other civic virtues. Europe is
passionately building up its archives, recording
everything, creating museums of all kinds and
exulting in commemorations and anniversaries.
Yesterday's forward-looking and messianic out¬
look has been replaced by a backward-looking or
antiquarian view of history, in which we are no
longer active participants but nostalgic, wistful
onlookers. Nature was once a "conservative"
value opposed to History. Ecology, the only new
or rising political movement, mythologizes nature
to rally support. Back to the land, to local com¬
munities, traditions and threatened ways of life is
the order of the day. Even the idea of the
Republic, as the author of these lines upholds it
in the French context, can be interpreted as a
form of "return to the past" in the face of the
communalist and mercantile tendencies of the
now dominant, devastating Anglo-Saxon model
of democracy. "Preserving" is once again a pos¬
itive, even chic if not avant-garde term. It seems
as if, faith in the future having taken refuge among
the poorest inhabitants of the planet, the rich are
getting used to seeing progress not as the pursuit
of a better world but, to quote Milan Kundera, as
"the forerunner of the worst", and they have
good reasons to do so.
The danger lies in the advantage thus gained
by nihilism and cynicism. If progress is dead,
then anything goes. The law that says "the winner
takes all" is the law of a self-sufficient present
where making money fast and in any way pos¬
sible becomes the individual's supreme ideal.
The solution doubtless lies not in creating
yet another utopia or a new secular messianism,
but perhaps in waging a series of specific, single-
minded, ethically-based struggles, if not to achieve
the ideal best, then at least to steer clear of the real
worst. And today the worst seems to us to be the
very dilemma that the course of events would like
to lock us into: either, in the name of modernity,
to transform the planet into a supermarket, sub¬
jecting all public and private human activity to the
law of supply and demand; or, in the name of
identity, to shut ourselves off in vindictive fan¬
tasies of a return to some lost purity, to the exclu¬
sion of those who are different from ourselves,
and to the integrity of an ideology, community or
religious belief. To exchange the technocratic
myth that technological progress is all it takes to
solve political and cultural problems, for the
ideocratic frenzy that claims a fine-sounding
moral norm can take the place of economic and
technological solutions, would simply be to
exchange a caricature from the North for a cari¬
cature from the South. Another kind of public life
could be reinvented in the middle ground
between the politics of the dollar and the various
politics of God, that would be worthy of the
Enlightenment philosophers but without their
illusions, and that would combine the pessimism
of intelligence with the optimism of the will. The
lie must, in short, be given to all those who believe
that every criticism of the myth of progress is nec¬
essarily reactionary.
12
REGIS DEBRAY
is a French philosopher,
essayist and novelist. Among
his works published in English
are Teachers, Writers,
Celebrities: The Intellectuals and
Modern France (1985) and
Critique of Political Reason
(1983).
