A SENSE OF
DIFFERENCE
by Yves Plasseraud
i
A thumbnail
guide to
the world's
minorities
Young aborigines
at play in Alice Springs
(Australia).
WAT HAT are the usual criteria by which a
minority group can be identified? In
the case of ethnic or cultural minori¬
ties, the first criterion is that of language. A group
using a language different from that of the majority
in the midst of which its members live, like the
Armenian community in exile or the Jews in nine¬
teenth-century Russia, is clearly a minority. The
same applies to peoples such as the Kurds in Iran
or the Welsh in the United Kingdom, who live in
a specific region of a state and speak a different lan¬
guage from that of the state.
The linguistic criterion is far from conclu¬
sive, however. A variety of identity "tags", such
as religion, or cultural factors such as tradition,
can also help to give people a sense of identity as
members of a minority.
We shall therefore adopt a definition that is
more subjective than objective and say that a
group constitutes a minority when it feels from
experience that it is in a minority in relation to the
environment in which it lives. Account must
therefore be taken of its culture, language, tradi¬
tions or religion.
36 |
RELIGIOUS, CULTURAL AN»
ETHNIC MINORITIES
The first and probably most obvious category of
minority is that based on religious affiliation.
This is more than just a statistical phenomenon.
The fact that there may be more Protestants than
Catholics in, say, Germany or the United States
does not mean that the Catholics can be said to be
a minority. For a religious group to be in a
minority situation, this situation must be con¬
spicuous enough for it to give rise to a sense of
vulnerability or even inferiority. By this crite¬
rion, the Bahais of Iran, the Copts of Egypt and
the Mennonites of Russia are minorities. The
same criterion has applied for some years now to
the Muslims in India and the Hindus in Pakistan
and Bangladesh.
So-called "cultural" minorities constitute

another important category, although one that is
mentioned less often and is sometimes ques¬
tioned. Their "difference" is not, strictly speaking,
one of language or religion. One such case is that
of the Jews who in some countries speak dif¬
ferent languages from most of the population,
even though some of these languages, such as
Ladino or Yiddish, could be described as "ethnic
languages". Here, religious affiliation often only
represents a symbolic form of loyalty to an iden¬
tity that has a number of other defining features,
such as dietary practices, humour and a long tra¬
dition of persecution. A similar situation is found
among the Gypsies, who show an awareness of
their identity that goes beyond differences of
language and religion.
When we come to the third category the
ethnic or national minorities which account for by
far the largest number of minority situations we
enter a problem area in which a distinction has to
be made between several sub-categories.
The first of these sub-categories is that of abo¬
riginal or tribal populations who live outside the
mainstream of present-day society and continue
to practise their ancestral customs. These groups,
which are often almost on the verge of extinction
because their way of life is out of step with the
modern world, include ethnic groups as different
as the Pygmies of Cameroon, the Aborigines of
Australia, the Miao of central Vietnam or the
Indians of the Mato Grosso in Brazil. Their situ¬
ation is in many respects different from that of the
other groups. They are specifically considered as
"indigenous peoples" by the United Nations.
Another sub-category consists of those peo¬
ples who are widely scattered and who, although
speaking a common language, do not have a
country of origin or attachment. This is the case
The view from the
Principal Mosque in Delhi
(India).
YVES PLASSERAUD,
a French lawyer, is Secretary-
General of the Minority Rights
. Group (MRG), a humanitarian
organization founded in 1 970.
He is the author of many
articles and several books,
including Les nouvelles
démocraties d'Europe centrale
(Paris, 1991) and Les Etats
baltes (Paris, 1992). 37

Gypsies on the move in
Romania.
of the Assyro-Chaldeans, or Assyrians, in the
Middle East and of the Vlachs in Europe. These
peoples, which tend not to be numerous, are par¬
ticularly vulnerable.
There are also the relatively rare cases of what
might be termed "majority" minorities, peoples
which comprise the majority of the population in
terms of numbers but are relegated to de facto
"minority" status in the country in which they live.
Among these peoples are the Quechua Indians of
Ecuador and the Blacks of South Africa.
Another category is that of the "territorial"
minorities, which have traditionally occupied a
specific area which they regard as their "ethnic"
or "national" territory. Members of this cate¬
gory include the Berbers, the Kurds, the Cata¬
lans, the German-speakers of the South Tyrol,
and the Maris (people of Finno-Ugric stock
living in the Urals), all of whom have long
occupied regions which they regard as their
"homeland", to which they are bound by col¬
lective memories that form the bedrock of their
"systems of symbols".
In many cases, they owe their situation as
minorities to border changes, particularly as a
result of the creation of new states. These changes
suddenly put them on the other side of a border,
along with other minority peoples from different
ethnic groups. The partition of Czechoslovakia
in 1993, which has left some Slovaks in "Czechia"
and some Czechs in Slovakia, is one such problem
area. These "contingent minorities", as they are
sometimes called, can be contrasted with other
minorities whose status might be said to be their
"essence". The latter traditionally regard them¬


selves as minorities and belong to two types,
"colonies" deliberately settled by a ruling power
for military or economic purposes, and "landless
nations" like the Gypsies.
The sense of identity varies significantly
between different groups, regardless of their size.
The factors that determine the extent of a people's
resistance to assimilation are still not fully under¬
stood. Our own time, when "progress" and "con-
sumerist" standardization are undermining iden¬
tities and differences almost everywhere, also
happens to coincide with a juncture when those
identities and differences are being strongly
asserted. When peoples are sucked into processes
of levelling down and standardization, they seem
to generate "differentiating antibodies" that inten¬
sify their sense of identity and prompt them to
seek greater autonomy.
Whatever the cause and significance of this
paradox may be, it is certain that people cannot
be robbed with impunity of the stabilizing and
comforting ethos of an identity fully accepted and
expressed. To uproot people and. repress their
identity is to breed anxiety among them and
destroy their sense of community. The choice
today may lie between urban riots and Sarajevo-
type situations on the one hand and on the other
the harmonious and unfettered development of
identities from which all features incompatible
with the dignity of the human person have been
banished.
38
