portrait
Mahmoud Mokhtar
(1891-1934)
by Magdi Youssef
Atthe beginning of the Muslim era in Egypt,
the art of statuary, which had flourished to
an outstanding degree during Antiquity,
went into a long decline as a result of Islam's rejec¬
tion of representations of the human figure on
the grounds that they were an insult to the divine
privilege of creation. Bowing to this interdict,
Muslim artists turned to experimentation with
"abstract" forms that were simultaneously real
and visionary, as can be seen in calligraphy, the
arabesque and Arab-Islamic architecture.
Egypt's contacts with Europe during the Enlight¬
enment, culminating in the invasion by Napoleon
Bonaparte at the end of the eighteenth century, led
to a change of attitude towards the "modern"
plastic arts. However it was not until 1908 that
Cairo followed the example ofWestern cities and
acquired a school of fine arts and that young
people began to show enthusiasm for sculpture as
a creative discipline.
One student who enrolled at the school in the
year it opened was eighteen-year-old Mahmoud
Mokhtar. He distinguished himself as a sculptor,
and in 1911 won a scholarship to study in Paris,
where Rodin and Maillol reigned as the undis¬
puted masters.
At this period, Egyptian society was seeking to
define a modern frame of reference for its cul¬
tural identity, as a platform for national and polit¬
ical demands. Mokhtar was still living in Paris
when the Egyptian revolution of 1919 broke out.
With the clamour ofEgyptian crowds echoing in
his mind, Mokhtar conceived his most important
work, The Renaissance of Egypt. He exhibited a
scale model of it and dreamed of returning to
Cairo to continue his work there.
Like his predecessors in ancient Egypt, Mokhtar
wanted his statue to live for ever. He decided to
execute the monumental work in Aswan granite,
the stone that Egyptian sculptors had used at the
time of the Pharaohs. The costs ofhis project were
more than the government could afford, however,
and so a subscription was launched. Completed in
1928, the statue became a cultural landmark,
inspiring a number ofpoets and writers, including
Tewfik el-Hakim.
The Renaissance ofEgypt, which is four metres
long and three metres high, depicts a lion with a
man's head (an allusion to the Sphinx ofGiza) beside
which stands a proud peasant woman, one ofwhose
hands is placed on the lion's head as though she is
holding the animal back; with the other she draws
aside the veil that covers her face. Both figures are
looking in the same direction, perhaps towards a
new dawn, towards the rising sun, symbol of res¬
urrection for the ancient Egyptians.
In addition to this masterpiece and a number of
monuments that adorn the squares of Cairo and
Alexandria, Mahmoud Mokhtar executed a large
number ofsculptures, which can be seen today in
the museum recently restored by the Egyptian
Ministry of Culture that bears his name. They
depict peasant men and women at work and dis¬
play a masterly power of execution and a perfect
balance ofplanes and volumes. At the entrance to
the museum stands one ofMokhtar's majorworks,
The Keeper ofthe Secret (1 926), which has the mys¬
terious density of ancient statuary.
Mahmoud Mokhtar is a perfect example of cre¬
ative fertility shaped by training in Western tech¬
niques and used to serve an inspiration that was
authentically Egyptian.
78
The Renaissance of Egypt
(1928), a granite sculpture
(3x4 m.) by Mahmoud
Mokhtar that stands in
front of the University of
Cairo.
MAGDI YOUSSEF
is an Egyptian writer who is
vice-president of the
International Association of
Intercultural Studies.
