The apple of my eye
by Nissim Merkado
NISSIM MERKADO
is a French artist and art teacher whose work has been
exhibited in a number of countries, including France,
Belgium and Bulgaria.

^ÏPPLES, green, yellow and red. Colours	
I have placed the red apple on the ground to
paint it. The ground is ochre, the colour of
scorched earth. There is a contrast. Consistent
and indelible, oils are best for getting close to
nature. Pigments.
The smell of oils is not that of the colour of
the apple. Energy of the senses.
"Energy" is a word that crops up often.
Nothing is certain. I went away for a
moment, and my absence made itself felt in the
silence, a unifying factor: "poly-presence".
Painting, watching colours appear on a flat
surface. A black line weaves around the colours,
which are obstinately pressed up against one
another. Chance.
Everything around gives off vibrations. The
apple is fixed in the retina, but its colour vibrates
somewhere else.
Watching the silhouette of the main object
taking form. The apple is white on a white back¬
ground. Barely visible. . . .
Apples are eaten. Apples rot.
Cézanne proved that there is more to apples
than that: there is beauty in them. The consis¬
tency of the colour builds up the object's
"unique" form a kind of magic whose power
can be transmitted and can be converted from
one material to another.
Physical sensation is consumed, like energy.
A painting, 50.7 x 73.5 centimetres.
Colour has a molecular structure, it reflects
light equally for two bodies whose basic iden¬
tity differs materially. The similarity between the
red skin of the apple and the colour of blood is
artificial. When removed from any convention
relating to form and given its freedom, colour
enters the realm of universal abstract thought.
The tree on which the apple grows is empty.
The sun shrinks in volume. Seen through
an electron microscope, the pips of an apple
contain a sequence of memories that have not
been decoded.
With the aid of X-rays, one can see that the
artist sketched and painted in the pips before
covering them over with green paint. Memory
is something else again.
Photo by Pascal Rieu.
27
