The Indus Valley
civilizationcradle of
democracy?
by Syed A. Naqvi
IN all the highly developed civilizations of
the past Mesopotamia, the Nile Valley,
Anatolia, China the pervasive influence
of an imperial authority can be felt, providing
patronage for the arts and directing the evo¬
lution of society. A close examination of the
archaeological discoveries made in the Indus
Valley seems to belie the presence of such an
imperial authority in this civilization, which
flourished some 5,000 years ago and covered
almost twice the area of the civilizations of
Mesopotamia and the Nile Valley combined.
Yet although it seems to have lacked an autho¬
ritarian regime, the Indus civilization had a
well-disciplined way of life, civic controls and
an organizational system which could only
have stemmed from the kind of "rule by the
people" that was exercised in some Greek
city-states some 2,000 years later. Did Greece
give birth to democracy, or did Greece simply
follow a practice developed earlier?
The fact that the Indus Valley script has not
yet been deciphered is certainly a handicap to
attempts to draw any final conclusions, but
there is a vast array of material evidence avail¬
able to help archaeologists, social scientists and
other scholars to analyse the social and admi¬
nistrative structure of this civilization. In spite
of the absence of grandiose structures acting as
centres of authority such as forts, palaces or
great temples, all the discoveries made so far
suggest that the rule of law extended over an
area measuring roughly 1,600 kilometres from
north to south and more than 800 kilometres
from east to west.
The main argument in support of this
thesis is the existence of well-established norms
and standards which would have required the
consensus of the people if they had not been
imposed by an authoritarian regime. It is
impossible to ignore the evidence furnished by
the perfect planning of the great city of
Moenjodaro and the use in its construction of
standard-size burnt bricks 27.94 cm long,
13.96 cm wide and 5.71 cm thick. Most of the
houses had a standard layout and size, and
48
<
*; a$k..
Aerial view of the ruins of Moenjodaro, a
metropolis of the Indus Valley civilization in
Pakistan. The site was placed on Unesco's
World Heritage List in 1980.
These weights and weighing dishes of
polished stone are vestiges of the Indus
Valley civilization.

only special structures, possibly public build¬
ings, were treated differently within the frame¬
work of a city plan which also provided for
separate residential and commercial areas. In
the two major cities of Moenjodaro and
Harappa, which are about 600 kilometres
apart, the gridiron pattern of street layout
uncovered by archaeological excavations shows
how much consideration was given to the
safety and security of the residents and suggests
the existence of a highly developed and well-
monitored civic control system. In their plan¬
ning, the city architects and engineers of that
time avoided the risks from heavy and fast
traffic on the main thoroughfares by giving
access to the houses from side lanes.
The grid layout and residential architecture
are not the only evidence of an organized
planning and control system. Never before
and not until Greek and Roman times was so


much attention paid to sanitation and civic
facilities as in the Indus Valley civilization.
Water discharge sluices from the houses
drained refuse into small cesspits lined with
bricks at the base of the walls, from which
the dirty water was led through conduits to the
main drains which ran along the streets below
pavement level and were covered with sturdy
bricks. This drainage system was connected to
larger sewerage outlets which were also
covered over and discharged waste and dirty
water outside the populated area.
Another striking aspect of the rule of law
imposed by the population has been revealed
by the discovery of a virtually complete series
of highly polished stone weights. Their shapes
are cubical, half cubical, cylindrical and spher¬
ical, and very few of them are reported to be
defective, They provide yet another proof of
a civic authority maintaining consistent com¬
mercial standards.
It will, of course, be difficult to prove
conclusively the existence of such a sophisti¬
cated concept of democracy until the Indus
Valley script is deciphered and provides written
evidence on the subject. But the signs are there,
and further research in this direction may well
establish that "rule by the people" originated
in the Indus Valley.
SYED A. NAQVI,
of Pakistan, is an internationally known
archaeologist and museologist who is
currently technical adviser for the Unesco
Project "Integral Study of the Silk Road: Roads
of Dialogue". A former Director-General of
Pakistan's Department of Archaeology and
Museums, he was for some years head of
Unesco's Division of Cultural Heritage. He
played a leading part in the successful
campaigns for the preservation of monuments
in Nubia (Egypt), Borobudur (Indonesia), Venice
(Italy) and Moenjodaro (Pakistan). 49
