Mor Ben jelloun
Theplight of theplayboy in early spring

AT the first sign of spring, when the
early flowers timidly open, as soon
as the weather starts to get warmer
and the body feels the first tender touch of the
sun, the women of Paris take to the streets. Not
to demonstrate: unconstrained, free from false
modesty, intelligent yet with a hint of fragility
overcome, they no longer need vindictive
speeches and slogans. They have already won the
battle, not only in Parliament but in the public
mind. They are there to show themselves off,
proud just to be there, free, in the vanguard of
fashion, and with an appetite that is intimidating
or at the least disconcerting to even the most
determined womanizer.
Paris, more than any other European capital,
is their realm, their territory, the stamping ground
of all their desires. The light in this city, particu¬
larly at certain special times of day, enhances not
only their beauty but also and this does not
come amiss their mystery. Tall or petite, dark or
fair, rich or poor, Parisians by birth or by adop¬
tion, they pass by, self-assured, the look in their
eyes hinting to those who know the language
of love and sorrow. They may not be dominating
but they are not averse to becoming so when
their intelligence is affronted.
When a man experiences this he starts feeling
scared. He is convinced that late twentieth-cen¬
tury women are bent on his destruction. In fact
he is not thinking of his own destruction but of
that of all men whose love for women has grad¬
ually become a weakness that puts them severely
to the test nearly every day. The friend in whom
he confides is happy to learn he is not the only one
waging a combat that is lost from the start. The
only serious problem in his life is not suicide or
death but how to go about loving women. He is
completely at a loss to understand the grammar
of women's language a language that is often
foreign to him but he obstinately persists in
his quest.
The playboy's problem is learning to adapt.
The times are changing fast; manners change and
women are not becoming any less demanding
He thought for a while that the threat of Aids
16

Senegalese glass painting
(artist unknown).
would cool his ardour, or at least slow down his
scoring rate. Now, with a packet of condoms in his
pocket he feels more sure of himself and ready for
anything. He knows women are uncompromising
about this, something that often plays havoc with
his libido. Love-making loses some of its charm
when the question of protection crops up; con¬
versation switches tone from beauty to fear, dis¬
tress and death, and the excitement of the first time
together is foregone while the necessary precau¬
tions are worked out. Nevertheless, women have
lost none of their arrogance, which itself has
something erotic about it. Acutely aware of this,
women wage a constant battle to ensure that love
takes precedence over sexual acrobatics. Our
playboy took a long time to understand this.
DREAMS OF FAIR WOMEN
Living with a beautiful métisse, he follows
Stendhal's advice not to see too much of his



beloved and to drink champagne in agreeable
company. He suspects women to be fickle, poor
fellow, but does not always keep the right com¬
pany. For the time being he would rather dream
and is even in danger of becoming imprisoned in
his dreams. He knows dreaming is pleasant but
forgets it is also a trap.
He sees her walking unhurriedly towards
him, caught in a ray of sunshine, tall, taller than
himself, wearing a very tight, short black skirt
on her it looks good because she has fantastic legs.
She walks with the measured but basically natural
elegance of someone out strolling for the pleasure
of it. Her jacket fits closely at the waist, a waist he
can encircle with his two hands. He runs his fin¬
gers through her tousled hair. Beneath her jacket
of a discreet red, her breasts hang free. Around her
neck and over her shoulders she is wearing a
huge cashmere scarf; when she throws it back it
blows a puff of wind into the gawping eyes of the
men. She walks on by without seeing him and he
names her Perfidy, the name of a perfume he
dreams one day of inventing. There is nothing
nasty or even perverse in the name, just a sly
play on words. As she moves away he looks at her
from behind, a perfect picture in her short skirt,
and of course undresses her. She slaps him and he
falls at her feet. She pushes him away. He gets to
his feet, cursing himself as usual for what he has
done. Looking in the mirror he sees she has
scratched him and finds a drop of blood on his
finger. He sucks it and bursts out laughing.
The woman who has just sat down at the
table opposite is a voluptuous creature with big
dark eyes and the expression of a runaway trage¬
dienne, pouting lips and a full bosom. She gazes
into the distance as she drinks her tea and he
pretends to himself she is not there. She goes to
the telephone and he strains to hear what she is
saying. What he hears is unreassuring. She speaks
with an Italian accent and is vowing revenge on
someone. The words are a mixture of tough and
tender: "I love you, my darling, but if I catch 17

ASTRA PARIS FILMS ftvuntt:
LÁHAHT ETERHEL
(LE FILS DU CHEIK)
jva* r*aa "ff.: J «m r»*/**- '
Rudolph Valentino,
one of the first great
international film stars,
with Wilma Banky on the
poster for The Son of the
Sheik (1926), directed by
George Fitzmaurice.
18
you at it once more I'll tear you limb from limb.
..." When she comes back he sees she is crying,
eye shadow running down her cheeks. She
reminds him of an old girlfriend who only blos¬
somed out when they had a big scene. Her name
is Marphysa. He is afraid she will move over to his
table as he feels she is quite capable of doing. He
hastens to pay his bill and scuttles out of the
café.
This one is eighteen, has a goddess's name
and only goes for men of forty. She rings his
doorbell and asks for a light. He notices her
impressively full, firm breasts, her disturbing
grey-green eyes and her hair, worn in Louise
Brooks pageboy style, that he feels a sudden
desire to stroke. He tells himself she's not the
sort to let herself be talked into things, she is
more in need of love, a romance with moments of
tension, surprises and upsets. He doesn't feel up
to involvement in such a romance. He asks.her in
for a cup of tea. She asks a lot of questions that he
answers as best he can. She asks if he would like
to go to the theatre with her. He detests the the¬
atre but smiles and says yes. He tries to persuade
her to go to the cinema instead but she has seen
all the films he was meaning to sec. The thought
that one day she will let him touch her lips with
his gives him the shivers. He looks at her lips.
They are a very bright red and her eyes are
laughing all the time. He names her Anastasia and
he knows she means to destroy him, he is
expecting it and getting ready for it. He knows he
is for the slaughter but doesn't know how or
where it will happen.
ALL-TIME LOSERS
He calls the friend in whom he confides and the
friend confirms his general impression: "I feel the
same way. My intuition tells me it's going to be
awful. Our only hope is to pray for rain: it's
spring that gives them these dreadful ideas. It's
only to be expected: beauty needs to breathe, to
commit a few offences, and we are marked down
as the perfect victims. You tell me about your
Anastasia but I just had a narrow escape from a
knife-thrower! Ruthless, merciless! Georges was
hit on the head with a Coke bottle swept into
his face as his girlfriend threw her scarf over her
shoulder. We're goners and it's just as well we
know it. I thought I was going to turn
Mirabelle still in high school into one of those
brainy creatures with generous mouths who
could be the talk of the town! It turned out she
already had two lovers!"
Models often meet other people in the rag
trade upstairs at the Café de Flore and even have
photo sessions there. The women change clothes
in full view of the customers. There is no
voyeurism involved since there aren't any mys¬
teries or secrets any more. Actresses arrange to
meet people there. Without makeup and in ordi¬
nary clothes they often pass unnoticed. The Flore
is not a place for striking up acquaintances but for
cultivating those made elsewhere. Our man feels
safe here. The girls go by, take their seats, chat,
dress and undress, dance and then disappear.
He likes thinking back to that Brazilian actress
who came to Paris for three weeks to make a
film. The time he spent with her was one of total
insecurity. Their love-making was sublime. The
first time she came to his door, by mistake, she
hesitated on the doorstep then, with an accent that
sent him into a spin, said: "Aren't you Skolawsky ?
Can I use your phone?" She put down her bag,
took off her coat and lit a cigarette as she dialled
the number. He took in her perfect figure, her
mane of hair, her wide, graceful gestures. The
number did not answer.
"Could I have a glass of water? I get thirsty
when there's no-one there."
"Wouldn't you rather have a glass of white
wine?
"No, we don't know each other well enough
to drink wine together."
"We've got to start sometime	"
"When I feel like it, not before."
As she was leaving she said, "See you soon".

Three days later she was back, with a bottle of
champagne, just like in the movies. The first time
they made love they did it standing up, like in the
movies. She said: "You're not French, you must
be a white-skinned African." He said: "No, I'm
a Parisian."
Love as in a novel, a film, an old song, love like
a misty, dewy morning, bashful as a crime of
passion, crazy like a mirror that has forgotten
how to reflect, in Paris love sometimes wears
the face of pain, of disconsolate grief, he told
himself as he thought of all those women, those
lovely, willing, wanton, deadly women, who
stroll beside the Seine and will be sleeping alone
tonight. He starts to reckon up, to work out the
statistics, then realizes that at the very moment he
is working them out a woman is having the
orgasm of her life, so strong and wild she loses
control and strangles her lover.
When she makes love she closes her eyes and
speaks a mixture of Portuguese and Spanish. She
asks him to talk to her in Arabic, saying: "That's
how you make love in Paris, in several languages."
When the film was completed she stayed on a few
days, shutting herself up with him in a small
hotel, offering herself up entirely to him. She cut
off a lock of his hair, like a teenager, stuck it on a
postcard and sent it to him with the message:
"Only in Paris do I have orgasms that make me
pass out. You may be partly responsible, but get
it into your head that it's the polluted Paris air that
really turns me on."
He was a long time getting over that strictly
sexual affair. Sitting now at an outdoor café table,
he watches, aloof, as the girls go by. They are all
different, gathered in from distant climes. The
African girls he admires for their firm breasts,
their outspokenness, forwardness and feistiness,
the Asians for their willowy figures. He knows
how North African girls indulge their rampant lust
once they have started to become emancipated, and
he appreciates their wilfulness and the intelligence
that goes with their passion. What he likes best in
Frenchwomen is the playful siren-song and light
in their eyes. He is in love with all women, in
love forever and always the loser. 9ß
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN,
Moroccan-born novelist and
poet. His most recent work is
L'ange aveugle (Seuil, Paris,
1992). 19
