Africa: the power
of speech
by Amadou Hampâté ßo
"Listen" says old Africa.
"Everything speaks. Everything
is speech. Everything around us
imparts a mysterious enriching
state of being. Learn to listen
to silence, and you will discover
that it is music.»
Texts chosen by Hélène ¡-¡eckmann-
A life-force
20
The Bambara tradition of the Komo1 teaches that
the Word, Kuma, is a fundamental force ema¬
nating from the Supreme Being himself Maa
Ngala, creator of all things. It is the instrument of
creation: "That which Maa Ngala says, is!" pro¬
claims the cantor the singing priest of the god
Komo.
Maa Ngala, it is taught, deposited in Maa the
three potentialities of ability, willing and knowing.
But all the forces to which he is the heir lie dumb
within him. They arc static, till speech comes
and sets them into motion. Then, vivified by the
divine Word, they begin to vibrate. At a first
stage they become thoughts, at a second sound,
and at a third words.
In the same way, since speech is the external-
ization of the vibrations of forces, every mani¬
festation of a force in any form whatever is to be
regarded as its speech. That is why everything in
the universe speaks: everything is speech that
has taken on body and shape.
Let me point out, though, that at this level the
terms "speaking" and "listening" refer to realities
far more vast than those we usually attribute to
them. It is said: "The speech of Maa Ngala is
seen, is heard, is smelled, is tasted, is touched." It
¡s a total perception, a knowing in which the
entire being is engaged.
If speech is strength, that is because it creates
a bond of coming-and-going which generates
movement and rhythm and therefore life and
action. This movement to and fro is symbolized
by the weaver's feet going up and down, as we
shall sec later.
In the image of Maa Ngala's speech, of which

Amadou Hampâté Bâ in
Paris in 1981.
HELENE HECKMANN,
o' France, a former staff
member of the French Senate,
is the literary legatee of the
late Amadou Hampâté Bâ and
has charge of his manuscript
archives. Most of the texts
published here have been
extracted from "The Living
Tradition", a study which
appeared in General History of
Africa (vol. I ), published by
Unesco and Heinemann
Educational Books Ltd., 1981.
it is an echo, human speech sets latent forces into
motion. They arc activated and aroused by
speechjust as a man gets up, or turns, at the
sound of his name.
Speech may create peace, as it may destroy it.
It is like fire. One ill-advised word may start a war
just as one blazing twig may touch off a great con¬
flagration. According to a Malian adage: "What
puts a thing into condition [that is, arranges it, dis¬
poses it favourably]? Speech. What damages a
thing? Speech. What keeps a thing as it is?
Speech."
Tradition, then, confers on Kuma, the Word,
not only creative power but a double function of
saving and destroying. That is why speech, speech
above all, is the great active agent in African
magic.
But for spoken words to produce their full
effect they must be chanted rhythmically, because
movement needs rhythm, which is itself based on
the secret of numbers. Speech must reproduce the
to-and-fro that is the essence of rhythm.
In ritual songs and incantatory formulae,
therefore, speech is the materialization of cadence.
And if it is considered as having the power to act
on spirits, that is because its harmony creates
movements, movements which generate forces,
those forces then acting on spirits which them¬
selves arc powers for action.
The weaver and
the blacksmith
In the traditional African society, every artisanal
function was linked with an esoteric knowledge
transmitted from generation to generation and
taking its origin in an initial revelation. The
craftsman's work was sacred because it imitated
the work of Maa Ngala and supplemented his cre¬
ation. Bambara tradition, in fact, teaches that
creation is not yet finished and that Maa Ngala,
in creating our earth, left things there unfinished
so that Maa, his interlocutor, might supplement
or modify them with a view to leading nature
towards its perfection. The craftsman's activity in
operation was supposed to repeat the mystery of
creation. It therefore focused an occult force
which one could not approach without respecting
certain ritual conditions.
That is why traditional craftsmen accompany
their work with ritual chants or sacramental
rhythmic words, and their very gestures are con¬
sidered a language. In fact the gestures of each
craft reproduce in a symbolism proper to each
one the mystery of the primal creation, which, as
I indicated earlier, was bound up with the power
of the Word. It is said: 21

The smith forges the Word,
The weaver weaves it,
The leather-worker curries it smooth.
Let us take the example of the weaver, whose
craft is linked with the symbolism of the cre¬
ative Word deploying itself in time and space.
A man who is a weaver by caste is the repos¬
itory of the secrets of the thirty-three pieces that
arc basic to the loom, each of which has a
meaning. Before starting work, the weaver must
touch each piece of the loom, pronouncing words
or litanies that correspond to the forces of life
embodied in them.
The movement of his feet to and fro as they go
up and down to work the pedals recalls the orig¬
inal rhythm of the creative Word, linked with the
dualism of all things and the law of cycles. His feet
are supposed to speak as follows:
Fonyonko! Fonyonko! dualism! dualism!
When one goes up the other goes down.
There is the death of the king and the coro¬
nation of the prince, the death of the grandfather
and the birth of the grandson. . . .
[In Africa, to say that someone is dead, people
use the expression: "His feet are in agreement",
in other words "they have ceased moving". "For
the wise elders," notes Amadou Hampâté Bâ,2
"life is movement and movement begins with
the contradiction of the limbs	 Non-contra¬
diction means death." The shuttle, the throwing
of which by each hand evokes a need to "let go",
is supposed to say: "Life is a constant toing and
froing, a permanent gift of self".]
The gestures of the weaver as he operates his
loom [like those of the smith or other traditional
craftsmen] are creation in action. His words accom¬
panying his gestures arc the very song of Life.
As for the smith, he is the repository of the
secret of transmutations. He is pre-eminently
the Master of Fire. His origin is mythical and in
Bambara tradition he is called the First Son of the
Earth.
The elements of the smithy are linked to a
sexual symbolism, itself the expression or reflec¬
tion of a cosmic process of creation.
Thus the two round bellows worked by the
smith's assistant are likened to the male's two
testicles. The air they are filled with is the sub¬
stance of life, sent through a kind of tube that rep¬
resents the phallus into the furnace of the forge,
this representing the womb where the trans¬
forming fire works.
The traditional smith may enter the smithy
only after a ritual purifying bath prepared with a
decoction of certain leaves or barks or roots of trees
chosen according to the day. Then the smith garbs
himself in a special way, since he may not penetrate
the forge dressed in just any sort of clothes.
Every morning he purifies the smithy by
means of special fumigations based on plants he
knows of.
These operations over, cleansed of all out¬
side contacts he has had, the smith is in a sacra¬
mental state. He has become pure once again
and is equivalent to the primordial smith. Only
now can he create in imitation of Maa Ngala, by
modifying and fashioning matter.
Before beginning work, he invokes the four
mother elements of creation (earth, water, air,
fire), which are necessarily represented in the
forge: there is always a receptacle filled with
water, fire in the furnace, air sent by the bellows,
and a little pile of earth beside the forge.
During his work, he pronounces special
22 M A Dogon weaver (Mali).

A Bambara mask of a
fearsome spirit (Mali).
words as he touches each tool. Taking his anvil,
which symbolizes feminine receptivity, he says:
"I am not Maa Ngala, I am the representative of
Maa Ngala. It is he who creates and not I." Then
he takes some water or an egg and presents it to
the anvil, saying: "Here is your bride-price."
He takes his hammer, which symbolizes the
phallus, and strikes the anvil a few times to sen¬
sitize it. Communication established, he can
begin to work.
The apprentice must not ask questions. He
must only look and blow. This is the mute stage
of apprenticeship. As he advances in knowledge,
he blows in rhythms that are more and more
complex, each one having a meaning. During the
oral stage of apprenticeship, the master will grad¬
ually transmit all his skills to the pupil, training
him and correcting him until he acquires mastery.
Then, after a liberation ceremony, the new smith
may leave his master and set up his own forge. [In
most cases he will previously have made a tour of
the country to work for other great masters from
whom he will have learned not only new tech¬
niques but also new practical or occult skills that
form part of the great initiatory tradition of the
blacksmiths.]
The smith must have knowledge covering a
vast sector of life. With his reputation as an
occultist, his mastery of the secrets of fire and iron
make him the only person entitled to perform cir¬
cumcision the grand Master of the Knife in the
Komo initiation is always a smith. In addition to
all his knowledge of metallurgy, he has a perfect
knowledge of the Sons of the womb of the Earth
(mineralogy) and the secrets of plants and the
bush. He knows what kind of vegetation covers
the earth, where it contains a particular metal, and
he can detect a lode of gold merely by exam¬
ining plants and pebbles.
He knows the incantations to the earth and
the incantations to plants. Nature being regarded
as living and as animated by forces, any act that
1 One of the great initiation
schools of the Mande
(Mali).
2 Interview in Jeune
Afrique magazine, Paris
(N° 1095, 30 December
1981).

disturbs it must be accompanied by a ritual behav¬
iour designed to save and safeguard its sacred
equilibrium, for everything is connected, every¬
thing echoes everything else, every action agitates
the life-forces and sets up a chain of consequences
the repercussions of which are felt by man.
The craft or the traditional function can be
said to sculpt man's being. The whole difference
between modern education and oral tradition
lies there. What is learned at the Western school,
useful as it may be, is not always lived; whereas
the inherited knowledge of oral tradition is
embodied in the entire being.
The instruments or tools of a craft give mate¬
rial form to the sacred word; the apprentice's
contact with the craft obliges him to live the
word with every gesture he makes.
That is why oral tradition taken as a whole
cannot be summed up as transmission of stories
or of certain kinds of knowledge. It generates
andforms aparticular type ofman. One can say
that there is the smiths' civilization, the weavers'
civilization, the shepherds' civilization, and so on.
Thus the traditional artisan, imitating Maa
Ngala, repeating the primal creation by his ges¬
tures, used to perform, not work, in the purely
economic sense of the word, but a sacred function
that brought the fundamental forces of life into
play and engaged him in his entire being. In the
secrecy of his workshop or his smithy he partook
of the renewed mystery of eternal creation.
Fishermen on the banks of
the River Bani (Mali).
AMADOU HAMPATE BA,
Malian writer, historian and philosopher, made an out¬
standing contribution, notably ¡n Unesco (of whose
Executive Board he was a member between 1 962 and
1 970), to win international recognition for African oral
cultures. While he revealed the wealth and values
of these cultures, he also drew attention to their pre¬
cariousness and played an active role in safeguarding
them. His manuscript archives, the "Fonds Amadou
Hampâté Bâ", is the product of half a century's research
into African oral traditions.
He published many books and articles, saving for pos¬
terity some fine examples of Peul oral literature including
Koumen (with Germaine Dieterlen, Mouton, Paris, 1955,
out of print), Kaidara (co-edited with Lilyan Kesteloot,
Belles-Lettres, Collection Classiques Africains, Paris,
1968) and L'éclat de la Grande Etoile (the sequel to Kai¬
dara, same publishers, Paris, 1974). His story L'étrange
destin de Wangrin (The Strange Fate of Wangrin; Presses
de la Cité, Paris, 1973) was awarded the Grand Prix
Littéraire de l'Afrique Noire. His book Vie et enseignement
de Tierno Bokar, le sage de Bandiagara (The Life and
Teaching of Tierno Bokar, the sage of Bandiagara; Seuil,
Paris, 1 980) is a tribute to his spiritual teacher. The first
volume of his memoirs was published in 1991 under the
title Amkoullel l'enfant peul (Actes-Sud publishers, Aries).
Almost half the documents in the manuscript
archives, which cover almost every aspect of the tradi¬
tional lore of Africa south of the Sahara (history, religions,
myths, tales, legends, oral literature, sociology, etc.) have
so far been catalogued and transferred to microfiche.
When this task is completed, full sets of microfiches will
be deposited with the main libraries in France and in
Africa and made available to researchers, in accordance
with the wishes of Amadou Hampâté Bâ. Meanwhile,
those wishing to consult these documents may contact
Mme Hélène Heckmann, 10-12 Villa Thoréton, 75015
Paris, France.
