Ihe ruses
of racism
by He/ Wieviorka
Racist violence has recently resurfaced.
What conditions encourage its growth?
RACISM is not always overtly, brutally vio¬
lent it does not always kill. Racial dis¬
crimination, expressions of prejudice and
racist tracts can all carry ominous overtones of
violence, but they cannot be ranked alongside
the physical violence perpetrated in pogroms,
lynchings, immigrant-bashing, murders and
other types of assault, which is what I wish to
discuss.
What is more, the most violent. forms of
racism do not necessarily grow out of other
varieties of racism. Contrary to popular belief,
prejudice does not invariably and inevitably
lead on to acts of violence. Deep-seated racism
may be widespread in societies where there is
no outward sign of naked violence.
For racist violence to erupt, a certain set of
conditions must exist. One conditioning factor
is the attitude of those in authority: what they
are willing and able to do in order to deal with
those who engage in racist acts. When a
government is weak or remote, or even tinged
with racism itself, it encourages political
groups and forces wishing to turn their mes¬
sage of hatred, contempt, subordination and
rejection into deeds. It may even become active¬
ly racist itself or manipulate racist violence,
as happened in the Russian Empire at the turn
of the century, where the Czarist regime was
largely instrumental in setting off the pogroms.
But there are other factors. Some institu¬
tions particularly the legal system and the
police may use methods which, although not
deliberately or explicitly racist in themselves,
nevertheless contribute to the spread of serious
outbreaks of violence. Many official enquiries
have found that when police behaviour has
exacerbated ethnic and social tensions instead
A Ku Klux Klan
demonstration in Atlanta
(USA) on Martin Luther
King Day, 20 January 1992.
Martin Luther King Day is
celebrated each year in the
United States to
commemorate the Nobel
Prize-winner and non-violent
champion of the Black
cause, who was
assassinated in 1968.
of defusing them, it has often led to an escala¬
tion of violence in which racism occupies a
prominent place.
Yet another factor is the existence of poli¬
tical forces capable of providing racist violence
with an organized structure and an ideological
foundation. As long as such forces do not exist
or are relegated to the sidelines of society, vio¬
lence is always possible and sometimes erupts,
but it crops up in the form of sudden out¬
bursts and short-lived explosions, in other
words of acts which, numerous though they
may be, are not linked by any apparent uni¬
fying principle.
When such forces do gain a political foot¬
hold, however, the violence for which they
provide a structure, even if it is not directly
organized by them, nonetheless becomes more 13

A confrontation between
police and skinheads
outside a hostel for
immigrants at Rostock
(Germany) in 1992.
cold-blooded, methodical, and active. It
becomes a matter of schemes and strategies; it
channels popular feelings of hatred and hosti¬
lity towards the group marked out as a racial
target, but does not allow them to be
expressed spontaneously. It may even prevent
them from being expressed at all, on the poli¬
tical grounds that any act of violence should be
consistent with the aims and thinking of the
party or organization.
This is why the emergence of a political
force with a racist ideology and plans does not
necessarily mean that there will be an imme¬
diate increase in violence, for violence, may
actually be detrimental to its attempts to
achieve legitimate political status. Violence
may create an image of disorder and accord¬
ingly be played down until the movement
achieves power, when it will be able to indulge
in violence in its most extreme forms. Con¬
versely, there may be an increase in violence
when the power of a racist force or party is on
the wane, because some of its members may
take a harder line if they feel they have no



political future. The end of apartheid in South
Africa is providing scope not for more racism
but for more racial violence.
Since the beginning of the modern era,
racism has been linked to patterns of domina¬
tion, especially those of colonialism set against
the background of empire-building. But it has
also informed trends in thinking which, from
the nineteenth century onwards, influenced
aspects of physical anthropology and other
doctrinaire intellectual movements. When the
14
term "racism" emerged in the period between
the two World Wars, some of the theories
from the past were refurbished. Above all,
racist attitudes spread all over the world in the
wake of the social upheavals that are at the
root of various forms of racial violence.
Racial violence is no longer only the crude
expression of colonial-type domination. It
may also stem from an economic crisis, in
which a deprived group, threatened with a
decline in social status or exclusion from the
mainstream, turns against another group in an
attempt to oust it, on racial grounds, from a
shrinking job market. The racism of the poor
whites, which led to the lynching of blacks in
the southern United States at the end of the
nineteenth century and to race riots in the big
cities of the northern United States in the first
half of the twentieth century, came about
when the whites saw their black neighbours as
dangerous competitors on the industrial job
market.
But racial violence may also occur among
more affluent classes, which want to maintain
the gap separating them from the less privi¬
leged. The method they use is a combination
of social and racial segregation, which may in
fact lead to more cold-blooded and calculated
forms of violence. At the beginning of the cen¬
tury, well-to-do white citizens in the southern
United States organized lynching parties to
punish black men accused of raping white
women or of theft.
However, racist violence does not always
stem solely or directly from social factors. It
may originate in a real or imagined threat to
the identity of a group, or it may accompany
the expansion of a state or religion, sometimes
claiming to represent universal values, as often
happened during the colonial period.
The urge to uphold a particular identity
can lead to unlimited violence, fuelled either
by an obsessive fear of "racial intermingling"
or by reference to an absolute difference that
prohibits all social intercourse and all contact
between races except in war. Such forms of
racism are intended to keep others at bay, to
ensure that they are segregated or even
expelled or destroyed. The aim is not so much
to establish the inferior status of a given group
on the grounds of its physical attributes as to
ensure that a community remains homogeneous
or a nation remains pure, or to justify their
unimpeded expansion.
Identity-related racism and the violence
that goes with it can have three quite distinct
motivations.
In some cases, this form of racism is
founded on the affirmation of an identity that
claims to be universal and seeks to crush every¬
thing that opposes it. The history of coloni¬
zation contains many instances of this pheno-

An anti-racist rally in Bonn
(Germany), November 1992.
MICHEL WIEVIORKA,
a French sociologist, is a
lecturer at the University of
Paris-Dauphine and
assistant director of the
Centre d'Analyse et
d'Intervention Sociologiques
in Paris. His published works
include Terrorisme à la une
(with Dominique Wolton,
1987) and Sociétés et
Terrorisme (1988).
menon. Conversely, it may be based on the
resistance of a nation or community to the
modern world, in which case the chosen target
is a group that is seen as the incarnation of evil,
intrusion, or the corruption of culture or tradi¬
tional values. The Jews have long been
denounced and attacked as representives of a



hated modernity. The explosive violence of the
pogroms and the more methodical violence of
the gas chambers largely grew out of criticisms,
-phantasms and rumours that reproached the
Jews on the grounds of their cosmopolitanism,
wealth, political power and influence in the
media.
Thirdly, this identity-related racism may
flare up as a result of a clash between two or
more communities within the same political
entity or a multiracial or multicultural society.
In such cases, violence results from strained
relations between communities, from a process
of interaction in which one group's real or ima¬
gined attempt to assert itself prompts reactions
from other groups and triggers off a spiralling
power struggle that may end in an outburst of
violence and political chaos. The civil war in
Lebanon and the breakup of Yugoslavia are
recent examples of conflicts where overt or
implied references to race can be sensed behind
rhetorical appeals to the nation or to the cul¬
tural, confessional and historical community.
When violence is associated with racism,
therefore, it is governed by various conditions
that dictate the course it takes and is rooted in
a wide range of social and identity-related fac¬
tors. But the important thing about violence is
that it compresses into a single action factors
that may be not only different but contradic¬
tory. Perpetrators of racist violence may wish,
for example, to exclude a specific group from
their society, and also assign it an inferior posi¬
tion in society so as to exploit it. This happens
frequently in industrialized countries, where
immigrants are employed to do low-grade jobs
and rejected on account of their culture. Or to
take another case, in Czarist Russia and central
Europe at the beginning of the present century,
it was the rich, assimilated Jew, symbol of
modernity, who was regarded as an intolerable
threat, yet the victims of the pogroms were the
culturally conspicuous and poverty-stricken
Jewish masses.
This is the paradox of violence: not only is it
unembarrassed by its inherent contradictions, it
also creates its own logic and its own dynamics,
so that in the end it alters the conditions that
allowed it to emerge in the first place. 15
