Once upon
a time
in Sumer. . .
10
by Arie S. Issar
EVER since very ancient times, human beings
have tried to explain the wonders of water,
for which they at first attributed responsi¬
bility to deities whose deeds were sung in hymns
and transmitted as myths and legends.
The earliest of these stories to come down to
us were written down in Sumer, Mesopotamia,
about 4,500 years ago. They tell of a universe
composed only of water, from which arose a
cosmic mountain that contained both heaven
and earth. The Sumerians believed that at the
creation of the world there was a fight between
the benevolent gods and Kur, the god of the
nether world, who controlled the primeval
waters. Kur was involved in a foul deed com¬
mitted against Ereshkigal, the sky goddess.
Ereshkigal was helped by Enki, the water god,
who set out in a boat to attack Kur. This evil
god fought back by sending the primeval waters
to sink the boat, but Enki, the god of good water,
triumphed.
The Babylonians, who adopted many
Sumerian traditions, chanted during their New
Year festivities the epic tale of the victory of the
benevolent god Marduk over Tiamat, the goddess
of the abyss. The tale began as follows: "When in
:or most of
mman history,
toter WQS the
stuff of myth,
hly in the
1 1th century
iid on
ipprooch based
)n observation
md experiment
lead to the birth
if modern
hydrology the height heaven was not named, And the Earth
beneath did not yet bear a name, And the
primeval Apsu who begat them, And chaos,
Tiamat, the mother of them both. Their waters
were mingled together." (Enuma Elish, The Seven
Tablets of Creation, Tablet One).
In the Old Testament, the existence of a
primeval ocean is taken for granted. The story of
creation begins when "darkness was upon the
face of the deep. And the spirit of god moved
upon the face of the waters" (Genesis 1 : 2). Inter¬
estingly, the Hebrew word for "the deep" is
Tehom, which brings to mind the Babylonian
Tiamat. After being defeated by Marduk, this
entity representing the abyss of primeval waters
and chaos was divided into two parts to form the'
bodies of atmospheric water and underground
water:
"Then the lord rested gazing upon her
[Tiamat's] dead body while he divided the flesh
of the body and devised a cunning plan. He split
her up like a flat fish into two halves. One half of
her he stablished as a covering for heaven. He
fixed a bolt; he stationed watchmen and bade
them not to let her waters come forth. . . . And
over against the Deep he set the dwelling of

'%. I
/
r\
A J
Nudinmud1 ". (Enuma Elish, Tablet IV, 135-142).
This story is reminiscent of the dividing of the
waters by the Creator as narrated in the Bible:
"And God made the firmament, and divided the
waters which were under the firmament from the
waters which were above the firmament: and it
was so. And God called the firmament Heaven."
(Genesis 1: 6-7).
Another reference to an ancient abyss appar¬
ently connected to the primeval waters is found
in the Canaanite myths deciphered from the clay
tablets found when the ancient city of Ugarit, on
the eastern shore of the Mediterranean, was exca¬
vated. In these myths El, the primeval deity, lives
at the sources of rivers in the midst of the outlet
of two deeps called Teomotaim.
Thus the Babylonian Tiamat, the Canaanite
Teomotaim and the Hebrew Tehom may all be
manifestations of the same idea of a state of
chaos, of an endless abyss of primeval water, a
state where life cannot exist and thrive. These
elements are also found in the Rig-Veda, an
ancient Hindu text in which the slaying of the
cruel dragon Vrtra by the valiant Indra involves
piercing the bellies of the mountains and letting
the water flow out.
In an impression taken
from a Babylonian cylinder
dating from the 2nd
millennium B.C., Enki, the
god of fresh water, is
shown amidst small
goddesses and streams of
water teeming with fish.
1. The father of Marduk and
the creator of humanity.
THE PRIMEVAL ABYSS
There is good reason to believe that these ideas
originated in prehistoric times, were brought to
Mesopotamia, transmitted to the Harappa pre-
Aryan civilization of northern India, and later
absorbed by the Aryan conquerors who settled
in this region during the second millennium B.C.
They may also have spread from Mesopotamia to
Egypt during proto-historical times, brought by
conquerors from abroad, probably from
Mesopotamia. The ancient Egyptians believed
in the emergence of a primeval mound from an
abyss of primeval water, at the site of the temple
of Atum-Ra at Heliopolis. The primeval waters
stretched endlessly in all directions. The rising of
the creator, the god Atum, from this water was
also the manifestation of the creation of order and
life. As long as he was immersed in the primeval
waters, all was chaos.
Ancient Egyptian texts found in the pyra¬
mids describe the Creator, who is the outflow of
the Primeval Flood, and who emerged from the
waters, as a serpent with many coils. In the cosmic
myth of Hinduism, the god Vishnu, the source of
the world and all things, is depicted as sleeping,
before the Creation, in the primeval ocean, on the II

This diagram of a
hydraulic machine is an
illustration from
Athanasius Kircher's
Mundus Subterraneus, a
1 7th-century treatise on
geology.
thousand-headed serpent Sesa. In his sleep a lotus
grows from his navel, and in the lotus is born the
demiurge Brahma, who created the world.
The same basic ideas are found in the pre-Hcl-
lenic mythologies of ancient Greece. Although in
these myths creation is attributed to a woman's
touch, the motifs of a primeval ocean and a snake
recur: Euronome, the goddess of all things, rises
naked from chaos and divides the sea from the
sky, dancing lonely upon the waves. She catches
hold of the north wind, rubs it between her hands
and thus creates the great serpent Ophion. In
the Homeric myths, all gods and all living crea¬
tures originated in the stream of Oceanus which
girdles the world.
Sumer was located in the lowlands of
Mesopotamia, near where the waters of the Tigris
and the Euphrates flow into the sea. In a dry
year, when river levels are low, seawater
encroaches into the river inlets and the subsurface.
Today we know how to calculate the decrease in
the flow of a river as a function of the quantity of
precipitation in its catchment area, thereby
making it possible to forecast the rate of recession
of the fresh water and the penetration of the sea
water. The Sumerians, however, did not connect
the encroachment of the sea with the lowering of
the water level in their rivers. They had a con-
Fijw.i V
12
ceptual model which claimed just the opposite,
namely that the water of the river receded because
Kur, the great god of the primeval waters (sym¬
bolizing the saline water of the sea as well as
subsurface water) became furious with Niuntra,
the god of the south wind. According to the
Sumerian poem, as Kur rises the Tigris does not
rise, famine rages, the water in the small rivers
does not rise, the fields are not irrigated, and
nothing grows but weeds. Niuntra solves the
problem by building dikes to protect the rivers
against the encroaching sea water. This stops the
flow of the fresh water into the sea and raises its
level so that the fields can be irrigated.
Thus a natural disaster and a feat of clever
engineering are reported in the form of a con¬
ceptual model which seemed logical to the
ancients. The king or the irrigation engineer who
devised and ordered the construction of the dikes
understood that the recession of the Tigris and the
penetration of the sea were interconnected. He
might not have understood that the low level of
the Tigris was due to a dry spell caused by low
rainfall on the Zagros mountains and that the
encroachment of the sea could have been
enhanced by a global rise in the sea level due to a
climatic change which caused the glaciers at the
poles to melt. What he saw and understood was
the change in the balance between the water of the
Tigris and the water of the sea, and he found a way
of coping with it. This however was not sufficient;
he also had to put forward a theory to explain
what happened, and the theory that came to his
mind entailed a fight between gods.
THE DELUGEMYTH AND
REALITY
Another story found in many ancient mytholo¬
gies is that of the Deluge. The oldest known ver¬
sion is Sumerian. Adopted by the Babylonians
and Assyrians and repeated in the Bible, it is
explained in terms of an ethical world-view. In the
mythologies of the people of Mesopotamia, the
Deluge occurs because the gods fight among
themselves, while in the Jewish version it is God's
punishment for the wickedness of the people.
The conceptual model suggested by the present
author is that a flood did indeed affect the
Mesopotamian plain at the dawn of history, caused
by a global climatic change that caused the glaciers
to expand and rainstorms to sweep over the
Mediterranean as far as the Levant. This caused
flooding in the lowlands. One reason for this sug¬
gestion, in addition to the palaeoclimatic evidence,
is the fact that all the ancient stories, although
written in a land of rivers, give the reason for the
floods as rain and not river overflow. This indicates
that the deluge was a climatic anomaly.
As we have seen, the conceptual model of the
ancient Greeks also involved a primeval abyss of
water. This conception might have been formed in
prehistoric times, before the Greeks reached their
peninsula. Once settled there, they became con¬
cerned with the origin of springs. Greece is a
Mediterranean country where most rain falls in
winter. Summers are long, hot and mostly dry, and
during them the water supply depends on the
flow of the springs issuing in many cases from

limestone caverns. Greek mythology regarded
springs as the place of residence of Pan, a god
who enjoyed playing a flute made from reeds
growing at the waterside.
In Greece in the sixth and fifth centuries B.C.,
there was a school of scientists and philosophers
known as the pre-Socratics, who combined obser¬
vation and logic to explain natural phenomena. It
can be claimed that the pre-Socratics were the first
thinkers to use non-religious conceptual models
and theories in an attempt to understand nature.
One theory to explain the phenomena of springs
was suggested by the pre-Socratic philosopher
Anaxagoras of Clazomenae (500-428 B.C.). His
writings have not survived, but fortunately Aris¬
totle, who lived about a hundred years later, refutes
him after citing him in his book Meteorológica.
Anaxagoras put forward the theory, advanced
for its time, that all groundwater originates from
rain, which is raised by the Sun (evaporation),
then falls on the Earth and collects beneath it in
great reservoirs. Rivers, which are fed by springs,
are fuller in winter when the subterranean reser¬
voirs are full, and diminish in summer when these
reservoirs empty. Some rivers even dry up alto¬
gether when their sources of supply empty before
fresh rains come. Anaxagoras also maintained
that no water is generated during its flow through
the hydrological cycle. This is the first statement
of the principle of conservation of matter.
Aristotle did not agree with this theory. He
claimed that the volume of water is much greater
than the volume of the Earth, and suggested
another conceptual model in which he main¬
tained that water is formed continuously in the
Earth from air, which he considered to be a sort
of aqueous vapour. He also seems to have believed
that juvenile water is replenished from the depths
of the Earth. He suggested that high mountains
cool the vapours that rise from the lowlands and
condense them into water.
In this conceptual model Aristotle tried to
weld meteorological and hydrological observa¬
tions into a single rational theory. It seemed to
him that the volume of water flowing in springs
and rivers is much greater than the volume of the
Earth in which it had to be stored. Aristotle
explained this discrepancy by the idea of the con¬
tinuous generation of water. This was the basic
flaw of his theory.
RECONCILING ARISTOTLE WITH
CHRISTIAN TEACHING
The Romans, who adopted the Hellenistic philo¬
sophical and scientific paradigms, were practical
people. Their engineers preferred perennial springs
to rivers as a source of safe and continuous water
supplies for their cities. They liked these springs
to be on a higher altitude than their cities so that
there was enough pressure for the water to flow
along beautifully constructed aqueducts and
emerge as fountains in the midst of the cities.
When perennial springs were not available, in the
vicinity of cities in the more arid parts of their
empire, they dug wells to reach groundwater.
They probably learned this technique from local
people who knew from proto-historical times
how to locate and use groundwater.
Aristotle's erroneous assumption about the
volumes of water and Earth, and the theory of the
A massive sculpture at
Buddhanilkanta, near
Kathmandu (Nepal) shows
the god Vishnu reclining
on the coils of the serpent
of eternity.
ARIE SHIMSHON ISSAR,
of Israel, Is head of the Center
for Water Resources at the
Jacob Blaustein Institute for
Desert Research and
professor of geology at the
Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev. He has taken part in
hydrological projects In several
countries, and under the
auspices of the FAO served for
4 years as advisor to the
government of Iran In the field
of groundwater research and
development. He is the author
of many publications on
hydrogeology, hydrochemistry
and the Impact of climate
change on hydrology. 13

perpetual generation of water which he devel¬
oped to answer it, dominated the scientific
thinking of civilization for more than 1,500 years.
Aristotelian views were adopted by the Chris¬
tian church and were taught in its schools to the
monks and priests who formed the literate class.
However, they were not accepted at their face
value. They had to conform with the Holy Scrip¬
tures, and much "scientific" research during the
Middle Ages and later was devoted to reconciling
Aristotelian views with the Bible and other con¬
victions of the church. The Scriptures were for the
monks a basic truth, like an observation of nature
that could not be doubted. Indeed, Aristotelian
writings and the Bible had greater authority than
any observation and thus provided the postulates
upon which the world-view had to be based.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF
SCIENTIFIC HYDROLOGY
In the seventeenth century, new ideas on the
need to study nature by observation became
widely current. Adherents of the classical para¬
digms of the church tried to find a middle way
between the Holy Scriptures and their own obser¬
vations. One solution was the theory advanced by
the GermanJesuit Athanasius Kircher, who in his
book Mundus Subterráneas (1665-1668) sug¬
gested that there are holes in the seabed which
communicate with caverns in the mountains and
that as a result of various processes the water is
made to flow upwards, thus fulfilling what is
stated in the Bible. Many other scholarly acro¬
batics were performed by pious people in order
to reconcile the Holy Scriptures, Aristotle, and
observable hydrological phenomena.
An unbiased understanding of what really
happens in nature came when people freed them¬
selves from the obligation to regard the ancient
writings as truths to be trusted more than obser
vations. Once this happened, new conceptual
models were created by such unconventional
thinkers as Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) and
Bernard Palissy (1510-1589), who hypothesized
that spring water consists of rainwater perco¬
lating through porous and fractured rocks.
The proof of these conceptual models came
when a quantitative approach was applied. This was
done first by Pierre Perrault, whose book De
l'Origine des Fontaines (1 674) presented a quanti¬
tative hydrological balance of the drainage basin of
the River Seine. This showed that all the water
that was drained by the river amounted only to
about one sixth of the total rainfall on its catchment
basin. This was followed a few years later by
another set of measurements and calculations by
the physicist Edme Mariotte, who modified the
figure to about one-eighth. Other quantitative
investigations which followed during the eigh¬
teenth century established the theory of the hydro-
logical cycle as it is found in modern textbooks.
Later, more precise calculations were made.
The engineer Henri Darcy calculated the flow of
water through a porous medium and thus for¬
mulated what is known as Darcy's Law, which
states that the volume of water flowing through a
certain section of porous rock is equal to the per¬
meability of the rock multiplied by the gradient of
the water table. This law was further developed for
application to various conditions by hydrologists
during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
With the coming of the computer era, some
hydrologists came to think that in the future only
very few field investigations would be needed to
supply basic data, and that all the rest of the work
would be done by computer. This approach is
reminiscent of the Greek belief at the dawn of
the classical era of philosophy, that logical rea¬
soning based on just a few observations would be
sufficient to reveal the mysteries of nature.
A scene from the lavishly
decorated tomb of
Sennefer, known as the
"tomb of the vines", at
Thebes, Egypt (I Sth
century B.C.).
14
