René Depestre
The enchantedgarden
In the land of Eros,
a painting by the Haitian
artist Blaise Saint Louis
THERE is a warm-blooded, pagan side to
my Caribbean character that immedi¬
ately sets my vision of love poles apart
from the gloomy experience that has coloured
the history of Eros in the Western world. That
existential gloom no doubt accounts for the feel¬
ings of shame, sadness and guilt in relation to
sexual activity that pornography helps to keep
alive, at the expense of the frank and free celebra¬
tion of the act of love.
In the Caribbean, the same sense of the won
derful within the day-to-day that characterizes the
Americas and is one of the hallmarks of the
Creole sensibility also makes its beneficent influ¬
ence felt in a relaxed attitude to the pleasures of
sex: the gods themselves make love freely, and the
enjoyment of the sexual act is the occasion for a
pagan ceremony, free from anxiety and the pangs
of religious conscience, and far removed from so-
called "porn", which is nothing other than the
crudity and obscenity of that diabolical killjoy, the
lout.
31

32
In my preferred erotic culture, the woman



achieves fulfilment in a paradise garden, clasped
in the arms of the enchanter, a gardener whose
spade thrusts and turns passionately in the inner¬
most parts of her adorable body. On this level, an
embrace has wings to carry lovers boldly onward,
joyously spiralling upward to the seventh heaven
of living. It is in these lyrical, dream-like terms
that, ever since I was an adolescent, I have expe¬
rienced the act of love, thus keeping faith with the
dream state that seems to be the main undercur¬
rent of the Haitian sensibility.
On the plantation in colonial days, sexual
diversions were perhaps the only form of freedom
allowed to my slave ancestors, the freedom to
dance out their loneliness and forget for a while
their unhappiness, offering up their flesh with a
burning intensity. This erotic heritage does not
simply reproduce former patterns of African or
French sexuality: there is without a doubt a Creole
flavour to eroticism in the Caribbean, just as there
is, in our bedroom exploits, a fanciful sexual sur¬
realism, with a spicy Creole seasoning, that existed
long before the literary movement that André
Breton, Philippe Soupault, Louis Aragon, Paul
Eluard and their circle made famous in Europe.
By rehabilitating the superb concept oí amour
fou or sublime love in European culture, the
Surrealists to their credit restored to love-making
both its romantic dimension and a marvellous
freedom in the employment of the intimate parts
involved in bringing it to its glorious fulfilment.
This represented a resounding break with the
Judxo-Christian view of sexuality (which brings
a taste of doom to the pure wine of copulation).
The Surrealists also gave pride of place to lib¬
ertinage in love, but I must confess that, reading
the works of glittering libertines such as Restif de
la Bretonne, Aretino, the Chevalier de Nerciat,
Mirabeau, Choderlos de Laclos, Sade, Casanova
and the rest, I feel a kind of nagging discomfort.
Though they undeniably contributed to the
progress of the Enlightenment and of democ¬
racy by secularizing the right to pleasure, these
books leave an aftertaste of guilt. A grim erotic
self-awareness often slips into the beds of lovers
apparently well suited to happy, innocent, care¬
free love, and a pall of ultimate disenchantment
hangs over the boldest love-making.
In the libertine tradition, sexual pleasure seems
still to have something smutty, lubricious or even
fetid about it, a murky aura of sinfulness that
pornography has been quick to take over and
incorporate into its nasty arsenal. Eros seems to
be under constant threat from.Thanatos: the
familiar post-coîtàl sadness plunges the carefree
couple into a mood of melancholy and contrition.
The grim figure of mortal sin that two or
more had come together to drive out of the
door has the impudence to reappear through the
open window, a slobbering voyeur toting a
shotgun and wearing a death's-head mask!
In the Caribbean, at cock-crow in the
enchanted garden, a man and a woman light-
The animals' feast,
a Haitian painting by
Y. J. Pierre.

RENE DEPESTRE
¡s a Haitian poet and novelist.
Among his works published in
English is The Festival of the
Creasy Pole (1990).
heartedly cast aside any sense of sin, leaving it to
die of hunger and thirst outside their door while
they make love like free and independent beings,
remaking the seasons, the stars and the whole
beautiful world in a shared state of poetic ecstasy.
I belong to an erotic culture that owes alle¬
giance to yEschylus, who once proclaimed "the
joy of holy Heaven as it penetrates the Earth", the
joy of the male instrument, the ploughshare, as it
plunges for minutes on end, minutes of tremen¬
dous bliss, into the yielding female earth,
romping, dreaming, laughing, revelling, climaxing
in the gratified flesh that fully participates in its
pleasure. Experienced thus in shared jubilation,
the act of love enables Adam's rod and Eve's
starry triangle to laugh out loud in the face of
death!
In this blessed realm, there was for a long
time a paradoxical situation in Haiti. In the oral
culture, Haiti's version of the Creole tradition, the
imagination was given an utterly free rein in mat¬
ters of love-making and eroticism. Haitian erotic
tales overflow with humour, ingenuity and lyri¬
cism, and their language is as joyfully unre¬
strained as the exuberant, magical art of Haiti's
naive painters. Strangely enough, it was, on the
other hand, some time before a similar exuberance
of tone and movement manifested itself in our
French-language literature. It was not until
Jacques Roumains Gouverneurs de la rosée (1944)
and Compère général soleil (1955) by Jacques
Stephen Alexis that young lovers' contagious
enjoyment of carnality entered the novel.
It is high time, good gentlefolk, as normal
men and women, to restore to the celebration of
love its dream configuration. In an age over¬
shadowed by the tragic threat of Aids, it is more
than ever necessary to counter all those who
have declared war on love with a lust for life that
is careful and gentle in its erotic manifestations.
Lovers must be free to enrich their amatory expe¬
rience with all the spiritual and physical delights
that contribute to the well-rounded fullness of
dreams.



All that now lies between us and the garden
that is woman, the celebration of the mystery of
her ample forms, is a river of light that I beckon
you to wade across with eyes closed. Transcending
the dogmas that divide them, whether in Brazil or
Sweden, Japan or Italy, in India or in Haiti, every¬
where on Earth, the gods who hold the secrets of
the art of living are well pleased by the warm,
round shape of love, which is why, in the begin¬
ning, in their collective wisdom they decided to
bestow the gift of roundness on the Sun, the cir¬
cling dance, the Moon, the harvests, the flight of
swallows, the movement of the tides, beds, a
summer evening's grass, blissful intercourse and
the other marvels of our fleeting existence.
What messiah could contradict this without
denying the redeeming worth and eternal beauty
of the carnal act, to which, gods and mortals
alike, we owe the poetry and music of our daily
lives? 9ß 33
