Human
i
activities as well
as climatic
onditions are
responsible for
(esert advance.
he/ can also
help to curb it
Shifting sands
by Harold Dregne
D
ESERTIFICATION has been defined as land
I degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-
humid areas resulting mainly from adverse
human impact.
It was long thought to be largely due to the
occurrence of droughts. Not until preparations
were being made for the United Nations Con¬
ference on Desertification, held in Nairobi,
Kenya, in 1977, and convened in an attempt to
prevent a recurrence of the human misery and loss
of livestock that occurred during the severe West
African drought of 1969-1973, did it become
clear that more than drought was involved in
the degradation of grazing land.
After all, droughts were an inevitable part of
the climatic regime in the drylands. Indigenous
plants had adapted to the sequences of wet and dry
years that affect all arid regions. They prospered
in the wet years, then called upon their adaptive
mechanisms to carry them through the dry years.
It was only when humans tipped the balance
against them by over-grazing and wood-cutting
that vegetation was no longer able to handle the
moisture stresses brought on by drought.
Grazing land is not alone in being subject to
desertification, and a lot of damage has occurred
32
M|
on both rain-fed and irrigated crop land. Most
descriptions of desertification are centred on
grazing lands simply because pastoralism is the
dominant land use in nearly 90 per cent of the
world's drylands.
Rain-fed crop lands become exposed to the
threat of accelerated (human-induced) water and
wind erosion as soon as the native vegetation is
destroyed when land is cleared for cultivation.
Controlling erosion requires good management
skills because crop production usually leaves
land bare and unprotected during some part of the
year. Salinization the accumulation of salts in the
irrigation water or in the original soil is an addi¬
tional threat to irrigated crop land and is usually
the consequence of inadequate soil drainage.
Vegetation degradation, water erosion, wind
erosion and salinization are the major desertifi¬
cation processes in the drylands. However, com¬
paction of cultivated land by machinery probably
does as much, if not more, damage in many coun¬
tries. A land degradation process that can be
locally important is the accumulation in the soil
of toxic substances such as heavy metals (lead,
chromium, etc.), pesticides and industrial wastes.
The adverse effect of such toxic substances is not
so much on the soil as on the humans and animals
that feed on plants growing in contaminated soil.
What is the extent of the problem? The results

s
Left, rice terraces in the
Philippines.
Above, a herd of cattle
near Lake Magadi (Kenya).
of a study made for the United Nations Envi¬
ronment Programme indicate that, over a total
area of some 5,160 million hectares, a quarter of
the irrigated land, half of the rain-fed crop land
and three-quarters of the rangeland are desertified.
CAN DESERTIFICATION
BE HALTED!
One interesting outcome of the desertification
study is the finding that there is an inverse relation
between the severity of desertification and the
intensity of land use. Rangelands represent a low-
intensity land use but have proportionately more
degraded land than the irrigated lands, where
land-use intensity is high. Rain-fed crop land,
where land-use intensity is medium, has an inter¬
mediate proportion of degraded land. This implies
that intensive land use produces a more sustainable
agriculture than does extensive use.
Methods of halting further land degradation
of all kinds and of reversing vegetation degrada¬
tion and salinization are known. Reversing water
and wind erosion is difficult, or impossible for all
practical purposes, since erosion causes removal
of soil, which requires decades, if not centuries,
to replace by natural means. Soil compaction by
machinery is readily controllable.
Improving salt-affected irrigated land is a rel¬
atively uncomplicated process and cost/benefit
analyses of salinity control are fairly easy to cal¬
culate, given the fact that the main cost is, usually,
to provide an effective drainage system. Recla¬
mation of the soil, once the reclamation system is
operating, is generally complete in three years or
less. Sometimes it takes only a few months.
In principle, grazing land improvement is
simple. All that is needed, in most cases, is to
reduce the grazing pressure on the vegetation. In
some situations seeding is necessary to ensure
that desirable perennial plants can be established
rapidly. Unfortunately, reducing grazing pres¬
sure is not easily implemented because fewer
livestock mean lower returns to the pastoralist.
Improving grazing lands in the dry sub-humid
climatic zone can be done much more rapidly
than in the arid climatic zone. Where it would
perhaps take five to ten years of good manage¬
ment to restore range productivity if weather
conditions were favourable in the dry sub-
humid zone, it might well require fifty years or
more in the arid zone.
Proven practices to control erosion by water
include terracing, strip cropping, contour culti¬
vation and minimum tillage. The two principal
objectives of such control practices are to protect
the soil from the impact of raindrops on bare
soil and to slow the down-slope movement of
runoff water. Bench terracing, which has been 33

34
practised for centuries on steep slopes in many
countries, particularly in Asia, is very effective but
is extremely labour-intensive.
Wind erosion control is usually accomplished
by building shelter-belts (wind-breaks), strip
cropping, using tillage practices that roughen the
surface, minimum tillage and spreading crop
residues over the soil. In each case the objective
is to slow the speed of wind movement at the soil
surface, thereby reducing the eroding ability of
the wind. One rarely used method of stopping
wind erosion is to spray the soil with asphalt.
Asphalt is selected as a last resort it is expen¬
sive in extremely arid regions where vegeta¬
tion cannot be established.
Solid walls, wooden fences and a latticework
of plastic strips are other devices that have been
tried for erosion control. Shelter-belts consisting
of a mixture of shrubs and trees are widely used.
The major disadvantage of shelter-belts is the
competition for water by tree roots extending into
the crop field.
Nearly all degradation control practices are
site specific that is to say that adjustments must
be made to fit local land, climate, economic and
cultural conditions. Bench terracing, for example,
is fine when soils are moderately deep and labour
is cheap, but it is completely impracticable when
soils are only moderately deep or labour is expen¬
sive. Similarly, minimum tillage is a highly effec¬
tive water and wind erosion control practice that
is only practicable if weeding can be done eco¬
nomically by hand labour or the timely applica¬
tion of herbicides.
THE SITUATION TODAY
My assessment of global desertification leads me
to draw a number of conclusions. First, that
grazing land deterioration in the drylands has
been going on for centuries in some areas and
more recently in all others. Rangeland produc¬
tivity has probably levelled off nearly every¬
where and will stay at a low level indefinitely. I see
little likelihood that the current situation will
change either for better or for worse. Grazing is
a low-value land use that cannot pay for expen¬
sive improvement measures. Only governments
can afford, for social or political reasons, to
improve rangelands. '
Second, there will be two opposite changes in
salinization of irrigated land as water shortages
become more acute. If the shortages lead to
increased water-use efficiency, salinization will
decrease. If the shortages are not met with prac¬
tices to increase water-use efficiency, salinity will
worsen. The sum of the two responses may well
be to increase global salinization of irrigated land.
There will almost certainly be an increase in dry¬
land salinity, which, globally speaking, is not
extensive as yet.
Third, water erosion is the major threat to
long-term soil productivity. For all practical pur¬
poses, water erosion removes soil permanently.
New soil material develops so slowly that it can
take centuries to change rock into soil. Whereas
gully erosion is readily observable, sheet erosion
gradually wears away the soil mantle. There is little
evidence of damage until, one day, a farmer notices
that the soil on his hills is orange-coloured instead
of the black it was originally. It is then that he real¬
izes that erosion has robbed him of topsoil and
that all he can do is to try to prevent further loss.
Fourth, wind erosion damage will be largely
unchanged in the future. Wind erosion is a fact of
life in the arid regions. Although there are many
knowledgeable people who believe this to be a
serious on-site problem, my view is that the
damage is modest on a global scale. Local
blowouts are one thing; they are very destructive,
but not extensive. Off-site damage to buildings,
highways, railways, machinery and human and
livestock health is another matter.
Whereas water erosion apparently causes as
much off-site damage (floods, reservoir sedi¬
mentation, water pollution, etc.) as on-site
damage, wind erosion stands out as having much
more severe off-site than on-site impact. The
only known study of on-site/off-site wind ero¬
sion damage costs was done for the State of New
Mexico, in the United States. That study con¬
cluded that off-site damage costs were about
forty-five times greater than on-site costs.
My overall conclusion is that no great change
in the extent and severity of desertification is
likely in the immediate future.
As part of a fight-the-
desert project in
Mauritania, fences are
built to keep the sand
from blowing away.
HAROLD DREGNE,
of the United States, is Horn
Distinguished Professor of Soil
Science at Texas Tech
University in Lubbock. He is
the author of 5 books and
many papers on arid lands,
irrigation water salinity, soils,
dryland agriculture and
desertification. In 1992 he was
a consultant with the United
Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) project
on a World Atlas of
Desertification.
