Above, a combination of
satellite images showing the
distribution of phytoplankton
in the Mediterranean. Areas
of densest population are
shown in red, the least
dense in blue.
Left, data from a Seasat
satellite showing surface
wind patterns over the
oceans on 14 September
1978.



HERE COMES BILKO
IAN S. ROBINSON
is Reader in Physical
Oceanography and Head of
the Oceanography
Department at the University
of Southampton, UK. He
heads a group which carries
out research on satellite
oceanography and on
education and training in
océanographie satellite
imagery.
A computer-based learning package initiated
by Unesco through its Training and Educa¬
tion in Marine Sciences Programme
(TREDMAR) is providing the worldwide training
required to keep pace with modern developments
in space oceanography.
At the heart of this package lies a simple
¡mage display software tool-kit called "Bilko",
written for personal computers operating in MS-
DOS. Corrunercial image analysis software
packages require specialized computers. Bilko,
however, was deliberately kept simple to enable it
to run on the most basic of machines.
The package contains lessons which guide
students step by step through the analysis of
several ¡mage data-sets. The software and image
data are stored on magnetic diskettes and the text
of the lessons is printed in a booklet along with an
introductory tutorial on the use of the software.
Bilko leads students with no computing skill
straight into interpretation of satellite image data
of the ocean. Each full screen Bilko image repre¬
sents 131,072 individual scientific measurements
of the ocean. If, for example, a student calls up an
image of sea surface temperature derived from a
satellite's infrared sensor, the cursor on the screen
becomes a "research vessel" which he or she can
"pilot" across the area of ocean illustrated to
"explore" the spatial distribution of temperature
levels.
The first module, produced in July 1989, was
received with enthusiasm by marine science edu¬
cators around the world. Their positive response
led to the planning of further lesson modules
which were to draw on image data from other sea
areas.
Module 2, published in February 1991,
contains material from South American and Aus¬
tralian coastal areas and the Indian Ocean,
written by local scientists. It also contains a
"Lesson for lesson creators" which explains how
to prepare image data for use with Bilko and how
to write a lesson around it. As a result, more mate¬
rial began to flow in from contributors around the
world. This led to the publication of Module 3, in
February 1992.
Bilko is a multi-authored product written by
marine science educators from around the world.
Lesson material from it has been incorporated into
other educational programmes. In parts of the
LJnited States the modules are used for science
teaching in high schools. In the Netherlands the
Open University is adapting five lessons for use in
a course on remote sensing. Several international
training courses and summer schools in marine
remote sensing have used the modules as the
basis of practical classes. Some such courses have
also led to the production of new lessons, includ¬
ing the first African lesson which will form part
of the fourth module to be published early in
1933. As a result of a course held at Lepe, in
Spain, the first three modules have been translated
into Spanish and several new lessons arising from
the course will be published first in a Spanish
module before translation into English.
I.S. Robinson, D.A. Blaci<burn,
R.D. Callison and D.C. Troost 37
