In the aftermath of the First World War
there was a widely-felt need for a supra¬
national institution that would put an end
to war, that endemic sickness ofhuman
societies.
The League ofNations was founded
in Geneva in 1920, and in the following
year its member states agreed that there
was a need for international intellectual
co-operation.
The idea won support, and on 4
January 1922 an International
Committee on Intellectual Co-operation
was created. A consultative body that
held an annual meeting lasting a week,
the Committee consisted of twelve
members elected on the grounds of their
' intellectual stature. Among these
distinguished thinkers were two physicists,
Marie Curie and Hendrik A. Lorentz; an
astronomer, George £ Hale; a
philosopher, Henri Bergson who v/as
the Committee's first president; and a
classical scholar, Gilbert Murray. In 1 924
Albert Einstein and the Argentine poet
Leopoldo Lugones joined the Committee.
The extent of the tasks facing the
Committee soon revealed its
inadequacies, and in due course it was
suggested that a permanent body should
be created. The French government
offered to host this organization and to
provide it with a budget In this way the
International Institute of Intellectual Co¬
operation, Unesco's forbear, came into
being. The Institute was inaugurated on
1 6 January 1926, with headquarters in
the Palais-Royal in Paris.
Between 1931 and 1939, the
Institute was extremely active, and a
distinguished body of thinkers took part
in its work. A Permanent Committee on
Arts and letters, whose president was
Paul Valéry, issued a number of
publications, including a periodical,
Correspondance; a series of booklets
known as "Cahiers"; and the verbatim
record ofa series of "conversations"
which in many cases are still as relevant
today as when they took place.
In 1 938, to extend the range of
activities that had until then been carried
out under the auspices ofa single state, a
diplomatic conference attended by
representatives of forty-five countries met
in Paris and set forth an "International
act concerning intellectual co-operation".
However the war prevented this plan
from being put into effect
R
Paul Valéry
A League of Minds1
Thefundamental aim ofthe League
of Nations appears to be to bring
about a state of mutual under¬
standing between the nations so that they
may no longer have recourse to the brutal
expedients and violent and short-lived
settlements of disputes with which they
have hitherto been content. The League is
therefore based on a belief in humanity
and on a certain faith in man's intelligence.
This belief and this faith are of the same
nature as the belief and faith which are
essential to any scientific research and to
any disinterested effort.
If that is true and if it is agreed that an
increase in understanding and knowledge
are the necessary conditions for the
achievement of the League's aims, co¬
operation between minds specially con¬
cerned with things ofthe mind (as we may
term intellectuals) is of all forms of inter¬
national co-operation the most impor¬
tant to encourage; and the particular
organs of that co-operation should be
made a subject ofspecial study and should
be strengthened and improved as experi¬
ence suggests.
	 Ifwe compare the results achieved
with the essential aim set forth above
that is to say, the creation of a state of
mind which will bring about and support
a League of Minds if it is agreed that a
League of Minds is a sine qua non for a
League ofNations and that each must rest
on one and the same foundation, namely
public opinion, and that neither can exist
unless its value is generally recognized;
and if lastly it is realized that the whole
problem of their existence consists in
making them needed and desired by every
thinking being in arousing an emotional
reaction to their existence then our work
of co-operation and the work of the Insti¬
tute, which in themselves are admirable
and may be of great utility, must be
regarded as a response to demands that
have not yet been made and as sustenance
offered to those who do not yet feel the
need for it.
	 The Committee onArts and Letters
is therefore of the opinion that, for a suffi¬
ciently prolonged period, the principal aim
of intellectual co-operation in general and
of the Institute in particular, should be to
convince the intellectual world that orga¬
nized co-operation is possible, that it is a
matter of individual and personal concern
to every intellectual and that each should
make it a habit to consult and utilize the
organs ofthat co-operation	
	 Unless the work of intellectual co¬
operation is dominated and inspired by
regard for the highest things of the mind,
it will never be understood by those for
whom it is intended and will not have the
slightest influence on education, produc¬
tion, public opinion and hence on the
mind of modern man whose co-opera¬
tion is so desirable and essential for the
League of Nations.
Texts chosen and presented
by Edgardo Canton
