The sky horizon
by Edmond Petit
18
EDMOND PETIT,
former reconnaissance pilot
and a founder member of
France's National Air and
Space Academy, is the author
of many published works, most
recently a history of aviation
entitled Nouvelle histoire
mondiale de l'aviation (Paris,
1991).
IN the beginning was the bird and the bird
was in the sky, and earthbound humans
sought to imitate it.
In the words of the French poet Saint-John
Perse, "The bird ... by encouraging humans to
fly, alone emboldened them afresh."1
Once people had worked out how birds flew,
they mistakenly believed that they could make
wings for themselves and that they would be
strong enough to work them.
While waiting for wings that worked and
above all for an engine to power them the
people ofAntiquity (which was, after all, modern
in its day) first made imaginary beings fly: gods
and demi-gods, heroes and spirits. To this we
owe the story of Icarus (not forgetting the
inventor Daedalus, his father), a recurrent theme
in the literature and imagery of every age.
We read of magic carpets, feathered capes,
winged horses . . . and of how humankind's first
imagined flights were borne on the pinions of
griffins, eagles or geese. Before aspiring to take
flight unaided, man first acquired experience of
falling: one after another, the would-be birdmen
of old crashed to the ground.
Then one day a visionary came close to
finding the answer. Leonardo da Vinci seems to
have foreseen flying machines, helicopters, para¬
chutes. To judge from his notebooks, he may
even have experimented with such devices.
Some time later, the French philosopher René
Descartes exchanged instructive letters with Père
Mersenne on the question of "whether the art of
flying is possible . . . and if men can fly as high, as
far and as fast as birds	"
The French fantasist Cyrano de Bergerac
devised "six ways of violating the virgin skies".
The Marquis de Bacqueville donned wings to
try to fly across the Seine, and Father Gallien
surmised that "the art of aerial navigation" might
lie in letting oneself be carried along on "air-
rafts" by currents (jet-streams, perhaps?) "at the
altitude where hail forms".
INGENIOUS FLYING MACHINES
Oddly enough, all these precursors of flight came
up with the same prescription: all that was
required was to devise "an ingenious mecha¬
nism". The formula crops up again and again, but
is never accompanied by further details. As early

Above, an effigy of Icarus
at the Lemon Festival at
Menton on the French
Riviera.
Left, a fleet of spaceships
as imagined by the science-
fiction illustrator Julien
Baum.
Below, an illustration from
a contemporary French
magazine shows America's
pioneer aviators, the
Wright Brothers, taking
flight.
as 1250, the English philosopher Roger Bacon
suggested that "Flying machines could be con¬
structed in which men, seated or suspended in the
centre, could turn cranks that would operate
wings to beat the air."-'
The project was in the air. . . . Everyone was
talking about it except scientists.
In 1782, an influential and respected mathe¬
matician and astronomer by the name of Joseph
Jerome de Lalande, a member of the French
Academy, affirmed that "if men of learning keep
silent, it is not through contempt. Rather it is
demonstrably impossible, in every sense, that a
man could rise into, or even stay up in, the air. . . .
Only an ignoramus would try to do so."
In 1783, Pilâtre de Rozier answered him by
taking off on the first balloon flight, accompanied
by the Marquis d'Arlandes.
Soon Victor Hugo was enthusing:
And Newton 's science flies away
Riding a Pindaric odeP
Writers, scientists and engineers such as
Nadar, Jules Verne, Mouillard, Caylcy, Marey
and Lilienthal made calculations, speculations,
experiments.
In 1 890, Clement Ader became airborne. The
aircraft had taken off at last. In their monoplanes
and biplanes, pilots were no longer floating but
flying. They had been a long time on the drawing
board, these flying machines!
One pioneer aviator, the French engineer
Gabriel Voisin, pointed out that "heavier-than-air
flight does not start with anything as clever as the
wheel. Its inspiration is the wing, rather as if,
instead of relying on wheels for land transport, we
had developed a vehicle with mechanical legs."
Jean Cocteau repeated the remark to me, going on
to add: "Wings arc growing shorter and starting
to disappear altogether. They are turning into
fins. The bird is becoming a fish." There you
have the history of aeronautical engineering in a
nutshell!
After the Wright Brothers, the pioneers gave
way to the sportsmen. Then it was the warrior's
turn. Considerable advances were made in avia¬
tion between 1914 and 1918. With the return of
peace, further progress was made in exploring the
planet. Oceans and mountains were conquered.
Records were broken.
A danger remained. As early as 1759, Samuel
Johnson had written: "If men were all virtuous
... I should with great alacrity teach them all to
fly." A second world war intervened, crueller,
more frightening, more modern than its pre¬
decessor. But aircraft arc not to blame for all the
harm humankind has done with them. Instead,
reflect on Charles Lindbergh's words:
"Hiroshima was as far from the intention of
the pure scientist as the Inquisition was from the
Sermon on the Mount".
Progress continued to be made, to the benefit
of civil aviation, which became safer. With the first
jets, the power of engines increased threefold. It
was time to take another step forward and, as the
French poet Jules Supervielle put it, "to colo¬
nize the stars".
A NEW DIMENSION
Is transient modernity anything more than a
matter of scene-shifting? Time has already lost
much of its importance and distance is a dated
concept. We have conquered a new dimension.
Should we not call it a new freedom? As Jules Roy
has noted, "the speed a spaceship must attain to
escape the Earth's gravity is called escape
velocity."'1
Have we finally escaped, and if so from what?
In continuing down the road that has led from the
prehistoric age of Gagarin to the glorious present
promised for tomorrow, fresh questions arise.



Are there boundaries to space? Is the sky the
limit?
Here on Earth, there is no cause for alarm as
long as speeds can still be measured in relation to
the speed of sound. It will be time to start wor¬
rying when people start talking about the speed
of light. But by then robots may have taken the
place of human beings.
1. Saint-John Perse, L'Ordre des Oiseaux, Gallimard
publishers, Paris, 1972.
2. Roger Bacon, De Opcribus Sccretis Artis et Naturae,
1250.
3. Victor Hugo, La Légende des siècles, 1883.
4. Edmond Petit, Le Ciel et ses poètes, preface by Jules
Roy, Le Cherche Midi publishers, Paris, 1992. 19
