IN SEARCH
OF THE GRAIL
by Sue Williams
In the wake of the UN Conference on
Environment and Development held at
Rio de Janeiro in 1992, sustainable devel¬
opment has become a new Holy Grail,
and "capacity building" strengthening
human resources, particularly in devel¬
oping nations has been deemed one of
the keys to fulfilling the quest. It is also
the foundation ofUnesco's scientific pro¬
grammes for the 1994-1995 biennium.
"The human element is the most
important factor, both as a means of
achieving sustainable development and
as its main beneficiary," says Adnan
Badran, Unesco's Assistant Director-Gen¬
eral for science. "We therefore need to get
whole populations involved and provide
countries with the knowledge and exper¬
tise they require to carry out research and
implement projects that will bring about
such sustainable development."
Unesco's science programmes for 1994-
1995, which in manyways served as a fore
runner to the Earth Summit and which
were roundly endorsed by the participants
in the Rio meeting, have consequently put
the emphasis on education, specialist
training and research. Workshops, schol¬
arships, exchange programmes, research
grants and specially devised computer
modules will thus enable thousands of
biologists, chemists, geologists, hydrolo¬
gists, marine scientists, ecologists and
technicians to be trained.
At the same time the science pro¬
grammes have fine-tuned their research
to the goals and priorities of Agenda 21,
the plan ofaction adopted at Rio, for which
they are particularly well suited. The Man
and the Biosphere (MAB) programme's net¬
work of3 1 1 biosphere reserves in all types
of ecosystems around the world, for
example, provides a ready-made global lab¬
oratory for the study and monitoring of
biodiversity. The "Diversitas" programme
has been set up to this end, covering ter¬
restrial, freshwater, marine and coastal
environments and all living things, from
whales to microbes. The biosphere reserves
could also provide logistic support for
research by the International Hydrological
Programme (IHP) which seeks to improve
understanding of the water cycle and man¬
agement of the planet's precious water
resources. Those in coastal areas could pro¬
vide precious data for the work of the Inter¬
governmental Océanographie Commis¬
sion (IOC) in monitoring global change.
For its part the International Geological
Correlation Programme (IGCP) will be
geared towards better identification ofmin¬
eral resources.
Another characteristic of the workplan
for 1994-1995 is the emphasis on an inter¬
disciplinary and multi-sectoral approach.
"The environment must not be treated in
isolation," explains Gisbert Glaser, co-ordi-
nator of Unesco's environmental pro¬
grammes. "It is inextricably linked to a
range of other domains, and our work
must concentrate on these interrelations."
The "Environment and population edu¬
cation and information for human devel¬
opment" project is a good example of the
new direction being taken. "The overall
UNESCO IN ACTION
aim is to improve education and informa¬
tion on subjects which are too often treated
as separate issues," says Glaser. The $2.1
million project is a combined effort by the
science, social science and education sec¬
tors with other UN agencies, and will see the
development of scientifically sound
teaching materials as well as information for
decision-makers and the media, the
training of experts, and the provision of
technical support for reshaping education
systems and training programmes.
^^^^1«^^«ffig I III I III IIIIMIIIIIII
GREEK ENGINEERS
A major push will also be made in basic
and engineering sciences to improve
university teaching and promote research
in these fields. "It was said clearly in Rio
that engineering sciences should incor¬
porate environmentally friendly compo¬
nents," says Mr. Badran. "Engineers shape
our landscapes and thus have an impor¬
tant impact on the environment. In the
past, they have not been concerned about
this impact they have not been con¬
cerned about such details as the level of
carbon that their machines have spewed
into the atmosphere or the effect of chlo-
rofluorocarbons (CFCs) on the ozone
level and this must change." The Uni¬
versity-Industry-Science Partnership
(UNISPAR) project well illustrates Unesco's
aims in this direction.
Unesco will also reinforce its support for
renewable energy research and networks of
solar energy centres in the Mediterranean
countries, Africa, Asia and Latin America.
"Strength through union" is how new
MAB Director Pierre Lasserre describes
the programme's guiding principle for the
coming biennium. It would also serve well
as the leitmotiv for the rest of Unesco's
science sector. T" m
