The universal and
the particular
by Joseph Ki-Zerbo
18
FOR some time, I have been arguing that the
idea of universality is put forward by
people in centres of power and places that
dominate the rest of the world. The spectacle of
the chaos reigning in the modern world impels
us to fall back on this idea as though on a
fortress. When danger threatens we use it like a
lifebuoy, clinging to it because we feel that it can
save the world.
Now terms such as the universal, progress
and development need to be approached with
great vigilance and in a critical spirit. I agree
that we should talk about the universal, but
without overlooking its counterpart, the par¬
ticular; and we should relate them to each other
dialectically rather than as a pair of opposites.
The universal feeds on particular cases, and par¬
ticular cases must make use of the universal.
This dialectical approach seems to me to
revalidate the idea of the universal, providing it
is agreed from the outset that there is a piece of
the universal in every individual. As regards
democracy, for instance, either we say that the
democracy the world needs is of the type
designed in the West which is liable to be met
with counter-arguments or even fierce objections
to any such intrusion or we seek to find in
every culture some starting point or predispo¬
sition towards democracy.
To take the case of Africa, that continent's

Above, Jour de fête
(1984), acrylic on canvas
(100x300 cm), by the
Moroccan-born artist
Fatima Hassan.
Below left, Germination
(1992), by the Brazilian
painter Kinkas.
JOSEPH KI-ZERBO,
of Burkina Faso, is a noted
historian who was general
editor of the first volume of
Unesco's eight-volume General
History ofAfrica. He is the
author of a history of black
Africa (Histoire de l'Afrique
noire, 1978).
history obviously contains advance pointers to
the state as an institution based on the rule of law.
Africans have a saying, "The king docs not have
royalty, royalty has the king", meaning that even
a king is subject to a higher authority. This idea
suggests that of the rule of law. I have confirmed
this myself in the case of the emperor of the
Mossi, who remained seated while people around
him continually made suggestions as to what he
should do. He was literally the first slave of law
and custom.
This gives the lie to our modern African dic¬
tators, who claim that democracy has never
existed in Africa and is an idea alien to our culture.
Africans who think this ignore the reality of their
culture and history. This type of particularism is
to be avoided.
Or again, consider man's relationship with
nature, with health, with life and death. In this area



every culture has good and bad, positive and neg¬
ative aspects. The universal must operate on the
basis of positive particulars. None of us, I think,
defends a "tribalization" of principles. The uni¬
versality of human rights is a just idea for the
simple reason that we all have a human identity. It
is as human beings that we all claim the applica¬
tion of these rights.
On the subject of progress, I recently wrote,
"It's all very well to move fast as long as you
know where you're going". We cannot speak of
progress solely in relation to means: the direction
and purpose must be defined from the outset. In
short, we cannot speak of progress without raising
the question of ends: and this raises an ethical
problem, since wc have to choose a model or a
plan for society. This aspect of the matter is often
left out of the discussion. What kind of society do
we want to build? In this context development
has tended to mask and even to promote
domination. Some Western leaders I am
thinking of Ronald Reagan in particular have
said, "They should do as we do!" On that basis,
development becomes a way of imposing a pre¬
determined model.
It is important to realize that the human and
social sciences are lagging behind the other sci¬
ences. In my opinion no development is pos¬
sible without the development of the former. In
the last ten years the world has witnessed a mul¬
titude of events that no-one foresaw because far
too much priority has been given to the sciences
that contribute to material development. People
have devoted themselves to the accessories of
intelligence, to the detriment of the brainwork
that is the prime mover of human progress.
We have reached the point where people's
individuality has been dismembered, split into
fragments. They have lost touch with certain
transcendent values and they have lost their
sense of community. By way of illustration of 19

On/Off (1 99 1),
a mixed-media work
measuring 48 x 39 x 25 cm
by Romuald Hazoumé, an
artist from Benin.
this process another picture comes to my
mind that of the god-king Osiris, whose body
was chopped up into pieces by his brother
before being put back together again. I believe
that this Egyptian myth is relevant today to
human society as a whole: it is time to recon¬
struct man and put him together again.
Intellectuals can play a crucial part in this
respect, not only by weaving the dreams and
myths that human beings need to give them a
reason for living, but also by blazing the trail
towards solidarity and mutual recognition on
the basis of universal values. A Senegalese stu¬
dent recently said to me, "Professor, what we are
interested in today is not development, but hap¬
piness." I was impressed by his remark. At a time
when everyone is talking about progress and
development, this young man brings us back to
the essentials. No doubt people will say that
happiness is as hard to define as progress. All the
same, it is what we should be aiming for.
Universality as the West understands it is a
truncated concept. It is based only on one
sequence of history. I have often rebuked my
Western colleagues for their lack of receptiveness
to other histories, their hermetic approach, and
their tendency to think that things have only
been happening in the last four centuries. If
they do go further back, it is to make ancient
Greece the absolute starting point, forgetting
that Greece was itself influenced by other his-
20
tories, especially that of Egypt, which in turn
owes much to Africa.
But let us go back to Ronald Reagan's posi¬
tion. It does not hold water. Take the question
of energy consumption. If the world's per capita
energy consumption was as high as that of
North America, the consequences would be
devastating. It is not enough to say that this
model is undesirable; it is impossible. Wanting
everyone to adopt it is a tragic mistake. Western
thought, by persisting on this ecumenical path,
actually tends towards exclusiveness.
Could we not get intellectuals to turn their
attention seriously to this dialectic between the
universal and the particular? This would lead to
agreement on some intangible principles which



hold good for all human beings, such as respect
for life and man's relationship with nature and
knowledge. What's the point of advocating uni¬
versality when in my country 70 to 75 per cent
of the population can neither read nor write? In
Africa we are moving directly from an oral tra¬
dition to the post-industrial era of the audiovi¬
sual, skipping the crucial stage of writing.
It is Utopian to propose the application of
universal values to peoples in situations where
the conditions for this do not exist. The principle
of intercommunication, whereby individuals
get to know themselves and communities get to
know each other, is essential. I have already
suggested that the right to know oneself and to
be known should be added to the list of basic
human rights. Many people, especially in the
developed countries, think nowadays that there
is nothing interesting to be learned in the coun¬
tries of the South. People who go there as
tourists do not really enter into their histories,
their cultures or their civilizations. This makes
it impossible to achieve the "co-responsibility"
we sometimes hear about.
The foundations of universality need to be
strengthened and another organization of peo¬
ples established. People say that the United
Nations Organization represents the peoples
of the world, but today this is no longer true.
States have gained the upper hand. They have
been described as cold monsters, but I wonder
whether they are not deep-frozen monsters.
Transcending the paradigm of the national
state, a legacy of nineteenth-century Europe, seems
to me one possible route to the universal. Modern
man's technological achievements are creating
new patterns, a new image of the world which
makes this framework obsolete. We must tran¬
scend the nation-state and move towards the estab¬
lishment of livelier and more receptive communi¬
ties. Movement in that direction will bring us
closer to the universal, and to progress.
