War and petite
in the minds of men
RECENT years have seen the confirmation of a vast tion which is inevitably unstable and such as to cast doubts
movement of liberation from totalitarianism, the both on our readiness and our capacity for action. However,
emergence of a broad consensus among the interna- the entire international community now feels concerned
tional community regarding the most basic values of our by the tragic situations facing so many countries. Its com-
societies, and the virtually universal recognition of the prin- mitment is necessarily strong and unambiguous inasmuch as
ciples of democracy and respect for human rights, a worldwide moral contract seems the essential first step
Extraordinary achievements seemed at last within our reach towards ensuring that a culture of war which appeared
and every hope seemed justified. to be on the decline is gradually transformed into a culture
Yet even in spite of the undeniable progress made in the of peace, which is already beginning to take shape. We can
direction of democracy, it is painfully obvious that world no longer shelter behind the responsibility of the nuclear
poverty has not lessened, that an entire continent is still at superpowers. We are all responsible and no one can now say
grips with grinding hardship and political instability and that " I didn't know" or "It's not my business ".
the impressive liberation movement in the former commu- No one can fail to be aware that the international com-
nist-bloc countries, although rich in promise, has brought in munity has mobilized its efforts under the flag of the United
its wake conflicts as numerous as they were unexpected. Nations in the case for example of Somalia, Cambodia
We cannot hide from ourselves the grave threats to the and the former Yugoslavia. Yet, significant as they are, those
world caused by famine and civil war in Africa, the bloody efforts can not always prevent massive migrations of
fighting in central Asia, the enormous development problems people as we are witnessing today or, looking towards the
confronting Latin America and the Caribbean, the myriad future, provide populations with aid on a scale that would
obstacles to peace in Cambodia, the murderous war in Bosnia- favour endogenous development.
Herzegovina, the damage possibly irreversible inflicted on It is my deep conviction that our incapacity to respond ade-
the environment and, in the last analysis, the failure of the pur- quately to these dramatic situations constitutes a serious
suit of happiness in the most prosperous nations. threat to the democratic and ethical foundations of our civi-
Yet this should not cause us to underestimate the remark- lization. For that reason, we must actand act quickly-
able mobilization of effort on the part of the international in order to equip ourselves against having to accept the
community to resolve all these problems which, it seems to unacceptable.
me, are without precedent in history. Admittedly, world For my part, I do not doubt that the determination of
and regional institutions have in some cases proved unable men and women of goodwill must ultimately prevail and that_
through ill-preparedness to deal with the new challenges we shall ensure that the basic values we hold dear will finally
arising at an accelerating rate. However, the debates at recent triumph. However difficult our task, we shall never yield to
international conferences, such as the United Nations discouragement. Our commitments, which are those of our
Conference on Environment and Development, and the Organization, seem more relevant than ever, and we shall
increased collaboration of international non-governmental keep constantly in mind the famous words of UNESCO's
organizations are opening up encouraging prospects. Constitution: "Since wars begin in the minds of men, it
Embarked as we are on the path towards a new world is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be
understanding, we are currently living in a period of transi- constructed". 45
