Words, gestures and symbols
by Pauius Gerdes and Marcos Cherinda
Africa has a rich variety of traditional
counting methods
A A ANY hundreds of well-structured
Ashanti weights used for
weighing gold dust.
38
PAULUS GERDES
is a Mozambican mathematician
who is rector of his country's
Higher Pedagogical Institute
and chairman of the
International Commission on
the History of Mathematics in
Africa (AMUCHMA). His
published works include
Ethnomathematics and Education
in Africa.
MARCOS CHERINDA,
Mozambican mathematician, is
a lecturer at Mozambique's
Higher Pedagogical Institute,
where he specializes in
ethnomathematics. He is the
co-author, with Paulus Gerdes,
of Famous Theorems of
Geometry.
of Côte d'Ivoire uses three bases: 5, 10 and 20.
Fifty-six, for instance, is expressed as golosso-ya-
kogbo-gbeplo, that is "20 times two plus 10
(and) 5 (and) 1". The Bambara of Mali and
Guinea have a 10-20 system in which the word
for 20, mugan, means "one person", while the
word for 40, debé, means "mat", referring to a
mat on which husband and wife sleep together
and jointly they have 40 digits.
The Bulanda (West Africa) use 6 as a base so
that 7 is expressed as 6 + 1, 8 as 6 + 2, and so on.
The Adclc count koro (6), koroke (6 + 1 = 7), nye
(8) and nyeki (8 + 1 = 9). Among the Huku of
Uganda the number words for 13, 14, 15 are
formed by the addition of 1, 2 or 3 to twelve.
Thirteen, for instance, is expressed as bakumba
igimo (12 plus 1). The decimal alternatives, 10 +
3, 10 + 4 and 10 + 5, were also known.
One advantage of using a low number such
as 5 as the basis of a spoken numeration system
is that it may facilitate oral or mental calculation
where the answer has not been memorized. For
instance, 7 + 8 would be (5 + 2) plus (5 + 3). As
2 + 3 = 5, one finds as answer 5 + 5 + 5, 10 + 5,
or 5 multiplied by 3.
The duplicative principle
A particular case of the use of addition to com¬
pose number words is the situation where both
numbers arc equal or where one of the two is
equal to the other plus one. For instance, the
Mbai count from 6 to 9 in the following way:
mutu muta (3 + 3), sa do muta (4 + 3), soso (4 +
4), and sa dio mi (4 + 5). The Sango of northern
Zaire express 7 as na na-thatu (4 + 3), 8 as mnana
(4 + 4) and 9 as sano na-na (5 + 4). One possible
reason for using the duplicative principle to
compose the number words between 6 and 9 is
that it may make it easier to do mental arith¬
metic, in particular duplication operations. For
instance, to obtain the double of 7, one has to
add, if one has not memorized the answer, 4 + 3
and 4 + 3. As 4 + 3 + 3 = 10, the answer becomes
10 + 4. In sub-Saharan Africa, there is a strong
tradition of mental calculation, and oral and
mental multiplication often were (and some¬
times still are) based on repeated duplication.
In several African languages subtraction, as
well as the additive and multiplicative principles,
has been used to form number words. In the
Yoruba language of Nigeria, for example, 16 is
expressed as eerin din logun meaning "four until
one arrives at twenty". The Luba-Hemba people
of Zaire express seven as habulwa mwanda
("lacking one until eight"), and nine as hab¬
ulwa likumi ("lacking one until ten").
Spoken numeration systems may vary
greatly within relatively small geographic
regions. In Guinea-Bissau, for example, the
Bijago have a pure decimal system; the Balante
use a five-twenty system; the Manjaco use a
decimal system with exceptional composite
number words such as 6 + 1 for 7 and 8 + 1 for
9; and the Felup use a ten-twenty system in
which the duplicative principle is also employed
in forms like 7 as 4 + 3 and 8 as 4 + 4.
Some number words are adjectives while
others are nouns. In this situation, number word
structures may appear that do not correspond
directly to an addition, multiplication or sub¬
traction. For instance, in the Tschwa language of
central Mozambique 60 is expressed as thlanu
wa makuma ni ginwe, that is "five times ten
plus one more (ten)".
To denote relatively large numbers, com¬
pletely new words are often used or words that
express a relationship with the base of the
numeration system. The Bangongo of Zaire say
kama (100), lobombo (1,000), njuku (10,000),
lukuli (100,000) and losenene (1,000,000), while
the Ziba of Tanzania say tsikumi (100), lukumi
(1,000), and kukumi (10,000), the three latter
terms being clearly related to kumi (10).
Counting by gestures
Gesture counting was common among many
African peoples. The Yao of Malawi and
Mozambique represent 1, 2, 3 and 4 by pointing
with the thumb of their right hand at 1, 2, 3 or
4 extended fingers of their left hand. Five is
indicated by making a fist with the left hand. Six,
7, 8 and 9 arc indicated by joining 1, 2, 3 or 4
extended fingers of the right hand to the left
fist. Ten is represented by raising the fingers of
both hands and joining the hands. The Makonde
of northern Mozambique start counting on their
right hand with the help of the index finger of the
left hand. Five is indicated by making a fist with
the right hand. For 6 to 9, the representation is
symmetrical to that of 1 to 4, that is, right and left
hands change roles, with the index finger of the
right hand pointing at the fingers of the left.
Ten is represented by joining two fists.
The Shambaa of Tanzania and Kenya prac¬
tise a method of gesture counting that uses the
duplicative principle. They indicate 6 by
extending the three outer fingers of each hand,
spread out; 7 by showing 4 on the right hand and
3 on the left, and 8 by showing 4 on each hand.
To express numbers greater than 10, the

The number I as indicated
in gesture counting (from
top) by the Makonde, the
Yao and the Shambaa.
Sotho of Lesotho employ different individuals
to indicate the hundreds, tens and units. To rep¬
resent 368, for example, the first person raises 3
fingers of the left hand to represent 300, the
second one raises the thumb of the right hand to
express 6 tens, and the third one raises three
fingers of the right hand to express 8 units. This
is actually a positional system, since it depends
on the position of each man whether he indicates
units, tens, hundreds, thousands, and so on.
The use of fingers and hands to count may
explain the choice of five and ten as bases for
verbal numeration systems. The use of bases
may also have been stimulated by practices used
to accelerate counting. For instance, Makonde
basket makers count the plant strands of the
bottom of their likalala-baskcts by fours instead
of counting one by one.
I Tally devices
Tally devices were commonly used in Africa
south of the Sahara. In Mozambique Chuabo
boys use the following counting technique when
they are playing football. The two halves of the
leaf of a coconut tree obtained after taking off its
vein serve as a tally device for each team. The
halves are called mulobuo. When a team scores
a goal, a fold is made in its mulobuo, and at the
end of the match, the scorer compares the
lengths of each one or counts the folds, in order
to see who has won.
Among the Tswa, also from Mozambique,
trees are used to record the age of children.
After the birth of a child a cut is made on a
trunk of a tree, and each year a new cut is added
until the person is old enough to count for him
or herself. Cuts on tally sticks arc also used

when counting the number of animals in a herd,
each cut corresponding to one animal.
Among the Makonde, knotted strings were
used. A man who was setting out on an eleven-
day journey would tie eleven knots in a string
and would say to his wife, "This knot" (touching
the first) "is today, when I am starting;
tomorrow" (touching the second knot) "I shall
be on the road, and I shall be walking the whole
of the second and third days, but here" (seizing
the fifth knot) "I shall reach the end of the
journey. I shall stay there the sixth day, and
start for home on the seventh. Do not forget,
wife, to undo a knot every day, and on the tenth
day you will have to cook food for me; for see,
this is the eleventh day when I shall come back."
Pregnant women used to tie a knot in a string at
each full moon so that they would know when
they were due to give birth. In order to register
a person's age, two strings were used. A knot was
tied in the first string at each full moon. When
twelve knots were tied, a knot was tied in a
second string to mark the completion of the
first year, and so on.
Figures in the sand
A variety of numeration systems exist in Africa
that are "written" in one way or another. The
eastern Bushongo (Zaire) counted simultane¬
ously by threes and tens. For each three objects,
they marked in the sand three short parallel
strokes with three fingers of a hand. After com¬
pleting three groups of three strokes, a longer
stroke was marked for the next object to indicate
that ten more objects had been counted.
The Fulani or Fulbc, a scmi-nomadic pas¬
toral people of Niger and northern Nigeria, place
sticks in front of their houses to indicate the
number of cows or goats they possess. One hun¬
dred animals are represented by two short sticks
placed on the ground in the form of a V. Two
crossed sticks, X, symbolize 50 animals. Four
sticks in a "vertical" position represent 4. Two
sticks in a "horizontal" and three in a "vertical"
position indicate 23 animals. The following was
found in front of the house of a rich cattle owner:
WVWVXII, showing that he had 652 cows.
The Akan peoples (Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana,
Togo) used figurines in stone, metal or simply
vegetable seeds as coins. The weight of each fig¬
urine was agreed to represent the monetary value
that corresponded to a certain quantity of gold
dust of the same weight. The figurines show ani¬
mals, knots, stools, sandals, drums and in some
cases have diverse geometric forms such as step
pyramids, stars or cubes. Many display graphic
signs representing numbers. Although in the lan¬
guages spoken by the Akan peoples only base ten
is used, base five is also found on the money
weights. The Agni, one group belonging to the
Akan people, used a scries of units of money
weights with a binary structure, each new unit
being double the previous one. 39
