Testing times
by Abdeiha'i Diouri
In Morocco,
competition
between the
rhythms of
traditional ana
modern life is
blurring people's
sense of time and
distance
THE idea of rhythm relates to music, to
poetry and to biology, but in all these
fields mere regular repetition is not
enough to produce rhythm: it simply divides
time into identical units. Rhythm comes into
being when a variation characterized by the
recurrence of a constant feature at regular inter¬
vals arises within this group of units. By differ¬
entiation, alternation, symmetry, emphasis,
changes of pace and other figures, this varia¬
tion arouses an emotion, imparts a meaning, or
induces people to do something.
In latc-twcnticth-century Morocco life is
lived at two rhythms which are out of phase
with each other: an old rhythm rooted in tradi¬
tion, and a new Westernized rhythm which
stems from Morocco's recent history. The two
are experienced simultaneously, in an apparent
confusion which deserves to be clarified.
Even today, traditional craftsmen wake up
for the dawn prayer and at once start their
working day, which is itself punctuated by
prayers. Work stops for a frugal meal at the
midday prayer, and is interrupted again between
the mid-afternoon prayer and the sunset prayer,
a time when craftsmen set about selling their
products, stocking up with raw materials and
doing the family shopping. After the evening
prayer everybody goes home for the evening
meal (this schedule changes during the month of
Ramadan).
OLD
AND NEW WAYS
The religious component, which is crucial to
the workings of the guilds, also plays an ethical
role in craftsmen's lives, by strengthening their
sense of integrity. Given the mechanism of
38

Above: the busy market on
Place Djema'a el-Fna in
the heart of old Marrakesh.
Left, pilgrims gather for
the moussem at Imilchil in
the High Atlas. Moussems
are annual festivals held on
the occasion of pilgrimages
to the tombs of
marabouts, Muslim holy
men.
checks and balances, operated mainly by the
peer group, and the competitive pressure of life
in the guilds, these craftsmen make it a point of
honour to produce high-quality work, even
using rudimentary tools. They feel personally
involved in their work and their dignity is at
stake. Their lives are governed by the rhythm of
their own bodies, and their finished products
bear the stamp of their energy and enthusiasm.
If you watch a coppersmith at work in Fez,
or a slipper-maker, or a tanner, you will sec that
manual strength is needed but strength allied
with dexterity. Mastery is a matter of technique:
working hours call for an ascetic's reverential
concentration and a certain meditative tension
a far cry from the mere use of mechanical energy
to turn out products.
Some time is also set aside for festivities, time
spent in another, livelier world. People go off on
pilgrimages lasting several days. They may visit
a holy shrine, where they make sacrifices, cat,
dance and play. They exchange gossip and word¬
play, devote themselves to pleasures and com¬
merce of various kinds, and then disperse. The
timing of these festivities is determined by the reli¬
gious calendar and the cycle of the seasons (which
draws on ancient astrological and mythological
beliefs), and also by public events.
Access to modernity results not in what
Roland Barthes called "the tame alternation of
work and rest" but in various uneven types of
rhythm so uneven, indeed, that those who
experience them often think they are victims
of an enforced, dubious and perhaps even
abortive form of change.
All the features of modernity exist in
Morocco today: electricity, industrialization,
electronics, the media, computerization, high¬
speed transport and communications, and big
cities (but not research, particularly basic
research). The so-called modern sector of pro¬
duction is in a ceaseless ferment of activity. As
well as the traditional craftsmen and small busi¬
nessmen, a mass of workers has come into being,
together with factory managers, company direc¬
tors and trade unions. Alongside the traditional
power structure, the Makhzen, a government, a
set of representative bodies and a tentacular
civil service have been set up.
Social life is now governed by a quite dif¬
ferent rhythm. With electric lighting people
stay up later, but they get up much later too.
They work two half-days, and measure time
by the clock rather than by prayers. At their
workplaces they have become familiar with the
nervous tension caused by operating machines, ¡S

Fishermen repair nets at
Essaouira (formerly
Mogador), a seaport on
Morocco's Atlantic coast.
40
ABDELHAI DIOURI.
of Morocco, teaches sociology
at the Mohamed V University.
Rabat (Morocco). He is the
author of a thesis entitled La
Transe au Maroc, for which his
supervisor was Roland
Barthes.
working to strict timetables and performing
endlessly repeated movements. Their powers
of endurance arc put to the test. They have dis¬
covered the dullness and monotony of admin¬
istrative tasks. They travel by car or public
transport, which means that they use space in a
new way and that much more time is bound
up with work. Instead of the narrow alley-ways
of the medinas, they use wide roads, and hear
motor horns and traffic noise instead of the
sound of footsteps.
On leaving work people stop off at a café or
bar for the "happy hour" (when they can get
two drinks for the price of one) before going
home, keyed up by the noise of the streets, which
gets worse and worse each year. Back at home,
they watch television, read the paper or talk on the
telephone. They have weekends off and a month's
annual holiday, and arc paid by the month. They
wonder how on earth previous generations man¬
aged to survive without today's technological
amenities, but the fact is that the pace of modern
life, dazzling though it may be, is relentless. Many
people, disappointed by modernity, have decided
to return to the past, without feeling that they arc
yielding to a nostalgic illusion.
A COMPOSITE SOCIETY
In practice, however, the modern rhythm and
the traditional rhythm succeed and interpene¬
trate each other. The transition from one to the
other, made up of the many adjustments char¬
acteristic of what the sociologist Paul Pascon has
called "composite societies", follows circuitous
paths and produces unusual situations.
Unpunctuality, the accumulation of garbage
in cities and sloppy work are three symptoms of
this crisis of modernity.
Unintentional lateness time apparently out¬
side the employee's control is especially
revealing. A person was "caught by the clock", or
there was a last-minute hitch, or he missed the train
or the bus. The car wouldn't start. The lights
stayed red too long. Often people don't even
bother to give an excuse. Lateness reflects a real dif¬
ficulty in mastering modern time. Instead of trying
to save it ("time is money"), people spend time lav¬
ishly. Weekends are extended (unofficially) to

a sign of the decline in the old organization of
public services. The ubiquitous presence of
refuse seems to be an evil inherent in modernity.
But perhaps the most unequivocal sign of the
profound insecurity caused by the sudden loss of
the old personalized relationships (with other
members of society, and with space and time) is
sloppy workmanship, which also reflects a strong
resistance to the depersonalizing anonymity of the
factory. The insidious advance of automation
breeds a feeling in those with the old craftsman's
mentality which comes close to resentment. Work
ceases to be regarded as a leading factor in defining
a person's identity, something that possesses a
value associated with dignity and love and is prac¬
tised with humility as is still the case among
craftsmen, despite their narrow profit margins. It
is not yet an end in itself, as it is in the modern
system. It engenders a kind of shame, rancour
even, which may have a paralyzing effect.
How will the crisis of relationships with time
and space, which afflicts so many societies, be
resolved? At what rhythm ought we to live? H
m
An orange
processing and
packing plant near
Marrakesh.
include Fridays. In addition to the many school
holidays which prolong the parents' month of
summer vacation, there arc days off for the official
events associated with public holidays. All these
holidays, a new feature of Moroccan life, combine
with religious festivities and extra days between a
public holiday and a weekend to paralyze pro¬
duction as during the month of Ramadan.
The reason for this poor timekeeping, which
has become a symbol of underdevelopment, is
that old habits still persist from the days when time
was measured in a rough and ready fashion (for
prayers), and the home and the workplace were
not far away. People are still far from accustomed
to commuting evaluating distances and the time
needed to travel them and despite electricity
they still maintain the habit of closing early, going
home early and keeping themselves to themselves.
Piles of garbage in front of houses, espe¬
cially in the streets of the old medinas now
abandoned by the urban elite, have become a
typical feature of the urban scene. This too is a
structural relic of the traditional emphasis on life
at home behind closed doors plus, of course, 41
