The Ajase complex
by ¡tienne Banal
o
Morning gymnastics in a
Hokkaido bottling plant
(Japan).
ERU kugiwa utareru," or "One should
knock in any nail that sticks out," is a
common Japanese saying. The metaphor
is symptomatic of the national approach to edu¬
cation. Japanese children are brought up not to
rock the boat, not to be different from their
neighbours and to conform with other mem¬
bers of the group. It is difficult to talk of the
emergence of the individual when principles of
this kind are firmly rooted in the national
mentality.
When asked about this, Dr. Tooru Taka-
hashi, a psychiatrist at Japan's National Mental
Health Research Institute, first puts the indi¬
vidual in context: "Even from a purely gram¬
matical point of view, the Japanese language
allows people a choice between several types
of T. The T they decide to use depends on the
person or persons they are talking to. The
individual constantly has to redefine his or her
identity depending on who is being
addressed a superior, a work colleague, or a
member of the family." The mental gymnastics
the Japanese practise in their relationships with
other people provide one clue as to why they
tend to see themselves less as well-defined
individals than as persons capable of adjusting
to their environment. Their ability to adjust
arises, according to psychiatrist Takeo Doi,
from their wish to avoid conflict with people
around them, and thus to be treated indul¬
gently, as a child is by its mother.
THE AJASE COMPLEX
In his book Anatomy of Dependence', Takeo
Doi describes the bond of emotional depen¬
dence amae which in his view greatly influ¬
ences the way in which the Japanese personality
is formed. In a matriarchal society in which the
father occupies a very limited place, the rela¬
tionship with the mother determines a person's
psychological development and his or her rela¬
tions with society. Whereas Western psychoan¬
alytical thinking emphasizes the "castrating"
20

role of the father in breaking into what would
otherwise remain a hermetic fusional relation¬
ship between mother and child, Japanese psy¬
chiatry starts off with an acceptance of this
mother-child dyad, which was described by
the first Japanese psychiatrist, Dr. Kosawa, as
the "Ajase complex". (Ajase was a king in
Buddhist mythology who wanted to kill his
mother.)
When he used the psychoanalytical tech¬
nique of free association on his patients, Dr.
Kosawa discovered that their fantasies did not



reveal an sdipus complex (or wish to kill the
The mother-child
relationship lies at the
heart of Japanese society.
father) of the kind he had learned about from
Freud in Vienna in 1932. What emerged,
rather, was an Ajase complex. "It is a guilt
feeling towards the mother in a relationship of
dependence, a feeling you experience after
obtaining her forgiveness despite the fact that
you have tried to kill her in order to satisfy
your hostile wishes," says Dr. Takahashi,
echoing Takeo Doi's work on amae.
"The archetypal relationship involving
amae is that between mother and child, but
this archetype also structures the relationship
between husband and wife, teacher and pupil, 21

A 19th-century Japanese
print entitled The Last Look
shows a man gazing out of
his window before
committing seppuku, or
ritual suicide.
22
ETIENNE BARRAL
is a French freelance
journalist who lives in Japan.
A contributor to a number of
French and Japanese
periodicals, he is the author
of a book on Japanese
society entitled 123 456
789 Japonais (llyfunet,
1991).
and doctor and patient," writes Yves Pelicier, a
French specialist, in a preface to a French
translation of Doi's book. "There is never any
question of equality. The relationship is asym¬
metrical, which means that it presupposes
respect and offers in return the definition of a
certain reassuring position or status in the rela¬
tionship system." What the child, and later the
adult, seeks in amae is not the independence of
the "individual" as it is envisioned in the West,
but a relationship of ideal dependence that will
earn him or her the indulgence of the mother,
then of the group.
"Amae is normally what a child feels in
relation to its mother when it becomes capable
of realizing that she can separate from it," Doi
says. But while that feeling indicates both a
request for the presence of the mother and a
negation of separation from her, it is some¬
thing that is found throughout adult life in a
culture which regards the individual, or "I", as
important only in his or her relationship with
other people. Amae is the wish to restore a lost
unity by going out to meet other people.
"The purpose of analysis," Dr. Takahashi
adds, "is to grasp the subject's individuality.
But the Japanese accept, and even tend to
emphasize, the ambiguity of their T, which is
determined by other people. The analysand
does not seek individual independence, which
would run counter to the very principles of the
way human relationships work"2.
As for his own patients, Dr. Takahashi
finds they chiefly suffer from behaviour prob¬
lems within groups: "There are two main
problems facing my patients: either they tend
to deny their individuality completely so as to
merge more successfully into the group, or
they react against the group to an excessive
degree by overasserting their individuality."
The bond between the individual and the
mother is of the same type as that between the
individual and the group: it is a bond based
more on the emotions than on reason. As long
as this relationship is an emotional one, the
individual can seek the indulgence of the
group in order to achieve his or her aims. This
is why it is important not to create open con¬
flicts, which would break up the harmony of
the group to the detriment of each individual's
interests.
THE THREE CIRCLES OF SOCIAL LIFE
The group is of prime importance because it
affects and conditions behaviour. But what
group, or groups, are we talking about? First
there is the circle of people to whom the indi¬
vidual is very close and needs to display no
restraint because he or she will always be
treated indulgently: this is the world of amae.
Then there is the circle of friends and col¬
leagues, which is dominated by the need for
compromise and the desire for harmonious
relations. A certain degree of restraint is
required in this circle, one in which individuals
become aware of their position within other
groups. This is the world of debt, obligation
and duty, of mutual favours and devotion, of
reciprocity, where emotional interaction must
achieve some kind of equilibrium and where
there may even be a feeling of understanding
similar to the amae of the first circle. But
anyone failing to observe the rules of this
second circle or betraying the trust of the
group, which is well-meaning but chiefly con¬
cerned with its own evolution, will incur dis¬
grace. The third and most distant circle is the
world of "other people", towards whom the
individual has no obligations or feelings, and
from whom he or she consequently expects
nothing. Neither their presence, nor what they
think, nor how they view the individual are of
any importance. That is why the Japanese
seem reserved in the presence of people they
do not know, or "strangers". These concentric
circles rarely overlap.
Dr. Takahashi also points out that people
who come for analysis are not interested in the
deeper causes of their neurosis, but simply want
the analyst to get rid of its symptoms. That is a
further indication of the way in which people
CONTINUED PACE 2*

CONTINUED FROM PASE 22
see themselves, which is not in relation to them¬
selves, but to the members of their immediate
circle, for whom an absence of symptoms
means an absence of disorders. A person with
no apparent symptoms runs no risk of being
rejected by the group, which is always very
concerned not to show any failings.
THE EYES OF OTHERS
In The Chrysanthemum and the Sword, which
appeared in 1946, the American sociologist
Ruth Benedict put her finger on the difference
between Judaeo-Christian culture, which is
based on guilt, and Japanese culture, which is
based on shame. Guilt feelings are generated by
reference to a given system of moral values, that
is to say the struggle between good and evil,
notions which are defined and identified as
such. Feelings of shame, on the other hand, are
produced by the way other people see us. Here
again it is the group which dictates a person's
behaviour. Takeo Doi comments on Benedict's
definition as follows: "Whereas guilt feelings,
after arising in the ego, travel outwards in the
form of an excuse, feelings of shame originate in
awareness of how other people see us and travel
inwards, towards the ego." Further on he adds:
"[The Japanese] love living as a group. It is
extremely difficult for them to dissociate them¬
selves from the group and act on their own ini¬
tiative. They somehow feel that to act indepen¬
dently is to betray. They are even ashamed to
do anything on their own."
Here again there is a parallel to be drawn
between the group, which a person feels
ashamed to disappoint or be excluded from,
and the mother. The sociologist Chie Nakane
wrote that a Japanese mother might punish her
child by letting it know symbolically that it no
longer belonged to the family, that it would
have to remain alone as it had not observed the
family rules, and that she was "putting the child
outside", whereas Western parents are more
likely to keep a child at home "in deten¬
tion" as punishment for being too indepen¬
dent-minded.
Given that the ultimate aim of analysis is the
process of individuation, it is easy to see why
the Western model of psychoanalysis has not
really caught on in Japan. As Dr. Takahashi
points out: "In Japanese society, the analyst as
well as the patient lacks the determination to
achieve personal independence. Psychoanalyt¬
ical treatment gives the patient the means to
break free from his or her primary dependence
and is therefore in contradiction with the gen¬
eral fabric of human relations in society. That is
why it has not yet really become an everyday
feature of Japanese life or been fully assimilated
by Japanese culture."
1 Anatomy ofDependence, by Takeo Doi, translated
from the Japanese by J. Bester, Kodansha International,
1982.
2 Histoire de la psychanalyse au Japon, by Tooru Taka¬
hashi, Livre de Poche, Hachette, Paris, 1982.
The Ideogram for
Self-control as drawn
by the 19th-century
calligrapher Hltsu Juko. 29
