CHARLES MALAMOUD
talks to Tony Levy
The French scholar Charles
Malamoud, a specialist in the
history and religions of India,
describes in this interview the
characteristics of Vedism and
Hinduism, the great Indian
religions, as revealed in their
scriptures, rites and gods. A
linguist by training, Malamoud
started his career by studying the
Sanskrit language before turning
his attention to the Sanskrit
classics and in particular to the
patterns of thought underlying the
oldest of these, the Veda. His
published works include Le
Svâdhyâya, récitation personnelle
du Veda, Talttirîya-Aranyaka II
(Boccard, Paris, 1977), Lien de
vie, naud mortel, les
représentations de la dette en
Chine, au Japon et dans le monde
Indien (EHESS, Paris, 1988) and
Cuire le monde, Rite et pensée
dans l'Inde ancienne
(La Découverte, Paris, 1989).
Could you give an overview of the reli¬
gious history ofIndia?
If you leave aside the so-called Indus Valley
civilizations, which are only known to us
through rather scanty material remains that are
difficult to interpret and even to date I'm
thinking of the sites of Moenjodaro and
Harappa, from the third millennium B.C. the
religious history of India can be divided, in a
very schematic way, into a "Vedic" period,
from about 1500 to 500 B.C., and a "Hindu"
period, starting in about 500 B.C. and contin¬
uing to the present day. These dates are
intended as no more than a rough guide.
H Have other religions been involved?
Indeed. Two movements that took the form
of a critique of Vedism and Hinduism made
their appearance in India around 500 B.C. On
the one hand there was Buddhism, a univer¬
sally-minded religion (perhaps it would be
more accurate to describe it as a world view)
founded by the Buddha, a legendary figure
who probably also really existed. Then there
was Jainism, founded by another half-real,
half-mythical figure, Mahavira, the Jina. Bud¬
dhism was to play a major cultural and philo¬
sophical role in India, but it disappeared almost
entirely from the mainland by about 1000
A.D., while spreading to and taking root in the
Himalaya region, Sri Lanka, and central, east
and south-east Asia. Jainism was confined to
India, where it has survived to the present
day. Jainists now make up a small, prosperous
and well-organized minority of the Indian
population.
Another major event in Indian history
was the conquest of much of the sub-continent
by Muslims from Iran and Afghanistan, again
around the year 1000 A.D. Once they had
seized power, the conquerors made many con¬
verts so many that Islam became one of the
great religions of the subcontinent. After Inde
pendence and Partition in 1947, Pakistan, later
to be divided in its turn when its eastern part
became Bangladesh, was set up as an almost
entirely Muslim state. But in the Indian Union
itself, 1 0 per cent of the population are Muslim,
which means more than 100 million people
today. Another religion that came from outside
is Christianity in its various forms, which
began to be introduced into India by Euro¬
peans in the sixteenth century.
But the most ancient and characteristic
religion of India, the one that can be said to
be indigenous to the country, is the Vedic-
Hindu complex. It has by far the greatest
number of adherents, and it is the faith most
closely linked to traditional Indian ways of
thought and forms of social organization.
How are Vedism and Hinduism linked?
Well, Vedism and Hinduism are two suc¬
cessive phases or aspects of the same religion
rather than two separate religions. To put it
another way, there was never a clean break
between Vedism and Hinduism, for all their
very obvious differences and even contra¬
dictions. There wasn't even a deliberate or
consciously undertaken movement of rad¬
ical reform. Even now in very orthodox cir¬
cles, Vedism is still considered the source of
Hinduism and its ultimate authority, as valid
now as ever.
What's more, there is a third term in the
vocabulary of historians of religion that
underlines the continuity between Vedism
and Hinduism. This is the word "Brah-
manism". It has more than one meaning,
referring both to the form of religion codified
in the texts known as the Brahmana, which
date from the end of the Vedic period, and
also to the orthodox core of early Hinduism.
Does each phase have its own scriptures?
Vedism is known to us through the vast

corpus of texts called the Veda. These were
composed at various dates between 1500 and
500 B.C. There is no similar body of literature
for Hinduism proper certainly not one that
is as clearly defined or that carries the same
authority. Even so, as the word "epico-
Puranic" that is sometimes applied to Hin¬
duism suggests, the two great epics of the
Mahabharata and the Ramayana, along with
the vast mass of encyclopaedic writings
known as the Parana, are in a certain sense the
sacred books of Hinduism, containing ideas
that all Hindus accept. These epics were com
posed in the closing centuries of the 1 st mil¬
lennium B.C., the Purana about a thousand
years later. These dates are approximate.
Where does the Bhagavad Gitafit in?
It's a fragment of the Mahabharata.
Is there any link between the Purana and
the Vedic hymns?
They belong to two very different literary
forms, and their content is also different. The
Veda is often quoted in the Purana, and is
spoken ofwith reverence. But the Purana (the
An 18th-century Indian
miniature illustrates a scene
from the great national epic,
the Ramayana, in which the
exiled Rama crosses a river
in company with his wife Sita
and his brother Lakshmana.
term means "antiquities") are first and fore¬
most creation myths and genealogies of gods
and men, mixed with dissertations on cos¬
mology, ritual, social organization, summaries
of various sciences, descriptions of places of
pilgrimage and so on. Some of these elements
also exist in the Vedic corpus, but the format
and the diction, if I may use that word, are
quite different. The Purana are long-winded,
jumbled, loosely expressed. The Vedic hymns,
on the other hand, are dense, profound, often
hermetic: they are great poetry.
Could you describe the Veda more pre¬
cisely?
As I said, the Veda is a corpus of texts. It is
our only source of information about India
from 1500 to 500 B.C. There are no other
written sources, no external evidence, no
archaeological remains to speak of. The texts
themselves are composite, varying greatly in
age, content and form. Yet they are all linked,
the latest elements presupposing a knowl¬
edge of the earlier ones, since they quote
them. But orthodox Hindus today see the
Veda as homogeneous, in the sense that they
regard the whole work as a revealed text. The
revelation concerns gods as well as human
beings, and although it was not delivered in
one piece it does not assume a chronological
framework implying a before and after.
In using the word "revealed" you suggest
comparisons with other religionsfounded on
holy scripture.
There is a great difference between the Veda
and revelation in the religions based on the
Bible. The Veda is not generally viewed as the
word of a god addressed to humanity but as a
text outside of time that exists of itself and
reveals itself by itself. Strictly speaking, the
Veda has no author. But men of exceptionally
powerful vision "saw" that is the word that

The 17th-century temple of
Minakshi, the consort of Shiva,
rises above the Indian city of
Madurai.
is used different fragments, different ver¬
sions of the text, put their vision into words
and passed it on to other men. These vision¬
aries are known as riski, a word usually trans¬
lated as "seer".
Yet even though the revelation has been
"seen", the Veda is primarily sound-oriented.
It is a collection or sequence of sounds formed
into meaningful words. The text of the Veda is
1 a manifestation of the word; words are oral,
made up of the sounds of language, and all
their power comes from vibrations of the
sound-waves. Furthermore rhythm, as deter¬
mined by the number of syllables and the
arrangement of long and short syllables, plays
an important part in the symbolism of the
work. A final point: the usual word to designate
the Veda as revelation is çruti, literally
hearing .
What is so extraordinary about the Vedic
revelation, then, is that the knowledge it con¬
tains (for veda means "to know") was "seen",
yet it consists of sounds. Nor can one resolve
the paradox by imagining that the "seers"
viewed a written text they subsequently trans¬
lated into spoken words, for the very notion
of writing is completely foreign to the Veda.
Even in later times when India had writing,
the very idea that the Veda could be learned
otherwise than by repeating the words of a
master was vigorously rejected.
Does this Word without an author have its
own specific intercessor?
Only the rishi, the seers who transmitted
the text to humankind through the medium
of sound. But they are not strictly speaking
intercessors, for they only put the Veda into
words, rather than interpreting it. What's
more, there is no question of them operating
in the other direction by transmitting the
thoughts or desires of human beings to the
Veda. They are simply the mouthpiece of
the Veda. The Veda is a text they discover and
that was there before them, not one they
have shaped themselves.
So it is an oral message that over the cen¬
turies has been committed to writing and
transmitted in written form. How much do
we know about the transmission process?
We don't know exactly when or how India
acquired writing. The oldest inscriptions date
from the third century B.C., and their technique
is so fine as to indicate a long previous history.
But there is no doubt that the corpus of Vedic
texts, or at least the oldest part of it, was con¬
stituted and transmitted from generation to
generation over many centuries without the
aid of writing. And I would repeat that even
when writing became common in India, even
when the Veda could be written down, the
text was still usually passed on orally from
master to pupil. To all intents and purposes
this process continued until our own day.
Studying the Veda means learning it by heart by
repeating it after the master. Highly elaborate
techniques are used to memorize such long
and difficult texts. But then even scholars for
whom reading and writing are everyday activ¬
ities habitually learn religious and even non-reli¬
gious texts they consider important by heart,
however long these texts may be.

How wouldyou describe the Vedic corpus
itself?
Two principal layers can be discerned in the
text. The older consists of collections of
poems in the form of prayers, or more often
hymns, glorifying a god or a group of gods,
or the sacrificial act and its various elements,
or the people who carry it out. The most
important of these collections is the Rig-
Veda, the "Veda of Laudatory Stanzas",
which comprises about a thousand poems.
The other important group is the Atharva-
Veda, part of which consists of magical texts.
One of the main themes of the Vedic hymns
is a celebration of the power of the word,
which means ultimately a celebration of Vedic
poetry by the Veda itself. The hymns are
composed in an archaic form of Sanskrit. The
style is often obscure, marked by figures of
speech, particularly metaphors, of great
power and boldness.
The more recent layer consists of the
prose treatises known as the Brahmana,
which explain what the various sacrificial
rites of the Vedic religion are and how they
should be understood. They provide liturgical
instruction, but also information on the sym¬
bolism of the rites and on their links with
mythology. Furthermore, since the perfor¬
mance of the rites calls for the recitation, in
whole or in part, of Vedic poems, the Brah¬
mana explain why specific ritual gestures are
associated with specific texts. In this respect,
the Brahmana can be considered as a com¬
mentary on the Vedic poems.
The Brahmana themselves have appen¬
dices, the Upanishads. The Upanishads come
right at the end of Vedic literature, and
Indians like to say that they contain the
Veda's deepest meaning. The content of the
Upanishads consists of speculations whose
starting-point is a meditation on ritual. But
this meditation ends by going beyond ritu¬
alism: rituals are no longer considered in
themselves but as symbols of the cosmos and
of the organization of the spirit. This "meta-
ritualism" lays the foundations for a meta¬
physical world view.
To sum up, the hymns, the Brahmana
and the Upanishads jointly make up the Vedic
revelation.
To make learning and understanding the
Veda easier, India developed very early on,
towards the end of the Vedic period, auxiliary
sciences known as the Vedanga, literally
"members" added to the body of the Veda.
These are phonetics, grammar, etymology,
astrology, the study of metre, and the analysis
and use of ritual. Despite their Vedic origins,
some at least of these disciplines came to be
studied for their own sake and became non-
religious fields of study.
One should add that literal commentaries
exist for most of the Vedic texts. These are for
the most part quite late, but they are consid¬
ered authoritative.
The word brahman seems to crystallize
certain links, particularly the necessary one
between the divine word and human speech.
The word brahman is without any doubt
the most mysterious in the Sanskrit language.
In the speculative tradition that begins with
the Upanishads, brahman links up with
atman. The brahman, the Absolute of the
universe, corresponds to the atman, which is
the Self, the Absolute as revealed in the reflex-
ivity of the individual soul.
The term brahman lies at the root of a
whole complex of derivations that need some
explanation. First and foremost we have the
word brahman itself, which is neuter in
gender. Its principal meaning is "essential
content of the Veda". Because the Vedic
poems contain many statements in the form
of riddles, brahman also comes to have the
secondary meaning of "riddle" or "enigma".
The first derivation is brahman, gender
masculine, which designates men who arc
particularly well-versed in knowledge and
use of the neuter brahman in its first sense. In
An ascetic, as depicted in
the huge 7th-century
sculptured rock relief at
Mamallapuram
(Mahabalipuram) depicting
"The Descent of the
Ganges from the
Himalayas".

Vedic ritual the brahman is the priest whose
job is to check that exactly the right formulas
are employed. As the "doctor of the sacrifice"
he says next to nothing but is, as it were, the
incarnation of the Vedic text on the sacrificial
ground. In post-Vedic Hinduism, Brahman in
its masculine form can also be a proper name,
for Brahman or Brahma is one of the great
gods who, with Vishnu and Shiva, makes up
the supreme triad, the triple figuration known
as Trimurti.
Then there's the word Brahmana, which
means "that which has reference to brahman"
and designates the sacrificial treatises I spoke
of earlier. Brahmana has another meaning in
Sanskrit, and that is what we think of when
we use the word "brahmin", which is to say
a man born into the highest of the four
"classes" of the Indian social hierarchy, the
priestly one. Brahmanism is the religion that
considers the brahmins to be the repositories
of Vedic knowledge, and that they alone are
entitled to officiate during sacrifices.
Can one say that the Veda created the
world?
Yes, certainly. The role of the Vedic texts in
the Creation is one of the themes of the Veda.
It is both a poetic motif and a principle of the
Vedic religion.
How does sacrificefit into what might be
called the geography of the sacred?
The sacrificial rite is one element among
others in the Vedic religion. Not all Vedic
ritual is sacrifice, just as not all the religion is
ritual. It is true, though, that sacrifice is the
main subject of the Vedic texts, and their
expositions of mythology and the creation of
the universe, their speculations on the corre¬
spondences between the macrocosm and the
microcosm and so on, are presented in the
context of sacrificial instructions. They also
tend to analyse such other rites as prayer,
funerals and marriages as though they too
were forms of sacrifice, organized in the same
way and with the same division of roles
between the participants.
Furthermore, as Louis Renou has pointed
out, one can see the idea developing that the
Vedic compilations are nothing more than
collections of mantras, forms of words to
recite during ceremonies. The gestures and
objects involved in rites become sacred and
effective insofar as they are "sacralized" by
the recitation of appropriate mantras.
It should be said that the clearest and
most vigorous creation stories present genesis
itself as a sacrifice, with the different ele¬
ments of the cosmos and of society coming
from the dismemberment of a primordial
victim, and also that the core of Vedic
mythology hinges on the efforts made by
the gods to take possession of the sacrificial
procedures and instruments or to put them to
their own exclusive use.
But another characteristic of Vedic civi¬
lization is that it produced thinkers, true
Characters from the Ramayana adorn the
Ranganatha temple at Srirangam, in Tamil
Nadu state, southeastern India. The temple
dates from the I Oth to the 1 6th century.
intellectuals in my view, who reflected on
the formal structure of the sacrifice, on the
way in which the various parts are linked
and on how all the acts of which it consists are
joined and separated. And since you men¬
tioned "geography", I would add that sacri¬
fices take place in the open, in a space
equipped with fire-altars and poles. Vedic
ritualists devised a whole system of geometry
to make sure that this equipment is set up in
conformity with the canons of shape and
size. Yet the sites themselves are considered
"abstract", in the sense that we know of none
that was marked out to serve exclusively as
the stage for any particular rite.
To whom are the sacrifices offered up?
To the gods or, using different procedures,
to ancestors. There is a whole mythology of
sacrifice, which can itself be seen as a divine
being, just as the word can. Various gods of
the Vedic pantheon have a double aspect, a
twofold reality. For instance fire Agni is
both a god to whom prayers are addressed
and the flame lit in the altars to receive offer¬
ings. Soma is a god, but also a plant whose
juice is considered the drink of immortality
and is therefore itself offered up to the
immortal ones.
Vedic speculation, particularly in the
Brahmana, tends to suggest that the gods
depend on the sacrifices made to them and in
a sense are even raised up by these sacrifices.
The right order of the world, prosperity in
our present existence and salvation in the
after-life can all be achieved by correct exe¬
cution of rites, much more than by any kind
of divine acquiescence or grace.
Ifsacrifice, in conjunction with the word,
helped to create the world and even the gods
themselves, is it possible to say that there are
established correspondences between the
macrocosm and the microcosm, the divine
and human worlds?
Yes, such correspondences exist, but it is up
to humans to discover them, to become aware
of them, to formulate them and in so doing,
to confirm them. Solving the Vedic riddles I
CONTINUED PACE 49

* INTERVIEW * CHARLES MALAHOUD talks te Tony Lévy ..» FMN pme .,
referred to earlier, which are one of the aspects
of brahman, involves linking similar elements
from the different levels of existence. There
are not just two of these, but more often
three: the level of the gods, which is that of the
cosmos; the level of the individual human
being (body and soul); and, between the two
of them, the ritual level. A ritual object, a
particular moment in a ceremony, is thought
to have a replica or counterpart in some spe¬
cific spatial or temporal element of the uni¬
verse, and also in some aspect of human
activity or an organ of the human body.
This network of correspondences is not
static. The Vedic authors, particularly in the
Upanishads, give much thought to finding
new, more refined and complex equivalences.
Several Sanskrit words convey this idea,
words that mean "connection", "link", even
"kinship". In Vedic India the idea of corre¬
spondences is more important than the con¬
cept of causality whereas Buddhism insists
on the sequence of cause and effect. Louis
Renou admirably clarified the difference
between Vedism and Buddhism on this point
in one of the articles collected in his book
L'Inde fondamentale, which came out in.
1978.
What differentiates Hinduism from the
Vedic religion?
We've already noted the differences with
relation to the nature and status of the holy
writings. If we turn to religious beliefs and
practices, and first and foremost to the pan¬
theon of gods, we find that some Vedic gods
survive into Hinduism, though in a weaker
and more obscure form, while others disap¬
pear completely. On the other hand, gods
that play only a secondary role in the Veda
move to centre-stage. Vishnu and Shiva are
the principal Hindu gods, co-existent and
venerated by all believers. But Hindus divide
into "sects" devoted to different aspects of
Vishnu or Shiva, for another important char¬
acteristic of Hinduism is that there are an
infinite number of divinities, but each is a
special manifestation of one of the principal
gods.
This is where the doctrine of avatars
comes in. At different times, depending on the
cosmic problems he had undertaken to
resolve, the god Vishnu made himself mani¬
fest by "descending" to Earth in various
guises, while always remaining himself. Each
of the personalities he adopted, and there are
canonical lists of these, has a mythology built
around it and is the object of a specific cult.
Rama and Krishna, for example, who are
both gods and heroes, are among the avatars
of Vishnu. It is extraordinary that these
avatars, destined to intervene in cosmic eras
earlier than our own, are still the object of fer¬
vent devotion today. I would also point out
that the theory of cosmic cycles, and the divi¬
sion of each cycle into a similar number of
successive eras separated from one another by
catastrophes, is also a Hindu innovation.
Unlike the Vedic gods, who are primarily
receivers of offerings, the Hindu gods are
seen as beings with whom humans can have
an intense emotional relationship. One of
the most remarkable aspects of Hinduism is
the appearance, in about the sixth or seventh
century A.D., of the concept of bhakti, or
fusional devotion, according to which wor¬
shippers seek to be absorbed into and fused
with the divinity they adore. Unity with the
god is the expected outcome of the love they
bear and the grace they hope for.
The Hindu conception of divinity is both
the cause and the effect of forms of worship
that are unknown to the Veda. In Hinduism
gods are represented by images or, more
accurately, they are present, alive and active,
in the images that represent them. These
images are permanently housed in sanctu¬
aries or temples, clearly defined places where
they are the masters.
The gods are present in every image of
themselves, but this presence has different
degrees of completeness and intensity, so that
there is a kind of hierarchy among images.
Worship consists of treating the image as a
living person whom one can contemplate,
revere and care for, and whose goodwill one
hopes to win. In Hinduism devotion to the
image of a god in his sanctuary or temple
occupies the place that the sacrificial rite held
in Vedism. Not that Hinduism did away with
sacrifices entirely; it shifted them from the
centre of life and religious thought and gave
them a secondary role.
What is asked of the Hindu gods?
The things of this world, first and fore¬
most: health, prosperity, above all offspring.
Wisdom and all kinds of success. On a wider
scale, the gods are expected to provide good
harvests, the normal round of the seasons,
order in society and the world. But also per¬
sonal salvation in the after-life. And this raises
the question of what salvation is and what it
is that one needs to be saved from. The
answer is: from unpleasant forms of life after
death. People want to avoid hell and go to
heaven. Such a desire was already expressed
in Vedism. When Hinduism emerged, how¬
ever, a new concept was added, and that was
the famous doctrine of karma (or karman).
The idea is that people are caught up in an
endless stream of successive lives. Death is
simply the unending passage from one life to
the next. The type of existence a person enters
at the end of each life is determined by his or
her actions in previous lives. Which is to say
that we always have the life we deserve. If it
is pleasant, it is to allow us to enjoy the fruits
of meritorious acts accomplished in some
previous existence. If it is disagreeable, it is the
result of bad deeds committed in past lives.
One's karma or stock of acts is of course
constantly renewed, as long as one passes
through lives in which taking action of some
sort is unavoidable. But Indian Hindus see the
necessity of rebirth in a series of lives that are
always deserved, through the workings of
an autonomous mechanism, as a misfortune
or rather as a state of subjection from which
they seek release. Salvation in the context of
karma is not a matter of seeking to obtain a
happy life in a heavenly abode after death, for
such a destiny would itself inevitably be tem¬
porary. Real salvation lies in deliverance, the
possibility of reaching the end of this mech¬
anism and so concluding the process of
rebirth.
49

Tenth-century sculptures
at Chamba, Himachal
Pradesh state (India), show
the god Shiva and his
consort Parvati.
How can this be brought about?
It can only be achieved by individuals who
have exhausted their karma by various
methods that involve on the one hand a very
difficult process of mental awakening and
on the other various kinds of asceticism. As
to the condition of those who achieve deliv¬
erance and the attitude to be adopted towards
them, different schools have different views,
though none has very much to say on the
matter. In popular Hinduism, however, deliv¬
erance is thought to lead to eternal happi¬
ness, which is another blessing expected from
the gods, or more accurately from the god one
entrusts oneself to in bhakti.
In speaking of Hinduism I have concen¬
trated on what distinguishes it from Vedism,
and I have also stressed the great diversity of
beliefs, doctrines and forms of worship con¬
tained within it. But I should also point out
that from a different viewpoint what is
striking is the continuity of certain funda¬
mental principles that are always present.
These include the idea that there is an order
that englobes nature as well as society. The
division of society into "classes" is not a
human institution but a fact associated with
the structure of the cosmos. Since the indi¬
vidual soul subjected to the laws of karma
passes not only through human existences
but also those of animals and gods, one might
well ask if there is anything special about the
role humankind plays in the cosmos. In fact
it is distinguished from all the other life-forms
by the fact that only humans act in such a way
as to produce karma.
Buddhism is thought to have emerged
from Brahmanism around the fifth or sixth
century B. C. What are the links, and the dif¬
ferences, between Brahmanism and Bud¬
dhism?
It is by no means certain that Buddhism did
grow out of Brahmanism, nor that it should
be explained as a deviation or an innovation
in relation to a pre-cxisiting Brahmanic faith,
even though this is often said. It might be
more accurate to think that Buddhism is
rooted in the religious traditions of the eastern
part of the Ganges Valley, a region which
was perhaps not exclusively given over to
Brahmanism.
It is true nevertheless that the Buddhist
texts presuppose the existence of Brahmanic
society and religion and are in fact a critique
of certain Brahmanic concepts. But the fact
that the Brahmanic texts are in Sanskrit, while
the earliest Buddhist texts are in Pali, a Middle
Indo-Aryan language, is evidence of early
Buddhism's autonomy of Brahmanism.
The distinctive characteristic of early
Buddhism seems to be the belief that suf¬
fering is ever-present, and that it is linked to
the impermanent nature of things. One has to
become aware of suffering, recognize its
causes and discover the means of deliverance
from it. From that flows a sentiment of uni¬
versal compassion, and a critique of both the
Brahmanic rites and the pretentions of the
brahmans, the masters of ritual. Then again,
Buddhism is the creation of a human founder
who lived in a known time and place. The
story of his life, his ordeals, the way he was
"illuminated" by the truth, his efforts to build
up the community of his first disciples all
these events make up a story that is an essen¬
tial part of Buddhist doctrine.
Without forcing the comparison, what
wouldyou say about the similarities and dif¬
ferences between Vedism andHinduism and
the religions of the Book?
I wouldn't overemphasize the gap between
Indian polytheism and the monotheism of
the religions of the Book. There is a differ¬
ence, obviously, but stressing it tends to lead
to oversimplification. On the one hand one
could point to the divine plurality of Chris¬
tianity; on the other to the idea, so often
repeated by Hindus, that all their countless
gods are only aspects of a single God. What
seems more important to me is that for the
religions of the Book, human beings are rad¬
ically different from the rest of creation.
Humanity is destined to have a history, and
that history is oriented and punctuated by
successive moments of revelation. We've seen
that in Vedism and Hinduism humanity and
society cannot be said to have existed before
the event of revelation and that revelation
cannot even properly be described as an event.
In my view, the most significant difference
between the two groups of religions lies in
this relationship to time.
SO
