The heartbeat of day
and night
by Ysé Tardan-Masquelier
T
14
HE soul, before giving itself to the
body, hearkened unto the divine har¬
mony. As a result, after it has entered
the body, whenever it hears the melodies which
best preserve traces of the divine harmony, it
greets them and is reminded of the divine har¬
mony. The soul is drawn towards that harmony,
responds to it and participates in it as far as it is
possible to participate in it."' This quotation
from the Syrian philosopher Iamblichus (c. 250-
c. 330) is an apt starting point from which to
consider the place of religion within the vast
context of the relationship between rhythm and
culture. Earlier, Plato, when discussing poetic
inspiration, had spoken of the "dance of the
soul".' Once the soul becomes incarnate, he
believed, its "dance" is paralleled by a "dance of
the body" based on the natural pulsations on
which religions confer a sacred character.
It is tempting for us in the modern world to
believe that biological rhythms, by tending to
induce calm, regularity or intense excitement,
create a feeling of communion with supernat¬
ural reality, but Iamblichus, a spiritual heir of
Pythagoras and the mystery cults, says precisely
the opposite. In his view, the "dance of the body"
docs no more than reproduce the "dance of the
soul". Body rhythms owe their existence to the
innate presence of an all-pervading energy known
to the Greeks as "harmony".
SAYING IT WITH GESTURES
The words "rhythm" and "harmony" appar¬
ently derive from a common Indo-European
root. The basic idea is that of a correlation of
parts that can produce an organic whole. That is
why the word "rhythm", before taking on in
Plato's time the meaning familiar to us today,
included the notion of "form", of a modifiable
pattern capable of moving from one state to
another, but subject to defined measures and cat¬
egories of movement.-1 Dance immediately comes
to mind, but it is also worth looking at another,
ctymologically related term, the Sanskrit word
rita, which designates a harmonious set of atti¬
tudes or gestures that are meant to maintain or
recreate the order of the world, the primordial
organization of reality intended by the divine.
Close to rita is the word ritu, which means
instant, season, moment of transition. Religions
have always flourished in that area between

rhythm and rite, between the vibration that
denotes the presence of life and the sacralization
of life through gestures ordained by religion.
In classical China, for example, when a son
performed a scries of formalized little jumps as a
sign of mourning for his father, he was not only
expressing his grief through a cathartic and ges¬
tural rite, but also miming death and transition,
since jumping, with its connotation of disconti¬
nuity, symbolized the point of separation between
two states and two worlds. He actualized sepa¬
ration, representing it in a ceremonial context
which enabled him to come to terms with it and
make it psychologically and socially acceptable.
Another important word is "gesture", which
is found in the Romance languages and comes
from the Latin gcrerc, meaning to act or to accom¬
plish. Religious gestures originate in habitual
acts, in the alternation of night and day, or even
in simpler phenomena such as breathing or the
beating of the heart, but they also have a broader
dimension bound up with myth and the cultural
community. It is possible to detect in French
expressions like chanson de geste and la geste des
Francs a highly specific usage of the word geste
(with a change in gender) whereby the religious
gesture is given the character of a great deed, a
transhistorical model. Without this symboliza-
tion, which distinguishes them from other human
actions, religious gestures would lose their force.
The same is true of the trance, on which
some of the oldest social rituals arc based. The
trance manifests itself clinically by spasmodic
movements that may either be spontaneous or
be brought on by cultural stimuli such as music,
lights, or toxic substances. Generally speaking,
such movements might be interpreted by an
inexperienced observer as pathological mani¬
festations and outlets of unbearable social
pressures, as phenomena accompanying a form
of possession. What makes trance a specifically
religious experience is the fact that it is a bor¬
derline state between life and death, between the
human and the non-human, between wisdom
and madness.
"Rhythm", "gesture" and "trance" all imply
the notion of a transition from a natural condition
whose pace is set by the norms which usually
regulate human life to a "different" situation. Such
a transition can be obtained only if these norms are
Evening prayer in Jordan.
IS

A dramatic moment
during the Festival of Our
Lady of Guadalupe, in
Mexico.
16
YSE TARDAN-
MASQUELIER
is a French anthropologist and
historian whose works include
Le Yoga, du mythe à la réalité
(Paris, 1991) and C.GJung, la
sacralité de l'expérience religieuse
(Paris, 1992)
diverted towards other goals: ecstasy, therapy,
fusion with cosmic forces or communion with a
deity. This transition from natural rhythms to
sacred gestures gives rise to tension between two
poles the pole of a biological existence that has
not yet been given symbolic expression, and the
pole of a life regarded as spiritual because it gives
meaning to the culture as a whole. Human beings
deliberately impose order on the apparently hap¬
hazard nature of cycles that are natural to them:
they regulate their breathing or observe the beating
of their hearts so these can best express "the trace
of divine harmony".4 Biological life thus ceases to
be something profane and insignificant and
becomes a vehicle for the sacred. Most initiation
rites aimed at giving the neophyte a "second birth"
are specifically based on this notion.
BREATHING CONTROL
AND MEDITATION
Breathing is the universal intermediary between
the body and culture. In virtually all traditions it
serves as the prima materia, in the alchemical



sense of the term,11 for prayer, meditation and
chanting. In human beings, it is a reminder of the
primordial energy, which is often imagined as a
breath instilled in them by one or more divine cre¬
ators at the beginning of the world. As it is the
most spontaneous and most necessary of acts, it
carries with it a very wide range of associations,
particularly numerous in some cultures.
One thinks of yoga, which is primarily a
breathing discipline and only secondarily a con¬
certed scries of postural exercises. In yoga, con¬
trol of breathing is not an end in itself but a
means of lulling physiological functions, char¬
acterized by an extreme slowing down of the
respiratory cycle and by prolonged immobility.
Agitation and distraction are states in which the
vegetative mechanisms remain below the level
of consciousness. Calm and concentration, on
the other hand, encourage awareness of breathing
as a gift of life, of the connection between respi¬
ratory rhythm and the emotions, and of the great
value of that function, which is both automatic
and deliberate.
The yogi works on two levels simultane¬
ously the immediate, somatic level, and a more
subtle level of archetypes and representations.
Yoga becomes truly effective when it gives its
practitioners the means to "work their way up"
from reflex pulsations to the subtle systems which
supply them with energy. Breathing, by its con¬
tinuous presence and extreme flexibility, serves as-
a "golden thread" leading from one level to
another.
In another cultural context, the "Jesus prayer",
a remarkable practice of the Eastern Orthodox
Church, also comes to mind. This spiritual exer¬
cise, which was formalized by three major the¬
ologians (St. Niccphorus the Hcsychast,'' Gregory
of Sinai and St. Gregory Palamas) in the thir¬
teenth and fourteenth centuries, is of very ancient
origin. It has something in common with the

Food and incense are
offered to the Buddha in a
Chinese monastery.
thinking of the Desert Fathers, who believed
that the invocation of the Saviour against the
forces of evil around or within them was a sov¬
ereign remedy. Down the centuries there has
been a constant reinforcement of the close link
between the force released by utterance of the
Holy Name, the Spirit inherent in it, the state of
meditation sustained by controlled breathing,
and access to a life of perpetual communion with
God. All these themes the motion of the Spirit,
the invocation of the Name, the transition from
energy to meaning in the Word, the attaining of
deconditioned states of consciousness live under
the same symbolic roof, whether it be yoga,
Muslim Sufism or Christian wisdom.
THE HIDDEN WORKINGS
OF THE HEART
Like breathing, the heart-beat has a marked effect
on the tempo of life, and, like it, can within cer¬
tain limits be modified, unintentionally or inten¬
tionally. So in spiritual experience the "heart" is
often seen as the symbolic seat of a divine life
granted to the individual, and the "centre of the
heart" as the innermost recess from which love
and prayer spring forth. Thus the Pscudo-
Symeon, another hesychast master, explains: "As
soon as the spirit has found the place of the heart,
it suddenly sees what it has never seen before. It
sees the air that is within the heart, it sees itself as
completely luminous and full of discernment."
A similar inspiration due perhaps to his¬
torical influences guides the Muslim practice of
dhikr, a continuous recitation of the name of
God based on the rhythm of the heartbeat, which
enjoins the worshipper to "gather" himself into
the centre of his breast and to coordinate the
various phases of breathing with rhythmical invo¬
cation. Superior to the "vocal dhikr" or the "dhikr
with the tongue" is the "internal dhikr" or "dhikr
practised in the heart", for "the heart is the scat of
Faith", "the mine of secrets" and "the source of
enlightenment".7
In the West, such disciplines must have been
practised in medieval monasteries, and were per¬
haps still practised in the sixteenth and seven¬
teenth centuries, to judge from St. Ignatius of
Loyola's Spiritual Exercises. In the calm of the
cloisters, sheltered from the elements, it was cus¬
tomary to practise lectio divina, that is a reading
aloud, or sometimes a murmuring, of the scrip¬
tures. This ritual activity was modelled on the
rhythm of breathing and a regular pattern
imposed by taking several paces in the direction
of each of the four cardinal points. It was less a
"reading with the eyes" than something that
came from the heart, as can be seen from the fact
that the same word was used to denote reading as
such and reciting by heart. At that time the aim
was probably for the whole body to take part in
spiritual life. Putting one foot in front of the
other while communing with nature was in itself
a form of meditation: in this respect St. Francis of
Assisi perhaps had something in common with
Gandhi, the source of whose thinking was a
prayer of the heart encouraged by long silent
peregrinations.
This broader context should also include psy¬
chic life the vibration of the emotions and of the
principal human feeling, love, whose seat is in the
hidden workings of the heart. Diastole and sys¬
tole, like breathing in and breathing out, show life 17

In this painting from an
ancient Egyptian tomb, the
god of dry air (Shu) is
shown supporting the body
of Nut the sky-goddess, as
it arches above him.
18
1 I.unhlicluis, On the LgypritW
Mysteries, 111,9.
2 Plato, ltm, 533d-536c.
3 For further details, sec Lmilc
Bern enisle, "La notion de rythme
et son expression linguistique", in
Problema tic Un^iiiitirjiiL' gcnádlc
I, pp. 327-33. The root concerned
is the root Ki. the form of which
changes according to the prefix or
sulhx attached to it. It becomes
aR, as in "art" or "arm", oR as in
"order", ,\nc\ so on. See Jean
Varenne, "I 'art, le rite et
l'articulation", in Rci'uc liimc.tisc
tic )<>gii. No 3S, September l'JS'J,
pp. 3-15.
4 Iamblichus.
5 In alchcim, lhc/>imM »idtcrùi
was identical in all bodies but
received its actual form through
the addition of qualities expressed
by the Arislotelian elements
earth, air, lire and water.
6 1 lesychasm, a tvpc ol Lastern
Christian monastic lite, whose
purpose is to achieve divine
quietness (bt'iytbi.i) through the
contemplation of God m
uninterrupted prayer, ¡'.tlitov
7 Quoted bv Jean Gouillard, Pclitc
pbilotdlic tic l,i pricrc tin cocitr, pp.
234-48, in .m appendix on the
tlblkr, "Une technique soutie de la
prière du coeur".
S Cb.oulo^ya Ujhuiisbdtl, 8, 1-2.
to be the result of two consistently polar move¬
ments that both exclude and attract each other,
creating a complex pulsation that expresses itself
in emotional instability. When humans really
grasp what occurs in that "place of the heart"
they can also feel the heart of the world beating
in it, as one of the Upanishads suggests with
wonderful intuition: "That space within the
heart is as immense as the space without: it is
there that all worlds arc to be found heaven
and earth, fire and wind, sun, stars, moon and
lightning, everything.""
It would seem, then, that the Hindu notion of
a cyclical creation proceeding by successive dila¬
tions and contractions is the macrocosmic exten¬
sion of a physiological reality that has taken on a
symbolic significance.
DAY AND NIGHT
Circadian rhythms also play an important part
in religions, and the hght/darkness polarity in
cultural dynamics. Thus, the Egyptian Pharaoh
is depicted with his legs firmly planted on the
earth and his arms raised skywards, holding



aloft the belly of the starry Night, through
which the sun travels to be born again at dawn.
His body's perfectly vertical posture makes him
the mediator between the earth and the night
sky. The meaning of this archetypal gesture,
represented on many tombs in the Valley of the
Kings, is that it joins the poles to ensure the
birth of a new day. It is easy to understand why
this image should have played such an important
role in funerary art, since it expresses in myth¬
ical language a belief in a certain form of rebirth
and, perhaps, immortality.
Elsewhere, the alternation of day and night
punctuates the various stages of creation. The
best-attested example is that of Genesis in the
Bible, where each "night" marks a further descent
into theprima materia from which the following
da)' will be drawn forth, where each "day" marks
the emergence from primordial chaos, of some
aspect of the real world. Whereas the notion of
concentration, of withdrawal into oneself, is con¬
nected with "night", "day" is a time of creative
expansion and propagation. It is also during the
day that gestures arc performed: "separating",
"calling", "allotting a place", "blessing", "saying",
"shaping", "giving" and so on arc all gestural
models for prophetic action or the working of
miracles. The daytime world is, then, a world of
gesture. It marks time and space, in their specif¬
ically human dimension, with acts that will
become rituals, acts whose ultimate purpose will
be to establish or re-establish a harmony or a
symphonic organization of reality. Just as roots
in the Hebrew language always express an action
and are each given a number, so there is, for each
gesture, an internal rhythm which the term
denoting it brings out to the listener in the form
of meaningful sound vibration.
By going back to the cosmogonies contained
in sacred texts, we can find the underlying ele¬
ments of extremely diverse sets of gestures to
which cultures allot religious functions. Going
into a trance, singing, dancing or playing a musical
instrument arc outward and visible representa¬
tions of a more basic, more comprehensive and
therefore more elusive insight: to create is to
impose a rhythm, or to rediscover, like the poet,
the metric seed of the cosmos.
