a crime without punishment
ho was responsible?
by Elikia M'Bokolo
Africans were above all victims of the slave trade,
but some of them were partners in it
Above, "The slave trade in
Africa". Late 18th-century
engraving (artist unknown).
To judge from the number of countries
I taking part in it, the slave trade must have
been for Europeans both a profitable business
and, considering the number of years it lasted,
a familiar fact of life. Even so, in some of the
ports involved in the trade, like Nantes, the
slave-traders themselves were reluctant to call it
by its name and instead spoke of it in more
veiled terms as the "matter".
What about the Africans? Were they merely
its victims or were they conscious and con¬
senting partners in a business arrangement with
whose terms they were perfectly familiar?
A controversial question
There has always been heated debate over the
part played by Africans in the slave trade. For a
long time, the slave-traders took refuge behind
what they saw as the irrefutable argument that
the Africans made a regular practice of selling
their fellow Africans, and that if the Europeans
refused to buy slaves from them, other people
meaning the Arabs, who also used black slaves,
among others would hasten to do so. Nowa
days, African intellectuals and statesmen contend
that that these exchanges were always unequal
(in that human beings were bought with baubles)
and that the Europeans always resorted to vio¬
lence to get the Africans to co-operate against
their will.
For historians the story is not quite as simple
as that, in the first place because our criteria are not
the same as those of 500 or even 150 years ago. Wc
believe that if only one slave had been shipped
across the Atlantic, it would have been one too
many. But did Africans think like this in the past?
Secondly, the slave trade, which went on for almost
four centuries, was a very complex process
involving a very wide variety of power relation¬
ships and participants whose interests and
responses were bound to have changed with the
course of time. This has prompted the British his¬
torian Basil Davidson to say that the "notion that
Europe altogether imposed the slave trade on
Africa is without any foundation in history. . . . [it]
is as baseless as the European notion that
institutions of bondage were in some way pecu¬
liar to Africa.""' 11

The European powers built
slaving forts in west Africa as
the bridgeheads of their military
presence and used them for
storing their merchandise and
holding their African captives
until they were shipped to the
Americas. From left to right:
Cape Coast Fort built by the
English in 1665 on the former
Gold Coast, in present-day
Ghana; the Portuguese fort of
Sao Jago (1482); Fort
Patience, a Dutch stronghold
(1697); the English fort of
Metal Cross (1693).
From slave-raiding to slave-trading
The first method by which the Europeans
acquired African slaves was through straight¬
forward abduction. Striking examples of this
can be found in the celebrated Crónica dos Feitos
da Guiñé (Chronicle ofthe Discovery and Con¬
quest of Guinea), written by the Portuguese
Gomes Eanes de Zurara in the mid-fifteenth
century. When the Europeans landed on the
coasts of Africa, they stopped at random at
places they thought might be suitable for their
purpose and set out on man-hunts. This was
not without its risks, however, as evidenced by
the massacre in 1446 of almost all the members
of the expedition led by Nuno Tristao near the
Cap Vert peninsula in present-day Senegal. This
was not the only such massacre, but it certainly
shows that the Africans were determined to
fight against enslavement.
The drawbacks of slave-raiding were that
its outcome was uncertain and it was incapable
of catering for the constantly growing demand,
when the plantations and mines of the Americas
had to be supplied with slave labour. The Por¬
tuguese were the first to switch from merely
seizing captives to actually trading in slaves,
following a suggestion made by Prince Henry
the Navigator in 1444 and subsequently fol¬
lowed by Portuguese sovereigns until the end of
the fifteenth century. However, even after this
v	 - " .. ' - -I
M" .. , V i ¿
trade had become a routine matter, raiding con¬
tinued to provide slave-traders with an addi¬
tional source of supply. The so-called "roving"
trade in which slaving ships sailed along the
coast and captured slaves at various places until
they had a full consignment often took the
form of armed incursions against villages situ¬
ated near to the coast. When countries engaged
in the slave trade, they often began by orga¬
nizing raiding expeditions, as did the first vessels
hailing from the "twelve colonies" (the future
United States of America) in the first half of
the seventeenth century.
By that time, however, the leading Euro¬
pean nations had imposed a code of ethics of a
kind on the slave trade. The English, Portuguese
and French agreed to make a joint declaration to
the effect that the slave trade was justified only
when it involved slaves duly sold by Africans.
Forts were built along the coastline in order to
organize the trade and at the same time to instill
a healthy sense of fear among the Africans. The
message they conveyed was perfectly clear: "Sell
us slaves and we shall leave it to you to choose
them as you see fit or else we shall take the
slaves we need at random."
The slave trade was therefore a one-sided
relationship, founded and maintained on the
threat of force. We once again have to agree
with Basil Davidson when he says, "Africa and
Europe were jointly involved	 Europe dom¬
inated the connection, shaped and promoted
the slave trade, and continually turned it to
European advantage and to African loss."
Affairs of state and lineage societies
At its height, the slave trade was regarded by
Africans as a kind of diabolical plot in which
they had to be accomplices or perish. Hence
almost all the lineage or state societies of the
African seaboard were compelled to become
involved in it. They did this in ways and under
conditions which differed significantly from one
region to another and from one period to another.
The social history of pre-colonial Africa
shows that slavery was a widespread institu¬
tion in states where, in some instances, a
domestic trade in slaves already existed for mil¬
itary or economic reasons. However, a distinc-

SLAVERY
tion has to be made between those states which
maintained relations with the outside world
and those which did not. The former were
quicker and more ready to join in the slave-
trade cycle. This was true of the states bor¬
dering the Sahel, which were already in the prac¬
tice of selling slaves, among other goods, to
their Arab and Berber partners, who actually
went on to sell some of them to the Europeans.
The chronicler Alvise de Ca' da Mosto, who
took part in a Portuguese expedition to
Senegambia in 1455-1456, reported that the
local sovereigns were skilled at taking advantage
of the new competition that was growing up
between the trans-Saharan trade and the Atlantic
trade by selling slaves to the Arabs and Berbers
in exchange for horses, and other slaves to the
Portuguese in exchange for European goods.
The situation was by no means the same in
those states which had no trading links with
the outside world. The part these played in the
slave trade is a pointer to the ambiguous and
contradictory attitudes they displayed and the
difficulties they faced when they came to take
decisions, often under duress. The kingdom of
Kongo, one of the most powerful in Africa at the
time of its encounter with the Portuguese at
the end of the fifteenth century, is a typical
example. In the view of contemporary histo¬
rians, its economic, political and social standing
was on a par with that of Portugal. From the
time of the very first contacts, the Kongo
nobility became converts to Christianity and
the king saw fit to address the Portuguese sov¬
ereign as "my brother". Yet the fact was that the
slave trade had already started, in violation of the
agreements, both tacit and formal, concluded
between the two states. A number of letters, in
which the king of Kongo protested against the
seizure of slaves, including members of noble
families, have survived to the present day. There
is still some controversy as to what was really the
motive behind these protestations. Some his¬
torians regard them as being an outburst of
nationalist sentiment, but others look upon
them more as a sign of the concern of the
country's aristocracy not to allow so lucrative a
business to slip through their hands. In any
event, the kingdom did not survive the impact of
the slave trade for very long. The same drama
blacks in the West
Indies", engraving from
La France maritime by
Amédée Gréhan, Paris, 1855
(artist unknown).
* Basil Davidson, Black
Mother, The Years of the
African Slave Trade,
Boston/Toronto, Little, a éy
Brown and Company, 1961. ¿O

Uross-section of the slave ship
Brookes, showing how the
captives were crammed
together between decks.
Engraving from The History of
the Abolition of the Slave Trade,
by Thomas Clarkson (1808).
14
ELIKIA M'BOKOLO,
Zairean historian, is director of
studies at the Ecole des Hautes
Etudes en Sciences Sociales in
Paris. He is the author of many
works on African history,
cultures and development
problems, including L'Afrique au
20* siècle, le continent convoité
(1985) and Afrique noire,
Histoire et civilisations, 19-2C
siècles (1992).
was to be played out to varying degrees else¬
where in Africa.
The kingdom of Dahomey was also exposed
to the bitter experience of the slave trade. In
the mid-eighteenth century, it took over the
port of Ouidah, one of the main centres of the
trade in the Gulf of Guinea. The king of
Dahomey regarded the port where there was
a growing buildup of firearms as posing a
threat to the security of his possessions, since the
slave trade gave it a tactical advantage over its
neighbours. Once they took control of Ouidah,
the rulers of Dahomey were caught in a vicious
circle: in order to maintain a strong state, they
needed rifles and gunpowder, but to obtain
these they had to sell slaves to the Europeans.
The answer was really very straightforward:
since the sale of the kingdom's own subjects
was strictly forbidden, powerful armies were
raised to raid neighbouring peoples and make
war on them for the purpose of taking slaves.
Unlike states, lineage societies did not have
any means of obtaining slaves by force. In such
cases, servitude was based on complex prac¬
tices in which various categories of social out¬
casts, such as criminals, misfits, sorcerers and vic¬
tims of natural or economic disasters, were
relegated to being slaves. Even so, this would not
have been sufficient to turn the slave trade into
the vast and lasting business it became. Other
means were therefore found of meeting the
Europeans' demands. For example, in the city of
Arochukwu ("the voice of Chukwu", the
supreme deity), in the Niger delta, a celebrated
oracle whose authority was respected by all the
population was called on to designate those
who, for whatever reason, were condemned to
be sold into slavery. This practice continued
until the beginning of the nineteenth century.
In other regions, especially in central Africa,
trading networks were gradually established,
extending from the coast deep into the interior.
All the goods exported or imported via these
networks predominantly slaves transited
through the heads of the lineages. In Gabon
and Loango in particular, the coastal societies
forming the key links in these trading networks
had a highly developed ranking social order
based on the extent to which their members
were involved in the slave trade. Kinship rela
tions, which are fundamental in lineage soci¬
eties, gradually gave way to relations based on
fortunes made in the trade, which came to dic¬
tate people's standing in society.
Africans and the abolition
of the slave trade
On the African side, however, the basis of the
slave trade was very precariously balanced. The
part played by Africans in the trade cannot be
discussed without reference to the part they
played in its abolition. In a one-sided view of his¬
tory, the role of Europeans philosophers,
thinkers, men of religion and businessmen is
too often stressed, while that played by the
Africans is left in the shade. Some people have
even gone so far as to tax the Africans with
being the main impediment to the phasing-out
of the trade in the nineteenth century. Nothing
could be further from the truth.
Outside Africa, the resistance of the victims
of the slave trade which took a variety of
forms, including the "Back to Africa" move¬
ment, the founding of "Maroon" communities
and even armed insurrection, like that in San
Domingo in 1791 was primarily instrumental
in calling the whole institution of slavery into
question. Those who had managed to escape
its clutches took a very active but often unac¬
knowledged part in the campaign for abolition.
They included people like Ottobah Cuguano,
who had been born in Fantiland, in present-
day Ghana, had been a slave in the West Indies,
and published his Thoughts and Sentiments on
the Evil and Wicked Traffic ofSlavery in London
in 1787. In 1789, another African, Olaudah
Equiano, alias Gustavus Vassa, a native of
Iboland, in Nigeria, published, again in London,
The Interesting Narrative ofthe Life ofOlaudah
Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa the African, written
by himself. These books played a significant
role in the movement of opinion which led to the
abolition of the slave trade.
In Africa itself, all through the "years of trial"
of the slave trade, along with slaves, blacks con¬
tinued to sell the produce of their soil and subsoil,
such as timber, ivory, spices, gold, vegetable oils,
and others besides. Changing European demand
was sufficient for the Africans to turn to a more
"legal" form of commerce.
