The abdication of thought
by Tahar Ben Jelloun
Fundamentalism and totalitarianism both
reject dialogue. They also have two enemies:
laughter, which is a foil to dogma of
all kinds, and subjective experience, which
sustains artists, rebels and poets
I When critical thinking is abandoned,
giving free rein to all kinds of absurdities,
and when doubt either methodical or
strategic absents itself, the individual ceases
to be an individual, melts into the crowd, and
becomes trivial, stifled and unrecognized.
Dialogue becomes impossible.
Rejection of dialogue is inherent in ideo¬
logical extremism, whether religious, political,
or both. The Other only exists insofar as he
enters the citadel of certainties and does
not think of leaving it, still less of voicing a
rejection or denouncing an error. Society
is viewed as a monolithic block with all its
exits sealed, for it senses danger, a threat
from outside introduced by those who have
gone astray.
From within this barricade enemies are
defined in simplistic terms. They are individuals
free in thought and deed, and in all kinds of dif¬
ferent thought philosophies, religions, liter¬
ature, art, poetry. And laughter. 23

litar food, signalling the end of
the Ramadan fast, is taken in
common in a mosque.
24
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN
is a Moroccan-born novelist and
poet who writes in French.
Several of his works have been
published in English translation,
including The Sacred Night
(1989) which won the Goncourt
Prize in 1987, Silent Day in
Tangier (1991) and The Sand
Child (1987).
Humour, a weapon against fanaticism
Laughter is the special attribute of human beings,



of free human beings. It marks the birth of
doubt it is an admission of the fact that there
are other ways of thinking and living. Humour
is a form of self-questioning, a less tense face of
despair. By its very essence it is anti-totalitarian.
It mocks the sacred and helps the prisoners of
authoritarianism to become aware of their con¬
dition. In his novel The Name of the Rose,
Umberto Eco has shown that the failure of reli¬
gious fanaticism is caused by the ability to laugh
uproariously; laughter has no respect for dogma
and is thus intolerable.
Another systematic enemy of fundamen¬
talism is subjectivity. Voicing one's individu¬
ality, demonstrating it in one's own manner,
expressing it according to one's own rules,
making it an asset, an identity all this is intol¬
erable for fundamentalism, whose aim has
always been to make society uniform, to rally it
under the same banner, and to exclude from it
the slightest expression of the individual will.
Among those condemned arc all creative artists
who draw elements of their creations from their
innermost selves, all rebels and all those who
aspire to have a private life.
From the moment when you are told how to
dress, what to wear, what should be the length
of a woman's dress or the colour of a man's
thought, from the moment when someone has
the right to interfere in your private life, when
you are told that you are under surveillance
and that someone can intervene at any moment
to call you to order, subjectivity becomes sub¬
version and even indecent assault!
At the base of all monotheistic religions
there is a totalitarian logic to which one finally
gives way, through fear or through faith,
accepting God as the only judge. But when men
substitute themselves for God, and take the ini¬
tiative of speaking and acting in His place, the
very foundations of religion itself are weakened
by this encroachment.
Islam has always been subject to various
currents. None has done it greater harm than the
so-called "fundamentalist" current. Muslim cul¬
tural values can help consolidate an identity
which has been ill-treated by history and which
finds it difficult to adjust to modern life. It all
depends on how these values are analysed and
interpreted. They v/ere long ignored or
neglected. That is why, today, some young
people are identifying with these values and
