India: the threat to union
by Rasheeduddin Khan
<
9* f*~
28
For 45 years India has been facing religious
movements which contest the foundations
of the secular pluralist state created at the
time of independence
I In India we use the word communalism to
designate the political exploitation of reli¬
gion, rather than the word fundamentalism,
which belongs to the strictly religious sphere.
Communalism appropriates religious tenets,
traditions and values and perverts them. It
exploits religious feelings and fear of others to
serve certain political interests. It is the enemy
of the concept of the federal nation-state based
on secularism and rationality.
Two formations emerged in India after the
achievement of independence: nationalism, with
secular overtones, and communalism Hindu,
Sikh and Muslim. In recent years the Indian
state has been besieged by a major opposition
grouping based on religious militantism. The
Hindu movement based on the idea of Hin-
dutva is perhaps the most dangerous.
The land of the Hindus
Hindutva is an ideology that gives supremacy to
the Hindu identity and denies any rights to reli¬
gious minorities, or to Hindus of inferior castes.
The idea of an exclusively Hindu India has been
articulated since 1925 and more particularly
since the entry on the Indian political scene of
Guru Golwalkar, who launched the idea that
India should be called Hindustan. In a pam-

A wall painting in Jaipur (India)
showing Christian, Hindu, Jain,
Muslim and Sikh at prayer
together.
Black Sunday
The destruction of the Ayodhya mosque on 6 December 1 992
sent shock waves through India
" 'Black Sunday' as it was called in the media will remain a disturbing experience in the minds and
hearts of those millions of our compatriots of all religions who recognize our common mother¬
land as a generous land of pluralism and accommodation," says Rasheeduddin Khan.
On that day, in the ancient city of Ayodhya in northern India, Hindu mutants celebrating a
religious ceremony sacked the mosque erected on the site which, they believe, marks the birth¬
place of the Vedic hero Rama.
In the hours that followed, there were clashes all over the country. Mosques and Hindu tem¬
ples were destroyed and "pogroms" were organized by small extremist groups, especially in
Bombay. A number of Muslims were shot by the police during demonstrations.
The confrontations continued for several weeks. Anti-Indian rioting occurred in several
Muslim countries, especially in Pakistan and Bangladesh. Almost 2,000 people died.
This crisis marked a revival of Hindu extremism and widened the gap between the Hindu and
Muslim communities.
Vinod Mehta, editor-in-chief of the daily The Pioneer, wrote of an India at war with herself,
and Salman Khursheed, a Muslim and secretary of state for foreign affairs publicly exclaimed his
concern about the rise in extremism and what he termed "a declaration of war against the secular
state!"
phlet entitled We or Our Nation Defined (1930),
he wrote, "Hindustan is the land of the Hindus
and the land for the Hindu nation alone to
flourish upon." He also claimed that "the foreign
races in Hindustan must adopt the Hindu cul¬
ture and language . . . must entertain no idea but
the glorification of the Hindu race and culture
. . . and must lose their separate existence to
merge in the Hindu race. ..."
The amazing conclusion was that non-
Hindus "may stay in the country, wholly sub¬
ordinated to the Hindu nation, claiming nothing,
deserving no privileges, far less any preferential
treatment not even citizen's rights." Golwalkar
denigrated the work of Gandhi and Nehru, who
had striven for inter-communal harmony and
friendship, and associated them with those who
"have committed the most heinous sin by killing
the life-spirit of a great and ancient people."
Golwalkar's ideology helped to break the
already fragile link between Hindus and Mus¬
lims. However, no act of war since the partition
of the country in 1947 was so traumatic as the
destruction on Sunday, 6 December 1992 of the
mosque at Ayodhya, built under the auspices of
the Mogul Emperor Babur (see box on this
page).
This "black Sunday" still disturbs those who
see India as the land of pluralism and coexistence
between communities. In direct contradiction
with centuries of intermingling of populations,
the attack was the tragic outcome of the Hindu
nationalist campaign begun eight years before.
After independence, India had the option
of becoming either a Hindu state, in response to
Pakistan declaring itself an Islamic state, or
remaining a secular state. Finally no definite
choice was made. India is not a Hindu state.
Neither is it an authentic secular state. Due to the
pressures of communal politics and confusion in
the ranks of the secularists, the Indian state is a
Hindu version of a pseudo-secular state. If it
wishes to be recognized as a dynamic modern
state, India must restore its image as a secular
state. Any secular state should show respectful
indifference to religions.
RASHEEDUDDIN KHAN,
an Indian political scientist, is
Director of the Indian Institute of
Federal Studies (Jamia
Hamdard). Among his published
works are Federal India: a
Design for Change (1992) and
(as editor) Composite Culture of
India and National Integration
(1987).
It is one of the greatest frauds on the people to
suggest that religious affinity can unite areas which
are geographically, economically, linguistically and
culturally different.
ABDUL KAMAL AZAD
29
