NIGERIA'S CHOICE
by Ayo ßamgbose
^----^^-"dsrS:^^^
12
AYO BAMGBOSE,
formerly Professor of
Ungulstlcs at the University of
Ibadan (Nigeria), has been
involved in linguistic research
and language planning activities
In West Africa for almost 30
years. His publications include
A Grammar of Yoruba
(Cambridge University Press.
1 966), Mother Tongue EducoOon:
The West African Experience
(Hodder & Stoughton/UNESCO,
1 976), and Longuoge and the
Nation (Edinburgh University
Press, 1991).
D
EVELOPING nations, in general, rarely con¬
sider language questions a priority unless
problems arise in connection with the
implementation of controversial language policies.
Nigeria is no exception, and economic problems
are popularly perceived there as being more imme¬
diate and important than language problems.
However, social, economic and political
upheavals since independence have brought lan¬
guage into the spotlight as a crucial factor for
the country's social and political stability. As a
result, questions about language have featured in
the deliberations of two Constituent Assemblies
set up to create new constitutions, in the national
debate over the framework for political gover¬
nance, and in successive constitutions since 1960.
Like most African countries, Nigeria is mul¬
tilingual. There are about 400 languages not
dialects and three of these languages, Hausa,
Igbo and Yomba, are spoken by about half of the
88.5 million population of the country. In addi¬
tion, another 10 per cent of the population is
made up of speakers of other languages who
are nevertheless able to speak at least one of the
major languages as an additional language.
Although Nigerian languages are usually clas¬
sified as either major or minority languages, this
is grossly misleading because next in numbers and
importance to the three major languages are
about ten main languages that serve as the prin¬
cipal languages of some of the states. Such lan¬
guages include Kanuri, Ibibio, Efik, Tw, Ijo, Edo,
Fulfulde, Urhobo, Nupe and Igala. The other
languages should not be dismissed as "minority"
languages, since the combination of all those
who speak them adds up to a substantial pro¬
portion of the population. We may thus con¬
clude that there are three functional types of lan¬
guages in Nigeria: major languages that have a role
at the national level, main languages whose role
is at the state level, and small-group languages that
function mainly at the local level.
Uiversity and divisiveness
The fact that a country has several languages is
often seen as an intrinsic problem. Nigeria, with
its 400 languages, is deeply concerned with the
problems of divisiveness and tribalism, and the
need to achieve national integration. One of the
popular myths in multilingual countries is the
association of a multiplicity of languages with
divisiveness. In spite of the prevalence of this
myth, it is important to stress that it is not mul¬
tilingualism as such that causes divisiveness, but
the exploitation of ethnicity, by linking it with
language differences. In some countries the
myth of divisiveness has been used to oppress
speakers of small-group languages. Fortunately,
this has not happened in Nigeria.
A complementary myth to that of divisive¬
ness is the myth that a single language can unite.
In Nigeria, the English language, which was

TO KEEP
NIGERIA ONE
IIS A TASK THAT
MUST BE DON^
.T t .' t '
lÍHIüiltlíJtltMIIIIItilllItlIII HtllMlllliilll'^
,î^7&^ iifcv-j^
the official language in the colonial period, is
widely considered the best candidate for a uni¬
fying role. It is well-entrenched, having been
used as the language of government and educa¬
tion, thereby "uniting" elites from the different
ethnic groups. Furthermore, because it does
not belong to any ethnic group in Nigeria, it is
believed to be a "neutral" language. However, a
common language does not automatically induce
unity unless there are already unity-inducing
factors in the communities concerned, and it is
simply not true that a language can be neutral,
since it inevitably comes with the baggage of the
culture it represents.
Three major questions have 


dominated
Nigeria's language policy since independence:
What should be the country's official language?
Which ofthe languages should be accorded the
status of a national language? What language
should be used in education?
tingUsh: overwhelmingly dominant
For some, the question of an official language has
been predetermined. Given the colonial heritage
of the use of English for practically all official
purposes in the pre-independence era, the possi¬
bility for change in this practice is almost nil. The
dominance of the English language is truly over¬
whelming. It is the language of government and
administration, including the proceedings in the
National and State Assemblies, the language of
education at almost all levels, the main language of
the media, the language of science and technology,
and the language used by many Nigerian novelists
and poets. Even the debate on the desirability of
change has to be conducted in English!
Attempts to reduce the use of English as an
official language have been singularly unsuc¬
cessful. For example, the 1979 constitution pro¬
vides for the use of the three major languages as 13

additional languages in the National Assembly,
but only subject to adequate arrangements. Such
arrangements include the compilation of leg¬
islative terminology, the training of translators
and interpreters, the installation of simulta¬
neous interpretation facilities and printing equip¬
ment, and hiring personnel for the production
of the Hansard, the official record of the pro¬
ceedings ofthe Assembly. Of all these require¬
ments, only the first one has been completed to
date. Hence, no Nigerian language is used for the
proceedings of the National Assembly.
A much-discussed and recurrent language
question is that of the evolution of a lingua
franca as a national language for the country.
While nationalistic sentiments ensure majority
support for an indigenous national language,
that is where consensus ends. The real problem
is how to decide which of the 400 Nigerian lan¬
guages should be selected for this prestigious
role. Here is where the fear of domination crops
up again, with speakers of smaller languages
fearing that they may be overwhelmed politi¬
cally, economically and linguistically by speakers
ofthe major languages. Even among speakers of
the three major languages, there is no consensus
about which one should become the national
language. In frustration, some Nigerians have
offered solutions ranging from the absurd pro¬
posal to create an artificial language from a com-
14
Left, the market at
Calabar.
Right, election posters on
a wall in a Nigerian town.

posite of elements of several to the deliberate
adoption of a small-group language in order to
marginalize speakers of larger group languages
and so put most people at an equal disadvantage.
While the difficulties of choosing an indige¬
nous national language have led others to propose
the adoption of a foreign African language such as
Kiswahili from Eastern Africa, or the promotion
of English from official language status to national
language status, the official government policy
has been to encourage the learning of the three
major languages in schools in the hope that one of
them may emerge in the future as an acceptable
national language. This, of course, means that
English, by default, will continue to perform the
functions expected of a national language, even
though it is not called by that name. It is this
unsatisfactory position that has led some other
observers to propose that 


Nigeria should opt for
three or more national languages in much the
same way as Switzerland operates nationally in
three official languages (German, French, Italian)
and one regional language (Romansh). Although
this may turn out to be very expensive in the
Nigerian context, it is at least a positive way of
resolving an impasse that effectively leaves the
country with English as a national language by
default.
education as the key to change
Changes in language habits are not easy to
enforce, but education provides a good oppor¬
tunity to modify language use. It is for this reason
that much of Nigeria's language policy is predi¬
cated on the educational system. The principles
on which the educational language policy are
based are: equal opportunity of access to the lan¬
guage of education; thorough grounding in the
child's own language; thorough mastery of Eng¬
lish; and bilingualism in two Nigerian languages.
Equality of access to the language of educa¬
tion is promoted by starting primary education
in a child's mother tongue or, failing this, the lan¬
guage of the immediate community. Adult lit¬
eracy is also taught in the local language of the
adult learners. Through this policy, a language
is not ignored simply because it is small. How¬
ever, there are practical constraints. Some lan¬
guages are not yet written languages, and some
have not been studied enough for literacy mate¬
rials to be produced in them. In such cases, edu¬
cation is conducted in the language of the imme¬
diate community. The situation is not static as
more and more languages are being analysed
by linguists and becoming written languages.
A thorough grounding in the child's mother
tongue is supposed to be ensured through an IS

A school class in the town
of Aba, in southern
Nigeria.
16
introduction to reading, writing and arithmetic
in the child's native language, and the use of
this language as a medium of instruction for
the first three years of primary education. Apart
from the constraints mentioned above, which
may militate against the realization of this objec¬
tive, the attitudes of parents and guardians often
run counter to the principle of mother tongue
education. This is because many children from
elite homes are sent to fee-paying schools where
they are taught in English.
Thorough mastery of English is promoted
through the introduction of English in the first
year of primary school and its later adoption as
the medium of instruction for the rest of the
child's education. In spite of the enormous
amount of time devoted to the study of English,
a frequently heard complaint is that the standard
of English in Nigeria is poor. Proof of this inad¬
equacy is the poor performance often recorded
in school certificate as well as university entrance
examinations. The underlying cause of this
problem appears to be the dissociation of mother
tongue teaching from the teaching of English. In
experiments where the two have been related,
significant success has been recorded. The point
is that it is not how long one learns English but
how well.
One drawback of the present practice is that
it assumes that every- primary school teacher
can teach English well. Yet this is not always
true: some primary school teachers have very
poor spoken and written English. An approach
that provides for specialist teachers of English
alongside teachers for other subjects taught in
the mother tongue has been shown to provide
excellent results in terms of mastery of both
English and the mother tongue.
The requirement that every Nigerian child
should leam one of the three major languages in
addition to his or her own language is meant to
facilitate the eventual emergence of a Nigerian
lingua franca. The policy is meant to be enforced
at the secondary school level, subject to avail¬
ability of teachers. Alany schools have sought
refuge in this escape clause and several state gov¬
ernments have not made any effort to produce
teachers for major Nigerian languages. Instead,
soft-option alternatives such as the use of
untrained native speakers to teach only spoken
forms of the language have been adopted, with dis¬
astrous results. There does not seem to be much
enthusiasm for the implementation of this policy,
which may well be connected with ambivalent
attitudes to the national language question.
In Nigeria, there is an acute awareness of
some of the most important language problems.
There are also spirited attempts to tackle them
through the formulation of appropriate lan¬
guage policies. What has been lacking is the will
to implement the policies. This may be due to a
lack of faith in the policies not only on the part
of the people, but also on the part of the policy¬
makers themselves.
