The monastery ofAlcobaça
From the spirit ofSt. Bernard to the idyll ofPedro and Ines
byJoséAugusto Seabra
36
UNESCO IN ACTION
HERITAGE
Few monuments of outstanding
universal importance have been
so closely tied to the history of a
people than the Cistercian monastery of
Santa Maria in Alcobaça, a town in central
Portugal. It was founded in 1 153 the year
of the death of St. Bernard, one ofthe great
spiritual leaders of the Cistercian order,
on land granted to the Cistercians by
Afonso Henriques, the first king of Por¬
tugal, in gratitude for their contribution to
the reconquest of his country from the
Moors. The "white monks" so called
because of their white habits, symbolizing
the austerity and purity ofmonastic life
built one of the most beautiful monastic
houses in Europe on this site. It stands as
testimony to the distinguished religious,
cultural, political and social role they
played in the emergence ofa nation which
by virtue of its great maritime discoveries
would become a beacon of Christian civ¬
ilization throughout the world.
The Cistercians had arrived in Portugal

Above, the monks'
dormitory.
Below right, the façade of
the church of Santa Maria
d'Alcobaça. Its Gothic
portal is flanked by statues
of St. Benedict and St.
Bernard.
ten years earlier, just after the kingdom
had been recognized by Castile. They took
an active part in strengthening the nation,
notably as organizers ofagriculture. These
"agronomist monks" maintained close ties
with the Portuguese sovereigns, who in
return granted them considerable powers,
including the right to create boroughs by
charter in order to clear and populate the
land around them. The monastery soon
began to prosper. In the thirteenth century
Alcobaça was a rich and influential com-



The vast Cistercian
monastery of
Alcobaça, founded
in 12th-century
Portugal, is a
masterpiece of
religious
architecture. Since
1989 it has been
inscribed on
UNESCO's World
Heritage List.
munity whose authority stretched over
vast fertile lands, thirteen boroughs, four
sea ports and two castles.
Later, these powers expanded and con¬
tracted according to the will of the crown.
Until the advent of the liberal monarchy,
the Cistercian order intermittently played
a significant role in Portugal's intellectual
and political life. While pursuing its edu¬
cational activities in the sixteenth cen¬
tury, the monastery became an important
cultural centre, distinguishing itself in
areas such as historiography and the
plastic arts, especially sculpture. It
endowed itselfwith a printing press and a
library that were to become famous.
An ideal of ascetic
simplicity
What makes the Monastery of Santa
Maria unique and justifies its place on
Unesco's World Heritage List is its archi¬
tectural beauty and harmony. Built in the
Gothic style characteristic of the old Cis¬
tercian abbeys, it embodies the ideal of
simplicity and asceticism that St. Bernard
preached, a simplicity that successive
transformations over the centuries have
not modified.
This spiritual vision is etched into the
smallest details of the monastery church,
which has a large, elegant façade com¬
posed of three sections. An early Gothic
portal with seven archivolts resting on
seven columns is flanked by statues of
St. Benedict on the left and St. Bernard on
37

Opposite each other in the transept
of the church are the tombs of king
Pedro I and Ines de Castro
(late 14th century). Their tragic love affair
inspired a literary tradition.
38
The two lovers



"In the monastery are the
famous tombs ofKing
Pedro I ofPortugal and
his mistress, Inès de
Castro. The two lovers lie
infacing tombs, as if
ready to look each other
in the eyes again when
they risefrom the dead
on Judgment Day."
the right. Austere and hieratic, the nave
extends beneath a quadrangular vault of
pointed arches to the chancel, whose
sublime vertical upsweep creates an
impression of simple grandeur. The
transept, also under a ribbed vault, con¬
tains two chapels illuminated by rose win¬
dows and gives the church its symbolic
form of a Latin cross.
From Burgundian art to the
Manueline style
The tombs of the first Portuguese kings,
queens, princes and princesses in the
transept or royal pantheon attest to the
monarchy's attachment to this Cistercian
monastery. The most famous tombs are
those of King Pedro I and Ines de Castro,
whose tragic love affair spawned a literary
tradition stretching from Camoëns and
Velcz de Guevara to Henry de Monther-
lant's La Reine Morte. The two lovers lie
in facing tombs as if ready to look each
other in the eyes again when they rise from
the dead on Judgment Day. Ines, whom
Prince Pedro had secretly married, was
murdered in Coimbra in 1355 on the
orders of the prince's father, KingAfonso IV
When Pedro succeeded to the throne, he
had the remains of his beloved solemnly
brought to Alcobaça and ordered her mur¬
derers to be executed. Their ill-fated union
is depicted on the friezes that adorn the
sides of the tall sarcophagi in which they
lie, watched over by angels. Combining
secular and religious motifs, the decorative
carving is of a rare beauty.
In the sixteenth century, a sacristy in
the Manueline style was added to the
church, together with chapels decorated
with a profusion of sculptures. The most
famous chapel, that dedicated to "The
Death of St. Bernard", is considered to be
one of the finest works of the Alcobaça
sculptors. Several other buildings have
been added at different times to the original
Burgundian framework of the monastery.
Among them are the cloister ofDom Dinis,
the chapter-house, the dormitory, the
monks' hall, the kings' hall decorated with
azulejo panels, the refectory, and an eigh¬
teenth-century kitchen with a monumental
chimney and great basin.
But the entire complex preserves an
austerity and simplicity of which St.
Bernard would have approved. The
monastery ofAlcobaça remains the same
masterpiece of Gothic Cistercian art that
has impressed so many historians and vis¬
itors, including the English writer and trav¬
eller William Beckford, who penned unfor¬
gettable pages about it. And it still bears the
indelible imprint of a people whose genius
"gave new worlds to the world."
JOSÉ AUGUSTO SEABRA
is a Portuguese poet and essayist who was formerly
his country's ambassador to Unesco and is now a
member of the Organization's Executive Board. He is
the author of several volumes of poetry, essays and
criticism, including Fernando Pessoa ou le
Poétodrame (José Corti, Paris, 1988), and wrote the
preface to the bilingual (French-Portuguese) edition
of Pessoa's important work, Mensagem (José
Corti/UNESco, Unesco Collection of Representative
Works, Paris, 1988).
