A RISING IIDE
by Rita Colwell
Marine
biotechnology is
transforming our
knowledge and
use of the sea's
resources
I he Kombu alga is grown
on Rishiri, an island
adjacent to Hokkaido
(Japan).
RITA COLWELL, of the
United States, is President of
the University of Maryland
Biotechnology Institute.
Adviser to several public
bodies, national and
international, she is a member
of the Executive Board of the
International Council of
Scientific Unions and of the
Scientific Advisory Committee
of the United Nations
University's Biotechnology in
Latin America and the
Caribbean programme. She is
the author or editor of 16
books, author or co-author of
several hundred papers and
articles and produced an
award-winning documentary,
Invisible Seas, on marine
microbiology.
IT is only a decade since marine biotech¬
nology was first recognized as an area
of great potential. In that short span of
time astonishing progress has been made.
Some of the most striking advances have
been in the aquaculture industry, where direct
genetic manipulation using recombinant DNA
techniques has made it possible to develop an
entirely new approach to fish farming. This is
important because of the significant expansion
of aquaculture in recent years. According to
some estimates aquaculture may be supplying
25 per cent of world seafood consumption by
the end of the century.
Fish are highly amenable to genetic manip¬
ulation because their eggs are large and can
therefore be injected with DNA constructs.
Major research efforts in genetic manipulation
have been directed towards enhancing the
growth and production of fish with superior
29

Below, a mullet is given
an injection of hormones
at the Hawaii Oceanic
Institute.
Bottom photo, carp eggs
seen through a microscope
at Ahrensburg Scientific
Institute (Germany).
When they hatch, the
alevin are kept immobile in
heated water and fed with
granules of egg white.
They grow three times
more quickly than in
natural conditions.
resistance to cold temperatures. With the spread
of intensive fish farming and the concomitant
increased risk of disease, the development of
disease-resistant fish has also become an
increasingly important objective.
Goldfish with a human gene
The first successful growth hormone experi¬
ment using fish was the transfer into a goldfish
of the human growth hormone gene, yielding
offspring significantly larger than untreated
fish. Since then, several vertebrate genes have
been introduced into fish species, including
Atlantic salmon.
Of more practical significance has been the
achievement of growth enhancement using fish
growth hormone. In several experiments, fish
injected with growth hormone reached double
the weight increment of untreated fish over a
sixty-day period. However, as growth hor¬
mone is not easy to administer to fish, research
is now focusing on generating transgenic fish.
Up to 1990, thirteen transgenic fish species
30
had been reported, including transgenic variants
of commercial varieties such as the Atlantic
salmon, channel catfish, carp and tilapia.
Research is now underway to determine the
physiological, nutritional and environmental
factors that maximize the performance of trans¬
genic fish. Major problems of safety and envi¬
ronmental impact must also be solved before
large-scale, commercial production of trans¬
genic fish will be permitted.
Antifreeze for salmon
Genetic manipulation of Atlantic salmon has
been carried out to try and increase the resis¬
tance of this species to cold. Many marine fish
that live in cold water produce proteins which
act as an "antifreeze" and protect them by
inhibiting the formation of ice crystals in their
serum. Atlantic salmon lack genes for the pro¬
duction of these proteins and therefore cannot
survive in icy waters. However, genes coding
for antifreeze proteins have now been trans¬
ferred to Atlantic salmon, and the expression of
adequate concentrations of these proteins in
their blood could extend the range of envi¬
ronments where this fish can be grown.
Shellfish are also amenable to genetic
manipulation, especially for enhancing their
rate of growth and their size. It has been shown
that bovine growth hormone can enhance the
growth rates of California red abalone, and
similar results have been reported for the appli¬
cation of biosynthetic rainbow trout growth
hormone to young oysters.
Unlike fish and shellfish, anthropoids such
as lobsters shed their exoskeletons during
growth by means of a moulting process that is
under hormonal control. Thus, regulation of
moulting by the hormone-secreting endocrine
gland may improve growth efficiency in the
lobster. However, knowledge of the molecular
genetics of marine crustaceans such as shrimp,
lobster and prawns must be expanded before
commercial production of these species will
be efficient and reliable. Growth, development,
and disease resistance have yet to be controlled.
One factor on which the successful
exploitation of a fish or shellfish species in
aquaculture depends is the ability to obtain
consistent, controlled reproduction as eco¬
nomically as possible. It has been shown that
water temperature and the period of daily illu¬
mination the fish receive can be manipulated
sufficiently to improve spawning. Fortunately,
some important advances have been made
recently in the use of hormone treatment to
control reproduction of fish species that are
important in aquaculture.
The farming of marine macroalgae sea¬
weed has been practised for several cen¬
turies in Asian countries, particularly Japan,

Above, dried dihé, a blue
alga rich in protein,
mineral salts and vitamins.
It is harvested by women,
top, in pools in parts of
Chad, where it constitutes
an essential part of the
diet.
and products derived from them have been
widely used as sources of medicine and food.
Macro- and microalgae yield a wide range
of products, including food additives and
supplements, culture media, pesticides, plant
growth regulators and antibacterial, anti¬
cancer and antiviral agents.
Seaweed for medicine and food
Microalgae have proved useful for large-scale
production of fatty acids which may help to
reduce the risk of coronary vascular disease.
The green microalga Dunaliella salina is
grown in large-scale, intensive culture in
California to produce beta-carotene, a sub¬
stance associated with the prevention of
cancer. It has also been suggested that oceanic
farming of marine algae could reduce global
carbon dioxide levels.
The application of biotechnology to the
cultivation of marine algae presents an
opportunity for countries near rivers and
the ocean, especially developing countries
with extensive coastal regions. This potential
is most likely to be realized by the formation
of partnerships with industrialized coun¬
tries. However, to achieve success, an under¬
standing of molecular genetics and an appli¬
cation of the techniques of modern molecular
biology will be required. Although molecular
techniques have not yet been widely applied
to achieve strain enhancement or the pro¬
duction of transgenic plants and algae of
commercial importance, this approach is now
being adopted in several laboratories in the
United States, Asia and Europe.
Marine organisms are sources of a very
wide range of natural products that have bio¬
medical, biotechnological, agricultural and
industrial applications. Chitin is one such
product that has made it to market in a
variety of forms as poultices to heal
wounds, extenders, and emulsifiers for pho¬
tography yet still remains a focus of exten¬
sive study. If and when the genes for chitin
synthesis are cloned, the production of this
compound will increase immeasurably since
a stable source can then be obtained.
In the past decade, more than 1,000 new
compounds, natural products, and other dis¬
coveries relating to the molecular genetics
of fish and shellfish growth, metabolism and
reproduction have been recorded. Promising
new antibiotics, anti-cancer therapeutic
agents, improved aquaculture stocks and
food additives have cither been discovered or
are in the development stage. Where once
only a few pioneers toiled in their laborato¬
ries, there are now major new centres of
biotechnology research and development in
Norway, Japan, the United States and else¬
where. 31
