INTERVIEW
YVES COPPENS
talks to
Francis Leary
A palaeontologist of international reputation, Yves Coppens
is professor of paleoanthropology and prehistory at the Collège de
France (Paris). He has carried out extensive fieldwork which has led to the
discovery of many fossil hominids and the oldest known manufactured
stone tools (over three million years old). He has also constructed
models to explain the origin of hominids (eight million years ago), and the
origins of Man (three million years ago), as well as a cultural
model to explain the evolution of thought
Among his recent publications are: Préambules, Les premiers pas de
l'Homme (1988); Le rêve de Lucy (1990, in collaboration with Pierre Pelot
and Tanino Liberatore); and "The Origin and Evolution of Man", which
appeared in From the Stars to Thought, no. 155 of DIOGENES, the
quarterly review of the International Council of Philosophy and Humanistic
Studies (published with Unesco support by Berg Publishers, Providence,
U.SA, and Oxford, U.K).
Gauguinpaintedafamous triptych that
depicted naked dream figures of Tahitian
women together with animals anda native
goddess. He made this brilliant fantasy of
colour and imagery a haunting symbol of
the human situation by entitling it: "Where
do we comefrom ? Who are wef Where are
we going?" Could we say that Gauguin's
questions summarize the goals of anthro¬
pological investigation ?
Absolutely. They were probably also
the first three questions that occurred to
man's earliest conscious mind, what some
recent philosophers have termed "existen¬
tial anguish". This triptych by Gauguin is
so symbolic of these basic questions in our
field that I used it on the cover of a volume
in the series of scientific publications
FRANCIS LEARY
is an American writer and journalist
entitled Les Cahiers de Paléoanthropologie,
which I have edited for fifteen years.
Dinosaurs are a subject ofgreatpopular
interest, these monsters that roamed the
Earth 220 million years ago, persisting
through theJurassic and Cretacious before
disappearing about 70 million years ago.
Various explanations have been advanced
for the extinction ofthe dinosaurs. What is
your viewf
The problem of massive extinction of
species is linked to the different episodes of
Earth's history, such as expansion and con¬
traction of the seas. During the last 500
million years, thirty-five such extinctions
have been known. This means that the
extinction of the dinosaurs, with that of
certain molluscs at the same time, is not an
exception. The meteorite theory of the
"Death Star" crashing into Earth is for me
a romance as big as some dinosaurs! For
cosmic reasons, the position of the Earth
on its parallax and consecutive alterations
of climate mean that the history of life
consists of successive periods of expan¬
sion alternating with periods of slow
decrease or even a quite rapid extinction of
species.
Is it not possible that the very size of
these monsters has influenced theories con¬
cerning their extinction? Afierce carnivore
such as Tyrannosaurus Rex, 15 metres
*L

long, couldn 'tjust quietlyfade away. Surely
some great catastrophe was neededfor its
exit?
I think that you are right. The extinction
of the invertebrates called trilobites 200
million years before, or the disappearance
of the beautiful molluscs, the ammonites,
at the same time as the dinosaurs, have not
inspired such romantic theories.
Are the birds we see today descended
from dinosaurs?
Definitely, yes. The earliest birds known,
the Archaeopteryx, of the UpperJurassic,
were very like dinosaurs, with anatomical
similarities, such as teeth and long savage
claws, to the small dinosaur, Deinonychus,
discovered by Dr. John Ostrom of Yale in
1964. Archaeopteryx, however, was also
warm-blooded, with feathers for insula¬
tion, like birds.
To get the time-scale ofMan 's origins
intofocus, true apes, the very remote ances¬
tors of Man, emerged about 20 million
years ago. Afterseveralmillion more years,
the line ofprimates split, giving rise to
apes such as chimps and gorillas on the
one handandhominids on the other. What
brought about this split, without which
we wouldneverhave existed, at least in our
presentform?
After fifteen years of digging in East
Africa between 1963 and 1978, 1 was sur¬
prised not to have collected any fossil rem¬
nants of chimps or pre-chimps and gorillas
or pre-gorillas among hundreds of thou- I
sands of fossil vertebrates distributed along 1
geological levels dating from eight to one j
million years. In contrast, I found in these j
sites hundreds of hominid remains. As i
molecular biologists and geneticists were j
then claiming that the African apes were j
obviously Man's closest relatives as far as \
the genetic card and proteins were con- Í
cerned, that is, chimps and gorillas were j
cousins and we shared with them common í
ancestors, I thought it interesting to try |
to solve this curious enigma. The African i
apes and ourselves were cousins, yet in the j
field were never found together. )
In 1982, 1 suggested at a conference in I
Rome and subsequently in other places j
and in many papers a model to explain this j

There is a good possibility
that Man had an Australopithecus as
progenitor. But which one? It's not yet
known for sure.
: apparent discrepancy, a model that I called
i "The East Side Story". Just before the split
occurred between apes and hominids, eight
million years ago, our common ancestors
: were living all across Equatorial Africa,
from the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean, in
very low-lying humid country, covered
with a dense forest and wooded areas.
A tectonic event intervened. The Rift
Valley sank 4,000 metres, while its
; périmètre thrust up 4,000 metres, forming
a barrier between west and east. This had
: important ecological consequences. Cut
off from the east, the western region
; between the Rift and the Atlantic remained
\ humid and wooded, while the eastern area
; between the Rift and the Indian Ocean
. became open country, much less humid
: and only seasonally watered by the new¬
born system of monsoons.
Our common ancestors, the apes, were
'- divided into a large western group and a
small eastern one. The western apes, in
; their forested niche, could have been ances-
\ tors of chimps and gorillas, while the
' eastern apes, having to adapt to the new
: open grasslands, could very well have been
the precursors of hominids, Australop-
; ithecus and Homo in succession.
: So that's how our ancestors got down
from the trees.
: They got down because they had 


to!
i With the trees disappearing, they had no
: choice.
Thefossil skeleton ofafemale was dis¬
covered in the Afar Valley ofEthiopia in
1974. Dating from about three million
years, this skeleton was more complete
than that of any previous find. She was
christened "Lucy", after the Beatles' song
Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds. Can
you discuss this Afar expedition and its
significance forpalaeontology?
The Afar palaeontological sites were
found by a French geologist, Maurice
Taieb, in the 1960s. As I knew him well, I
was the first to be consulted and I gave
him the approximate geological age of these
sites, according to the determination of
the fossil remains collected, which was
two to three million years.
In 1972, Taieb organized an expedi¬
tion under international leadership: two
French scientists, Taieb and myself, and
two Americans, Don Johanson and Jon
Kalb, which constituted the International
Afar Research Expedition. We conducted
five field campaigns over a period of six
years. The chief discovery was that of Lucy,
an Australopithecus about three million
years old. It was the first time that such a
complete skeleton from that epoch had
been found and we could as never before
get a good idea of the size of the specimen,
the proportions and how the joints
worked.
In my own lab, I had ten theses done on
this analysis, each one over three years; in
other words a total of thirty years trying to
understand Lucy's behaviour! We finally
created the extraordinary picture of a pre¬
human female, probably twenty years old,
between 1 metre and lm. 20 in height and
weighing 20-25 kilos, with long arms and
short legs. She ate fruit, roots and tubers
and may have had primitive stone tools.
She stood erect and walked as a biped but
with short steps, rolling her shoulders and
hips. With her flat feet and prehensile big
toe, the curved phalanges of her hands and
feet, she was still climbing trees.
Where would you place Lucy in our
family tree?
Lucy was probably a cousin but
descended anyway from one species of
Australopithecus to which we gave the sci¬
entific name Australopithecus afarensis,
which also became the genus Homo that
appeared in East Africa three million years
ago. This appearance was linked to another
environmental event that I had discovered
in 1970 in the sediment of the Omo River
Valley, in southern Ethiopia. That's why,
making a pun, I called it the (H)OMO
event.
Between 3.3 million and 2.4 million
years ago, an important climatic crisis
occurred a prolonged drought. The
number of trees drastically decreased, as we
know from fossils contained in geological
levels of three million to two million years.
The entire fauna altered, trying to adapt to
the changed environment. For hominids,
the genus Homo, with a much larger brain,
was the solution. Poor Lucy had a brain of
only 340 cc, while Homo's brain was 800
cc. Homo was also equipped with a denti¬
tion adapted to a much more varied diet
than that oí Australopithecus.
In 1972 the Kenyan anthropologist
RichardLeakey discovered on the shores of
Lake Turkana in Kenya some hominid
fossils datingfrom about two million years.

These hominidshadwalkederect, "with an
easy striding gait like that of modern
humans." Homo habilis could have been
aprogenitor ofMan, with a brain capacity
of 800 cc, or more than half that ofMan
today.
As the earliest men had been found in
East Africa, where the earliest Australop¬
ithecus had also been found; as australop-
ithecines are the beings with the nearest
resemblance to Man; and as the earliest
australopithecines are older than the earliest
men, there is a good possibility that Man
had an Australopithecus as progenitor. But
which one? It's not yet known for sure.
Australopithecines were vegetarians
and only exceptionally carnivores out of
necessity. Because of the climatic crisis of
three million years ago, the Homo (Homo \
habilis) are both vegetarians and meat- \
eaters; thus, they could very well have been !
the first killers, sometimes scavengers but '
hunters as well.
Controversy over whetherMan inher¬
ited an instinct for killing from ancestors ;
millions ofyears agofirst began with Ray- :
mondDart. This South Africanprofessor of
Anatomy concluded that a skullfound in ;
1924 at Taung near the Kalahari Desert I
was that ofan Australopithecus, sixyears
oldandliving three millionyears ago. The
creature walked erect, with a brain the
size ofa gorilla's. The evidence ofthe teeth
convinced Dart that it had been a carni¬
vore. Was he right?
Dart's interpretation of some animal ;
bones that he associated with Australop- ;
ithecus as tools, called by some writers
"Danifacts", was perhaps partly correct. ;
But now it seems more likely that,
according to the analysis of marks on the
occusal surface of their teeth and the
analysis of the tooth morphology, the aus- -
tralopithecines were vegetarians, not car-
nivores.
One day in Antanarivo, Madagascar, I ;
had to give a lecture on the "Taung baby"
and the organizers of the event had the :
idea of making a large poster with the :
restored image of the Australopithecus
infant. Shortly before the lecture, I saw
two Malgache ladies looking at the poster
and one said to the other, "This lecturer
seems really very young!"
NeanderthalMan, whosefossil was dis¬
covered nearDusseldorfin 1856, was said \
to have descendedfrom Australopithecus
robustus, a slow-brained, heavy-jawed,
plant-eating hominid. Hefadedfrom the
picture, the pace a million years ago too
much for him, but was said to have sur- ,
vived in NeanderthalMan, who hadsome- \

what similar characteristics. Hegave way
in turn to Cro-Magnon Man. What hap¬
pened to NeanderthalMan?
Australopithecus robustus is one of the
answers of the hominid family to the
(H)OMO climatic crisis, that is, a new
Australopithecus, heavier, taller and
stronger, with a very peculiar dentition,
tiny front teeth and enormous molars for
a quite specialized tough vegetarian diet.
And it now seems 


to us urn robustus
became extinct one million years ago.
It seems also that the first Homo,
because a bigger brain had made it more
daring and because of an omnivorous diet,
which made it more mobile, was the first to
expand its territory. These adventurers soon
reached the Middle East from East Africa
and then went on to Europe and Asia, grad¬
ually transforming themselves into what
we used to call Homo erectus and Homo
sapiens, which are not in fact true species.
But the successive glaciations of the
quaternary period, covering the Alps and
Scandinavia as well as Germany and
Poland, isolated the first hominid popula¬
tion. In such a case, a genetic drift hap¬
pens to the population. In western Europe,
Homo habilis became Homo erectus as
elsewhere, but a particular Homo erectus,
already with some Neanderthal features,
and this Homo erectus became Homo
sapiens as elsewhere, but a very distinc¬
tive Homo sapiens that we call Homo
sapiens Neanderthalensis.
So Neanderthal Man is not the descen¬
dant of robustus but is what Homo became
in an island called western Europe. This
genetic drift only came to a stop between
30 and 40,000 years ago, when Homo
sapiens sapiens came from the Middle East
to Western Europe. Otherwise, the Nean¬
derthal phenomenon could have given
birth to a new Humanity, unable to inter¬
breed anymore with the other one, that is,
with Cro-Magnon Man.
Darwin 's thesis ofthe "survival ofthe
fittest" has often been used to justify a
claim to the superiority of white people
over others, blacks and Amerindians, for
example. What do you think about this?
Every scientist, in any discipline, has,
like any layman, more or less preconceived
ideas. Everything is all right as long as such
ideas are just working hypotheses. If these
hypotheses are confirmed, it's fine, but if
they are not, the true scientist must forget
them and change his thinking. That's the
way to recognize a good scientist.
Darwin was an outstanding scientist,
with particularly clear and synthesizing
concepts, but he was quite wrong when he
tried to apply, without any correction, his
conclusions obtained from plants or ani-

mais 


to Man and human societies. He
forgot that Culture interfered, bringing
liberty and responsibility while dramati¬
cally changing the rules.
On entering the Paris Musée de
l'Homme, ofwhich you wereformerly the
director, a large sign tells one to leave "Cul¬
ture" in the cloakroom and concentrate
on the universal biological affinity of
humankind. Yet, as we may see every day
on TV, people can be violently aroused by
bothphysicalandcultural differences, pro¬
ducing outbursts ofrage and hatred.
It's true that there are differences
between people and it's true that people are
often divided by economic, territorial and
religious rivalries, causing violent behav¬
iour. But it's also true that these differ¬
ences are essentially superficial. We are all
Homo sapiens sapiens and share the same
genetic characteristics, separating us from
the apes.
Somepeople have seized upon discov¬
eries in anthropology as demonstrations
ofdivine intervention, on thegrounds that
no scientist has been able to explain fully
the development ofthe human mind, with
all its complexities andachievements. How
does one accountforMan 's unique stature
in the animal kingdom?
The invention of the first stone tools
was an essential stage in Evolution, the
introduction of culture in Nature. My own
expedition in southern Ethiopia found the
earliest tools, 3.3 million years old. After
the natural environment has prevailed for
four billion years, suddenly, three million
years ago, a new environment is created by
a hominid. This changes everything
because Man will respond to the sollicita¬
tions of the natural environment faster
than Nature, adapting to them before
biology does. Thus, biological evolution
will decrease and finally stop.
Man is the only animal to have
"chosen" to develop his nervous system
at this level for his adaptation.
The quest for an explanation beyond
Evolution, born of consciousness and the
effort to reduce the "angoisse existentielle",
is outside the realm of science. The end of
our scientific research is to describe the
world through its history; to find an expla¬
nation of how it works. And the natural
explanation cannot solve the supernatural
question.
Every step in the history of life has
been extraordinary the origin of life itself,
only known for a brief hour in palaeonto-
logical time, the appearance of pericel¬
lular beings and of sexuality, the respiration
of air, the development of vision, of
thought, of speech, the invention of culture.
Thanks to prehistorical studies, we know
about the intermediate steps between the
first tool-maker and Cro-Magnon, as well
as, for example, those between Cro-
Magnon and the civilization of Sumer and
Akkad.
Man is the only animal to have
"chosen" to develop his nervous system at
this level for his adaptation. Other ani¬
mals have chosen the transformation of
their limbs in order to run faster or of their
teeth to improve their diet. A scientific
answer would be: confronted by such an
environmental event, it so happened that
Man adapted to the new conditions by the
development of a big brain, but it might
just as well have been the horse. A philo
sophical response would be: this event
occurred in this area and not elsewhere
and at that time and not at another time and
Man was the member of the animal
kingdom who developed his brain.
Can human nature be so modifiedas to
prevent the extinction ofour race by all-out
war, by the destruction ofourfragile envi¬
ronment, or by runaway demographic
problems?
I must say that I am optimistic. Since the
emergence of consciousness about three
million years ago, humanity has developed
knowledge of itself and of its environment,
losing its primeval instincts and gaining
its liberty. Though formidable individual or
collective problems remain, the way we
are organizing answers to these problems
is very impressive.
Overall, humanity is becoming a
thinking, rational and organized society,
aware of its responsibilities. But it is not
easy: over three million years we have had
to learn to deal with hundreds of thou¬
sands of people, then with millions. Now
we have to cope with billions. Education,
the acquisition of more knowledge, the
colonization of our solar system and, in the
distant future, of other systems will bring
us to a better understanding of our world,
better control of ourselves and of our
planet and an increase in freedom.
