European artist
discovers the salt of the earth
by Jacques Leenhardt
Above, traces left by salt
gatherers on Lake Sayula in
Mexico (600 to 900 A.D.).
Countless are the representations of the
Other, and infinite the choice of ways that
lead to them.
The artist is like the traveller, always tuned
into a world that speaks the language of the body,
of space, of the wind that sweeps through space,
and also the language of vision and light. Before
coming into contact with ideas, an artist embraces
different kinds of matter and things, colours and
sounds.
Lake Sayula is in the Mexican state ofJalisco.
French artist Jean-Charles Pigeau had travelled
the length and breadth of Mexico. He had pitted
himself against El Tajin and the classical grandeur
of Chichén Itzá. He had combed the country
from the Atlantic to the Pacific in his quest for a 45

site where he could install his steel mirrors to
face the sun. He wanted a space that was totally
free of anecdote. Far from the monuments erected
by civilizations, he hoped to discover the very
foundations on which they are based.
He had chosen Mexico so that the light cap¬
tured by his polished parabolas would appear in
its primal, absolute brilliance, in a state somehow
prior to the forms in which man captures and
symbolizes light. Materialized as temples and
pyramids, the light of the Mexican plateau has
already lost what it must have given to monu-
mentality. Pigeau wanted to experience it as the
Indians had known it immemorial and pre¬
dating constructions erected to memory. To that
end he crossed the coast and the plateaux from
cast to west until he reached Jalisco state, where
he saw a lake that reflected the sky.
Gazing at the expanse of Lake Sayula and
the ring of green hills surrounding it, Pigeau
knew he would have to wait until the water fed
by winter rains had evaporated. This landscape,
which he had discovered the previous year, did
not seem to bear the emblematic marks of pre-
Columbian cultures. Yet it was those cultures
that he wished to encounter through his quest for
light. Since it had no pyramids or temples, Lake
Sayula, which dries out each year in the sun, was
the natural product of light. That is why he
returned there. He would have to wait.
Symbolizing the cycle of life,
water and sun
The lake gradually turned into a vast expanse of
silt. In places, the dried crust began to crack.
Soon it would be possible to walk over it without
getting one's feet wet. In a few days' time, Pigeau
would be able to arrange his concave mirrors,
focusing them on a hollow in the mountains bor¬
dering on the Lake Sayula site, very low on the
horizon.


The waters of Lake Sayula are brackish. Pigeau
had not yet realized, but he may have uncon¬
sciously chosen the lake because of that. No veg¬
etation interferes with the perfect plane the lake
waters offer the eye, or the plane formed by the silt
once they have disappeared. On the dried-out
lake, Pigeau was going to ressuscitate, by pointing
his mirrors skywards, the momentarily absent
reflective waters. Thus he would symbolize the
cycle of life, water and sun. He would bring light
and heat back down to earth. With a propitiatory
gesture, he would mimic the birth of our inhab¬
itable world, a thousand leagues from any inhab¬
ited land. Or at least that was what he thought.
But because artists create their ideas solely out
of matter, matter responds to them matter
which has always been informed with the
memory of the people who have worked, trans
formed and inhabited it. Human beings inhabit
matter just as matter inhabits human beings, and
a site is always the form taken by nature when
humans imprint their lives on it.
Meeting the men of salt
The surface of the lake was almost uniformly
cracked. The time to arrange the polished
parabolas on the hardened silt was approaching.
And yet something in the distance disrupted the
harmony. Pigeau moved closer and was clearly
able to make out circles on the ground of almost
exactly the same diameter as his mirrors slightly
concave circles in which the water was taking
longer to dry out. Their circumference was
marked by pottery shards.
Over a thousand years ago, at a time known
to archaeologists as the Sayula period, Indians in
the region had discovered how to exploit the
lake's brackish waters, as Antonio de Ciudad
Real described in his Tratado Curioso y Docto de
la Grandezas de la Nueva España ("A Curious
and Learned Treatise on the Grandeur of New
Spain"). After capturing the salt water in shallow
basins dug in the bottom of the lake, they speeded
up its evaporation by lighting fires and then gath¬
ered the salt.
The circles that Pigeau was looking at were
therefore aquatic hearths, traces of humans who
used nature by thwarting it, by pushing its logic
to extremes through ingenuity and artifice.
That was how Pigeau 's devices came into
contact with those of an ancient Indian civiliza¬
tion. All of a sudden he discovered that this out-
of-the-way expanse had been entirely occupied
by the labour of human beings. After going back
into the past beyond the cultures whose jade
objects and ball games, in full colour photographs,
now adorn coffee-table books, he thought he
had at last found the very origin of his own
. impetus. And now, after moving so far out of line
as to be on the verge of deculturation, he had
found human beings at work, human salt collec¬
tors. The people of Sayula did more than collect
salt, they shaped it. They made cakes of it and
modelled figures with it "men of salt", in
Antonio de Ciudad Real's words heads of salt,
busts of salt and thousands of other figures. That
was how the Indians created a world out of the
primal silt that had been doomed by the brackish
waters of the lake to remain barren.
Taking his time, because such encounters
encourage one to see everything in the context of
eternity, Pigeau laid out his parabolas next to the
Indian hearths. The sunlight allowed itself to be
captured with the same benevolence it has shown
in drying out the lake since the beginning of
time, so that the artist in each of us can make
statues of salt and light parabolas.
French artist Jean-Charles
Pigeau's parabolic mirrors on
the parched bed of Lake Sayula.
JACQUES LEENHARDT,
of France, is a professor at the
Ecole des Hautes Etudes en
Sciences Sociales in Paris and
president of the International
Association of Art Critics (AICA)
and of Crestet Art Centre
(Vaucluse, France). Among his
published works are Les
Amériques latines en France
(1992) and Dans les jardins de
Roberto Burle Marx (1994).
