the ribald scholar
byAlain Frontier
Thisyear marks the 500th anniversary ofthe birth of
the French writerFrançois Rabelais, hailed by his compatriot
Chateaubriand as "one ofthe nurturinggeniuses ofhumanity".
The earthy, exuberant universe that he created has lost none ofits
liberatingpower.
anniversary
44
Not even the French can get over the idea
that their literature should have spawned so
vast and overwhelming awriter as Rabelais.
They still regard him with a sort of bemused
incredulity.
The little that is known about his life is strange
enough as it is. We know that he was born near
Chinon in western France in the closingyears of the
fifteenth century and that he died in Paris around
1553. We also know that he was a monk. He must
have been an odd kind ofmonk, attracted more by
study than by monastic life, spending his days
devouring books, including some which the arbiters
of the intellectual and moral order of the time
regarded as suspect. Flis reading was not only in
Latin, the language of the clergy and the Church, but
also in Greek, a language dear to adepts of the new
thinking, and Hebrew, which made it possible to
read the Bible without having to go through Latin
translations and official commentaries. This rather
unorthodox monk seems to have been protected by
people in high places, where enthusiasm for new
ideas can sometimes be found. After his Greek
books had been confiscated on the orders of the
Sorbonne, he found a haven in a Benedictine
monastery, whose library was more congenial and
whose abbot was more accommodating. Eventually
he was authorized to shed his monk's habit and
was released from his vows.
All through his life, he corresponded and
debated with the leading intellectual lights of the
age, men such as Guillaume Budé, Erasmus and
Thomas More. Very much a man of his time, he
was deeply involved in the current ofrenewal which
ushered in more critical attitudes and a greater
sense of freedom, truth and beauty. He travelled. He
studied medicine at Montpellier, became a famous
doctor and was for several years head of the hospital
in Lyons. It was then that Rabelais, the man of sci¬
ence and culture, became known not for learned
treatises and scholastic works but for his folâtries,
the collections of fantastic and very funny tales
published under the titles of Horribles et épou¬
vantablesfaits et prouesses du très renommé Pan¬
tagruel (\52>2) orthe Vie inestimable du grand Gar¬
gantua, père de Pantagruel (1534). In these stories
erudition rubs shoulders with barefaced humour,
and folly and wisdom are to be found in equal mea¬
sure. Rabelais' characters are giants not only in
size but in wit. Their appetite for fleshmeat and
knowledge is boundless, and so is their thirst for
strong drink! Wise men or lunatics, scholars or
jokers, they spend all their time drinking and have
the uncanny power to provoke the same alcoholic
thirst in everybody they meet.
Even at their most serious, the tales are liable to
cause a great eruption ofbelly laughter. Everything
is good for a laugh Rabelais was never one to
dally over the daintier aspects of language or to
Francois Rabelais
(c.1494-1553). Drawing by an
unknown 16th-century artist.
Gargantua à Paris, an
illustration by the French artist
Albert Robida (1842-1926).

"Better to write of
laughter than
tears,
For laughter is
proper to man"
Rabelais
"Gargantua at his great board",
detail from an early-19th-
century engraving based on a
play inspired by Rabelais' work
and performed in the Tuileries
Gardens in Paris.
mince his words. He uses a staggeringly rich vocab¬
ulary, ranging from the recondite to the demotic,
from the most picturesque of evocations to the
crudest slang. Too bad ifchaste ears are offended by
crude jokes or obscene language. Rabelais' laughter
propels his sentences along at a breathtaking pace,
as the sounds collide with one another and set off
reverberations, to the extent that they sometimes
cloak the actual words he uses. The sentences go on
and on, before disappearing in a torrent of enu¬
merations that sweeps away both the words and the
music they make.
Rabelais is a laughing cavalier of philosophy.
This is the problem. What relationship can there be
between this booming laughter and this universal
intelligence? Rabelais was blessed with the mar¬
vellous gift ofbeing able to give expression to values
such as love of freedom, tolerance, thirst for knowl¬
edge, and faith in progress that are so precious and
essential to us. But through this laughter, he also
seems to be taking away with one hand what he
gives with the other. There may therefore be a great
temptation to cut the man in two, to look at the man
of laughter on one side and the man of ideas on the
other; on the one hand the verve of the writer, on the
other the ideas of the philosopher.
Even in the eyes ofhis contemporaries, Rabelais
was more than just a public jester. This can be
clearly seen from the attacks directed at him by
the Sorbonne. A clown would not have been so
unrelentingly pursued. Rabelais made people feel
ill at ease. They could not be indifferent to the crit¬
icism he levelled against the Church and the courts,
against ideas about education, against the insti¬
tutions ofofficial thinking. People could not coun¬
tenance his lack of respect for those whose function
is to be taken seriously.
In reality, the funny, crazy side ofhis books is not
merely an agreeable wrapping for the austere con¬
tent of the message. What Rabelais had to teach us
is that laughter is necessary in the quest for truth.
There is nothing more serious than laughter at
least Rabelais' sort of laughter. It is a weapon to be
used against people who take themselves too seri¬
ously. It makes fissures in the walls ofobscurantism.
It prevents thought from becoming set in certain¬
ties. It is what makes thought possible. Rabelais
always kept his eyes wide open and his ears to the
ground. He listened to all kinds ofvoices, languages,
cultures and worlds. He said, "I want to make sure
that there is no sea or river or fountain whose fish
you do not know. . ., all the birds of the air, all the
trees of the forest, all the blades of grass, all the
metals hidden deep in the bowels of the earth . . .
that there is nothing that you do not know".
There can be no thought without this freedom,
this feeling for movement, and open-mindedness.
The laughter of Rabelais makes them possible.
ALAIN FRONTIER,
a French poet and grammarian,
is the author of several
introductory works to classical
Greek and a dozen volumes of
poetry and fiction. Among his
most recent published works is
La Poésie (Belin publishers,
Paris, 1992).
45
