Historians
should eschew
the role of
prophecy and
myth-making
Myths that die hard
by Henryk Samsonowicz
Above, a ceremony held
in the church of St.
Stanislas In Warsaw in
1983 to mark the third
anniversary of the Gdansk
agreements which led to
the creation of the
"Solidarity" trade union.
IN eastern Europe, historical materialism had
a dual role: first to demonstrate that all
changes must inevitably lead to world com¬
munism, and secondly to justify the political
activities of the moment and, in particular, the
reasons for whatever policy was pursued by
Moscow at any given time.
In Poland, this doctrine was supposed to
"explain" both the territories annexed from
Germany after the Second World War and the
territories lost to the U.S.S.R. in the east. It also
led to certain manipulations (comical, to say
the least) of Poland's past. For example, Casimir
III the Great, who ruled in the fourteenth cen¬
tury, was downgraded in the official textbooks,
where he was designated by the figure "HI"
because he had annexed part of Ukraine to
Poland and abandoned Pomerania to the Teu¬
tonic Knights. After 1956, Casimir was par
tially rehabilitated but suspicion of him
remained strong. Depending on whether or not
they justified the gradual progress of mankind
towards communism, historical figures,
processes and actions were decreed to be either
"progressive", meaning good, or "retrograde",
meaning bad.
However, as the institutional crisis gathered
momentum, attempts to impose such crude
views of the more distant past were gradually
abandoned. The situation in regard to recent
history was quite different, however. For
example, it was forbidden to write about the
massacre of Polish prisoners of war by the Rus¬
sians at Katyn, the bloody repression of the
Stalin era, the civil war in Poland after 1945,
the war against the Ukrainians or the anti-Semi¬
tism that was rife during the events of 1968.
Similarly, it was extremely difficult to publish

In October 1956, during
the rising in Budapest
(Hungary), demonstrators
climb on a Soviet tank in
front of parliament.
24
HENRYK SAMSONOWICZ,
of Poland, teaches medieval
history in Warsaw.
anything at all about controversial popular fig¬
ures such as Marshal Józef Pilsudski in Poland,
Jozef Tiso in Slovakia or Imre Nagy in Hungary.
Black legend, white legend
This state of affairs confirmed the physical law
that action and reaction are equal and oppo¬
site. Fighting to preserve its identity, civil society
was to create a mythology of history: there
would be a "white legend" as well as a "black
legend". In Poland Marshal Pilsudski (1867-
1935) never enjoyed such popularity in his life¬
time as he did under the regime of martial law
proclaimed after 1981. There were three rea¬
sons for this. First, he had achieved victory in the
war against Russia in 1920. Secondly, he was
the symbolic figure of the political generation
that had succeeded in restoring the state after the
First World War. Thirdly, he was perceived as a
politician who stood for the sovereignty and
independence of Poland. The opinion that
society formed of him was of course based on
what was known at the time about the history of
the inter-war years, but it also reflected a genuine
collective need and the country's profound
desire to see its dignity asserted.
This reaction to the official version encour¬
aged a search for truth in the old textbooks that
had been used before the days of the communist
regime. The nineteenth-century historians were
particularly highly thought of by readers. The
Lithuanians, the Poles, the Czechs and the Slo¬
vaks did not acquire their own state until after
the First World War, while the Bulgarians, the
Romanians and the Hungarians only achieved
independence in the nineteenth century after a
long period of subjection. In every case in which
a national community did not have its own
state, history played an essential compensatory
role. Real or imagined, made up of facts but
also of myths, history reflected a search for
identity and was often positioned in relation to
a Utopian golden age. That is why historical lit¬
erature written at a time of subjection to "com¬
fort men's hearts" became popular again during
the period of Soviet domination.
Witnesses for the prosecution
However, this "idealizing" current also endeav¬
oured to absorb what were known as the "blank
spots", the parts of the past that had been deleted
from official history. The human hecatomb sac¬
rificed to the October Revolution, the war of
independence between Poland and Russia, the
mass deportations and massacres perpetrated
against the Poles in the days of Stalin, the total
indifference the Soviet authorities had shown
towards the desperate Warsaw insurrection
those were just some of the subjects raised by the
opposition and followed with interest by the
whole of society at a time when they were passed
over in silence or distorted by the authorities.
In any case, those who had taken part in the
events of the recent past were still alive. Their
role had been diminished or falsified, but their
testimony was too important to be completely
ignored. These people provided knowledge of
the "blank spots" through their activities and
through their writings, which were circulated by
the only independent institution in Poland, the
Catholic church. The number of these actors and
witnesses of the history of the immediate past
grew rapidly as the crises of the communist
system proliferated Berlin in 1953, Budapest
in 1956 and Prague in 1968. In Poland, social dis¬
content erupted on several occasions. There
was street fighting in 1956 between the army and
workers in Poznan, student uprisings against
censorship and police methods used by the
authorities in 1968; bloody repression of the
workers' demonstrations at Gdansk in 1970;
more workers' demonstrations at Radom and
Warsaw in 1976.
Each of these crises led to changes, some¬
times substantial, in the government (this was
both a warning to the rulers and a source of
hope to the ruled), and also swelled the ranks of
active opposition militants belonging to suc¬
cessive generations of Poles. The light these
militants threw on events was naturally quite dif¬
ferent from the official interpretation.
The great Solidarnosc (Solidarity) movement
in 1980 was the most striking illustration of this
CONTINUED ON PAGE 3 1 »

CONTINUED FROM PACE 14
In April 1943 German
troops discovered in the
Katyn forest (Russia) mass
graves of thousands of
Polish officers executed by
the Soviet security
authorities. Below,
identifying the dead.
phenomenon. Almost all the participants in pre¬
vious movements were involved in it and made
no secret of their commitment. Several million
people were now in active opposition. The
proclamation of a "state of war" by the gov¬
ernment led to a definitive break between "offi¬
cial history" and "true history", as the majority
of the population called it.
Démythification
When the communist system collapsed in 1989,
the vision of the past that it had imposed col¬
lapsed with it. The history created by living
people and the versions which had "comforted
men's hearts" in previous years now came to the
fore again. Genuine scientific historiography
also experienced a fresh dynamic.
There were several reasons for this. The first
is based on the national and international pres¬
tige enjoyed by Polish historical science. Since
the nineteenth century, Polish society has held
its historians in high esteem. Also, the
researchers into ancient and recent history
included men who were known for their oppo¬
sition activities, so that all the more trust was
placed in them. People were more willing to
accept from them theories which were still not
popular. In addition, the participation of Polish
historians in international research and their
co-operation with universities in many countries
increased their credibility when they wrote the
history of their nation.
Polish researchers have long drawn on the
cultural anthropology of scholars such as Claude
Lévi-Strauss and Georges Dumézil. They had
taken part in programmes to apply the principles
of Fernand Braudel's universal history and
exploited the theories of American, German
and English researchers.
The second reason is equally, if not more,
important. Institutional change had led to the
abolition of anti-democratic constraints. Once
freedom of expression was regained, censor¬
ship abolished and "ideologization" of the past
ended, the conditions for genuine scientific
work once again existed. Moreover, Polish
society had acquired its own state, laws and
institutions. There was no longer any need to
resort to an idealized image of the past to glorify
national identity.
Hence the rewriting of history in Poland, as
elsewhere in eastern Europe, is defined by three
main features. First, the rejection of a single point
of view in other words, of an official version of
history. Secondly, the possibility of writing about
the past without neglecting any of its aspects, a
feature that implies the authorization of public
debate in a spirit of complete critical freedom, not
so much about the existence of the facts as about
their interpretation. Thirdly, the abandonment of
the idea of history as a substitute for public insti¬
tutions and as a way of providing the nation with
a sense of identity. Historiography must abandon
the role of prophecy and myth-making and
devote its energies instead to the analysis of his¬
torical processes. Society and historical science
will both be all the richer.
31
