One and indivisible
The dangers ofan à la carte approach to human rights by Antoine Bernard
/Xbove, meeting of
women in Ghana to discuss
the development of their
village.
SINCE the adoption in 1948 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the principle
of the indivisibility of the rights of the indi¬
vidual has become, along with the principle of
universality, the pivot of the present interna¬
tional system for the protection of such rights.
Indivisibility means that the corpus of inter¬
national standards forms a coherent whole, of
which the different parts are indissociable in
their conception and their application.
Its raison d'être is, as set forth in Article 28
of the Declaration, that: "Everyone is entitled to
a social and international order in which the
rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration
can be fully realized".
Indivisibility means first and foremost a
refusal to accept the view that certain rights
should take precedence over others, a view that
would allow the most pernicious ideologies,
whether spiritual or temporal, to go about their
abject business. It also insists that there can be
neither development without democracy nor
democracy without development. It is a way
of preventing human rights from becoming an
empty shell, leaving people without the eco¬
nomic, social, cultural, civil and political means
to enable them to live in dignity.
Although the principle of indivisibility has
been constantly reaffirmed by the successive
resolutions and other international instruments
adopted by UN bodies over a period of decades,
it has never been given a more precise definition
in international law.
The obvious explanation for this lack of pre¬
cision is to be found in the divergences, within
a pluralistic, imbalanced and even profoundly

antagonistic international society, in the political,
economic and cultural interests for which the



principle of indivisibility is both the instrument
and the point at issue.
The World Conference on Human Rights
confirmed that this is the case, since conflicts of
interests arose both during the two years of its
preparation and over its final declaration, which
turned out to be a lukewarm document. The
principle of the indivisibility of individual rights
was reaffirmed, but in terms that leave scope for
the restrictive interpretations of those who
uphold so-called "religious and cultural rela¬
tivism". On the other hand, the sanction given
to the right to development provides grounds for
hoping that the United Nations family will take
a greater interest in the protection of economic
and social rights.
A single human community
Some governments launched an out-and-out
offensive against the indivisibility principle,
seeing the opening of Pandora's box in Vienna
as an excellent opportunity to justify supposedly
divinely inspired practices and to release them¬
selves from the obligation to respect interna¬
tional principles that are decidedly too much of
a hindrance to their repressive activities.
On the opening day of the conference, UN
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros Ghali in fact
presented the double issue of indivisibility and
cultural diversity as being the guest of honour at
the conference and tried, with a diplomatic nod
in that direction, to get round the obstacle. "While
human rights are common to all members of the
international community," he explained, "and
each member of that community recognizes him¬
self in them, each cultural epoch has its own spe¬
cial way of helping to implement them."
In any case, he continued, "human rights ... are
not the lowest common denominator among all
nations, but rather what I should like to describe
as the 'irreducible human element', in other words,
the quintessential values through which we affirm
together that we are a single human community."
This was not a view shared by some gov¬
ernments of the South, which were unenthusi-
astic about accepting the existence of universal
standards for the protection of human rights.
These governments had some success at Vienna,
starting with the reservations expressed
regarding the principles of the indivisibility and
universality of human rights. The elimination of
the condemnation of religious extremism that
had featured in the draft of the final declaration
was another victory for them.
Although consensus was finally reached on
the reaffirmation of the principle of indivisi¬
bility, its ambiguity threatens to legitimize atti¬
tudes that are sometimes far removed from the
universal culture of human rights, and in par-
Workers on a Rwanda
tea plantation wait to
receive their pay.

ticular to give surreptitious endorsement to so-
called "cultural relativism".
Development
and solidarity
Respect for economic and social rights was
another subject at the heart of the debate on
the indivisibility of human rights.



Three years after the fall of the Berlin Wall,
the Conference provided the countries of the
South with an opportunity to raise their voices
in some cases not without ulterior motives to
demand that the international system direct its
attention first and foremost to economic and
social rights.
The reticence displayed by many Western
countries in this regard in the run-up to the
Conference suggested that a North-South con¬
frontation might be on the cards. The demand
made by some countries of the North for the
indivisible application of human rights indeed
appears hypocritical to the nations of the South,
so long as the North remains indifferent to the
huge problems caused by the pauperization of
80 per cent of the planet.
By insisting on the indivisibility of human
rights without practising solidarity as a veri¬
table duty, the Western powers ultimately make
themselves accomplices of austerity policies that
have dramatic social consequences and result
in repressive regimes remaining in power.
Furthermore, the emergence of counter¬
vailing forces such as the many human rights
organizations that have sprung up in the South
in recent years is often like the precipitate
introduction of a multi-party system no more
than window dressing hiding rampant corrup¬
tion among the political authorities.
In this context, the confirmation at Vienna of
the right to development as a "universal and
inalienable" human right (paragraph 10 of Sec¬
tion I of the Declaration) is evidence of a new
awareness on the part of the Western countries,
the United States in particular, since this was the
first time they had recognized such a right. It in
any case represents a step forward that must
now be given substance.
To that end, it is imperative that several con¬
ditions be met: the rights of the individual must
be scrupulously respected in the context of mul¬
tilateral and bilateral aid; the debt crisis must be
resolved; the right to a healthy environment
must be respected; and a struggle must be waged
against corruption and the fraudulent self-
enrichment of those in power. In other words,
the human being must be put back at the centre
of the development process.
On the level of principles, the Vienna Dec¬
laration proclaims democracy, development and
respect for human rights to be "interdependent
and mutually reinforcing" (paragraph 8). It also
stipulates that, in this context, "the lack of devel¬
opment may not be invoked to justify the
abridgement of internationally recognized
human rights" (paragraph 10).
At the same time the Declaration calls upon
the international community "to help alleviate the
external debt burden of developing countries"
(paragraph 12). It also reaffirms that "the least
developed countries committed to the process of
democratization and economic reforms, many of
which are in Africa, should be supported" (para¬
graph 9), and it comes down against strings-
attached development aid (". . . the promotion and
protection of human rights . . . should be universal
and conducted without conditions attached",
paragraph 8).
Everyone was pleased that a consensus was
reached on all these points and that the Vienna
Conference therefore did not give rise to the
North-South clash that the run-up had sug¬
gested might happen. .
Let us not delude ourselves, however: each
interest group got what it wanted out of the Con¬
ference, and only the exhaustive application of
itsin fact very modest Programme of Action
will make it possible to tell whether it marks the
start of a convergence of political wills in favour
of respect for the right to development as a human
right indissociable from the rest.
Street scene in Portugal,
1 974, when the "Junta of
National Salvation"
came to power and put an
end to the regime founded
by Antonio de Oliveira
Salazar.
ANTOINE BERNARD,
of France, is executive
secretary of the International
Federation of Human Rights,
an international non¬
governmental organization
which has consultative status
with the United Nations,
Unesco and the Council of
Europe, and observer status
with the African Commission
on Human and Peoples' Rights.
17
