orest
rovers of
the Amazon
by Howard Reid
The Maku of Amazonia enjoy roaming
through the tropical forest and resist
efforts to settle them down
rVlaku village-life in Colombia. I The Maku are a highly mobile group of
; Amazonian indigenous peoples who live
in the rainforests of the northwest Amazon in
Colombia and Brazil. Their territories stretch
discontinuously from the northwest fringes of
the rainforest around the river Guaviare in
Colombia to the forests lying between the rivers
Japura and Negro in Brazil, a distance of about
1,000 kms from one end to the other. There are
six named sub-groups of the Maku, a word
which has been imposed by outsiders and can be
equated with the English term "Gypsy", each
speaking a dialect of the Maku language family.
All the Maku live in the rainforest itself,
away from the network of large rivers which
weave through this area. The riversides are
mostly occupied by ethnically distinct indige¬
nous peoples or by white colonists. Both these
latter groups live mainly by growing food crops
and by fishing, while the Maku of the forests rely
heavily on hunting, fishing and gathering. How¬
ever, they do also grow crops, albeit on a much
smaller scale than their riverside neighbours.
The Maku move around a great deal. Every
day the men or women of any group will take off
into the forest in search of game, fish, nuts,
fruit, insects or raw materials for making baskets,
weapons, houses in fact almost everything
they need to survive comes from the forest.
Most Maku groups have a "base" village or
longhouse with small gardens nearby from
which they make their daily sorties into the
forest, but everyone also spends weeks or
months each year living in camps inside the
forest proper. The location of these camps varies
according to seasonal rhythms and the ripening
of fruit and nuts, movements of game animals,
water levels in streams and so on.
Sometimes an entire group will go to camp in
the forest together, sometimes just a few families. 25

"Freedom of
movement tends to
produce egalitarian
political systems
if there are no rules
saying that you
must remain under
the control of the
head of your group,
political life
remains in essence
voluntary. If a
leader abuses his
authority, he is very
likely to find
himself without a
group to lead."
Making curare, a substance
made from plants which
paralyses the motor nerves and
is used as an arrow poison by
the Maku.
When camps are going to be short only two or



three days then usually only men and older
boys go. On longer camps of a week or more the
people usually move camp-site every few days.
Forest camps are a time of intense work for
the men, who hunt and fish from before dawn
until dusk. Their aim is not just to get enough
food to feed everyone, but to build up a tem¬
porary surplus of meat and fish which will be
used for ritual purposes or traded to the river¬
side peoples. The choice of where people go
and for how long depends on many factors,
including the kind of food desired, the time of
year, and the state of rivers and streams. At any
one time any Maku man or family has a wide
range of choice in these matters, and it is quite
normal for each family in a residential group to
split up and go, all at the same time, to different
parts of the forest in search of different products.
For the women, forest camps are a welcome
change from the drudgery of the daily routine of
farming and the processing of food which fills
their days in the "base" village. In the cool of the
forest shade they collect vines to weave bas¬
kets, or gather ants, termites or caterpillars to eat,
and relax and play with their children at the
camp-site.
Working on the move is fun, working in
the same place is a bore
The Hupdu Maku, with whom I lived for two
years, have two contrasting words for the activ¬
ities they perform. "Bu'ui" means to work, that
is to clear gardens, build houses or make tools.
26
This is generally considered to be disagreeable.
The other word is "Get Ko'ai" which roughly
means "to cruise in the forest". You may be
fishing, hunting, foraging or just keeping an
eye on what's going on, but everyone agrees
that "Get Ko'ai" is a pleasant and valued way to
spend your time. So at a very basic level working
on the move is fun, while working in a fixed
place house or garden is irksome.
Besides moving around in pursuit of food the
Hupdu Maku also like to go and visit relatives.
They live in small dispersed groups (one to five
families, six to about forty individuals), and
there are always close kin in neighbouring
groups. The arrival of visitors is an exciting
moment. The sharp-eyed children are usually the
first to call out, "People are coming!" when vis¬
itors arrive, and then everyone in the house
rushes to see who it is. Once the guests have
entered the house, been shown where to sit and
been given something to eat and drink, every res¬
ident greets them by asking them, "Have you
arrived?" The reply is, "Yes, I have arrived, are
you here?". The hosts reply that they are here,
both parties thus affirming that it is indeed they
who are greeting each other and not some malig¬
nant spirits masquerading as people.
The Nukak Maku in Colombia are the most
mobile of all the Maku, and probably the most
mobile people in South America. Every three-
to-ten days they abandon their banana-leaf shel¬
ters and walk for a few kilometres through the
forest to a new camp-site. Although they have
small gardens in the forest, they do not use them
as "bases" with more permanent houses in them
as the other Maku do. We are not yet certain of
the reasons for this extremely high level of
mobility, but the Nukak were hostile to out¬
siders until very recently. For at least two cen¬
turies their region has been subjected to slave
raiding, and more recently rubber gatherers,
cattle ranchers and cocaine growers have tried to
penetrate their lands. This has resulted in several
massacres, isolated killings and outbreaks of
epidemics. I am sure that the Nayak realize that
it is much safer to keep on the move in these cir¬
cumstances.
The Maku not only move as individuals,
families or groups, they also very often move
between groups. For them, as for many other
nomads, people are free to choose where and
with whom they spend their time.
Searching for clues in a forest of dreams
The Maku love the world they live in. I have
often walked through the forest with old men
who would call to birds or monkeys just for the
pleasure of hearing them answer back. Talking
to the animals makes them laugh. A big game

The base village or longhouse
of the Baras, a Maku group
living in Colombia.
kill, the discovery of honey or trees laden with
fruits or nuts are occasions of great joy. In their
dreams the Maku rove through the forest
searching for clues to dream of tobacco leaves
is to find wild pigs (peccary) as their noses are the
same shape as the leaves. A hunter will search for
and sometimes find peccary after such a dream.
The forest lives deep inside them and moving
around it is a way of keeping it alive within
them as well as deriving sustenance from it.
It is utterly wrong to say that nomads only
move around because they have to. It is even
more wrong to suggest that they would stop
doing so if they could find other ways to subsist.
The Maku, for example, have for decades had
sufficient tools to clear big gardens and live
more sedentary lives, but they do not want to.
The Tuareg speak of houses as "the tombs of the
city dwellers".
In the rainy season of 1975 there was a lot of
heavy rain and the streams overflowed their
banks, washing away the fish population and
making it difficult to get around in the forest.
There was little game and the hunters had no
luck. One morning a young man shot a yellow
agouti, a long-legged rodent, which weighed
about one kilo. Bringing it home he gave it to his
older brother, the leader of the group, who
pointedly did not offer any of it to the three fam¬
ilies who had been staying for the past month,
nor to his mother's brother, although he was a
resident member of the group.
Failing to share meat is the worst crime imag¬
inable to the Maku, so the offended parties
stormed out of the house, muttering about the
rudeness of the leader. A week later a drinking
party took place and when all were getting
drunk a scuffle broke out, there was a lot of
shouting and all those who had been denied the
agouti meat stormed out of the house, setting fire
to the shelter a guest family had been staying in
as a protest.
The guests returned to their own base village
and the mother's brother set up a base in an old
garden of his about three hours' walk away. A
year later all were on friendly terms again, but
the ex-resident never returned to live with that
group.
Being able to move is therefore an extremely
important mechanism in dispute settlement for
the Maku, and for most other nomad groups.
Freedom of movement also tends to produce
egalitarian political systems if there are no rules
saying that you must remain under the control of
the head of your group, political life remains in
essence voluntary. If a leader abuses his authority
he is very likely to find himself without a group
to lead. The Maku are extremely opposed to
other Maku giving them orders and will simply
leave if one person gets too bossy.
This is not a question of the absence of social
hierarchies or inability to develop them, as found
in property-based societies. It is a positive inten¬
tion not to let inequality develop in the first
place.
When the Maku stopped moving
In the 1970s Salcsian missionaries in the Upper
Rio Negro, Brazil, stepped up their pressure
on the Hupdu Maku to stop wandering in the
forest and build permanent settlements sur¬
rounded by large gardens, with a chapel and a
school. They "invited" six or more Maku local
HOWARD REID,
British film-maker, author and
anthropologist, is currently
Simon Fellow in Visual
Anthropology at the University of
Manchester. He lived with the
Maku between 1974 and 1976,
and revisited them in 1989 and
1992. He has also lived with
and made films on the Khazaks
(China), the Maasai (Kenya) and
the Tuareg in Niger.
27

groups to come together in this task, at a stroke
creating villages of 120-150 people. The mis¬
sionaries' intermediaries in this policy were
local riverside people who effectively ordered
the Maku to comply. Several sites were selected,
with the eventual aim of concentrating all the
Maku there (they were then living in about
thirty-eight separate communities). As incentives
the missionaries offered them handouts of
clothes and manioc flour to tide them over until
their new gardens began to yield.
All the main concentration villages share a
very similar subsequent history which was
roughly as follows. For a few months the Maku
were interested. There was a lot of unpleasant
"Bu" (work) to do, and not enough "Get Koai"
(cruising or foraging), but there was free food,
clothes and the strange missionaries to watch.
Within months, however, tensions began to
mount. All the game for several hours' walk
around the concentration villages was hunted
out and the streams stripped of fish.
After six months the missionaries went away
for a break. The Maku then brewed a big batch
of manioc beer and a large-scale brawl ensued.
The people broke up into their old small groups



and dispersed throughout the forest. Hearing of
this, the missionaries sent out the riverside
teachers to round up the Maku and bring them
back to the concentration village. The mis¬
sionaries banned parties, dancing and the
brewing and drinking of alcohol. The Maku
remained, especially those who were keen for
their children to learn a little Portuguese,
28
reading, writing and basic arithmetic. But life
was not good there.
Pooh, a Maku friend, summed up the mis¬
sion experience in this way: "The priests come
here and they tell us to stop drinking beer and
dancing and playing our sacred trumpets. This
is like a man coming to us and taking all our food
away. What should we do? Without food,
without music there is no movement in the
world. People are sad, become sick and die."
How should we meet the needs of
nomads?
Countless other tales from all round the world
could be told of the sufferings of nomadic people
forced to stop travelling by outsiders of superior
military, political or economic strength. I have
never come across a case of nomads who want
to abandon their nomadism. Nomads not only
need to move, they like to move.
However, most governments feel that the
only way to protect nomads is to pin them to the
ground so they can be counted, taught, vacci¬
nated, taxed and the like. Yet, the few experi¬
ments which have been tried out in bringing
these services to nomads on the move have
proved highly successful. It is not difficult to
provide mobile medical aid and vaccination pro¬
grammes, even in tropical rainforests.
Education presents more problems, but it is
far from impossible, especially if the people
themselves are motivated and want to learn.
Once basic educational skills have been
implanted in the people themselves they will
be able to teach and travel with minimal support.
Many young Maku parents regret that they
cannot speak Portuguese or Spanish, do not
know how to handle money and are therefore
exploited. However, they do not wish to sacri¬
fice their way of life as the price to pay for being
able to understand what's being said on their
riverside neighbour's satellite TV set.
The last and perhaps most important factor
is land. The world's remaining nomads occupy
the most marginal lands on the planet deserts,
rainforests, tundra and steppe. These rugged
and beautiful wildernesses are, however, hardly
the most fertile places on Earth. For people to
survive without radically altering these envi¬
ronments they need a lot of space. It is essential
that nomads be granted proper title to their
lands and that this title should extend to the
subsoil. Extractive industries have caused hor¬
rendous suffering to nomadic peoples from the
Arctic to Australia. Only with secure land rights
can nomads both continue to move and choose
in what ways they wish to engage with the rest
of humanity.
Left, a hallucinogenic drug
used in rituals is being prepared
from plants.
