NGOs: thefight to be heard
by Sophie Bessis
The non-governmental organizations were a force to be reckoned with at Vienna
12
SOPHIE BESSIS,
who has Tunisian and French
nationality, is a historian and
journalist. A contributor to
several French newspapers and
magazines, she has written
mainly on the economic
problems of the Third World,
development problems and
the Maghreb. Among her
recent publications are
Les enfants du Sahel
(L'Harmattan, Paris, 1 992) and,
with Souhayr Belhassen,
Femmes du Maghreb, l'enjeu
0--C. Lattes, Paris, 1992).
INTERNATIONAL conferences are not what
they used to be. The atmosphere in which
they once used to meet, with diplomats
coming together to settle the affairs of the world
away from prying eyes, is a thing of the past. The
veterans of past UN jamborees who met at the
World Conference on Human Rights had to
reconcile themselves to rubbing shoulders with
new players they were not used to consorting
with.
Dishevelled demonstrators carrying plac¬
ards daily crowded the forecourt of the Austria
Center, venue of the conference, to defend the
rights of those we never hear about: yellow-
robed Buddhist priests demanding the right to
practise their religion; American Indians in
colourful headdresses proclaiming their exis¬
tence to the world; women from every land
demanding at last to be treated like human
beings; associations of street-children; peasants,
Kurds, Bosnians the whole of humanity in its
richness and variety had foregathered for the
occasion in the Austrian capital.
The presence en masse of all kinds of non¬
governmental organizations (NGOs) on the
very spot where an official conference was taking
place not only lent colour to the occasion but
marked a new era in the history of the United
Nations and international relations. For non¬
governmental organizations to take part in meet¬
ings of this kind is of course nothing new: they
had earlier made their voices heard loud and
clear at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in
June 1992. There, however, nearly twenty-five
miles separated the official conference from the
NGOs' forum. In Vienna, government repre¬
sentatives and the spokespersons of ordinary
citizens worked in the same building. This jux¬
taposition is surely more than just a coinci¬
dence: it may even mean that from now on
nothing can be done without the latter.
Never before' had organizations representing
civil society been so closely associated with the
preparations for a world conference. They were
present at all the preliminary regional sessions,
and managed to voice the views of the walk-on
players who are all too often muzzled. On the tra¬
ditional "Prepcoms", the preparatory commis¬
sions set up to compile the working papers, they
fought tooth and nail for their existence to be rec¬
ognized and for the right to speak. At Vienna they
at last showed their determination to stop being
bit-part players and to have real speaking parts in
discussions with government representatives.
A voice for civil society
The theme of human rights certainly lent itself
thereto better than any other, given that for
decades the only protests against the high-hand¬
edness of dictatorial regimes and the hypocrisy
of the old democracies, always ready to point the
finger at their enemies and connive at the turpi¬
tude of their allies, had come from associations
such as national human rights leagues and inter¬
national organizations campaigning against the
systematic violation of human rights.
If they had decided to exclude them, the
organizers would have disqualified themselves
in the eyes of world public opinion at the outset.
They therefore opted to let them join in their
proceedings, over the objections of those most
strongly opposed to their participation.
This massive presence of NGOs at Vienna
was certainly not the outcome of a consensus
among the UN Member States, many of whom
clashed with all comers in an attempt to deny the
podium to those who had come to denounce
dictatorships and massacres, pinpoint those
responsible and secure a hearing for their myriad
victims. So there were battles first in the "Prep¬
coms" and then at Vienna itself, where much of
the discussion consisted of wrangling about the
place to be allotted to the NGOs. Between their
demands and the obstacles erected by certain
states that carry weight in the South, the Con¬
ference secretariat sought tirelessly to reach
compromises in their favour.

End of the century (1993),
sculpture in Carrara
marble by the Argentine
artist Eugenia Wolfowicz.
Disregarding all the commotion at the Con¬
ference about the propriety of their attending the
drafting committee for the final declaration, or
how many seats they should have in the main
conference room, we can now gauge the size of
their achievement and the extent of their influ¬
ence on the document that came out of the
Vienna meeting.
They certainly did not get all they were after,
and some of them, such as Amnesty Interna¬
tional, justifiably criticized the vagueness of the
UN discussions, the absence of forthright con¬
demnations, and the lack of concrete decisions
such as would help the champions of human
rights to campaign more effectively.
The new international landscape
Their presence nevertheless had a considerable
impact. By pulling the official delegates up every
time the discussions showed signs of drifting off
into party-political byways, they reduced
though they could not eliminate the danger of
the human rights theme being used as a means
for other ends. By attacking dictatorships and
refusing to underwrite authoritarian regimes 13

Femme (1992),
mixed media. Sculpture by
Anne Delfieu.
on the pretext of development needs, the NGOs
of the South showed that the South is anything
but monolithic.
This was perhaps one of the most striking
revelations to come out of Vienna. It had of
course been known for some years that the so-
called Third World had changed, but it is now
clear for all to see that it is split two ways
between the champions of authoritarianism
who defend their respective regimes on grounds
of religious or cultural identity or economic
constraints and the proponents of the idea of
democracy, which for them is a universal.
Many discussions were of course coloured
by the North-South divisions, but contrary to
expectations they did not set the agenda of a con¬
ference that had other issues on its mind. The
most dictatorial states of the South had to con¬
tend not only with the old democracies of the
North but also with the representatives of their
own societies, who came to tell the world that,
to put it mildly, they did not share their rulers'
hostility to the idea of human rights.
Having by their continual presence com¬
pelled the participating states to take sides with
or against them, the NGOs also showed that
ways of exercising power are tending to diver¬
sify in the South. While most representatives
from Asia and the Arab Muslim world sought to
justify the old authoritarian attitudes, the bulk
of African and South American states seem to



have swung over, at least in words, to the side of
the champions of democracy.
The NGOs thus emerged as both the agents
and the exponents of the new divisions that are
redrawing the international political landscape.
Their fierce struggle for unequivocal acceptance
of the proposition that human rights are uni¬
versal and indivisible overcame the resistance of
those defending special interests, and the col¬
lective pressure exerted in the drafting com¬
mittee ensured that on this point at least the
final document was clear enough.
14
A watchdog role
As to their role, this document mentions their
contribution to the discussion, acclaims their
courage and their work on the ground, and calls
on governments to collaborate with them more
closely. Some people sneered at what they saw
here as a belated tribute paid by vice to virtue, but
behind the careful wording, calculated, in accor¬
dance with UN practice, to offend no-one, may
be seen an implicit recognition that citizens' orga¬
nizations have a right to exercise a watchdog role
in regard to the behaviour of governments.
This is a crucial matter, and the NGOs are
quite determined to fight in future for this right
to be explicitly recognized, for their entrance
upon the UN scene albeit for the moment
only in a modest capacity also means that gov¬
ernments have begun to lose their monopoly of
the right to lay down the law, and that having
half-opened the door to them the UN will have
difficulty in shutting it again. Although at Vienna
the NGOs did not take part directly in the
drafting of the final declaration, there seems
little doubt that at future international confer¬
ences they will try, and probably succeed, in
storming other bastions.
One last and not inconsiderable result of
their presence in hundreds in the Austrian cap¬
ital is that the international community, having
resigned itself to granting observer status at the
UN Economic and Social Council to some 20D
of the major transnational NGOs such as the
International Commission ofJurists, the Inter¬
national Human Rights Federation and
Amnesty International, can no longer ignore
the existence and the energy of thousands of
regional, national and local associations deter¬
mined to press their case.
The representatives of oppressed minori¬
ties, of women, and of all those living on the
fringes of society played an active part in the
NGOs' Forum which met for three days before
the opening of the official conference, and by
main force gained the right to be present thereat.
The Conference thus brought to light the extra¬
ordinary variety of citizens' movements, and
the diversity of their campaigns. The word
"cacophony" was applied to them, and it is true
that the Forum was the scene of some Homeric
battles, but this actually represents an emerging
realignment in the world of the NGOs. Their
success in bursting on to the international stage
is leading to a distribution of tasks among them¬
selves, a development that some NGOs have
already taken into account.
Many NGOs were disappointed at the
meagre results of a conference that went no fur¬
ther than restating a few principles, without
providing the necessary clout to implement
them. They all proclaimed that their struggles
would not slacken until the rule of law pre¬
vailed over brute force. They are under no illu¬
sions: they know that hard battles have still to be
fought. In gradually taking by storm the UN
fortress, some bastions of which they managed
to conquer at Vienna, they hope above all that
their members will no longer suffer in silence,
and that the United Nations will respond to
their demands less timidly than in the past.
