COMMENTARY
by
Federico
Nayor
41
This article is one
of aseries in which
the Director-General of
Unesco sets out his
thinking on matters of
current concern



THE PRICE
OF
PEACE
THE world has changed. The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989
and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 marked the
end of Cold War confrontation between the two major
power blocs, which is undoubtedly the most important polit¬
ical transformation of the last few years.
What has this meant for world peace? The geopolitical
interpretation, perhaps the commonest, maintains that bipolarity
based on the existence of two nuclear powers of equal strength
was the guarantee of peace over the last forty years. Now that
this balance of terror has disappeared, all kinds of wars are once
again possible.
I do not share this view of "negative peace". In the first place,
it is inaccurate since, while applicable in some degree to Europe,
it does not take account of the hundreds of wars that have
devastated other parts of the planet since 1945. Secondly and
most importantly, it overlooks the perverse effects of the'
unquestioned paradox that "war is unthinkable but disarma¬
ment is impossible", which made superpower confrontation the
inescapable fate of several generations and justified the arms race
as the only rational solution.
The end of the Cold War has nullified the logic of this rea¬
soning. The widespread propagation of violence, which is a
characteristic of the second half of the twentieth century, today
appears to us as a self-evident fact and forces us to recognize that
the nature of war and its protagonists have changed. War, today
assumes the form of civil war and its belligerents are not states
but the distinctive communities ethnic and social which
seek political fulfilment to compensate for their personal, cul¬
tural and social frustrations.
This exaggerated desire for political compensation explains
why the achievement of freedom in the countries of Central and
Eastern Europe has mainly taken the form of a radical affir¬
mation of the integrity of their collective identities and has
been reflected in intransigent and violent claims for the restora¬
tion of ideal frontiers. The Geophysical Institute of the Moscow
Academy of Sciences reported in 1 99 1 that of the twenty-three
frontiers that separated the different republics only three were
fully accepted, which put at seventy- five the number of poten-

tial trouble spots, seventeen of which were already the scene of seeds of coexistence in places where today we are reaping the
open conflict. fruits of distrust and intolerance, then the most developed
In the face of these intrastate wars, ethnic and cultural in countries will have to decide to invest in collective security
origin, fluctuating and intermittent, highly varied and changing before it is too late.
in form, involving an unpredictable and indeterminate number We will have to change our habits even though it may be
of participants, traditional conflict scenarios have little to tell us. unpopular to do so. There is an urgent and imperative need for
These situations require profound historical and sociological us to think, without self-censorship or fear, about how we can
analysis; they call for a new cultural approach tenacious and overcome the great contradictions that beset our contemporary
imaginative that sees prevention as the only possible solution, world. How, for example, can we reconcile the dichotomy
In other words they demand more than ever a culture of between ethical requirements and technical rationality?
peace, and thereby assign UNESCO a key role in this context. . . .T
A new civilpact
Redefining the concept ofsecurity We find thls dichotomy in the different approaches of those
who advocate either development or human rights. While some
What are difficult are the conceptual changes, the changes talk in terms of human rights and democracy, others speak of
in course that future generations will reproach us for not development. We often forget what is most important of all-
having made if we do not have the clear-sightedness and spir- the human beingand the need common to alljustice. If
itual strength needed to embark on them. Not only has war the globalization that communication and technology make
changed; so too have the conditions affecting our collective secu- possible can lead to the best as well as the worst, why not
rity, and indeed the very concept of security itself. For that choose the best?
reason I think the United Nations Security Council, as it It is clear today that without the agreement of peoples and
approaches the fiftieth anniversary of its foundation, could without their participation, neither states nor institutions can
come up with a fresh definition of the idea of security, which shape the course of history by means of economic or political
is now so different from what it was in 1945. In my opinion, all conventions. We thought that economics and politics would
the global threats to security deterioration of the environment bring happiness and progress, and that they eliminated the
and living conditions, population problems, cultural and ethnic need for conscience. It is not so.
incompatibilities, lack of respect for human rights and so on Therefore, change we must. We must learn to pay the price
should be regarded as falling within the competence of the of peace just as we had to pay the price of war. We shall have to
Security Council. set fresh priorities. We shall have to convince all statesmen of the
If we really want to put an end to this other kind of threat need to draw up a pact for education and for social development.
to our security, part of the vast sums spent on military power We must strengthen democratic systems, because the big
must be invested in the struggle against poverty, especially in issues of the present day can only be tackled and resolved in a
rural communities, so as to prevent the violence and mass emi- democratic context. The state must concentrate on its role as
gration that result from it. Money will have to be invested to guarantor, and civil society must take its destiny in hand. Edu-
abolish the shameful situation of street children and child cation is the keystone of a strong democracy, as it is of economic
labour. We are accepting the unacceptable. We are continuing growth. The only possible form of development is that in
to arm ourselves against enemies who no longer exist, and we which every individual is both participant and beneficiary. On
stand defenceless before those now threatening us. the world scale, access to knowledge and the transfer of knowl-
We are well equipped to contend with the more conventional edge are the only basis on which we can build democracy, that
dangers of war culture. We have armies, and our national bud- common dimension where all differences can exist peacefully,
gets include appropriations for defence and armaments. But the side by side, in synergy.
amount of aid provided to help developing countries to mobi- We must guarantee democratic systems in which all indi-
lize their immense potential remains derisory. The results are viduals, minorities and peoples can freely express the charac-
poverty, excessive population growth, mass emigration, intol- teristics of their cultures and, at the same time, get to know,
erance and violence. We are paying a preposterous price for our respect and why not ? admire and incorporate characteris-
short-sightedness. The first threat facing us today is that posed tics of other cultures. The defence of minority cultures is an issue
by the deepening chasm that divides the countries of the North of the utmost importance and, no matter how sensitive it may
from the countries of the South. Yet there can be no doubt that be, UNESCO must tackle it, since it is a major source of misun-
the world is one and that either we go forward together or we derstanding, isolation, marginalization and violence,
shall be unable to avoid chaos and disaster. A global outlook is Culture is not spread by retreating into itself or by a process
now the prime condition of our survival. of territorial fragmentation. It is not by drawing frontiers that the
The most developed countries must realize that they will rights of everybody and every culture will be respected. Each
only be able to solve their own problems within this global and person is both unique and universal, but the future of humanity
unitary perspective, by contributing without delay to the devel- lies in intermingling, in the fruitful union of the most varied civ-
opment of the countries of the South. If we want to sow the ilizations. We must protect and foster all forms of diversity. 4 3
