portrait
Hryhoriy Skovoroda
An Enlightenment philosopher ofthe Ukraine
byTatianaZolozova
40
IT n an old district of Kiev, the Podol, a monu¬
mental statue looks out over Peter Mogila
-L Academy Square. It depicts a gently smiling
man who looks for all the world as if he has just
stopped for a chat with the bystanders. He is
wearing a simple Cossack's outfit, and slung over
his shoulder is his faithful knapsack in which one
can easily imagine a flute, a Hebrew Bible and a few
manuscripts. The monument is a memorial to
Hryhoriy Skovoroda, one of the Ukraine's most
brilliant thinkers. Engraved on the pedestal
beneath the statue is the epitaph he wrote for
himself: "The world wanted to take me over, but it
didn't succeed". The words sum up the beliefs, the
destiny and the thought ofa man who sacrificed a
clerical and university career and abandoned the
comforts of life as a court poet and musician,
choosing instead to live in freedom as an itinerant
philosopher.
Skovoroda was born in 1722 to a Cossack family.
After studying the Bible and learning Latin and
singing at the school in his native village, Cher-
nuhy, at sixteen he entered the Peter Mogila
Academy, the leading university in eastern Europe
and the most prestigious Western-style establish¬
ment in the Ukraine at that time. While there he
studied the works ofgreat European thinkers such
as Bacon, Descartes, Leibniz, Locke, Spinoza and
Bruno. In 1742 he went as a singer to the court of
the Tsarina Elizabeth in Saint Petersburg, but he
did not take to court life and returned to Kiev to
continue his philosophical and theological studies.
When the time came for him to leave the Academy,
it was suggested that he enter holy orders, but he
decided instead to accept a diplomatic mission
that would take him to many countries over the
next four years. Back in the Ukraine, he taught
poetry in a seminary at Pereiaslov, not far from
Kiev, then at the high school in Harkiv. But his
modern teaching methods created a scandal, and
he was forced to turn his back on official institu¬
tions. At this point the richest, most exciting and
most fruitful period ofhis life began.
For twenty-eight years, between 1766 and 1794,
Hryhoriy Skovoroda wandered alone, taught in
market places, and wrote. During this time he wrote
eighteen philosophical treatises, works with tides
such as Narcissus: A Conversation about Knowing
Thyself, TheABCofthe Universe, and OftheAncient
World. He also produced a book of poetry, a col¬
lection of fables, seven translations ofancient clas
sics, and a voluminous correspondence in Latin
and Ukrainian with his pupils and friends.
In the spirit of the Enlightenment, he called
for the return of authentic values, a free spiritual
life and a just society. His adherence to modern
European philosophy did not prevent him from
admiring the scholars and poets ofGreekAntiquity,
the Old Testament prophets, St. Paul and St. Augus¬
tine and the sages of non-Christian religions. He
owed much to Plato and the teachings of the Bible,
which he regarded as the supreme expression of
human wisdom.
Skovoroda's poetry, the most outstanding poetry
written during the baroque golden age in the
Ukraine, is inseparable from his philosophy. In
addition to his philosophical and satirical stories
and poems, his investigations into the natural
rhythm of language and into types of poetry, we
owe a debt to this inspired poet for introducing a
profound feeling for nature into traditional
Ukrainian lyricism. He was the Slavic harbinger of
Romanticism.
Hryhoriy (Grigori) Skovoroda,
1722-1794.
TATIANA Z0L0Z0VA,
cultural attachée at the
Ukrainian embassy in France, is
the author of a book on French
instrumental music since 1944
(Kiev, 1989) and of many
articles and essays on the arts
and philosophy.
