R H
Thomas Mann
The new obscurantism
Tliis is the third andfinal instalment
ofThomas Mann's address to a
meeting organized in Nice in 1935 by
the International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation on the
theme of"the education ofmodern
man" (see our two previous issues).
Tins ardent defender ofEuropean
culture and civilization concludes
with a bitterly ironical commentary
on the rise ofirrationality in a
Germany delivered to Nazism.
Text selected and presented
"W ^L by Edgardo Canton
Necessity may indeed teach people
to think, but, one may wonder,
to think in what way? We have
seen for ourselves what happens when
the masses the middle and lower middle
classes, reduced to penury, dispossessed,
racked by distress and filled with resent¬
ment start to think and to indulge in
mystical speculation. The petty bour¬
geoisie had been taught that reason had
been done away with, that intelligence
was there to be insulted, and that those
bogeymen not unconnected with
socialism, internationalism and even the
Jewish mentality might in fact be to blame
for their plight; with this sanction from
above, they turned their thoughts against
reason and learned to get their tongues
around the difficult but reassuring term
"irrationalism". The spread of irrationalism
among the people at large during the
second and third decades of this century
is perhaps the most deplorable and ridicu¬
lous spectacle that history has to offer. It
was the petty bourgeois who had risen
from the ranks of the masses who them¬
selves, by dint of febrile mental effort,
came up with the term "intellectual mon¬
ster", a stupid expression but one that had,
to a certain extent, the blessing of the
higher echelons, where the anti-intellec¬
tual spirit reigned, and one that carried a
vulgar punch, a deadly turn ofphrase that
was primarily directed, in matters political
and social, against all reasonable, peaceful
aspirations and against all European sen¬
timents, but above and beyond that,
against all intellectual discipline and
morality.
A miasma of bad literature
Since, however, the mind, even when it is
anti-intellectual, cannot but remain mind,
its lowly offspring, the average man with a
few ideas in his head, cannot do without
either mind or thought. He talks, philoso¬
phizes and writes, but everything ema¬
nating from him is but a caricature ofmind,
low-powered intellectualism. The air is
heavy with thoughts spawned in the over¬
wrought brains of the populace. A stifling
miasma of bad literature hangs over the
country. Mass man, reasoning against
reason itself, has presumptuously claimed
for himself the exclusive right to think,
speak and write. He has silenced everyone
else and, confident that he will not be con¬
tradicted, avails himselfofhis privilege in a
way that takes one's breath away and
tempts one to curse the liberal democracy
that taught all and sundry to read and write.
Thought itselfand the written or spoken
word seem as if forever sullied by such
despicable misuse. Freed from all restraints,
a derisory culture, deplorablyworked up to
fever pitch, spreads far and wide its
pseudo-knowledge and its evil doctrines,
its farrago ofmystagogic nonsense and its
impudent decisions, with their thousand-
year pretensions; and learning, now intim¬
idated, now sheepishly sympathizing, dare
only feebly and fearfully raise some slight
objection. Some day soon, these "thinkers"
will be in a position to put their "ideas"
boldly into practice everywhere and write
them by main force into history. They will
get the history they deserve.
A philosophy of violence and
falsehood
Is there not, nevertheless, from the Chris¬
tian point of view, something moving
about the sight of this victorious uprising
by the poor in spirit, this overthrow of
learning, culture, intelligence and civi¬
lization and their replacement by the taste
and judgment of the lowly, the publicans
and sinners? One should, I believe, be very
careful about drawing such parallels. There

V
Thomas Mann in 1950.
are, between the Christian revolution and
the revolution of the masses, differences of
character, differences in regard to the feel¬
ings ofkindliness and humanity as I would
say to put it simply, that suffice to put us
seriously on our guard against misunder¬
standings and false comparisons.
Some might reply that the modern
movement is heroic in character, whereas
the Christian revolution and the French
Revolution were altruistic and humani¬
tarian. But much as I love and admire
heroism in its great spiritual manifesta¬
tions, I cannot bring myself to believe in
the heroism of the common people. Their
world is not heroic, it is a sensation-
seeking, detective-story-like world; it
strongly resembles the atmosphere of
dime novels and sensational films, but
there is nothing heroic about it.
One would hesitate to apply the word
heroic to the new methods of crime and
murder, the creations of a small-time
fanaticism, that are being followed in the
realm ofpolitics. Merely to be able to grasp
the meaning of heroism, one needs to
move on a higher moral plane than that of
a philosophy that takes violence and false¬
hood to be the fundamental principles of
life. This is in point of fact the philosophy
of the petty bourgeois who have been
infected by the urge to think. Apart from
violence, they believe only in falsehood,
and believe in it even more fervently than
in violence. Among the European ideas
that, since they have gone up in the world,
they hold to have been abolished for
good truth, freedom and justice it is
truth that they find most detestable and
impossible. They put "myth" in its place,
this term figuring as prominently in their
intellectual vocabulary as heroism.
The threat ofwar and the ruin of
civilization
Clearly, what we are dealing with here are,
again, a degenerate mind and a debased
literature. There are certain vital interests
to which the demands ofpure mind must
give way. Truth is an absolute, but life, the
realm of the permissive, is not; life requires
that truth which is useful and advanta¬
geous to it. So be it; but to acknowledge
falsehood as the only life-giving power,
the only power capable ofmaking history,
to elevate such a system to the status of a
philosophy in such a way that it becomes
impossible to distinguish truth from false¬
hood, to establish in Europe a disgraceful
pragmatism that repudiates mind itself in
favour of profit, that without compunc¬
tion commits or approves crimes so long
as they serve the cause of its ersatz
absolutes, that does not shrink from the
idea of falsity but values falsity as much as
truth as long as it finds it useful this is
what was in store for the type ofpeople to
whom I refer. I would not go so far as to
claim that they represent the "modern
man" we are supposed to be discussing,
but they are a common type; multitudes of
them exist, and when I say that they deter¬
mine the age in which they live, I am doing
no more than expressing their own con¬
viction, the conviction that provides the
devastating impetus with which they are
preparing to take on and conquer the
world a world whose moral scruples
hinder it from defending itself effectively
against them.
The outcome to which such a conflict
would lead is absolutely clear and certain:
it would be war, a disaster of immense
proportions, the ruin of civilization. I am
firmly convinced that this is the only pos¬
sible outcome ofsuch people's philosophy
in action. That was why I thought it my
duty to speak about them and about the
terrible threat they pose.
