AN UNSETTLING FREEDOM
omads and the
modern state
by André Bourgeot
Nomadism is one of
the most balanced
relationships mankind
has made with
nature. But nomads
are misfits in the
modern state and
today their living
space and their
identity are under
growing threat.
8
j Nomadic societies have played an impor-
I tant part in history and have made an
undeniable contribution to the development of
different techniques and ways of using land.
Although their economic, political and religious
role is beyond doubt, for generation after gen¬
eration nomads have been looked down upon,
and regarded predominantly as rapacious
vagabonds and as parasites upon the body of
society.
In our own times, most of these societies
are suffering from the decline of their tradi¬
tional structures and deepening poverty. In these
circumstances, they become dependent on inter¬
national aid as and when they adopt a sedentary
way of life in urban environments.
Nomads are, however, to a considerable
extent self-sufficient in food production and
still have a contribution to make to countries'
economic balance. Pastoral nomadism, in par¬
ticular, remains the surest safeguard against
environmental degradation and desertification.
Diversified societies
Nomad societies in fact practise a very wide
range of productive activities in a great many dif¬
ferent environments. The best known of these
activities, which may thus be taken as the main
example, are those of nomad herders. Including
part-time pastoralists who also engage in agri¬
culture and stock-rearing, they number some
thirty million worldwide. Their chief occupation
is tending flocks and herds of domesticated her¬
bivores, and the territories over which they range
are ones where naturally-occurring resources
enable an annual cycle of production to be main¬
tained.
In nomadic as distinct from sedentary com¬
munities, man's relationship with nature is con¬
ducted via his livestock, which are both his
means of production and his consumer goods.
The nomadic community is concerned to pre¬
serve and regenerate the environment, and there¬
fore manages its territory in a rational manner.
Various other forms of nomadism are repre¬
sented by "travellers" (European Gypsies), dis¬
tinguishable by their attitude towards the dead
and towards language; the Moken fisher-gatherers
of Myanmar and the south-west coast of Thai¬
land, recognizable by the indentations in the
poop and prow of their boats and by the place of
the yam in their culture; the aborigène hunter-
gatherers of the Kimberleys (Australia), whose
identity is expressed in the symbiosis between the
sanctuary, the individual and the supernatural
being; or the Pygmy hunter-gatherers, scattered
over eight countries, who are ignorant of agri-

culture and metalworking and whose identity is
symbolized by the (mainly male) activity of
hunting with nets and the (mainly female)
activity of gathering.
Diverse as they are, all these communities
have certain common features, a combination of
mobility and flexibility that has enabled them to
face up both to domination by the societies
with which they are in permanent contact and to
the effects of colonial expansion, which repre¬
sented a crucial point in their history.
The fact is that colonial rule interfered with,
or in some cases obliterated, the internal
dynamics of these communities, as a result of the
introduction or expansion of new economic
activities, changes in the pattern of land owner¬
ship, the disruption of the established power
structure, the re-drawing of frontiers and
boundaries, and so on. The crisis in nomad
society that began then has gathered speed in the
context of the post-colonial states.
A comparison of the history of herding
The Tsaatan (in Mongolian,
"those who have reindeer") live
in northern Mongolia, where
they continue a tradition of
reindeer breeding that goes
back as far as the Bronze Age.
Above, in spring they move
down the wooded mountain
slopes to the place where the
reindeer give birth. The Tsaatan
live in yurts, tents similar to
the tepees of North American
Indians. Below right, striking
camp.
societies with that of other nomadic societies
shows that the former devised strategies of con¬
quest, with the aid of the camel in the case of the
Bedouin (Moors and Tuaregs) and with that of
the horse in the case of the Fulani and the Mon¬
gols; conversely, the nomadic societies of itin¬
erant merchants or of hunters and gatherers

IMomadic goat-breeders in the
Rif mountains, northern
Morocco.
A "Copper Eskimo"
photographed in 1916. Copper
Eskimos lived in the Northwest
Territories of Canada and made
weapons from the native copper
they found on the shores. Today
the Eskimos (or Inuit) only
follow their ancestors' nomadic
hunting and fishing way of life
in summer.
were in most instances reduced to a position of
subordination to societies of agriculturalists.
The fate of most of these communities was,
however, to be subjected to economic and polit¬
ical marginalization (e.g. the herders of the
Sahel) or to be parked in reservations or exter¬
minated (Amerindians, South African Bushmen,
Gypsies in Nazi-dominated Europe), or else to
undergo integration or indeed assimilation, a
policy inspired by an ideology aiming to achieve
cultural and economic uniformity.
Integration is imposed on nomads by
herding them together around centres of eco¬
nomic activity (as happened to the Moken
during World War II), by radically altering their
10
territorial organization with the aim of setting up
community stations and villages (the case of
the Australian Aborigènes), and by repressive
policies of expulsion, confiscation of flocks and
herds, and the destruction of crops grown on
state land.
The main way in which state policy affects
nomadic herders' way of life is via the intro¬
duction of technical innovations. Thus, the effect
on the environment of the sinking of public
wells overgrazing leading to erosion through
the disappearance of vegetation is to upset the
balance of the ecosystem and to disrupt the
management of grazing land and the control
exercised over it by the community, in the
absence of which such well-drilling operations
turn the adjacent area into a desert.
In the minoritynumerically or
politically?
As regards animal husbandry, the main innova¬
tions are in the field of veterinary medicine,
measures to combat livestock epidemics in par¬
ticular. These measures encourage livestock
growth but in so doing upset the balance
between the carrying capacity of the grazing
land, which itself varies in accordance with cli¬
matic factors, and the increasing size of flocks
and herds.
Lastly, the development of food or cash
crops such as rice and cotton takes up more
and more land to the detriment of nomad com¬
munities.
Except in those countries like Mauritania,
Djibouti or Somalia whose leaders themselves

come from a nomad background, nomads find
themselves in one or other of the following
minority situations:
a) groups that move about on the frontiers of
one country but are of the same nationality,
religion and language as the populations of a
neighbouring country; such groups form a
restricted minority within a given national ter¬
ritory, e.g. the Algerian Tuareg of Tamcsna, in
Niger;
b) groups isolated within a given country
and surrounded by population groups of the
demographic majority, e.g. certain Arabic-
speaking groups in Niger and Mali;
c) groups scattered over the whole of a
country's territory the commonest case;
d) groups belonging to one and the same
cultural community spread across several nation-
states, e.g. Fulani, Toubou, Moorish, Arab and
Tuareg nomad herders.
When applied to these groups, the term
"minority" docs not necessarily imply that they
are fewer in number; it refers to a politically
dependent situation. Such minorities fall into
two categories, which may be labelled respec¬
tively:
a) the minority "in itself", consisting of
groups of nomads who are distinguished from
the rest of the population by ethnic, linguistic
and religious characteristics and by their cultural
links; the overall population of these groups is
small and they do not occupy a dominant polit¬
ical position;
b) the minority "for itself", i.e. one that has
woken up to its situation and is resolved to pre¬
serve its way of life and patterns of behaviour;
this state of awareness may lead to the group
voicing demands relating to its identity that arc
in effect political demands.
Frontiers and limits
The societies in which nomadic herders live are
mostly homogeneous cultural communities with
a territory scattered over several nation-states.
The intensive stock-rearing that they practise
cannot be contained within artificial, often arbi¬
trarily drawn frontiers; a cross-border territory
is a necessity for the purposes of a yearly pro¬
duction cycle the most striking feature of which
is transhumance, the seasonal migration of live¬
stock to different feeding grounds.
The strict delimitation of national frontiers
has in many cases had deleterious effects on the
structure of these societies. National sover¬
eignty, surveillance, and the principle of the
inviolability of frontiers, all matters of vital con¬
cern to the state, represent real difficulties for
nomadic herders and for some fishing commu¬
nities; they arc, however, less of a problem for
Pygmy hunter-gatherers since, owing to the
nature of their activities, the diversity of the
natural resources and the type of environment,
Pygmies do not need large swathes of territory.
A convention for nomads
The major international human rights conven¬
tions fail to take account of the particular case of
transnational minorities. Since these minorities
often have no wish to belong to any one nation,
they find themselves relegated, in terms of inter¬
national law, to a political and legal limbo.
The time has perhaps come to look into the
possibility of special conventions relating to
nomadism that would encourage the easing of
border-control measures, ensure a transnational
territorial basis for each community, and protect
its cultural homogeneity. These conventions
should lead on to the drafting of a charter on
transhumance, for which the requisites would be,
firstly, the simultaneous establishment in the coun¬
tries concerned of a body of land law governing
access to resources and, secondly, the recognition
of a system of landed property that at last responds
to the interests of nomadic herders.
The last Aka pygmy nomads
live deep In the equatorial
forest of central Africa, on the
border of the Central African
Republic and the Congo.
Hunters and gatherers, they live
In huts made of leaves and
branches (above).
ANDRE BOURGEOT,
a French anthropologist, is a
specialist In pastoral societies,
especially that of the Tuaregs,
with whom he lived for several
years. A researcher at his
country's National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS), he
is co-leader with Henri Guillaume
of a research team on "States
and Nomad Societies" (CNRS
and ORSTOM, the French
Institute of Scientific Research
for Development in
Co-operation).
11
