THE VALLEE DE MAI
UNESCO IN ACTION
HERITAGE
«
Thegranitic islands of the Seychelles
archipelago, rising from a large
submarine plateau that may have
been the legendary land of Lemuria, are
like great hanging gardens. Forming, so
to speak, a "microcontinent" of their own,
they bear little resemblance to the other
islands, volcanic or coralline, of the Indian
Ocean. They are distinctive in other
respects too: one of them, Praslin, is home
to an astonishing native species of palm,
the famous coco-de-mer.
Two hundred years ago, these as yet
virgin islands were covered in vast, tropi¬
cally luxuriant rainforests that filled the
ravines and valleys and clambered up hills
and mountains.
In the lowlands, up to an altitude of
300 metres, grew giant trees more than 30
metres tall and with boles of 15 to 20
metres in diameter, and even they were
dwarfed by the superb Dipterocarpaceae,
as much as 65 metres tall.
Between the altitudes of 300 and 600
metres was intermediate forest that
formed a canopy only twenty or so metres
above the ground but was very rich in
endemic species. Huge bare boulders
emerging like islets from a sea ofgreenery
provided a habitat for interesting com¬
munities of ferns and oforchids, including
the paille-en-queuewüh its gorgeous spray
of mother-of-pearl flowers and delicious
gardenia-like scent.
On the mist-shrouded heights, the
trees grew to no more than 15 metres, but
it was here that the pitcher plant or
Nepenthes was to be found, usually
winding itself around a species of man¬
grove tree that also grew there.
These ancient forests, with their botan¬
ical links to Africa, Madagascar, India and
Malaysia, were largely replaced by plan¬
tations, leaving only a fewprecious vestiges
on the mountain tops of Mahé and Sil¬
houette Islands. A few of the smaller
islands such as Praslin provide the last
natural sanctuaries for the coco-de-mer.
A LIVING MUSEUM
The Vallée de Mai Nature Reserve is per¬
haps the most attractive and interesting of
these sanctuaries. It is easily accessible by
means of the well-surfaced road linking
the villages of la Grand'Anse and la Baie
Sainte-Anne. As it is only some 18 hectares
in area, it takes only an hour to walk the
length of the path that runs round it. The
low hill overlooking it affords a superb all-
round view. Its shady groves of palm and
pandanus give the visitor some idea of
how beautiful the woodlands of Praslin
must once have been.
The Vallée de Mai is an outstanding
reminder ofwhat the world's flora was like
at an earlier stage, a kind of living museum.
Much too small to survive on its own, it
owes its continued existence to human
intervention. It is thus both a fine example
of rational management of the environ¬
ment and a conservation area for rare and
interesting botanical species. These
include the bois rouge (red wood), a large-
leaved tree of the Dilleniaceae family so
called for its brightly coloured trunk; the
capucin, a sapotaceous plant whose large
seed resembles a hooded head; the
latanier latte, a palm with large, stiff, dark
green fronds; the palmiste, perhaps the
handsomest of Seychellean palms; and
two species ofpandanus, the vacoa parasol
with its perfectly symmetrical triple
branches, and the vacoa marron with its
astounding aerial prop roots, sometimes
over 30 metres in length.
As if to make up for the solemn immo¬
bility of its trees, the forest swarms with
animal life: emerald-green geckos, big
dark-brown snails of the primitive
Acavideae family, big, black but reputedly
harmless scorpions, lovely shimmering
snakes, little "tiger chameleons", tawny-
breasted bats, big-billed bulbuls, charming
souï-mangas, red, white or blue fruit-
eating pigeons, and the little vasa parrots
whose clear, strong whistling call shatters
the silence of the valley in the early
morning and late afternoon.
Indisputably, however, it is the 4,000
coco-de-mer palms, a unique population

A paradise garden in the Seychelles
byGuyLionnet
Air view of the Vallée de Mai.
of trees whose splendour rivals that of the
cedars of Lebanon or the giant redwoods
of California, that make the Vallée de Mai
one of the botanical wonders of the world.
THE LOVE-LIFE
OF THE COCO-DE-MER
Lodoicea sechellarum, the coco-de-mer,
is one of the six species of palm native to
the Seychelles. With its straight, bare trunk,
its fans of large, stiff fronds and its huge
fruits, it is a truly majestic tree.
Like all members of the Borasseae
family, it is dioecious, i.e. the male and
female reproductive organs, stamen and
pistil, grow on separate plants; the male
and female palms stand side by side like a
loving couple. Unable to live one without
the other, the two sexes are similarly pro¬
portioned. There are several surprising
things about them. The male is about five
metres taller than the female and appears
to be protecting her; its stamen resembles
a large penis. Under the smooth, shiny epi¬
dermis of the fruit, a huge, green, heart-
shaped object some 50 cm. long and
weighing 15 to 20 kg., the nut itselfthe
"sea coconut", the biggest and heaviest seed
in the vegetable kingdom consists of two
grey-black lobes, covered in a very tough
integument and with a narrow groove
between them, recalling a smoothly
rounded pair of female buttocks. According
to an old Seychelles legend, on wild stormy
nights the coco-de-mer palms consum¬
mate their union in a strange ceremony to
witness which spells death to humans.
When ripe, the fruit gives off a pun¬
gent odour. Generally speaking, only three
or four fruits ripen on each inflorescence,
though as many as ten have been known to
reach maturity, and in such cases the
bunch of fruits may weigh as much as 200
kg. The trees produce only one or two
bunches a year.
Another remarkable feature of these
trees is their extremely slow rate ofgrowth
and, linked with that, their longevity. They
take three years to germinate and, after
they fruit the first time, it takes twenty-
five years before they start to bear fruit
again and getting on for a thousand years
before they reach their full size the oldest
coco-de-mer in the Vallée de Mai are reck¬
oned to be over 800 years old.
Why do they occur only in the Sey¬
chelles? One theory is that when the orig¬
inal continent of which the Seychelles are
thought to represent the remains broke
up and disappeared in the course ofaeons
ofgeological time, many plant species also
disappeared because they could not adapt
to their new habitats, whilst others, like
the coco-de-mer, lived on in isolation on
certain small islands. In the case of the
Above, a Phelsuma, a small arboreal gecko
found in the islands of the Indian Ocean.
Top, a Vanigula seychellensls, a gastropod
native to the Vallée de Mai.
coco-de-mer, this isolation was to prove
final, since there were three factors standing
in the way of its natural dispersal. In the
first place, its nut is too heavy, when still
fresh and thus capable of germinating, for
sea-borne dispersal. Secondly, since the
species is dioecious the male and female
palms have to grow side by side for repro¬
duction to take place. Lastly, the species is
also gregarious, fruiting and reproducing
well only within a community.
THE REMAINS OF EDEN
It was in 1768, in the course of the Marion-
Dufresne expedition that had sailed from
the Ile de France (now Mauritius) to recon¬
noitre the Seychelles, that the coco-de- 43

Below, a group of Seychelles fodies
(Foudiae seycheffenses), a bird
species endemic to the Seychelles.
Bottom photo, a cluster of coco de
mer nuts.
44 I
mer was discovered on Praslin Island. Its
existence had, however, been suspected
and it gave rise to all kinds of legends that
long haunted the imagination of those
who dwelt on the shores of the Indian
Ocean and of the early European naviga¬
tors; it is in fact to one of these legends,
according to which it grew underwater,
that it owes its name of "sea coconut". Its
nuts were much sought after for their
aphrodisiac properties, and its shell was
reputed to be an excellent antidote.
It was, however, the Englishman
Charles Gordon General Gordon ofKhar¬
toum who was the author of the wildest,
and hence the most amusing, theory. In a
still unpublished study, dated 1881, the
year of his visit of inspection to the Sey¬
chelles, and entitled Eden and its two
sacramental trees, Gordon claimed that
these islands were the remains of the
earthly paradise and that the coco-de-mer
was the tree of the knowledge ofgood and
evil. He seems to have been struck not
only by the extraordinarily suggestive
shape of the nut but also by the fact that it
was contained within a heart-shaped
fruit the heart ofman being, according to
the Scriptures, the seat of his carnal
desires. To explain how Eve could have
tasted of a fruit with such a hard shell and
so indigestible a nut, Gordon added that
the coco-de-mer might have been dif¬
ferent in times gone by and might have
lost its mystical properties by reverting to
what he called its natural state.
The Vallée (formerly Val) de Mai, so
called because its original owner acquired
it during the month of May, remained
intact until the 1930s, after which, for fif¬
teen years or so, plantations were laid out
there. In 1945, the Seychelles authorities
bought the land and cleared it ofdead wood
to prevent forest fires, causing soil erosion.
From the 1950s onwards, a sustained effort
was made to restore the site. In view of its
great ecological interest, it was declared a
nature reserve in 1966, became a National
Park in 1979, and in 1983 was selected as a
World Heritage Site.
As in the case of the Aldabra atoll,
another World Heritage Site in the archi¬
pelago, administration of the Vallée de Mai
Nature Reserve was entrusted in 1989 to
the Seychelles Islands Foundation, a non¬
governmental organization on which are
represented such major international sci¬
entific bodies as the Royal Society (London),
the Smithsonian Institution (Washington,
D.C.) and the Paris-based research organi¬
zation ORSTOM. By the support it gives to
the Foundation, Unesco makes a major
contribution to the maintenance and
preservation of the two sites.
GUY LIONNET,
of Mauritius, is technical advisor on environmental
issues and honorary president of the Seychelles
Islands Foundation. He is the author of Par les
chemins de la mer: périples aux Seychelles au temps
des voyages aux longs cours, which will be published
shortly by CR.I publishers, Réunion.
