Elvis
Chief.
visits a neighbouring
Elvis Johnson-ldan is a man with two lives. For eleven
months of the year, he works as the parks manager of a
London municipality, spending the weekends relaxing with
his wife Elizabeth and their three children. In December and
January, however, Elvis is usually to be found in his
birthplace, a little village in Ghana where he reigns supreme
as Nana Otumayin Kofi Idan I, Brahene ofJukwaa. George
Darley-Doran accompanied him on his most recent visit.
by George Darley-Doran Wß AfñCíM
8
Some time ago I came across a small
item in a London newspaper that went as
follows:
"King Gets Back to his Parkland
"Elvis Johnson-ldan, alias Nana Elvis ofJukwaa,
was back in his job as head of Brent Council's
parks department yesterday, after having been
made a chief of his native Fanti tribe in Ghana.



Tt was fascinating,' reported the 37-year-old
chief upon his return. T was absolutely spell¬
bound by it all. On one day I had to bathe in a
wooden tub filled with herbs to tone up my
muscles and skin to get me looking my best.'
Nana Elvis plans to continue with his job at
Brent Council, and visit his tribe once or twice
a year. Apart from that, he and his English-
born wife, Queen Elizabeth, do not expect their
lives to change dramatically. 'We still shop at
Sainsbury's', Queen Elizabeth admitted last
night."
I decided to track down this Anglo-African
chief. I called up the Council in the northwest
London suburb of Brent and was put through to
Mr. Johnson-ldan. He could not have been
friendlier when I told him of my wish to meet
him in order to discuss "a project". Several days
later, I found myself in a big, drab council
building.
Elvis Johnson-ldan welcomed me into his
office. He was of average height, on the portly
side, and his round face was characterized by a
pair of sharp but limpid eyes. His voice was
understated but musical and full of laughter.
He had the ability to make one feel entirely at
ease and we were soon on first-name terms.
Elvis told me his story. He had grown up in
a small town on the Ghanaian coast. Both his
mother and father were Fantis of "noble"
descent, but he had always been fairly oblivious

to this. Well into his adulthood, he left Ghana
(and an unsuccessful marriage) to study horti¬
culture in England. He and Elizabeth met at
agricultural college and were soon married. He
took her back to his country, where he was
second in charge at the National Department of
Parks and Gardens. After a couple of years in
Accra, they returned to England, and settled
down. Liz began having children, and their life
became more and more independent of his
Ghanaian origins. Then, one day, Elvis received
the news that his mother had died. Grief-
stricken, he returned to his family village,
Jukwaa, to attend her funeral. In the course of
that visit, he discovered to his amazement



that the "kingmakers" of his village had been
planning for years to make him a chief. This
was all the more surprising in that he was the
youngest of nine brothers. The situation was
thrust upon Elvis, without his being given much
say in the matter. Two months later, he went
back to Jukwaa with his family and was for¬
mally "enstooled" as Nana Otumayin Kofi Idan
I, Brahene of Jukwaa-Idankrom.
Elvis explained to me the meaning of his
formal name. "Nana" is the title preceding the
name of any Fanti, male or female, of noble
descent. "Otumayin" (breaker of men) is the
name of Elvis's father. "Kofi" means "Friday";
many Fantis are named after the day of their
birth. "Brahene" is a designation of chiefdom,
signifying that Elvis has special responsibilities
for the "youth" of his area. Jukwaa is the name
of Elvis's village, and "Idankrom" signifies that
the village is the traditional domain of the Idan
family; "-krom" can effectively be translated
into English as "-ville".
Elvis among his people.
Since the time of his enstoolment, Elvis's
life has been a balancing act between his roles as
head of Brent Council's Department of Parks
and Recreation, husband and father, and Fanti
chieftain. He now visits Ghana once or twice a
year, usually spending a good part of December
and January with his people. This coincides
with the anniversary of his enstoolment (27
December) and Jukwaa's usual end-of-year fes¬
tivities. The rest of Elvis's time is divided
between his job in Brent and his family home.
Elvis told us that he had been subject to a
considerable amount of media attention at the
time of his enstoolment. He had been appalled
at the degree of inaccuracy in the various articles
written about him. Every paper had its own
version of the story. One quality daily had
claimed that he was named after Elvis Presley,
which is clearly impossible if one considers that
Elvis (the chief) was born years before Elvis
(the Pelvis) had cut his first single. The most
common mistake was that Elvis had been made
king of the entire 1.5-million-strong Fanti tribe.
He had, in fact, only been made chief of some
20,000 souls.
Several film companies had expressed interest
in developing Elvis's story into a full-length
movie. With only a few exceptions, he had found
their ideas to be banal at best and at worst an
offence to his people. One studio had suggested
a plot in which his wife would be kidnapped by
another tribe and then rescued amid plenty
of jungle combat by a crack team from the
British army. This was not the kind of publicity
that Elvis wanted to attract. On the other hand,
he was open to anything that would give the
world a better idea of the realities of his people,
their way of life and the problems they faced.
It was arranged that later in the year I would
join Elvis and his family on their annual visit to
Jukwaa, where I would have the opportunity to
see a modern-day African chieftain at work.
Over the next couple of months I spent a
good deal of time piecing together some back¬
ground information about Ghana in general
and the Fantis in particular.
The "stool lands"
I discovered that the Fantis and the better-
known Asante (or Ashanti) are two branches of
a single tribe originally known as the Akan.
Hundreds of years ago, the Akan moved down
from the African interior towards the Gulf of
Guinea. One group went as far as the central
coast of what is now Ghana and evolved into the
Fanti tribe. The other group settled down fur¬
ther inland (in the region surrounding what is
now Kumasi) and developed into the Asante.
The languages of the two tribes became distinct

"After a couple of years in Accra, they returned to England,
got married and settled down. Then one day Elvis received
the news that his mother had died. Grief-stricken, he returned
to his family village, Jukwaa, to attend her funeral. In the
course of that visit he discoveredto his amazement
that the 'kingmakers' of his village had been planning for
years to make him a chief."
from one another but remained closely related,
rather like English and French. The turning
point in the history of both tribes came in the
late fifteenth century with the arrival of the
European traders, who came in search of gold
and slaves. From that point on, the Fantis were
under constant attack from the Asante, who
were intent on capturing a bigger slice of the
lucrative coastal trade.
Despite the almost perpetual state of war
between the Fantis and the Asantes, their tribal
institutions were not at all dissimilar. The bloody
conflicts gradually died away, but many of the
institutions have survived intact until today.
The most important one of all is the tradition of
the stool. This is more than just a seat of power,
in that the stool embodies the very spirit of the
people relating to it. Once a chief has been
enstooled, he maintains custody of the stool
and is therefore directly responsible for the spir¬
itual well-being of his subjects. Throughout the
Asante and Fanti tribes there are countless major
and minor stools, each one relating to an area of
land and the people living within that area.
These areas are known as "stool lands". The
C chief acts as custodian of these lands, as opposed
hildren in Elvis's village,
Jukwaa.
to owning them outright. It is, and has always
been, rare for a chief to "personalize" the stool
lands.
The power behind the stool
An important clan will often control more than
one stool. The "blue blood" tends to go back a
good many generations to the time when lands
were originally conquered and settled. Para¬
mount chiefs, chiefs and sub-chiefs are all
selected from eligible males of the "noble" clans.
Chieftains are not chosen according to their
age, but rather to their strength and political
skills. The power behind the stool resides with
the "kingmakers", the group of elders that
decides who is to be enstooled or in the rare
event of abuse, destooled. A Byzantine net¬
work of relationships usually exists between
the kingmakers, the various ranks of chiefs and
those aspiring to chiefdom. In the midst of all
this intrigue is the Queen Mother, who often
plays an influential role in deciding which of her
sons will be enstooled.
Fanti society is based upon kinship and
group solidarity. The isolated individual is con¬
sidered to be a lost and hopeless soul not just
for the course of this life, but for all eternity. This
is because the religious ceremonies of the Fanti
are directed towards their ancestors, who are
considered to exercise surveillance over the
living. There is no activity in life that lies outside
the scope of religion. It would be rare, for
example, to see a Fanti take an alcoholic drink
without first offering a libation to the spirits. The
Fantis have such a firm belief in the afterlife
that if you happened to be standing next to a
grave and a Fanti walked by, he would quite
IO
GEORGE DARLEY-DORAN
is a Turkish-born Englishman
who lives in London, where he
works as a television
correspondent.

likely say, "Good day to you both." The exiled
Fanti therefore faces the horrifying prospect of
being "left out" for ever and ever.
The area occupied by today's Republic of
Ghana used to be known by Europeans as the
Gold Coast. From the late fifteenth century
onwards, the seafaring nations of Europe were in
fierce competition for the wealth of this region.
All of these powers Britain, Denmark, Sweden,
Prussia, the Netherlands and Portugal built
themselves coastal forts along the Gulf of Guinea.
(All twenty-nine of these forts, incidentally,
remain standing today.) By the mid-nineteenth
century, the Gold Coast had been formally assim¬
ilated into the British Empire. It was ruled by
colonial governors until 1957, at which point
Ghana became the first African nation to gain
independence from Britain. Ghana's first presi¬
dent was Kwame ("The Saviour") Nkrumah.
He, along with Egypt's Nasser, was perhaps the
most vocal Third World leader of his day. But
power went to Nkrumah's head. He eventually
died in exile in Romania. Ghana went into a
downwards spiral. One military junta replaced
another, and the country became more and more
embroiled in debt. Ghana has only achieved a
measure of stability over the last decade.
In December I flew to Accra ahead of Elvis
and his family, and stayed for a while with a
friend of Elvis named Nathan Austin. I was well
looked after. Nathan's wife Pauline introduced me
to African food. This usually consisted of yam (a
kind of enormous mutant potato), cassava (a
smaller root vegetable), plantain (long, savoury
green-skinned bananas) or some combination of
the three. Being comparatively well off, they
would often have some meat or fish on the side.
Various friends and relations would come and
spend time with them, and the atmosphere was
convivial. They all tried to teach me Fanti, and I
gave drawing lessons to the children. Pauline's
brother Emmanuel told mc about his plans to go
to America, work and save for five years and
then return to Ghana to build his own house.
A resilient, optimistic people
I soon came to like Ghana. I was struck by the
lively, joyful and humorous nature of the
Ghanaian people. Children would fall about
laughing at the sight of a white man in shorts and
countless stallholders would beckon me over to
say hello. Everywhere, all the time, music was
playing. Interspersed with "I'm dreaming of a
white Christmas" and "Jingle Bells" was the
indigenous music of West Africa, which itself is
Elvis presides at a traditional
gathering.
I I

"Fanti society is based upon kinship and group solidarity. The
isolated individual is considered to be a lost and hopeless
soulnot just for the course of this life, but for all eternity.
This is because the religious ceremonies of the Fanti are
directed towards their ancestors, who are considered to
exercise surveillance over the living."
influenced by a whole range of different styles:
pop, disco, gospel, even country & western.
The songs might be badly recorded, and
they might blast out from some tinny car stereo,
but the melody is invariably subtle and elegant.
The vocals are in English, French or any number
of tribal languages. The sound is unmistakably
African and it transforms an uncomfortable
minibus ride into a vivid and memorable expe¬
rience. West African music is fundamentally
positive and good-natured not angry like
American rap or depressive like Jamaican
reggae and says an awful lot for the resilient
optimism of the Ghanaians.
There are Muslims, Buddhists and animists
in Ghana but the dominant faith of all is evan¬
gelical Christianity. Every other building seems
to be the headquarters of some colourfully-
named denomination: The Church of Christ of
Zion; The Holy Gospel Movement of West
Africa; The Order of the Holy Trinity. The
Jukwaa market.
fronts and backs of all the trucks and minibuses
are emblazoned with holy slogans: "DON'T
GIVE UP, YOUR MIRACLE AWAITS" ... "I
CAN'T HELP YOU BUT MIGHTY JESUS
CAN" ... and the best of all, "IF YOUR GOD
IS DEAD . . . TRY MINE". Even business
names have been evangelized: King of Kings
Transport Ltd., Jesus Saves Chemical Store and
the Christmas in Egypt Chop Bar. It is not at all
uncommon, at any hour of the day or night, to
hear the singing and clapping of an outdoor
congregation, backed up by an electric organ,
guitar, bass, drums and a few tambourines.
Christmas was approaching day by day and the
religious fervour was reaching boiling point.
Nana Elvis arrives
On 24 December I heard that Elvis and his family
would be arriving that evening. I went out to
the airport to meet them. I walked into the VIP
lounge and there was Nana Elvis, as friendly,
smiling and understated as ever. Accompanying
him was Elizabeth and their children Theresa
(seven), Matthew (five) and Christopher (three).
There was also his daughter Eunice (sixteen)
from Elvis's previous marriage. Queen Eliza¬
beth in person was the epitome of an English
middle-class wife: maternal and unruffled. Eunice
was darker in complexion than the other three
12

Elvis's akyempona or
sceptre.
due to the fact that Elvis's first wife was Ghanaian.
The younger ones are light coffee-coloured with
curly (as opposed to Afro) hair. The little children
were all lively, but it was clear from the start that
Christopher was definitely the ham of the family.
Elvis and Liz were very welcoming and told me
to just latch myself on to the family for the next
two weeks.
The next morning, after breakfast, we hauled
everything into the Peugeot station wagon that
Elvis had hired for the duration of their stay. We
all managed to squeeze in. I got the front seat,
which I shared with a suitcase, two overloaded
carrier bags and a ghetto blaster. Then we took
off for Jukwaa, which was an hour's drive away,
about fifteen kilometres inland from the fishing
port of Winneba.
Driving away from Accra, the monotonous
coastal plain gradually subsided into low, bushy
hills that were dotted with the occasional enor¬
mously tall baobab tree. The drive itself was quite
an experience. Our car weaved crazily down the
highway, avoiding the countless potholes. The
cars approaching us were doing the same. Some¬
times we would pass them on one side, some¬
times on the other. We stopped for petrol. The sta¬
tion had a 1920s manual pump with two large
glass cylinders that were filled with petrol before
being discharged into our tank. It was late morning
when we reached Jukwaa.
N'BAAH SANTY,
of Togo, studied medicine at
Kharkhov (Ukraine) during
the 1980s. He is currently
studying in France.

