
QUEBEC
a city beyond compare
byAndré Charbonneau,
Yvon Desloges and Marc Lafrance
The cradle ofFrench civilization in America and afortified city
ofoutstanding interest, historic Quebec is one ofUnesco's world
heritage sites
When he built his first lodging,
which served as a warehouse,
home and fort on the northern
bank of the St. Lawrence in 1608 on the
site ofwhat is today Place Royale; Samuel
de Champlain harboured great ambitions
for Quebec that it should become the
main port of the new colony, its political
and religious centre, its major stronghold.
The future proved him right. In the span of
one and a half centuries, Quebec became
the capital of an immense French empire
in America a giant with feet of clay
extending from the Gulfof St. Lawrence to
the Gulf of Mexico, and from the Atlantic
Ocean to the Rocky Mountains.
Located on a steep hill with two
plateaux one high, the other low
Quebec acquired its characteristic fea¬
tures very early on. In the upper town were
the fortress, the governor's palace, reli¬
gious and administrative buildings and
numerous dwellings. The lower town was
the commercial district whose port was
until the mid-nineteenth century the far¬
thest point up the St. Lawrence that ocean¬
going vessels could sail. From Quebec furs
were exported in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, as was lumber in
the nineteenth, bywhich time the city had
become the third largest port in North
America and the principal point of entry
for immigrants to Canada.
Moreover, the city and its educational
institutions served as the administrative
and intellectual centre of the new colony
46
View of Quebec.
(19th-century
French engraving).
of New France, and was the apostolic seat
of a large diocese that extended over a vast
area ofNorth America, from the Atlantic to
Louisiana. From it explorers and mis¬
sionaries set sail in search of new lands
and new souls. It was the destination of
French settlers who found there reminders
of the land from which they had come.
The cathedral, built in the middle of the
eighteenth century, and the seventeenth-
century parts of the Ursulines Convent
and the Seminary, are all that remains of
the complex of religious buildings the
archbishopric and other institutions
that once stood in the upper town.
In spite of important political, eco¬
nomic and social changes, Quebec has
succeeded in preserving its cultural her¬
itage, which is based on its institutions
and architecture, but also on its geography.
While large architectural structures have
undergone major changes, the layout of
the city remains fundamentally the same,
spreading out like a spider's web, with a
chequerboard pattern added in the middle
of the eighteenth century by the engineer
Chaussegros de Léry. The typical Quebec
house had a distinctive architectural style
adapted from a French model. Most of
them were destroyed during the bom¬
bardment of 1759 and were rebuilt after
the English conquest by craftsmen using
traditional skills. Large chimneys, fire-
break walls and high roofs are character¬
istic features.
THE FORTIFIED CITY
The upper town offered many tactical
advantages to a city that was strategically
important as a centre of communication
with the mother country and as the port of

The Château Frontenac looks out over the
St. Lawrence. It is named for Louis de
Buade, count of Palluau and Frontenac,
who was governor of New France in the late
1 7th century.
entry for supplies from France. Indeed,
Quebec's defensive system reflected the
advances of European fortification tech¬
niques from the seventeenth to the nine¬
teenth centuries. Several elements of the
system have survived to evoke the rich
military past of a city that has experienced
no less than five sieges.
Champlain's first wooden house calls
to mind a medieval castle equipped with
platforms for cannon. By the end of the
seventeenth century, however, and during
the first halfof the eighteenth, the colony
was caught in the throes of rivalry between
European nations. Quebec became a prize
in the conflict between troops and military
techniques of the old continent. A suc¬
cession ofdefensive walls were built whose
geometry and contours reflect the influ¬
ence of the great French military engineer
Vauban. Several military structures from
this period have survived, notably the walls
around the old city, which were built by
Chaussegros de Léry after 1745. Quebec
was besieged twice during the Seven Years
War (1756 to 1763), which was caused by
rivalry between France and England in
North America.
After the Treaty of Paris (1763), as a
result of which New France became an
English colony, Quebec continued to be of
great strategic importance, although its
situation was transformed by the Amer¬
ican War of Independence against the
British. American troops attempted to
seize the city in 1775. British contribu¬
tions to the defence system can still be
seen. The construction of a citadel on the
top of a strategic site is a classic response
by an army ofoccupation in a newly-con¬
quered land, and the British were no
exception to the rule. After many projects
had been put forward and some building
work was done between 1778 and 1782,
the Citadel, which still dominates Cape
Diamond, was finally built between 1 820
and 1830 to plans by Colonel Elias
Durnford.
Old houses in the
lower town evoke
the atmosphere of
Normandy or
Brittany, where
their first occupants
originated.
47

48
Rebuilt in neogothic style in the 19th
century, the St. Louis gate was one of the
fortified passages through the city wall.
The surviving elements of the defence
system are one of the dominant features of
Quebec's urban landscape. They are widely
regarded as a key cultural resource that
gives Quebec its distinctive character
among North American cities.
THE END OF AN ERA
Quebec's era as a military fortress ended
towards the middle of the nineteenth cen¬
tury. The departure of the British garrison
in 1871 provided an opportunity to
abandon the fort and destroy the old mil¬
itary gates. It marked the start of changes
whereby the fortress became a historical
monument and of struggles between the
forces of progress and the supporters of
conservation.
It was a bitter struggle, waged during a
time ofsteady decline in Quebec. The large
sea port, the shipbuilding industry and
the lumber trade collapsed and the city
lost ground when Ottawa became national
capital after the creation of the Canadian
Confederation. Yet in spite of these diffi
culties, major building projects such as
the Parliament buildings (1886), City Hall
(1895) and the Château Frontenac (1894)
enhanced the city's image and gave it a
new skyline.
The preservation movement launched
by the government of General Dufferin in
1874 to protect the old walled enclosures
determined the present shape of Quebec.
The construction of the famous Dufferin
terrace that overlooks the cliff, and the
opening of new entry points into the city
transformed Quebec from a fortress city
into a national historic site.
The preservation movement grew
stronger during the twentieth century. The
fortifications were classified as a monu¬
ment ofnational historical interest in 1957.
Around the same time, the government
of Quebec undertook the restoration of a
number ofhouses and buildings situated
on Place Royale in the lower town the
E za
ANDRE CHARBONNEAU, WON
DESLOGES AND MARC LAFRANCE
are Quebec historians working with Parks
Canada-Quebec Region. They have been active for
over twenty years in the protection and
presentation of Canadian historic sites. They are
co-authors of Quebec, the Fortified City: from the
17th to the 19th century (Quebec, 1982).
former commercial and residential heart
of Quebec. In December 1985, following a
recommendation by the International
Council on Monuments and Sites
(ICOMOS), the historic district ofQuebec
was added to Unesco's World Heritage List.
Rue Notre-Dame, in the lower town, is one
of the oldest thoroughfares In North
America.
