"How can science
be left free to
pursue its
discoveries and the
state be allowed to
exercise its
responsibility
towards society!"
enetics in the market-place
by Ezra N. SuleimanThe prospect of shopping for "spare part"
organs and tissue confronts modern
societies with acute ethical dilemmas
SO
There have always been but few certain¬
ties in the world, and the most funda¬
mental of them life and death are now being
questioned by the scientific engineering of the
last decade. As Andrew Kimbrell observed in his
recent book, The Human Body Shop, "the engi¬
neering and marketing of life . . . raises some of
the most profound questions our society has
ever had to answer: What is life? What does it
mean to be human? Should we allow our scien¬
tists to become the genetic co-authors of evo¬
lution? How do we define death? Who deter¬
mines what life is worth living? Do we want a
'free market' in human organs, tissues, genes
or children?"1
Genetic engineering not only raises funda¬
mental questions about the meaning of life and
death, it also challenges our notions of the life

process. It spawns whole industries that seek to
exploit every scientific advance made by this
process. It challenges our notion of human
rights.2 It raises ethical and moral questions
about using foetuses for "spare parts" for, as
Andrew Kimbrell has written, "many experts
feel that the current disapproval of 'growing
foetuses' for medical use will be short-lived."
While philosophers and ethicists must, and
will, continue to debate the morality of some
aspects of genetic engineering, the fact is that the
issues raised by biotechnology cry out for poli-
- cies that establish the contours within which
these scientific advances can legitimately occur.
We now know that the implications for the
scientific community and for society of the dis¬
covery of the genome are nothing less than rev¬
olutionary. That this discovery is the culmina¬
tion of many years of research does not lessen its
impact or alter its unprecedented character.
When scientific research advanced to the point
of giving us the atomic and hydrogen bombs, the
world marvelled, but only realized the full impli¬
cations of these scientific discoveries after their
dangers had become a fact of life. Should the
development of the weapons of mass destruc¬
tion remarkable scientific discoveries in their
own right not be seen as a warning signal for
us today where genetic engineering is con¬
cerned? Should we not react now, for the process
is already well advanced? To ask these ques¬
tions is to ask what role the state should take in
orienting research and in regulating the diffusion
of the discoveries of genetic engineering.
The role of the state
This is a matter of concern to the entire inter¬
national community. It can no longer be
regarded as a matter best left to scientists. Just as
war is too important to be left to the generals, so
life and death are too important to be left to
the hazards of scientific discoveries.
Underlying the issue of the role of the state
in scientific research are the questions of the
responsibility of the scientific community and
the "ownership" of scientific results. These are
fundamentally ethical issues, and as such must
be debated by society.
There are essentially two views regarding
the role that the state should play in encouraging
and regulating scientific research. The first holds
that the state should in no way interfere in sci¬
entific research because science can only advance
unfettered. Following from this premise, it is
believed that:
The state should remain a bystander where
scientific research in general is concerned.
The state should not seek to dictate the
diffusion of scientific results. Scientists are the
best judges of what results should be made avail¬
able to the public. They are the owners of these
results and discoveries.
The state should not determine the direc¬
tion of scientific research. By the same token, it
should not seek to control the outcome of sci¬
entific discoveries.
The interference of the state in scientific
research risks making science an instrument of
a state ideology rather than the objective pursuit
of knowledge.
The second and diametrically opposed view
is that the state, charged with responsibility for
society, has an obligation to involve itself in sci¬
entific research. This view is based on the belief
that:
In a democratic society, science must never
become a mere instrument of a state ideology. It
can proceed freely and still leave a role for the
state.
The state has a responsibility for preserving
the cohesion of society and for ensuring equality
before the law.
The state has an obligation to be active in any
area that poses a potential threat to individuals,

A confrontation between
science and the authorities:
Galileo before the Holy Office,
1633, by the French painter
Joseph Nicolas Robert-Fleury
(1797-1890).
22
EZRA N. SULEIMAN,
of the United States, is IBM
Professor of International
Studies and Director of the
Committee for European Studies
at Princeton University. He is the
author of numerous books,
including Politics, Power and
Bureaucracy in France (1974)
Bites in French Society (1979)
and, in French, ¡.es Hauts
Fonctionnaires et le Politique
(1976) and Les Elites en France
(1979)
that affects the equilibrium of society and that
affects the social order in any way.
Both these views express general ideologies
regarding the proper role of the state in demo¬
cratic societies. How can they be reconciled?
How can they be applied to the specific context
of the discovery of the genome? How, in short,
can science be left free to pursue its discoveries
and the democratic state be allowed to exercise
its responsibility towards society?
First of all, there is no contradiction between
requiring the state to guarantee the freedom of
scientific research and expecting it to play a role
in regulating the consequences of this research.
This is particularly the case in biotechnology.
Secondly, as many of the potential conse¬
quences of biotechnological research are already
becoming known, the state has the obligation to
regulate some of the adverse or nefarious uses to
which this research may be put.
Thirdly, regulating biotechnological research
and the diffusion of its results is not a way of
opposing the scientific community. Scientists
themselves do not have control over the uses of
their discoveries. Hence, scientists can work with
the state to ensure the ethical uses of their
research.
Fourthly, research in biotechnology is expen
sive and, in an era of scarce resources, the state
needs to justify such expenditures. And justi¬
fying expenditures requires justifying the use of
these expenditures.
Because of the potentially profound effect on
society on inequality among individuals, on
the relation of the individual to society and,
finally, on the very concept of collectivity the
state has an obligation to be perhaps more
involved in this area of scientific research than
in others.
The state, however, cannot merely impose
guidelines. It must have its own guidelines to
follow. A democratic state is always subject to
controls, and the confines of its actions in the area
of biotechnology must be carefully demarcated.
The state needs to develop its levels of inter¬
vention in scientific research through wide-
ranging discussion in a democratic context. This .
ensures the legitimacy of actions, and ensures
controls over actions. In short, the state needs to
work with the scientific community to ensure
the freedom of research and the ethical uses of
the results of this research.
1 Andrew Kimbrell, The Human Body Shop: The Engi¬
neering and Marketing ofLife (New York, 1993).
2 See Eugene B. Brody, Biomedical Technology and
Human Rights (Dartmouth Publishing Co., Cambridge,
U.S.A. and UNESCO, 1993).
