The splendourofSpis
by EdouardBailby
A unique ensemble
of medieval fortifications in Slovakia
Thesite is dramatic. Perched atop a
rocky outcrop 634 metres above
sea-level in the centre ofSlovakia,
Spis castle Spissky Hrad dominates a
green carpet of rolling hills and valleys.
Bathed in light, buffeted by the wind
blowing off the Tatra mountains, its ram¬
parts dominated by an imposing keep and
looming watch-towers bear witness to a
troubled history that stretches back into
the MiddleAges. No other castle in eastern
Europe has such extensive fortifications.
The visitor needs a fairly detailed map
ofSlovakia to find the way to Spis castle. It
lies about ten kilometres from the town
of Levoca (population 17,000), whose
church of St. James boasts a Gothic altar-
piece of gilded wood that is 18.6 metres
high, the tallest in the world. The entire
region abounds in such treasures, largely
unknown to tourists, who tend to favour
the sunny forests of the Tatras in summer
and their ski-slopes in winter.
The castle is built round a keep and an
inner courtyard, which are protected by
two romanesque inner walls with forti¬
fied access gates and an outer wall in
which the main gate is located. There are
also a chapel, garrison buildings and a
large barbican. The castle is reached by a
narrow, winding country road barelywide
enough for two cars to pass each other.
Sometimes coaches pull up at the foot of
the walls and disgorge streams of school-
36
Above, the imposing ramparts of Spis
castle. Left, the church of the Holy
Spirit (13th century) in the nearby
village of Zehra.

children, who love to play in the ruins at
least those open to the public and
scramble along the ramparts that run
along the crest of the hill. There is a small
museum where they can learn about the
castle and its history.
An eventful past
Archaeological excavations have shown
that this area has been peopled since
neolithic times, i.e. the fifth millennium of
the pre-Christian era. In the first century
A.D. people ofSlavic origin began to build
an ingenious network of mud walls, ves¬
tiges ofwhich are still visible today. Early
in the tenth century Magyar tribes came
down from the Ural Mountains, setded in
the Carpathian Basin and extended their
dominion as far as the Tatras. For a thou¬
sand years, right to the end of the Habs-
burg Empire, Slovakia was ruled by Hun
garian monarchs, who left many traces of
their presence. One of them is Spis castle.
To crush Slovakian peasant uprisings
and check foreign invasions, a system of
fortifications was built at the beginning
of the twelfth century. It included a tower
(22.5 metres in diameter), which was sited
on a geological fault and eventually col¬
lapsed. It was not until the thirteenth cen¬
tury that a genuine castle began taking
shape on the rocky outcrop. Work stopped
in 124 1 when the area was invaded by Tar¬
tars, Mongolian horsemen who pillaged
the region. Eventually, however, the Hun¬
garian king Bela IV expelled the Tartars
from his kingdom, established a system
of feudal lordships to bring prosperity
back to his lands, and built a number of
defensive fortresses. Spis castle was
embellished in 1249 with a palatial
romanesque building and in 1270 with a

'Restoration work will take ten
years and costabout
$1.6 million, and we'regoingto
have a liard time raising this
sum without international



help,' says the director ofthe
Spis museum.
magnificent keep. But in less than a cen¬
tury another enemy invasion caused mas¬
sive damage.
Then in the fourteenth century, King
Lajos I of Hungary (1342-1382) decided
to rebuild the castle in the Gothic style.
Two vast courtyards were built within the
walls, and the expanding castle became
one of the pillars of the Hungarian defence
system. Each succeeding owner con¬
tributed to its growth. The Zapolsky family,
whose descendants still bear the heredi¬
tary title of "Governor of the County of
Spis" built the chapel of St. Elizabeth in
the late Gothic style and added fortifica-
38
tions on either side of the main entrance
gate. In 1531 the castle passed into the
hands of the Hurzó family, which owned
the country's biggest foundries and intro¬
duced Renaissance elements into the
castle's architecture. The most recent
changes were made by the Csaky family,
one of the wealthiest in the Austro-Hun-
garian empire.
When Stephan Csaky died in 1663, his
kinsfolk moved a few kilometres away into
the Hodkovce and Bijacovce palaces. Only
a small garrison remained in Spis castle,
leaving in 1780 after the castle was gutted
by fire. The local people plundered what
remained. They took timber for their
houses, fuelwood, iron sculptures and
stone for building.
The years passed, the tide ofwar ebbed
and flowed, and the castle was forgotten.
Only its ruins survived, neglected and aban¬
doned to the elements. In 1945, in the after¬
math ofthe Second World War, Spis castle,
which still belonged to the Csaky family,
was declared a national cultural monu¬
ment by the Czechoslovak Republic.
In the 1970s restoration and archaeo¬
logical excavations were conducted at the
castle, but theyproved to be very expensive,
were suspended on several occasions and
were finally abandoned a few years ago.
When Slovakia became an independent
republic in 1993, it asked for three historical
sites in the Spis region to be included on
Unesco's World Heritage List: the wooden
village of Vlkolinec, the mining village of
Banska Stiavnica and Spis castle. In
December 1993 the sites were added to the
List.
'We need tourists'
Eva Spalekova, the director of the Spis
museum, is responsible for administering
the castle. She received us in her office in
Levoca, across the road from St. James's
church. "We have calculated that restora¬
tion workwill take ten years and cost about
$1.6 million," she explained. "And we're
going to have a hard time raising this sum
without international help." Last year part
of the ramparts collapsed, and the rest
had to be shored up. But work was delayed
by an unusually hard winter and the
extremely strongwinds that blow at certain
times of the year. We noticed a huge crack
in another wall that supports the keep.
"We're counting heavily on tourists," Eva
Spalekova continued, "who pay a small
entrance fee. Their presence is a great
encouragement to us. We need them."

Spis castle is part of a complex of
medieval military, political and religious
monuments Zehra, Spissky Podhradie
and Spisska Kapitula that has no equal in
central and eastern Europe. The sites form
part of the castle's estates and are associ¬
ated with it on the World Heritage List. In
the charming village ofZehra at the foot of
the chalky hill, a staircase leads to the late-
thirteenth-century church of the Holy
Spirit with its immaculate white walls.
Remarkable frescoes dating from the thir¬
teenth to the seventeenth centuries line
the interior, but they are under attack from
mildew and will not survive much longer
without restoration.
The little town of Spissky Podhradie at
the foot of the castle was razed by the Tar¬
tars in 1241 but rebuilt two centuries later.
A fine example of medieval town plan¬
ning, it also has a romanesque parish
church and seventeenth-century Renais¬
sance-style houses.
Standing above the town, of which it
now forms part, Spisska Kapitula was orig¬
inally a fortified religious complex and is
certainly the most astonishing site on the
old feudal estate. The castle provost lived
there in the monastery of St. Martin, which
has not survived. Despite the Tartar inva¬
sion in the thirteenth century and the fre¬
quent Bulgarian raids that forced the
inhabitants to build fortifications that are
still intact, many architectural vestiges of
the complex have survived. Within the
oval area enclosed by its ramparts a maze
of narrow streets climb to St. Martin's
cathedral. Founded in the thirteenth cen¬
tury and added to over the years, the cadie-
dral is a blend of romanesque, Gothic,
Renaissance and baroque elements. In
1819 the first teacher-training college in
the kingdom of Hungary was opened in
the adjoining episcopal palace, which is
mainly Gothic. The hamlet's twenty- three
listed buildings belong to the Catholic
Church and are much in need of repair,
especially the old houses along the main
street, most ofwhich are in ruins.
It is urgent that the international com¬
munity should become aware of the uni¬
versal quality of Spis castle and the three
sites associated with it. Without its aid, this
unique medieval ensemble and the mas¬
terpieces of Gothic and Renaissance art
that it contains may one day disappear.
A party of schoolchildren climb
the narrow path to the castle
(above) before making a
spectacular tour of the
ramparts (opposite page).
EDOUARD BAILBY
is a French journalist who has
been a correspondent with the
weekly L'Express and a press
officer in Unesco's Office of
Public Information. He is the
author of guides to Cuba (6th
edition, 1993) and Hungary
(1991), published by Arthaud,
Paris.
39
