YEHUDAH
AMICHAI
talks to
Edgar Reichmann
Yehudah Amichai, one of Israel's most outstanding
writers, is mainly known as a poet, although he has
also written novels, short stories and radio plays. His
poetry, in which Biblical and contemporary allusions
are blended, is written in simple colloquial language.
In 1982 he was awarded his country's Israel Prize for
Literature for his work as a whole. Among his poetry
collections published in English are Selected Poems
(1986), Great Tranquillity (1983) and Love Poems (1981).
What is theplace ofpoetry in people 's
lives and can poetry contribute to their
happiness?
If you write about things that are hap¬
pening to people you can contribute to
happiness. My poetry helped me over¬
come my first encounter with adult life.
Between the ages of eighteen and twenty-
five, I was in two wars, the Second World
War and the Israeli war of independence. It
took me quite some time to overcome that,
to realize what it meant to start my adult
life with war. I needed my words to achieve
peace with myself.
I don't think that you should lie in
poetry and say that everything is fine and
beautiful. But you can write about things
as they are in a positive way. You can sing
them and by singing, even the bad things
become soothing and can heal you.
I think poetry is a part of the healing of
mankind, like all art. Think of Picasso's
painting Guernica. It is a great outcry
against the cruelty of the Spanish Civil
War. Or consider how a poem can be like
a lullaby. There's a Yiddish lullaby that
goes like this: "Sleep my child, sleep. Father
went to the war. The pound is falling, the
city's on fire, the enemy's coming, the
wolves are howling, but sleep my child,
sleep." The mother mentions all the bad
things in such a way that even the fire and
the enemy become soothing to the child.
She doesn't have to lie and talk about angels
and butterflies.
Your first collection of poems was
"Now and the other days", which the
critics saw as a sign ofradical change in the
Hebrew language and the birth ofa new
school ofHebrewpoetry.
Well, I'm reluctant to describe it as a
"new school". I started writing and I
thought that the generation before me was
not capable of expressing my experience.
It's like when you go to a restaurant and eat
very good food, and then go home and
say, "I really want to make it myself." So I
made it myself.
The change was that I wrote about
things that were on the edge of being for¬
bidden in poetry. Not totally forbidden,
but nearly. Consider Nathan Alterman, a
great writer of the generation before me.
He wrote war poems but he never used
the word "gun". He always spoke about
the sword and the arrow.
Wouldyou say that traditionalHebrew
poetry had a collective feeling and that
you needed to have a more individual
approach in your own poetry?
There is something in that. The genera¬
tion before mine wrote about "we" and
my generation writes more about "I".
Even in a war, when fate brings people
together, even in a very just war like the
Second World War or the Israeli war of
independence, every soldier has questions

about whether it's a good war or a bad
war, whether it is against good people or
bad people. Every soldier has his indi¬
vidual experience. In a similar vein, you
don't write love poems about love in gen¬
eral, you write poems about your own
experience in love.
I want to add, though, that I wasn't
making a conscious effort to change
Hebrew poetry. I just wanted to write my
poetry. I say this because there were other
poets of my generation who were very
conscious, very aware of what they were
doing. I think a real artist does what he
does because that's the only way he can
doit.
Why do we needpoetry?
I feel that poetry is the oldest form of lit¬
erary expression. Prayers are poetry and
they have not changed. Language and
images change but the basic things are
human events: love, death, sorrow, despair,
hope. Praise of women, praise of man,
praise of love. Weeping about them. So in
a way, poetry is actually the backbone, the
spine of the human language experience,
from the Bible on through to many other
great poems of the world.
It's the backbone because in a war
you're not going to take a book by Tolstoy
with you. It's too big to carry. But you
can take a few poems, even if they're just in
your head. That's why I think poetry will
survive. Novelists may have to adapt to
the demands of movies or television; they
constantly have to change. But poetry
remains the same.
I once said that poets are like the
infantry, the foot soldiers in an army.
They're out there in the war, all by them¬
selves with a few others. Novelists are
more like generals who sit in shelters plan¬
ning huge operations and don't really get
involved. Of course, literary academicians
are like war historians who write about
past wars because that way they have
nothing to fear from bullets.
Has Hebrew poetry gone through any
important metrical changes? Are you free
to use rhythm?
There's one style which is very strict,
where you have sonnets, couplets, poetry
with rhyme and metre. But you also have
another style, the style of the Bible and of
prayers, which is freer and has a kind of
internal rhythm. I've written in both styles.
I've also written some sixty rubaiyat, a
style of poetry from the Middle Ages that
is widely known through the Rubaiyat of
Omar Khayyam. It's a four-line poem,
very strict, with the same rhyme at the
end. It's like the sonnet in European lan¬
guages. I wrote rubaiyat poems under the
influence of one of our medieval poets,
Judah Halevi. He was one of the great
Jewish poets who lived alongside Muslim
culture in southern Spain until both cul¬
tures were driven out.
Through being translated into twenty
languages your work has reached a vast
number ofpeople.
Yes. That's a kind of compensation.
Because if you had an audience around
"I think poetry will
survive. Novelists may
have to adapt to the
demands of the movies
or television; they
constantly have to
change. But poetry
remains the same."
you in those times it was only fifty, a hun¬
dred, two hundred, four hundred people.
Nowadays poetry has another way of get¬
ting to people and I think it's very impor¬
tant. It's like when you start a fire with
little twigs at the edges. A big wind may
blow up later, but there always has to be a
fire burning. I was asked, when my poetry
was translated, "Do you think that your
poetry loses in translation?" I said, "Yes,
sure, but we lose things all the time. We lose
weight, but that can be a good thing." It's
okay if poetry loses a little something in
order to survive.
How do you explain that yourpoetry,
which is so deeply rooted in yourpersonal
experience and in a particular place and
time, can be understood and appreciated
by very differentpeople?
If you talk about your own life and feel¬
ings, then I think this gets through to other
people. What's happening now, all over
the world, is very interesting. Economically
people have been joining forces, but local
cultures and languages are again becoming
very important. The more a piece of art is
local, the truer it is. To my mind, there is no
such thing as universal art. I think that is
why Esperanto failed to catch on.
You have said that your roots extend
into thepast andpresent ofyour land and
yourpeople and that you never became a
chauvinistic nationalist. What's the dif¬
ference between realpatriotism andxeno¬
phobic nationalism ?
I think that's one of the main problems
of our time. If you love your culture, your
landscape, your climate and your history,
then that's fine. But if patriotism is based on
negating someone else's culture then it's a
bad patriotism. Patriotism also means
speaking out against your own people if
you think they are doing something wrong.
That's an even stronger patriotism. Real
patriotism has to be critical sometimes.
This brings us to the Palestinians	
That's important. We don't live in an
empty world. Only the feeble-minded
think that they're the only people in the
world. We have to see the others, even if we
think they are our adversaries and we think
they did a few things wrong. We have to try
and get them to understand our patrio¬
tism. And we have to understand them
and their patriotism.
Doyou think thatyou andaPalestinian
poet like Mahmoud Darwish could work
together anddo something to solveproblems
between Israelis and Palestinians?
In a way, yes. We are good friends. We
don't see each other very often, but he trans¬
lated a lot of my poems into Arabic and
published them in Syria and Egypt before
the Israel-Egyptian peace treaty. I may differ
with Mahmoud Darwish on certain points
but I regard him as a great poet.
We could do something that in a sense

I needed my words
to achieve peace with myself."
goes much deeper than what is done by pol¬
itics or journalism. Poetry is much slower,
but it's far more profound. The basic thing
in Mahmoud's poetry and in my poetry is
that it starts from human beings in their
own place. And that is where people meet.
Do you think the world is destinedfor
conflict, that it's doomed to explode or col¬
lapse?
In each generation people think the
world is going to collapse; it's one of our
basic feelings. My father thought that if
the world wasn't religious everything
would fall down. Some people feel that if
socialism collapses the world will fall apart.
But there are certain things like love that
can keep the world alive.
But now even youngpeople are begin¬
ning to have doubts about the world.
I remember as a fifteen-year-old in
Jerusalem in 1939, when the Second World
War broke out, that my parents and their
friends were fully aware of what was going
to happen. It was a big war, a big danger.
But I wasn't: when you are young you
have a totally different approach. When I
"If you love your
culture, your landscape,
your climate and your
history, then that's fine.
But patriotism also
means speaking out
against your own
people if you think they
are doing something
wrong."
was in my first two wars, I didn't have the
feeling that it was the end of the world. On
the contrary, I had the feeling that we were
fighting for a brave new world.
H Do you think, like many others, that
the great collective ideas of the past have
been shattered?
I'm quite sure that the next century will
find its own way to define itself positively.
After the First World War people thought,
because it was the first big war in which
millions were killed, that there was no
hope for the world. Then we had another
war. But even then mankind went on, even
after the holocaust. I think it was Theodor
Adorno who said that after Auschwitz it
was no longer possible to talk about God.
But people started talking about God again.
This could be foolish optimism, the
optimism of someone saying, "I have sur¬
vived so many wars that the world can't
be too bad." It's a very primitive and naive
optimism. But primitive in a sense that isn't
necessarily bad. It's also the lust for life,
for continuity, for not seeing all the dangers.
If you're always on the lookout for danger,
you stop living and just wait to die.
The developments in the Israeli-Arab
conflict have proved my optimisim to be
right. Without throwing caution to the
winds, there is still hope in our world for
even the most severe conflicts to be solved.
EDGAR REICHMANN is a writer and literary critic.
