fHE MAGIC OF MUSHROOMS
by R Atthasampunna and S.T Chang Fungus with
a future
THE mushroom has always been a
thing of mystery. In ancient times the
seemingly miraculous manner of its
growth without seed, its sudden appearance
after rain, its equally rapid disappearance and
ts curious umbrella-like shape gave rise to a
ealth of allusions and mythologies. Today, it
is continuing to perform feats of magic and
versatility, not only as a source of food, but by
helping to convert agricultural and industrial
wastes into useful matter.
16
I he mushroom as symbol
of longevity. Detail of a
Korean painting (late- 1 8th,
early- 1 9th century).

Edible mushrooms provide high quality
protein that can be produced with greater
biological efficiency than animal protein. They
are rich in fibre, minerals and vitamins, and
have a low crude fat content. These properties
are major contributing factors to the tradi¬



tional recognition of mushrooms as "healthy"
food.
However, although a large number of
mushroom species are not only edible but
also possess tonic and medicinal qualities,
some are lethally poisonous. There is no
simple way of distinguishing between edible
and poisonous mushrooms, and one should
eat mushrooms only if one knows their names
and their properties with considerable preci¬
sion.
Mushroom cultivation, moreover, requires
relatively little in terms of large-scale equip¬
ment, capital, land and processing. In the rural
areas of less-developed countries, where large-
scale capital-intensive operations are inap¬
propriate, well-managed mushroom farms
can make important contributions to the
nutrition and economic welfare of the local
people. This is especially true in regions where
the indigenous population suffers from pro¬
tein deficiency.
Nature's garbage man
However, the mushroom would not be
worthy of its versatile reputation if it were
only a source of food. It can also help to solve
one of humankind's most urgent and growing
problems its propensity to create waste.
The agricultural, forestry and food pro¬
cessing industries generate huge quantities of
wastes, much of which is either burnt, dis¬
charged into watercourses or used for landfill.
And yet it constitutes a potentially valuable
resource. Most agricultural, industrial and
household solid wastes are rich in organic
matter, mainly cellulose, hemicellulose and
lignin, substances that are highly resistant to
biological degradation and have little or no
food value in their original form. Further¬
more, their disposal can be a major source of
environmental pollution. However, when
properly treated with bioconversion tech¬
nology the process whereby micro-organ¬
isms are used to transform organic residues
into utility products they can be modified
and upgraded into high-quality protein for
human and animal consumption, and used
for the production of microbial metabolites
and the generation of new feedstocks for the
polymer industry, which creates materials
such as plastics, resins and synthetic rubbers.
Edible mushroom production is a partic¬
ularly effective form of bioconversion tech¬
nology. Mushrooms differ from green plants
in that they cannot use sunlight to manufac¬
ture their food. What they do is produce
enzymes that degrade the complex substrates
on which they grow and then feed themselves
on the soluble substances thus produced. They
can be cultivated on a wide variety of woody
and cellulose wastes, and the spent residue
left after harvesting can be used as an animal
feedstock and/or a soil conditioner.
There is also rapidly growing interest in
/\bove, Shiii take (Lentinus
edodes), a fragrant
mushroom grown in Japan
from which a natural
product, active against
certain types of tumour, is
extracted.
Below left, the poisonous
mushroom fly agaric
(Amanita muscaria).
P. ATTHASAMPUNNA of
Thailand, is Director of the
Microbial Resources Centre
(MlRCEN) at the Thailand
Institute of Scientific and
Technological Research,
Bangkok. She is a specialist in
biofuel research and also heads
the Microbial Culture Service
Unit at her country's National
Centre for Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology.
S.T. CHANG, of Australia, is a
specialist in fungal genetics. A
former Executive Secretary of
the Headquarters of
UNESCO's Southeast Asian
Network on Microbiology, he
is now Chairman of the
Biology Department at the
Chinese University of Hong
Kong and Director of the
Hong Kong MlRCEN on
Bioconversion Technology. He
is a member at large of the
Executive Board of the
International Union of
Microbiological Societies.
17

Mushroom spore used to
inoculate wood with fungus
for growing Shii take on a
mushroom "farm" in
Texas (U.S.A.).
Cultivated mushrooms
are grown in former
quarries near Paris on
sacks of manure covered
with crushed chalky soil.
The harvest lasts from
3 to 6 months.
mushrooms as a source of high-value metabo¬
lites, substances which can be used to treat
tumours, strengthen the immune system and
reduce blood pressure and cholesterol levels.
One such substance, PSK, also known as
Krestin, is made from the mushroom Coriolus
versicolor and has become the best-selling
anti-cancer drug in Japan, where it has 25 per
cent of market share and in 1987 had an annual
sale of $357 million. One Japanese company
has annual sales of lentinan, a polysaccharide
derived from another mushroom, Lentinus
edodes, amounting to $90 million. These nat¬
ural products are active against certain types
of tumours and have the advantage of not
being toxic to non-target cells.
Mushrooms also represent a relatively
untapped source of novel products for use in
the food and drink industries as illustrated
by the growing number of products reaching
the retail market. Important examples include
natural food additives such as colorants and
flavour compounds that can be used to replace
chemical additives that are often considered
less acceptable. Furthermore, the food
industry is already subject to consumer pres¬
sure to produce "healthy" foods and, as the
emphasis on prevention rather than cure of
diet-related diseases grows, this trend will
become even stronger.
It should be noted that world production
of cultivated edible mushrooms is, well, mush¬
rooming. Nearly 4,000 tons of mushrooms
were cultivated worldwide in 1989-1990, a
dramatic increase from just over 2,000 tons
cultivated in 1986. There has been a particu¬
larly sharp increase in growth over the last five
years. This trend is expected to continue in the
future.
While it is likely that more low-tech
processes such as mushroom bioconversion
technology will be of interest to developing
countries, it is certain that the application of
microbial biotechnology to solid organic
wastes will be an important tool for their food
industries and environmental management in
the years to come.
18
