R H
Gregorio Marañan
TJie Spanish polymath Gregorio
Marañan (1867-1970), one ofthe
pioneers ofendocrinology, was also a
historian, art critic and moral



philosopher. He was a prolific author
(a bibliography compiled towards
the end ofhis life listed more than
' 1,200 titles), notably ofhistorical
and literary works which reached a
wide public ofreaders attracted by
the clarity ofhis style and ideas. In
May 1 933, he tookpart in a
symposium on the "Future of
Culture" organized in Madrid by the
International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation. An extract
from the address he gave on that
occasion is reproduced below.
Regardless of how we define the
term, culture is the highest form of
expression of the human mind. It
exists and will continue to grow in parallel
with the development ofhumanity, which
is still only in its adolescence and whose
sins are the sins ofyouth. People today are
much the same as they always have been.
It is a mistake to think thatwe are at the very
hub of history. When we see everything
around us going from bad to worse, we
imagine that it is the world that is about to
disappear and change, not us.
In future, as new forms of culture
emerge, itwill be difficultfor us to associate
them with what we currently understand by
Thefuture ofculture
Text selected and presented
by Edgardo Canton
46
the term, and hence to predict their future
course. The same kind ofthing will happen
to the family of the future: it will differ from
the family as we know it but its existence
will not be jeopardized, as some people
nowadays are apt to think. Change, which
is synonymous with renewal, is all too often
confused with death.
The evolution of culture down the ages
has something in common with the evo¬
lution of living organisms. Both have var¬
ious growth centres, each with a cycle of its
own. The focus of evolution shifts as it
advances from one phase to the next. In
each of these phases, specific external fac¬
tors confer a different physiognomy on
organisms and culture alike. Yet the gen¬
eral course ofall these random events fol¬
lows a constant direction, at first upwards,
then to maturity, and eventually to the
stage of "involution", when the process
starts going into reverse. Suffice it to say
that human culture has barely reached
the mature stage and still has a long way to
go before it starts to regress.
MACHINE CIVILIZATION AND
THE ART OF LIVING
The culture of the future will accordingly
differ from our own in its forms and will
undoubtedly go deeper and be more effec¬
tive. The difficulty lies in predicting what
its fluctuating surface movements and
features will be in the phases immediately
following our own generation in that
future which we shall only just manage to
glimpse in the distance before we hand
over to the next generation.
However, there are a number of very
important factors which partly dictate the
shape that culture will take in future. These
are bound up with the way our human
instincts will develop a subject on which
we could hold forth at great length without
any danger of getting things wrong. One
such factor is the spread of the civiliza¬
tion of the machine. Another is the growing
influence of biological concerns, espe¬
cially as they pertain to the physical culture
of the body, the prevention of disease or
the precepts underlying eugenics. In the
generations coming after us, these con¬
cerns will become actual mandatory rules
ofconduct. Both factors are affecting and
will continue to affect the instincts of
human beings; they will, in the first
instance, have a direct influence on the
tone of culture.
People today often wonder whether
the advances that machines are bound to
make in the coming decades and they
will certainly be phenomenal will have a
decisive impact on culture. There can be
no doubt that they will. There is, however,
one point on which I cannot agree with
other people. I do not believe that the
impact of the progress they make will do
any harm to human culture. There can be
no doubt that at the present time per¬
haps only because the progress of
machines is still going through its honey¬
moon period we attach undue impor¬
tance to machine-minded people, people
who use their instincts, to the detriment of
cerebral people. But that fact should not be
regarded as being any more important
than the purely incidental and negligible
importance that it actually possesses. It
is unfortunate that somebody driving a
car should earn more than a poet and that
the winner of an automobile race should
be borne aloft in triumph by a crowd that
is unaware of the publication of a funda¬
mental work in the arts or sciences. But all
this, I repeat, is only of incidental impor¬
tance. The main thing is that the progress
made by machines spares humanity much
toil and trouble and therefore allows it
complete freedom to attend to its spiri¬
tual development. It also adds a happy
zest of precision and speed to the human
mind and culture, although we ourselves
do not realize this.
MAKING HASTE SLOWLY
Speed is a virtue, but at the same time it is
instrumental in spawning a vice, the vice
of precipitation. There can be no doubt

V E
that undue precipitation has had a harmful
effect on culture because it has forced
intelligent people to sacrifice the quality of
what they write to the need to spread the
word at great haste among the harried and
faceless mass of the population. We have
all stopped writing page after densely-
packed page ofslowly pondered thoughts
which came to us unobtrusively and which
may perhaps have made a deep impres¬
sion on people's minds. Instead, we have
all scattered our half-baked ideas and our
still inchoate emotions in the now yel¬
lowing pages of newspapers and in the
endless comings and goings of congresses
and conferences.
But there is an antidote to this poison.
The same progress of the machine that
indisposes and demeans us because of
our lust for speed at the same time helps to
bring us into direct and ready contact with
the timeless rules of the universe. As a
result of this progress, people nowadays
may perhaps not live in such close com¬
munion with nature, but they go out
increasingly in search of it and have a
better grasp of its inner meaning, which is
to synchronize our waking lives with the
variable rhythms of differing worlds.
RELIEVING PAIN
Living in communion with nature and
reading the humanities will automatically
compensate for the petty dangers to which
the present machine age exposes culture.
In short, the distorted image which it is
responsible for imprinting on our per¬
sonality has a significant effect on our out¬
ward demeanour but is less important in
terms ofour innermost being. It is like the
facial expressions which we unwittingly
copy from our cinema heroes and which,
in their outward forms and in those
forms alone make people nowadays so
different from those of forty years ago. For
example, it is surprising how slight an
impact the possibility of flight has on our
minds, although the fact that such a pos¬
sibility exists at all is in itself quite mind-
boggling. It has done little more than step
up the pace at which age-old sentiments
and ideas are handed down and make it
easier for us to gain a deeper knowledge of
them. If Leonardo da Vinci were to come
back to life, he would have to admit that
the pilot of an aeroplane is, by the act of
piloting, not really any different from the
helmsman of one of the galleys that sailed
the oceans of his time.
What is much more important for the
culture of the future is the whole range of
biological concerns to which we referred
earlier. Today lack of money or a fragile
digestion are the only things that stop
people from eating all they want. Future
generations will behave differently. They
will eat in accordance with a scientific
method imposed on them by the economy
of the future and the laws of nutrition.
They will not passively allow their bodies
to suffer the wear and tear ofmaturity and
old age, but will defend them by practising
sport and leading open-air lives. They will
not leave responsibility for their offspring
to the vagaries of physical passion or
fleeting love affairs but will turn love into
a reasoned emotion, separating simple
pleasure from the procreative function.
Yet, all these things and they are rem¬
iniscent of the sort ofpedantic statements
experts in hygiene are wont to make at
their gatherings are already a reality
being thrust on peoples furthest from the
mainstream ofcivilization. In the very near
future, these principles will be inviolable
rules governing our behaviour, and there¬
after they will become essential heredi¬
tary factors. I wonder how deep down into
people's souls this influence will pene
trate, and to what extent it will have an
effect on the way culture evolves.
To those who ask themselves what new
universal concern may come to replace the
fight for individual freedom, which set the
tone of culture for several centuries, the
answer may be that any such concern will
probably aim at relieving people ofphysical
pain, of the ordeal ofpain suffered by indi¬
viduals and the species alike. Naturally, I
believe in the need for pain as a fount of
progress. But the effectiveness ofsuffering
really lies in keeping alive the struggle to
prevent it from occurring, so that the soul
will remain thereafter alert and receptive to
all forms of struggle. People who do not
rebel against pain have no feeling for life or
for efficiency as the key to progress. As long
as progress keeps on being made, humanity
will suffer and will struggle in order not to
suffer. On the day people gain their
freedom, they can then be afraid and
rightly so of the coming of theAnti-Christ
and the end of the species, which will no
doubt come to pass when we enter the
reign of absolute happiness.
47
