For eleven months of the
year, Elvis Johnson-ldan
lives in a London suburb
with his wife Elizabeth and
their three children.
However, in mid-December
every year, he goes back to
Jukwaa, his native village in
Ghana, where he reigns
supreme as Nana Otumayin
Kofi Idan I. In the two
previous issues, George
Darley-Doran accompanied
Elvis on his annual visit to
Jukwaa. In this third and
final episode, he discovers
the subtleties of tribal
organization and the role
Elvis plays in the village.
GEORGE DARLEY-DORAN
is a Turkish-born Englishman
who lives in London, where he
works as a television
correspondent.
I By 9:30 in the evening the whole village
was buzzing as a funeral rite got
underway, ft should be explained that a Fanti
funeral rite is not at all solemn and depressing,
but rather an occasion of celebration and joyful
remembrance of those who have passed away.
Tonight was no exception. There was an outdoor
disco for the children, where the music was
loud enough to . . . wake the dead. And once the
spirits had been fully aroused, they were sere¬
naded by the Wesleyan anthems belting out
from a largely female congregation in the Bethel
Chapel just a few steps up from the disco. A
good chunk of the male population was to be
found at Paoli's and Vic's, Jukwaa's two watering
holes, both of which are located directly outside
the Chapel. Vic's lovely barmaid Theresa a
devout Mormon and a strict teetotaller could
not keep the schnapps and akpeteshie* flowing
quickly enough. Up by the main road, young
women and girls were cooking and selling food
by the light of their hurricane lamps. The party
continued until the early hours, ft was almost
dawn when the men and women gathered into
a procession and swayed up and down the main
road, chanting praises to the spirits of the
deceased. Then everybody went to bed.
By now New Year's Eve was upon us. This
year, the usual celebrations would be coinciding
with the tenth anniversary of Ghana's December
31st Revolution. Those who bought newspapers
could read about it, and those with televisions
(perhaps two households in the village) could
watch all the speeches, but that was the extent to
which the village was affected. Ghana's revolution
(if that is the correct word for it) is to a large
extent an urban phenomenon. The central gov¬
ernment simply lacks the resources necessary
for effective local administration. Until that
changes, local chiefs will remain the practical
managers of the areas under their control.
The power of the chiefs in Ghana is officially
formalized in the National House of Chiefs. This
is situated in Accra. There are also regional houses
around the country. All the tribes of Ghana arc
represented the Fantis and Asantes, the Ga and
various others. The National House of Chiefs
convenes twice a year. All aspects of local gov-



the African
by George Darley-Doran
ernment issues are covered: education, transport,
communication, social policy and so on.
The concept of central government is rela¬
tively new to this part of the world. Modern
Ghana was born out of an arbitrary amalgamation
of many tribal elements. This national entity is still
very much in the gelling process. Even today,
for most of Ghana's population, the word of the
local chief is law. A villager might be tried for a
crime by the Supreme Court, and perhaps sent to
prison, but he will not feel that justice has been
done until he has been tried by his chief.
A noble lineage
The more 1 discovered about the nature of chief¬
taincy in Ghana, the clearer it became why Elvis
in particular had been targcttcd by the king¬
makers ofJukwaa. The village is in great need of
the managerial and diplomatic skills that Elvis has
picked up in the course of his career.
The Idan family to which Elvis belongs con¬
trols one of the five stools scats of power
relating to the area surrounding Jukwaa. Each
stool carries with it a specific area of responsibility.
Elvis, as Brahene, is responsible for harnessing
and developing the resources of the "abran" sec¬
tion of the population. The loose translation of
abran is "youth", but any able-bodied adult can be
classified as a member of this class in other
words, just about everybody between the ages of
fifteen and sixty. Most of Elvis's activities tend to
be in the economic area, trying to create incentives
for young people to stay in the village. He is
trying to improve farming techniques; promote
land-clearance for bigger and better-yielding farms;
experiment with new crops and seeds; and intro¬
duce small-scale technology such as charcoal-
making. A bakery and street-market have both
been established inJukwaa since he was enstooled.
Goats arc, as always, raised inprofusion but cattle-
raising is impossible due to the tsetse fly.
Elvis works in co-operation with the other
four chiefs of Jukwaa. One of these is the
"Odikro", Nana Kojo Idan VII. The direct trans¬
lation of Odikro is "village owner" but this title
is, in fact, a largely ceremonial one similar to that
of an English mayor. His sceptre features a golden
parrot, a symbol of intelligence in Fanti
mythology. Nana Kwesi Ansa the man who
had presided over sports day a few days earlier
is the "Omankrado" ofJukwaa. This title indicates
his role as the spiritual unifier of the village. His
responsibility is to keep the peace and to resolve
matters of civil dispute. The other two chiefs are
the "Tufuhene", who is in charge of the asafo mil¬
itary caste, and the "Gyasehen", who acts as a
kind of lieutenant to Elvis in his role as Brahene.
The role of chief is not necessarily one that 49

"I used to come here when I was a
boy and find a canoe like this one. I'd
sit in it and look out over the sea."
Elvis would have chosen for himself. Indeed, his
mother (prior to her death in 1985) had been



adamant that he pursue his own life, independent
of the village. The kingmakers ofJukwaa were well
aware of this. But kingmakers take a long-term
view. They could see, even when Elvis was young,
that he had a potential capacity for decision¬
making and leadership. They waited until the
death of his mother before thrusting chiefdom
upon him.
Elvis is descended from "noble" lineages on
both sides. Most of the tribes under the Fanti
umbrella are matrilineal, in that men inherit
power via the senior females of each generation.
Elvis's mother Esi Nyarkoa Johnson was of
such a clan. Her family controlled (and still con¬
trols) an important stool situated in Ekumfi
Abaka, to the southwest ofJukwaa. She had been
groomed to be the "queen mother" of her people.
She never accepted the title as such but due to her
stock, as well as her personal strength of character,
she was a formidable woman. Elvis's father
Kobina Otumayin Idan was born into a divi¬
sion of the Fanti tribe that happens to be patri¬
lineal. The Idans are divided into two branches:
one controls an important stool in Winncba, and
the other controls the Jukwaa stool. Elvis's father
was directly descended from both of these
branches. Elvis is therefore the immediate product
of three families that are all-powerful in their
own right. The kingmakers see in Elvis a chance
to consolidate the power of the three families.
The schemes and manoeuvrings of the king¬
makers have implications not just for Elvis, but
for his offspring too. All four of his children
Eunice, Theresa, Matthew and Christopher
will grow up to occupy positions of considerable
influence. It is up to them to decide whether or
not they will exercise that influence. Each of the
children has a Fanti name in addition to his or her
Western one. These names were chosen by the
family elders, and each of them relates to a par¬
ticular stool or forebear. The relevance of the
name increases in proportion to the potential
status of the child in question. Christopher has a
particularly significant Fanti name: Nana Kwame
Akycn. This was the name of Elvis's paternal
great-grandfather, of whom Christopher is seen
to be a reincarnation. The original Nana Kwame
Akyen was the Idan family head before his
descendants separated into the Jukwaa and Win-
neba branches. The kingmakers see Christopher
as potentially being in a position to further con¬
solidate the two halves of a family that has been
divided for generations. But the kingmakers are
in no hurry. They bide their time, waiting entire
decades for their plans to come to fruition.
Liz, Elvis's English wife, has taken her hus¬
band's rise to chieftaincy in her stride and main¬
tains an active interest in the future development
of Jukwaa. She is particularily interested in the
development ofJukwaa's female population. The
lives of the village women consist of a great deal
more than just pounding away at fufu all day. The
men might have all the glory of chiefdom, but it
is the women who get most of the work done. All
the market traders are female. The bars and shops
ofJukwaa are all owned and run by women. It is
the women who run the households, often with
their own finances. They make all the important
decisions regarding the welfare of their children.
For the most part, the women of Jukwaa like
those all over Ghana do what they want, in
their own right, without seeking permission from
their husbands. The extended family solves the
child-care question at a stroke, leaving women to
lead their own lives. Birth out of wedlock is
accepted and not regarded as the stigma that it is
in the west. I could sense a great feeling of soli¬
darity among the women of the village. They
have a robust sense of humour, particularily
regarding men, and at the various festivities I
attended it was always the women who were the
life and soul of the party.
Beyond the horizon
The next day a whole crowd of us drove to Win-
neba together and visited the fishermen's neigh¬
bourhood to get what we needed for a barbecue
on the beach. The children were happy when
we got to the seaside, and immediately began
splashing about in the surf. Elvis climbed onto a
beached canoe and sat gazing out over the
horizon. I went over to join him. He was in
rather a philosophical mood. "That's where they
came from all those hundreds of years ago," he
said, "from beyond the horizon. They came and
turned our world upside-down. I can't say
whether it was for better or worse, but we have
to accept what happened and come to terms with
it. I used to comehere when I was a boy and find
a canoe like this one. I'd sit in it just as I'm sitting
here and look out over the sea. I'd wonder what
the world across the horizon could possibly be
like. I'd dream about going to that world one
day. I'd imagine myself taking what was best
from here and bringing back with me what was
best from over there."
1. A spirit derived from sugar cane. Editor
