sÀbEl REmiTED
by Peter Mühhousler
Unguistíc diversity is a resource whose value has beer) widely
mderestimated
ÍO
IN the biblical story of the Tower of Babel, the
descendants of Noah tried to build a tower
leading to heaven, but God frowned on their
presumption and sabotaged the common lan¬
guage that enabled them to communicate. This
story, which portrays linguistic diversity as a
divine punishment, has dominated Western
thinking about languages for centuries and as a
result many people believe that a multiplicity of
languages is undesirable.
I believe, on the other hand, that linguistic
diversity should not be seen as a problem but as an
essential resource and that there is an urgent need
to reverse policies and practices that currently

Left, The Tower of Babel
( 1 990), acrylic on canvas by
the French artist Robert
Combas.
Right, desert greeting
(Egypt).
threaten thousands of small languages. Unless
this is done, the chance to learn from the cumula¬
tive insights, successes and errors of a large pro¬
portion of the human species will be lost forever.
¡he attractions of a single language
There have been many attempts to replace the
diversity of human languages with a single lan¬
guage. This goal was vigorously pursued by the
philosophers of the European Enlightenment
and, in the latter half of the nineteenth century,
by the supporters of artificial languages such
as Volapuk and Esperanto which attracted mil¬
lions of followers around the globe. Many
Esperantists hoped not only that Esperanto
would one day become a universal auxiliary
language but that at a later stage it would be
the world's only language.
The idea of the modem nation-state also pro¬
vides a powerful inspiration for those who are
committed to reducing linguistic diversity: a
common language is often seen as a necessary
binding ingredient for new nations. Only 200
years ago, French was not the mother tongue of
the majority of people born in France, whereas
today, non-French-speakers living in France
belong to a small and shrinking minority. What
happened in Western Europe in the past is being
repeated nowadays in states such as Indonesia,
where Bahasa Indonesia developed from being a
small auxiliary language into the country's main
language and will soon be the mother tongue of
more Indonesians than any other language.
It would be no exaggeration to say that the
choice of a single national language is often
regarded as a precondition for all moderniza¬
tion. No matter what language is chosen an
introduced language such as English, French,
Mandarin or Russian, or a newly-developed lan¬
guage such as Filipino a basic requirement is
that it should be fully intertranslatable, that is,
capable of expressing the concepts and distinc¬
tions that are needed in the modem world. But the
. need for intertranslatable languages has an unfor¬
tunate side effect the destruction of small lan¬
guages as outmoded and irrelevant.
The processes of streamlining which are
taking place in the field of language can be com¬
pared to the streamlining of the world's plant
and animal species. Both developments have been
promoted by people acting with the best of inten¬
tions reducing the cost ofcommum'cation in the
first case and feeding the world's growing popu¬
lation in the second. Regrettably, those people had
only a very limited understanding of the nature
and function of diversity.
In recent years there has been a growing real¬
ization of the importance of biological diversity,
and even more recently the voices of those advo¬
cating linguistic and cultural diversity have
become louder. However, the importance of lin¬
guistic diversity has not yet aroused widespread
public concern; nor has the notion that "lin¬
guistic ecology" needs the same amount of care
as natural ecology. There are, however, a number
of parallels between the two. First, all present-day
diversity is the outcome of processes that took a
very long time: millions of years in the case of bio¬
diversity, at least 100,000 years in the case of lin¬
guistic diversity. And once genuine diversity is
lost, it cannot be easily restored, in spite of
progress in bioengineering and linguistic engi¬
neering. A second, equally important similarity
is that linguistic diversity and diversity in the
natural world are both functional. The 10,000
or so languages that exist today reflect necessary
adaptations to different social and natural con¬
ditions. They are the result of increasing special¬
ization and finely tuned adaptation to the
changing world.

18
yJne world or many?
To understand the nature of this fine-tuning,
we need to contrast two theories about the rela¬
tionship between language and the world. One
theory, known as the mapping or labeling view,
maintains that we live in one world that consists
of many parts and each language provides a dif¬
ferent set of labels for the same set of parts.
According to this theory, the differences
between languages are only superficial and all
languages are fully intertranslatable.
The second theory holds that most percep¬
tions of the world and parts of the world are
brought into being and sustained by languages.
Speakers of different languages, therefore, do
not perceive the same world. Instead, different
languages emphasize and filter various aspects
of a multi-faceted reality in a vast number of
ways.
If we accept this theory, each language may be
seen as a provisional interpretation of a world so
complex that the only hope for understanding it
is to approach it from as many different per¬
spectives as possible. If we regard each language
as the result of a long history of human endeavour
to gain knowledge ofthe world, we may begin to
see why linguistic diversity is an invaluable
resource rather than an obstacle to progress.
Different languages communicate different
perceptions of reality in a number of ways. These
include differences in vocabulary, differences in
the grammatical information that is expressed, and
differences in the boundary between what is
regarded as literal truth and what is regarded as
metaphorical.
Virtually all human knowledge depends on
having criteria with which to determine similar¬
ities and differences. Doctors need to know, for
instance, whether or not the red spots on the
foreheads of two patients are symptoms of the
same disease. Psychologists need to know
whether two forms of behaviour are manifesta¬
tions ofthe same psychological state, and biolo¬
gists need to know whether two animals are
members of the same species. In most instances,
reliable criteria for similarities and differences
are difficult to come by and decisions are usually
determined by the available lexical resources.
One well-known area is that of colour names.
The same area of the colour spectrum may have
one name in one language, two names in a second
language, and three names in a third. Not making
a lexical distinction between, say, green and blue

Re/otiVity (1953),
a lithograph by
the Dutch graphic artist
Maurits Cornelis Escher
(1898-1972).
(as in the Welsh g¿ís), means not focusing on the
difference between the two colours in real life. In
the field of plants, there are again considerable dif¬
ferences. Where certain plants are central to a
culture, an amazing degree of lexical fine-tuning
can occur. Many New Guinea languages, for
example, make dozens of distinctions between
different types of cordilync leaves, according to
whether such leaves are used for dressmaking,
decoration, magic or other purposes. Similar
fine-tuning can also be observed in the sub-lan¬
guages spoken by specialist groups in Western
societies, for example, the sub-language of motor
mechanics, painters, doctors or bankers.
Suddenly to get rid of all these fine distinctions
developed by specialists over centuries would
greatly impoverish a language such as English,
making it incapable of referring to anything
except in general terms. Abandoning language
diversity could have similar consequences on a
global scale. Specialist vocabularies and specialist
knowledge about phenomena as diverse as types
of snow, useful plants, types of weather or ways
of dealing with children would suddenly be lost.
Language and the breakdown of
traditional societies
One area that offers many examples of differences
of this kind is kinship. Anthropological linguists
have accumulated a vast amount of evidence as to
how different languages focus in different ways
on the shared properties and differences among
family members. While in English, the word
"sister" refers to the female sibling of both males
and females, in Tok Pisin of Papua New Guinea,
a pidgin language that often reflects a Melanesian
interpretation of the world, the word "sister"
means sibling of the opposite sex. A brother calls
his sister "sister" and a girl calls her brother
"sister". In some Aboriginal languages in Aus¬
tralia and other languages in Melanesia, the same
word is used to refer to both grandfather and
grandchild. In these instances, having the same
label usually means getting the same treatment.
Such labels reinforce solidarity within the group.
For example, giving the same name to members
of different generations can be a way of reducing
generational conflict. The rather impoverished
inventory of words in most modern Western
languages may not be sufficient to sustain com¬
plex extended family networks, and the replace¬
ment of an indigenous language with more dis¬
tinctions by a Western language with fewer
distinctions could be a factor in the breakdown
of traditional societies.
Another area in which there are considerable
differences between languages is the naming of
parts of the body. In many languages, including
some spoken in West Africa, the term "hand"
covers either the whole arm or the arm up to the
elbow. The West African practice of gripping
another person's lower arm when "shaking" is a
reflection of a different linguistic organization. In
my own native Alemannic, the terms "foot" and
"leg" are not distinguished lexically, something
that caused me considerable confusion when
learning High German, where the distinction is
made. In Melanesia, dogs are said to have two
arms and two legs rather than four legs, and cen¬
tipedes are perceived as having many arms rather
than many legs.
Most of the examples given so far have dealt
with the different ways in which languages lexi¬
cally subdivide a fairly tangible reality the reality
of colour or the reality of plants and people.
There are other less tangible realities where per¬
ception is even more closely linked to language:
for example, the names of emotions or states of
mind. The German word Gemütlichkeit does

not compare neady with the English word "cosi¬
ness", nor is "depression" the same as the out¬
moded "melancholy". The absence of words for
depression or sadness in certain Polynesian lan¬
guages would seem to correspond to the absence
of the associated phenomena.
Language is even more direcdy involved in the
creation of philosophical and religious approaches
to the world. It sustains the meaningfulness of
ideas such as solipsism, "the view that self is all
that exists or can be known" or of elements in sys¬
tems used to explain the workings ofthe universe
such as "phoneme" in linguistics or "phlogiston"
in eighteenth-century science. Death in tradi¬
tional Polynesian languages is described by a
number of words, ranging from initial permanent
unconsciousness to the ultimate disintegration of
the body. The practice of "reburial" reflects this
linguistic distinction.
Another important difference between lan¬
guages relates to the ways in which they require
speakers to make important choices about the
people they are addressing. This is well known to
English speakers who find that when they learn
French the neutral English second person singular
pronoun "you" has to be translated into "tu" or
"vous", depending on the degree of politeness or
solidarity being shown towards the person
addressed. When using nouns, some languages do
not have number distinctions at all, while others
like Fijian need to express at all times whether the
speaker is talking about one, two, three, a few or
more than a few entities. In some New Guinea
Highland languages, a sentence such as, "The
pig broke the fence", cannot be said in this kind
of neutral manner. Using grammatical endings,
the speaker has to indicate whether this is a report
of what he or she has actually observed or
whether it is an inference from indirect evidence
such as pig droppings or hearsay.
iVletaphorically speaking
The expression of social distinctions, numbers or
the credibility of a piece of information can lead
to interesting quandaries. One wonders what
advertising is like in Aiwo, a language spoken in
the Solomon Islands in which all words referring
to useless objects have to be given a prefix indi¬
cating uselessness. How could one describe a
nuclear power station in Aiwo? Would one have
to use a prefix indicating the class of entities that
are dormant but liable to sudden change?
The influence of certain semantic distinctions
may be so strong that it leads languages to inter¬
pret reality in very different ways, that may be
described as either event-dominated or object-
dominated. Many standard European languages
can be regarded as object-dominated because of
their strong tendency to convert processual verbs
into abstract, object-like nouns. For example,
the subject matter of linguistics is not perceived
as the activity of speaking but as an object termed
"language". One of the consequences for this
area of enquiry is that, while speaking always
involves people, and a spatial, temporal situa¬
tion, the abstract term language suggests an object
that can be analysed as something self-contained.
Equally important in Western languages is
the very strong presence of causalit)'. Verbs such
as "to teach" or "to cure" can be paraphrased as
"to cause to leam" and "to cause to get better".
However, there is a very different, equally valid
way of looking at what goes on in the classroom
or in a doctor's practice, as seen in languages
such as Wintu, an American Indian language
spoken in California, which favours comitative,
or "being with" interpretations. In a Wintu's
perception, the doctor takes part in the patient's
recovery and the teacher shares the learner's
learning progression. It is not at all clear that a
causative view of these matters necessarily leads
to better teaching or healing practice.
Languages, finally, differ according to the
metaphors their speakers live by. Western life
tends to be dominated by a small number of
metaphors. The saying "time is money", for
instance, reinforces cultural practices such as
charging by the hour, trying to save money by
getting things done more quickly and the view
that there are more economical and less eco¬
nomical uses of time. Needless to say, such a
metaphor does not occur in non-monetary, tra¬
ditional societies where work and gain are mea¬
sured in terms other than quantity of time
"spent". Another prominent Western metaphor
is that of "rule", the idea that there is an abstract
ruler of the universe who has laid down the rules
of nature. So deeply entrenched is this metaphor
that scientists believe that it is literally true and are
convinced they can discover the rules of nature,
a belief that has only recendy begun to weaken as
a consequence of discoveries by chaos theoreti¬
cians. Researchers on neural networks are now
beginning to question the idea that language
Right, a dancer from the
Fine Arts University of
Phnom Penh (Cambodia).
Her dress consists of a
rectangle of cloth specially
fitted and sewn before
each performance.
Delow, a Tahitian woman
(French Polynesia).

1 ^
f^^
wL,. J
yiÊ^Ê^j^j^^^ ^v
PETER MÜHLHÄUSLER,
of Germany, taught linguistics
at the Technical University of
Berlin and then at Oxford
University (United Kingdom).
Since 1 992 he has been
Foundation Professor of
Linguistics at the University of
Adelaide (Australia). He Is a
Fellow of LInacre College,
Oxford, and a Fellow of the
Academy of the Social Sciences
of Australia.
learning involves rules and mle systems, a dogma
of linguistics for many decades. It is quite likely
that metaphors of other cultures not dominated
by the idea that the world needs to be governed
by rules may produce future breakthroughs in
scientific thinking.
Environmental discourse provides a striking
example of why learning from different languages
may be very important. Western languages have
many gaps in their ability to express aspects of the
environment. The number of edible plants the
average Westerner can name contrasts very
unfavourably with the many hundreds of names
known to the average speaker of a South Amer¬
ican Indian language.
There is now a growing awareness of "green"
issues, and "green" vocabulary is on the increase.
We have words such as "biodiversity", "recy¬
cling" and "lead-free petrol" but not all of these
terms are equally suitable for environmental dis¬
course. For instance, the word "resource" sug¬
gests that the notion of regeneration is applicable
to both renewable and non-renewable resources
and the very term "environment" suggests a divi¬
sion between humans and what is around them,
an idea that is not widely found in the languages
of the world.
The combined propensity of Western lan¬
guages to emphasize human causativity and con¬
trol and their object-dominated character suggests
that the best course of action is one of estab¬
lishing control over a small bounded area and not,
as other languages would suggest, learning to
understand an undivided whole.
Note also the underdifferentiation between
different types of control in languages such as
English, where the possessive pronoun "my"
can be used to express three situations:
A controls B = my child (A's child)
B controls A = my father (A's father)
A and B reciprocally control one another =
my partner.
In Barrai, a language of Papua New Guinea,
these three categories are clearly distinguished by
different pronominal forms. Interestingly, to
express the notion of "my land" in Barrai, one uses
the pronoun for mutual control suggesting inter¬
dependence, the need for balance and co-operation
between people and the land. Western metaphors
of the land are dominated by the distinction
between human beings and the non-human world,
and the idea that human beings are a privileged
species, the rulers or controllers for whose benefit
the rest of the world was created. Recent
metaphors such as "Spaceship Earth" reinforce the
idea that the Earth exists predominandy for the
benefit of its human inhabitants, and the idea of
environmental management and eco audits is just
another version of the old picture of human beings
as rulers over the rest of creation.
I would suggest that Westerners are trapped
within the limitations imposed on them by their
languages and this is one of the principal rea¬
sons for the lack of genuine progress in the envi¬
ronmental sciences. This example of environ¬
mental discourse illuminates the dangers of
monolingualism and monoculturalism and shows
how many different interpretations and many
different languages are necessary to solve the
problems facing the world.
