NESCO
and bioethics
by Georges B. Kutukdjian
Through ethical
reflection,
humanity can now
keep pace with the
challenges of
science instead of
realizing too late
when things have
gone wrong
A biologist using state-of-the-
art microscope equipment to
insert DNA segments into
embryos.
I Scientific research on the human genome,
I and especially on gene therapy and the
diagnosis of genetic diseases, has far-reaching
implications for the lives of all of us children,
men and women alike. It is a field holding out
immense prospects for man's self-transformation
and it will, in the long run, require societies to
make certain choices. As a result, it is giving
rise to anxieties that may in some cases be jus¬
tified but are more often irrational.
These anxieties lie behind the effort many
countries are now making to look into the eth¬
ical framework of such research. Legislation is
starting to be adopted to define limits for med¬
ical practice and some types of research, in order
to ensure that human dignity will be respected.
Two points must be stressed, however. In the
first place, the type of legislation differs signif¬
icantly from one country to another and we do
not have any common yardstick to judge it by.
Secondly, it does not exist everywhere in the
world, but only in some of the industrial coun¬
tries. Elsewhere, there are are still a number of
grey areas surrounding research and experi¬
mentation.
It is for all these reasons that the Director-
General of UNESCO decided to set up an Inter
national Bioethics Committee and invited Ms.
Noëlle Lenoir, a member of the Constitutional
Council of the French Republic, to preside over
its deliberations.
The Committee met for the first time in Sep¬
tember 1 993 and commenced its work by identi¬
fying three priority themes. These are genetic
screening and testing, the therapeutic applications
of genetics research, and population genetics.
Genetic testing
Should genetic screening be made compulsory
for so-called "risk" populations or should it
simply be made available to them? Should it be
introduced into premarital examinations or be
included in prenatal diagnosis? Should it be car¬
ried out before gamete donation or the implan¬
tation of embryos fertilized in vitro?
At the outset, a distinction must be made
between two kinds of genetic tests. Tests in the
first category are used to identify a particular
gene which is virtually certain to bring on a
hereditary disease. Those in the second cate¬
gory show whether or not a person has a pre¬
disposition to certain diseases and thus reveal sit¬
uations involving varying degrees of probability.
Depending on the environment and sundry
other factors, about some of which little is
known, the outward symptoms of a disease may
appear in its early stages or may emerge only
later, and the disease itself may vary in severity.
A genetic mutation may become more dominant
and grow worse from generation to generation.
On the other hand, the tendency for genetic
damage to occur may be reversed. In short, the
same defect in a person's genotype (genetic con¬
stitution) may take different forms in his or her
phenotype (the physical constitution as it inter¬
acts with the environment).
This influence of the environment on the
form a genetic mutation may take brings into
play the concept of the responsibility of indi¬
viduals towards themselves and their families
and the responsiblity of citizens towards the
community. Preventive medicine could there¬
fore be said to go hand-in-hand with predictive
medicine.
Should people be told that there is a proba¬
bility that they will eventually develop Hunt¬
ington's chorea, for example, and transmit it to
their offspring? Should their close or distant 23

relatives be warned? What about employers
and insurance companies? Can a company's
medical service insist on being given the results
of genetic testing?
Since genetic testing may extend over several
generations and involve varying numbers of
individuals, questions about the storage and
confidentiality of the data are bound to arise
sooner or later. How long should genetic data be
kept and how can its confidentiality be guaran¬
teed ? Who should be empowered to divulge or
withhold information which often involves
whole families?
Similarly, if people can choose to know what
their genetic future will be, can they also choose
not to know? Should they or should they not be
compelled to take account of the results of
genetic testing?
In this regard, it is important that people
should be freely able to exercise their discretion.
Information that is liable to change their whole
lives and force added responsibilities on them
should not expose them to any form of dis¬
crimination. Genetic testing should not prompt
the authorities to adopt repressive policies
leading to a restriction of individual freedoms.
Another ethical issue connected with genetic
testing is bound up with the need to ensure that
all countries, including the least advanced ones,
reap benefit from them, so that they too can
join the fight against hereditary diseases.
Therapeutic applications
The first question that has to be raised relates to
the pre-implantation diagnosis performed on
artificially fertilized embryos which, in view of
its greater simplicity and lower cost, is likely to
replace gene therapy in cases of rare genetic dis¬
eases. This involves a choice that is already
framed in ethical terms.
The second question is whether the work
currently being done is not liable to become nar¬
rowly focused on looking for the genes that
account for people's behaviour their sexuality,
for example their talents and abilities, or even
their "déviances". This could lead to a kind of
genetic reductionism whereby people would be
defined exclusively in terms of their genome, or
to a situation in which some individuals or groups
of individuals might be stigmatized by society,
ostracized or even eliminated. This would be
tantamount to adopting eugenic policies.
There are other problems. We know, for
example, that through agriculture, gene therapy
could bring about radical changes in public
health. A diet of genetically modified plants
could become a regular form of treatment, a
sort of oral "vaccine" given in repeated doses.
However, the in vivo reproduction of these
plant species would be liable to give rise to new
recombined organisms that could become vec¬
tors for diseases. In such an eventuality, what
kind of preventive measures and legislation
should be instituted?
The same applies, mutatis mutandis, to the use
of human genes for the development of transgenic

animals. What limits should be set on the supply
of human genetic material? Should it be reserved
solely for therapeutic purposes, say for xeno¬
grafts, and its use for any other purpose, such as
for improving livestock, be ruled out?
We have to accept that the issue of transge-
nesis applied to the human species now has to be
faced. Reports of germ-line therapy experiments
on embryonic cells or spermatozoa have recently
been published in scientific journals.
As a result of the rapid strides being made by
genetic engineering, it is now possible to store
gametes and germ cells in "banks" for possible
future use, such as for autografts. This practice
is now regarded as acceptable, under certain
conditions, for young cancer patients who have
to undergo X-ray treatment or chemotherapy
and who wish to preserve their chances of later
conceiving children by in vitro fertilization
techniques. With the exception of these medical
cases, the storage of gametes and germ cells
poses the problem of the storage of human
products generally, as well as that of storage
methods and the criteria governing access to
such "banks".
Lastly, careful thought has to be given to
the best ways of protecting the intellectual prop¬
erty of researchers whose inventions have indus¬
trial or commercial applications. Should such
protection be regarded as akin to copyright?
How is it possible to regulate access to genetic
data banks and their possible industrial or com¬
mercial uses?
First, steps must be taken to secure the free
and informed consent of population groups
participating in major surveys on population
genetics. The scientific aims and objectives of the
surveys should be clearly explained to them.
The results of these surveys should not be
detrimental to those who participate, nor should
they lead to discrimination against them. Nor
should they be allowed to lead to the establish¬
ment of a genetic pseudo-classification of the
population groups involved.
These results should also be communicated to
the individuals and population groups concerned.
Access to genetic data banks where the infor¬
mation is stored, the processing of this informa¬
tion and its use should be rigorously defined.
The human genome project
Deciphering the totality of genetic information
on the human race is an ambitious project which
calls for international co-operation. The ensuing
progress will help to prevent and treat genetic
diseases which are incurable today. It will also
make a significant contribution to understanding
the structure and the functions of the genetic
system and individual development, as well as
the "natural history" of DNA.
Such fundamental knowledge of human beings
clearly raises ethical, social and legal problems, and
consequently it is not surprising that UNESCO
attaches very great importance to it. The human
genome project has a place among UNESCO's
activities because of UNESCO's ethical mission
and its competence in the fields of education, sci¬
ence and culture. UNESCO offers an ideal envi¬



ronment for multidisciplinary debates on the dif¬
ferent aspects of study of the human genome.
UNESCO is thus fully involved in this project.
By organizing or encouraging meetings, holding
workshops, helping to finance training pro¬
grammes and awarding short-term scholarships,
Unesco is seeking to do three things: to
encourage international co-operation and co¬
ordination, to stimulate debate on the many
repercussions of the human genome project,
and to promote the participation of countries of
the South and East. The sharing of knowledge
between North and South, East and West is,
after all, an ethical imperative in itself.
St. Cosmas and St. Damián
graft onto the deacon
Giustiniano the leg of a recently
deceased Ethiopian. 15th-
century fresco by Fra Angélico
in the San Marco Museum,
Florence.
(Illustration taken from the
catalogue of La vie en kit,
éthique et biologie © Fondation
de l'Arche de la Fraternité,
Paris).
GEORGES B. KUTUKDJIAN
is the head of Unesco's
Bioethics Unit. A philosopher
and anthropologist, he has
published a number of papers
on kinship systems and
proverbs, and literary essays on
Marguerite Duras, Kafka and
Proust. He was the co-editor,
with Antonio Papisca, of a
collective work on the rights of
peoples, published in 1991 by
CEDAM, Padua (Italy).
25
