he long road to abolition
by Nelly Schmidt
The eradication ofslavery in North America and the West Indies proceeded at
snail's pace. Even the leaders of the French Revolution dragged their feet.
Above, masthead of The
Liberator, the newspaper
published in Boston in 1831 by
the writer William Lloyd Garrison,
an ardent advocate of the
abolition of slavery in the United
States.
Some words are historically loaded. "The
abolition of slavery" is of course a con¬
venient phrase, but historical authenticity
requires us to choose terms more faithful to
reality. The process the Americas went through
in the nineteenth century and are still going
through today, may be more accurately
described as the destruction of the system of
slavery. It was a slow process, beginning with the
ending of slavery in San Domingo/Haiti in
August-September 1793.
The crucial importance of resistance move¬
ments by slaves themselves in triggering this
process is just beginning to be realized. The
case of San Domingo/Haiti is a typical example
20
Though Marster was a Mef'dis' preacher, he whip his slaves, an'
' den drap pitch an'tuppentine on dem from a bu'nin' to'ch.
Marster preach to de white folks Sunday mo'nin'. Den, at night, all de
marsters roun' dat country sen' dey slaves, an' he preach to us. He had
two fav'rit tex'es he uster preach from to de slaves. One was, "Serv'nts,
obey your marsters". He didn' say much 'bout de Marster in Hebben, but
alius tole us to obey our earthly marsters. De other tex' was "Thou shalt
not steal". He preach dat over an' over, to de niggers. Dey couldn' read
deir Bibles, so dey hatter bliebe jis' what he say.
Since I's got to readin' an' studyin', I see some of de chu'ches is
wrong, an' de preachers don' preach jis' like de Bible say.
Jack White
slave
of this: a slave revolt that turned out to be impos¬
sible to curb was what triggered the abolitionist
movement there in 1791.
In response to Spanish and British threats to
invade the island, Sonthonax, the civil commis¬
sioner assigned to the colony by the revolu¬
tionary government in Paris, decided on 29
August 1793 to end slavery in the north, and this
measure was extended to the west and south of
the colony in September and October of the
same year. The measure was confirmed on 4
February 1 794 (16 pluviôse of the year II) by the
Convention, which decreed that "all men
without distinction of colour domiciled in the
colonies are French citizens, and shall enjoy all
the rights guaranteed by the Constitution". The
1795 Constitution even specified that "the
French colonies are an integral part of the
Republic and are subject to the same constitu¬
tional law", and provided for their accession to
the status of departments.
This assimilationist legislation, however,
never came into force. In 1802, the legislative
body declared itself in favour of reintroducing
slavery. On 17 May the Consulate, taking the
view that "illusions of liberty and equality have
been spread to these remote lands" (i.e. France's
American colonies), where "the difference
between civilized and uncivilized men" was too
"striking", passed a decree providing that "In the

colonies restored to France under the Treaty of
Amiens dated the 6th germinal of the year X,
slavery shall be maintained in accordance with
pre-1798 laws and regulations".
The opposition aroused by the coming into
force of this decree obliged Napoleon Bona¬
parte to dispatch military expeditions to Guade¬
loupe and San Domingo. The colonial war that
raged in these two islands ended with the réin¬
troduction of slavery in Guadeloupe. In San
Domingo one of the great leaders of the insur¬
rection, Toussaint Louverture, was captured
and imprisoned in France, at Fort-de-Joux in the
Jura, where he died in April 1 803. But the French
troops sent to impose the reintroduction of
slavery were defeated, and the independence of
the colony (under its old Amerindian name of
Haiti) was finally proclaimed on 1 January 1 804.
The British practise "the right of search"
Emancipation in the British colonies which
followed thirty years later was likewise largely
the result of the long rebellion by the slaves of
Jamaica (1831-1832). As early as 1780 a human¬
itarian trend had emerged in England, one of its
supporters being a young M.P. of aristocratic
origin, William Wilberforcc: in 1807 he per¬
suaded the House of Commons to prohibit the
I When Dr. Cannon found out
dat his carriage driver had
larned to read and write while he was
takin' de doctor's chillun to and f'om
school, he had dat nigger's thumbs
cut off, and put another boy to doin'
de drivin' in his place.
Tom Hawkins
slave
transatlantic slave trade. From that date
onwards, and then after the 1815 Congress of
Vienna (which drew up a European agreement
on ending the slave trade), Britain was to lead a
campaign for the inspection of slave-ships,
which were pronounced illegal.
Well-established networks of illicit slave
trade had grown up from the coasts of Africa to
Brazil, the United States, Cuba and the French
colonies of Guadeloupe and Martinique. Pro¬
paganda against this trade though not against
the system of slavery itself developed partic¬
ularly in London, where numerous leaflets cir¬
culated in several languages. One of them enti¬
tled The cry of the Africans against their
SLAVERY
"The emancipation of slaves in
the United States", an engraving
published in the Illustrated
London News in 1864 (artist
unknown).
21

Poster depicting Harriet Tubman
(1820-1913), a celebrated black
activist In the United States
before the Civil War. Herself a
fugitive from a Maryland
plantation, she helped more than
300 runaway slaves to reach the
northern states and Canada.
22
European oppressors, or a look at the murderous
commerce known as the slave trade, by Thomas
Clarkson, which appeared in 1822, contained the
famous cross-sections of the slave-ship Brookes.
The "right of search" practised by British
transatlantic vessels aroused lively controversy.
France and the United States in particular grudg¬
ingly accepted the role of policeman of the seas
first performed by the British.
A proliferation of petitions and the creation
of a society for the abolition of the slave trade
eventually brought about an investigation by the
Crown. But it was not until 1823 that an Anti-
Slavery Society was founded in London. In
1831 the Crown manumitted slaves within its
own lands, and on 28 August 1833 the King
approved an Act voted by Parliament emanci¬
pating slaves in the British West Indies, Guyana
and British Honduras (now Belize). This Act
No siree, I never did learn how to read and write. I just hold to
the end of the pencil so the white man can sign my name.
Eli Davison
slave
My moster would put slaves
in a calaboose at night to be
shipped de next morning. He always
limited de lashes to five hundred.
After whipping dem, he would rub
pepper and salt on deir backs, where
whipped, and lay dem before de fire
until blistered, and den take a cat,
and make him claw de blisters, to
burst dem.
Robert Burns
slave
Right, Victor Schoelcher
(1804-1893), one of the leading
architects of the abolition of
slavery in the French colonies
in 1848.
gave the planters generous compensation, and set
a time-limit of four-to-six years for the complete
liberation of slaves employed in farming and
domestic work. They were subject to compul¬
sory unpaid apprenticeship under their mas¬
ters, limited to four years because of the diffi¬
culty of enforcing such a system. Only children
under six and adults over sixty were declared free
in August 1834.
The new citizens of the Republic
Little attempt is usually made to situate the
beginnings and the acceleration of abolitionist
processes in the context of the resistance by
slaves themselves to the system of slavery. By
and large, European abolitionist movements
remained very timid. In Paris a decision to
abolish slavery was not on the agenda of the
Société française pour l'abolition de l'esclavage,
founded in 1834 and modelled on the British
Anti-Slavery Society. Nor did it form part of the
programme of the provisional government that
came to power after the revolutionary days of
February 1848. But Victor Schoelcher, who had
travelled in the French colonies and had set
himself up as the apostle of the abolition of
slavery, managed to persuade the Minister of
the Navy and the Colonies that a general
uprising was imminent if the status quo were
maintained; he got the government to accept
the principle of abolition in the French colonies.
It was only at this price that law and order, and
work on the sugar-cane plantations, could be
maintained. He was appointed Under-Secre¬
tary of State for the Colonies and Chairman of

the Commission for the Abolition of Slavery,
which on 27 April got the new government to
sign a decree providing for immediate emanci¬
pation. This instrument was modelled on the
British precedent, and granted slave-owning
colonists compensation; but its original feature
was that it made the "new freedmen" citizens
empowered to elect their representatives to
the National Assembly in Paris by universal
suffrage.
The introduction of this decree in the French
colonics where rebel slaves had already forced
the governors to proclaim liberty even before the
text arrived from Paris caused riots in the
Danish colonies of the Virgin Islands (St. Croix,
St. John and St. Thomas), where in July 1848
Governor Von Schölten had urgently to pro¬
mulgate an emancipation decree drawn up by
King Christian VIII's government. In 1863 a
similar decree was brought into force in the
Dutch colonies.
A different kind of emancipation of slaves
was to be seen in the United States and the
Spanish colonies, in the context of armed con¬
flicts. This was the case in Latin America in the
days of Bolivar, and also in Cuba starting with
the Ten Years' War, between 1868 and 1878.
Slaves were promised their freedom in return for
enlisting in the armies being raised against Spain.
The Moret law (from the name of the Spanish
Minister for the Colonies) was passed by the
Cortes in 1870 and brought into force in Puerto
Rico in 1873, and then progressively in Cuba in
1880 and 1886.
In the United States slavery was not so much
a colonial as a national problem. The northern
I Old Missus and young Missus told the
little slave children that the stork
brought the white babies to their mothers,
but that the slave children were all hatched
out from buzzards' eggs. And we believed it
was true.
Katie Sutton
slave
states, where industrialization had come rela¬
tively early and progressed relatively quickly,
were exposed to effective propaganda from the
Quakers and other Protestant sects. Indeed, the
Quakers were the only white group to plead the
cause of emancipation of the negroes in Eng¬
land's North American colonies before the War of
Independence. As early as 1688 the Quaker com¬
munity in Pennsylvania had protested against
"the business of buying and keeping blacks".
a crime without punishment
Toussaint Louverture,
below, as depicted in an
engraving published in the
Histoire du Consulat et de
l'Empire (1845-1862) by the
French historian and statesman
Louis Adolphe Thiers.
23

I I recollect seein'
one biscuit crust,
one mornin'. Dey throwed
it out to de dogs, an' I
beat de dog to it.
Alex McCinney
slave
makandal burned alive (1991),
acrylic on canvas by the Haitian
painter Frantz Zéphirin. François
Makandal, a slave of Guiñean
origin, was known as the "Black
Spartacus". The instigator of an
uprising in Haiti, he held out with
his comrades-in-arms against the
French army, terrorizing the
plantations until he was caught
and burned at the stake in 1758
on the square in front of Cape
Haitien cathedral.
In 1775 the principles set forth in the Dec¬
laration of Independence were injected into the
debate on slavery. During the war the negro
slaves of New England intensified their anti-
slavery activities and produced a stream of peti¬
tions. They claimed to be following the example
of the oppressed colonists "in their present glo¬
rious struggles for freedom". Vermont, by pro¬
hibiting bondage in its 1777 Constitution, took
the lead among the northern states which pro¬
claimed the ending of slavery. The same step
was taken by Massachusetts and New Hamp¬
shire, while Pennsylvania, Rhode Island and
Connecticut opted for gradual emancipation.
Disappointed hopes
In 1830 the movement acquired fresh impetus.
William Lloyd Garrison founded the news¬
paper The Liberator. In 1845 Frederick Dou¬
glass, a fugitive arrived from the south, pub¬
lished his famous autobiography and settled in
Washington, where he made a career in jour¬
nalism and diplomacy. Harriet Tubman helped
to organize the clandestine departure of slaves
from the south to the north and Canada via the
"underground railroad". In 1848 the Free Soil
Society and then in 1854 the Republican Party
(whose candidate Abraham Lincoln was elected
President of the United States in 1 860) included
in their manifestoes the ending of slavery
throughout the country. The end of the War of
Secession in 1865 made it possible in any event
to enshrine abolition in the Thirteenth Amend¬
ment to the United States Constitution.
After Puerto Rico in 1873 and Cuba in 1886,
24
it remained for Brazil in 1888 to promulgate
the last slave emancipation decree in the Amer¬
icas having received the largest number of
captives from the illicit slave trade in the nine¬
teenth century.
Each decree was followed by an often
lengthy period of transition to other ways of reg¬
ulating labour and social relations. In the
Caribbean, agreements were very soon con¬
cluded between the European governments and
various agencies in Africa, India, Indonesia and
China for the importation of underpaid contract
(indentured) labour. With the arrival of several
hundred thousand of these coolies, recruited
from among the most deprived peoples, the
"new freedmen" inevitably found themselves
excluded from the labour market: the central
administrations had fixed their wages at four
times those of the new immigrants.
While the Second Republic in France gave
freedmen in its colonies citizenship rights, this
was not the case elsewhere. In the British West
Indies, for instance, decentralization of power
by the Colonial Office allowed the local
planters' assemblies to institute a means-tested
suffrage which disenfranchised the slaves
recently freed from their period of appren¬
ticeship. In the United States, when the Thir¬
teenth Amendment to the Constitution, offi¬
cially ending slavery in all the states of the
Union, was approved, the Ku Klux Klan came
into being in Tennessee in December 1865.
The southern states adopted a policy of dis¬
crimination and racial segregation similar to
apartheid, and it was to take another century to
bring this to an end. B
The quotations from
» the testimony of
slaves that accompany this
article are taken from
Bullwhip Days, edited by
James Mellon © 1988
Grove/Atlantic, New York.
NELLY SCHMIDT
is a French historian who is
engaged in research at France's
National Centre for Scientific
Research (CNRS). She is the
author of Victor Schoelcher and
La suppression de l'esclavage
aux Caraïbes, Une perspective
comparative, both published in
1994.
