MELINA'S LAST BATTLE
34
THE unforgettable Medea who bestrode
the stage in Salonika, the headstrong
Ilya who appeared, larger than life, on
cinema screens all over the world, the
determined resistance fighter who took
on her country's military junta, the ever-
active Minister of Culture, Greece's leading
lady, is no longer with us. But she has
bequeathed to us the legacy of the over¬
brimming vitality that made her so charis¬
matic a figure.
Her memory lives on in the Melina
Mercouri Foundation that has been created
by her husband, the film director Jules
Dassin, in order to further the causes for
which she fought and fulfil her dream of
completing the construction of the new
Acropolis museum and bringing back the
Parthenon sculptures to Greece.
Melina Mercouri fired the first shots in
"the battle of the Parthenon sculptures" in
the 1980s, but their turbulent history goes
back many years before that.
"Furiously, but withpleasure"
Between 448 and 432 B.C., the great
sculptor Phidias and the celebrated archi¬
tect Ictinus built a temple dedicated to
Athena, the goddess of wisdom, on the
hill of the Acropolis in Athens. The temple
had two parts, the "hundred-foot-long"
Hecatompedon housing a 12-metre-high
gold and ivory statue of Athena by Phidias,
and the Parthenon, the "room of the
maidens", which later gave its name to the
entire building.
The förty-six simple yet imposing
columns of the outside colonnade sup¬
ported a frieze whose ninety-three square
"metope" sections depicted scenes from
Greek mythology. At either end were two
pediments illustrating the birth of Athena
and her contest with Poseidon. The inner
walls of the "celia" or chamber housing the
statue of the goddess were decorated with
a 160-metre-long frieze.
The Parthenon's Doric splendour
remained untouched by the hand of time
for some 900 years. Then it suffered its
first indignity. It was taken over by new
gods and visited by foreigners prompted
more by greed than respect. It was used
successively as the place of worship of a
Christian cult, a Catholic church and a
small mosque. When the Venitians laid
siege to Athens in 1687, a cannon ball
caused extensive damage, and General
Francesco Morosini took advantage of the
situation to carry away everything he could
tear off the pediments.
A century later the British ambassador
On 6 March Melina Mercouri,
known to her fellow-Greeks as
"the light of Attica", passed
away after a long struggle
against cancer, the last of her
many battles
7
\
^j
to Athens, Thomas Bruce, seventh Earl of
Elgin, succeeded in obtaining authoriza¬
tion from the Ottomans, who had ruled
Athens since 1456, to remove "certain stone
fragments on which inscriptions and figures
have been carved". Between 1801 and 1803
he removed most of the remaining sculp¬
tures and shipped them to London. Some
ten years later, the British parliament bought
them from him and donated them to the
British Museum, where they remain to this
day and are more commonly known as the
Elgin Marbles.
This, then, was how the Parthenon,
one of the seven wonders of the ancient
world, came to be stripped of the essence
of its beauty, "It was as though it had had
an eye gouged out," Melina Mercouri said
not long ago. "It is cruel, and it is very
ugly. I shall carry on fighting this battle to
the very end." The battle to which she was
referring was aimed at returning the sculp¬
tures to their original location. As the
Greek poet Yannis Ritsos put it, the sculp¬
tures "cannot get used to seeing less sky".
Melina Mercouri threw herself into this
struggle with the same fervour that she put
into her political and theatrical life. As she
said in the December 1991 issue of the
UNESCO Courier, she campaigned in poli¬
tics iñ the same way that she rehearsed in the
theatre "furiously, but with pleasure". Pas¬
sion was the driving force behind everything
this exceptional woman did. The whole
Greek nation gradually came to identify
with her, and this in itself was a stunning act
of revenge on the colonels who had stripped
her of her Greek nationality. In her bid to
save her homeland from dictatorship during
her seven years' exile, she went on singing
The Children ofPiraeus on stages all over
the world. On the international political
and cultural scene, as Minister of Culture
from 1982 onwards she never let up in her
fight for the return of the "marbles" to their
homeland.
A certain idea of Greece
In 1984, the Greek authorities lodged an
official request with the British govern¬
ment for the marbles to be returned. In
1989, they launched the project for the con¬
struction of a new museum on the Acrop¬
olis, where "an enormous room will remain
completely empty until the Parthenon frieze
is returned", as Melina Mercouri stated late
in 1993, shortly after she had returned to the
Ministry of Culture.
But this was not her only concern. She
also set out to create a University of the
Mediterranean; to carry through the "Arch¬
ipelagos" programme aimed at reviving the
memory of the Greek islands; and to host
the 1996 Olympic Games in Athens. These
were all projects to which she gave herself
to the full in her determination to serve a
certain idea of Greece and to stave off the
threat of death that hung over her for the last
five years of her life.
She died without seeing the Elgin mar¬
bles back on the Acropolis. But she had
already laid her plans. "Ask me if I'll be
alive when they come back," she said. "The
answer is yes, I'll be alive! And if not, then
I'll be born again". E.J.M.
