HIDDEN WATERS 3y Daniel Balland
For centuries arid land in many parts of the world has been
made fertile by tapping underground mountain water through
tunnels often several kilometres long that are masterpieces of
hydraulic engineering
30
THE world's biggest and oldest oases are, to
adapt Herodotus's celebrated phrase about
Egypt, the "gifts" of great rivers such as the
Nile, the Tigris, the Euphrates, the Helmand, the
Indus, the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya, the
Tarim and others. However, it is in the extraction
of "hidden" water from underground aquifers
that oasis-dwellers have shown their genius for
hydraulic engineering. An extraordinary range
of techniques have been used for this purpose.
Most of them share a common characteristic: the
use of an external energy-source to raise the
water from the aquifer to the fields that need irri¬
gating.
There is, however, a remarkable exception to
this rule. The drainage tunnels known as qanats
in Arabic and kârêz in Persian are driven into
hillsides virtually horizontally, with just enough
slope to allow water tapped from an under¬
ground source to flow off into the open air by
the force of gravity alone. A regular 0.1 or 0.2%
gradient (which is to say an incline of a metre or
two per kilometre) is about right: less than that,
and the slope encourages alluviation, so the tun¬
nels need to be cleaned out more often; more,
and the flow of water causes excessive erosion.
Each tunnel divides into a tapping section
penetrating into the aquifer and a downstream
section that carries the water out to the fields.
The amount of water extracted, and therefore the
surface area irrigated, depends on the length of
the former. The tunnel must be big enough for
a man to move about and work in. Typically, it
may be 1.3 metres high by 80 centimetres wide.
Lengths vary greatly, from a few hundred metres
to several dozen kilometres; the average seems
to be about three kilometres.
On the surface the only sign that there is a
tunnel is a line of air-vents sunk every 20 metres
or so. These vertical shafts, which provided
access when the tunnel was being dug, are used
Cultivated plots in the
foothills of the Zagros
Mountains (Iran), the
region where irrigation by
water tunnels was
developed to the highest
degree of technical
perfection.
V /
/

subsequently for maintenance work. The further
up the hillside they are, the deeper they are.
Shafts several dozen metres deep are common;
some may be far deeper than that. Each one is
surrounded by a ring of rubble, like some giant
molehill pierced in the middle by the vent itself.
At the point where the tunnel emerges into
the open air, there is always something magical
about the sight of fresh water flowing naturally
all the year round into a pool or irrigation
channel. Women and children come to fetch
unpolluted water, and the menfolk like to gather
here after the day's work. This is a focal point of
social life in the oasis.
Some small oases are irrigated by a single
tunnel, but more commonly several some¬
times even several dozen form an organized
network. In some cases the system is added on
to a network of channels diverted from a river.
When building an underground infrastructure of
this type, whether simple or complex, specialists
have to decide on three essential matters: the
location and depth of the aquifer that is to
be tapped; the area to be irrigated; and the direc¬
tion and slope of the tunnel needed to connect
the two. Building the tunnel is a long and dan¬
gerous job. It is only really feasible when labour
is cheap and plentiful, typically under some
form of agrarian capitalism based on slave-
owning or a feudal system. Most of the tunnels
31

Diagram of a drainage
tunnel (in cross-section
and viewed from above)
1 . Underground tapping
section
2. Underground feeder
section
3. Open-air section
4. Irrigated area
5. Village
6. Cultivated land
7. Air-vents
8. Aquifer
9. Impermeable rock
currently in use are, therefore, survivals from
the past, living fossils that are kept in working
order with varying degrees of success. Clearing
them out is a relatively straightforward job,
but rebuilding them when they collapse or
lengthening them to compensate for a lowering
of the water table are difficult and expensive
operations.
It is estimated that some 30,000 tunnels are
today in use in different parts of the world.
Placed end to end, they would stretch for more
than 100,000 kilometres, or over two and a half
times round the Earth.
Orientai satrapies
and New World colonies
Although some scholars have tried hard to prove
that this irrigation system originated in their own
part of the world, it seems to have spread as a
result of a fairly straightforward process of dif¬
fusion. The most comprehensive treatise on the
art of digging a kârêz, the Kitâb inbât al-miyâh
al-Khafiyya, or "Book of the Extraction of
Hidden Waters", was written in Arabic in about
1019 A.D. by Mohammed al-Karadji. As his
name suggests, the author came from Karadj, a
town that once stood on the slopes of the Zagros
Mountains, 100 kilometres southeast of
Hamadan. Now Hamadan, as it happens, is the
ancient Ecbatana, imperial capital of the Medes
and summer residence of the first Achaemenids
in other words, the centre of the very region that
was the cradle and principal diffusion point of this
irrigation technique.
The construction of kârêz in fact originated in
the kingdom of Urartu, in the district surrounding
Lake Urmia, early in the last millennium of the
pre-Christian era. It probably developed as a
simple dewatering technique designed to run off
seepage threatening to inundate mines that pen¬
etrated a subterranean aquifer. The genius of the
people of Urartu lay in transforming it into a
technique to tap water for irrigation.
32
m s m s
.,_^	
a a
1 9J fc^BHfcMSMl^ta^^íij^^^^M^*^
m _SLé^
~7^
A by-product of the mining economy, kârêz
irrigation is known to have existed by the late
eighth century B.C. In the course of the next
four centuries it spread, with state encourage¬
ment, throughout the lands of the Persian
Achaemenid Empire, from the oriental satrapies
of Arachosia and Gandhara (in present-day
Afghanistan and Baluchistan) to the western
satrapies of Egypt, Arabia and Syria. From there
the Phoenicians, who founded Carthage and
played an important part in the transmission
of oriental techniques to the Mediterranean
West, introduced it to North Africa.
In the following centuries kârêz were intro¬
duced to various peripheral regions, but there
was little technical innovation, even in the
Islamic era, which in other respects was so fer¬
tile in agricultural innovation. There was a half¬
hearted attempt to introduce the system to the
Deccan, but only as far as we know at a few iso¬
lated sites such as Ahmadnagar and Burhanpur.
It was used on a far larger scale in Spain, where
tunnels were dug as far north as the Ebro basin
and in Catalonia. The only surviving evidence
for it today is that of place-names, starting with
the name Madrid, which derives from the Arabic
madjrît, meaning "place where there are
madjrâ", one of the words that were used to
denote the tunnels in the Iberian peninsula.
Spain's importance in the history of the kârêz
stems principally from its role as a secondary
centre of diffusion from which the technique
spread to areas where it is still used today. These
areas include Lanzarote in the Canary Islands,
the former Spanish colonies in America and
also the western Maghreb, where the system
may have been used in Almoravid times in the
ninth century A.D. The area in which the tech¬
nique came into use most recently is generally
considered to be the Xinjiang region of China,
where its introduction is normally dated to the
eighteenth century. It may, however, have arrived
there much earlier via that great cultural
highway, the Silk Road.
Standing
the test of time
Meanwhile, by far the greatest concentration
of tunnels in the world is undoubtedly on the
dry uplands of the Irano-Afghan plateau, at the
heart of the ancient Achaemenid Empire. Of
the 30,000 kârêz known in the world today,
Afghanistan has one fifth and Iran three fifths.
The borders of the central Iranian desert are
probably the place where the "hidden water
civilization" has reached its highest degree of
technical perfection. The moqanni (workers
who specialize in digging kârêz) of Yazd have

Irrigated land in Iran. The
air-vents of water-tunnels
can be seen in the
foreground.
DANIEL BALLAND
¡s a French geographer whose
special field of interest is the
arid regions of central Asia. His
publications include Les eaux
cachees. Etudes géographiques
sur les galeries drainantes
souterraines (Paris, 1 992).
always rightly been held in high regard. It is in
their area that the longest and deepest tunnels, the
product of extraordinary technical prowess, are
found. Here too ingenious systems of tunnels
on different levels were designed and constructed,
with lower tunnels collecting infiltration from
those above. In tunnels where the flow was par¬
ticularly abundant extraordinary underground
water-mills were built, accessible to pack ani¬
mals via no less amazing sloping tunnels.
What are the prospects for this form of irri¬
gation? It is reportedly in decline everywhere,
not so much because many of the tunnels are dis¬
appearing as because they are not being replaced
when they fall into disuse. When a tunnel ran
dry in the past, a new one was constructed some
distance away, for unlike river oases which are
forever physically tied to the stream that replen¬
ishes them, kârêz oases were to some extent
moveable. This is no longer the case now that a
massive exodus from the countryside has com¬
bined with galloping wage inflation to virtu
ally do away with all new construction, partic¬
ularly in the oil-producing countries. Now
when a tunnel dries up, wells equipped with
motor-pumps are dug, contributing to the low¬
ering of the water table and speeding up the
decline of the kârêz network.
Here and there, however, a reaction is setting
in, and oasis-dwellers are coming up with orig¬
inal solutions to the problems confronting them.
Farmers in the Gourara region of Algeria are
attempting to revive tunnels that are running dry
by installing motor-pumps in them. Similar
steps have been taken in Xinjiang, where wells
sunk near to kârêz have been connected to them
in order to increase their discharge. This com¬
bination of modern and traditional techniques
permits tunnels that otherwise would have been
abandoned to remain in use, at least for a time.
Once threatened with extinction, the "civi¬
lization of hidden waters" that has profoundly
shaped the development of many oases still
seems to have a bright future. 33
