R H
Thomas Mann giving a radio talk in 1 928.
The following year he was awarded the
Nobel Prize for literature.



Thomas Mann
The collectivist betrayal
44
In 1935 Thomas Mann (1875-1955)
tookpart in a meeting in Nice
(France) organized by the
International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation on the
theme of"the education ofmodern
man", and delivered a lecture thefirst
instalment ofwhich is published
below. (The second and third
instalments will appear in
forthcoming issues.) Mann, who had
leftHitler's Germany two years
before, here expresses his beliefin
"European civilization" and defends
the culture threatened by the rise of
Nazi ideology. Readers mayfind
some ofthe ideas he putsforward are
still surprisingly topical.
Deep down, Goethe never lost his
kind heart or his good nature;
and in his old age he confesses
to us that he loved youth dearly, and that
when young he liked himself much more
than he liked himself as an old man.
But these words occur among others
which do not hide his impatience with
and lack of faith in the younger generation.
"When you see," he wrote in 1812, "not
only how people, especially the young,
devote themselves to their pleasures and
passions, but also how the age's serious
forms of madness change and distort all
that is highest and best in them, so that
everything that should make them happy
becomes their loss, to say nothing of the
unspeakable pressure from outside, then
it is not surprising that people obstinately
persist in committing crimes against
themselves and others."
We know all about that: the distortion
of all that is highest and best in young
people, the unspeakable outside pressure,
and also the crimes. "The incredible pre- .
sumption," wrote Goethe on another occa¬
sion, "to which young people give rein will
manifest itself in a few years' time in the
greatest lunacy," words that might have
been uttered today, a really topical
prophecy. He also wrote: "Young people no
longer listen. It is true that listening
requires a special kind of culture." Cul¬
ture! A word that attracts the sneers of a
whole generation. These sneers are
directed against the favourite word of the
liberal middle class, as ifculture were really
only another word for middle-class liber¬
alism, as if it did not denote the opposite
ofbrutishness and human destitution: the
opposite also of idleness, of that miser¬
able sloppiness that is still sloppiness even
when it adopts a martial gait, in a word, as
if culture, as form, as desire for freedom
and truth, living by conscience and cease¬
less efforts, were not the discipline of
morality itself!
AN ESCAPIST GENERATION
So who bothers nowadays? The children of
the modern world claim that life is harder
for them than it ever was for us, because
they share its risks, its distress and its total
uncertainty, whereas we grew up in the
economic security of the bourgeois cen¬
tury. But they exaggerate the importance
of material things: and in any case, must
not we children of the past in our old age
now get used to a change in the circum¬
stances that have taken us from bourgeois
satiety to heroic penury? The important
thing is that young people have no idea
about "culture" in the lofty, profound
sense, or about inner struggles, individual
responsibility or personal effort; they take
their ease in collective life instead.
Collective life is comfortable compared
with individual life deliriously comfort-

able. What the collectivist generation
desires, and allows itself, is a perpetual
holiday to escape from itself. What it wants
and loves is ecstasy: and if we look at this
term, expressive of noble, holy ideas and
essential for the exaltation and religious
uplifting of life, we see at once that the
collectivism that is fashionable today is
but one example of the popular distor¬
tion that great and venerable European
concepts undergo when they are distrib¬
uted and handed over for consumption
by the masses.
"To make but one with all of life," cried
Hölderlin in Hyperion. "At these words
virtue doffs its warlike armour, the spirit of
man lays down the sceptre; death disap¬
pears from the midst of life, and everlast-
ingness and eternal youth inspire and
beautify the world." The Dionysiac event
that these words portend is cheapened in
the collectivist ecstasy, the purely selfish
hedonistic pleasure, informed by no real
meaning, that young people get from
marching in serried ranks to the rhythm of
songs that are a mixture of folk-songs that
have fallen into the gutter and newspaper
articles.
AN IMPOVERISHED CIVILIZATION
These young people like to melt into the
mass untrammelled by any personal
responsibility, and don't really mind which
way they are going. When asked what sat¬
isfaction they get out of it all, they are in no
hurry to draw definite conclusions or make
projections. The collective intoxication
that brings freedom from the self and its
burdens is its own reward. Related ideas
such as "the state", "socialism" and
"national grandeur" are more or less
excuses subsidiary and, frankly, super¬
fluous ideas. What matters is to achieve
ecstasy, to break free from the selfand the
need to think, i.e. essentially to free oneself
ofall morality and all reason and also, of
course, of fear, of the anxiety that leads
people to crowd together in dense masses,
keeping each other warm and singing
loudly. This aspect of the matter is far and
away the most likely to arouse our sym¬
pathy and commiseration.
This sense of wellbeing that people
feel when they escape from themselves
and shake off all personal responsibility
goes back to the war. When we speak of
modern man, today's man, we are of
course thinking of the post-war European,
the man who fought in the war or was
born into the world created by the war.
We tend to regard the present state of the
world, economically, intellectually and
morally, as the result of the war. But per¬
haps that is going too far. There is no
denying the enormous material and moral
havoc the war caused, but it did not create
our world. It merely brought to light,
accentuated and exaggerated what was
already there. The incredible impoverish¬
ment of civilization and the moral deca¬
dence we cannot avoid observing by com¬
parison with the nineteenth century are
not the result of the war, although the war
doubtless made a big contribution to
them. The movement had already started
beforehand. It is an old phenomenon,
caused primarily by the rise to power of
mass man, as José Ortega y Gasset has so
brilliantly shown in his book, La Rebelión
de las masas (1929; The Revolt of the
Masses, 1932).
It is a tragedy that all the confusion of
our times is due to the generosity and
boundless benevolence ofthe nineteenth
century, that immensely productive age
whose scientific and social blessings
enabled the population of Europe to
increase threefold; it is a tragedy that this
crisis, which bids fair to send us back into
barbarism, grew out of its shortsighted
magnanimity. Ortega splendidly describes
how the new masses irrupted into a civi¬
lization which they proceeded to use as
though it were a natural phenomenon,
ignorant and utterly disrespectful of the
complex mechanisms that were essential
to its existence.
As an example of the masses' attitude
to the conditions that gave them birth, it is
worth recalling that they trampled liberal
democracy underfoot or, more precisely,
that they used liberal democracy to destroy
liberal democracy. It is very possible that
they will bring about the decline of tech¬
nology too, despite all the childish love
their primitive souls have for it, because
they do not know that technology is merely
the practical application of free and dis¬
interested research pursued for love of
knowledge, and because they despise ide¬
alism and everything related to it and
hence freedom and truth.
INTELLECTUAL DECLINE
"Primitivism" is the right word to use. "The
average modern man," says Ortega, "has a
much healthier, more vigorous, but also
much simpler mind than his predecessor
of the last century." Thus if a play such as
Ibsen's Wild Duck is played to a modern
audience (assuming that the term, with
its overtones of elitism, is the right one to
apply to the modern masses), it will turn
out to have become completely incom¬
prehensible thirty-five years later. The
audience takes it as a farce, and laughs in
the wrong places. In the nineteenth cen¬
tury there was a society capable ofunder¬
standing the European irony, the double
meanings, the idealist bitterness and the
moral refinement of a work of this kind.
This faculty has been lost; and the proven
possibility of the "disappearance", the low¬
ering of the intellectual level almost
overnight to a primitive state in which
people are not merely insensitive to the
finer points but feel a fierce hatred for
them this whole phenomenon, which
would have been thought impossible in
the nineteenth century, because then
people believed in continuity, is all the
more frightening because it opens up
wider vistas. It shows that victories can in
the end be lost and fall into oblivion, and
that civilization itself is by no means cer¬
tain to escape this fate.
(TO BE CONTINUED)
Text selected and presented
by Edgardo Canton ¿L «C
