Twenty women aged
between eighteen and
twenty-five. After not
very successful school
careers they are
attending the Active
Preparation Programme
for Qualification and
Employment (PAQUE) at
the Parismédica centre.
Set up by the French
government in 1992,
PAQUE aims to assist
young adults in the
eighteen to twenty-five
age group from all
cultural backgrounds.
The Parismédica Centre,
which was opened In
1987 and is located near
the Gare de l'Est in
Paris, trains them to
become paramedics. But
the teaching staff is also
prepared to listen to
their problems. . . .
reams oftwenty
30
One morning I told the young women on
my course: "Today it's your turn to do the
talking. Fire away."
There was a moment's hesitation, then the
well-behaved Fatma, with her large white collar,
overcame her shyness and said:
"Everyone here makes their clans!"
As I had decided not to intervene, I let gra¬
matical errors go by. Fatma's French is as shaky
as her colleagues'.
Martine, a Frenchwoman "born and bred",
chipped in: "It's simply that one likes to be with
people one prefers." Her categorical tone, round
glasses and slight plumpness accentuated her
air of being the little lady who knows everything.
Nelly from Martinique was surprised at the
odd way they had all decided where to sit. She
walked elegantly round the classroom, her high
heels tapping on the floor, and said:
"Could it be that we're sitting like coun¬
tries drawn on a map? Yes, that's it, we've
formed a map! The two Comorans are sitting at
the same table. On their right are the three
inseparable Sri Lankans, on their left the West
Indians. And who do we find in the middle?"
Her varnished nails flashed as she raised a
slender hand and pointed:
"The metropolitan French!"
Sabrina from Morocco rose to her feet:
"What about the Africans? If we're sitting
like a map, they should be occupying the whole
of the middle of the room."
But beautiful, smooth-haired Sirga from
Côte d'Ivoire, an imposing figure in her ample
boubou, said calmly, and with an authority
probably inherited from her father, who is a
judge in her native village:
"We African women never form groups.
Here we're mixing with the rest."
It is African women, though, who are the
most reluctant to give up their traditional cos¬
tumes, even when we advise them to try to reas¬
sure their future employers by dressing in a
more conventional fashion. Their brightly
coloured boubous contrast sharply with the
skirts and blouses of the other women, whose
style of dress, we explain, is more likely to
secure them the kind of jobs they are being
trained for by "Parismédica" as nursing aux¬
iliaries, assistant paediatric nurses or geriatrics
auxiliaries.
The people in my class come from a host of
countries Algeria, Comoros, Côte d'Ivoire,
Ethiopia, France, French West Indies, the
Gambia, Guinea, Haiti, Italy, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Portugal, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Viet
Nam and Zaire, among others and theypersist
informing clans!
A certain intercultural resentment, which
can sometimes flare up into open conflict, is
the inevitable result of so many women being
cooped up in a little rectangular room and
wanting to stick up for their own traditions
rather than their neighbour's.
"Let's talk about the ideal husband."
There was a buzz of excitement in the room.
All the women were interested in my request.
Several were already married, others were

Young women today. From left
to right: in France, Morocco
and Viet Nam.
young women
by Hélène Trouche Simon
engaged, though they had no say in the choice
of their future husbands. In many cases, their
fathers still had the right of veto.
"In Algeria we're regarded as French," said
the already married Fatma. "But my mother,
who is French, converted to Islam to marry my
father."
"But couldn't you have 'gone' with a
Frenchman?" asked Linda the Senegalese.
"No, I wasn't interested," Fatma replied
with a nervous laugh.
"What if he'd converted?"
"Oh in that case, yes."
"But he'd still have remained French."
"I'd have encouraged him to convert."
Fatma is an unquestioning believer in Islam:
whatever the "infidel's" colour or nationality, he
will be accepted as a brother by the Muslim
community as long as he recognizes the Qur'an.
"But a converted Frenchman is still a French¬
man," repeated Linda, who regards ethnic ties as
more important than religious denominations.
African men
who live with Frenchwomen
Martine got to her feet and took off her glasses.
A great believer in freedom of conscience, she
banged her fist on the table:
"It's outrageous to force someone to convert! "
Fatma stood up to her bravely:
"I can't see anything wrong in it it's my
mother who urges us to remain faithful to Islam.
Yes, my mother! "
She emphasized her affection for her mother,
which, she said, was why she had taken the
decisions she had. They were linked by a strong
and profound bond which had a whole tradition
behind it. Contrary to the suggestion of the
indignant "free thinker" and however goody-
goody she might seem to other people she
was not under the thumb of an intransigent
father.
"Wouldn't you like to be able to choose for
yourself?" Linda insisted, proud that she had
recently managed to shake off the yoke of tra¬
dition by marrying a man who, it would seem,
came from another milieu.
"My parents are demanding people. I would
be dishonouring them," Fatma replied quietly.
She was referring to horma, the honour
without which a Muslim is excluded from
society, the family honour which hinges largely
on the conduct of the daughter of the house.
Honour, for Fatma, was something vastly more
important than any other notion cherished in the
West, such as personal happiness, independence
or freedom of choice.
Martine unexpectedly took Fatma's side,
revealing that she was not such a great believer
in freedom after all:
"My family would never speak to me again
if I went off with a black!"
Calmly, and with a mysterious smile on her
lips, Sirga decided to intervene:
"There are African men who go with
Frenchwomen, and Frenchmen who go with
African women. In Senegal we women now do
the choosing. I met a young man in Corsica. His
"For Fatma,
whatever a
person's colour or
nationality, he will
be accepted as a
brother by the
Muslim community
as long as he
recognizes the
Qur'an. 'But a
converted
Frenchman is still
a Frenchman,'
retorted Linda,
who regards
ethnic ties as
more important
than religion."
31

"That day each of them stuck to their
guns, with a hint of condescension,
not to say contempt, for those who did
not share their vision of the 'ideal
husband'. In fact very little was said
about that putative husband. All that
counted was the attitude of the family,
that omnipresent and time-honoured
institution whose shadowy presence
hung over the lives of Sirga, Linda,
Jasmina and even Martine, who was
so proud of being a free spirit."
Young women today in Sri
Lanka (above) and Côte d'Ivoire
(below).
family doesn't like blacks, but he does. I won't
say anymore!"
Martine, the little Frenchwoman, put on her
glasses again and tried to justify her reaction:
"It has to do with my two brothers. They
like to know who I'm going out with. At their
school there were lots of immigrant children
who bullied them. That's where their hatred of
foreigners comes from."
The piping voice of Jasmina, the young Sri
Lankan who had arrived in France less than a
year ago, could be heard above the hubbub:
"My fiancé is Sri Lankan, like me. And he
was chosen by my parents. I have to wait three
years before getting married	".
Martine interrupted her:
"Three years? Good luck to you!"
Encouraged by the approving giggles her
quip had produced, she went on:
"In the meantime, what do you get up to
with him?"
"We just talk," murmured Jasmina, who
normally never says a word in class.
32
HÉLÈNE TROUCHE SIMON, a
French psychologist who was
born In Zaire, is an educational
advisor and consultant for
developing countries. She has
published a number of studies
on the Rorschach test, a
projective test widely used in
psychology.
