BUTRINTI
rediscovered
byZijaXholi
42
In Albania, archaeologists
have rescued a great city
of theAncient Worldfrom
the mud and vegetation
that concealed itfor
centuries
ALBANIA has witnessed the passing
of a wide variety of civilizations.
From Antiquity to the beginning of
the twentieth century, successive domina¬
tion by the Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman
empires has left its traces. The city ofBoth-
rota Butrinti in Albanian is one of the
fragments which form the fabric ofAlbania's
ancient cultural landscape, in the south¬
west of the Balkan peninsula.
Nestling in the highlands in the far south
of the country and surrounded by dense
vegetation, Butrintiwas doubly protected by
nature and by the fortifications which its
inhabitants built in ancient times. How¬
ever, this was not sufficient to isolate the city
from the rest of the world. Less than ten
kilometres from the island ofCorfu, Butrinti
was linked to the Mediterranean by the
Vivari canal, which ran from the Butrinti
Lake to the Ionian Sea.
The proximity of the sea and the lake, the
gentle climate and the beauty of the sur¬
rounding countryside provided a splendid
environment for the foundation ofa city. In
taking advantage of this site, the architects
of the past constructed whatwas to become
one of the major maritime and commercial

Above, the ruins of the
amphitheatre (4th-3rd century
B.C.). In background, remains of
houses with colonnaded
courtyards.
Opposite page, the baptistry (4th-
6th century) with its double row of
granite columns and mosaic floor.
Right, a statue belonging to the
school of Praxiteles unearthed at
Butrinti.
ZIJA XHOLI, of Albania, lectures ¡n
history and philosophy at Tirana
University and is a member of the
Academy of Sciences of the Republic of
Albania. His publications include
Thinkers of the Albanian Renaissance
(1987).
centres of the Ancient World. Butrinti
reached the height of its glory in the fourth
century B.C., at which time the city num¬
bered 10,000 inhabitants.
The sight of the fortifications alone,
which date from the sixth century B.C.,
evokes the military and economic potential
of the city at that time. The hill on which the
acropolis stands is encircled by a wall built
of huge stone blocks. In places this wall is
two metres high and 3.5 metres wide.
The amphitheatre, dating from the third
century B.C., bears witness to the cultural
riches of the city. The stone banks ofseating,
ofwhich twenty- three rows have been pre¬
served, would have held an audience of
1,500. The theatre is situated at the foot of
the acropolis, close by two temples, one of
which is dedicated to Asclepios, the Greek
god of medicine, who was worshipped by
the city's inhabitants. Approximately thirty
inscriptions, almost all in ancient Greek,
carved in the western façade of this temple,
and another hundred or so found on a tower
which was rebuilt in the 1st century B.C., are
the only examples ofwriting discovered in
Butrinti. These inscriptions are mainly con¬
cerned with the liberation of slaves. 43

44
Excavations have brought to light many
objects plates, vases, ceramic candle¬
sticks as well as sculptures, including a
remarkable "Goddess of Butrinti", which
seems to completely embody, in the per¬
fection of its features, the Greek ideal of
physical beauty.
The ramparts served to remind the
inhabitants of their peaceful life and the
uncertainty of their future. For centuries,
the walls faithfully defended Butrinti. But
no wall is invincible, and these huge blocks
of stone finally ceded to the assault of the
Roman legions which landed on the Adri¬
atic and Ionian shores in the second cen¬
tury B.C. Under the rule of the occupiers,
Butrinti was to fall slowly into decadence.
Unlike Dyrrachium and Apollonia, cities
comfortably situated on the roads joining
Head of Apollo (4th century B.C.)
known as the "Goddess
of Butrinti".
Rome to the East, which experienced a
wave ofprosperity, Butrinti far from the
major road links was at the mercy of the
whims of patricians and senators whose
sole concern was achieving rapid personal
gain.
In spite of this, three monumental foun¬
tains, three public baths, a gymnasium
decorated with mosaics, and especially the
aqueduct constructed during the reign of
Augustus, prove that the site was not com¬
pletely abandoned. Augustus also oversaw
the reconstruction of all the ancient city
walls and the erection ofnew fortifications.
He accorded Butrinti the status of a colony,
and it was at this time that the city minted
its first coins.
Christianity brought new life to Butrinti.
The palaeo-Christian period adorned the
city with two basilicas and a baptistry,
which is among the most beautiful in the
Mediterranean region. Sixteen granite
columns, forming two concentric circles,
support the roofof the main hall. The floor
is paved with a magnificent mosaic repre¬
senting the Tree ofLife and decorated with
medallions embellished with animal
motifs.
But this was to be a mere respite. Bar¬
barian incursions and Norman raids in the
eleventh century, a catastrophic earth¬
quake in 1 153, conquest by the Venetians
in 1386, the subterranean infiltration of
water and the subsequent epidemics com¬
pleted the ruin of the city and forced the
inhabitants to flee. Butrinti was buried in
silence and oblivion. Throughout the
occupation by the Ottoman Empire, from
the fifteenth to the twentieth centuries,
the city remained in deep slumber. The
waters covered Butrinti in mud, and an
abundant vegetation completely hid the
remains from view.
It was not until the beginning of the
twentieth century that systematic excava¬
tions were carried out at Butrinti by the
Italian archaeologist I. Ugolini, followed by
his compatriots R Marconi and D. Mustili.
Between 1928 and 1941, the ground was
cleared and the ancient city gradually began
to reveal its hidden treasures.
Following the liberation of Albania in
1944, Albanian archaeologists undertook
more ambitious excavations. In turn, the
ramparts, the acropolis, the agora, the
amphitheatre, the temples, public baths
and private residences re-emerged into
the light ofday. The entire city arose, almost
intact, under the fascinated gaze of the
archaeologists. The mud and vegetation
that covered Butrinti had protected it from
the natural and human ravages of time.
Today, this rediscovered city represents
a unique cultural treasure whose value far
surpasses national frontiers. The impor¬
tance of Butrinti can be gauged from its
inclusion in 1992 on UNESCO's World Her¬
itage List.
