nder the whiplash
by Oruno D. Lara
Slavery existed in very early times, but it was in the Greek city-state that the
slave became what Aristotle called "apiece ofproperty which is animate"
8
Top, a Roman slave.
Lithograph by an unknown
artist.
Above, "Mandarin of Turan, In
Cochinchina, with his slave
pipe-bearer". Illustration from a
French edition (1804) of
"Journal of the Embassy to
China" by Earl Macartney, the
first British envoy to Peking
(Beijing).
Right, black slaves in Brazil
washing for precious stones
under the threat of the
supervisors' lash. Watercolour
by Carlos Juliao (circa 1775).
Forced labour existed in a variety of forms
throughout Antiquity in the Egypt of
the Pharaohs, the Middle East (Babylon and
Assyria), and Greece and Italy. However, slavery
as an institution, in which the slave became a
commodity or what Aristotle called "a piece of
property which is animate", was first devised by
the Greek city-states.
Slavery is essentially a relationship in which
one person dominates another. It is based on the
power of a master, who imposes his will by force
and threats. The slave system was created and
maintained by violence. Whipping slaves was
not only a means of inflicting punishment on
them but of dominating them, making an impres¬
sion on them and reminding them of their state of
servitude. Slaves were kept apart from one
another. The alternatives before them were "abject
submission", escape or rebellion.
This domination was justified by the "original
alienation" of the slaves and their status as "people
without honour". Stripped of any rights or title,
they no longer had any family history, ancestry
or issue. Completely isolated, they could not
receive or hand down any heritage. In their state
of rootless alienation, they were tools whose
owners could treat them as they saw fit. Masters
had a whole array of physical or symbolic instru¬
ments which they could use to control the bodies
of their slaves.
When did the slave system start to go into
decline, or rather to be replaced?1 In Italy, the first
imperial measures against the breaking-up of
slave families were promulgated in the year 325
of our era. According to some historians, how¬
ever, the ancient form of slavery is considered as
having ended under the reign of Charlemagne.
Even so, the Church at that time was still a con¬
siderable owner of slaves. The Anglo-Saxon the¬
ologian Alcuin, one of Charlemagne's closest
advisers, owned 20,000 slaves in the four abbeys
under his control. Almost 20 per cent of Europe's
population in Charlemagne's time consisted of
slaves. Some forms of medieval slavery continued
to exist from the ninth to the fifteenth centuries
and gradually faded out only when they were
superseded by the African and Asian slave trades.
Exploitation and torture
How many men, women and children left Africa
in the holds of the slave ships? How many
African and Malagasy captives were sold on the
slave markets of the Caribbean and mainland
America? The answer is that they were prob¬
ably tens of millions, but we shall never know the
exact figure because there are no reliable statistics.
In this respect, the stumbling-block historians
have to contend with lies in the conditions and
practices of the trade, both legal and illegal, which
went on from the mid-fifteenth century to the
closing decades of the nineteenth century.
The slaves of Antiquity, like those of modern
times, had to submit to the sexual demands of
their masters. Prostitution was only one feature of

	.¿¿^J.¿i**íu,
the relationship. Trimalchio, one of the characters
in the Satyricon of Petronius, the Roman author of
the 1st century A.D., says: "For fourteen years, I
was the light of my master's eyes. There is no
shame in doing what your master orders you to do.
In the meantime, I also kept my mistress happy".
A variety of methods, such as changing slaves'
names, inflicting corporal punishment on them or
torturing them, were used to dehumanize and
degrade them, deprive them of their personality
and make them different from other human
beings, who were not chattels. This was the sole
purpose of the practice whereby all male slaves,
regardless of their age, were called "boy" pais
in Greek, puer in Latin.
Attempts have been made to minimize, and
indeed conceal, the many acts of physical cruelty
meted out on slaves, and to deny the existence of
torture in Greece and Italy. Torture was practised
in Athens, however, and the instruments used
are well-known to specialists. As Demosthenes
noted, freedmen differed from slaves because the
latter had to answer for all their crimes with their
bodies. What we do not know, however, is
whether the slave-owners of Antiquity displayed
the same refinement as the planters of the Amer¬
icas in inflicting cruelty on their slaves. The atroc¬
ities perpetrated by the latter have provided mate¬
rial for a large number of books on the subject and
are borne out by irrefutable eyewitness accounts.
A totalitarian system based on racism
There were two ways of escaping from slavery:
emancipation or flight. Emancipation meant
that the slaves were no longer chattels. In Greece,
they became "metics", resident aliens who were
free but were debarred from discharging polit
ical obligations, whereas in Rome they auto¬
matically acquired Roman citizenship. Their
legal status changed from being that of an object
to that of a person recognised by law. The eman¬
cipated slaves of Antiquity were able to become
absorbed into the mass of the population within
the space of one or two generations. The poet
Horace, whose father was an emancipated slave,
complains in his Satires of having sometimes
been insulted about his origins.
This was by no means the case of the eman¬
cipated slaves of the Caribbean and the Amer¬
icas, for whom the colour of their skin was the
indelible mark of their slave origins. Writing in
1776, the colonist Hilliard d'Auberteuil noted
that "In San Domingo, for the sake of our own
interests and security, we show such contempt
for the black race that anybody descending from
it ... is marked with an indelible stain"2 In
Brazil, emancipation was regarded as a pow¬
erful form of pressure whereby slave-owners
were able to keep control over their slaves and
sow discord among them. In the Spanish
colonies of the Caribbean, a system of gradual
emancipation, known as coartación, under which
slaves could buy back their freedom in instal¬
ments, was introduced in the sixteenth century.
The emancipated slaves remained dependent
on their masters and were therefore obliged to
respect and honour them or work for them.
Slavery in the Caribbean was more than an
institution with its own laws and customs and
methods of keeping order. It was literally a "total¬
itarian" system of economic, political, social and
sexual exploitation based on force, violence and
the ideology of racism. The ceremonial in which
the slaves were integrated into the system was
SLAVERY
Above left, the slave market
at Zabid, in Yemen. Illustration
from the Maqamat
("The Assemblies"), short
anecdotes told in rhyming prose
by the Arab writer al-Hariri
(mid-13th century).
Below, the prison for
Christian slaves in Algiers.
Engraving by an unknown
18th-century artist.

meant to blot out their past and their culture, and
kill them as free men and members of society. It
was only by making a bid for freedom that the
black cimarrón, the runaway slave, could regain
his identity as a man (by again using his African
name) and his will to work.
In Greece and Italy, and also in Roman-
occupied Egypt, slave-owners had specially
designed instruments, in the shape of metal
chains and collars, to prevent the slaves from
escaping. If slaves did escape, the owners offered
rewards through public announcements or called
on the authorities or engaged professional slave-
hunters known as fugitivarii.
What fate lay in store for the runaway slaves?
They could flee into the bush and form small
bands living off robbery. One account from the
third century B.C. tells of a celebrated example on
the island of Chios, at some unknown date. A



band of runaway slaves had sought refuge in a
rugged, forest-covered mountain region, under
the leadership of a chief called Drimacos. They
successfully resisted several punitive expeditions
until Drimacos eventually concluded a formal
agreement with the authorities. He gave an under¬
taking to protect the property of Chios and only
to accept as members of his band those slaves who
had "suffered intolerably" and returned the others
to their masters. On his death, he was raised to the
dignity of "benevolent hero".
In the course of history, only four slave
revolts took on the proportions of actual war¬
fare, with thousands of armed men on either
side, pitched battles, sieges and the occupation
of towns. The first three took place in Sicily
and Italy over the period from 140 to 70 B.C.
The fourth was the major insurrection on the
island of San Domingo, which culminated in
the independence of Haiti in January 1 804.
1 "Slavery is not a moral category: it is an institution
which provides a large fraction of the labour force. As
long as that force is necessary, slavery cannot merely
go into decline, it has to be replaced". Moses I. Finley,
Ancient Slavery and Modern Ideology, New York,
Penguin, 1983.
2 Hilliard d'Aubertcuil, Considérations sur l'état
présent de la colonie française de Saint Domingue
(1776-1777).
"For the emancipated slaves of
the Caribbean and the
Americas, the colour of their
skin was the indelible sign of
their origins". Right, photo
taken in South Carolina (U.S.A.)
in 1899.
10
ORUNO D. LARA,
of Guadeloupe, is a historian
who heads the Caribbean-
America Research Centre at the
University of Paris X-Nanterre.
His published works include Les
Caraïbes (1986), Caraïbes en
construction: espace,
colonisation, résistance (2 vols,
1992) and, in collaboration with
Nelly Schmidt, Les abolitions de
l'esclavage, Une longue marche
(Centre national de
documentation pédagogique,
Paris, 1993).
