ULUGH BEG, THE ASTRONOMER-KING
byJasminaSopova
Fromhis birth in Soltaniyeh in 1394 to
his death in Samarkand in 1449, the
life story ofMahmud Turgay was one
ofwisdom and ofenthusiasm. A sagacious
ruler who has gone down in history by the
name bestowed on him of Ulugh Beg, the
"great prince", he is also known as the cel¬
ebrated scholar Guragon. Governor ofparts
of Khorasan and Mazandaran from 1407
onwards, he ascended the throne of the
Timurids only towards the end ofhis life, in
1447.
Grandson of the famous Mongol con¬
queror Timur, the founder of the Timurid
dynasty whose empire stretched from the
Mediterranean to Mongolia, and son of
Shah Rokh, a ruler famed for his peaceable
nature and his interest in the arts, Ulugh Beg
also made his contribution to the intellec¬
tual life of Samarkand and became one of
the leading makers of the Timurid Renais¬
sance. He enhanced the splendour and
prosperity of Samarkand, building a mag¬
nificent madrasah or religious school,
entirely overlaid with ceramics, a convent,
a caravanserai, the Alike Kukeltash great
mosque, and a small mosque of such
exquisite workmanship that it was known
as the "carved mosque". The madrasah
played a decisive part in the progress of
astronomy, Ulugh Beg's preferred field of
study, providing the point ofdeparture for
another colossal undertaking that the "great
prince" had in mind since childhood.
Fascinated by the thirteenth-century
Maraghah observatory, he gave orders, soon
after the opening of the modrasa/z, in about
1424, for his architects to build an obser¬
vatory that would be without equal any¬
where in the world. This was how the
Samarkand observatory, which for 300 years
was likewise to inspire astronomers and
architects, came into being.
It was erected on a rocky hill some
twenty metres high, set in a handsome
park and with living quarters around it.
The main building consisted of a long
tunnel, three storeys high, leading from
the entrance and plunging below ground
before curving back skywards, thus
forming a giant sextant, the largest astro¬
nomical instrument of its kind in the
world, with a forty-metre radius. The pur¬
pose in constructing it on such an
imposing scale was to enable more accu¬
rate observations to be made of the transit
of the moon and the planets through the
solar meridian. Equipped with an astro
labe and an armillary sphere, its primary
function was to obtain precise measure¬
ments of the length of the year and ofsuch
important astronomical data as the angle
between the trajectory of the sun and the
celestial equator.
The main scientific findings to come
out of these observations are to be found
in the set of astronomical tables known
as the Zij-i Gurgani, written in Persian,
Arabic and Turkish. Although they were
probably completed by about 1437, Ulugh
Beg kept making modifications to them
right until his death. Ulugh Beg must share
some of the credit for their accuracy, often
compared to that of modern tables, with
his first astronomer royal, Ghiyath al-Din
al-Kashi, who was held in the highest
esteem by his master.
Among the documents left by Ghiyath
al-Din to posterity, one that deserves par¬
ticular attention is a letter addressed to
his father in which he describes the work
of the observatory in minute detail and
The gigantic sextant of Ulugh Beg's
observatory, Samarkand. Tunnelled right
through the rock and with a 40-metre
radius, it was the largest astronomical
instrument of its time.
also sketches a portrait in words of Ulugh
Beg. Carefully pointing out that what he
was writing was not a gesture of defer¬
ence the ruler could not stand flat¬
terers but the strict truth, he tells us that
the "King of Islam" was already an accom¬
plished scholar by the age of twenty- five,
always avidly in search of knowledge. A
man of immense erudition, he knew nearly
all of the Qur'an by heart and had a talent
for quoting aptly from it. He wrote Arabic
very well and expressed himselfwith great
eloquence, rhetoric being among his
favourite exercises. He regularly attended
the madrasah, often surprising his lis¬
teners by his apposite comments and his
speed in mental arithmetic. He also had an
exceptional memory, as the following
anecdote shows. As befits a ruler, he was an
enthusiastic huntsman, and as befits a
scholar he kept a detailed record in his
notebook of what birds had been shot,
when and where. . . . When one day the
librarian despondently announced that
the notebook had disappeared, Ulugh Beg
cheered him up by saying he knew it all by
heart, and proceeded to dictate it all from
memory to his assistant, who took it down
in a new notebook. When later the original
turned up, the two texts were compared
and were found to differ in only four or
five particulars.
Forever gazing at the stars, Ulugh Beg
also wished to tell his future from them,
but the stars that had looked down benev¬
olently upon the scholar reserved a cruel
fate for the man. It is said that a great rift
occurred between him and his son Abd
al-Latif over the interpretation of their
respective horoscopes, and things came to
such a pass that the son finally, so it is
said, killed his father.
Thus it was that Samarkand came to
lose one whose image has gone down in
history as that of a simple, modest man, a
respected ruler, an eminent scholar, a poet,
historian and patron of the arts to whose
court the greatest minds of the time
flocked. Despite his early death, the scale
of his achievement was such that it
became known far beyond the frontiers
of the Islamic world and its influence on
astronomy extended into Europe.
JASMINA SOPOVA
¡s a Macedonian essayist who has written widely
on the art and literature of black Africa, the Indian
Ocean and the West Indies. 47
