The comfort of certainty
by Flora Lewis
^ . à t*
In France the separation of
church and state was designed to
protect the Republic.
In the United States its purpose
was to preserve freedom of
religion.
wk+z*"
M
44^*11«***
V
8
Some years ago in Mozambique, a Por-
I tugúese settler who had decided to stay
on after independence was showing me around
Luanda. We came to a particularly handsome,
newly restored church, and he explained that as
part of the recently launched reform policy to
enhance people's confidence, the Marxist gov¬
ernment had decided to end its compaign against
the church. "The trouble", he said, "was that
both promised heaven, but we promised to
deliver it on earth. We haven't succeeded."
That is the straightforward fact which led to
the collapse of communism an attempt to pro¬
vide an all-encompassing secular faith to regu¬
late all aspects of man's relation to man, making
the idea of man's relation to God not only super¬
fluous but subversive. It has failed, and where it
was imposed there has been a robust revival of
the traditional religion, a testimony of the deeply
felt need of all kinds of people with differing cul¬
tures for something to believe in beyond the
evidence of everyday life. One way or another,
people do seek meaning, a sense of purpose,
that politics cannot adequately provide.
But seldom does religion, by itself, provide
the organizing mechanisms through which soci¬
eties can deal with the perennial issues of power
and the need to adapt to changing circumstances.
That is why there is always an element of poli-


&&&****&
A*Q
Friday prayers at the Istiqlal
(independence) mosque in
Jakarta, Indonesia.
tics, even in the most fundamentalist states, even
in the most totalitarian dictatorships, though it
may be hidden in religious rhetoric or a "cult"
(a word borrowed from the vocabulary of reli¬
gion) "of personality". People have conflicting
interests and they can be ordinary. The way
societies deal with this is politics, whatever it
may be called. Politics and religion are pre¬
sented as two different worlds, the one material,
often self-serving, the other spiritual. But they
are inevitably intertwined, and can no more be
isolated from each other in social life than body
and soul can be kept apart in a living person.
Take that as given. The question then is their
impact on each other, their differing priorities,
how they are to be reconciled. The separation of
church and state, which does not necessarily
mean their opposition, is a Western idea that
emerged from the Renaissance and the Refor¬
mation, buttressed by the tremendous advance
of science into the realms of mystery which
once could only be penetrated by religion, by
faith. Just now, quite apart from the familiar
challenges that knowledge of cosmology, of
physics, of biochemistry present to religious
dogma, there are troubling new questions posed
by innovative techniques in biology, lumped
under the new word "bioethics". These have
to do with genetic manipulation, extra-corporeal


conception, the possibility of women, fertile or
not, giving birth to somebody else's genetic
baby. The possibilities didn't exist before, so
neither did the questions. Are the answers to be
supplied by politics (legislation), religious
- - am -

Politics and religion are presented as two different
worlds, the one material, often self-serving, the other
spiritual. But they are inevitably intertwined, and can
no more be isolated from each other in social life than
body and soul can be kept apart in a living person.
10
authority, or individual choice? A great debate
is beginning in Western countries. A bill is
already before the French Senate. Religious
views will certainly play an important role wher¬
ever these questions are being faced.
One nation, under God
In any case, separation of church and state has
never been so complete or so widespread as the
concept suggests. There are modern democracies
with formally established churches. Israel and
England are examples. The Catholic church has
special status in many countries, such as Italy,

Spain and Poland. Germany provides publicly
funded support for both Catholic and Protestant
church institutions. In the United States, the
tax system gives indirect support to churches of
all kinds, and it can be a matter of political or
judicial decision as to whether or not any group
claiming to be a religion actually qualifies for this
privilege.
The two countries which historically and
emphatically insist on separating church and
state came to that decision for opposite reasons.
In France, after the 1789 Revolution, it was to
protect the state from the power of the church,
deemed abusive under the Ancien Regime. In the
United States, it was to protect the churches
from the power of the state, to ensure the rights
of religious diversity and religious dissidents, a
major motive for the original colonization of
North America.
Nonetheless, the sessions of Congress open
with a prayer, the pledge of allegiance is "to
one Nation, under God" and the oath of public
office is taken with one hand placed on the
Bible.
The vehemence of the introduction of reli¬
gious issues in American politics waxes and
wanes abortion, prayer in public schools,
public funding for church-run schools are heated
current controversies. The Washington Post
writer E.J. Dionne, Jr., commenting on con¬
temporary arguments about the proper domains
of religion and politics in the United States,
concludes that a certain tension between the
two is desirable, both for government and reli¬
gion, since each would lose from immunity to
challenge excessive claims of authority. Despite
the Constitution, whose first amendment
adopted in 1791 reads "Congress shall make no
law respecting an establishment of religion, or

prohibiting the free exercise thereof." The issue
of religion and politics has never been defini¬
tively settled in the United States and probably
never will be. Desirable or not, some tension
persists. What is consistent is the requirement of
tolerance, room for difference.
Not just a religion
This is the core of the issue, the fundamental of
democracy. It isn't about the coexistence of reli¬
gion and politics, but about whether religion
claiming to encompass politics is compatible
with democracy (or, as in Mozambique, whether
politics claiming to liquidate religion is com¬
patible with democracy).
Islam is a special case in today's world
because some militant Muslims, identified as
fundamentalists or Islamicists, insist that their
The Spring ceremony in
Seoul's Chong Myo sanctuary,
where the tablets listing the
names and accomplishments of
Korea's Confucian kings are
kept.
faith gives the basis for all necessary social reg¬
ulation, all functions of government. Aliza
Izetbegovic, the president of Bosnia and Herze¬
govina, wrote in his Islamic Declaration of 1970
that Islam is "not just a religion", an idea that
helped provoke the conflict in his benighted
country. Though they used existing secular law
to run for election in hopes of gaining power
(thwarted by a coup) Algerian fundamentalists
in the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) declared
that once they were in a position to rule, no
constitution or legislation would be appropriate
because the Qur'an contains, in God's words, all
the regulation that state and society require.
There is no room, in this view, for choice and
interpretation. Authority claims to know what
God intends, so disagreement, rebuttal and
opposition are not just to the mortals who rule IjL

but to the will of God himself. This is not com¬
patible with democracy because, though they
base their fiats on scripture, these are people
telling other people what they must believe.
Even if scripture is considered infallible, the
people who say what it means and how its
instructions and denunciations are to be applied
are not infallible. The attempt to impose their
single-mindedness takes especially ugly, repul¬
sive form in the campaign in parts of North
Africa to murder intellectuals for the sheer
reason that they are the ones most able and
likely to formulate and express other ideas. Nei¬
ther liberty nor democracy can tolerate this vio¬
lent breach of tolerance.
The phony Islamic threat
The American Arabist Edward W. Said attacks
those who raise alarm at what he calls "the
phony Islamic threat" by pointing out how
much diversity exists within Islam, how many
different interpretations have been offered and
widely accepted over the centuries. The cur¬
rent militant version has no better claim to
exclusive truth than the others, though it makes
its assertions more aggressively. It is spawned,
Said argues, by reaction to "corrupt and
mediocre governments", not by the intrinsic
precepts of religion itself. "Islam is a cultural
identity", he says, "not a synonym for bomb-
throwing. The real danger in the Arab world is
not the people, but the ruling elites."
In any case, the logic of proclaiming " God's
will" as the answer to the problems of society is
a closed circle. If what is must be because God
Below, François Mitterrand at his investiture as President of
France at the Elysée Palace, Paris, on 21 May, 1981.
Below right, Bill Clinton, 42nd President of the United
States, taking the oath of office on the steps of the Capitol
in Washington, DC, on 20 January 1993.
willed it so, then how is urgent change to be
brought about? How are people to help them¬
selves and others? How is hope to be found on
earth, the only place we surely know? This,
along with violence and persecution, is what so
offends democrats when they warn against
allowing religion the upper hand in politics.
The door is slammed shut against innovation,
initiative, the individual's responsibility to think,
without which there can be no freedom.
Of course, it is true that not everybody
values democracy, and those who do also cherish
other values which it is the duty of democracy
to protect. Democracy does not pretend to be a
faith, though so far as I know all religions do
preach God's equal concern for all human beings
and do not make a hierarchical order of those
who deserve His blessings. Democracy is simply
a way of enabling society to function. It recog¬
nizes human failings and propensity to error, and
makes it easier to correct mistakes peaceably
than systems which claim absolute righteousness
and can only be obeyed or overthrown. It guards
against the sin of hubris, always a threat.
The issue of religion and politics has come to
the fore again in this period because of a number
of circumstances, including the spread of democ¬
racy, the immediacy of communications which
make people much more aware of others outside
their own communities, and the sense of bewil¬
derment, uncertainty and insecurity which the
modern world has much magnified. But this is
not really new; there is a tendency to recur¬
rence. The French writer Emile Zola wrote a
century ago, "great disorders lead to great devo¬
tions". They are the times when people most
want the comfort of certainty. But the human
condition cannot assure it. People need spiritual
solace; they also need politics to cope with life
in an ever more complex society.
12
FLORA LEWIS,
a distinguished American
journalist specializing in
international affairs, is a
syndicated columnist whose
work is widely distributed. She is
the author of several books, the
latest of which is Europe: Road
to Unity (1992).
