The Dawn ofSerenity:
Letterfrom Borobudur
The Buddhist sanctuary of Borobudur (Indonesia) is one of the jewels of the world cultural heritage. Eiji
Hattori, a specialist in Buddhist art and thought, has long been fascinated by this great monument. Here
he suggests a new interpretation of its symbolism.
UNESCO IN ACTION
HERITAGE
68
Dawn.The endless forest ofcoconut
trees is sleeping beneath white
mist, while to the east the elegant
silhouette of Mount Merapi stands out
against a background ofgolden light. Smoke
is rising gently from the volcano. Here and
there on the awakening plain below a cock
crows and breaks the silence. The lines of
stupas stand like süent shadows in the cool
of the early morning. Among them I can
see the statue ofa Buddha facing the rising
sun; the new day's light does not seem to dis¬
turb his meditation for an instant.
It is the dawn ofserenity.
In the half light I can make out a man
dressed in white sitting at the foot of the
central stupa. A strange vibration emanates
from him. I listen. He is murmuring a sutra.
Perhaps one of Java's few Buddhists,1 his
hands are joined as he calmly greets the
sun that by now is shining on Mount
Merapi. Then he goes silently away.
This is not my first visit to Borobudur.
The more I get to know this monument, the
more I am dazzled by its beauty. Some
twenty years ago Unesco launched an appeal
to the international community to save it.
Twenty-seven countries responded and
worked with Unesco and Indonesian experts
to move a million stones over a ten-year
period so that this chandi2 could live again
in its original form. Borobudur is an excep¬
tional place. It is not a temple it has no
place forworship nor for making offerings
but a huge Buddhist sanctuary that is both
a stupa3 and a mándala (a cosmic image) .

by Eiji Hattori
"I see the statue of a Buddha facing the rising
sun." At right of photo, the volcanic peak of Mt.
Merapi.
In eighth-century Java the rulers of the
prosperous Sailendra {saila indra: king of
the mountains) dynasty converted to
Mahayana4 Buddhism, a form ofBuddhism
that came into being around the same time
as the beginning of the Christian era. Using
the most advanced techniques available,
they built this brilliantly designed stone
mándala some time around the year 800.
Thousands of labourers, craftsmen and
artists worked on it. But how briefwas the
life-span of their masterpiece! Less than a
century after its completion Borobudur
had disappeared into oblivion, rather like
the earth mándala in ancient India that
returned to dust after seven days ofuse.
Why did the dynasty, which had built
other masterpieces in central Java, abandon
it in the tenth century and turn its attention
to the eastern part of the island? Could it
have been because ofan eruption ofMount
Merapi and the violent earthquake that
would have followed? Like Pompeii beneath
its shroud of ash, Borobudur fell into a
thousand-year sleep. It was not until 1814
that the legendary chandi, buried deep in
the jungle, was rediscovered by an agent
sent out by Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles, at
that time the British governor ofJava.
The three spheres
Let us take a closer look at Borobudur. On
the Kedu plain, formerly known as the
garden ofJava, the sanctuary stands on the
top of a decapitated hill and is built of
andésite, a bluish-greyvolcanic rock. It is a
colossal pyramid of superimposed tiers
that are crowned by an enormous bell-
shaped stupa. From a distance you can tell
that the whole construction is organized
around this stupa.
At closer range you can see a heavy stone
encasement around the base thatwas prob¬
ablybuilt to shore up the monument during
its construction. It hides the real base or
"hidden foot", which is decorated with 1 60
reliefs, all of which were photographed
shortly after they were discovered in the
late nineteenth century.
These "invisible" reliefs depict the
Sphere of the Desires that the human being
is bound to, the kâmadhâtu. I do not agree
with theories that claim this part of the
monument was deliberately covered up for
religious motives to prevent pilgrims from
"In eighth-century Java the
rulers of the prosperous
Sailendra dynasty
converted to Mahayana
Buddhism. Using the most
advanced techniques
available, they built this
brilliantly designed stone
mándala. Thousands of
labourers, craftsmen and
artists worked on it. But
how brief was the life-span
of their masterpiece!"
seeing it. On the one hand, the "hidden
foot" contains unfinished reliefs indicating
that work suddenly came to a halt due to
some unexpected event. On the other, as I
shall explain later, such an error seems
quite inconceivable in such a carefully
planned monument. This part of the mán¬
dala symbolizes "extreme exteriority": each
side has a stairway in the middle, leading up
to the monument's highest point.
The main structure of the sanctuary is
composed of this foundation and, standing
on top of it, five square terraces. The super¬
structure consists of three circular terraces.
This is the basic shape of the mándala: the
square, a symbol of the earth, and the circle,
symbolizing the sky, combine to produce
Borobudur's bas-reliefs are a vast picture-book in
stone illustrating the life of the historical Buddha
and the spiritual quest for Enlightenment of
Sudhana, the son of a rich merchant.
T - . 1
J
I ¿±d.
mt
P
B

"In Borobudur the transition from earth to sky, from
form to non-form, is made gently. I see it as an
intentional transition towards the circle. The
square form is not rigorously adhered to. Nor are
the first two terraces exactly circular. Only the
topmost terrace is a perfect circle." Left, aerial
view of Borobudur.
Opposite page, the "Mándala matrix" {Taizo-kal
mandara), an initiatory painting of Japanese Tantric
Buddhism. The height of the mándala, painted on
canvas from a Japanese temple, is 179 cm.
70
the number nine, the supreme figure of
Buddhism.
The galleries, which have to be visited
clockwise to respect the ritual circumam-
bulation, begin on the second terrace. They
are lined with 1,300 wonderful bas-reliefs
2,500 metres long. This is rûpadhatu, the
Sphere ofForms, in which the human being
gives up his thirst for desire but keeps his
Borobudur: from rediscovery to World Heritage listing
The site: a vast Mahayana Buddhist monument in the form of a pyramid-shaped mándala, built
in the heart of Java around 800 A.D. by the Sailendra dynasty and abandoned shortly after its com¬
pletion.
Size: the square base, with sides measuring some 120 metres, covers an area of almost one and
a half hectares; the central dome that crowns the monument is almost 35 metres above the base.
1814: rediscovery of the monument by Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles, who has the site cleared
of rubble and vegetation. Specialists compile documentation based on drawings.
1885: discovery of "the hidden foot"the original baseand its bas-reliefs concealed behind the
retaining wall needed to keep the structure from sliding.
1907-1911: Theodoor Van Erp carries out the first restoration work. He dismantles and rebuilds
the three circular terraces and the stupas.
1955: Indonesia seeks Unesco's advice on measures to prevent the monument's dilapidation.
1972: Unesco launches an international appeal to save Borobudur.
1975-1982: restoration work carried out.
23 February 1983: inaugural ceremony to mark the completion of restoration work. Total cost: $20
million, two-thirds from the Indonesian government, and $7 million from Unesco's international cam¬
paign, in which 27 countries took part.
1991: Borobudur included on Unesco's World Heritage list.
name and form. This immense stone book
relates Buddha's life as told in the sutras.
Nooks located on the outside of the
balustrades that surround the galleries each
contain a stone Buddha seated cross-legged
on a lotus cushion. There are 432 in all.
Next we come to the foot of the upper
part of the mándala. Here the view to the
outside, hitherto impeded by the balustrades,
suddenly opens up, so that one has a sense
of spritual breadth as one enters the arû-
padhâtu, the Sphere ofFormlessness.
In Borobudur the transition from earth
to sky, from form to non-form, is made
gently. The square form is not rigorously
adhered to: the edges around each square
terrace jut out and break up the hard right
angles, perhaps in an attempt to use archi¬
tecture to relieve the monotony of the pil¬
grim's perambulation. Personally I see an
intentional transition to the circle. Aerial
photos show that the first two terraces are
not exactly circular. A slight deformation
makes them more like squares! Only the
topmost terrace is a perfect circle.
Borobudur's three spheres mark the
spiral stages of an ascension that leads the
pilgrim up to the stupa of ultimate truth.
This central stupa, whose walls are not per¬
forated like those of the others, contains
nothing, the ultimate point is nothing but
emptiness {sûnyatâ). Buddha himself is
hidden. He is there yet not there; he is being

and non-being. Each of the seventy-two
small stupas with perforated walls that stand
on the three terraces contains a statue of
the Buddha. His face can only be imper¬
fectly made out through the gaps in the
stonework. These gaps are of different
shapes and become less numerous as one
approaches the central stupa, signifying the
Buddha's increasing invisibility. All these
Buddhas have the same hand position
[mudra): that of the perpetually-moving
wheel of the Law.
When we reach the summit, we sud¬
denly share the cosmic vision ofMahayana
Buddhism. Here the supreme reality is
unveiled, light is born! Yes, Borobudur, which
shimmers in a thousand colours from
morning to night, itself glistens like a huge
beacon. The sanctuary's 504 Buddhas face
the fourpoints ofthe compass and embrace
the world with merciful, shining eyes. Not
only these stupas, but the nooks in the wall-
parapets, the little towers, the smallest parts
ofthe edifice all reach skywards as if to seize
the breath ofpassing clouds.
The mándala of mándalas
According to this interpretation, Borobudur
is the lotus home of the "Great Buddha of
Light", who is depicted in a myriad ofsmall,
finely carved Buddhas. Dust itselfbecomes
light. As the doctrine of Mahayana Bud¬
dhism has it, the one resides in the many,
which is itself the manifestation of the one.
In the Gandhavyûha, the sacred text of
Mahayana Buddhism, light is not the enemy
ofshade: it is the light of the original empti¬
ness, which transcends the opposition
between being and nothingness.
Let us now look at the mándala this
esoteric image that aids active meditation of
the Buddhist cosmos formed by
Borobudur. Mándalas, whether painted or
sculpted, like the statues in the To-ji temple
in Kyoto, are always oriented in relation to a
central point. Borobudur, which looks out at
the four points of the compass while its
"heart" is empty, is a perfect illustration of
the mándala concept.
In 1930 the French archaeologist and
architect Henri Parmentier suggested that
Borobudur might have been originally con¬
ceived as an immense stupa resting on
square terraces but that problems of sta¬
bility forced the builders to rethink the plans
for the upper part. This theory was sup¬
ported by several participants in the inter¬
national symposium on Borobudur held in
Tokyo in 1980, but it seems unacceptable to
me. Even if Borobudur underwent minor
changes during its construction, the extreme
rigour of its design rules out the idea ofany
such architectural compromise.
A mysterious concordance
The mysterious concordance of the num¬
bers one sees at Borobudur is to my mind
sufficient proof. As I have said, there are
432 Buddhas on the square terraces and
72 others on the concentric terraces of the
upper part. These figures are not a mere
coincidence. Since the stairways divide
each of these groups of statues by four, in
each case their total number (432 and 72)
and the number of each group thus
obtained (108 and 18) can be divided by
three and nine. In other words, it is clear that
the entire structure was conceived as a
function of the number three, which sym¬
bolizes unity and the square of three, nine,
a sacred number in Buddhism.
Another researcher, J. G. De Casparis,
believed that the central stupa crowning
the structure was a tenth terrace, corre¬
sponding to the ten stages passed through
by the bodhisattva ("Buddha-to-be") before
reaching the state of Buddhahood. But
when Borobudur was built only six stages
were practised in lava. Surely they are rep¬
resented in the six square terraces. But how
can the transition from the square to the
circle be explained?
I had never been entirely happy with
any of these interpretations. Then one day
I read the Jûj'û shin ron (Treatise on the Ten
Stages of Thought) in which Kukai, the
Japanese Buddhist Grand Master who IÎ

72
founded the esoteric Shingon sect at the
beginning of the ninth century, expounds
his conception of the mándala.
In his eyes the "ascending transforma¬
tion of the spirit", for which the mándala is
the pictorial expression, is effected in nine
exoteric (apparent) stages, followed by a
final, esoteric (secret) stage. Could there
be any better definition of Borobudur's
architectural significance? Starting from
the sphere ofanimal desire, the monk even¬
tually reaches the "spirit laden with mys¬
tery" {Himitsu-shôgon-Shiri), the culmi¬
nating and hermetic point. The awakening
he experiences then transforms the world
into light. Was this not the secret that the
immense mándala was whispering to us
in the early light of dawn?
So is Borobudur a monument of eso¬
teric Mahayana Buddhism? I cannot say
so categorically, but I am profoundly con¬
vinced that it is.
Let 'there be no mistake. I am not
claiming that Kukai influenced the building
of Borobudur. I am only saying that
Borobudur and Kukai's teachings share a
common source. Kukai himself was initi¬
ated into the esoteric doctrine of Shingon
(True Word) in China and introduced the
first mándala to Japan.
In which year did he return to his
country? In 806, at the very time when the
Sailendra were building Borobudur on the
island ofJava. Let us not forget either that the
Todaiji, the temple of the Great Buddha in
Nara (Japan), the conception ofwhich was
based on the same Gandavyûhathat is illus¬
trated along most of Borobudur's square
terraces, was inaugurated in 751, the date
when work on the foundations of the
Javanese sanctuary is thought to have begun.
The sea route to China
This apparent coincidence is not confined
to Japan and Indonesia. In Ceylon at the
same time thousands of monks practised
the same doctrine ofMahayana Buddhism
in the monastery ofAbhayagiri, which was
in permanent contact with China. And to
reach China the Sinhalese monks did not
cross mountains but the sea!
This is where the maritime Silk Road
comes in. It played a decisive role in the
story of the meeting ofcivilizations. It was
a speedy route for the exchange of goods
and culture between the East and West,
perhaps even before there was an overland
Silk Road. It was used by many different
peoples: Indians, Chinese, Greeks, Romans
and Arabs, as well as Indonesians. Ceylon
was a port ofcall for those who crossed the
Indian Ocean, and once across the Malacca
Straits they either made a detour around
Singapore or sailed along the coasts of
Sumatra and Java before heading north¬
wards for Canton in southern China. The
maritime Silk Road eventually stretched
from Italy (Rome) to Japan (Nara), uniting
the Indian Ocean, the western Pacific, the
China Sea, the Red Sea and the Gulf.
Borobudur must be seen in the context
of this network ofextremely rich and varied
maritime exchanges. The seas of South¬
east Asia teemed with activity in the seventh
and eighth centuries. And when talking
about Indo-Javanese civilization, especially
a Buddhist monument, we should not
forget the part played by cultural influences
from nations other than India.
Look carefully at the meditating Bud¬
dhas ofBorobudur. Their expression differs
from that of Indian or Thai statues, and has
a greater affinity with those of China and

Japan. Did not the Sailendra have a large
fleet that travelled to China as well as to
India and Ceylon? Moreover the monks of
Abhayagiri often stopped in Java on their
way to China. They were even reported to
have founded a community in the eighth
century on a hill near Borobudur.
Could there be a link between the pres¬
ence of this monastic community and the
building of Borobudur? There is no defi¬
nite proof, but the shape of the stupas in
Borobudur is not unlike that of the stupas
in the lotus style ofAnuradhapura, Ceylon's
ancient capital. I also remember being
struck by the resemblance between two
statues ofBuddha discovered in the ruins of
Abhayagiri and the statues at Borobudur.
It is of course impossible to understand
the conception of Borobudur without
referring to the local culture. In Indonesia
"Not only these stupas, but the nooks in the wall-
parapets, the little towers, the smallest parts of
the edifice all reach skywards as if to seize the
breath of passing clouds." (Opposite page).
Below: "Each of the 72 small stupas with
perforated walls that stand on the three terraces
contains a statue of the Buddha. His face can only
be imperfectly made out through the gaps in the
stonework."



"Borobudur must be seen in the context of the network of extremely
rich and varied maritime exchanges formed by the maritime Silk Road.
The seas of Southeast Asia teemed with activity in the seventh and
eighth centuries."
THE MARITIME ROUTE TAKEN BY MAHAYANA BUDDHISM IN THE 8TH AND 9TH CENTURIES.
JAPAN
Dazaifu .... Nara
unang An \ Aian j 9 	
CHINA '.
Canton
INDIA
Pacific Ocean
Bay of
Bengal
SRI LANKA
Indian Ocean \ ' '
..- Borobudur
JAVA
UWWWmWÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊIÊÊÊÊÊÊÊmWWWWWÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊm.	wÊK
"Is Borobudur a monument
of esoteric Mahayana
Buddhism? I cannot say so
categorically, but I am
profoundly convinced that
it is."
EIJI HATTORI,
of Japan, is currently an advisor for
culture and science to the Director-
General of Unesco. A Unesco staff member
for many years, he initiated the
Organization's Integral Study of the Silk
Roads project.
there was a form of ancestor worship that
venerated the ancestors' spirits by building
tiered pyramids in their honour. Could
this great pyramid-shaped mándala have
been built without such a tradition? The
world owes this unique heritage to the
Indonesian people.
The sun has risen over Borobudur. My
thoughts turn to the outward-looking spirit
of the eighth century. There were no cultural
boundaries then. Peoples absorbed each
other's cultures like travellers slaking their
thirst together. Have those far-off times
gone forever? I cannot believe that they
have. Down in the water lotuses commu¬
nicate with one another through their roots.
Dew drops on petals reflect the same moon
that shines down on white flowers thou¬
sands of miles apart. And the sun that
shines on Mount Merapi now shone on pil¬
grims' faces at a time when beauty was the
splendour of truth.
1. The Javanese converted to Islam in the 15th
century.
2. A name given to Indonesia's oldest
monuments.
3. A reliquary or commemorative monument.
4. A sanskrit word meaning "a great means of
progression" or "Great Vehicle".
J3
