globa view. . . global view. .
The plight of the world s
street children
I Many people remember Pixote.
I Some may remember two Pixotes
the tragic little hero ofJosé Louzeiro's novel
about Brazilian street children,1 and Fer¬
nando Ramos da Silva, the squint-eyed
child who played his role in the film version
of the novel made by Hector Babenco in
1981 . Both of them were killed, the fictional
one in a cemetery, the boy actor on the
steps ofhis home, their deaths mirroring the
violence oftheir lives. The destiny of thou¬
sands ofBrazilian children is played out in
the streets. Alcohol, drugs, disease, prosti¬
tution, rape, kidnappings or remand centres
form the sum total of their childhood. Death
squads take care of the rest.
Fatherless, Fernando Ramos da Silva
was living in dire poverty with his mother
and his four brothers and sisters when he
was chosen to play the role of Pixote. The
film achieved worldwide success and the
life of his family was transformed. For the
budding actor the future would surelyhold
a home, work, drama lessons	 But it was
not to be. The street claimed him for good.
It was already too late. No one was able to
save him from the only too predictable end
that stalks a hundred million children gone
astray in streets, marketplaces and railway
stations all over the world.
"Dropouts", "urchins", "children of the
dust"the terms used to describe them
vary from continent to continent, but their
lives bear an aching similarity. Driven out by
unbearable poverty or the brutality of their
parents, sold or abandoned for those very
same reasons, they are orphans no one
wants to feed, let alone educate. Every¬
where they share a terrible plight. But the
laws that govern life in the street are not
the same everywhere.
In some of the world's sprawling mega-
cities, hundreds of thousands of children
live in the streets without the slightest pro¬
tection, prepared to do almost anything for
a few coins. Violence, however, is not
common. The street children are generally
looked upon as urchins who have learned
to survive on their wits.
Elsewhere, the story is one of forced
Combating sexual
violence
As part of preparations for the World
Conference on Women, which will be
held in Beijing in 1995, Unesco organized
a seminar on "Sexual exploitation and the
trafficking of women and children in Latin
America" in Caracas in March 1994. The
purpose of the seminar was to draw up
strategies for combating a reprehensible
practice which is particularly rife among
disadvantaged sectors of the population.
Unesco has also commissioned a group of
experts to prepare an exhaustive report
on the violence to which the women of
Bosnia are exposed, with a view to
drawing up a plan for the reintegration
into society of the victims and their chil¬
dren.


labour and prostitution. Tourism tied to
child prostitution is on the rise and cor¬
ruption triumphs over legal sanctions. A
policeman who bought a twelve-year-old
Thai girl, Mii Chuu, from her stepfather
to sell her into prostitution paid less than
$200. Saved by an American missionary,
Mii Chuu now plans to become a teacher.
Her case is clearly an exception, as is the
fact that she did not contract Aids.
While many children spend their nights
in sleazy hotel rooms in the vain hope of
rejoining their parents after having paid
off the family debts with their bodies, others
bargain for their pavement beds with local
policemen and await the morning to go
scavenging for food. Still others expect
nothing at all. When hope has gone, why
make the effort? Suicide orwar on the adult
world are all that's left. They have nothing
to lose and they are afraid ofnothing. Even¬
tually, they get used to the tough ways of the
street, grow a thick hide against fear and
pain. Rage begets rage, and small-time go-
getters turn into hardened criminals. 43

.global v
"Children take over the streets the way
pirates take over the sea," writes Jacques
Meunier,2 who was told by a Bogota child:
"At first I was ashamed. But not for long."
This is a journey from which there is no
return.
A Unesco priority
These children have become society's
open wound. For some, eradicating the
problem means eliminating the children
iew. . . global view
44

themselves. In 1990 the press revealed that
492 children had been murdered in Rio
de Janeiro alone more than one child
per day. In July 1993, a mysterious group
killed eight Rio children in a single night.
Following this massacre, the Latin
American Faculty of Social Sciences,
France's Centre Unifié d'Enseignement et
de Recherche pour les Services de Sécurité,
UNICEF, and Unesco organized a seminar
on "Children and Adolescents in Conflict
with the Law" in Rio de Janeiro from 8-11
November 1993. This seminar, the first of
its kind, tied in with a project launched
by Unesco in 1989 in order to alert public
opinion, seek sources of funding, and,
through publications and seminars, pro¬
vide training for educators and social
workers working with street children. In
close collaboration with UNICEF, two
international meetings forAfrica were held
in Cotonou and Nairobi in 1990. As part of
the same project, an international work¬
shop of field specialists, held at Unesco
Headquarters in 1991, was devoted to
identifying the priority educational needs
of street children.
The purpose of the Rio seminar, which
was attended by 81 representatives from
the police and justice departments of six
Latin American countries, was to examine
ways and means of educating and
informing police and legal officials so that
the problem of violence perpetrated
against street children and child workers
can be tackled head-on.
