TUNISIA t/ They do ¡t their way
Sometimes the most efficient management style is to take things as they come
by Riadh Zgbal
N
f\ chemical factory in
Qafsa, a part of Tunisia
that is rich in phosphates.
Y father always told me: 'When you
work, always remain aziz'l" the
workman we were interviewing began.
Aziz means "dignified", but also has connotations
of pride, independence, self-respect. In other
words, a distinction must be made between
someone who sells his labour for wages and
someone who sells himself, between the labour of
a free man and that of a slave. Popular culture,
however, equates paid employment with servi¬
tude, as these proverbs attest: "The olive tree is
wealth; work in the service of men is degrada¬
tion", "Only destitution drives a free man to
work for a free man", and "A man who works
under the orders of another is a dying man".
20
Other sayings speak of the need to keep one's dig¬
nity at any price: "Better to die than suffer humil¬
iation" and "Suffer hunger rather than accept
kindness from someone who will later remind
you of your debt".
This rejection of working for others has
roots in the religion itself, which recognizes no
intermediary between Allah and man. The
Qur'an glorifies the brotherhood of believers
and extols justice, an implicit warning to the
strong to deal fairly with the weak. Belief in
the worth of the human person and equality
before God is moral compensation for the
downtrodden.
"Woolliness" in the workplace
This conception of man in the workplace reveals
a fundamental contradiction: on the one hand,
the cruel realities of a human society made up of
rich and poor, of nobles and commoners, of
scholars and the unschooled, where to work in
the service of others is for most people a neces¬
sity; on the other hand, a belief in the equality of
all and the need to safeguard one's dignity while
working for others. How can this dilemma be
resolved?
One possible response is resignation, under¬
pinned by a belief in fate, mektub that which
is written, the path God traces for each of us.
Another possibility is to draw a line between
working time and time spent outside work, thus
maintaining at least a semblance of indepen¬
dence.
A third response consists of looking to pater¬
nalism to provide a counterweight to the theo¬
retically humiliating state of being a subordinate.
In the framework of a paternalistic relationship,
the subordinate looks up to his superiors, wishing
to see his interests, even outside the workplace,
defended by the hierarchy. He places feelings
above the objective definition of individual rights
and duties. This primacy of emotional responses

Festivities in Tatouine,
southern Tunisia.
gives rise to a charismatic style in the exercise of
authority and makes for situations that are not
cut-and-dried.
Organizations usually put down markers of
some kind so that their members know where
they stand and can predict the behaviour of
others. What we have observed in the Tunisian
workplace is a certain reluctance to formulate
precise rules for dealing with particular prob¬
lems. Where rules have to be established, they
are left deliberately ambiguous and lend them¬
selves to diverse interpretations. Individual
responsibilities are loosely or poorly defined,
and when a discussion is opened on a specific
question, it is often suspended without a clear
decision being taken.
This "woolliness" is not confined to the
workplace; it also manifests itself in ordinary life.
In a changing society where traditional values are
continuously being questioned, uncertainty pre¬
dominates when any new situation arises.
Landmarks in an uncertain world
This indeterminacy, associated with paternalism,
gives rise to a strong attachment to interper¬
sonal relationships and to social allegiances. The
active networks of solidarity that grow up
between individuals belonging to the same
family, region, school or even workplace provide
some landmarks in an uncertain world.
In short, to understand the behaviour of the
Tunisian worker, one must bear in mind a whole
range of cultural factors: attachment to the values
of equality and dignity, the role of paternalism as
a regulator in situations where inequality is
inevitable, the absence of regulations, indetermi¬
nacy and the importance of relationships based on
membership of social groups. Taken individu¬
ally, each of these factors is found in other cultures,
but this particular combination of cultural para¬
meters is what distinguishes the Tunisian case.
Going against this cultural profile can disrupt
the smooth operation of a business organiza¬
tion. In Tunisian businesses administered in a
bureaucratic fashion (i.e. with a formal hierarchy
and impersonal authority based on a set of rules
and competence), we found many cases of atti¬
tudes that are hardly conducive to efficiency.
The workers are disinclined to work because of
the influence real or imagined of personal
relationships on career prospects. The super¬
visor is judged, not on his competence, but on his
friendliness and courtesy. His authority may 21

I he town of Kairouan,
huddled around the
9th-century Great Mosque.
be undermined if he does not come from the
same social group as his subordinates, and the
absence of well-defined procedures, coupled
with the feeling that paid employment is undig¬
nified, invalidates that authority.
22
A minimum of regulations
On the other hand, a business which takes
account of this cultural reality has a better chance
of achieving a relatively satisfactory perfor¬
mance. A comparative study of productivity in
one industrial enterprise brought to our notice
a workshop where an absolute minimum of



regulations paradoxically went together with a
relatively high productivity.
The workers in this factory were unhappy
with their pay they considered their wages
were too low or unfairly distributed but they
were nonetheless concerned about the survival
of the business and were afraid of being dis¬
missed or of being forced to take early retire¬
ment. They were therefore prepared to maintain
a minimum level of productivity without
pushing themselves too hard. This being the
case, one of the supervisors had the idea of
reducing to a minimum the distance between
himself and his workers. He adopted a more
flexible style of management by rotating assign¬
ments: the operator of a certain machine might
be shifted to another or given a manual job to do,
his assistant taking charge of the machine if
need be. This flexibility softens the differences
in status between the workers and reduces
fatigue and boredom by allowing them to share
the unpleasant jobs. It also contributes to the
smooth running of the workshop in the absence
of key personnel. The supervisor himself told us
that the production rate does not slow down
when he is not there.
This system of organization creates a kind
of community in which social and professional
differences are blurred and where productivity
levels, more or less tacitly agreed, are the respon¬
sibility of everyone. Although this does not dispel
the feelings of frustration and injustice many
workers are convinced that they work harder
than their colleagues without getting anything in
return for their extra effort and competence
these aggressive sentiments arc diverted away
from the shop floor towards top management,
which is held responsible for the unfairness of the
wage system, and this helps to keep shop-floor
relations on a fairly even keel.
This shop was considerably more efficient
than the other two shops in the factory, which
were run on more authoritarian lines.
This form of organization of work might
appear to have been inspired by the most
advanced modern management methods, but
what had happened was, basically, that in a con¬
text of general undcr-productivity and in the
absence of an organizational policy, the super¬
visor had simply adapted his management style
to the mentality of his workers, without the
least reference to a theoretical framework.
RIADH ZGHAL,
of Tunisia, is dean of the faculty of economic sciences and
management at the University of Sfax. Among her published
works are an "Introduction to social psychology and
organizational behaviour" (in Arabic, Beirut-Damascus,
1 993) and La culture de la dignité et le flou de l'organisation
(CERP, Tunis, 1993).
