tsss
A hard look at
a troubled past
P m
JVhS*\>V.\KK\^
Svaty Vaclav a Radslav Zlicky r. 929.
Lost illusions
by Eva Schmidt-Hartmann
31
EVA
SCHMIDT-HARTMANN
is a Czech sociologist and
historian who teaches at the
Carolinum Collegium in
Munich (Germany). She is the
author of many studies on the
modern history of central
Europe, historiography and
political thought.
AS in every other former communist
country, public interest in the past in
post-communist Czechoslovakia began
with curiosity about everything that had been
previously forbidden. The history of churches
and religion, old noble houses and individual
politicians were the most popular topics in the
media and in books. Clubs that were heirs to a
rich tradition were founded and the historic
heritage of Prague and other cities became
tourist attractions that brought in ready cash.
The liberated state derived its new legitimacy
from its brief but glorious past.
As the many different faces of the past were
dusted off and rediscovered, long-forgotten and
repressed memories of unpleasant and con-
flictual situations and developments resurfaced.
For example, the controversies between the
Czechs and the Slovaks dating from the era of
the first democratic Czechoslovak Republic
between 1918 and 1938 took on a new lease of
life. The exploitation by the tourist industry of
everything to do with Franz Kafka raised ques¬
tions about the fate of the German and Jewish
peoples in the Bohemian regions who had made
up nearly one-third of the total population
before the Second World War. The passionate
debate that ensued prompted recollections of
many facets of past suffering and raised the
question of how different sections of the popu¬
lation had behaved in those days and what assis¬
tance they had given to the victims of harsh
persecution. The myth of specifically Czech
democratic traditions began to be undermined.

St. Wenceslas (Vaclav I) is
shown on this postcard
reproduction of a painting
by Adolf Liebscher.
Regarded as the patron
saint and defender of the
Czech nation, he ruled
Bohemia from 921 to 929.
The debate focused particularly on one ques¬
tion not least because of its significance
throughout Europe today: whether, and if so
how, different nationalities can live together in
a democratic state. On this subject, the history
of Czechoslovakia offers a particularly rich fund
of experience.
Modern Czech historical consciousness was
formed during the nineteenth century in an age
when Czech society acquired nationhood as an
integral part of the Habsburg monarchy. As a
defence against the lordship of the German-
speaking Austrians which was experienced as a
repression of nationality, Czech historians
emphasized the cultural and historical origi¬
nality of their nation. At the same time, Czech
society did all it could to promote the democ¬
ratization of multinational Austria. The idea of
Czech nationhood, differing from others
because of its democratic character, was born at
that time and undoubtedly encouraged the adop¬
tion of parliamentary democracy by the
Czechoslovak state created in 1918.
But the Czechs were not alone in Czecho¬
slovakia. Even if they dominated the new state,
the latter also contained Slovaks, Germans,
Hungarians and other small ethnic groups. They
perceived the newly founded state as the fulfil¬
ment of their struggle for emancipation from a
Habsburg monarchy dominated by German
speakers, and regarded the new republic as
"their" state. They were deaf to similar endeav¬
ours by other nationalities to achieve self-deter¬
mination. By clever manipulation, democrati¬
cally elected majorities managed to ensure that
a parliamentary system functioned, but they
made no compromises with the members of
other nationalities and did not allow them any
share of power.
When the communist dictatorship fell in
1989 and democracy was restored, the Czech
and Slovak memories of their common past
proved very different. While the Czechs spoke
of democracy, many Slovaks stressed the way in
which their nationhood had been jeopardized.
Three years later, the two nations went their
separate ways and formed two independent
states. The public debate on the past that
emerged in post-communist Czechoslovakia
did much to ensure that national conflicts
became unbridgeable. Once again, it transpired
that democracy provided no miracle recipe for
conflicts between nationalities.
The age of suspicion
Czech society also gradually discovered that
its democratic traditions had not prevented it
from committing massive crimes against another
nationality. Today, people are asking to what
extent the expropriation of three million Ger¬
mans after the end of the Second World War,
their forced exodus from the country and the
confiscation of the property they left behind
them contributed to the establishment of the
dictatorship of the communist party in 1948. The
popular belief in the collective guilt of the Ger¬
mans at the end of the Second World War, the
neglect of individual liberties, blind belief in
progress and uncritical faith in individual polit¬
ical leaders are often the subject of public debate
by historians today.
Communist rule itself is starting to be viewed
by historians in the longer term context of Czech
history rather than as the rule of violence imposed
by outside forces the Soviet Union and its
henchmen without the co-responsibility of the
Czech people. Today, few if any proponents
remain of the idea of a Czech society shaped by its
own supposedly democratic tradition on the one
hand, and evil imported from outside on the other.
On the contrary, people are now asking how it was
that large segments of the Czech population could
be convinced by communist ideology, why there
were so few avowed opponents of the regime,
and how certain elements of national self-aware¬
ness were exploited by the communists in an
attempt to win over public opinion. 31

lop, Tomas Garrigue
Masaryk, the first
President of the
Czechoslovak Republic
(1918-1935), arrives on
Prague's Wenceslas Square
in 1918.
Above, a demonstration in
Wenceslas Square in
Prague in November 1989
during the velvet
revolution that led to the
election of the dissident
writer Vaclav Havel as
President of the Republic.
34
Here, the lively debate over traditional
images of history is a source of valuable infor¬
mation. Today, a traditional dislike of elites, a
populist vision of politics and a taste for author¬
itarian rule are coming to be seen as typical fea¬
tures of the political culture of both bourgeois
and communist Czechoslovakia. It is gradually
becoming apparent that the communists rein¬
terpreted traditional myths of Czech history
but were able, first and foremost, to make ide¬
ological capital out of prejudices deeply rooted
in the popular mind.
However, it is hard to come to terms with
such a rapid change in the historical self-aware¬
ness of a society. New knowledge is often dis¬
cussed in simplified form, and where a cautious
and difficult critical assessment would be useful,
radical prejudices tend to crop up instead. Often
a glorified image is replaced by its opposite
denigration. Discussion turns into heated
polemic based on slogans in which complex
historical relationships are personalized and
viewed in crudely simplified terms. Only a few
years ago, historians were still often called upon
to make statements of decisive importance in
their capacity as guardians of truth; today many
complain of the public's loss of confidence in
statements based on historical studies.
The way in which history has been written
in the past four decades is therefore a matter of
controversy among a general public that takes an
interest in history. Were all the historians who
obtained permission to publish their works
under the communist regime minions of the
rulers or were they able to present the results of
serious research? Can any confidence be placed
in a historian who served the communist regime?
What is the relevance of the moral and political
integrity of a historian to the quality of his or her
works ? How does a presentation of history that
has been purged of communist jargon to incor¬
porate a new vocabulary and a few additions
differ from sound modern historiography?
The uncertainty principle
In the schools and universities, complaints are
being voiced about the lack of new teaching
materials; historical journals are facing financial
problems, and the Czech Republic, which now
has only ten million inhabitants, is not a big
enough market for books written primarily for
specialists to be profitable. These practical prob¬
lems contribute to an uncertain perception of the
past by a broad sector of the public.
In reality, however, this climate of uncer¬
tainty corresponds in many respects to the
changed consciousness of modern societies,
which is a widespread phenomenon. In the West,
the process of disintegration of the historical
images handed down from the nineteenth cen¬
tury, which remained popular everywhere until
the 1950s, has been slower but certainly not
dissimilar to current developments in Czech
society. Who in Europe today would claim that
the English have an ideal recipe for a satisfactory
political system, that the French are the only cre¬
ators of culture and that the Germans are inca¬
pable of democratization? The fact that the
post-communist reinterpretation of history
shows the Czech past to have been many-faceted
and the Czechs themselves as neither better nor
worse "democrats" than others should therefore
not come as a surprise.
The modern approach to history has revealed
that many historical concepts once regarded as
"scientifically proved" are myths, although such
realizations are only gradually finding their way
into the school textbooks. The disappearance, .
practically overnight, of traditional historical
myths comes as a hard blow to many. People
today must learn to live with the new uncer¬
tainty instead of using it to paint frightening
scenarios of crisis. For the democratic future
of Czech society, the démythification of its
democratic traditions has brought valuable new
insights into the complex relationships that
spelled the end of democracy in the inter-war
years.
