TOGO ^ Going by the book
A cose of efficiency based on scrupulous observance
of a rule-book that contains echoes of village
traditions
by Alain Henry and Yao Badjo
Above, a motorcycle
assembly line in Burkina
Faso.
IN his account of the 1948 strike on the
Dakar-Niger Railway, the Senegalese writer
and film director Sembene Ousmane recalls
how one of the European supervisors said: "If
ever we go, there'll be nothing left"1. The phrase
has come down to the present day as a kind of
curse. Many people still believe African busi¬
nesses are foredoomed to hopeless inefficiency,
while on the World Bank's reckoning there are
too many foreign experts in Africa.
Should we doubt, as some people do,
whether African cultures are compatible with
industrial modernization? It is by no means
certain that we should, as is shown by the fol¬
lowing example of an African business that is
getting excellent results.
Detailed instructions
The enterprise in question, which we shall call
STAR, is an industrial firm producing and selling
consumer goods manufactured to international
standards. When we visited it, the books were
balanced. The World Bank itself cites it as an
example to be followed, and there is only one
European white-collar worker among its 650
employees. While its success is certainly attrib¬
utable to management style, it is obvious that it
also has a motivated workforce 2.
Visitors curious to know the reasons for this
dynamism are told that there are written rules of
procedure. They are shown manuals that set I J

I
Late 1 9th-century photo
of a "medicine man" in
southern Africa.
ALAIN HENRI,
a French civil engineer who
was born in Cameroon, is a
research associate with
France's National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS).
His research interests focus on
the modernization of
management in Africa. He is
the author of Tontines et
banques au Cameroun (Karthala
publishers, 1991).
YAO BADjO
¡s a Togolese engineer who was
formerly director general of
the Togolese national water
authority. He is currently with
the infrastructures division of
the West and Central African
Department of the World
Bank.
forth precisely what each employee is supposed
to be doing. Procedures for carrying out main¬
tenance work, making out invoices, stock¬
taking, mailing and even organizing the end-
of-year staff party are covered in surprising
detail. The manuals even specify the frequency
with which such routine tasks as the sending of
telexes should be done. Where necessary, alter¬
native solutions are suggested, and there are
repeated reminders of the need to ensure that
particular points have not been overlooked.
Former employees recall with a smile one of
the first items in these manuals, explaining how
to receive customers and advising that they be
treated "with an iron hand in a velvet glove".
Though less detailed for the upper echelons,
the instructions nevertheless cover every post, up
to that of managing director.
Equally surprising is the interest taken in the
manuals. Supervisors advise their staff to read
them "like novels", and everyone, from shop-
floor level to the boardroom, refers constantly to
them. STAR is thus more fully equipped in this
respect than European firms, most of which have
little if any of such documentation. This codifi¬
cation of working practices may, it is true, be
reminiscent of Taylorism-style "scientific man¬
agement", but with the significant difference that
it emanates from the workforce itself, not from
some outside authority.
It is worth pointing out the influence this
example has had in sub-Saharan Africa. A major
Cameroonian firm, for instance, recently issued
a manual in twelve volumes of about a thousand
pages each, and one of the first steps to be taken
when the Power Company in Côte d'Ivoire
was nationalized was the revision, in collabora¬
tion with the staff, of the rules and regulations.
Respect for the written word
When the manuals were first issued, the
employees of STAR are said to have been satisfied
to "find what part they were required to play".
According to some of the managerial staff, the
object was to "channel behaviour patterns", so
that employees were not "tempted to do the first
thing that came into their heads". Apart from
providing a useful way of learning skills and
passing them on, these manuals thus meet a
widely-felt need and fit in with prevalent ways of
thinking. Those for whom they are intended rely
on them to "safeguard themselves against over¬
sights". Whereas in the Western world an over¬
sight is usually regarded as misconduct, here it is
accepted as part of "human nature". It is only to
be expected that numerous checks and verifica¬
tions should be carried out in order to combat
shortcomings that are tolerated in the social envi¬
ronment but are not allowed in industry.
Staff in enterprises without manuals have a
hard time fending off inadmissible requests from
colleagues. Unless justified by reference to the
rules, a refusal is taken as being "unfriendly",
while, conversely, failure to abide by explicit
instructions is put down to thoroughly repre¬
hensible "shirking" or even "troublemaking".
For the rules to provide this kind of shelter,
however, it must be clear that it is' impossible to
get round them. Their application is therefore
closely monitored and they are observed to the
letter to avoid any charge of subjective inter¬
pretation. The respect thus shown for the
written word gives the lie to certain clichés
about the oral nature of African culture.
Traditional ethics in a modern form
The STAR manuals may be regarded as an adap¬
tation to the world of industry of the precepts by
which village life was traditionally ruled. They
proceed from a social obligation of goodwill,
and enable people to be judged fairly on their
intentions. The administrative officer herein plays
a role comparable with that of the sorccrcr-cum-
healer to whom villagers used to turn to unmask
those who wanted to harm the community: those
found to be "at fault" are given a severe dressing-
down.
Many African tales illustrate the necessity of
understanding a neighbour's ulterior motives,
while other stories set up the figure of the true and

borne present-day
management procedures
in Africa recall the rules
that governed traditional
village life (see article).
Below, a village in northern
Cameroon.
faithful friend as a social ideal. Similarly, a good
man is one who can show that his intentions are
good. It therefore seems justifiable to judge indi¬
viduals by what they have accepted to do rather
than by what they have succeeded in doing.
A strange misunderstanding
Considering how effective they are, one would
have expected STAR's methods to have gained
widespread acceptance, but this is not yet the
case. Foreign experts, French in particular, who
have been approached about introducing them are
fairly hesitant, finding it hard to believe that they
could act as an incentive. In their cultural back¬
ground, rules are mainly there to be interpreted,
and they would prefer not to be "straitjacketed"
by pettifogging procedures that seem to them
unlikely to encourage a sense of responsibility.
Africans themselves believe the opposite,
and foreign experts' reluctance is put down to
the fact that it is in their interest to keep their
skills to themselves an explanation reinforced
by recollections of the colonial-era overseers
who carried a notebook around in their pockets
to mark down the settings of all their machines.
It is true that the manuals fulfil something of the
same role as the foreign experts, who are often
called in to validate the "objectivity" of admin¬
istrative decisions, but who, in the belief that
they are showing greater respect for their
African partners, would rather suggest new
management methods than get to grips with
existing procedures. Perhaps unwittingly, they
are thus helping to prolong their own presence.
Efficient local management of businesses is
of the greatest importance for the development
of the African economies. Some experts,
thinking they have found the solution, have
suggested that workers be given individual
objectives against which to be assessed, but in the
African context any criticism bearing upon indi¬
vidual results is seen as a personal attack and
soon causes strongly hostile reactions.
Such imported methods stem from a different
conception of how people work as a group. They
are unsuited to the local mentality and this explains
why they fail, a failure wrongly ascribed to some
inherent shortcoming in the cultures concerned.
It may be easier than it seems to change outlooks:
all that is needed is to bear in mind the specific
characteristics of the host society and to encourage
foreign experts to adapt themselves thereto by
reminding them of the old African saying that "a
foreigner is a baby who needs to let himself be cos-
setted and trained".
1. Sembene Ousmane, Les bouts de bois de Dieu, Le
Livre contemporain, 1960, Presse Pocket, Paris.
2. For a detailed case study of this business, see "Vers
un modèle du management africain", by A. Henry, in
Cahiers d'études africaines, 124, XXXI-4, 1991 .
