/
The "Vienna Declaration and Programme ofAction, ", extractsfrom which are
published below, was adoptedat the World Conference on Human Rights by con¬
sensus, but only after long and often difficult negotiations. Thepreparatory meet¬
ings for the Conference revealed profound differences between the partici¬
pants, notably on the question ofthe universality ofhuman rights in a world of
different cultural traditions. In the dossier beginning on this page are long
extracts from the final declarations produced by some of these meetings. They
show where the different approaches to human rights issues coincide and where
theypart company.
The Vienna
Declaration and
Programme of
Action
Adopted 25 Tune 1993
by the
World Conference on
Human Rights
The World Conference on Human Rights,
Recognizing and affirming that all
human rights derive from the dignity and
worth inherent in the human person, and
that the human person is the central subject
of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and consequently should be the principal
beneficiary and should participate actively in
the realization of these rights and freedoms,
Emphasizing the responsibilities of all
States, in conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations, to develop and
encourage respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, without dis¬
tinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Considering the major changes taking
place on the international scene and the
aspirations of all the peoples for an inter¬
national order based on the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, including promoting and encour¬
aging respect for human rights and funda¬
mental freedoms for all and respect for
the principle of equal rights and self-deter-
mination of peoples, peace, democracy,
Tw justice, equality, rule of law, pluralism,
development, better standards of living
and solidarity,
Deeply concerned by various forms of
discrimination and violence, to which
women continue to be exposed all over
the world,
Solemnly adopts the Vienna Declara¬
tion and Programme of Action.
1. The World Conference on Human
Rights reaffirms the solemn commitment
of all States to fulfil their obligations to
promote universal respect for, and obser¬
vance and protection of, all human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all in accor¬
dance with the Charter of the United
Nations, other instruments relating to
human rights, and international law. The
universal nature of these rights and free¬
doms is beyond question.
2. All peoples have the right of self-deter¬
mination. By virtue of that right they freely
determine their political status, and freely
pursue their economic, social and cultural
development.
Taking into account the particular situ¬
ation of peoples under colonial or other
forms of alien domination or foreign occu¬
pation, the World Conference on Human
Rights recognizes the right of peoples to
take any legitimate action, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, to
realize their inalienable right of self-deter¬
mination. The World Conference on
Human Rights considers the denial of the
right of self-determination as a violation of
human rights and underlines the impor¬
tance of the effective realization of this right.
5. All human rights are universal, indivis¬
ible and interdependent and interrelated.
The international community must treat
human rights globally in a fair and equal
manner, on the same footing, and with the
same emphasis. While the significance of
national and regional particularities and
various historical, cultural and religious
backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is
the duty of States, regardless of their polit¬
ical, economic and cultural systems, to
promote and protect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
6. The efforts of the United Nations
system towards the universal respect for,
and observance of, human rights and fun¬
damental freedoms for all, contribute to the
stability and well-being necessary for
peaceful and friendly relations among
nations, and to improved conditions for
peace and security as well as social and
economic development, in conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations.
8. Democracy, development and respect
for human rights and fundamental free¬
doms are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing. Democracy is based on the
freely expressed will of the people to deter¬
mine their own political, economic, social
and cultural systems and their full partic¬
ipation in all aspects of their lives. In the
context of the above, the promotion and
protection of human rights and funda¬
mental freedoms at the national and inter¬
national levels should be universal and
conducted without conditions attached.
The international community should sup¬
port the strengthening and promoting of
democracy, development and respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in
the entire world.
9. The World Conference on Human
Rights reaffirms that least developed coun¬
tries committed to the process of democ¬
ratization and economic reforms, many
of which are in Africa, should be sup¬
ported by the international community in
order to succeed in their transition to
democracy and economic development.

10. The World Conference on Human
Rights reaffirms the right to development,
as established in the Declaration on the
Right to Development, as a universal and
inalienable right and an integral part of
fundamental human rights.
As stated in the Declaration on the
Right to Development, the human person
is the central subject of development.
While development facilitates the
enjoyment of all human rights, the lack
of development may not be invoked to
justify the abridgement of internationally
recognized human rights.
States should co-operate with each other
in ensuring development and eliminating
obstacles to development. The international
community should promote an effective
international co-operation for the realiza¬
tion of the right to development and the
elimination of obstacles to development.
Lasting progress towards the imple¬
mentation of the right to development
requires effective development policies at
the national level, as well as equitable eco¬
nomic relations and a favourable economic
environment at the international level.
11. The right to development should be
fulfilled so as to meet equitably the devel¬
opmental and environmental needs of pre¬
sent and future generations. The World
Conference on Human Rights recognizes
that illicit dumping of toxic and dangerous
substances and waste potentially consti¬
tutes a serious threat to the human rights
to life and health of everyone.
12. The World Conference on Human
Rights calls upon the international com¬
munity to make all efforts to help alleviate
the external debt burden of developing
countries, in order to supplement the efforts
of the Governments of such countries to
attain the full realization of the economic,
social and cultural rights of their people.
15. Respect for human rights and for fun¬
damental freedoms without distinction of
any kind is a fundamental rule of interna¬
tional human rights law. The speedy and
comprehensive elimination of all forms of
racism and racial discrimination, xeno¬
phobia and related intolerance is a pri¬
ority task for the international commu¬
nity. Governments should take effective
measures to prevent and combat them.
1 7. The acts, methods and practices of ter¬
rorism in all its forms and manifestations as
well as linkage in some countries to drug
trafficking are activities aimed at the
destruction of human rights, fundamental
freedoms and democracy, threatening ter¬
ritorial integrity, security of States and desta¬
bilizing legitimately constituted Govern¬
ments. The international community should
take the necessary steps to enhance co¬
operation to prevent and combat terrorism.
18. The human rights of women and of
the girl-child are an inalienable, integral
and indivisible part of universal human
rights. The full and equal participation of
women in political, civil, economic, social
and cultural life, at the national, regional
and international levels, and the eradication
of all forms of discrimination on grounds
of sex are priority objectives of the inter¬
national community.
Gender-based violence and all forms of
sexual harassment and exploitation,
including those resulting from cultural prej¬
udice and international trafficking, are
incompatible with the dignity and worth
of the human person, and must be elimi¬
nated. This can be achieved by legal mea¬
sures and through national action and inter¬
national co-operation in such fields as
economic and social development, educa¬
tion, safe maternity and health care, and
social support.
The human rights of women should
form an integral part of the United Nations
human rights activities, including the pro¬
motion of all human rights instruments
relating to women.
The World Conference on Human
. Rights urges Governments, institutions,
intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to intensify their efforts for
the protection and promotion of human
rights of women and the girl-child.
19	The World Conference on Human
Rights reaffirms the obligation of States to
ensure that persons belonging to minorities
may exercise fully and effectively all human
rights and fundamental freedoms without
any discrimination and in full equality
before the law in accordance with the Dec¬
laration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Lin¬
guistic Minorities.
The persons belonging to minorities
have the right to enjoy their own culture,
to profess and practise their own religion
and to use their own language in private
and in public, freely and without inter¬
ference or any form of discrimination.
20. The World Conference on Human
Rights recognizes the inherent dignity and
the unique contribution of indigenous
people to the development and plurality of
society and strongly reaffirms the com
mitment of the international community to
their economic, social and cultural well-
being and their enjoyment of the fruits of
sustainable development. States should
ensure the full and free participation of
indigenous people in all aspects of society,
in particular in matters of concern to them.
21	 National and international mech¬
anisms and programmes should be
strengthened for the defence and protec¬
tion of children, in particular, the girl-
child, abandoned children, street children,
economically and sexually exploited chil¬
dren, including through child pornog¬
raphy, child prostitution or sale of organs,
children victims of diseases including
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome,
refugee and displaced children, children
in detention, children in armed conflict, as
well as children victims of famine and
drought and other emergencies. Interna¬
tional co-operation and solidarity should
be promoted to support the implementa¬
tion of the Convention [on the Rights of
the Child] and the rights of the child
should be a priority in the United Nations
system-wide action on human rights.
22. Special attention needs to be paid to
ensuring non-discrimination, and the equal
enjoyment of all human rights and funda¬
mental freedoms by disabled persons,
including their active participation in all
aspects of society.
23. The World Conference on Human
Rights reaffirms that everyone, without
distinction of any kind, is entitled to the
right to seek and to enjoy in other coun¬
tries asylum from persecution, as well as
the right to return to one's own country.
36. The World Conference on Human
Rights reaffirms the important and con¬
structive role played by national institu-



tions for the promotion and protection of Tr I

;?
42
human rights, in particular in their advi¬
sory capacity to the competent authorities,
role in remedying human rights vio¬
lations, in the dissemination of human rights
information, and education in human rights.
37. Regional arrangements play a funda¬
mental role in promoting and protecting
human rights. They should reinforce uni¬
versal human rights standards, as contained
in international human rights instruments,
and their protection. The World Conference
on Human Rights endorses efforts under
way to strengthen these arrangements and
to increase their effectiveness, while at the
same time stressing the importance of co¬
operation with the United Nations human
rights activities.
The World Conference on Human
Rights reiterates the need to consider the
possibility of establishing regional and
sub-regional arrangements for the pro¬
motion and protection of human rights
where they do not already exist.
38. The World Conference on Human
Rights recognizes the important role of
non-governmental organizations in the
promotion of all human rights and in
humanitarian activities at national, regional
and international levels. The World Con¬
ference on Human Rights appreciates their
contribution to increasing public aware¬
ness of human rights issues, to the conduct
of education, training and research in this
field, and to the promotion and protec¬
tion of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms. While recognizing that the pri¬
mary responsibility for standard-setting
lies with States, the Conference also appre¬
ciates the contribution of non-govern¬
mental organizations to this process. In
this respect, the World Conference on
Human Rights emphasizes the importance
of continued dialogue and co-operation
between Governments and non-govern¬
mental organizations.

