One hundred and
forty million
Africans died or
were sold into
slavery. For every
slave taken aboard
smp, six or seven
other Africans lost
their lives as
indirect victims of
the trade.
continent of fear
by M'Baye Gueye
16
One of the most patent consequences of
the slave trade was without any doubt its
effect on Africa's population. Although it is dif¬
ficult to put a precise figure on the numbers
involved, it may reasonably be estimated that 20
million slaves were taken to the New World
during the four centuries or so that the trade
existed.
When one remembers the kind of methods
used to obtain slaves, the losses suffered by
Africa take on appalling proportions. Natu¬
rally, thieves, criminals, witch doctors and all
kinds of misfits were unceremoniously sold to
traders. But most slaves were seized in the course
of wars and plundering forays. In such cases, in
addition to those who were exported as slaves,
there were direct and indirect victims of the
trade people who died fighting or as a result of
the famine, diseases and epidemics that followed
in the wake of destroyed harvests, burnt grain

Opposite page,
"The rebellion of a slave on a
slave ship", oil on canvas
by the French painter
Edouard Renard (1802-1857).
Below, ivory pendant
probably representing an "oba",
or king, of Benin
(16th century). The heads of
bearded Portuguese are carved
on the tiara.
stores and the disruption of the population's
fragile equilibrium with its environment.
Such infamous acts were familiar events in
all regions of Africa involved in the Atlantic
trade. Oral literature is haunted by the sound of
groaning victims and the sight of burning vil¬
lages lighting up the horizon. That permanent
state of war, with its succession of massacres,
destruction, plundering and violence, made fear
"one of the dimensions of the African soul". It
may be estimated that for every prisoner taken
aboard the slave ships, six or seven Africans died
on the continent.
Yet these losses, which were spread over a
period of time, represented barely more than 1 per
cent of the black population. It may be won¬
dered why such a relatively small manpower
drain had such a paralysing effect on African
society. The reason is that slave-traders mainly
took young people. The massive deportation of
those sections of society that were able-bodied
and of an age to have children resulted in a pop¬
ulation shortfall which new births were increas¬
ingly unable to offset.
A political disaster
The political repercussions of the slave trade
were equally drastic. The former political struc¬
tures of northern Nigeria, Chad and the Congo
entered a period of decline, as they were unable
to adjust to the situation created by the slave
trade. The Congo, then at the height of its pros¬
perity, failed to resist the pressure of the Por¬
tuguese, who sallied forth from their base on the
island of Sào Tomé to seize Congolese slaves for
their colony in Brazil despite the fact that cer-
SLAVERY
tain members of the ruling aristocracy, who had
converted to Catholicism, were well disposed
towards them. The Portuguese furthered their
own interests by encouraging provincial chiefs to
rebel and by fomenting strife among the factions
that were struggling for power, with the result that
the country eventually lapsed into anarchy.
The same fate was suffered by the kingdoms
of Oyo and Benin, which had achieved a certain
degree of institutional stability until the Euro¬
peans arrived. They failed to withstand the con¬
tinual wars caused by the slave trade. Soon their
provinces set themselves up as independent
principalities. By the end of the eighteenth cen¬
tury, an outstanding culture over two centuries
old had been turned into a vast theatre of con¬
stant conflict which resulted in Benin being
grimly known as "bloody Benin".
However, the coastal states and those in their
vicinity managed to recast their institutional
structures and set up strong regimes. In the
Senegambian region, for example, traditional
political structures underwent far-reaching

This plate made of bronze, a
. metal which the Europeans
traded for slaves, adorned a
wooden pillar in a royal palace
in Benin.
changes. A system of monarchy by divine right,
which set the king apart from his subjects and
put power in the hands of his representatives,
was replaced by a form of autocracy. Although
the latter system, which relied on a considerable
centralization of power, inevitably resulted in
abuses, it did make it possible to keep the slave
trade within "tolerable" bounds. The Futa, the
Waalo, the Kayor, the Banol, the Sine and the
Salum had succeeded in neutralizing each other,
so their respective kings felt little temptation to
venture on to their neighbours' territory.
The state of Akwamu, near the coast, took
advantage of its dealings with the slave traders
to assert its supremacy in the area. By control¬
ling roads to the hinterland, it was able to exert
pressure on commercial transactions. Towards
the end of the eighteenth century, it imposed
18
M'BAYE GUEYE,
of Senegal, is senior lecturer in
history in the Faculty of Letters
and Human Sciences at Cheikh
Anta Diop University in Dakar.
He has written a number of
books on the slave trade and
French colonization in West
Africa.
heavy levies on its neighbours. Akwamu s rise to
power was not an isolated case. The state of
Denkyira, in the western part of the "gold
coast", also expanded spectacularly as a result of
trade with Europeans. It secured substantial
revenues by acting as a broker, and built up a
powerful army that enabled it to impose levies
on the Ashanti confederation, whose various
districts decided to unite against their powerful
neighbour.
Ashanti achieved political and spiritual unity
towards the end of the seventeenth century.
Then, after a series of victorious campaigns
against Denkyira, it established its authority
over the main gold trade routes and opened up
a road to the coast. In order to administer its new
conquests, it set up a bureaucracy whose docility
only reinforced the central power.
Inadequate restrictions
Yet the Africans did not always take the slave
trade lying down. Many local chiefs reacted as
best they could to halt the practice. Slaves
rebelled on many occasions. Their uprisings in
Gorée in 1724 and 1749, in St. Louis in 1779 and
in Galam in 1786 ended in bloodbaths.
Several kings and religious leaders tried to
organize resistance against the slave trade.
Between 1673 and 1677, a Moor called Nasir al-
Din conquered the kingdoms of Futa, Waalo,
Jolof and Kayor by leading a veritable crusade
against local kings involved in the slave trade.
After repressive action was taken by the trading
post in St. Louis, the former regimes were
returned to power. In 1701, Lat Sukaabe, king of
Kayor and Bawol, kidnapped a slave-trader and
released him only after obtaining a tidy ransom.
Agaja, king of Dahomey, embarked on a
campaign that was as resolute in the resources it
marshalled as in the ambiguity of its aims. After
opening up a way to the sea, he took steps to
restrict the slave trade in his kingdom. Euro¬
peans were not allowed to put their merchandise
on board ship or to leave the territory without
his permission. He then posted a permanent
military unit on the coast and turned the slave
trade into a state monopoly.
But all such efforts, however commendable
they may have been, were incapable of putting
an end to the slave trade. African chiefs hostile
to the practice had no way of forming a united
front against it. The initiative shifted to the
marabouts, who urged the people to convert to
Islam on the grounds that it was their only
chance of salvation. In 1 725, the revolution of the
marabouts triumphed at Futa Jallon. In 1776, it
was Futa Toro 's turn. Between 1787 and 1817,
Uthman Dan Fodio founded the theocratic state
of Sokoto. But despite the efforts of various
parties to stop the slave trade, it continued until
the end of the nineteenth century.
By that time, all these political entities had
ended up losing their cohesion. As well as being
ill-defined geographically, they were handi¬
capped by having populations which were very
unevenly distributed and scarcely growing at all.
The oppressive authoritarianism of the ruling
aristocracies, combined with political exclu¬
sion, social discrimination and extreme tribal
idiosyncracies, resulted everywhere in a con¬
stant state of tension that did not favour the
emergence of peaceful societies. By the time
slavery was about to die out, those societies had
become profoundly weak and vulnerable to
colonialism, which was poised to take over
where the slave-traders had left off.
