An African student
discovers Ukrainian hospitality
and vodka
orshch
and sympathy
by N'Baah Santy
My first contact with a Ukrainian family came as a
result of an invitation from my Russian teacher. She came
to fetch the ten of us who were in her study group at the
trolleybus station and took us to her home, a villa sur¬
rounded by apple-trees and a flower garden.
Her father greeted us on the verandah, where we
took off our jackets. Then he took us into a rather spa¬
cious and beautifully furnished living room. The usual
introductions were made. Her parents were retired
people. Her father had been an army officer, and her
mother a primary schoolteacher who had taught
Ukrainian. Their son, a professional soldier in Moscow,
was not present. Their daughter our Russian teacher
had invited a pastrycook woman friend of hers along for
the occasion.
We took it in turns to give our name and nationality.
Our hosts were delighted to have representatives of
every continent under their roof. They were interested
in knowing why we had chosen to study in Ukraine and
wanted to hear what we thought of the country. The
father could not resist offering us some vodka as an
aperitif, under the reproving gaze of his daughter, who
had clearly instructed him not to serve us alcoholic
drinks. He was happy when we drank to each other's
health. Our teacher kept an eye on the quantities he
served us.
The meal was quite different from what we had so far
experienced in canteens. The borshch with fresh cream
was so delicious I ate too much of it, which meant I could
not enjoy as much of the following dishes as I would have
liked. The mother urged us to have second helpings if we
wanted to. During the meal we discovered that her hus¬
band now spent a lot of his time doing carpentry. She
proudly showed us the furniture he had made with his
own hands. Her hobby was gardening, but she also
sang in a choir and played the piano.
A woman of about sixty, she radiated the content¬
ment of a life well spent. She was very unaffected in the
way she spoke to us, explaining how well she could
understand the worries of our parents, as she was also
worried about her absent son. Her husband was less
forthcoming, and content merely to approve or correct
his wife's and daughter's remarks.
After the meal, the two young women taught us a
sailor's dance and a few waltz steps. The mother said she
was sorry she had not been able to admire our traditional
dances. We said goodbye to our hosts after tea.
They gave us some cakes and apples to take away
with us. 13
