THÉODORE MONOD talks to
Michel Bâtisse
Théodore Monod ¡s a naturalist who himself belongs to a disappearing
species: that of the explorer-scientists who travel to remote regions to
satisfy their passion for knowledge. In his Paris workplace,
the Ichthyology Laboratory of the Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle,
he welcomed me amid shelves packed with books, phials, preserving
jars, fishes' jaws, samples of rocks and stone tools.
He has travelled far and wide through his beloved Sahara andat the
age of ninety-oneis currently preparing for his "last long-distance
expedition by camel". As well as a scientist, Théodore Monod is also a
man of peace and convictions, who has fought tirelessly for the
respect of human rights and the defence of Nature.
You arefamousforyour travels through
the desert by camel, butyou began your sci¬
entific career as a student ofmarine species.
What was your real vocation?
The important decisions in life are usu¬
ally made by chance. I joined the Muséum
as an assistant in a department concerned
with "Fish and colonial productions of
animal origin". The staff were required to
travel in the then French colonies, and in
1922 I was sent to Mauritania to study,
not the desert, but the coast and fishing.
Instead of returning to Bordeaux by ship at
the end of my stay, which lasted almost a
year, I took a camel and crossed the whole
of western Mauritania as far as Senegal.
The conditions were somewhat arduous,
since I was poorly equipped and quite
inexperienced. But that did not turn me
against the desert, and in 1934 I went on
another big expedition into the western
Sahara. Then in 1938 1 was appointed head
of the French Institute for Black Africa
(IFAN) in Dakar, where the desert was
right on my doorstep.
I started out studying fish and I still
work as a zoologist. Right now I am trying
to finish a study I began forty years ago on
the skull of the parrot-fish, whose bucco¬
pharyngeal anatomy is highly distinctive.
I have also spent part of my life studying
the marvellous world of crustaceans. In
1924 I discovered a group so unique that
no-one had even suspected their existence,
the Thermosbaenacea, the first example of
which had been identified in a Roman bath
in Tunisia. I managed to organize my activ¬
ities so as to specialize in these two areas,
while continuing to pursue my interests in
desert regions.
Was it a taste for adventure that took
you on your expeditions to Mauritania
and elsewhere? Was there a scientific or
spiritual link between yourpassion for the
sea andyourpassion for the desert?
My curiosity is insatiable. If I go to the
Sahara, or if I dissect the skulls of fish, it is

to try to understand, to add a little more to
human knowledge. That is the mission of
the researcher. No, it's not a matter of
adventure but of research, of making pre¬
cise observations intended to add a little to
the volume of existing knowledge. Rejec¬
tion of ignorance, the desire to know and
to explain are, I think, the honour and
glory of the human mind.
Sometimes and it's no bad thing
there is also an attraction for a certain kind
of life. The life of the sailor and that of the
camel-driver have several points in
common in the sense that they both
experience intense freedom and solitude
in the midst of extreme heat or cold. . . .
Life in the desert demands a strategy for
survival, for plants, animals and man. The
true Saharan nomads are an ecological suc
cess just as the Inuit of Baffin Island are.
They are people who live on the outer
edge of the Earth's habitable region and
they are admirably adapted to life in their
territory which they think is the finest
land in the world. They know all there is to
know about its resources. For the camel-
drivers of the Sahara, each plant has a use,
as a medicine or a source of food.
In the modern world is there a future
for the knowledge, traditions and ways of
life ofdesert people?
The nomads are today threatened by a
number of new factors. Several of the eco¬
nomic pillars of nomadism have collapsed.
The razzia, for example, as it was prac¬
tised in the past, as raiding for booty, not
for the pleasure of going off to kill or be
killed (on the contrary there was as little
killing as possible). You went to a Sudanese
village, stole camels and children to be
your slaves, then returned home and shared
the proceeds if there were any, for some
of these expeditions ended very badly. You
could also invest in a big raid, become a
kind of shareholder in it, just as the ladies
of Versailles did in eighteenth-century cor¬
sair expeditions. It was all perfectly legal
and highly structured.
Razzias came to an end with the nine¬
teenth century. There were also the tolls
that had to be paid in the days of trans-
Saharan trade. Caravans of thousands of
camels plied through the desert from
Morocco to Timbuktu, In-Salah, Ghadamès
and Tripoli, carrying salt, gold dust, a few
animal skins, a little gum arabic. They
S

The desire to know and
to explain are, I think, the honour
and glory of the human mind.
would have to cross land claimed by such
and such a tribe, and to get through they
would have to leave something behind en
route. Not money, for they had no money,
but a share of what they were carrying.
Today only trucks make these journeys.
Then states came into the picture.
Today the nomads live on the territory of
modern states, and generally speaking cen¬
tralized government is not very keen on
them. For the bureaucrats a free man ought
not to exist. What's to be done with him?
Get him to settle down in one place, either
of his own accord or by force, or else
destroy him. Many nomads have become
rebels after violent clashes. But negotia¬
tions are taking place, moves towards solu¬
tions are afoot. The ideal would be to grant
the nomads a considerable degree of
regional autonomy, give them a say in mat¬
ters that concern them, make sure that
they are governed by people from their
own society who know all about their
problems. It should be up to the nomads to
decide their own future. If, as they cer¬
tainly have the right to do, they want to
conserve their historical, cultural or lin¬
guistic autonomy since the Tuareg have
a language and even a script of their own
they will have to find financial resources.
Because even in the Sahara people have to
pay taxes, whether they like it or not. And
while it is possible to live in the Sahara, it
is impossible to live simplyfrom what the
Sahara provides. The nomad needs to go to
a shop from time to time just as the sailor
needs to reach port. To buy cloth, for
example. It is a long time since nomads
wore animal skins, although I have seen
slaves' dresses made of goatskin.
Do slaves still exist?
In large numbers. There are tens of thou¬
sands of them. Of course no-one uses
the word "slave" any more, you find
euphemisms such as "servants". Many are
needed, to draw water from the wells, for
example, above all in summer. Since the
razzia has ceased to exist no new slaves
are taken, but slaves marry and their chil¬
dren belong to their masters. Some have
sought and obtained their emancipation, as
they have the legal right to do. But it's not
as simple as that. It's all very well to free a
slave, but then you've got to provide him
with a livelihood. His status as a slave gives
him the right to certain things: his master
is under the obligation to feed him, to pro¬
vide him with clothing from time to time,
a pair of sandals. ... A kind of profit-
sharing system should be invented,
whereby the former slave would have a
share in the increase of the herd. It's bound
to happen. These are old ways that take a
long time to die out.
You were director of the French Insti¬
tutefor Black Africafor twenty-fiveyears
andyou made certain choices regarding the
direction of scientific research. Did you
favour basic or applied research?
When I arrived in West Africa, applied
research was already well organized. Agro¬
nomic, geological, medical, veterinary and
other forms of research were all going on,
and there was no question of IFAN taking
the place of existing research centres. My
ambition was to model IFAN to some
extent on the Muséum in Paris, in other
words to choose a certain number of dis¬
ciplines and establish departments for
them. But with something more. IFAN
had two wings, the human sciences and
the natural sciences. Between the two there
was a geography section which in my
opinion acted as a very useful bridge
because the work of the human sciences
and why not? that of the natural sci¬
ences, often took the form of maps that
geographers could prepare and process.
It was particularly important to start
doing basic research because there were
no universities in those days. I was involved
in the creation of West African universities
and for two years I was dean of the faculty
of sciences at Dakar. Now there are many
universities and a wide range of research is
carried out in them, often in basic science.
There's plenty of work waiting to be done
in Africa. The distances are colossal and
fieldwork is not always easy, but the main
thing is to get things going and to see that
6

they continue. IFAN still exists; it has
financial problems of course; its publica¬
tions come out a little late, but they do
still come out.
So you're not one of those who thinks
that basic research is a luxury for devel¬
oping countries, and that these countries
should concentrate on more "profitable"
research?
No, I'm not. Basic research is part of the
activity of the human mind, and is needed
in a modern country. When the former
colonies became states, they had to acquire
the attributes of a modern state. Museums,
for example. In the past there were no
museums in Africa. Now all the big coun¬
tries have them, and perhaps I played some
small part in the process. Museums are
important. Some sciences, such as archae¬
ology, seem remote from current preoccu
pations. Yet archaeology is one of the foun¬
dations of any nation's history. People need
to connect with something in their past,
even the very distant past.
For example, here's a hand axe I found
in the Libyan desert, in a valley between
sand dunes. As you can see, the upper side
is shiny; it has been polished by the wind
and the sand. But the other side is dull.
That means the axe can't have been moved,
because if it had been turned over it would
be polished on both sides. This hand axe
was fashioned by someone in palaeolithic
times who used it to cut up an antelope,
maybe, and then threw it away because it
was of no further use to him. Three years
ago someone else picked it up, and that
person was me. How many years passed
between those two actions? A hundred
thousand at least! That's just a flash, a
nanosecond, in the history of the Earth, but
we are impressed by it, because we are
ephemeral insects and it is very hard for us
to imagine the passing of any length of
time. Lamarck said that "Everything
becomes possible with time". Even unpre¬
dictable, incredible things come about
given time. The microfossils that I am cur¬
rently collecting in Mauritania are found in
rocks estimated to be 800 million years
old. That's quite a while ago, but it's still
not the time when life began on Earth,
which was even earlier. But it is an impor¬
tant stage in the evolution of living cells.
Yourpassion for knowledge is bound¬
less, like that of the eighteenth-century
Encyclopaedists. But we live in an age of
specialization.
I'm a naturalist, in the old-fashioned
sense of the term. I think it's a terrible pity
that basic sciences such as zoology and
botany should disappear from the univer¬
sities and from academic life. I don't think
that it serves the cause of knowledge. If you
want to be a molecular biologist, it's a good
idea to know what you're talking about, to
know what species or organism you are
studying. What's more, the inventory of the
world's flora and fauna is far from com¬
plete. We know all the big animals now. We
are not going to find a new okapi or giraffe,
although we do come across a hitherto
unknown cetacean from time to time. But
thousands of small species insects, for

example are discovered every year, and
there's still a long way to go. We're making
extraordinary discoveries by studying envi¬
ronments that were inaccessible fifty years
ago: creatures living in the soil, cave-
dwelling fauna, interstitial fauna living
between grains of sand on the seabed	
H Perhaps we hear so much about mole¬
cular biology and biotechnology because
we expect them to have economic conse¬
quences.
I have nothing against molecular biology
as such. I just wish people would stop
dividing the sciences into those that deserve
to receive funding and those that can be
abandoned. We need molecular biology; it
has extraordinary possibilities. But we also
need to know about animal and plant
species, their anatomy, their morphology,
their way of life. Who knows which plants
in the forests we're busy destroying may
produce effective remedies for some sick¬
ness or endemic disease? Let's not give up
natural history, in the strict sense of the
term.
Maybe the first thing that should be
done is toprotect the natural environment
while there is still time especially in arid
regions which seem to be particularly
fragile.
I couldn't agree more. We have to make
a distinction here between the Sahara, the
real desert where there are few people and
where nomads simply move on when an
area has been overgrazed, leaving the veg¬
etation time to grow again, and savannah
areas like the Sahel where there are too
many people and above all too much live¬
stock. Veterinarians understand the situa¬
tion very well; they can calculate how
many kilos of beef, mutton or goat can be
raised on a given piece of land without the
risk of overgrazing that is harmful both
for plant life and for the animals, which no
longer have enough food to live on and
eventually die from lack of nourishment.
What can be done about the Sahel, then,
where there's no hay, where no grazing
land is set aside and people go on living as
they always have? It's very hard to get
people who are used to following old tra¬
ditions to accept new forms of organization
and land use.
The fact is, however, that it's impossible
to draw a boundary between arid, semi-
arid, predesert and extreme desert zones.
Nature is a continuum. We are the people
who put up barriers, dividing it up
according to the degree of aridity or cli¬
matic differences so that we can talk about
it more clearly. The universe is one and
indivisible, so let's take a global view of it.
I believe in the idea of cosmic unity, and
consequently of solidarity between living
things.
Youfightfor human rights as wellas the
protection of the environment.
Absolutely. It's the same struggle. People
are part of Nature just like other living
creatures. But they do things that other
animals wouldn't dare to do. I never use the
word "bestial", in the sense in which news¬
papers employ it when they describe a
"bestial" crime. It's totally inaccurate; ani¬
mals don't behave like that! We should say
"a human crime", but it seems that the
word "human" isn't pejorative. And yet
human beings are the only animals that
have schools to teach their young to kill

Deserts stir our emotions because they represent
Nature as it was before human beings came on the
scene. They also show us what it may be like after
we have disappeared.
one another. It's monstrous! Lions aren't
crazy, they don't teach their cubs to kill
other lions, they teach them to kill gazelles
or zebras. Personally I'd prefer lions to be
vegetarian, but I wasn't consulted a great
pity, since I could have given some excel¬
lent advice! The future of humanity will be
jeopardized as long as we love violence,
cruelty and war. This homo we call sapiens
may not last very long. Deserts stir our
emotions because they represent Nature as
it was before human beings came on the
scene. They also show us what it may be
like after we have disappeared. Nature will
survive. Fortunately, it has a future, but
we won't have much of one if we go on
behaving rashly.
Do you find a spiritual dimension in
the desert?
No more than anywhere else. Spiritu¬
ality is found in cities just as much as in
deserts. It's true that the desert encour¬
ages meditation, because you have to pass
the time. The desert can be terribly boring.
A day spent on camelback is deadly dull.
You can't read, you do four kilometres an
hour and you have to ride for ten hours a
day. That's a long time. You're very happy
to stop in the evening. On the other hand
there's the silence, the simplicity, the fru¬
gality. There are some things one can learn
from the desert, but they don't directly
relate to what people mean by spirituality
in the religious sense.
The desert offers protection against
certain dangers. In the early days of Chris¬
tianity it was where monastic life began, in
its eremitical form. People went there to get
away from the moral dangers of the cities,
to take refuge in a place where they could
devote themselves to meditation, prayer
and an ascetic life. But I'm not sure that it
creates religious feeling.
Even so, it's beautiful and it's clean!
The desert doesn't lie; everything is there
for you to see. There's even something
shameless about it: the earth is naked. The
sand covers it in places, but apart from
that its skeleton can be seen wherever you
look. It's a paradise for geologists. Rocks
can be seen from far away; you know
where you're going; you can decide exactly
where you're going to take your samples
tomorrow. The scale is grandiose. The
dunes are immense some of them are 200
metres high and their colours and shapes
are extraordinary. They are waves created
by the wind, like sea-waves except that
they last much longer; some of them date
back to the New Stone Age or earlier. The
superstructures move, but we don't always
see it happen. To appreciate the movement
of dunes you need to come back in a thou¬
sand years' time, which we can't do and
the people who will be there a thousand
years from now won't have seen them as
they are today. We need to think in terms
of long periods of time, and that is some¬
thing we find very difficult.
