Ifmisused, our
growing knowledge
ofhuman genetics
could have
disastrous
consequences.
Should there be any
restrictions on
research and above
all on the
application of its
results!
knowledge and
human dignity by Jean Dausset
Above, freeze-dried DNA
produced by the Human
Polymorphism Study Centre In
Paris, founded by Jean Dausset
In 1984. The Centre provides
the international scientific
community engaged in gene
mapping with DNA obtained
from 61 families (800
Individuals) regarded as having
been "healthy" for several
generations.
Molecular biology has invaded all or
very nearly all areas of medical research,
investing scientists engaged in research in
human genetics with heavy responsibilities.
Perhaps for the first time, these researchers
are now faced with two agonizing questions:
how far should they go in their research and
how should their findings be applied?
The answer to the first question is quite
unequivocal. There are no limits to knowledge,
which is the pride and honour of humanity.
We are the only creatures capable of under¬
standing and influencing our environment.
Under no circumstances should research be
halted or even slowed down. It must be pursued
on condition that studies made on human beings
respect human dignity.
In theory, the answer to the second question
is also unequivocal but it nevertheless raises
some serious problems. It is unequivocal because
new knowledge should be used for the good of
humanity and not be diverted to serve the inter¬
ests of individuals or communities which do
not respect human rights. In the case of human
genetics, unwise use of new techniques could
have disastrous consequences.
There can be no doubt that the powers now
vested in research scientists impose new oblig¬
ations on them and raise crucial ethical issues. We
are only too aware that all technical progress has

"Multi-blotters", powerful
instruments used for analysing
DNA at the Généthon laboratory
near Paris. Founded in 1990,
Généthon is the first laboratory
to be equipped with facilities on
an industrial scale, in order to
speed up the mapping of human
genes.
IO
JEAN DAUSSET,
French medical doctor, is
internationally known for his
work on tissue groups and the
HLA system, which has been
instrumental in the considerable
progress made in organ
transplants and grafts and
earned him a share (with George
Snell and Baruj Benacerraf) of
the 1980 Nobel Prize for
Physiology or Medicine. He is
Professor of Immuno-
Haematology at the
tarisboisière-Saint Louis Medical
Faculty in Paris and of
Experimental Medicine at the
Collège de France. In 1984, he
set up the Human Polymorphism
Study Centre (C.E.P.H.), and is
now president of the Foundation
Jean Dausset-C.E.P.H, which
plays an active part in the
human genome project. He is a
former member of France's
National Advisory Council on
Ethics and since 1982 has been
President of the Universal
Movement for Scientific
Responsibility.
its positive and negative sides. It is up to society
to reap the benefits from it, while as far as pos¬
sible averting potential risks and deviations, so
that the balance is tilted in favour of the advan¬
tages. There can be no denying that, in the long
run, the advantages accruing from genetics will
be considerable.
An end to hereditary diseases
Thanks in particular to the work being done
by the Human Polymorphism Study Centre,
in Paris, in conjunction with Professor Daniel
Cohen and the Généthon laboratory, the genetic
map and the physical map of the human genome
have been plotted more quickly than might have
been hoped, and it is now possible to locate on
the long DNA strand the genes responsible for
the most common genetic diseases. For instance,
it has proved possible not only to pinpoint the
genes responsible for cystic fibrosis and
Duchenne muscular dystrophy but actually to
isolate, describe and sequence them. The same is
true of many other genetic diseases, and hardly
a week goes by without the genes responsible for
one or another of them being identified.
These discoveries have given rise to a great
wave of hope. Now that we know which genes
are defective, we can start thinking about devel¬
oping specific therapies either to correct the
gene itself or the protein coding it.
This is how the idea of gene therapy came
about. A distinction must be made between two
types of such therapy. One is somatic therapy,
which deals only with the cells of the body (or
soma). This has absolutely no effect on heredity
and is therefore perfectly ethical, since it can
be likened to a simple graft. The other is germ-
line therapy, which is concerned with repro¬
ductive cells, male or female, or with the
embryos of certain cells. In this case, any change
is handed down from generation to generation
and, in some individuals, the human genetic
heritage will be altered accordingly. Thus, as
things stand at present, germ-line therapy must
be strictly banned.
In addition to these hereditary diseases caused
by a single flawed gene, we are now studying
such widespread pathological conditions as dia¬
betes, cardiovascular or neuropsychiatrie dis¬
eases and cancer. These diseases may have a
variety of causes, due to the action not only of cer¬
tain genes but of environmental factors.
They are now thought to be due to the simul¬
taneous existence in one and the same individual
of a relatively limited number of defective genes,
say five or six in the case of non-insulin depen¬
dent diabetes, for example. If, through bad luck,
these five or six genes exist together in the same
person, it is to some degree probable, though by
no means certain, that he or she may contract the
disease. We therefore now have a means of quan¬
tifying the risk.
Prevention is better than cure
This, in turn, is how the concept of predictive
medicine came about. Prevention is better than
cure. And preventing means predicting.
The concept of predictive medicine came to
me when it was found that many diseases are
connected with the antigens of the HLA system
(human leucocyte antigen system).1 For instance,
somebody with the HLA-B27 antigen is 600
times more liable to suffer from ankylosing
spondylitis than somebody without it. It is now
possible to identify in the genome the genes
predisposing people to certain illnesses.
This gives an idea of the prospects being
opened up by the application of genetics to
medicine. With predictive medicine, we shall
certainly be able to avoid much pain and suf¬
fering and perhaps even live in perfect health to
a ripe old age. In short, medicine will be tailored
to the individual and will prove less costly and
more effective.
But these discoveries also have negative
aspects. It seems pointless, indeed heartless, to
tell people that they are predisposed to a disease
when we still cannot offer any preventive treat¬
ment, not to mention the unnecessary anxiety
and the host of psychological side-effects this
may cause.
What is more, such information obviously
has to be kept strictly confidential. The results
of genetic testing should be divulged only with
the authorization of the patient, since there is a
risk that they may be used by insurance com¬
panies or employers to make unacceptable dis¬
criminations. If such abuses are to be avoided, it
will be necessary to lay down strict rules. There
must be a public debate on this issue. Universal
answers will have to be found. UNESCO is
actively engaged in this search.

So act as to treat
humanity, whether in
thine own person or
in that of any other,
in every case as an
end withal, never as
means only.
Immanuel Kant
German philosopher
(1724-1804)
In conclusion, I should like to dispel the
myth that genetics creates in the public mind. It
is only natural that current developments in
this field should make people afraid. But are
their fears justified? Or, rather, to what extent are
they justified? People are often afraid of the
seemingly all-powerful scientist. It is not the
scientist they should be afraid of, but individuals
or groups of individuals driven by a lust
for pov/er that is often tainted by a totalitarian
ideology.
And so we must regard with serenity the
revolution that is taking place today. It is a rev¬
olution that must be harnessed in the service
of humanity and lead to the long life, happy
and free of ailments, which we all hope for.
This is the dream I invite you to share a
dream in which genes spell hope.
The only priority we have set ourselves is to
relieve suffering. As Paracelsus2 put it, "medicine
is love".
1 The antigens of the HLA system are present in virtually
all the nuclear cells of the body, which is why they are
called "cell antigens". They are genetic markers that are
particularly useful for studying the biological make-up of
individuals or population groups and evaluating their sus¬
ceptibility to certain diseases. Editor .
2 Swiss doctor and alchemist (1493-1541) Editor I I
