BOOKS OF THE WORLD by Edgar Reichmann
On the trail
ofFernäo
Mendes Pinto
Wien Renaissance Europe
discovered the distantEast
pI eregrinations ofFernäo Mendes Pinto,
in which he relates the very numerous
and very strange things which he saw
and heard in the Kingdoms ofChina and also of
Tartaria, of Sornau, which is commonly known
as Siam, in those of Calaminhâ, of Pegu, of
Martaban and in many other Kingdoms and
Realms ofthe Orient, ofwhich little or nothing is
known in Occident. And also relates the many
and exceptional adventures which befell him
and many other persons	" Thus reads the
title page ofa monumental work, first published
in Lisbon in 1614, which was subsequently trans¬
lated from Portuguese into many other lan¬
guages and published in various editions
throughout the world. Today, there are signs of
a resurgence of interest in this remarkable best¬
seller of the seventeenth and eighteenth cen¬
turies, as evidenced by recent translations into
American English, French and Japanese.
Who exactly was Femäo Mendes Pinto? Most
reference books have little to say about him. A
contemporary ofanother poet of the warm seas,
Luis de Camoens, he explored the East Indies and
published an account ofhis travels, Peregrinaçâo
(1614): this is all we are told. The index of place
names in the most recent French edition of this
worktranslated by Robert Viale and containing
an illuminating commentary by the translator-
yields further information regarding the myste¬
riously named places visited by this writer-
adventurer. Thus Calaminhâ, initially thought to
be Tibet, has been identified as Laos; Pegu was
the capital of Burma, and Martaban was a very
ancient city in the same country.
Femäo Mendes Pinto's life was that ofa char¬
acter in a baroque novel. It has similarities with
that of the French explorer Henri de Monfreid in
this century. Probably from a modest back¬
ground, talented and cultured, at the age of
twenty-seven Pinto left his position in an aris¬
tocratic Portuguese household and set out into
the unknown to make his fortune. He did not
return to his homeland for more than two
decades, during which time he explored the
horn of Africa, the coast of Arabia, the fabled
land of India, and Southeast Asia, China and
Japan. After returning to Portugal, he obtained a
royal pension late in life and devoted his twi
light years to the writing of his book. This man
who was at various times a trafficker and a slave,
condemned to death and reprieved, an ambas¬
sador, a missionary and a friend of the Jesuit St.
Francis Xavier, is, because ofhis epic story-telling
genius, an exemplarywitness of the way in which
Renaissance Europe perceived other civiliza¬
tions.
A THIRST FOR CONQUEST
Pinto does not depict the Portuguese as supe¬
rior to the peoples he discovers. On the con¬
trary, with the exception of their religious prac¬
tices and military weakness, he admires the
munificence of these distant civilizations
particularly Chinato the extent of indicating,
by contrast, the weaknesses of the West, espe¬
cially in the areas of social organization, justice
and economics. As Robert Viale points out in
his introduction, this is the account of a lucid,
meticulous observer, who went so far as to
count each and every wick in the 1,439 lamps
in one temple he visited, but one who is also at
pains to provide the reader with a full picture
of whatever he is describing.
This thirst for detail and astonishing pre¬
cision are by no means innocent, however.
For Fernào Mendes Pinto, everything has a
price, and the defensive weakness of the pros¬
perous countries which he visits awaken in
him the desire for mastery. As early as the Aviz
dynasty (1385-1580), Portugalthis small
country at the furthest western extremity of
Europehad established its first trading mis¬
sions on the African coast. Portuguese navi¬
gators rounded the Cape of Good Hope in
1487, and founded a colonial empire in the
Indies, of which Vasco da Gama became
Viceroy. More than the metaphysical quest for
an improbable grail, probably more than the
thirst for knowledge, it was the attraction of
great wealththe fabrics, spices, precious
wood, gold and gemstones which abounded
on the Far Eastern shoreswhich made Euro¬
pean caravels hasten to these hitherto
unknown lands.
ENTHRALLING ADVENTURES
However, these travels also form a series of
amazing adventures. The narrator recalls his
youth prior to his departure, his discovery of
India, and the harrowing demise of the King of
Aaru (a now-extinct kingdom on the north¬
east coast of Sumatra). Among a host of other
portraits, Femäo Mendes Pinto paints a picture
of Beijing in the sixteenth century, "wherein the
king of China holds his residence". The author
also evokes "the cares which are dispensed to
all infirm and needful persons", stating that
"throughout the kingdom are to be found habi¬
tations destined for the poor", but also relates
the way in which "the town of Martaban was
sacked and destroyed and the manner whereby
the Queen and many other women were sub¬
jected to manifold tortures".
The author condemns the religious
hypocrisy of his compatriots, who cause harm
by invoking the name of the Lord; he is horri¬
fied by the cruelties of the Inquisition. His
"peregrinations" illustrate those of a humanity
which wishes to progress, reaching beyond its
limits and breaking away from the conditions
imposed by the environment, to finally
encounter the "Other". But at what cost? the
reader is tempted to enquire, after turning the
last of the 777 pages of this Odyssey of the
1600s. The disappearance of the civilizations
of the Andes and Central America, the depop¬
ulation of Africa by slave traders, the geno¬
cides which ran like a sore through the fol¬
lowing centuries suggest that he who sets out
in search of the "Other" without first taming his
appetite for conquest and his lust for wealth
runs the risk of losing himself on the way.
Fernào Mendes Pinto, Pérégrination, travel
writings translated into French from the Por¬
tuguese and presented by Robert Viale, Col¬
lection Outre-mers, La Différence publishers,
Paris, 1991. ISBN: 2-7291-0597-2.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Cover, page 3: M. Baret© Rapho, Paris. Pages 4,
6: Emmanuel Scorcelletti © Gamma, Paris. Page 7:
Satoru Ohmori © Gamma, Paris. Pages 8-9: Markel
© Gamma, Paris. Pages 9, 32: © Claude Sauvageot,
Paris. Pages 10, I I, 35 (above): Lynn Johnson©
Black Star/Rapho, Paris. Page 12: Patrick Land¬
mann © Gamma, Paris. Pages 1 3 (above), 33, 34
(right): Fred Ward © Rapho, Paris. Page 1 3
(below): Filipacchi/Liaison © Gamma, Paris. Pages
14-15: Jörgen Schytte © Still Pictures, London.
Page 1 6: Roland Michaud © Rapho, Paris. Pages 1 7
(above), 1 8 (above): Howell/Liaison © Gamma,
Paris. Pages 1 7 (below), 24: Gérard Boutin ©
Explorer, Paris. Page 1 8 (below): Alain Le Toquin
© Explorer, Paris. Page 1 9 (above): Y. Cavaille ©
Explorer, Paris. Page 1 9 (inset): Francis Jalain ©
Explorer, Paris. Page 20: © Vincent Poulain, Paris.
Page 2 1 : M. Fournie © Explorer, Paris. Pages 22,
34 (left): Bruce Patton © Panos Pictures, London.
Page 23: J. P. Porcher © Explorer, Paris. Page 25:
Jacques Joffre © Explorer, Paris. Page 26: Missir ©
Explorer, Paris. Page 27 (above): © Société
Pachamama, Lima. Page 27 (below): Durand ©
Jacana, Paris. Page 28: Boiffin Vivier © Explorer,
Paris. Page 29: Nacivet © Explorer, Paris. Page 30:
Michael Friedel © Rapho, Paris. Page 3 1 : © M. Y.
Brandily, Paris. Page 35 (below): Paris. Aventurier
© Gamma, Paris. Page 37 (left): Laurence Berkeley
Laboratory/ SPL© Cosmos, Paris. Page 37 (right):
© John Maine, The South Bank Centre, London.
Page 38 (left): Pamela and David Parker/SPL ©
Cosmos, Paris. Page 38 (right): © Noel Forster,
The South Bank Centre, London. Page 38-39: ©
Fabian Miller, The South Bank Centre, London.
Page 40: © Fabian. Pages 42, 43 (above), 44:
Michel Setboun © Rapho, Paris. Page 43 (below):
All Rights Reserved. Page 45: © Archiv für Kunst
und Geschichte, Berlin. Page 47: Lotte Jacobi ©
Archiv für Kunst und Geschichte, Berlin. 49
