COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR
An active pact
WE are living in an age of paradox, an age
which is baroque in its immoderation, and in
which the hopes born at the end of the Cold
War hopes for a more peaceful world enjoying
greater prosperity, justice, solidarity and freedom
encounter the despair of the poor, whose impover¬
ishment grows steadily worse, and the excluded,
whose rejection is ever more complete.
At this watershed it is vital that we rethink the
development of our societies from top to bottom.
Only in so doing can we lend substance to our hopes.
Having learned from experience, we will not forget
that the sole protagonist and beneficiary of develop¬
ment is humankind.
In this connection, agreement has been reached on
three essential issues: social integration, the fight
against poverty, and productive employment. Rather
than seeing social development as merely the devel¬
opment of "social services", UNESCO views it as a
global process whose ultimate aim links up with that
of human development. The interdependent nature of
the phenomena and trends involved in this process
and the increasing internationalization of the economy
demonstrate clearly that our present problems are
intertwined and that human societies therefore need



an active form of solidarity which could take the
form of an "international social pact".
An imperative and I prefer to speak of an ethical
imperative for this type of solidarity is sharing:
sharing of means, of knowledge, of work, of leisure.
This type of solidarity also involves shared choices and
I will mention here only those which in my view are
most important.
Social development in the broader sense to
which I refer involves first of all a global struggle
against all forms of exclusion starting with
poverty through the development of human
resources and productive employment. It means that
developed countries, having realized the nature of
their own difficulties and the links between those
difficulties and the constraints experienced by other
groups of countries, must proceed forthwith to make
the necessary changes in their ways of thinking and
their behaviour with regard to social integration,
growth, consumption and employment.
It also means that the strategies adopted by deci¬
sion-makers must take account of those whose inse¬
cure conditions contribute to international insta¬
bility I am thinking of emigrants, refugees, displaced
persons and members of minority groups.
It also involves a shared determination, a joint
effort of all parties, at both the national and the inter¬
national level. At the national level, it is essential to har¬
monize, with imagination and daring, policies for
employment, education, health, science, technology,
regional planning, population and social integration. It
is also essential that the private sector, the trade unions,
the non-governmental organizations, indeed all parts
of society co-operate with the authorities to ensure that
these policies are successful. The role of women (so
indispensable for social development), training and
the acquisition of new skills (for jobs connected with
the environment, for example) such questions need
to be treated in the context of society as a whole. Real
social development necessitates the active and demo¬
cratic participation of all members of society.
At the international level, changes in the eco¬
nomic situation and the extent of economic co-oper¬
ation will clearly play a considerable part in forming
the social pact, on condition that they are reflected in
a reorientation of commercial exchanges and financial
mechanisms. Within the United Nations system, the
required change of direction is already being made,
but it is essential to improve the coherence of the
activities being carried out to acknowledge the human
and social dimension of development. Allowances
for this dimenson must involve scrupulously planned
demilitarization, so that the new priorities gradually
open up areas of genuine decision making and
empowerment for civil society.
This will not be easy. But it would be illusory to
think that social development can be achieved through
the worn-out, myopic approach of economic devel¬
opment pursued up to now.
