The dry lands
These limestone formations in
Nambung National Park, north of
Perth (Australia), formed around
the roots of plants that grew there
in sand some 30,000 years ago.
When the plant cover died, the
dunes shifted, leaving these curious
pillars exposed.
*

IN most people's minds the term desert conjures up an
image of undulating sand dunes beneath the hot sun.
There are, however, many other kinds of desert.
Antarctica, Greenland and the polar ice packs are cold
deserts where where the water is locked up in ice. As for
the Earth's arid regions, they exist both in areas such as
| Arabia where the climate is permanently hot, and in others
such as the steppes of central Asia where the winters are
cold. The common denominator between them is that on
average more water evaporates than falls as rain, and life
has to adapt to the deficit.
Where there is practically no rain, as in the Sahara and
the Gobi, there is virtually no life. The only exceptions to
this rule are places where irrigation water can be drawn
from rivers (as in Egypt, Iraq and the Indus region, all of
which saw the birth of great "hydraulic civilizations"), or
from underground "fossil" reserves that can be exploited
for a limited time, as is currently happening in Libya.
Regions in which enough water falls to allow grazing and
perhaps some dry farming are described as semi-arid. There
are many of these in Africa, India, Argentina and Australia.
Arid and semi-arid regions make up more than a third of
the world's land surface, whereas cultivated land accounts
only for one-tenth. They are concentrated in two zones
straddling the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, on each
side of the Equator. The main cause of aridity is to be found
in the circulation of the atmosphere above our revolving
globe. The almost permanent ridges of high pressure that
predominate around the 30°-latitude mark stop rain from
forming. Great distance from the oceans or the presence of
mountain barriers are other factors that contribute to the
aridity of regions like central Asia or the American Midwest.
So deserts have not been created by humankind, as is
sometimes claimed, though people do contribute to
desertification. In our time increased population pressure
and over-intensive agriculture and grazing are accelerating
soil degradation and worsening the effects of drought in
semi-arid regions such as the African Sahel and north¬
eastern Brazil.
There is another way in which human activity may affect
i the evolution of arid regions. It is thought that the
I accumulation in the atmosphere of carbon dioxide from
automobile engines, heating or industry and other gases of
industrial and agricultural origin can lead to global warming
through the "greenhouse effect". It is not yet possible to
predict the consequences of such global warming for
different regions, but it may well be that in a few decades
some arid regions will be drier still while others will be less
so. In that case, people will have brought about a significant
climatic change, comparable to those that have taken place
in the course of geological history.
i
'&
dfl
MICHEL BATISSE !
¿
. iíwKkl i
