World peace begins at home
Published below are extractsfrom a letter by the Chinese thinker Cai Yuanpei
(Ts'ai Yuan-pei; 1863-1940) whichfirstappeared in Correspondance, the
journal ofthe International Institute ofIntellectual Co-operation, in 1933. In
the letter Cai Yuanpei discusses what he regards as the regrettable propensity
to dissociate private moralityfrom public morality and to demand ofthe
individual the kind ofrational and altruistic behaviour that is not expected
ofthe state.
to his own state but hostile to the other
Chinese states; in the secondary stage of
world peace, everyone is loyal to the Chi¬
nese states, while hostile to those outside
China; in the final stage ofworld peace, all
the barbarian (non-Chinese) states, large
and small, far and near, have come up to
the same level of civilization, and every
citizen conducts himself as a perfect gen¬
tleman."
To the Chairman of the International
Committee of Intellectual Co-operation
Academia Sínica (Shanghai)
In the book Ta Hsueh ("The Great Learning")
we find a unifying conception ofworld order
which seeks to lay its foundations in the
psychology of the individual.
This book was written two thousand
years ago byTseng Ts'an, a disciple ofCon¬
fucius, later incorporated in the Li-Ki by
the Han scholars, and finally chosen, as
one of the Four Books to be studied by every
schoolboy, by the scholars of the Sung
Dynasty. . . . The passage I wish to refer to
reads as follows:
"In ancient times, those who wished to
make clear their virtue before the world
would first put their country in order; those
who wished to put their country in order
would first bring about right relationships
in their family; those who wished to bring
about right relationships in their family
would first cultivate their own self; those
who wished to cultivate their own self
Text selected and presented
by Edgardo Canton
46
would first rectify their own heart; those
who wished to rectify their own heart
would first make their will sincere; and
those who wished to make their will sin¬
cere would first try to attain knowledge;
and they would attain knowledge by
studying matter.
"When matter is studied, then knowl¬
edge may be attained; when knowledge
is attained, then the will becomes sincere;
when the will is sincere, then the heart is
rectified; when the heart is rectified, then
the self is cultivated; when the self is cul¬
tivated, then there exist right relationships
in the family; when right relationships
exist in the family, then the country is in
order; when the countries are in order,
then there is peace in the world."
The end to be aimed at is described as
"world peace", while the method of
attaining this peace begins with "making
clear one's virtue before the world". This
virtue is regarded as rational conduct, and
proceeds, neither from superstition, nor
from blind acceptance, but from the exer¬
cise of intelligence. The development of
intelligence is again described as the
attainment of knowledge through the
objective study of matter. It is therefore
characteristically free from theological
and metaphysical fancies.
The conception of world order was
further elucidated in the Kung-Yang Com¬
mentary on the Spring and Autumn
Annals. According to Kung-Yang, a Con-
fucianist, there are three stages in the
development ofworld order, as follows:
"In a world of chaos, everyone is loyal
WELL EDUCATED CITIZENS
Expressed in modern terminology, the first
stage is the stage of nationalism; the
second stage, when one is loyal to all the
Chinese states while hostile to the others,
may be regarded as rather similar to the
American Monroe doctrine and the con¬
ception ofa federation ofEurope; the final
stage is more or less foreshadowed by the
League of Nations.
"Peace" is thus regarded as a stage
when all the large and small, distant and
near states are treated alike. The final ref¬
erence to every citizen conducting himself
as a perfect gentleman points to the stage
when all should be so mentally disciplined
that they can successively form the ever-
widening units which culminate in a world
of universal peace.
European philosophers have evolved
theories wherein either individual liberty
or state sovereignty is pushed to the
extreme, both ofwhich are incomprehen¬
sible to the Chinese mind. The Chinese
scholars think that the successive units of
human society from the cell to the indi¬
vidual, the group and the higher groups
like the state and the world differ in size
and complexity, but not in their behav¬
iour.
What is regarded as good or evil in a
small unit is also regarded in the same
way in the larger units. Chinese scholars
are sincerely puzzled when one holds that
honesty is a virtue as between individuals
but could be ignored in international
diplomacy; that while mutual considera-

V
tion, as stated in the Confucian or Chris¬
tian Golden Rule, should be the rule for
intercourse between individuals, the
reverse attitude ofaggression and whole¬
sale slaughter should be countenanced;
that while selfishness is regarded as a
shame and self-sacrifice a virtue in indi¬
vidual conduct, self-aggrandizement
should be the norm for international poli¬
cies; that while in individual conduct
chivalry consists in helping the weak and
defenceless, the dictum that might is right
should be accepted as the rule in inter¬
national relationships.
A NEWWORLD ORDER
The League of Nations is, I believe, com¬
mitted to a new conception ofworld order
and dedicated as an instrument to abolish
dishonesty, unkindness, unrighteousness
and lack of mutual consideration from
international politics. The International
Committee of Intellectual Co-operation
has especially the duty of bringing about
the support of the scholars of the world for
this new conception. If it is accepted that
the successive units ofhuman society are
causally related as described above, then
we may deduce two principles which are
worthy of our own effort and may well
cover our multifarious activities:
1) All supporters of the idea of intel¬
lectual co-operation should try to live up
to the norm of individual conduct, which
will thus serve as the ideal for group con¬
duct also.
2) All should co-operate in the work
of objective study and investigation of
facts bearing on all international prob¬
lems, analyse the causes and effects and on
the strength of this objective study make
recommendations for the consideration of
the proper authorities.
I believe the above two proposals are
well in accord with the Confucian political
philosophyand with the aims and objects of
the Institute of Intellectual Co-operation.
CAI YUANPEI
K'ung-Fu-Tzu
(or Confucius), circa
551-479 B.C., a portrait
dating from the
18th century.
47
