BOOKS OF THE WORLD by Raoul Silva-Cacérès
Here comes THE SUN
so
Although not many of those who watched
last February's Winter Olympics may have
been aware of it, the Olympic flame that
burned in Lillehammer (Norway) was a
legacy of an ancient solar cult.
The sun is an omnipresent symbol in
the history of civilization. It has been given
many names Helios, Ra, Shamash, Apollo,
Sûrya, Amaterasu are only a few and has
been deified since the dawn of time. The
fount of light and life, it came to symbolize
truth, the all-seeing eye of justice and
equality, and became associated with the
power to heal physical and mental ailments.
The illustrations ofsun-related objects in
The Sun: Eternal Flame of Creation, many
never before published, show how the sun
has been an endless source of inspiration
to the human imagination. They include
the chariot of the sun-god; the vampire
(destroyed by sunlight); sacred mir¬
rors; mountains that became solar
deities; the pyramids; various
animals (birds of prey, serpents,
lions and stags); the phoenix;
trees such as the cosmic fig-
tree, its roots upturned
towards the sky; gold; and fire.
Most religions, rites, social
functions, cultural events, fes¬
tivals and sports originate in
ancient solar cults, or can be asso¬
ciated with the "day star" through
ceremonies linked with agrarian and
fertility rites.
This book evokes solar cults all over the
world, focusing particularly on past cultures
and the cultures of indigenous peoples today.
An international team of twenty-four noted
scholars has written the texts which accom¬
pany a pictorial record ofoutstanding quality.
In a remarkably comprehensive intro¬
duction of some 130 pages, the book's com¬
piler and presenter, Madanjeet Singh art
historian, writer, painter and photographer
compares the different symbolic and artistic
representations of the sun, points to some
unexpected similarities between different
cultures, and outlines the central issues
underlying his research. "The comparison
which some scholars have made between
the Amerindian and Greco-Roman pan-
The Sun: Eternal Flame
of Creation
compiled and presented by Madanjeet Singh,
with a preface by Federico Mayor,
Director-General of Unesco,
UNESco/Thames & Hudson, London/Adams, New York,
1993.
This monumental 400-page volume with 550 colour
plates is being published simultaneously in six
languages, within the framework of the World Decade
for Cultural Development. It is the result of co-operation
between Unesco and seven of the world's largest
publishing houses (Thames & Hudson, London, and
Adams, New York, for the English edition; Bordas, Paris,
for the French; Plaza & Janes/Circulo de Lectores,
Barcelona, for the Spanish; Silvan, Milan, for the Italian;
Wasmuth, Tübingen, for the German; and Kodansha,
Tokyo, for the Japanese).
Price: 460 French francs
(or equivalent in other currencies)
theons," he writes, "shows how solar cul¬
tures and their mythologies in widely sepa¬
rated parts of the world seem to converge,
transcending both time and space, and man¬
ifest themselves continually in the global
totality of form and content. It is at the heart
of the controversy whether or not such sim¬
ilarities are coincidental or resulted from
interaction between cultures. Perhaps in this
inexplicable phenomenon lies the funda¬
mental character of the prehistoric myth-
making age and its cultural universality."
For the first time, here is a single work
which lists, discusses and draws compar¬
isons between symbolic and artistic repre¬
sentations of the sun from the earliest times
to the present day, both in works of art and
in the rituals of each of the major civiliza¬
tions. This thoroughly entertaining geo-
cultural travelogue takes the reader
from Mesopotamia to the Incas of
ancient Peru, via the medieval
French epic La chanson de
Roland.
Two examples may be
given. The chapter (by
French writer Jacques Lacar-
rière) devoted to represen¬
tations of the sun in popular
French culture is ofparticular
interest. Most of these repre¬
sentations originate in Celtic
folklore and an ancient animist
tradition which forms a symbiosis
between celestial phenomena and
human beings. This complicity is strongly
apparent in the popular legends of Brittany

and in the torch festivals which take place on
the first Sunday in Lent in the Christian cal¬
endar. To revive the energy of the weakening
sun, flaming torches of straw were paraded
through village streets and nearby pathways
and orchards.
In the chapter dealing with the Aztecs of
ancient Mexico, Eduardo Matos Moctezuma
stresses the importance to this people oftheir
creation myth, the Leyenda de los Soles
(Legend of the Suns) . The Aztecs considered
themselves the chosen elite of the sun, and
according to this tradition, the history of
humanity was divided into four consecutive
eras or "Suns": "The Tiger Sun", "The Wind
Sun", "The Rain Sun" and "The Water Sun".
However, it was the fifth Sun, the "Sun of
Movement", which allowed humanity,
through the sacrifice of the gods, to become
integrated with the world:
The Sun is not moving!
How in truth shall we make people live?
Let the Sun gain strength through our
mediation,
Let us sacrifice ourselves, let us all die!
This demonstrates clearly the funda¬
mental role of sacrifice in Aztec religion and
society: man must offer up his life to the gods,
so that the sun may continue on its course and
cosmic harmony may be preserved.
In short, this book gives us a magnificent
lesson in comparative mythology. Consid
ered as a whole, this vast panorama reveals a
poetic vision of history and a record of the
hopes and frustrations of men and women
past and present. The story of the sun is the
story ofan eternal dream ofhumanity.
To complement this historical and cul¬
tural study of the world of imagery inspired
by the sun, UNESCO has decided to prepare
a second volume, devoted to solar energy
and the environment.
RAOUL SILVA-CACERES, of Chile, is a professor at
the university of the Sorbonne (Paris IV), where he
is in charge of doctoral studies in Latin American
literature. Among his published works are Elogio de
mi locura (1991; "In praise of my madness") and
L'arbre aux figures, Etude sur Julio Cortázar ("The
tree with faces, a study on Julio Cortázar").
81
