A NEW INTERNATIONAL PROJECT
THE SLAVE ROUTE
a crime without punishment
In September 1S34, at a meeting
held in Cotonou (Benin), Unesco
launched an international study
project on the slave trade which
will help to promote research and
other activities relating to this
major historical phenomenon.
Here Dotîdou Diene, the head of
Unesco's Division for Intercultural
Projects, talks about the new
Slave Route project.
How did the project come about?
The initiative came from Haiti and the
African countries, including Benin, which
is particularly concerned by the project. In
the days of slavery, its port of Ouidah, on
the west coast, was one of the leading cen¬
tres of the black slave trade. At the same
time, Benin was one of the few countries to
which slaves returned after they had been
set free, and even today many Beninese
families still have names of Brazilian origin.
It is doubtless this historical heritage that
prompted President Nicéphore Soglo to
give priority to the Slave Route and to
decide to host the Conference formally
launching the project in Cotonou.
What are the main features of the
project?
Its first objective is to re-examine a major
historical event over which, for a variety of
reasons, a veil has been cast by its European
perpetrators and African victims alike.
This will entail studying the slave trade
and its causes, and the manner and
sequence in which it proceeded. In other
words, it will mean retracing our steps
along the "middle passage". There is more
to the project than that, however. This
journey back in time is only one way of
understanding the events involved. The
most important thing is to analyse them
and shed light on their consequences. I
believe it is essential to take a closer look at
the paradox inherent in the fact that the ini¬
tial act of the black slave trade, barbaric as
it was, came strangely enough to be instru¬
mental in laying the foundations of a new
civilization. More than any other event in
history, the slave trade led, through bru¬
tality and coercion, to a far-reaching inter-
penetration of the African, European and
American continents. The massive dis¬
placement of slaves brought in its wake a
similar displacement of cultural values,
sensibilities and traditions.
Can you be more specific?
The slave trade had a cultural impact
first of all in Africa, where the violence
originated. But its consequences can also be
detected, in more or less disguised form,
among its European perpetrators. It influ¬
enced their ways of thinking, their forms of
artistic expession, and even their spiritual
lives. However, the cultural influences were
strongest in the Americas, the Caribbean
and the West Indies, where the actual phys¬
ical encounters took place. It is there that
cross-fertilization flourished. It began with
ethnic intermingling between blacks,
Indians and whites, despite the resistance
to it, as we well know. It was followed by
cultural intermingling, because the slaves'
ancestral traditions, which had become an
essential factor in their survival, were kept
alive and came to influence not only the
local cultures but also those imported from
Europe. Whether in music, poetry or other
areas, these encounters produced an extra-
The initial act of the black
slave trade, barbaric as it
was, came strangely
enough to be instrumental
in laying the foundations of
a new civilization.
ordinary mix that nobody could have pos¬
sibly foreseen. It created a whole give-and-
take relationship which still exists today
and is being projected into the future. Iden¬
tity is a process, the outcome of inter¬
mixing, of borrowing and appropriation.
So the Slave Route project is both
intercultural and interdisciplinary. Can
we expect it to give rise to activities
such as scientific debates, historical,
literary or musical research, cultural
events, exhibitions.and so on?
The Slave Route project had actually got
underway even before it was formally inau¬
gurated. When we asked the countries con¬
cerned for information on their projects, we
discovered that some of them had already
started work. This was the case, for instance,
of an exhibition entitled "Les anneaux de la
mémoire" which a group of intellectuals
from Nantes once one of France's largest
slave ports put together after several years'
work. A permanent exhibition is being pre¬
pared in Liverpool, once a British slave
port. In Africa, Senegal launched its Gorée-
Almadies Memorial project to create a his¬
torical monument on a small island in the
Atlantic from where millions of slaves were
shipped across the ocean. We have already
sponsored several exhibitions, including
one at Arc-et-Senans in eastern France on
art produced during the slave trade and
another at Nantes on the image of blacks in
advertising, and seminars. The proceedings
of one seminar on the abolition of slavery
held under the auspices of the University of
Paris VIII are being published jointly by
UNESCO and Paris VIII. We are aiming to
cover a very broad spectrum of activities,
situating them in a global context and pro¬
viding them with Unesco backing. The
Slave Route project sets out to bring people
together. 29
