A new Hindu identity
by Sudhir Kakar
Psychoanalysis of a Hindu ideology
A demonstration in New Delhi
on 4 March 1991 calling for the
construction of a temple in
Ayodhya.
30
SUDHIR KAKAR
is an Indian psychoanalyst best
known for his book Intimate
Relations: Exploring Indian
Sexuality (1989). Among his
other published works are
Shamans, Mystics and Doctors
(1989) and The Inner World: A
Psychoanalytic Study of
Childhood and Society in India
(1979).
In many parts of India today, especially
the northern and central states, a new
Hindu identity, Hindutva, is being constructed.
It is the basis of an amorphous group of Hindu
parties and groups, the Sangh Parivar, and bears
only a faint family resemblance to its predeces¬
sors. Analysing the fantasies, images and arche¬
types contained in the campaign speeches of
the votaries of this new identity, we can dis¬
cern some of the stages in its construction.
The first notable feature of the speeches is the
way in which they redraw the boundary of the
Hindu community by hailing selected gods and
heroes who are presented as ideals to be shared
by members of the community in order to main¬
tain its cohesion.
They also evoke a shared social loss, sym¬
bolized by the Ram temple at Ayodhya. This
temple is a symbol of the mourning of Hindu
society: mourning for lost honour, lost self-
esteem, lost civilization.
This emerging Hindu identity is presented as
being constantly threatened by external and
internal forces. Constant vigilance is needed to
prevent that which has been recently united
from being divided. The speeches single out the
political forces representing this threat. A
process of idealization and a search for scape¬
goats come next.
Group narcissism
Hindu tolerance, compassion, depth of insight "
and breadth of social concern are idealized.
These are the qualities inherent in a Hindu
group self which makes the individual member
feel righteous and pure. This increase in self-
esteem can be maintained only by projecting
the bad, the dirty and the impure onto another
group, the Muslims.
The process of splitting activates the group's

persecution fantasy. The Muslim ceases to be a
stereotype and becomes an archetype the
archetype of tyranny. A note of helplessness
creeps into the speeches at this stage, engen¬
dered by fear of persecution. This feeling reveals
the fragility of the group's self. The positive
self-image of the Hindu is tarnished by his fear
of being impotent to change the material or
social conditions of his life. Are we tolerant or
are we merely weak? Or are we tolerant because
we are weak?
The crumbling self demands restoration
through forceful action. The campaign speeches
channel this need by calling for collective and
united action in the political arena. They hold
out the possibility of some kind of self-assertion
through the electoral process, where all the per¬
secutory anti-Hindu forces, from within and
without the Hindu fold, can be engaged and
defeated.
The Sangh Parivar cannot be faulted for fos¬
tering Hindu pride. This is a normal aim of any
group's narcissistic economy. The question is
when narcissism becomes deviant or abnormal.
This group pride and narcissism have made
it possible for the Hindutva forces to offer a
specific vision of India's future. The pivotal
issue for them is not the acceptance of global
techno-science and the economic institutions
and forms of modernity, but their possible



impact on Hindu culture and identity. Such
an approach will have great appeal to the
emerging middle classes and sections of the
intelligentsia which are committed neither to

universal modernism nor to post-modern tra¬
ditionalism.
In a society in the throes of modernization,
there is a pressing need for continuity with the
past in order to maintain a sense of individual
and collective identity. It is this need for a con¬
tinuity of collective memory, or more accu¬
rately for a collective representation of the past
in times of rapid change, even turbulence, which
the Sangh Parivar addresses with considerable
social and political success.
A poster in Calcutta.
^	
who is high, who is low ?
we are all
EQUAL
insis i on
your civil rights
tat U-jT T^^S« 31
