StateS Ofbondage m by Manfred Nowak
28
TORTURE is one of the most barbaric acts of
state repression, and it constitutes a direct
and deliberate attack on the core of the
human personality. Like slavery, it is an expres¬
sion of the almost unlimited power of one indi¬
vidual over another. In the case of slavery, the
human being is degraded to the condition of a
non-human object deprived of legal personality.
Torture aims to destroy human dignity and
reduce the victim to the status of a passive tool in
the hands of the torturer.
In ancient and medieval times in Europe, tor¬
ture was employed to aggravate criminal pun
ishments usually the death penalty and to
extort confessions. Its use was an officially
accepted and legally regulated aspect of the crim¬
inal justice system.
Torture was officially abolished in all European
countries between 1750 and 1830. Like the aboli¬
tion of slavery, its suppression was the fruit of
the humanism and rationalism of the Enlighten¬
ment. Although torture continued to be applied
behind prison walls, there were comparably few
allegations of its systematic use in the late nine¬
teenth and early twentieth centuries. Whereas
slavery and the slave trade were explicitly pro-

Torture is a crime in
international law but it
is widely practised.
What can he done to
bring the cidprits to
book?
Left, A scene of the
Inquisition,
by Francisco de Goya y
Lucientes (1746-1828).
Right, Slave (1948),
by the Mexican painter
José Clemente Orozco.
hibited by a number of bilateral and multilateral
treaties culminating in the 1926 Slavery Conven¬
tion, torture was so much regarded as a phenom¬
enon of the past that neither international human
rights law nor even most domestic bills of rights
of this period contained explicit prohibitions.
Under National Socialism in Germany and
Stalinism in the U.S.S.R. torture was again prac¬
tised in a systematic, albeit clandestine manner. It
acquired a new rationale as a means of state
repression against political, ethnic and religious
"enemies of the people". As well as being used as
a punishment and in obtaining confessions, tor¬
ture now served additional functions: the extor¬
tion of denunciations and other information
about third persons, intimidation and discour¬
agement of the victim, and the creation of a gen¬
eral atmosphere of fear as a violent means of
deterrence and repression.
Since these modern functions proved to be
fairly efficient in combatting criminality and ter¬
rorism as well as "subversion" and other oppo¬
sition tendencies, torture unfortunately began
to spread again after the Second World War, to
such an extent that it is now sometimes referred
to as "the plague of the twentieth century". It was,
for instance, systematically practised by European
colonial powers against decolonization move¬
ments in the 1950s and 1960s (well-documented
cases include those under French rule in Algeria
and under Portuguese rule in that nation's former
African colonies), under British anti-terrorist
legislation in Northern Ireland, by the Greek
colonels in the late 1960s, by many Latin Amer¬
ican military dictatorships based on the ideology
of "national security", by African dictators, by
communist regimes, and by many other govern¬
ments in many other regions.
What is torture?
The international movement against torture can
only rest on humanitarian grounds and on the
moral, political and legal force of human rights.
In contrast to their practice with regard to torture
in earlier centuries and to most other human
rights violations today, governments now prac¬
tically never admit that they order or even tolerate
its use. Condemnation of these barbaric acts is
universal, which might make the "mobilization of
shame" somewhat easier than, for instance, in
29

IT can be more clearly seen today that we shall solve none of the
world's profound and serious problems without the full
participation of indigenous people, ethnic minorities, the victims
of arbitrary acts and repression, women, widows, children,
displaced persons and other vulnerable elements, of all those who
comprise the vast majority of the poor of our societies and whose
experiences and demands must be taken into account.
It is essential, for the future of humanity, to envisage a new
type of education which conveys the message that indigenous
people and minorities in general demand co-operation from all sec¬
tors of society so as to avoid confrontations, racism and discrimi¬
nation and so that their struggle to achieve full respect for their
rights and their identity may be crowned with success.
Recognition and respect for cultural pluralism are key factors in
the construction of new relations based on equality and peaceful
coexistence between our peoples and the nations of the world.
Rigoberta Menchú
Nobel Peace Prize-winner
SO
MANFRED NOWAK,
Austrian specialist in
constitutional, administrative
and international law, is
director of the Ludwig-
Boltzmann Institute of Human
Rights in Vienna. He was co¬
ordinator of NGO-parallel
events during the World
Conference on Human Rights.
the case of the campaign against capital punish¬
ment. On the other hand, the same fact leads
governments to apply torture primarily in remote
and clandestine detention centres on prisoners
who are held incommunicado, which makes the
gathering of evidence about its use usually very
difficult. It also increases the risk of victims being
killed after having being subjected to torture.
Torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman
and degrading treatment or punishment are pro¬
hibited in various international treaties and
agreements generally considered to have the
force of law, among them the Geneva Conven¬
tions of 1949, the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights of 1966 (CCPR), the
1984 UN Convention against Torture (CAT),
the 1950 European Convention on Human
Rights, the American Convention on Human
Rights of 1969, and the African Charter on
Human and Peoples' Rights of 1981. In addition
article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights of 1948 is generally regarded as part of
customary international law. The Vienna Dec¬
laration and Programme of Action again con¬
firmed in the strongest terms that freedom from
torture is a right that must be protected under all
circumstances.
Despite this impressive evidence regarding
the universality of the right to freedom from tor¬
ture, doubts remain as to whether this universal



standard can be applied equally to all political sys¬
tems, religious and cultural groups. The govern¬
ments of certain states claim that amputations
and similar forms of corporal punishment pro¬
vided for by Islamic law do not contravene the
right to freedom from torture. While feminist
groups around the world denounce female cir¬
cumcision as a form of torture prohibited under
international law, many Africans view the prac¬
tice as an expression of their traditional culture.
Similarly, the admissible minimum standard of
prison conditions is said to depend on the cultural
background as well as the socio-economic devel¬
opment of the respective country.
These examples show that even an absolute
right such as freedom from torture may be rela¬
tivized as a result of the different interpretations
given to the term in different cultures. Even in a
single cultural environment, opinions as to what
constitutes torture can differ considerably. In
the case of Northern Ireland, the European Com¬
mission of Human Rights considered the so-
called five techniques used by British security
forces during interrogation (hooding detainees,
subjecting them to constant and intense noise,
depriving them of sleep and sufficient food and
drink, and making them stand for long periods on
their toes against a wall in a painful posture) as
torture; but the European Court of Human
Rights viewed them only as inhuman treatment.
The drafters of the 1984 UN Convention
against Torture (CAT) aimed at solving the
problem of defining a universal minimum stan¬
dard of unacceptable behaviour by elaborating a
precise definition of torture. According to Article
1 of the Convention, torture is an act of public
officials that intentionally inflicts severe physical
or mental pain in order to fulfil a certain purpose,
such as the extortion of information or confes¬
sions. The concept of severe pain is itself of course
partly subjective.
The CAT definition further excludes "pain or
suffering arising only from, inherent in or inci¬
dental to lawful sanctions". This limitation has
been heavily criticized as an unacceptable loop¬
hole. Who is to decide whether a sanction such as
corporal punishment is lawful? If cultural diver¬
sity is to be taken into account, the obvious
answer would be the domestic legislature
involved. Yet to leave the question exclusively
with national authorities would strip the right to
freedom from torture of its regulatory function.
In the circumstances, it is hard not to agree with
the observation of the Special Rapporteur on
Torture, whose post was created by the UN
Commission on Human Rights in 1985, that "it

is international law and not domestic law which
ultimately determines whether a certain practice
may be regarded as lawful".
In defining torture and other forms of
inhuman treatment or punishment, one therefore
has to strike a careful balance between the need
for common universal minimum standards and
the requirement to take political, social, religious
and cultural particularities into account. This
can only be done on a case-by-case basis by the
competent international bodies. In cases involving
certain dictatorships such as that which formerly
existed in Uruguay, the Human Rights Com¬
mittee of the United Nations found that inter¬
rogation techniques that included systematic
beatings, electric shocks, burns, mock execu¬
tions, hanging prisoners for extended periods by
their arms or forcing their heads under water
constituted torture and violated Article 7 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights.
By these universal standards, there can be no
doubt that the more severe forms of corporal
punishment practised under certain religious laws,
including amputation and stoning, would con¬
stitute inhuman or cruel punishment or even tor¬
ture. Whether states under present international
law are under a positive obligation to prohibit
female circumcision is more difficult to judge.
Since these traditional practices inflict severe phys¬
ical and mental pain on the girls and women con¬
cerned and are, moreover, discriminatory on the
ground of gender, states should at least try to pre¬
vent them by educational and similar means.
Torture and human rights
Since most cases of torture take place in detention
and/or are related to criminal proceedings, an
indivisible relationship exists between freedom
from torture, personal liberty and the right to a
fair trial. To strengthen the guarantees of these
other human rights may, therefore, have the indi¬
rect effect of preventing or reducing the occur¬
rence of torture. Consequently, states should
ensure the following minimum guarantees, which
are not dependent on the political, social or cul¬
tural background of the country concerned:
The absolute prohibition of incommunicado
detention;
The right of arrested persons to immediately
contact relatives, a lawyer and a doctor;
The right of arrested persons to be brought
promptly (within forty-eight hours of arrest) to
a judge and to have a medical examination by an
independent doctor;
Supervision of interrogations by an indepen¬
dent authority;
Prohibition of the use of statements obtained
by torture as evidence before courts.
Some of these standards can be derived from
present international law; others should be
added as a means to prevent torture. Another
provision that links freedom from torture with
personal liberty is the right of detained persons
under Article 10 of the Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights to be treated with humanity
and dignity. This right provides a guarantee
against harsh prison conditions that nonetheless
do not amount to inhuman or degrading treat¬
ment as defined by Article 7. Again, what is
considered inhuman will reflect a country's cul¬
tural background.
Nevertheless, the United Nations has adopted
standard minimum rules for the treatment of
prisoners. In one recent case, the UN Human
Rights Committee even found that allowances of
just five minutes a day for personal hygiene and
for open-air exercise constitute inhuman prison
conditions. Since it had already earlier expressed
the view that states must establish a minimum
standard of conditions of detention regardless
of economic difficulties, this comparatively high
standard will have to be applied equally in all
States Parties to the Covenant.
In view of the fact that, despite its unanimous,
runeral of the black
leader Steve Biko, who had
died in detention. (South
Africa, 1977).
31

absolute and universal condemnation, torture was
practised on such an unprecedented scale in the
1970s, Amnesty International, the International
Commission ofJurists and other NGOs called for
more efficient and innovative implementation
measures. In fact the traditional monitoring mech¬
anisms under the terms of the Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and regional conventions
only apply retrospectively, usually years after the
actual violation has taken place, and offer little
relief to the victim. A person under imminent
threat of torture needs either immediate inter¬
vention or else international measures that effec¬
tively deter potential perpetrators.
A victim of repression by
the Securitate (secret
police) in 1 989, at the time
of the fall of the Ceausescu
regime in Romania.
Current trends
The main thrust of the Convention against Tor¬
ture is the punishment of torturers by means of
the criminal law. States Parties are obliged to
treat all acts of torture as criminal offences, and



to assign appropriate penalties for them. The
CAT provides for universal jurisdiction, which
means that torturers can be detained, prosecuted
and punished in all States Parties regardless of the
nationality of the torturer or his victims or the ter¬
ritory in which the act of torture was perpe¬
trated. In addition to the traditional monitoring
procedures, Article 20 of the CAT authorizes
the Committee against Torture in cases of alleged
systematic torture to carry out confidential
enquiries, including visits to the territory of the
state concerned if it gives its consent.
The experiences of the first six years of CAT s
implementation have not been particularly encour-
311
aging. States are extremely hesitant about applying
universal criminal jurisdiction against foreign
nationals, and the Committee against Torture
seems to be more occupied with its traditional
task of examining state reports than with adopting
a new and more efficient approach. However, in
November 1993 the Committee issued for the
first time a public statement in which it confirmed
the practice of torture in Turkey.
The Special Rapporteur on Torture has a
worldwide mandate to examine questions rele¬
vant to torture and to report on its occurrence and
on the extent to which it was practised in all
countries. His activities consist of communi¬
cating with governments on questions relating to
torture, launching urgent appeals when he
receives information that a person is at risk,
paying visits to countries which invite him for
consultation, analysing the phenomenon of tor¬
ture and the root causes conducive to it, and rec¬
ommending measures for improvement.
To permit more efficient action to prevent
torture, the Special Rapporteur time and again
stressed the need for a universal system of pre¬
ventive visits to places of detention. This system,
originally proposed byJean-Jacques Gautier and
the Swiss Committee against Torture, is based on
a very simple idea: states should give an interna¬
tional body the right to carry out visits to places
within their jurisdiction where persons are
deprived of their liberty by a public authority.
This international body would then draw up a
report on its findings and make the necessary
recommendations. The mere fact of an interna¬
tional body having the right to inspect places of
detention without giving previous notice would
presumably have a deterrent effect on those
responsible for torture.
Thus far, the fear that such a system would
interfere too much with states' internal affairs
has prevented its adoption at the universal level.
That is why the Council of Europe took up the
idea and adopted, in 1987, the European Con¬
vention for the Prevention of Torture, which fol¬
lows the lines described above, and entered into
force in 1989. The European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture has made a very dynamic
start by carrying out regular visits to all States Par¬
ties and by submitting very thorough and critical
reports with detailed recommendations, which are
taken seriously by governments.
On the basis of these encouraging experi¬
ences, efforts to establish a similar non-juridical
and non-bureaucratic system at the universal
level also have gained force in recent times. In
1992, the Commission on Human Rights setup
an open-ended intersessional working group in
order to elaborate a drafL Optional Protocol to the
UN Convention against Torture. InJune 1993 the
Vienna World Conference on Human Rights
reaffirmed that efforts to eradicate torture should,
first and foremost, be concentrated on prevention
and therefore called for the early adoption of
this draft. 0
