lortrait of Niccolo
Machiavelli (detail) by
Santidi Tito (1536-1603).



Free speechdemocracy 's
by Helen Darbishire
Censorship as a threat to human rights
18
THE ancients, especially the Greeks and the
Romans of the early Republic, wrote
choice phrases in defence of the right to
freedom of expression. Demosthenes, for
example, declared that no greater calamity could
befall a people than "the privation of free
speech". But there is no evidence that, in even
Greece's most libertarian periods, opinions
could be expressed verbally or written with
impunity. Plato relates how Socrates was pun¬
ished by the freedom-loving Athenians for the
crime of subversive utterances. And Plato him¬
self was an exponent of censorship. "The poet
shall compose nothing contrary to the ideas of
the lawful, or just, or beautiful, or good, which
are allowed in the state," he wrote. "Nor shall he
be permitted to show his compositions to any
private individual, until he shall have shown
them to the appointed censors and guardians of
the law, and they are satisfied with them."
Nevertheless, the fundamental nature of
freedom of expression has been recognized by
many societies throughout the ages. For
instance, a fifteenth-century Kazakh law of the
Steppes stated that you may chop off a man's
head but you may not cut out his tongue. Such
a philosophy is perhaps not so far removed
from an English pamphleteer's cri de coeur of
1721 that "Where a man cannot call his tongue
his own, he can scarce call anything his own."
Censorship, including self-censorship, was
often regarded as an acceptable part of the
process of free speech rather than its enemy.
Machiavelli epitomized the attitudes of the
Renaissance when he qualified the right of every
man to "think all things, speak all things, write
all things", by asserting that Princes should be
talked of with "reserve and respect". And even
John Milton, who in 1644 thundered in his
acclaimed Areopagitica, "Give me liberty to
know, to utter and to argue freely according to
conscience, above all liberties", became
Cromwell's official censor.
It was in the Enlightenment of the eigh¬
teenth century that tolerance, based on the idea
that there is no such thing as an absolute truth,
began to take hold. This gave rise to a belief in
liberty and is best embodied in Voltaire's famous
statement "I disapprove of what you say but I
will defend to the death your right to say it."

Constitutional changes introducing new
ideas of personal liberty often followed histor¬
ical discontinuities such as civil wars or revolu¬
tions. In 1688, the year of the "glorious" revo¬
lution, the British parliament had enacted a "Bill
of Rights" and the process reached its climax at
the end of the eighteenth century, with the rebel¬
lion of Britain's American colonies and the
French Revolution. In each case, the successful
rebels saw merit in enshrining in one or more
great texts the Declaration of Independence
and the Bill of Rights in America, the Declara¬
tion of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen in
France values which had inspired them in the
struggle against their respective anciens régimes.
These texts showed a significant evolution in
political philosophy. For the first time they set
forth principles recognizable today as proposi¬
tions of modern human rights law. The rights,
including that of expression, were described as
freedoms: they fell beyond the scope of regula¬
tion or interference by the state, whether
through the enactment of law or otherwise.
Many subsequent constitutions were modelled
on these principles.
The role of technology
The battle for freedom of expression and infor¬
mation, unlike that for other rights, has been as
closely tied to technological developments as to
cultural changes developments which pro-
Young resistance
fighters in Prague at the
time of the invasion of
Czechoslovakia by
Warsaw Pact troops in
August 1968.
voked censorship as often as they advanced the
cause of freedom. The invention of the printing
press by Johann Gutenberg in Germany in 1440
immediately brought restrictions on dissemina¬
tion of ideas in written form. In the English-
speaking world it was not until about 1700 that
the concept of a right to print had been estab¬
lished, and newspaper editors fought for another
century to gain acceptance of the right to criticize.
A second revolution in communications began
in the mid-nineteenth century with the invention
of the telegraph and the electrification of com¬
munications which greatly increased the flow of
information and within a few years spawned the
first news agency (Associated Press in the United
States). This revolution has continued during the
twentieth century with the spread of radio and
television, facsimile machines, computers and
satellites. Through the airwaves and down tele¬
phone lines, individuals now have greater freedom
than ever before to send and receive ideas and
information. But at the same time there are greater
possibilities for sophisticated control and manip¬
ulation of information.
State control of the mass media for war-mon-
gering and racial propagandizing was a feature of
the genocide and other massive human rights vio¬
lations committed during the Second World War.
In the aftermath of the war, freedom of expression
was recognized by the countries represented at the
founding of the United Nations as one of the
fundamental democratic values necessary for the
peaceful coexistence of nations. Thus it was given
the highest status in the 1948 Universal Declara¬
tion of Human Rights by being included in the
preamble as one of the four essential freedoms:
"human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech and
belief and freedom from fear and want." It is also
set forth in Article 19 of the Declaration which



states: "Everyone has the right to freedom of
opinion and expression; this right includes freedom
to hold opinions without interference and to seek,
receive and impart information and ideas through
any media regardless of frontiers."
Expression:
indivisible from other rights
Freedom of expression is a fundamental right
which is indivisible from other human rights. In
other words it is a right which is necessary for
the enjoyment and protection of other rights.
Without freedom of expression and access to
information one cannot participate in national
debate about government economic policies or
gain the information vital to protect one's health;
without free speech one cannot speak out against 19

violations such as torture, disappearances and
extra-judicial executions.
At its most extreme, censorship threatens the
right to life. Sometimes this is a direct threat when
murder is used as a sanction against those who
express their opinions. But there are many other
ways in which censorship can kill. Millions of
deaths from starvation have been linked to delib¬
erate concealment of information. Denied a voice
by repressive governments, the starving could
not cry out to the world; deprived of information,
the international community could not respond to
their plight in adequate time to save lives. By con¬
trast, in countries where a relatively free press
regularly addresses the issue of food shortages,
major famines have not arisen in recent years.
The right to health is also jeopardized by
censorship. In some countries government inter¬
ference with information about Aids, other sex¬
ually transmitted diseases and the benefits of
using condoms is contributing to the sickness
and early deaths of millions.
Protection of the environment is equally
dependent on freedom of information and expres¬
sion. Without information about environmental
damage, such as the scale of rainforest depletion
or toxic waste deposits, it is impossible to mount
effective campaigns in defence of our natural
heritage. Environmental protesters are often
silenced, censored or even murdered.
There is now a widespread recognition that
respect for civil and political rights is crucial to sus¬
tainable development and the advance of eco¬
nomic, social and cultural rights. Arguments by
some governments that freedom of expression is



'THE COMMUNALITY OF FREEDOM'
It is freedom of expression that guarantees the rights of individuals,
minorities, the collective and the community. Any suggestion that
freedom of expression is a luxury of the West insults the historic
struggles of individuals and communities all over the world for the dig¬
nity and well-being of their kind, for social fulfilment, equality of
opportunity, equitable sharing of resources, access to shelter, nour¬
ishment and health. Such claims are an attempt to diminish our
humanity, to reduce us to marginal existence even within our own
societies. It is a clear vote for the party of Power against the com-
munality of Freedom.
Wole Soyinka
Nigerian writer
Nobel laureate in literature
a luxury to be granted once development has been
achieved have been exposed for what they are:
pretexts for retaining power and denying democ¬
racy. This recognition has yet to be translated
into real support for the development of infor¬
mation systems: the development aid budgets of
industrialized countries give no more than 0.4
per cent to information and communication.
Duties and responsibilities
Freedom of expression is a universal right. Uni¬
versality is often challenged by countries whose
system of government is based on adherence
Opposite page,
aborigines demonstrating
on the occasion of the
bicentenary ( 1 988) of the
British presence in
Australia.
Below, Sandinistas
demonstrating in Managua
(Nicaragua) after their
party's defeat at the polls.
20

to one particular religion or ideology, or which
prefer to govern without having to take into
account the will of the people. In such countries
free speech, particularly for those whose opin¬
ions run counter to the dominant ideology, is the
first right to be curtailed.
Indivisible, universal and fundamental,



freedom of expression is not, however, an absolute
right. This means that unlike the rights to be
free from torture, summary execution or pro¬
longed arbitrary detention the right to freedom
of expression may be subjected to restrictions in
certain narrowly defined circumstances. The Inter¬
national Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
states that freedom of opinion is absolute and
may not be interfered with, but freedom of expres¬
sion and information "carries with it special duties
and responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to
certain restrictions, but these shall only be such as
are provided by law and are necessary:
a) For respect of the rights of others;
b) For the protection of national security
or of public order {ordre public), or of public
health or morals."
These conditions may appear to be suitably
narrow, but in the words of a 1992 UN report on
freedom of opinion and expression: "History
teaches that restrictions have an unfortunate
tendency to spread beyond the limits within
which they were originally conceived." The
task of defending individuals against govern¬
ments who overstep the mark, or who flout
international law completely, falls largely upon
non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
In 1986 a new international NGO was
founded with a mandate to defend victims of
censorship and to promote freedom of expres¬
sion. Taking its name from the relevant article of
the Universal Declaration, ARTICLE 19, the
International Centre Against Censorship, works
to oppose both the practice of censorship and the
laws which allow it to be imposed. One can
campaign for the release of an individual or for
the unbanning of a newspaper, but the threat of
future censorship remains as long as the laws
which allowed these actions to take place remain.
New trends in censorship
Campaigning for freedom of expression requires
alertness to new forms of censorship, new trends
in government repression. A recent example of this
is the rise in sedition cases in several countries of
HELEN DARBISHIRE,
of the United Kingdom, is
Campaigns Officer for
ARTICLE 19, the International
Centre against Censorship,
based in London. She is
responsible for designing and
implementing campaigns
against violations of the right
to freedom of expression at a
national and international level. 21

§the South which, often under international pres¬
sure, have been forced towards multi-party sys¬
tems of government and to respect the rule of
law. Increased use of criminal law to restrict
freedom of expression, such as by charging jour¬
nalists and opposition politicians with sedition, is
a clear indication of the lack of commitment of
many entrenched regimes to permit true democ¬
racy to take root. This trend is often paralleled by
informal measures, including the use of hit squads
to attack and intimidate government critics.
Another area which poses complex problems
for anti-censorship organizations is the continuing
rise of fundamentalism in many religions. The
threat which fundamentalism poses to freedom of
expression takes many forms, from political
expression to the rights of women, including the
right of access to jobs, to participate in the cultural
and political life of their societies and to dress as
they choose. But at the same time this threat must
not be used to justify censorship in the name of the
war against fundamentalism.
Gathering information about abuses of
freedom of expression has been greatly aided by
the creation in 1992 of an electronic network
linking freedom of expression groups around
the world. The International Freedom of Expres¬
sion eXchange (IFEX), based in Toronto (Canada),
uses electronic mail to disseminate information
about censorship incidents often within hours,
enabling rapid and co-ordinated protest actions.
It is a clear example of information technology
being used as a tool for for good in the fight
against censorship.
Two recent developments demonstrate an
increasing recognition of the importance of the



UNESCO AND THE DEFENCE
OF FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
UNESCO is closely involved in programmes to promote the growth of
communication systems in developing countries. In 1991 it held a
conference in Namibia which brought together journalists from across
the continent to discuss the legal and economic conditions necessary
for an independent and pluralistic press. The "Windhoek Declara¬
tion" adopted by this conference has rapidly become a standard text for
identifying the needs of media in developing countries.
A follow-up conference in Kazakhstan in 1992 brought together
print and broadcast journalists from across Asia from Turkey to
Fiji. The "Alma Ata Declaration" resoundingly endorsed the principles
of Windhoek and restated the belief that the development of free and
independent means of expression is vital to the building of democracy.
The United Nations has declared 3 May the anniversary of the
Windhoek Declaration as International Press Freedom Day. It is an
annual reminder of the central role the media play in promoting and
protecting other human rights.
right to freedom of expression. One is the
appointment by the UN in 1993 of a Special
Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression whose
mandate includes receiving complaints about
violations from individuals and NGOs and
raising these with the governments involved. The
other is the declaration by the UN of 3 May each
year as International Press Freedom Day.
22
Recording studio of Radio
Pachamama, an Aymara
broadcasting station in La
Paz (Bolivia).
