
The Bangkok
Declaration
Regional Meeting for Asia
The Ministers and representatives of Asian
States, meeting at Bangkok from 29 March
to 2 April 1993, pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 46/1 16 of 17 December
1991 in the context of preparations for the
World Conference on human rights,
Adopt this Declaration, to be known as
"The Bangkok Declaration", which con¬
tains the aspirations and commitments of
the Asian region:
1. Reaffirm their commitment to the prin¬
ciples contained in the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Decla¬
ration of Human Rights as well as the full
realization of all human rights throughout
the world;
_ _ 2. Underline the essential need to create
TT T" favourable conditions for effective enjoy
ment of human rights at both the national
and international levels;
3. Stress the urgent need to democratize the
United Nations system, eliminate selec¬
tivity and improve procedures and mech¬
anisms in order to strengthen international
co-operation, based on principles of
equality and mutual respect, and ensure a
positive, balanced and non-confrontational
approach in addressing and realizing all
aspects of human rights;
4. Discourage any attempt to use human
rights as a conditionality for extending
development assistance;
5. Emphasize the principles of respect for
national sovereignty and territorial
integrity as well as non-interference in the
internal affairs of States, and the non-use of
human rights as an instrument of polit¬
ical pressure;
6. Reiterate that all countries, large and
small, have the right to determine their
political systems, control and freely utilize
their resources, and freely pursue their eco¬
nomic, social and cultural development;
7. Stress the universality, objectivity and
non-selectivity of all human rights and the
need to avoid the application of double
standards in the implementation of human
rights and its politicization, and that no
violation of human rights can be justified;
8. Recognize that while human rights are
universal in nature, they must be consid¬
ered in the context of a dynamic and
evolving process of international norm-
setting, bearing in mind the significance of
national and regional particularities and
various historical, cultural and religious
backgrounds;
9. Recognize further that States have the
primary responsibility for the promotion
and protection of human rights through
appropriate infrastructure and mecha¬
nisms, and also recognize that remedies
must be sought and provided primarily
through such mechanisms and procedures;
10. Reaffirm the interdependence and indi¬
visibility of economic, social, cultural, civil
and political rights, and the need to give
equal emphasis to all categories of human
rights;
17. Reaffirm the right to development, as
established in the Declaration on the Right
to Development, as a universal and inalien¬
able right and an integral part of funda¬
mental human rights, which must be real¬
ized through international co-operation,
respect for fundamental human rights, the
establishment of a monitoring mechanism
and the creation of essential international
conditions for the realization of such right;
18. Recognize that the main obstacles to
the realization of the right to development
lie at the international macroeconomic level,
as reflected in the widening gap between the
North and the South, the rich and the poor;
1 9. Affirm that poverty is one of the major
obstacles hindering the full enjoyment of
human rights;
22. Reaffirm their strong commitment to
the promotion and protection of the rights
of women through the guarantee of equal
participation in the political, social, eco¬
nomic and cultural concerns of society,
and the eradication of all forms of dis¬
crimination and of gender-based violence
against women;
23. Recognize the rights of the child to
enjoy special protection and to be afforded
the opportunities and facilities to develop
physically, mentally, morally, spiritually
and socially in a healthy and normal manner
and in conditions of freedom and dignity;
29. Stress the importance of strengthening
the United Nations Centre for Human
Rights with the necessary resources to
enable it to provide a wide range of advi¬
sory services and technical assistance pro¬
grammes in the promotion of human rights
to requesting States in a timely and effec¬
tive manner, as well as to enable it to
finance adequately other activities in the
field of human rights authorized by com¬
petent bodies;
30. Call for increased representation of
the developing countries in the Centre for
Human Rights.

