Justice (1 990), a sculpture
by the French artist Niki
de Saint-Phalle, was one of
a number of works by
contemporary artists sold
in aid of Amnesty
International, founded in
1 96 1 , to mark its thirtieth
anniversary.



Seedphtfor thefuture Iby Stéphane Hessel
The results of the Vienna
Conference will take
time to bearfruit
Hi
1 ow do the results of the Vienna Confer¬
ence look today, several months after the
.meeting ended?
The most disappointing thing about the Con¬
ference was that it failed to make a significant
impact on public opinion. At the time the media
were too absorbed by the Bosnian drama and the
inability of the international community to bring
it under control for them to give the speeches
made in Vienna the coverage they deserved.
The best efforts of the Austrian Govern¬
ment, thanks to which the Dalai Lama was in
attendance at the Conference, the strongly
expressed, and sometimes persuasive, opinions
voiced by the leading figures invited by the Sec¬
retary-General of the United Nations, including
Cory Aquino, Jimmy Carter, Rigoberta
Menchú, Wole Soyinka and others, and the tur¬
bulent scenes that occurred daily in the non-gov¬
ernmental organizations' Forum none of these
sufficed to arouse journalists' interest. Maybe
they would have liked to regale their audiences
with stories of confrontations between the
democracies and the dictatorships, but such
confrontations failed to materialize.
One needs to have followed the development
of international relations in the area of human
rights to be able to pick out, as I shall attempt to 33

34
STEPHANE HESSEL,
French diplomat, was formerly
his country's permanent
representative at the United
Nations in Geneva. He headed
the French delegation at the
World Conference on Human



do here, the significant new elements that
emerged from the Conference.
The previous world conference on human
rights was held in Tehran in 1968, the year of
the short-lived "Prague spring", when East-West
antagonism was at its height. The Vienna Con¬
ference enjoyed the advantage of meeting in a
radically different context in which, with the col¬
lapse of the last of the great empires and the rap¬
prochement between its main successor state,
Russia, and the Western democracies, a whole
new perception of international co-operation is
taking shape.
One-party regimes have everywhere been
routed or at least challenged, as witness many
examples in eastern Europe and others in Latin
America and the Caribbean, Southeast Asia and
several African countries. The prosperity of those
countries where democracy is underpinned by the
rule of law and respect for individual liberties
stands in stark contrast to the impoverished con¬
dition that the peeling façades of the authori¬
tarian regimes can no longer disguise.
Rights.
The right to development
Two arguments have been rebutted: the one
claiming that "development" reduced to a mere
synonym of growth in the gross national
product could more readily be achieved by
constraint than by consent among the individual
interests involved and requires a centrally
directed distribution of resources; and the other
regarding "democracy" reduced to the pres¬
ence of a multiparty systemas a luxury only
rich countries can afford. In point of fact, a linkage
has been established, both in the East and in the
South, between the market economy and respect
for individual liberties, the challenging of the
leadership and accession to material well-being.
While there can be no question of taking the
regulatory mechanisms necessary for ensuring the
public good out of the hands of the state, only a
state wherein the rule of law, issuing from demo¬
cratic processes of consultation, prevails can per¬
form that role. Breaches of human rights and
oppression exerted by force of arms or by means
of the police arc seen for what they are, serious
obstacles to economic and social development.
Conversely, "underdevelopment", mani¬
festing itself in the form of drastic insufficiencies
in such vital areas as health, food and urban
development, and resulting in the exploitation of
children and corruption in the ranks of an under¬
paid civil service and a poorly trained magistracy,
provides a fertile breeding-ground for viola¬
tions of civil and political rights and at the same
time slows down the necessary process of raising
civic awareness and creating a civil society
capable of conducting a dialogue with the state.
Economic and social development clearly has a
crucial part to play in the establishment of insti¬
tutions for the safeguarding of human rights.
There thus exists, not only on paper but in
reality, a dialectical relationship between the
three themes of human rights, democracy and
development on which the Vienna Conference
was focused.
Each of these needed, however, to be inter¬
preted in the light of recent history: human
rights include not only civil and political rights
but also, inseparable from them, economic,
social and cultural rights. Democracy entails
not only the existence of constitutional guar¬
antees but also the establishment of the rule of
law, together with the system of justice and the
appeals procedures needed to enforce it for the
benefit of the citizen. Development means not
only the increased production and consumption
of material goods but also improved living con¬
ditions for the population as a whole in eco¬
nomic, social and cultural terms.
Development in this sense is an inalienable
right. The definition given in the Declaration
adopted by the Conference (see page 41, Article
10) deserves to be expounded in greater detail
and seen in the light of the many studies carried
out by all the specialized agencies of the United
Nations family. The industrial powers hitherto
regarded the "right to development" simply as
an impossible demand on the part of the poor
countries for ever-increasing aid from the rich
ones. They need to show a better understanding
of the place it occupies in a world strategy that
takes fuller account of the inescapable relation¬
ships of interdependence between civil and polit¬
ical rights and economic, social and cultural
rights.
It was on this level that the real breakthrough
came at the Conference. We managed to recon¬
cile the contrasting views of states belonging
to different cultures cultures all equally proud
of their fundamental values in a text wherein
they reached agreement on a common definition
of the universality of human dignity and the
imprescriptible nature of human rights: what
the United Nations Secretary-General, Boutros
Boutros Ghali, called the emergence of a "world
culture of human rights". The hope that this
culture will gradually spread to the whole of
the planet is replacing the former antagonistic
ideologies as a new Utopia to be striven for.
Despite the strong misgivings of certain states,
breakdown was avoided and the final document,
adopted by acclamation on 25 June, gives away
nothing essential in relation to that hope. Those
who feared a breakdown were reassured for the
time being, albeit on the understanding that they
must pursue their efforts unrelentingly. Those
who, on the other hand, hoped for a breakdown,
either because they wanted to smash what they
denounced as a hegemony of Western values or
because they wished to blacklist the countries

that were least co-operative and were guilty of the
most serious violations, were disappointed in
their hopes.
One of the most interesting speeches made in
this connection was that of the Indonesian For¬
eign Minister, Ali Alatas, whose country at pre¬
sent occupies the presidency of the non-aligned
movement. He denied the Western countries the
right to impose on others, in the name of human
rights, their system of values, which he denounced
as being flawed and rejected as being arrogant, at
the same time declaring that every effort should
be made, by means of a form of co-operation
that paid respect to cultural diversity, to achieve
the full flowering of the human being.
Aprogramme ofaction
An equally important speech was given by Sec¬
retary of State Warren Christopher, taking
United States diplomacy a decisive step for¬
ward in the direction of the countries of the
South. Acknowledging the right to develop¬
ment as an inalienable right means recognizing,
not that such a right takes precedence over
respect for civil and political rights, but that it
merits an effort of international solidarity to
enable all societies to become states where "the
rule of law" prevails, guaranteeing fundamental
freedoms and a peaceful world order.
By refusing to confine itself to a statement of
principles, as some delegations would have liked,
and adopting a substantial programme of action,
the Conference mapped out ways of strength¬
ening the many mechanisms devised by the
United Nations Commission on Human Rights
at its last three sessions. Above all, it called for
the promotion and protection of human rights
to be included among the concerns of the inter¬
national co-operation system as a whole.
Steps had already been taken in this direction.
In 1992, the Commission held two special ses¬
sions on the former Yugoslavia. At these sessions
new texts on minorities, enforced disappear¬
ances, indigenous peoples and arbitrary deten¬
tion were adopted, and bodies were set up for
the protection and promotion of human rights
in El Salvador, Cambodia and Haiti. Amnesty
International had no hesitation in calling the
progress made in that year "historic".
Where do the states concerned stand in rela¬
tion to this progress? Many of the states that
were represented at the Conference remain more
fearful of interference by an international insti¬
tution in their internal problems than appre¬
ciative of the help such an institution offers
them to solve those problems, and this despite
Uemonstration in .
Guatemala City, capital of
Guatemala, calling for
greater participation by
civil society in the peace
process.
35

the great skill with which this offer was made by
the Conference's Secretary-General, Ibrahima
Fall, who heads the United Nations Centre for
Human Rights in Geneva.
The two key questions put before the United
Nations General Assembly by the final document
of the Conference were those of the human and
financial resources of the Geneva Centre, which
were to be substantially increased, and of the
status of the senior official in charge of it.
By resolution 141 adopted on 22 December
1993, as its forty-eighth session was drawing to
a close, the Assembly pronounced itself in favour
of creating a post of High Commissioner for
Human Rights. It decided that the Office of the
High Commissioner should be located in Geneva,
and that the High Commissioner should be
responsible for overall supervision of the Centre
for Human Rights.
The resolution gives the High Commis¬
sioner extensive, well defined terms of refer¬
ence, in keeping with the wishes expressed by
the Vienna Conference, thus representing an
undeniable success for those who defend human
rights throughout the world.
In the paragraph dealing with the Centre's
resources, on the other hand, the resolution,
without going into further detail, limits itself to
requesting the Secretary-General, "to provide
appropriate staff and resources from within the
existing and future regular budgets of the United
Nations, to enable the High Commissioner to
fulfil his/her mandate, without diverting
resources from the development programme
and activities of the United Nations".
In regard to these two key issues, it will be
for Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali to decide how
best to ensure that the impetus provided by the
Vienna meeting and indeed by the 1992 Rio
meeting is followed through in practice.
The pressure ofcivil society
The caution shown by states on human rights
questions should come as no surprise. It is, on the
other hand, encouraging to see how the activities
of the various associations, federations, commit¬
tees and commissions for the defence of human
rights, increasingly numerous in every part of
the world, are growing in strength.
The question as to how these bodies could
play an effective part in the deliberations of the
Vienna Conference was one of those most hotly
debated during the meeting of its Preparatory
Commission and was still giving rise to heated
controversy before and after the official opening
of the Conference itself.
The "voice of the peoples" was being given
free, often sharply controversial, expression at the
NGOs' Forum, but how was it to make itself
heard in the intergovernmental deliberations on
a document entailing commitments on the part of
the states represented? In the first instance, the
Women protesting in
Moscow (Russia) in 1992
against official silence over
the disappearances of
Russian servicemen.
two thousand or so Forum participants had to
reach agreement on the proposals put forward in
their name. Notwithstanding the conflicts,
moments of high drama and outbursts of passion,
the NGOs succeeded in doing so.
The Conference plenary heard what they had
to say without paying it too much heed. The
plenary commission accorded them plentiful
speaking time but the Drafting Committee closed
its doors to them. In fact, however, all the dele¬
gations kept in constant contact with them. It may
therefore be said that considerable progress was
made in the interpénétration between the official
and unofficial levels, the latter including not only
the non-governmental organizations, with or
without consultative status, but also the National
Commissions, the mediators, the authors of the
special reports and the experts from the bodies
responsible for monitoring the treaties and con¬
ventions, all of whom kept up constant pressure
on the Conference.
The most encouraging thing to report, now
that the Conference itself is over and done with,
is the existence and the strength of this pressure,
even if it is as yet exerted in too unco-ordinated
and sporadic a fashion. It is no longer a phenom¬
enon peculiar to the old democracies, as it was in
the early decades of the United Nations. The
preparatory conferences in Tunis, San José and
Bangkok attested to the fact that civil society in
Africa, Latin America and Asia is a force to be
reckoned with.
The peoples of the world will no longer
leave it to governments alone to realize their
common aspirations less injustice, less oppres¬
sion, greater accountability and less violence. As
the media now present it, this goal seems distant
and unreal; but looking back on the progress
already made, progress that it is up to all of us to
consolidate, we cannot help but believe that it
can, and therefore must, be attained.
