COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR
Sharing the future
m OOKING towards the future, I think UNESCO's
¡y role could be summed up as fighting for human
~3m& dignity and solidarity, both ofwhich are inseparable
from respect for freedom.
North and South alike are doomed not only to suffer
the same endemic ills that go together with underdevel¬
opment but also to consume the same products, whether
they be dreams or material goods, exported by the indus¬
trially developed nations. In both, we are witnessing the
growth of sprawling monster cities, with their mixture of
splendour and squalor, vast agglomerations where alien¬
ation and the worst kind of solitude, that experienced in the
midst of crowds, are rife; where extreme poverty radical¬
izes the emotions and the longing for justice degenerates
into hatred and violence; where the well-to-do, blinkered
by their own affluence, see no promise for the future other
than that held out to them by "market forces" alone.
Well-being, democracy, freedom and education are
not rewards to be conferred by one set of people and
gratefully accepted by another. They develop, find expres¬
sion, take shape and attain fulfilment in each one of us. Sci¬
entific and technological advances are indeed necessary in
order to facilitate this process, but they need to be applied
judiciously and in moderation, since if they go too far
they could have the opposite of the desired effect, lulling
and inhibiting us and making us the slaves of our handi¬
work instead of its masters.
A single read
This is why I would assert that the culture of peace calls,
at all levels of decision-making but especially at the highest
level, for a clearsighted and at the same time open-hearted
perception of the historic change now under way.
We must not cling to the past, merely taking stock
and laying stress on past achievements. Time has become
the most valuable of commodities, and we do not have
enough of it. Since we cannot draw up an inventory before
we set out, we shall have to do so as we go along. We have
to set off on the road to the future, without undue haste but
resolutely the same road for all, not just for a chosen few,
involving a process of change whereby civil society pro¬
gressively comes to occupy those areas of activity that the
state will have to hand over to it. The creation of ever-wider
interfaces, especially at the local level, is absolutely essen¬
tial if, in spite of wounds that are still fresh and painful, there
is to be a reconciliation. Regardless of our different out¬
looks, we must all unite so that our paths converge and
combine into a single road, pluralist and integrated, where
each is mindful of our common future.
We must advance united, or rather reunited, in pursuit
of a grand project to usher in, at the end of the present mil¬
lennium, peaceful coexistence, justice and freedom, world¬
wide interaction and a form of competition that preserves
identities and diversity. History is something to be written
and made, not described and viewed from outside. The sole
protagonists ofprogress and its only beneficiaries must be
human beings individual men and women and it is up
to each and every one of them, exercising their rights to the
full, to shape their own destinies.
It is unimaginable that such a process, whereby each
individual is given a chance to be listened to and to play a
part, could take place in an atmosphere of isolation and dis¬
trust. It calls for a thorough educational approach. As the
great Cuban patriotJosé Martí said with prophetic insight,
"Education means pulling individuals up to the level of their
time".
Ready for dialogue
In the first instance, the lifting of barriers and the removal
of obstacles will allow contacts to be revived and dialogue
to be established as we look to the future. The ideal dialogue
is sometimes said to be that between grandparents, who
have lost their memory, and grandchildren, who do not yet
have memories. We would do better to ensure that our chil¬
dren's memory is not like ours nor like that which our
grandparents have already lost.
Let us open doors instead of shutting them; let us
build bridges instead of destroying them. If we are to be
stubborn, let us be stubborn only in our resolve to engage
in dialogue and in our endeavours to discover new ways and
means. It is impossible to forget, but provided we acknowl¬
edge that those who come after us are the only people
who really matter, that mindfulness of the future should
guide our steps, then we can put the past behind us and
advance together, in step, towards that new age to which
all aspire.
Sharing, talking together, respecting other people and
our environment, all the avenues leading to a future com¬
mensurate with the human condition meet at the same
crossroads, that represented by democracy. Civil society
has to take charge of its own destiny, with the state, hith¬
erto all-powerful and omnipresent, contenting itself from
now on with the role of watchful guardian, ensuring com¬
pliance with the rules that society itself has chosen.
