THE GIFT OF TONGUß
by Stephen Wurm
=SEr5=^^
lO
STEPHEN WURM,
of Australia, is Professor of
Linguistics in the Research
School of Pacific Studies of the
Australian National University
in Canberra. Among his 300
publications are Papuan
Languages of Oceania ( 1 982),
Language Atlas ofthe Pacific Area
(1981-1983) and Language At/as
of China (1987-1990).
N
ORE than 5,000 different languages are
currently spoken in the world, with a
very much larger number of dialects.
Many of them are mutually unintelligible or
virtually so, and are spoken by small groups of
people.
The need for communication across lin¬
guistic and cultural boundaries which has
become even more pressing and widespread in
recent decades as a result of dramatic increases
in the movements of people in many parts of the
world can be met in a number of different
ways. One common method is for speakers of
two different languages that are used adjacently
to each other to learn to speak, at least to some
extent, the language of their neighbours. This is
called active two-way bilingualism. If only one

of two groups that speak different languages
learns the language of its neighbours, this is
called active one-way bilingualism. For instance,
if two neighbouring groups live near 


the
seashore but only one of them has access to the
sea and possesses a commodity such as salt or
fish that the other group is eager to acquire, the
sellers of such commodities are in an economi¬
cally more powerful position than the potential
buyers, and their language takes precedence
over that of the inland tribe when contact occurs.
Ambassadors and negotiators
One interesting case of bilingualism has been
observed among certain traditionally hostile
tribes in Papua New Guinea who speak dif¬
ferent languages but need to communicate with
each other in order to settle disputes. These
tribes customarily exchange children who then
learn the language of the tribe that has adopted
them, in addition to their own. Afterwards,
they act as ambassadors and interpreters, helping
to negotiate settlements or other matters arising
from tribal disputes. Their safety is ensured by
strict laws on both sides.
Members of very small language communi¬
ties which are surrounded by larger linguistic
groups usually learn to speak several of their
neighbours' languages. Such people may play an
important cultural role as interpreters, nego¬
tiators and intermediaries.
Another solution to the intercommunication
problem occurs when the speakers of two or
several closely related neighbouring languages
Above, a dancer ofthe
Trobriand Islands (Papua
New Guinea) during a
festivity associated with
the kula, a ceremonial
form of economic
exchange.
Opposite page, the leader
of a village community at
Ccatca in the department
of Cuzco (Peru) holding his
silver-tipped staff of office.
I I

learn to understand, but not to speak, their
neighbours' languages. Participants in such sit¬
uations speak their own language and are under¬
stood by all their communication partners, and
vice versa. This is called passive bilingualism or
passive multilingualism. It is especially common
between speakers of different Turkic or Mon¬
golian languages in Central Asia, but is also
found in parts of Africa and New Guinea.
Lingua francas
The cases mentioned so far involve languages
that are native to at least one 


of the communi
cating groups. However, there are many situa¬
tions in which languages not native to any of the
speakers are used as a means of intercommuni¬
cation. They occur frequently between speakers
of European and non-European metropolitan
languages, such as when a Frenchman, a Nor¬
wegian, a Hungarian and a Japanese communi¬
cate with each other in English. Such a contact
language used for wider communication is called
a lingua franca.
There are many of these languages in the
world, and they achieve their status for a variety
of reasons, one of which may be that their
It
Left, sports day at a
school in a Paris suburb.
Opposite page, villagers
wall< to the fields on the
island of Java (Indonesia).

speakers possess some appealing cultural features
or achieve cultural or political supremacy, which
makes their language prestigious in the eyes of
speakers of other languages. Many of them
emerge as a result of trading relations in which
the speakers of a given language take their wares
far and wide for sale, and use only their own lan¬
guage, which their customers have to learn, at
least rudimentarily, in order to trade with them.
Examples of such traders' lingua francas are
Kiswahili in East Africa, Bazaar Malay in the
East Indies (though it is now receding before
Indonesian), and several trade languages in the
New Guinea area. In centuries past, Iranian lan¬
guages such as Sogdian and Middle Persian, and
later Modern Persian, were used as trade lingua
francas on the silk route across Asia.



ridgin languages
The majority of such trade lingua francas
become simplified when used as such, but they
continue in their original full form within the
communities that use them as their native
tongues. Some trade languages have become
pidgin languages, that is languages that are
sharply reduced in their grammatical complexity
and vocabulary. Examples include a Russian-
Chinese pidgin used in the Chinese-Russian
border areas in Siberia from the eighteenth to the
twentieth centuries, a number of pidgins devel¬
oped from local indigenous languages in parts of
New Guinea before the time of European con¬
tacts, and an Inuit pidgin used between Inuit and
Alaskan Indians in northern Alaska during the
nineteenth century.
A more common way for a pidgin language
to emerge is as a means of communication when
representatives of a metropolitan culture estab¬
lish a colonial-type rule over indigenous popu¬
lations. Quite often, however, such tongues
become lingua francas that permit wider inter¬
communication between speakers of different
local languages. This is especially true in areas in
which many different tongues are spoken, as is
the case in Papua New Guinea, and parts of
Africa, northern Siberia and South America.
The grammars and sound structures of these
pidgins reflect, in varying degrees, features ofthe
language or languages of the local indigenous
population, while their vocabularies are usu¬
ally, but not always, based on the metropolitan
language with an admixture of indigenous ele¬
ments. Most such pidgins, where they are still
spoken, have become the first language of com¬
munities, replacing their original native lan¬
guages. Such languages are called creóles. 13

There are, however, some parts of the world
in which very prominent and widely-used
pidgin languages have not, or have only to a
very limited extent, replaced local languages.
These areas include New Guinea and regions
adjacent to it, where several large pidgin lan¬
guages play very important roles because of the
enormous multiplicity and diversity of the local
tongues. Nevertheless, the indigenous popula¬
tions adhere tenaciously to their native lan¬
guages, which are their most cherished sym¬
bols of cultural and ethnic identity.
Many pidgin languages that are in close con¬
tact with the metropolitan languages on which
much of their vocabulary is based tend to grad¬
ually approximate to that language in both
vocabulary and grammar and to move towards
that language via what is called the post-pidgin
(or post-creole) stage. Eventually they become
sub-standard forms of the metropolitan lan¬
guage concerned.


iVlessages of religion and power
The so-called mission languages, also known
as church languages, constitute another type of
language of wider intercommunication. These
are local languages originally adopted by Euro¬
pean mission organizations as the vehicle of
their activities. When the missions extended
their work beyond the boundaries of the indige¬
nous language they had adopted, they usually
continued to use the adopted local tongue in the
new areas, making it thereby an artificially-
introduced lingua franca. With the reduction
of missionary work in many parts of the world
and the nativization of religious activities intro¬
duced by Westerners, such languages have in
some cases turned into secular lingua francas.
A somewhat similar situation is that in which
a local language is adopted as the language of
administration by a colonial or conquering
powen The language chosen for this purpose is
usually fairly widely spoken in the area in ques¬
tion and enjoys some prestige. The Dutch intro¬
duced Standard Malay as the official adminis¬
trative language and general lingua franca in
what is now Indonesia. In the same way, the
post-colonial rulers of Indonesia adopted
Indonesian as the official language even before
the country became officially independent.
(Indonesian is based on Standard Malay, which
made its introduction fairly easy.)
An example of the introduction of a con¬
queror's language as the general language in the
invaded area was the compulsory introduction
of the Quechua language of the Incas in what is
today Peru in South America. This took place a
comparatively short time before the arrival of the
Spaniards.
The metropolitan languages of present or
past colonial or similar rulers constitute another
type of lingua franca in certain areas. Even after
most colonies become independent, the lan¬
guages remain lingua francas, usually among
members of elite groups. Their use is beginning
to spread in former colonial areas, especially
among members of the young generation, at
the expense of other lingua francas, in particular
of pidgin languages.
A procession of gods chanting ritual
words is depicted in this Zapotee painting
(c. 5th-7th centuries) which adorns
a tomb at Monte Albán, a pre-Columbian
site in Mexico.
14

lese three mops are details from Language
Atlas ofthe Pacific Area* {1981) produced
under the general editorship of Stephen Wurm
and Shirô Hottori. The Atlas is one of o series
sponsored fay the Internotionol Council for
Philosophy and Humonistic Studies with the
financial assistance of UNESCO, which
encourages the safeguarding and
revitalization of endangered longuoges as port
of Its progromme for the preservation ofthe
culturel heritoge. Atlases on the longuoges of
China and Korea have aiready appeared, and
an 


Atlas of the World's Languages has just
been published by Routledge, London. Other
otloses are in preparation on languages of
Interculturo/ communicotion ¡n the Pacific,
African languages, and the indigenous
languages of South America.
* Published (in Canberra) by the Australian Academy ofthe
Humanities in colloborotion with the japan fltodemy.
Oirtributed by GEO CENTER, D-7000 Stuttgart 80,
Poitfoch 80 08 30, Germany (fox; 49111 1669354).
Sfek 7 _S*^Jt fBÀ S .1
«l^P**t V '^ ' Ifcmr	 , 1»
^H
Northern Borneo
mm^^.
