etting to know ChiefIamory
by Louis Gustave Binger
Louis Gustave Binger (1856-1936) was a French officer who explored the Niger bend
and the hinterland of Côte d'Ivoire in 1887-1889
I Thursday 9 February 1887
In the Sudan, the chiefs' power over their subjects is lim¬
itless. Since they are to some extent suspicious of
any white traveller, when they have not decided in
advance to let him through, they never broach a dis¬
cussion with him.
Here this was not the case, since Iamory would
allow me to see him. But would I get permission from
him to continue my journey? He had been described to
me as a despotic chief who held merchants to ransom
and made them endure all imaginable kinds of vexation.
Iamory is a tall fine-looking man who bears some
resemblance to our Wolof contacts. Unfortunately he is
slightly disfigured by the tattoos of the Mandé-Dtoula,
which consist of three long grooves that run from the
temples and the ear and spread out at the corners of the
mouth.
Uaptain Binger being received by Iamory
(seated at right), as shown in an illustration from
the Captain's account of his travels (1892).
SI

When you arrive in a village or come into the pres¬
ence of a chief of whom you have something to ask, you
must take care not to tell him immediately what you
want of him. However urgent your mission, you should
only talk about it after several interviews.
The first audiences are devoted to greetings and
expressions of welcome; then gifts are despatched
and other mutual courtesies are exchanged.
On the second or third day, people from the chief's
house come and skilfully sound you out. It is a good idea
only to unbutton yourself gradually and not to be too pre¬
cise about your intentions. As he gets to know about
your plans, the chief consults his entourage and enquires
about public opinion, which it is always advisable to pre¬
pare or to win over by cajoling a few powerful figures.
Only when he has worked out what he is going to do will
he ask to see you. Usually he will only question you as
a formality; he will have made his decision beforehand.
But Iamory is a very intelligent man, and there's no
point in beating about the bush with him. I explained to
him the purpose of my journey. He took a great interest
in everything I said, asked for more information about
France and our political situation in Europe and assured
me that I would be well received wherever I went.
Extracts from Du Niger au golfe de Guinée par le pays de Kong et le
Moss/ (1892).

