R H
Marie Curie, the French physicist of
Polish origin who shared the Nobel
PrizeforPhysics in 1903 and won the
Prizefor Chemistry in 1911, was one
ofthe mostpopular members ofthe
scientific community ofher day.
Always a proponent ofinternational
intellectual co-operation, she was
one ofthe 12 members ofthefirst
committee set upfor this purpose by
the League ofNations, and until her
death played an active role in the
work ofthe International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation (IIIC).
Wien she chaired the IIIC



symposium on the Future ofCulture,
held in Madridfrom 3-7May 1933,
she spoke on all the topics that were
discussedthe definition ofculture,
the crisis ofculture and thefuture of
culture. Salient extractsfrom her
address are given below.
Marie Curie
The spirit ofadventure
Text selected and presented
by Edgardo Canton
46
Before throwing the discussion
open, I think it may be useful if
I summarize the contributions
of previous speakers and add a few
thoughts ofmy own.
We agree that there is a national ele¬
ment at the root of every culture; and we
also agree on the fundamental point
that a universal culture needs to be
superimposed on every national cul¬
ture, and that the development of the
individual is a duty in every national
and international culture.
What matters and here again we
are all in agreement is not so much
knowing how to strike a balance
between national and universal culture
as clearly recognizing the need to elim¬
inate whatever makes for hostility and
antagonism and to prefer co-operation
and reconciliation.
By way of example perhaps I may
quote the case of laboratories, since that
is what I know most about. A big scien¬
tific laboratory is an example of uni¬
versal culture sustained by input from
national cultures: mutual respect for
work done ensures a favourable envi¬
ronment for co-operation. It is a source
of great satisfaction to find that the
sharing of a common task is conducive
in the workers to a state of mind
favourable to universal culture.
Like some members of the Com¬
mittee, I am not convinced that a state of
crisis is particularly abnormal. It may
be a normal state, in the sense that evo¬
lution takes place not at an even pace
but through an alternation of what we
may call crises and what we may call
bursts ofspeed. This is an example of the
discontinuity found everywhere in the
field of science, and I believe it is the
natural way things work. If at the
moment we have an unusually serious
crisis, it is because of the dreadful cir¬
cumstances that have recently shaken
Europe, and also no doubt because of
the rapid pace of industrial and tech¬
nological development on which some
of us have insisted.
Features of the crisis include the spe¬
cialization and standardization that
rightly perturb the intellectual world.
Some of you hold that it is possible to
react against specialization, and that
the sciences can be better presented
and better taught.
I am one of those who believe that
science is a thing of great beauty. A sci¬
entist in his laboratory is not merely a
technician: he is also a child faced with
natural phenomena that impress him in
the same way as a fairy story. We must
have a way ofcommunicating this feeling
to outsiders; we must not let it be sup- .
posed that all scientific advance boils
down to a matter ofmachinery and appa¬
ratus not that machinery and appa¬
ratus do not also have a beauty of their
own. Like Professor Haldane, I believe
that we can remedy this state of affairs.
CURIOSITY AND THE SPIRIT OF
ADVENTURE
I also do not think that the spirit ofadven¬
ture is likely to die out in the world. The
one vital thing I see as I look around me
is the spirit ofadventure: it seems inerad¬
icable, and is related to curiosity. I am
inclined to think that it is a primitive
human instinct, for I cannot see how
humanity could have survived without it,

E
any more than a person could survive
with absolutely no memory. Curiosity
and the spirit ofadventure have certainly
not died out. What about the people who
go up in aircraft and cross the Atlantic?
There are plenty ofother examples: if I do
not quote them it is for lack of time. The
spirit ofadventure is found in children of
all ages and at all levels.
That leaves the problem of tiredness
and overdoing it. That is a real source of
danger. People who do intellectual work
do not have time to think about the
problems that crop up. They are obliged
to adopt at high speed ideas that can
only be assimilated gradually. Technical
advances force on us ways of living and
working that are perhaps beyond the
capacity of the human organism.
Thinking is a form of activity that
requires time. It is not certain that when
we considerably accelerate the speed
of such a phenomenon the human
organism can adapt to the change. If
experience showed that some of what
modern civilization demands of us is
actually dangerous, and cannot be made
harmless by reasonable adjustment,
then perhaps we ought to give up some
of the efforts that we ask of our organs
and are helping to destroy them. That is
a suggestion for the biologists: it is not
for me to judge.
As regards lack of drive and initia¬
tive, I am not pessimistic. Drive and
enterprise are, I believe, the attributes of
every person in good physical and
mental health, so I do not think they
will die out provided that the species
can resist physical decadence. The spirit
of enterprise doubtless needs to be
channelled and given worthwhile tasks
to perform, otherwise it will operate in
areas where it may have ill-effects.
Marie Curie (1867-1934)
in her laboratory.
It is hard to forecast the future. As
many ofus here have said, we can make
wishes, put forward solutions, and seek
to make dreams come true; but we
cannot say what the results will be. We
cannot, among other things, prevent
natural disasters, which can destroy
what we have achieved.
But just because we have this spirit of
enterprise, which we cannot do without,
we behave as though the future
belonged to us. This is part of the instinct
of self-preservation, and also of our
feeling of racial solidarity, which does for
us what our inner life does, namely gives
us responsibilities towards future gen¬
erations.
A UNIVERSAL GOAL
How are we to express our ambitions,
the goal of our dreams? This is a big
problem, which I shall not tackle for the
moment. Mr. Jules Romains has told us
that we must go to the limits of the capa¬
bilities of the human species. We cannot
imagine what these limits may be,
because we have no idea what the spirit
of invention and initiative, which shows
itself so strongly, has in store for us. But
ifwe agree to go to the limits, that is all
we can do. So I am happy to accept this
expression.
One thing we can do is to state here
and now the conditions in which dreams
can become possible and not be inex¬
orably destroyed by events. We can rec¬
ognize that our dream of the future
requires the synthesis of national cul¬
tures, and the subordination of largely
political differences to a universal aim,
that of culture and communication.
47
