Seoul at age 600
A city built to face in the right direction
by Choe Chong-Hyon and Yi Tong-Ok
40
Capital of the Republic
of Korea since 1 945,
Seoul stands on the
Han river 60 km from
its estuary with the
Yellow Sea. This city
whose story can be
traced back to
prehistoric times
became the prestigious
capital of the Yi
dynasty 600 years ago.
When General Yi Song-gye, founder
oftheYi dynasty (1392-1910), came
to the throne in 1392, his first wish was to
transfer his capital to Han-yang (present-
day Seoul), but he was prevented from
doing so because ofobjections by some of
his subjects. The following year, at the
prompting ofone ofhis court officials and
with the encouragement of a Buddhist
monk named Muhak, the sovereign
decided to set up his capital on Mount
Kyeryongsan. His plans were again frus¬
trated, however. The mountain lay too far
south on the Korean peninsula and was
not consonant with the p'ungsu theory
based on the principles of yin-yang and
the five elements, according to which good
fortune was closely bound up with the
environment of one's place of residence
and the direction in which it faced.
Some ten other sites were envisaged
including, yet again, Han-yang, which was
finally chosen in 1394. Its location was
deemed to be favourable on several
counts: the city was in the centre of the
country, was accessible to shipping, had
roads fanning out to the north, south, east
and west, and was surrounded by moun¬
tains and rivers.
What was the reasoning behind this
decision, which created such difficulties
and took so long to make? The answer is
that our Korean ancestors looked upon
the earth as a living substance. Whenever
they selected a site, for whatever purpose,
they not only took account of its geo¬
graphical location but abided closely by
the principles enshrined in the divinatory
tradition ofgeomancy ("earth divination"),
based on the ki, the life force informing the
universe. According to the p'ungsu theory,
the ki was considered to emanate from
Mount Paektusan, the highest mountain
on the peninsula, and to strike southwards
in the direction ofMount Pukhansan, one
of the four mountains surrounding Seoul.
The city would therefore be cocooned and
protected by this life-enhancing energy.
I KYONGBOK PALACE
General Yi Song-gye ordered the Govern¬
ment Bureau in charge of the capital's
foundation to build a royal sanctuary for
his ancestors, temples for the tutelary salt
Below, the National
Museum building in
Kyongbok palace.
CHOE CH0NG-HY0N,
of the Republic of Korea, is
Professor of Architecture at
Hanyang University in Seoul.
One of his main fields of
interest is traditional
Korean architecture.
YI T0NG-0K
is in charge of the Korean
edition of the Unesco
Courier.

í
and grain deities, and palaces and defen¬
sive walls, and to lay out the streets. Before
work started on the new capital, ritual sac¬
rifices were made to the earth and sky
gods, the spirits of mountains and rivers
and the spirits of the five directions pro¬
tecting Kyongbok palace.
The symbol of the Yi dynasty, the
palace was built at the very heart of this
highly propitious location. Inaugurated
in 1395, it was comparable in size to the
Palace ofVersailles. In front of the building,
the Kwanghwamum Gate marking the
centre of the capital was flanked by two
stone carvings of haet'ae, mythical crea¬
tures resembling lions and representing
water. According to the principles of geo-
mantic divination, these beasts protected
the palace from the spirit of fire emanating
from Mount Kwanaksan, south of Seoul.
Round the palace were the "four great
gates" Tongdaemun to the east,
Sodaemun to the west, Namdaemun to
the south and Pukch'ongmun to the north.
Between them were the "four small gates"
facing north-east, north-west, south-east
and south-west.
Owing to its location and design, the
palace functioned as a source of energy.
The literal meaning of the name
"Kyongbok" given to it by a certain Chong
To-jon (1337-1398), a Confucian sage from
the early days of the Yi dynasty, is "pray for
good fortune". According to the theory of
the five elements, the southern gate of the
royal residence faced "the earth and the
centre". It was from this point that the sov¬
ereign's authority extended in all direc¬
tions to the furthest corners of the country.
anniversary
The twelve animals of the
Chinese zodiac, left, keep
watch on the stone
balustrades of the staircase
leading to the Kyongbok
palace throne room.
Below, detail of the palace
roof. Bottom, Kyongchon
pagoda (134S), a ten-storey-
high edifice of carved marble.
49
