BY FRANCE BEQUETTE
In Chinese mythology, heaven is
represented as a group of rocky
islands where the immortals lead
a blissful existence, and in many
other traditions in India, Cam¬
bodia, lapan, Ireland and Britain,
among the Celts and the ancient
Greeks islands were regarded as
paradise. In his Works and Days,
Hesiod wrote: "There, on the Islands
of the Blessed, by the edge of the tur
bulent depths of the Ocean, with
carefree hearts live the heroes
favoured by fortune, for whom the
fertile earth thrice yearlybrings forth
sweet and abundant harvests."
Although islands are still thought
of as ideal places to spend a holiday,
the reality is often less idyllic. In 1920,
the League of Nations refused to
accept as members what it referred
to as the "Lilliputian" states, most of
Above, phosphate mining
on the island of Nauru
in the Pacific.
23

SMALL ISLANDS: DREAMS Al REALIT
Windmills at
Algaida in
Majorca, the
largest of the
Balearic Islands
(Spain).
which were islands. Seventy-two
years later, at the United Nations
World Conference on Environment
and Development in Rio de laneiro,
islands were in the forefront of atten¬
tion and were the subject of many
studies, meetings and development
projects. As early as 1973, Unesco
organized its first meeting ofexperts
on island ecosystems, in the frame¬
work of its Man and the Biosphere
(MAB) programme. In 1989, it helped
to set up a nongovernmental orga¬
nization, the International Scientific
Council for Island Development
(INSULA), whose aim is to promote
the sustainable development of
small islands all over the world.
WHAT IS A "SMALL" ISLAND?
Various attempts have been made
to answer the question, byno means
an easy one, as to what "small"
means in this context. MAB con¬
siders an island small when its area
is less than 10,000 sq. km. and its
population less than 500,000, but all
small islands, wherever they may be
and whether they are independent or
linked in some form of association
with larger countries, have to deal
with the same issues: water, energy,
fisheries, agriculture, the manage¬
ment of coastal zones, waste dis¬
posal, forestry, wildlife and tourism.
Their very isolation is at the root of
24
their problems limited sources of
revenue, insufficient exports or
shortage of raw materials. While
technological progress may bring
prosperity, it can also contribute to
their marginalization. Mauritius, for
instance, which was an ideal port of
call for sailing ships plying between
Europe and Asia until the nineteenth
century, lost its privileged status with
the opening of the Suez Canal and
more especially with the advent ofair
travel, although it was later able to
find alternative sources of develop¬
ment. When landing strips are not
big enough for jet aircraft and there
are no deepwater harbours for
today's cargo vessels, it becomes
impossible for small islands to pro¬
cure the heavy capital goods needed
for the major infrastructure projects
that will draw in business. Some
islands are so small that they lack
the institutions to train their work
force, the materials needed by
industry, the possibility of negoti¬
ating political or trade agreements or
the means to send representatives
to defend their interests in interna¬
tional forums. On the other hand,
some isolated territories, overlooked
by the mass media, are managing to
preserve their cultural identity and
their natural environment. Island
status nevertheless calls for a spe¬
cific approach fully justifying the
attention now being given to it.
All the experts agree that the
major problem facing small islands,
especially those in the Mediter¬
ranean whose population may
double in the tourist season, is that of
fresh water supplies and waste dis¬
posal. Very few ofthem have lakes or
permanentwatercourses. Pockets of
fresh water (also known as Ghyben-
Herzberg lenses) provide only lim¬
ited resources. The Mediterranean
island ofMalta, to take one example,
consists of a slab of porous lime¬
stone and its groundwater runs off
into the sea. As the long dry season
coincides with the tourist season,
around ten million cubic metres of
sea water peryear have to be treated
by means of extremely expensive
desalination plants. The islands of
Elba (Italy) and Nueva Tabarca
(Spain) are linked to mainland water-
supply systems by undersea
pipelines (some offshore islands
receive electricity via underwater
power cables), while some of the
small Greek islands are supplied by
tankers. Louis Brigand, ofthe Institut
Français de Géo-architecture, writes
in Les îles en Méditerranée ("The
Mediterranean islands"), one of a
series of booklets covering various
aspects of the "Blue Plan" (a project
setting out different scenarios for
the future of the Mediterranean) that
the characteristics ofsmaller islands
are such that they call for an orig¬
inal energy policy, their small popu¬
lations and limited requirements
inclining them towards a varied mix
of alternative energy resources
wind power for pumping up
groundwater, solar energy, geo-
thermal energy in the case of vol¬
canic islands, imported fossil fuels,
wood or biogas and he adds that
ability to solve the problem ofwater
and power supplies will be a decisive
factor for the future in terms both of
development and of environment.
DISASTROUS DEFORESTATION
The policies adopted have not,
unfortunately, always been wise
ones. The overuse oftimber for fire¬
wood or for boat-building and wood¬
land clearance for farming has often
resulted in disastrous deforestation,
as has happened on Easter Island
and in Haiti and the Cape Verde
islands, leaving the denuded land a
prey to erosion. Western Samoa nev¬
ertheless recently took the risky step
ofselling off timber extraction rights
to foreign interests. Moreover,
though vegetation conserves water
and also protects the soil, some
deep-rooting crops such as the
coconut palm can exhaust ground¬
water, and that at a time when copra,
like cane sugar, is harder and harder
to sell. These two so-called cash

Quayside scene
in Male, main
island and
capital of the
Maldives
archipelago
(Indian Ocean).
crops have often, in the tropics, taken
the place offood crops, to the detri¬
ment of the inhabitants' food sup¬
plies. An extreme case of this phe¬
nomenon is provided by Sào Tomé
and Principe, where it was long for¬
bidden to grow anything but cacao.
Meanwhile, the inhabitants of the
Pacific island ofNauru have literally
destroyed their island by the overex-
traction ofphosphate; having made
their fortunes, they now have to find
somewhere else to live, but where?
lamaicans spend a good part of their
income on buying their national
dish, cod a fish caught in cold
waters. There are rich fishing
grounds around Kiribati, but the gov¬
ernment has leased the fishing rights
to Russia, while the local fishermen
pay a fortune for tinned sardines!
KIRIBATI, A TV-FREE ZONE
This archipelago, one of the
islands ofwhich (Christmas Island)
was used by Britain and the United
States for nuclear tests from 1945
to 1948, was offered a complete tele¬
vision network in exchange for the
right to dump nuclear waste in its
territorial waters . . . but is still
luckily without television. The dis
posal of household garbage and
industrial waste, imported or oth¬
erwise, is a serious problem for
islands. Shortage of space means
that sewers and disposal sites are
often too near to drinking-water
reservoirs. Fertilizers, pesticides and
hydrocarbons infiltrate coral atolls
and limestone, and can also conta¬
minate coastal waters. The situa¬
tion is even worse when population
density is increased by an influx of
tourists. But who can resist the lure
of foreign-currency income from
holidaymakers looking for a change
of scenery? Many islands have suf¬
fered the consequences.
Is there any way of preventing
coastlines from being smothered in
concrete, ofsafeguarding the islands'
identities, of preserving the true
worth of local cultures and pre¬
venting the indigenous population
from being drawn into a master-ser¬
vant relationship with the tourists?
The solution entails the protection of
sites and the promotion of cultural
tourism and ecotourism. At its
Member States' request, Unesco has
given biosphere reserve status to a
number of islands, including Lan-
zarote (Canaries), the Colón (Gala¬
pagos) Archipelago, the Taiaro atoll
(French Polynesia), Hawaii, and
Yakushima (japan). The Galapagos
Islands have also been placed on the
World Heritage List. The Darwin
Foundation, which has been set up
there, is making efforts to protect
the islands' flora and fauna, and
tourism is strictly regulated so as not
to disturb the native wildlife.
Could all these positive measures
encouraged by Unesco nevertheless
be cancelled out by the global
warming that is forecast by some cli-
matologists? Will low-lying islands
be engulfed as the ice-caps melt?
Although the global warming
hypothesis is not without its critics,
the Government of the Maldives has
already taken preventive measures,
putting down concrete blocks and
building concrete sea walls to protect
the most exposed parts of the coast¬
line. Let us hope the international
communitywill rally to the defence
of islands, so that they may remain
the abode of the blessed.
FRANCE BEQUETTE
is a Franco-American journalist
specializing in environmental
questions. Since 1985 she has been
associated with the WANAD-Unesco
training programmeforAfrican
news-agencyjournalists.
