COHHENTABY
by
Federico
Mayor
This article is one
of aseries in wliicli
the Director-General of
Unesco sets out his
thinking on nnatters of
current concern

THE SPIRIT PF GRANADA
UNESCO is proud to have organized last December in
Granada (Spain), an international symposium at which
Israeli, Arab and European intellectuals met to discuss
the intellectual aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian reconciliation
process.
Among all the geopolitical, ideological and strategic changes
that mark the tumultuous closing years of this century, it is
inspiring to see the desire for reconciliation expressed by two
parties who have long been embroiled in conflicts so absolute
and so deep-rooted that many had given up all hope. At the
beginning of the 1 980s, anyone who had predicted such devel¬
opments as the ending of the Cold War, the dismantling of
apartheid in South Africa, or Israeli-Palestinian dialogue would
have been greeted with derision.
The process that has brought Israelis and Palestinians to the
negotiating table is also of enormous, and universal, moral
significance.
TRAMSFORMIMC DESTINY
A tribute is due to the architects of this reconciliation, those
responsible for the historic gesture made in Washington in
September 1993. Transcending the tragic scenario of resentment
and mistrust, they demonstrated courage, reason and vision.
They preferred the sweet promise of future innocence, however
fragile, to the bitterness of experience. In so doing, and in
accepting the risks they were running, they reflected what is
most noble in human nature, for, as Aimé Césaire has observed,
"man is distinguished by a special propensity to defy destiny
and transform it into history."
What they have done is truly a challenge to destiny. The idea
of peace, now miraculously illuminating the sky of the Middle
East, is very fragile. We must all join in the efforts of the peo¬
ples of that region to ensure that peace is strengthened. Polit¬
ical co-operation, economic development and the reduction of
military spending are certainly necessary for that. However, I
believe that the essential task is to let the idea of peace take root
and to consolidate the moral and intellectual solidarity of indi¬
viduals and peoples.
The ethical, cultural and human aspects of peace are of
paramount importance. Without them, no political or eco¬
nomic agreement can be viable. With them, the culture of peace
can be firmly grounded in all areas of the life of society; national
capacities can be built up and strengthened; knowledge and skills
can be mobilized, and the potential of each individual can be
developed for the common good.
Almost fifty years ago, UNESCO defined as its most impor¬
tant goal the combat against racism, antisemitism, prejudice and
stereotypes, and the defence of human rights and peace, hoping
to prevent any return of the hideous ideology of which the
Jewish people had been the victim. Later, in accordance with
those same aims, UNESCO undertook various activities designed
to help the Palestinian people, deprived of sovereignty and
forced into exile, in several Middle Eastern countries. For years
the Israeli-Arab conflict, with its many reverberations within
the international community, caused heart-rending divisions in
Unesco.
These rifts now belong to UNESCO's past. But the values set
forth in its Constitution notably the need to construct the
defences of peace in the minds of men and to strengthen the
moral and intellectual solidarity to which I alluded above shine
out with undiminished radiance and are more relevant than ever.
A NEW CHAPTER IN HISTORY
The past cannot be changed. The future, unlike the past, is not
yet written; it can be changed. It is the only part of our common
heritage that is still intact. The key to the relaxation of tension,
understanding, good neighbourliness, solidarity, conciliation
and reconciliation is the "memory of the future" rather than
memory of the past. However long the conflict lasts, there
always comes a moment when the adversaries shake hands. We
must strive to ensure that this moment comes as soon as pos¬
sible, so as to avoid immense suffering, so that people do not die
for causes that deserve to be lived for.
Of course, the memory of those who have been wounded
in their person or their dignity during the long years of con¬
frontation must be respected. Morality no less than practical
reason demands it since a common future cannot be built on the
flouting of memory. Yet while forgetting is impossible, deter¬
mination to open a new chapter in history can ensure that the
memory of the future prevails over that of the past. It is nec¬
essary to look beyond present realities. "Only those who can
see the invisible can achieve the impossible". Shortsightedness
in politics has already caused too much harm. We must now dis¬
cover new ways of seeing. 43
