Le Corbusier
Le Corbusier (Charles Edouard Jeanneret-
Gris; 1887-1965).



Aftergiving his views on the
architectural perfection of
Venice (see the Unesco Courier,
March, 1994), Le Corbusier
invited modern society to
devote its art and industry to
the service oftown planning,
starting with the home.
Art and the home
Text selected and presented
by Edgardo Canton
I believe that a town consists primarily
of dwellings; the temples and the
palaces come afterwards. Now that
we have set our subjects of concern in per¬
spective, you will at once realize why
modern society, in the mass, is not in the
least concerned about creating for itself an
art that assuages its highest desires. The
very basis on which society rests is
missing homes. Housing in the world's
cities is awful. It has been sacrificed on
the altar of profit, and the only thing that
has so far supplanted money has been the
violent crisis that we are now experiencing
and that may perhaps show us what a vain
thing money is and how pointless it is to go
too far in its pursuit. What is required is to
point human consciousness in the right
direction, so that our hearts and minds
may aim for true, real, tangible goals,
accessible by our own efforts rather than,
as at present, by savagery, cruelty and reck¬
less greed.
I have taken part in a series of ven¬
tures all of them, needless to say, unsuc¬
cessful in the field of urban develop¬
ment in major capitals such as Stockholm,
Antwerp, Moscow, Paris, Buenos Aires and
Algiers, and all I can say is that those cities
are at present in a state of unconscious¬
ness, of ignorance ofwhat I claim modern
civilization has to offer them. They need to
be shaken out of their torpor, their abdi¬
cation of responsibility. Since it is a good
idea in all matters to have a clear termi¬
nology, I came up with a maxim. I said
that "a city is a collective endeavour that
should provide each individual with the
essential joys." These "essential joys" are
easy to describe.
I "said my piece" long ago; I waded
into the muddled debate over styles, fash¬
ions and snobbery, with the sledge
hammer argument that "la maison est une
machine à habiter" houses are machines
for living in. I have been threatened a thou¬
sand times with a beating for saying that.
When I say "for living in" I do not mean just
that the occupants' material needs should
be satisfied. I top the expression out by
adding "and for meditating in after the
most pressing needs have been met". But
for a home to become a place of medita¬
tion it must take on an entirely new form.
To be at all attainable, this in turn requires
an overall composition for the town, the
redesigning of its paths of communica¬
tion, boldness in the creation of its visual
spaces, anewwayofbuildinghomes, and
sound design for even the least of house¬
hold objects. As to the design of these
smallest household objects and here I
refer back to Venice, and the gondola in
particular I would like our modern inge¬
nuity to snatch the task out of the hands of
"professionals" who are not up to it, and
turn these minor things into magnificent
machines that are as efficient as those
built by engineers but, being subject to
the discipline of meeting our spiritual
needs, embody proportion divine pro¬
portion to the same degree as certain
well-known examples of work hitherto
done more or less by hand. I cannot accept
debasement ofeither neither of the hand
nor of the machine; there is no reason why
the faultless exactitude of the machine
should be inimical to beauty.
It is not widely enough realized that
modern architecture, immensely impor¬
tant as it is in the construction of a
machine-age society, finds its way into
every occurrence of life, even into a speech
or a book. That same unity can prevail in
all objects, and will one day prevail, pro¬
vided that, at some point, the spiritual T9

R C H I V E S
46
currents are strong enough to indicate a
line of conduct and make the unanimity
apparent.
In conclusion, I would say that art itself
is at the very basis of the great metamor¬
phosis that is already under way. If we go
on, in defiance of any logic, applying the
old architectural formulae we no longer
need today thick walls and so on we
shall be unable to tackle the problem of
cities today. The problem is to create "inte¬
riors" that will bring back serenity and
quiet; to eliminate noise; to flood them
with sunlight (modern technology has
done away with stone façades with holes
punched through them and replaced them
by glass walls, making it perfectly feasible,
technically and economically, in modern
buildings to open apartments on to sky¬
scapes and green landscapes); to arrange
the accommodation and the objects the
interior spaces, fixtures and fittings in
such a way as to make the maintenance
simple, the functions efficient and the life
lived there a life filled with tenderness;
and lastly, whilst achieving this harmo¬
nious combination ofaims, to keep prices
down to a level that is compatible with
modern economic conditions, a level it
would be madness to think of exceeding.
The world has never been rich and
building must be, as it has always been,
economical only the nineteenth century
indulged in extravagant spending for the
benefit of a few, to build homes that were
merely appliances for bringing happiness.
When large-scale industry, which has sub¬
sided into turning out countless futile con¬
sumer goods, finds its rightful path again
and produces goods intended for fertile
consumption, for the home, and at last
turns its attention to building, doing in
the factory all the marvellous things that
can be done only then will the result be
achieved. Let me illustrate these asser¬
tions with a striking example, that of the
car, which arouses general admiration
because it is well made and relatively
cheap. For ages I have been wearing myself
out making the point that if only we could
bridge the gap between that miracle, the
car, and our housing its planning and
design, its fixtures and fittings we could
provide modern society with admirable
accommodation that would be, in artistic
terms, as beautiful, as clear-cut and as
capable ofarousing emotion as the car or
the aircraft.
What we need today are people with
enough faith and enough strength of char¬
acter to persevere in drawing up even
in the nothingness of this world killed
stone dead by money the plans required
in every domain. One day those plans will
be the common heritage ofall. Just look at
my own domain of construction: one per
cent of my workmen already take an
interest in the question, and that's not bad.
When those plans are sufficiently vast and
pure for it to be possible to see in them that
unity towards which we are heading, the
workman will understand that what goes
on in the factory relates to his own home.
When, for instance, the first group of three
or four thousand homes is erected some¬
where using the same machines as he uses
today to build cars for the rich, he will
realize that society has new aims in sight.
That common faculty will then come into
operation that long-forgotten seed
love, the love that goes into all human
endeavours. That is where art will manifest
itself, where art will burst forth. I see no
other way of motivating art than through
the way in which work, any work, is under¬
taken. Then we shall no longer be
searching about, at earnest meetings like
this one, for ways to attract ordinary
people to the higher expressions of music
and the fine arts cubism, futurism,
expressionism, constructivism and so on,
and all the "isms" yet to be. Firmly
grounded upon enthusiastic participation
in the common pursuit, the many and
varied tiers of artistic expression will rise
up serene and bright. For my own part, I
believe in the so-called "higher" arts,
which I believe are not for everyone; but it
is heartrending for me to look at today's
dismal spectacle of the whole mass of
people indifferent or even hostile to what
they are doing. I believe in an imminent
upturn, an age ofharmony close at hand.
Greece shows us an example of such
harmony, the Middle Ages too; and Venice
sets one before our very eyes.
