The idea of the sovereign individual
regarded independently of his religion and
his origins is a relatively recent
development. It was preceded by the idea
of a community towards which the
individual has contradictory feelings.
Let us get down to essentials. We are
here first and foremost to know whether
we should render unto Caesar that which is
Caesar's and whether the temporal can be sep¬
arated from the spiritual.
If we believe, for whatever reason, that such
a separation is impossible, we must conclude that
religious belief in a divine order should dominate
civic organization and we must consider a theo¬
cratic state as legitimate. This being the case,
one question that arises is whether theocratic
states can respect their minorities if they hold a
different religion from that of the state or if
they have no religion at all.
However, if we consider that a separation
between the spiritual and the temporal is desirable
and possible, we must ask ourselves about the role
of a secular state. Can political ethics exist without
a spiritual basis, or laws without a transcendental
basis? Or is the function of the secular state
merely to organize the coexistence of different
religious communities? If it is, then we must
examine the categorical imperatives of a federa¬
tive government and the natural or civic rights it
lays down. In other words, are the ethics of a god¬
less state legitimate and effective? 13

A Hindu celebration in
Malaysia.
14
God as Head of State
The English Revolution of 1688, the American
Revolution of 1776 and the French Revolution of
1 789 were major initiating events of an anti-theo¬
cratic trend. From the Habeas Corpus Act of 1679
to the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
Citizen of 1791 we can see the emergence within



the civic community of a movement to pass sen¬
tence of death on God and deny Him a place as
Head of State. Secularism as it is practised in
modern states coincides with the definition of
religion found in Greek and Roman Antiquity.
Aristotle and Cicero regarded religion as sepa¬
rate from civic administration. The gods were
omnipresent, but they were not necessarily obeyed.
We should now ask ourselves what has hap¬
pened in our secular states to change the nature
of our expectations of religion and politics. I
hope that I shall not be accused of Gallo-cen-
tricity if I refer to the French example, or what
is left of it, since it is being threatened on all sides.
In France too religion is separate from the state.
Furthermore, with the beheading of Louis XVI,
the death of God-as-Hcad-of-State was more
than just symbolic.

In a sense the individual, transformed into a
citizen, was born in France between 1789 and
1791, even if almost two centuries went by
before he reached maturity. This was a hugely
presumptuous creation. The free thinkers, the
radicals and the Voltaireans who had contributed
to the Encyclopédie had contested the power
of the Catholic church, whilst remaining mis¬
trustful of the people. The Revolutionaries and
the members of the Constituent Assembly cre¬



ated this promethean idea of the sovereign indi¬
vidual, someone considered apart from his reli¬
gion, his origins, his environment and his social
class. The republican state was not merely the
arbitrator between the various communities,
which had no legal or official existence. It was
the expression of popular sovereignty by free
and equal individuals. Now, communities are
starting to spring up again in France, forming
ranks and sometimes joining to lobby for some
reform or other. This is undoubtedly an alarming
trend, as we can see today in its ludicrous con¬
vulsive culmination in the United States, in
Lebanon and even worse in the former Soviet
Republics and the former Yugoslavia. We are
living in the era of communalism.
Why is this? I should like to suggest three
reasons.
Man is a religious being
First, we have forgotten that Man is a religious
being. He is more than Aristotle's political
animal or Hobbes's man who is wolf to man. He
is, and always has been, a social and religious
being. The individual is an invention, a con¬
struction, which appeared late in human his¬
tory. The community existed before the indi¬
vidual, who cannot exist without it. The
individual keeps wanting to get away from the
community, yet always wants to return to it. A
great French Hellenist, Jean-Pierre Vernant,
admitted that he had spent his life thinking like
Marx that nation and religions were doomed
by history. Later, he said, he realized that he
could understand nothing about his subject,
Greece, unless he resigned himself to accepting
the permanence of both concepts within Man.
The first conclusion is that everything in
modern life which too brutally assails the indi¬
vidual's integration into his religious community
will eventually cause the individual to react,
sometimes even to regress. The expression "reli¬
gious community" must not be taken to imply
a community of believers. What is most often
regretted in religious tradition is not faith or
even belief, but a certain balance in a patriarchal
society imbued with religious feeling.
Secondly, we have for some time been going
through a crisis of reason linked to the emer¬
gence of the individual. The cult of reason, the
progress of science and the organized cult of
history and the people have been celebrated
and experienced in a religious way. The cult of
reason has even led to totalitarian ideologies.
The crisis of reason does not only stem from
the ideologies that led it astray or even from
the scientific limits that scholars have recently
imposed on it. According to the French philoso¬
pher Emmanuel Lévinas, it results from the
tremendous outcome of two ideologies of
TriumphAnniversary of the
Universal Democratic and
Social Republic, a French
allegorical engraving, 1848.
15

The opening session of the
new German Bundestag, Bonn,
1992.
progress liberalism which ended up in nazism,
and communism which bore Stalinism along
with it. "World wars and local conflicts, national
socialism, bolshevism, the camps, the gas cham¬
bers, nuclear arsenals, terrorism and unem¬
ployment it's all too much for one genera¬
tion." I feel I must add to this the horrors of
colonization and decolonization. This crisis of
reason leads to either a temporary nihilism or a
permanent need for transcendence.



The powers taken from the Gods
I attach even more importance to the third
reason. Our century has not only dispossessed
the Gods of all powers in civic life, of the power
to destroy humanity, to recreate humankind
and to reproduce ad infinitum. It also enjoys the
ubiquity of images, eliminating space and time
by means of waves. What kind of New Man
will emerge from the mediasphere? We have no
idea, but we do know that there is only one
earth, one world, one planet. From a philo-
What is taken to be a return to religion is
often a return to what preceded religion.
While Man's natural religious side should
be taken into account, this drift back to
nature should be resisted. Certainly we
must fight for the separation of religion
16
sophical point of view, it is disconcerting to
think that nothing human can remain unknown
to us. But knowing that the world is one does
not mean that its unity has been achieved. Quite
the opposite. And it is to be feared that the
upheavals we must suffer before we achieve this
unity will be terrifying. Population movements,
soaring birth-rates, the mingling of peoples, the
mixing of cultures and the babelization of the
world's languages everywhere gives rise to anx¬
ieties, withdrawals and tensions.
Remember that Babel, far from being a
tribute to multilingual cosmopolitanism, was a
curse.
The Tower of Babel is a tower of punishment
and misery. Before accepting to be happy to
belong to planet earth, we wonder who we are
and prefer to be what we were or what we
thought we were. We chase after what is called
"authenticity", which often means reinventing
our roots and claiming to have rediscovered
our fathers' religion, a religion whose message
we sometimes use selectively in order to reject
others.
For some the need for the religious expresses
a lack; for others it expresses nostalgia. It may be
regret for a world of continuity and immanence
where an animal feels an integral part of its com¬
munity, like "water in water". To the French
writer Georges Bataille, it is a need for intimacy
with things and with others. It may also become
regret for a transcendental and original state,
such as the soul in Plato's universe or paradise
before the Fall. The historian of religions Mircea
Eliade identified and studied rites in ancient
Greece, India and Christianity which show or
imply a need and desire to return to an imagined
time of origins and an age of founding myths
which can, when necessary, be reconstructed.
If we contemplate the force of the three rea¬
sons I have just given, we can assess the fragility
of regimes which claim to counter or ignore it.
We can also understand how systems that
manage to satisfy humankind's basic religious
needs can have a future, however totalitarian
these systems may be. Finally, we can see the
essence of despotism and the precarious nature
of democracy.
The sacrifice of Abraham
We also start to fear a return to the religious
socio-psychological phenomena described by
the French scholar René Girard, who sees prox-

imity as the key to aggression and its continu¬
ance. For Girard, the enemy is the person next
door, one's brother, what the Ten Command¬
ments call one's neighbour. If we are asked to
love our neighbour as ourself, it is precisely
because he is the person we are most likely to
treat as a rival and thus consider hostile. The



person who resembles me most strongly but
who is not me is my enemy. He is the part of
myself which I like in myself but of which I
am dispossessed because it is outside me, and so
I wish to destroy it. In other words, fratricide is
the only real war. We only fully hate what we
know best, and from which we are separated by
hardly anything any little difference will do.
In this situation there can be no spontaneity
in love; the initial drive is to appropriate what is
identical. Love can only exist in this social (and
Below, a statue of an angel
with hands uplifted in prayer. It
stands on a grave in the
cemetery of Florence (Italy).
JEAN DANIEL,
of France, is Editor-in-Chief of Le
Nouvel Observateur, a weekly
magazine which he founded in
1964. Among his recent works
are Cette grande lueur à l'Est
(1989) and La blessure (1992).
17

thus religious) self at the price of immense self-
restraint, in fact a kind of rape. In the nature of
the sons of Abraham, therefore, there is an ini¬
tial inaptitude for love because they are reli¬
gious before being the sons of the Prophet. The
heritage of Abraham and eventually the Judaeo-
Christian heritage is not one of love at first sight



but of learning to love. If we adapt the reflexes
observed between religions, races and nations,
we arrive at the Balkan proverb quoted today by
a Croatian leader: "We have no friends. We just
have allies among the enemies of our enemies".
This is a very pessimistic interpretation, and
we are in no way obliged to share it. However,
it helps to remind us that religion exists before
religious belief and that initially belief often
corrected what was imperfect in natural reli¬
gion. For example, the sacrifice of Abraham
would lead, through the customs practised by
the Chaldeans, to human sacrifice. Now, what
is taken to be a return to religion is often a
return to what preceded religion and what faith
corrected, or would have corrected by evolving.
In other words, there are many reasons for
taking into account Man's natural religious side,
but there are even more for resisting the results
of this drift back to nature. Certainly we must
fight for the separation of religion and politics.
In conclusion, I would say that religion
colours, nourishes and impregnates politics, but
religion alone cannot inspire the political orga¬
nization of the community. It is one thing to take
into account the irreducible nature of the reli¬
gious act, but it is quite another to submit the
institutions of people who have achieved the
dignity of the individual to the manifestations of
religious belief.
We asked how to provide a basis for the
need to resist Man's irreducible religious nature.
I think that the answer lies in the universal
nature of everything that emerges into con¬
sciousness. The eighteenth-century philosopher
Montesquieu answered this question in a way
that has since become widely accepted. It is
worth recalling here: "If I knew some scheme
which was advantageous to myself but hurtful
to my kindred, I would banish it from my mind.
If I knew of some scheme which was advanta¬
geous to my kindred but hurtful to my country,
I would try to forget it," he wrote. "If I knew
what was of advantage to my country, but
hurtful to Europe and the human race, I should
regard it as a crime."
