UNESCO'S HISTORICAL
WORKS
H
ISTORIANS often change their methods and the problems they
study without in any way lessening their commitment to the
search for historical truth. As the French historian Marc Bloch
once wrote, "each age reconstructs the past in terms of its own preoc¬
cupations."
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the Soviet bloc,
many countries have been attempting to rewrite their histories. Among
them are Russia and other countries of eastern Europe, as well as the
former Soviet republics in the Caucasus and central Asia, such as
Azerbaijan, Georgia and Tajikistan, where there is an evident desire to
look into the past to help rebuild a national cultural identity.
At a time when ideologies and theoretical models are being widely
questioned, new ways of looking at the past can also be observed in the
West. To take one example, the French Revolution of 1789 is no
longer seen exclusively in terms of the onward march of liberty and
progress. Analysis of the Revolution now finds room for an objective
view of certain episodes, such as the Terror and the revolt of the
chouans, during which liberties and cultural identities were stifled.
Long before these changes took place, Unesco had been engaged
on a number of major historical projects, including the history of the
scientific and cultural development of humanity, and general histories
of Africa, Central Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean. These pro¬
jects have made use of new scientific procedures in historical analysis,
different visions of history and appropriate methodologies (such as the
use of African oral traditions) to establish and interpret the facts via
a wide range of viewpoints.
Rewriting history means, first and foremost, taking into account
new discoveries and advances in knowledge; it also means accepting
other explanatory hypotheses, rehabilitating ignored or marginal¬
ized civilizations and cultures, and accepting a history that has many
dimensions and moves in many directions, while always remaining true
to human experience. This new approach, this change of emphasis and
focus, make the UNESCO histories as topical as ever.
However, UNESCO's mission is also to contribute to the recon¬
struction, for the future, of a history which is an instrument of mutual
understanding as well as a corpus of knowledge. On the basis of
books already written or yet to be written, new historical syntheses
(regional or inter-regional) will go further than the deciphering of civ¬
ilizations using traditional methods, and reveal complicities, conver¬
gences, and trends that are universally shared. Rewriting history will
thus involve far-reaching changes in approach and emphasis.
CHRISTOPHE W0NDJI
Head of Unesco's Section of General and Regional Histories
In the following article, Professor Jean Dévisse, one of the architects
of UNESCO's General History ofAfrica, sets an agenda for the rising
generation of historians of Africa.
