gftftPVt*
A sociologist discovers how
history can be retouched by
those who took part in it
When
memory
plays tricks
jj Liliana Deyanova
o
UR past is becoming more and more
unpredictable." Bulgarians today are
increasingly familiar with this paradox.
Not for the first time, they are asking them¬
selves such questions as these: Did the commu¬
nists come to power on 9 September 1944 as the
result of a "popular uprising" against a monar¬
chist-fascist dictatorship, without direct inter¬
vention by the Red Army, or as the result of a
coup d'état by a gang of traitors and terrorists
supported by Russian guns? Was Bulgaria ever
fascist? Who saved the Jews from deportation to
Nazi concentration camps? The communist
party or King Boris III?
In one of its first directives, the new govern¬
ment set up in 1944 enjoined teachers "not to
expound the positive actions of monarchs in his¬
tory lessons, but to stress the tyrannical quality
of their rule and the struggle of the oppressed
people". The triumphant workers and peasants
were to be glorified. Thus was history rewritten.
It is no surprise to find Spartacus described as a
"proletarian"; the most grotesque illustrations
of communist iconography came close to
depicting him brandishing a hammer and sickle.
Today's history books, on the other hand,
avoid talking about "the positive aspects of the
proletariat", and filter or exclude previously sacro¬
sanct expressions such as "anti-fascist popular
uprising" and "the glorious October Revolution".
Perhaps this is what the French sociologist Jean
Baudrillard has described as "a rewriting of history
that is contrary to the totalitarian version"?
A sociological enquiry
In Bulgaria a far-reaching research programme
has been launched on "the rewriting of his¬
tory". It is sociological rather than historical, and
is less concerned with discovering the truth
about past events than with understanding how
they are interpreted in the various "rewritten"
versions. The content of history books and his¬
tory lessons, exhibits in historical museums,
and biographies are all being studied as part of
this programme.
A\ propaganda poster
showing Todor Zhivkov,
secretary general of the
Bulgarian communist
party from 1 9S4 to 1 989,
and a text vaunting the
country's economic
strength.
35

In September 1944, the
Soviet army occupied
Bulgaria. A coalition
government declared war
on Germany. Below, in the
little town of Lovec, the
population salutes the Red
Army and shouts anti¬
fascist slogans.
By examining the ways in which individual
biographies are being rewritten it is possible to see
the two-way relationship between biography
and history. We can discover how people see
their own lives and try to "legitimize" them by
making sure that they conform to newly-accepted
standards, and also how new interpretations of
certain historic events are being inserted in these
"revised" biographies. Two different processes are
involved: giving meaning to one's own life, and
using one's life story to make sense of the past. It
is possible to identify various strata in the col¬
lective memory by seeing how certain events are
given emphasis, important facts are omitted,
minute details are magnified, and what Freud
called "screen-memory" comes into being.
In this context it may be hard to say exactly
"what happened on 9 September 1944". Perhaps
we ought instead to see what the various inter¬
pretations of 9 September are, or even find out
about the different 9 Septembers stored in the dif¬
ferent layers of the memory. What story do those
who once called themselves "active combatants
in the struggle against fascism and capitalism"
now tell? What story do their victims tell?
To carry out this analysis we are using a
variety of sociological techniques and a number
of sources. By collecting the life stories of people
as they are described in the eulogies pronounced
at their funerals and in later conversations with
those who knew them we have tried to find out
how biographies are orientated nowadays', by
people on both sides of the fence.
We shall not dwell on the way in which
people make crude manipulations (intentional or
otherwise) of their own past. What interests us
is the way in which episodes in a biography are
unconsciously reorganized at the time of death.
In every biography we have noted a transference
of guilt, a refusal to be associated with evil. Evil
is rejected: it is done by enemies, or at a pinch by
black sheep on one's own side. What is inter-
36
esting in the biographies we have assembled are
the compromises, the guilt-feelings, the justifi¬
cations and rationalizations. Matters of this kind
are not mentioned at funerals, but they can be
taken into account precisely because of the way
in which they are passed over in silence.
We examine and compare the various strata
of a biography to see how it is constructed,
what is concealed, retouched or given emphasis,
how sensitive matters are evaded (e.g. the case of
someone from a middle-class background who
joined the Communist Party), and what appar¬
ently serves as mitigating circumstances (e.g.
euphemisms whereby a crime is called a
"youthful mistake", or a compromise is
described as "the wisdom of experience"). In
other words, we try to find out how biogra¬
phies are "normalized".
Biographical revelations
We have distinguished four categories of biog¬
raphy. In each of them, the subject always
remains an outsider, a figure who is somehow
divorced from events.
First, what is striking about the biographies
of communist leaders is the extraordinary inno¬
cence they affect with regard to everything that
happened. Thus Anton Yugov, an ex-prime min¬
ister, is said to have fought "for a humanist
society that did not come about, but that was not
his fault	 He was not to see his dreams come
true. Others are guilty." Elsewhere, however,
Yugov is described as "a titan of the Revolution";
he was "one of the protagonists of history, and
will always belong to it".
The "titan" thus makes history but is not
responsible for what happens. This is a peculiar
logic, but one that is aware of its own illogicality
and seeks to justify Yugov's failings by adding:
"errors did not spare him, either". This is a typ¬
ical example of exteriorization. The errors are the
subject of the sentence; they come from an out¬
side source. There are wicked men like Todor
Zhivkov, who "seized power". Yugov, more¬
over, "had his own opinion about things, and
that did not please the sinister Zhivkov, General
Secretary of the Party". In this kind of biography
we see how the ideal of the revolutionary, "the
humanist society", is made into the norm.
The same method appears again in the
biographies of humbler figures: "He had no
feeling of guilt towards anyone," reads one typ¬
ical sentence. By shifting emphasis one can try
to make the subject of the biography appear
innocent. A militant's life is always portrayed as
a sacrifice "Total commitment of self to build
a new life, making a gift of oneself." And even
if "ne'er-do-wells, careerists and profiteers" or
"people placed by chance on the stage of his¬
tory" deceived them, "real revolutionaries
always resented the contradiction between the
ideal (the norm) and reality, which they regarded
with a critical eye". These revolutionaries were
always indignant about mistakes; they wrote

H
-. i
fftl
«
1 1
L~-v ^
i
"...
-mm
.*"'' c
i« r\$ %*dtK* jV^^^tMH iPÉTr M^J^ V^h v i T'a à
m%%ÏVp Fm rTa, i
à* *' /Wr i W ¿Si *
ms - m. ¿ f
p" /' Wm
letters to protest and complain: that is one of the
distinctive features of this category of biog¬
raphy. Another way of acquitting revolutionaries
is to emphasize their "disinterestedness" and
their "refusal of privileges" with phrases like
"he left no worldly goods" or "he donated his
inventions to his professional association".
What was the point of these sacrifices? How
did these disinterested, self-sacrificing people
manage to build such a society? Our findings
reveal a denial of responsibility. To work for
the construction of socialism, at whatever level,
was to be a cog in a piece of machinery. Deeper
levels of personality and identity (where prob¬
lems of morality and guilt are, in the last analysis,
decided) were unaffected.
The biographies of those who were perse¬
cuted after 9 September 1944 and have since
been rehabilitated belong to a third category. A
striking feature of their tragic stories is a feeling
of inevitability, of an all-pervading, irrational,
insuperable destiny. The thread running through
their stories and the value judgments on which
they are based, is the dichotomy between "com¬
munist barbarians" on one side and "us superior
beings" on the other. Life is divided into two
parts: "Before the Revolution he was happy",
after it "his life was trapped" or "life stopped".
"He was a talented man, but his life came to a
standstill: the communists shattered his creative
genius," says a woman intellectual from "a
family with the gene of culture".
Here too the break is always seen as coming
from outside. Had it not occurred, the "gene of
culture" would not have been stunted it is as
though life was lived in a pure ideal environment
that only the impure reality of socialism could
taint. Communism is seen as the main cause of
a ruined life. The person was a failure because he
or she did not live a "normal life" and a "normal
life" is impossible without "a normal society".
People whose life-stories fit into this category
see themselves as possessing a particular gene,
which is the other side of "the hereditary taint"
which the communists long accused them of
possessing an excuse which for long allowed
them to hound the "old guard", the "bour¬
geois". For the victims of repression, every¬
body except those on their own side was
mediocre, pretentious and ignoble.
The fourth category consists of people who
managed to "overcome the resistance of socialist
circles", people whose "gene of culture was able
to develop". Admittedly, they lived amidst "the
poisonous vapours of hatred and hostility", but
they "sowed the seeds of good". Though they
came up against "a scowling present", they
remained "part of our tradition", giving meaning
to the emptiness and absurdity of life.
In this category too we find the same tragic
dichotomy: a life torn between "a scowling pre¬
sent" and "tradition", between "yesterday" and
"now", between the "old guard" and the "new
people" two groups permanently divided.
f\ pro-reform
demonstration in Sofia
In 1989.
LILIANA DEYANOVA,
of Bulgaria, teaches sociology
at the university of Sofia and is
a member of her country's
Institute of Social Criticism.
Her published works include
"The Sociology of Symbolic
Forms" (Sofia, 1 993) and a
number of studies on the
sociology of personality.
37
