globa view... ajo
S.O.S. Children
To mark the close of the International Year of the Family,
here is a portrait of a family with a difference
I In the space of ten years, Virginie
I Kankoua has had thirteen children,
five ofwhom are now old enough to leave
home. One of her older daughters, who
suffered from depression as a child, has
started a small sewing business. Another
has opened a beauty parlour. Their mother
is proud to see them well integrated into
society. It is her greatest reward for the
long years of hard work, patience and
devotion she has given to these children.
Child care a new
yardstick of progress
The Progress ofNations 1994, the latest
issue of an annual report published by
UNICEF, the United Nations Children's
Fund, ranks the world's nations
"according to their achievements in child
health, nutrition, education, family plan¬
ning and progress for women". Based on
data collected from various United Nations
agencies (including Unesco), the report
shows that some developing countries
meet the needs of their people better
than some wealthier countries. We learn,
for example, that Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe
both have a per capita Gross National
Product (GNP) of less than $600 dollars
yet still manage to provide 90 per cent of
their children with at least four years of pri¬
mary education, i.e. twice that of Brazil
with an annual per capita GNP of nearly
$3,000. Nearly 30 per cent of the children
In Guatemala are suffering from malnu¬
trition, but less than 5 per cent in
Paraguay, which is not much wealthier.
Viet Nam has a per capita GNP of only
$240 but its child-survival rate is higher
than that of Algeria, whose GNP is about
seven times higher. Disparities like these
show that social development does not
automatically result from economic
progress but constitutes a goal in itself
that should be pursued and evaluated
directly.
Not one of them is a natural child of hers,
for "Mama Virginie" works in the S.O.S.
Children's Village ofKara, Togo, where she
takes in orphaned or abandoned children,
cares for them, sees that they go to school
and loves them.
The village ofKara, built between 1974
and 1979, today consists often houses, an
administrative building, a kindergarten,
a primary school, a nutrition centre, a
farm, a cafeteria and a youth club. Nine
"mums", helped out by five "aunts" live
there with about ten children each.
Brothers and sisters are never separated.
The director, the educators and the main¬
tenance men are all "dads". The village
also has sponsors. The children don't know
them since they tend to live far away from
the village, but thanks to their material
support, their presence is felt.
There are 315 other S.O.S. Children's
villages in 122 countries. The first one was
founded in 1949 in Imst (Austria), where a
young medical student named Hermann
Gmeiner had the idea ofbringing together
war orphans and widows or unmarried
women in a few houses that he had built
for them. Ten years later the idea had
caught on in France and elsewhere in
Europe. In the 1960s it spread to Asia,
South America and Africa.
In 1964 the International Federation
of S.O.S. Children's Villages was founded
and today it is the biggest non-govern¬
mental organization working on behalf of
children in distress. Based in Innsbruck
(Austria), it has consultative status with
the United Nations and Unesco.
From Imst in the Tyrol Mountains to
Antananarivo in Madagascar, from
Busigny, France, to Bamako, Mali, from
Choglamsar in northern India to Teguci-
galp, Honduras, from Pokhara, Nepal, to
Port-au-Prince in Haiti, S.O.S. Children's
villages are giving thousands ofchildren a
chance to enjoy a real childhood.
To subscribe to the S.O.S. Children's
magazine Villages dejoie (French only), to
make a donation or sponsor a village,
please contact Village d'enfants S.O.S.,
6, Cité Monthiers, 75009 Paris.
Tel.: (33-1) 4526-7179; Fax: (33-1) 4995-0285.
tib ew
The 1994 UN Population
Award
The 1994 United Nations Population
Award has been won by to President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt and by the Turkish
Foundation for Health and Family Planning.
The award is made annually to persons or
institutions who have raised public aware¬
ness about population problems and pos¬
sible solutions. "We are not only hon¬
ouring the laureates. . . ," declared UN
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali
at the award ceremony, "we are also sig¬
nalling our continuing concern for people's
needs and aspirations for a peaceful world
in balance with population, environment
and development."
More than 100 million
victims of sexual
mutilation
Female sexual mutilation is commonly
practised in 28 African countries, and
the World Health Organization (WHO) esti¬
mates the number of women and girl vic¬
tims of these practices at between 85 and
114 million. No religion prescribes these
mutilations which belong to traditions
intended to preserve virginity and repress
female sexuality. Apart from their
degrading and traumatic nature, they may
lead to death, haemorrhaging, tetanus,
septicemia and the spread of Aids. In the
long run they compromise sexual activi¬
ties and may cause infections and com¬
plications during childbirth. Combating
such practices is difficult, and according
to a recent WHO report the women them¬
selves must take the lead. Several orga¬
nizations, including the Inter-African Com¬
mittee for the Elimination of Harmful
Traditional Practices, are trying to con¬
vince women that they can renounce such
customs without betraying their cultural
values.
Further information may be found in
Mother and Child Health and Family
Planning: Current Needs and Future
Planning, a report by the Director-
General of WHO to the WHO Executive
Board, 12 January 1994. 45
