Although they know
how to grow crops,
the Moken prefer to
live on the sea
through fidelity to
their foundation myth,
the story of Gaman
and Sibian.



THE MYTH OF THE MOKEN
wixt land and sea by Jacques ivanoff
14
I The Moken are a nomadic seafaring folk
I who, living to all appearances on the
fringes of human society, ply the waters of the
Mergui archipelago, off the Tenasserim coast
in the Bay of Bengal. No documentary evidence
subsists from the period before British colo¬
nial expansion into this region to throw light on
the mysterious past of these people who live
afloat on extraordinary craft, use the resources
of their environment in a curious way, and avoid
all contact with the outside world.
Employing so-called "archaic" technology
the harpoon and the adze being their main imple¬
ments and clad only in skimpy loin-cloths, the
Moken practise a purely symbolic type of agri¬
culture and refuse technical innovation in any
shape or form, including the use of more efficient
gear such as fish traps and nets that could increase
their catches; they have made a deliberate choice
to go on using only pointed or pronged harpoons.
A mistaken explanation was long put upon
this choice by observers who saw the Moken
only during the dry season and sent back a gar¬
bled account of their constant comings and
goings, their apparent lack of any system of
beliefs, and what seemed on the surface to be the
looseness of the nomadic structure, as evidenced
by the scattered and shifting dispositions of the
fishing fleets.
In fact, when the rains come the Moken go
ashore on the inhabited islands of the archi¬
pelago, where they grow rice, sorghum and
millet. They do not, however, eat the crops they
harvest. They use a few handfuls of rice for
ritual purposes, in particular at the festival of the
"Post of the Spirits", which occurs during the
fifth lunar month and represents a recapitulation
of the whole pre-Islamic and proto-Malay
period of Malay history. Since, moreover, the
only agricultural produce they do consume is
obtained by way of trade, they are thus demon¬
strating that, while they are familiar with agri¬
cultural practices, they at the same time reject
them.
During the rainy season, Moken society
again becomes strongly bonded, and the various
pieces of the nomadic jigsaw puzzle, with its dif¬
ferent levels of social integration by boat, fleet
and subgroup come together. This seasonal
transition to a sedentary way of life awakens
powerful unifying forces of which an upsurge of
religious activity is the most visible expression.
This alternation between the rainy season
and the dry season, between coming together

Some 150 Moken boats are
still sailing today (above).
Poised for the kill: a Moken
fisherman hunts turtle. Living
between land and sea like the
Moken, turtles are prized as a
delicacy.
and dispersing, between a nomadic and a seden¬
tary mode of life, between fishing and farming
and between food-gathering and a self-imposed
food shortage the price the community pays
for infringing its own rule of keeping on the
move is not by any means determined by the
forces of nature alone: a logical explanation is to
be found in the mythical account of the Moken's
origins.
Gaman and Sibian
The key to the symbolic link between man, sea
and boat is provided by the epic of Gaman,
which sets forth the cultural motivations that
have enabled the Moken to keep their identity
intact throughout the changing fortunes of their
history, withstanding, one after another, Islam,
the agricultural way of life, missionaries, colo¬
nization, and the pressures exerted by expan¬
sionist nation-states that wanted to bring them
under their control and acculturatc them.
Gaman, a Muslim Malay, was the consort of
Queen Sibian but was enamoured of his young
sister-in-law Kèn and became her lover. By this
act Kèn transgressed society's taboo against
"mounting", i.e. taking the place of, one's elder.
Outraged, Queen Sibian decreed that thereafter
it would be forbidden to dwell on land, a ban
symbolized by her ordering Kèn to be cast into
the sea (lemo Kèn the "immersion of Kèn")
and that ever thereafter boats must be dugouts
hewn from a single balk of timber, with inden¬
tations fore and aft ("a mouth that eats and a rear
that defecates"), symbolizing the unending cycle
of ingestion, digestion and evacuation.
Thus it came about that the Moken were
QUEEN SIBIAN'S
DECREE
"Gaman, a Muslim Malay, was
the consort of Queen Sibian
but was enamoured of his
young sister-in-law, Kèn, and
became her lover. By this act,
Kèn transgressed society's
taboo against 'mounting', i.e.
taking the place of, one's
elder. Outraged, Queen Sibian
decreed that thereafter it
would be forbidden to dwell
on land 	"
condemned to a life at sea, cut off from their ter¬
restrial roots and from the royal bounty. The
golden age was over. Sibian's sentence was to
weigh heavily upon the subsequent fate of the



Moken and to provide the members of the new,
nomadic community with a common criterion
of identity: a Moken is anyone who accepts that
name and builds his boats in accordance with
Sibian's precepts.
This drama of forbidden love brings us to the
heart of the factors that determine the Moken's
sense of identity. By her immersion in the sea,
Kèn came to symbolize a community casting off
its terrestrial moorings, as embodied by Sibian.
This is why the Moken cannot return to terra
firma, which nonetheless remains symbolically
present in the community in the form of yams
and other traditional foods.
What's in a name?
The mythical account of the origins of the
Moken yields, upon analysis, an explanation of
certain features specific to them, such as their
self-imposed poverty and the fact that they do
not amass property, their rejection of technical
innovations and the fact that they do not con¬
sume their own agricultural produce, charac¬
teristics that, among these "sedentary nomads",
take on an ideological aspect rooted in the myth
itself: the Moken derive their nomad identity
from the judgment that sentenced them to a life
afloat, the symbolic immersion of Kèn "lemo
lolo nganyan Kèn", as commanded by Sibian.
The initial contact between Gaman and
Sibian represents the relations between the
Malays and the coastal civilization. The coming
of Gaman the Malay betokens the intrusion of
the rice-growing world into the Moken com¬
munity. The Moken did not adopt rice-growing
and were driven out by it. According to the
epic, there were at the time tens of thousands of
them, and they had reached a point where they
had to choose cither to extend their territory and 15

The Moken respect their
ancestors and believe in spirits
and try to make contact with
them during rituals. Only the
shaman, however, can
communicate with the beyond
via the "Post of the Spirits".
take up farming or to stabilize their population
level and gather their food. Gaman acted as the



catalyst in this clash of opposing life-styles.
In the myth, Sibian and her people are shown
as an uncivilized sedentary society, while Gaman
appears as a civilized nomad. By taking rice with
them in the wanderings that followed the trans¬
gression committed by Kèn and Gaman, the
Moken were in effect bearing civilization with
them, thus redefining the terms and becoming, by
virtue of the rice, a society both nomadic and
civilized. By accompanying the Moken to the
islands of the Mergui archipelago, Gaman comes
to represent the rice borne away by a community
that rejects the sedentary agricultural way of life
but which, as a concession to the ascendancy of
a dominant people for whom rice represents civ¬
ilization, does not refuse to eat cultivated crops.
Sea and cereal thus became inseparably con¬
nected. Since the time when Gaman and rice, i.e.
Islam and rice-growing, appeared on the scene,
the Moken have been sea-going nomads, using
their catch as currency wherewith to obtain rice
for their own consumption. Only in the light of
this ambivalent attitude of the Moken to rice can
one understand their refusal to grow it for that
purpose and their acceptance of the economic
tyranny of the taukès, the Chinese traders and
middlemen from whom they obtain it.
From myth to reality
Furthermore, by leaving rice-growing to others,
the Moken are asserting their particular identity:
rice-growers, whether Muslim or Buddhist,
facilitate their self-awareness. Malays and Chi¬
nese are the middlemen preferred by the Moken
who, like Gaman, barter pearls and other prod¬
ucts of the sea for rice and other consumer
goods, such as clothing. By enfolding their com¬
mercial links within a system of kinship, the
middlemen secure the loyalty of the Moken,
though it would perhaps be more truthful to put
it the other way round. . . . The middlemen's
ships ride in the midst of the Moken fleets which
they exploit, and the Moken boats nuzzle up to
their huge bellies to take on supplies.
The hull of the Moken boat, with its analo¬
gies to the human body, carries hewn into its
flanks the history of the Moken people. The
"mouth that eats" (okang makan) and the "rear
that defecates" (butut maé) represent in visual
and technical terms the nomad belief that accu¬
mulation spells death. The "belly" (lake), i.e.
the hold, cannot take in food unless it also dis¬
charges itself. The middlemen's ship is thus
needed by the Moken, who accept as a necessary
compromise the resultant reduction in their
mobility.
I he Moken live on boats roofed
with palm-fronds.
16
JACQUES IVAN0FF,
a French historian and
sociologist, is a researcher at
France's National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS). He
is currently engaged on an
ethnological history of Moken
mythology as part of a project,
entitled "Grand Sud", that is
being carried out jointly by the
CNRS and the Prince of Songkla
University in Thailand.
