The coexistence of secular
rationalism and religion is a
safeguard of freedom and democracy
I understand a rationalist when he tells a
Catholic bishop: Non serviam I shall
not serve.
A secular rationalist is someone to whom I
feel close. When I argue with him, I argue with
a part of myself, with a fragment of my biog¬
raphy. I understand his aspiration for freedom
in the name of a heroic atheism which makes a
human being a master of the world, the sailor
and the ship. I understand his disagreement
with the situation in which someone tries to
restrict his freedom in the name of God.
I understand and yet I continue to argue
with him.
A good cause
A secular rationalist certainly represents a chal¬
lenge for a Christian. But this challenge may
not be a threat, but a noble competition for a
good cause. It may be a way of "cleansing"
one's own religious and philosophical convic¬
tions. A great deal depends on whether the
atmosphere in which the discussion takes place
is one of mutual respect or religious war.
Faith in a world without God, a world ruled
by enlightened intellect, designed in a laboratory
and cleansed of religion such a faith is Utopian
and dangerous. Utopian because there is no his¬
torical evidence to support this belief: secular¬
ization changes the role of religion but does
not eliminate the need for it.
For the rationalist, the main axis of the
Catholic vision of the world is that of a helpless
individual, enclosed by his feelings of guilt and
the authority controlling him. I think differ¬
ently: the main pivot of the Catholic view of the

Faith and reason
by Adam Michnik
world is a human being invested by God with
such self-esteem that he bends his knees only
before God. Some repent in the confessional,
others do it elsewhere. But one has to respect the
choice of others: the confessional is a place in
which to give an account of one's conscience, and
this is essential for everyone.
In the story of the shepherd and the sheep,
the rationalist sees the conscious surrender of
freedom by the Catholic. I think differently. A
Catholic knows that human beings can accept
God and his commands only as free subjects.
That is why a Catholic must always choose
freedom against slavery.
But the question remains: how should this
freedom be exercised? Is Pope John Paul IPs
statement that "freedom is not moral relativism"
not worth serious consideration? Do we not
need an institution which will refuse to submit
to the latest fashions and situations and will
The annual pilgrimage to
Czestochowa in Poland, above,
has attracted crowds since the
17th century.
obstinately remind us what is good and what is
bad?
I am afraid of a world of rationality without
limits and of culture without the sacred, for it
would be a world without morality and without
culture. I am also afraid of the logic of a religious
cold war which extremists on both sides of the
barricade are eager to put forward.
The need for a confessional
One can understand the world without visiting
temples, and want to live without a shepherd yet
defend the right to have a shepherd and a teacher.
One can make the effort to see, behind the
words and institutions, people who deserve
respect, living with the conviction that Christ
blessed them with faith and called upon them to
lead a responsible and compassionate life, a life
of dignity and hope. 19

Below, Allegory of Reason, a
French painting dating from the
revolutionary period (artist
unknown).
Opposite page, The Good
Shepherd. (Italian engraving,
about 1800).
On the brink of mass insanity
In this world which is dangerously approaching
the brink of mass insanity, I think that religion
and secular rationalism should coexist. The con¬
flict between the religious fundamentalist and
the irreligious nihilist can be transformed into a
kind of ecumenical peace. The intellect could be
a guarantor against political doctrines which,
in the name of ethnic, social and religious soli¬
darity, call for absolute obedience. This will be
a constant source of resistance to political char¬
latans, but not to the Gospel.
The totalitarian experience has revealed the
undisputed importance of the Church. The
stand taken by the Church then showed its
other face, its virtuous face, at a time when the
intellect tended to seek reconciliation with a
reality which seemed impossible to change.

Remembrance of the Cross called upon people
to fight against slavery. This remembrance was
a source of courage and the wisdom of the heart.
I would thus suggest to the Catholic and
the secular rationalist the following: demand
from yourself as much as you can; forgive others
as much as you can.
A perfectly devout world and a completely
secular, rationalized world are the two faces of
the same utopia. Every attempt to realize this
utopia has led to a multiplication of conflicts and
sins. Sin and the defence of the sacred are part of
human experience. So too are the absurd and the
defence of reason.
ADAM MICHNIK,
of Poland, is Editor-in-Chief of
Gazeta Wyborcza, Poland's
biggest-selling daily paper.
Among his many books are The
Church and the Left (1977) and
Polish Questions (1987).

