'Most successful
Japanese businessmen
have the skills of the
samurai in the sense
that they are never
afraid to take difficult
decisions and do not



flinch from bad news'
JAPAN i/ The new samurai
byJohn Harford
Above, a computer-
generated image of Yin
and Yang
H
OW is it that a relatively small island
country with hardly any natural
resources has become such a powerful
force in world trade? One simple story tells
everything. In 1952 the small Japanese com¬
pany that was eventually to become Sony Cor¬
poration struck a deal with Bell Labs of the
United States for the production of transistors.
The American company's last words of advice
were, "Whatever you do, do not try to use tran¬
sistors in radio sets; they cannot accept the elec¬
trical frequencies required."
Later, having solved the frequency problem,
and thus helped to launch the transistor revo¬
lution, the Japanese company set itself the objec¬
tive of producing a miniature radio that would
fit into a shirt pocket. Unfortunately the
designers were unsuccessful in producing a
model that was quite small enough, and so all the
members of the sales force were issued with
shirts with extra wide pockets.
The sense of purpose illustrated by this story
is one of the outstanding features of Japanese
business practice. It is based on qualities that are
simple to describe in words but very difficult to
put into practice. The qualities are respect, trust,
loyalty, courage, practicality, solidity, substance,
simplicity, brevity, calmness, tolerance, patience,
perseverance, clarity and wisdom. To understand
their place in Japanese business one has to go
much deeper than studying such outward mani¬
festations of social behaviour as politeness, def¬
erence and courtesy. These are only external reflec¬
tions from a deep pool. One needs to look at the 35

tffigy of the Buddha on
Repulse Bay, Hong Kong.
36
whole context of Japanese culture, which has
grown and been influenced for centuries by a
number of concepts, philosophies and religions.
Some of the most significant of these influ¬
ences came from China via Taoism, Confu¬
cianism and Chan (Zen) Buddhism. The written
language of Japan also came originally from
China, as did Japanese medicine and military tac¬
tics, and many philosophical concepts. One
good example of this influence is the Japanese
adoption of the Chinese character system. There
are literally thousands of calligraphic symbols in
the average Japanese daily newspaper. (To read
a paper it is necessary to know about 2,000
characters). The ability to perform this incred¬
ible feat of recognition and mental storage is
developed by the repetitive practice of writing
characters from a very early age. By the time a
child is four, in some cases even younger, he or
she will have absorbed the skills of patience,
perseverance, endurance and the "work ethic"
four of the most potent attributes of successful
management.
The universe and the individual
The Japanese regard individuals as a micro¬
cosm of the universe and as irrevocably bound

to changes which continually occur. This puts
humankind firmly in its place in the order of
things. Most of them understand the concept of
harmonizing and not conflicting with natural
events. The idea of change is indicated by the
concept of Yin-Yang, the mutual interaction
of positive and negative forces which not only
oppose each other but also mutually support
each other. The Japanese believe a balance
between Yin and Yang forces must be continu¬
ally sought in all matters. The saying that "the
only thing that is constant is change" is an
everyday reminder that one should always be
taking corrective action to retain one's balance.
The concept of Yin and Yang can be seen in
the fluctuations between night and day, male
and female, hot and cold, dark and light.
Its importance in business forecasting and
planning rests on the belief that changes or
events can be predicted in advance to the extent
that a sudden increase in Yang will be immedi¬
ately followed by a rapid descent to extreme Yin
and vice versa. In other words, if corrective
action is not taken quickly, disaster will follow.
When changes occur too rapidly in nature,
thunderstorms, earthquakes and flooding result.
Parallel situations arise in business if things are
done in a precipitate manner. Accordingly busi¬
ness planning in Japan takes into account the
advisability of introducing change slowly and
harmoniously.
Planning and ritual
The exploratory process that is carried out
before embarking on a business project can be
likened to rituals that are associated with
preparing land for sowing and date back to
ancient times. The ground must be fertile, the
seeds (ideas) must be of good quality and must
be placed at the right spacing and depth so as not
to interfere with each other. The ground must be
well drained and irrigated if necessary, and weeds
must be discouraged.
Plans are based on an idea or ideas. In Japan
ideas are allowed to sprout naturally into matu¬
rity, and since they are taken seriously they are
subject to quality control, like any other
product! When the Japanese have an idea they
do not go around telling everyone about it,
they put it aside mentally and allow it to mature.
This process is called pondering, or searching
for perfect clarity, literally waiting for the mud
to settle down. The idea is then looked at by a
group, whose members take the concept away
as individuals and apply the pondering process
themselves. This process may be repeated many
times before the group agrees that the concept
is viable, for a plan is constructed like a pyramid
built in wafer-thin layers, the thinner the better.
No new layer is added until the previous one
has set hard. The bottom layers receive input
from all members of the group, and the final
Japanese managers take
part in a rigorous training
course at Fuji Nomiya,
1 00 km from Tokyo.
37

38
JOHN HARFORD
is a British engineer and
management consultant who
has first-hand knowledge of
Japanese management and
business methods, on which he
has lectured widely. He is a
registered practitioner of
Chinese medicine.
layer represents the approval and go-ahead from
the chief executive or board of the company.



This process exercises the skill of patience: "With
a light top and heavy bottom, solidity and inspi¬
ration are present and success is guaranteed."
The group pondering method is used exten¬
sively for solving problems. It is very effective
for optimizing human resources and means that
doing things in a fit of enthusiasm is avoided.
Dealing with difficult problems
The key to dealing with difficult problems in
Japanese eyes is Ki, "internal strength". In
ancient Japan survival meant avoiding immi¬
nent death at the hands of a warlord by devel¬
oping martial and military skills and belonging
to a group. Professional soldiers or samurai
acted as protectors to the group, who paid the
samurai's salaries. The samurai had a strict code
of honour and conduct and were impervious
to suffering and hardship; they also had to be
masters of strategy and tactics. Only men of
iron resolution, outstanding courage and
strength could withstand the training. The one
skill that was paramount was calmness under
pressure. The development of principles
requiring these qualities and involving mental,
physical and spiritual toughness and the will to
succeed is at the heart of management training
in Japanese companies today. This "whole
person training" is carried out in addition to
learning the skills and techniques of business
management. Thus most successful Japanese
businessmen have the skills of the samurai in the
sense that they are never afraid to take difficult
decisions and do not flinch from bad news.
The belly
If you look at any representation of a Buddha or
a Japanese warrior, you will see that they both
have a well-developed belly. The belly inJapanese
is called the Hara, and traditionally training the
Hara has been an important activity for many
Japanese. It is of fundamental importance to
anyone wishing to accomplish great things. "A
man without a developed Hara will not aspire to
greatness" is a common Japanese saying.
The Hara represents the "seat of life and
vitality". InJapanese medicine the internal organs
and the energy associated with them form part of
the mental process as well: "To think only with
the head is considered insubstantial." The
Japanese word for a plan, Fukian, literally means
"belly project", thus implying that there must be
heart in the plan as well as purely intellectual
content. Traditionally, the strength of the Hara is
developed by sitting or standing, coupled with
deep abdominal breathing and strong mental
concentration. This causes the Ki or life force
energy to grow and hence increases the power to
get things done. Strong Ki is evident in Judo,
Karate, Kendo, archery, sword drawing, the tea
ceremony, flower arranging, meditation and
successful businessmen!
The concept of Ki is baffling to most occi¬
dentals. It cannot be seen, heard or smelled, and
therefore it is not amenable to normal methods
of reasoning or study. An appreciation of Ki
can be achieved by working with an accom¬
plished teacher, by doing and feeling things
under close supervision. The irony is that Ki, the
most important driving force in any kind of
activity, is an imponderable, but its reality is
readily accepted in the East. Perhaps the term
"inner strength" could make it understandable
to occidentals. No movement or activity can
occur without the consumption of Ki energy.
The quest for balance
Enlightened Japanese managers understand the
need to avoid excess and the need for balance and
restraint to avoid illness caused by psychological
disturbances or imbalances. Their approach is
based on the belief, central to Japanese traditional
medicine (which is itself based on traditional Chi¬
nese medicine) that the physical, mental and spir¬
itual aspects of any disease or illness cannot be sep¬
arated from one another in diagnosis or treatment.
The patient must be treated holistically.

Two of the most important features of
Japanese medicine and culture are the Yin-Yang
theory, described above, and the Laws of the
Five Elements. In simple terms, if your Yin and
Yang energies are not balanced you are sick and
it is the doctor's job to create a balance.
According to the Laws of the Five Elements, all
human beings are made up of a combination of
five elements (or tendencies): wood, fire, earth,
metal and water. The five elements are in turn
related to the internal organs, the emotions,
colours, smells, tastes and the seasons. In busi¬
ness terms they are concerned with helping in
staff selection, creating effective organizations,
creating a harmonious working environment
and reducing stress and tension generally.
Element Organs Emotion
Fire Heart Joy
Earth Spleen Sympathy
Metal Lungs Sadness
Water Kidneys Fear
Wood Liver Anger
Training and leadership
Business training methods in Japan are practical
and follow a traditional pattern. Trainers are
highly respected for their skills and trainees are
expected to pay full attention at all times. The
responsibilities are mutual: the teacher gives out
what the student needs, and the student absorbs.
Each party must be humble and respect the other.
The training of young managers is similar to
martial art or military training. The emphasis is
on doing real things rather than debating or
attending lectures or "business games".
It is not normal for graduates to go straight
into management. When they join a company
they are usually assigned to a very experienced
mentor with specialized skills. Usually three or
more graduates will work in a single office for up
to three years, during which time they are given
tasks to accomplish under guidance from the
mentor. The system of training is akin to a "drip
feed", which means that substantial skills are
acquired slowly and organically.
The Western world could learn much from
what makes the Japanese so successful in business.
It is not just a case of adopting Japanese tech¬
niques and technology but of recognizing and
developing the necessary human skills. Such a
process would take time, but the qualities and
attributes can be learned by exercising determi¬
nation and constantly keeping an open and flex¬
ible mind. The East has borrowed heavily from
the West in improving its business performance;
the West could also take note of the lessons of
Japanese history and culture and consider
applying them in its own organizations. 39
