R H
Thomas Mann
The downfall ofidealism
III this second excerptfrom the
address he gave in 1935 at a meeting
organized in Nice by the
International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation on the
theme ofthe education ofmodern
man (see previous issue), the German
writer Thomas Mann has harsh
wordsfor the moral waywardness of
the masses and their betrayal ofthe
intellect. This text, written almost
sixtyyears ago at the time ofthe rise
ofNazism, is in some ways still
strikingly topical. The third and
final instalment will appear in next
month's issue.
Text selected and presented
4#£ by Edgardo Canton
THE First World War was not the
prime cause of the impoverish¬
ment of European civilization. It
only accelerated and accentuated it. It
was not the war that threw up the gigantic
wave of eccentric barbarity and dema¬
gogical, primitive brutality that is over¬
whelming the world; it only enlarged and
intensified its blind rage. Modern man is
both the victim and the product of the
disorganized and confusing as well as
exciting and exhilarating impressions that
assail him. The fantastic development of
technological expertise with its triumphs
and disasters, the blare and thrills of
sporting records, the exaggerated impor¬
tance and remuneration given to crowd-
drawing "stars", the boxing matches fought
for fabulous prizes and held in vast arenas
before huge crowds these are some of
the characteristic features of our time,
along with the decadence and decline of
concepts that are edifying and salutary in
their severity, such as culture, the mind, art
and ideas. These are the conceptions of
the bourgeois age, the glad rags of nine¬
teenth-century idealism.
In fact the nineteenth century was
above all a period of idealism. With a cer¬
tain emotion we see todayjust how ideal¬
istic it was. It not only believed in the ben¬
efits of liberal democracy but in socialism,
a socialism that would elevate the masses,
instruct them and have them participate
in the advantages of science, culture and
art, in short, in civilization. Today we are
convinced that it is more important and
also easier to dominate the masses by
increasingly perfecting the crude art of
using their psychology, i.e. by replacing
their education with propaganda, not, it
would seem, without the intimate con¬
sent of the masses, who can easily be
swayed by dynamic propaganda that
seems more modern and more attractive
to them than any educational idea. The
masses are organizable, and it can be seen
that they always accept organization grate¬
fully, whatever the spirit behind it may
be, even if it is the spirit of violence. Vio¬
lence is a principle that greatly simplifies
things; it is no surprise that it should be
understood by the masses.
If these modern masses were merely
primitive, if they only consisted ofhappy,
naive barbarians, it would be possible to
get along with them and hope for some¬
thing, but they have two qualities that
make them quite simply appalling: they
are sentimental, and they are disastrously
philosophical. The mind of the masses,
imbued with noisy modernism as it is,
speaks in romantic jargon. It talks of race,
the earth and blood, a stack of old ideas
both traditional and pious	 The result
is a hypocritical blend of sentimentality
and popular stupidity bathed in mawk-
ishness, a triumphant combination that
characterizes and defines our times.
THE IDEALISTIC REBELLIOM
Things are even worse concerning the
masses' philosophical system. Of course,
they didn't invent it; it has trickled down to
them little by little from the intellectual
spheres above. The role played by the
mind for several decades now has been
extremely remarkable. It has turned
against itself, has begun to indulge in irony
at its own expense and has pathetically
abdicated in favour of life and the gener¬
ative forces of the unconscious, of the
dynamic, and of the subterranean deities,
those august and dark creative forces
whose maternal breast is the sacred source
of all life. We all know of this attack by the
mind against itself, against reason that it
has pilloried by accusing it of destroying
life: it is a bold and fascinating spectacle,

E
Thomas Mann in 1936.
but apt to engender confusion so that per¬
haps it would have been better not to let
the general public in.
It is clear that the struggle against ide¬
alism was started by idealism. The nine¬
teenth century was so bitterly in love with
truth that through Ibsen's voice it even
wanted to recognize the "lie of life" as
indispensable. But it is easy to see that
there is a big difference between the
person who accepts the lie because of
painful pessimism and bitter irony and
the person who accepts it because of a
lack of love for the truth. Today this dif¬
ference is no longer apparent to everyone:
Nietzsche's polemical virulence against
Platonism, Socraticism and Christianity
was the polemic of a man more like Pascal
than Cesare Borgia or Machiavelli. It was
the ascetic victory of a Christian-born
man over himself. Marx's fight against
German idealism's conception of truth
and morality was not without analogies to
Nietzsche's. Marx undertook the struggle
because of idealism, because of love for a
new truth and justice and not out of con¬
tempt for the mind.
This contempt was to be expressed in
the decades that romanticized the ideal¬
istic rebellion against idealism, thereby
opening up dangerous possibilities ofpop¬
ularity. Those who professed these theo¬
ries neither saw nor cared about the dan¬
gers to which humanity and civilization
are exposed by any intellectual attack on
the mind, about the seeds of latent reac¬
tion in a revolution of this sort, about the
dark possibilities ofabuse they can lead to
when, transposed into reality, they
become in the bat of an eyelid the charter
for all kinds of "spiritualism", for all kinds
of human indignity, for impudent con¬
tempt for truth, freedom, justice and
honour. We are forced to observe that the
mind has been lacking in a sense of
responsibility and has not understood
that morality and mind go together, that
their rise and fall happen simultaneously
and that contempt for reason leads to
moral licence. Thousands of proponents
of irrationalism have not bothered to find
out whether or not they are leading the
people into moral impoverishment and
training them to be apathetic towards all
kinds of atrocities.
THE HULLABALLOO OF THE FAIR
The new masses heard rumours about the
sensational downfall of the mind and
reason that had taken place in the higher
spheres; they learned that this was the
latest thing, and they did not seem very
surprised about it, for movements of this
kind had already long been rampant
among them. Many things that would
never have been accepted by the more
demanding humanity of the nineteenth
century had again become possible, had
once more insinuated themselves into our
habits, owing to our age's fairground hul-
laballoo: all kinds of occult sciences, half-
sciences and quackery, obscure sects and
stupid back-street religions, bare-faced
bluffing, blind and simple faith and the
airs and graces of an old charlatan, all
these aberrations had their day, drew in
the masses and set the tone of the times.
Many cultivated men saw these things
neither as a vulgar, modernistic hotch¬
potch nor as the degeneration of civiliza¬
tion. Instead they mystically proclaimed
that we were witnessing the resurrection
ofdeep-rooted vital forces and venerable
popular feelings. The ground was even
prepared for the most absurd and the most
shameful of mass superstitions. And this
was not the vague and thoughtless super¬
stition of the past, but a modern democ¬
ratic superstition based on the right
of every person to think, in short a super¬
stition that went with "philosophical
ideas".
(TO BE CONTINUED)
4J
