EASTERN EUROPE */ Voices from the past
Each nation has its own
language, history and
ways ofworking
32
SINCE the fall of the Berlin Wall, eastern
Europe has been overrun by Western busi¬
nessmen eager to initiate entrepreneurs in the
former communist countries into their methods so
as to establish dialogue, if not partnership, with
them. Well armed with advice and management
techniques, they are sometimes welcomed with
open arms and sometimes eyed with suspicion, but
their message, a simple one, is always the same: for
more than forty years you have been running
your businesses without having to face competi-
tition or reckon with market forces, and we're
here to let you into the secrets of competitivity.
Whether they are German, French, British or
by Tatjana Qobokar
Italian, they set up more and more joint ventures,
consultancies and business schools. There are a few
surprises in store for them along the way.
A/lore differences than meet the eye
There are surprises on both sides. Western busi¬
nessmen realize that, contrary to the stereotyped
image they have of the command economy
laggardly decision-making processes, inefficiency
in the workplace, buck-passing and the rest
there are marked differences from country to
country. It was convenient, between 1945 and
1990, to lump the whole of eastern Europe from

r\ foundry at Nowa Huta
in the suburbs of Krakow,
the site of Poland's largest
iron and steel industry
complex.
the Baltic to the Black Sea together as a monolithic
bloc, all ruled over in the same way by socialist
regimes. Nobody took much notice of the fact
that the peoples of the Iron Curtain countries
were quite different one from another, and had
their own cultural identities that inevitably influ¬
enced management styles.
Meanwhile, east European entrepreneurs
were surprised to find, in their dealings with
Westerners, that the efficiency, consistency and
speed of decision-making that were the proud
hallmarks of Western business were sometimes
conspicuous for their absence, and that those
dealings could be more or less easy, depending on
where their partners came from.
The rapprochement that has followed the
breakup of the eastern bloc has, if nothing else,
taught those on either side that each nation has its
own language, history and traditions but also its
own way of working. There is, however, a danger
that these differing characteristics will again be
smothered, in the countries of eastern Europe,
under management methods copied from the West.
They should be studied systematically so that they
can be integrated into the local business context.
Between 1985 and 1992, we were able to carry
out research in this field in Poland, Hungary,
Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
research brought to light some widely differing
behaviour patterns and value systems linked with
the history of each of these countries.
Idealism and pragmatism
"To work in peace, I have to know that the
manager likes me," an overseer in a Polish fac
tory told us. We were at first surprised at such
an emotionally loaded attitude to relationships
in the workplace, but found it fully under¬
standable once it was set against the general
background of the enterprise.
Our interviewee expressed a strong need for
trust and for constant reassurance as to his supe¬
rior's feelings towards him. From other clues we
came to the conclusion that the bonds of soli¬
darity between the workers in the factory were
similar to the bonds of comradeship so much in
evidence between the soldiers on the many bat¬
tlefields of Poland's stormy past.
Because of this solidarity, patriotic feelings
far removed from everyday realities are involved
in attitudes to work. Those we interviewed laid
little emphasis on the job in hand or the factory's
performance but placed great emphasis on the
importance they attached to Poland's prosperity
and glory. "Poles are stirred by anything to do
with the homeland," as A. Podgorecki confirms
in Une théorie de la sociétépolonaise (1991).
The motivations of Hungarian workers, on
the other hand, are simpler and more pragmatic.
In the factory we investigated, individual ambi¬
tions are subordinated to the cohesion of the
group. A good worker, in the eyes of the super¬
visor, is one who is unassuming, talks little and
does his workmates' jobs for them, an attitude
viewed as desirable and indeed necessary inas¬
much as it serves the higher interest of the group.
The group in question may be a production
unit, a department of the administration or a
maintenance service. Its cohesion is seamless,
and it tries to solve its problems without "out¬
side" interference. Although such loyalty is not
The siege of Czestochowa
by the Swedes in 1655 is
pictured in this late 17th-
century painting by a folk
artist. The siege ended in
victory for the Poles.
.:
r-
y^v"ÉÉih \ 3 3

**.<**'&,
feasants of Swabian
descent in the Banat,
Hungary, are shown in this
early 20th-century
postcard.
34
TATJANA GLOBOKAR,
a Slovenian-born economist, is
a research associate with
France's National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS).
She is the author of many
studies on the economies of
east and central European
countries.
necessarily reflected in a feeling of belonging vis-
à-vis the enterprise, it does on the other hand
give rise to keen competititon between the dif¬
ferent groups, each of which wants to outdo
the others.
The roots of this attitude go back into the
past of a society that is a patchwork of peoples
and religions, obliged by a hostile environment
to turn inwards upon itself, coalescing in feudal
times around the local gentry. In a context of
such ethnic and religious diversity, community
spirit was the glue that held society together.
Family and village communities
We observed similar, albeit more individual¬
istic, attitudes in a Slovene factory, The emphasis
here was on know-how, which seemed to be
the one and only criterion for accepting and
tolerating other people. "We get on well with
this foreman. He's always been in the iron¬
works. At least he knows his stuff", we were told
by a workman, while the foreman in question
told us he always listens to the workman because
"who knows the job better than him?"
We built up from this a picture of Slovene-
style management under which the workers can
develop their skills if they are placed in an atmos¬
phere of collective mutual aid. The strong con¬
cern for equality that permeates their relation¬
ships with each other gives them a feeling of
dignity and trust. In organizational terms, this
is reflected in a negative attitude towards exces¬
sively hierarchical structures and a positive one
towards internal communication, enabling
everyone to have his say and prove his point.
The reason why Slovenes set such store by
equality, mutual aid and competence is that the
basis of their society is the village community.
When Slovenia was occupied territory, the pos¬
sibilities for climbing the social ladder were
very limited outside of that community. The
community thus favoured equality and soli
darity among its members, whose only way of
making their mark was by means of their skills.
As our experience in Slovenia had confirmed
the part played by different cultures in former
Yugoslavia, we turned our attention to Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
In this country inhabited by Bosnian Mus¬
lims, Catholic Croats and Orthodox Serbs, the
influence of the "zadruga" model of social orga¬
nization is still strongly felt. The zadruga itself,
the traditional extended family of the Balkans
where the sons lived and worked together under
the authority of the father, has all but disap¬
peared but is still very much a part of the mental
landscape. The two focal points are the father
and the brothers. The father is the chief incar¬
nate, whose duty it is to protect the family com¬
munity and dedicate himself to its welfare. The
brothers represent the submission of individuals
to the group, which is bonded together by strong
feelings of solidarity.
This family hierarchy appeared to influence
the two-way relationships in the factory we
researched, the higher echelons exercising
paternal authority and the workers practising
fraternal solidarity. Superiors took on the role of
the all-powerful, protective but also well-
beloved father, a role their subordinates were
content to let them play. The "chief", of what¬
ever rank, is the one who knows everything,
anticipates everything and is also prepared to
listen to everyone. On the shop floor, on the
other hand, where an egalitarian spirit reigns,
relations among the workers are characterized
by familiarity and spontaneous co-operation.
The expressions "our factory", "our house"
and "our family" cropped up continuously in
interviews. Each member of this "family" had a
specified role and his ambitions in working life
were integrated into the collective endeavour.
What are the lessons for
management?
This brief overview of the distinctive features of



certain countries of eastern and central Europe
clearly shows that modern management requires
a thorough knowledge of the employee's cultural
and social background. As of now, the man¬
agers and management consultants who get the
best results are those who display the ability to
look, listen and act on intuition: it is useful to
know that unduly hierarchical structures should
not be imposed in countries where the com¬
munity spirit predominates and that individu¬
alism should not be accorded preferential treat¬
ment in those where the individual willingly
takes a back seat not only so as to avoid con¬
flicts but also to help give full scope to the abil¬
ities of each individual as part of the common
endeavour.
