renatal diagnosis:
foretelling the quality of life
by Hans Galjaard
Mother and Child (1992)
mixed media on wood
(60 x 60 cm) by the Moroccan
painter Hamid.
DNA technology has revolutionized the
laboratory diagnosis of genetic disease. It
has also provided new perspectives for the detec¬
tion of very minute chromosomal aberrations
which are invisible under the microscope. In
the near future DNA probes for specific parts of
each human chromosome will facilitate large-
scale prenatal diagnosis in women at risk of
giving birth to offspring with a congenital mal¬
formation or genetic disease. They will also
contribute to the elucidation of the causes of
hitherto unexplained mental retardation and
physical handicap.
At present some 750 disease genes have been
Screening for most genetic
risks will eventually be possible
through analysis ofchromosomal
aberrations. But social or religious
factors may impede the applications
ofscientificprogress.
identified. This has widened the scope of the pre¬
natal diagnosis of genetic diseases and the detec¬
tion of gene-mutation carriers, who are usually
healthy themselves but may have an increased
risk of producing affected children. DNA tech¬
nology also offers new perspectives for the
development of animal models for human dis¬
eases, making it possible to study pathogenesis
and work out new therapeutic strategies. The
latter will be especially important in the var¬
ious types of cancer for which specific chro¬
mosomal aberrations and gene defects have been
identified both in germ cells and somatic cells.
These techniques of diagnosis and carrier
identification form the basis for genetic coun¬
selling to couples who on the basis of their
family history or exposure to possible harmful
environmental factors fear the birth of a hand¬
icapped child. The choices are often difficult
and involve refraining from pregnancy, accepting
the risk, adoption, fertilization with donor
gametes, or prenatal diagnosis with the option
of terminating the pregnancy if the foetus is
found to be affected. Follow-up studies in our
own centre revealed that 50 per cent of couples
at high genetic risk refrain from pregnancy when 17

Current techniques of prenatal
diagnosis and detection of
genetic diseases make it
possible to counsel couples
who risk giving birth to a
handicapped child because of
their family ancestry. Above, a
married couple in Japan.
18
HANS GALJAARD,
of The Netherlands, is Professor
of human genetics at Erasmus
University and Chairman of the
Department of Clinical Genetics
at the University Hospital of
Rotterdam. A member of his
country's Royal Academy of
Sciences and its National Health
Council, he has published
hundreds of articles in scientific
journals, chapters in many
specialized works, and several
monographs on technological,
social and ethical aspects of cell
biology and genetics.



there is no prenatal test available. If, however,
there is such a test, 85 per cent of the couples
choose to have progeny because they know
they can avoid the birth of a handicapped child.
Hence, prenatal diagnosis should not only be
considered as a technology leading to abortion
but also as an approach that may provide re¬
assurance and stimulate couples, who might not
otherwise have dared to do so, to reproduce.
In the wealthy countries clinical genetics
services are universally accepted as part of
modern health care. The only controversial issue
is whether or not a pregnancy should be termi¬
nated because of an affected foetus. Abortion
remains ethically, religiously unacceptable to a
minority. Nearly all countries offering this
option have, however, legalized abortion up to
twenty-four weeks of pregnancy and a few
countries, like the United Kingdom, do not
even have a time limit in the case of an affected
foetus. The only remaining concern is social
pressure on those parents who give birth to an
affected child when this could have been
avoided. It is clear that freedom of choice should
also be guaranteed for people who for moral
reasons do not want to use a specific technique.
In the Scandinavian and northwestern Euro¬
pean countries today 50 to 60 per cent of preg¬
nant women of advanced child-bearing age
undergo prenatal diagnosis and the rest do not
want it, even if they know of its existence.
Social attitudes to screening carriers of
hereditary diseases
In a number of populations a particular genetic
mutation is so prevalent that population
screening for carriership is justified, provided
that a reliable, easy and cheap test is available,
and that the population involved has been well
informed. Such carrier screening programmes
have led to a marked reduction or an eradication
of ß-thalassaemia, a hereditary anaemia which is
found amongst Mediterranean populations, of
sickle-cell anaemia in Cuba, and of the severe
neurological Tay-Sachs disease among Jews in
North America and Israel.
The importance of economic, social and reli¬
gious factors is evident in the success or failure
of population screening for carriership. In some
Mediterranean countries where the prevalence
of ß-thalassaemia carriers is as high as one in
seven, the church and health authorities have co¬
operated, and the same is true for the Jewish
authorities in North America and Israel in the
case of the Tay-Sachs screening programme.
In the United States, however, attempts at
carrier screening for sickle-cell anaemia among the
black population, one in ten of which is a carrier,
have failed. There are several reasons for this.
Almost 60 per cent of black children are born out
of marriage and 80 per cent are born to very
young mothers, so that it is difficult or impossible
to test both partners and provide timely genetic
counselling. In addition, many blacks and His-
panics are not insured for health care and cannot
afford genetic testing. Furthermore, termination
of pregnancy in federally funded clinics has for a
long period been impossible. Finally, when car¬
rier screening was propagated, many members of
the black community felt it to be yet another
means of discrimination.
The fact that carrier screening for sickle-cell
anaemia has been successful among the black
population in Cuba demonstrates that political
and social background plays an important role
in the acceptance of genetics services. Cuba and
China are both examples of low income coun¬
tries which have given a high priority to health
care and education. Contrary to many other .
Asian countries contraceptive use in China is
high (71 to 86 per cent), people are well informed
about prenatal care and the one-child-family
policy motivates couples to make use of all
available technology to ensure the birth of a
healthy child. The main limitation is the rela¬
tively high cost of genetic testing.
In India, Bangladesh and Pakistan, which
account for 30 per cent of the world's child mor¬
tality and for 40 per cent of its non-immunized

"About 6,000 conditions in human beings are now known to be associated with a
microscopically invisible defect in a single gene, and more than 2,500 of these
concern genetic diseases which result in early death or chronic impairment. It is
possible to diagnose 400 of these diseases by biochemical analysis."
children, illiteracy, low contraceptive use (12 to
43 per cent), inadequate education, the status of



women and poverty are'major limitations on the
future application of gene technology. The deeply
rooted preference for male offspring, which has
a religious basis in Hinduism, has unfortunately
led to misuse of prenatal diagnosis, as it had pre¬
viously for economic reasons in China. In India
there are private clinics which perform prenatal
sex determinations for members of the higher
social classes who may terminate their pregnancy
if the foetus is female. So far only one state has
imposed a legal ban on this practice, and attempts
at national legislation have failed.
In countries where Islam is the major reli¬
gion (their total population is about one billion
people worldwide) different religious schools,
political structures and ethnic backgrounds are
associated with different interpretations of the
Qur'an in terms of reproductive technology. In
general, diagnostic methods and genetic coun¬
selling will be accepted, as well as certain con¬
traceptives, depending on the number and sex of
the children already present in the family, and the
goal. Sterilization and abortion are usually not
acceptable. In most Muslim societies abortion
during the first forty days of pregnancy is per¬
mitted ("halal"), and after 120 days is strictly
forbidden ("haram"). In between those times the
soul is believed to enter the foetus and abortion
might be considered under special circumstances,
but it is not liked ("marrouh"). This excludes
amniocentesis the removal of fluid surrounding
the foetus in the womb for therapeutic or diag¬
nostic purposes as an option for couples at risk
of having an affected child, but there would be
some scope for early procedures like chorionic
villus biopsy or foetal cell testing in maternal
blood. Family and tribal traditions play a major
role, which mean an additional obstacle to the
acceptance of certain genetic services.
Religion also plays a role in Latin America
where the Roman Catholic Church is widely
influential and where abortion laws have not
been liberalized. Unequal distribution of wealth,
illiteracy, low contraceptive use in rural areas and
a high rate of teenage pregnancy are other major
problems. Again, as in several other developing
countries, some private clinics offer genetics
services, but their use is restricted to the few who
can afford them.
An interesting illustration of the importance
of religion and tradition is provided by Japan, a
country with a high gross national product, very
advanced technology and the world's lowest
infant mortality rate. However, clinical genetics
is hardly developed in Japan, for two main rea¬
sons. The presence of a handicapped relative is
often hidden from the outside world because it is
associated with feelings of guilt and shame. This
makes it difficult to perform more extensive
family studies on the basis of an index patient.
Secondly, despite one of the highest abortion
rates in the world for social reasons, the Japanese
tradition does not approve of judgments of the
value of a human being and hence the finding of
an abnormal foetus is not accepted as a reason for
abortion. Wealth and technology alone are not
sufficient for the incorporation of new services
into the health care system.
In order to implement genetic services at a
global level much has to be done to improve
living conditions (clean water, sanitation,
housing, nutrition, work), reduce infant mor¬
tality, illiteracy and poverty, and extend educa¬
tion, especially of women, in order to make
people aware of the possible benefits of contra¬
ceptive use and timely prenatal care.
In countries such as India, the
status of women may be an
obstacle to some applications
of gene technology. Below,
Indian village women in
Karnataka hold a weekly
meeting to manage the craft
co-operative they have created.
19
