MEXICO Locol loyalties: a hidden asset
by¡eon Ruffier and Daniel Vûlovilnào
A modern factory can run smoothly without a highly skilled workforce
Apprentices being trained
at a car factory in Puebla,
Mexico.
ACCORDING to an idea so widespread that
it has almost become a truism, ultra¬
modern factories that work properly are
only to be found in countries with industrial
experience, high-quality infrastructures, plentiful
capital and a skilled workforce. If accepted, this
idea would mean that the less developed coun¬
tries are inevitably condemned to backward¬
ness, and would commit the world to an increas¬
ingly unfair division of labour and wealth. Yet
companies in various parts of the world are suc¬
cessfully using sophisticated technology without
having a skilled workforce or a strong industrial
background.
Such cases are of course rare. They have also
been very little studied. Many research workers
have investigated the most efficient factories in
Japan, Europe and North America, but their
conclusions are only valid for a limited number
of countries that enjoy similar conditions. In this
article we shall see how a small factory sixty
kilometres from Mexico City has managed to
become highly competitive at producing
yoghurt.
Teething troubles
Beyond an ungated level crossing lies a red-brick
estancia built around a chapel, a relic of past
grandeur. Here a French multinational company
has set up a yoghurt factory not just anywhere
but in the middle of a big cattle farm. This once
had its own milk-packing shop, but it eventually
closed down, and the herd was considerably
reduced. Only a tenth of the milk used to make
the yoghurt comes from the estancia.
23

"Amate", a bark painting
by a Mexican folk artist.
24
JEAN RUFFIER,
of France, is a researcher with
the Groupe Lyonnais de
Sociologie Industrielle (GLYSI).
DANIEL V1LLAVICENCIO,
of Mexico, is a teacher and
researcher at the National
Autonomous University of
Mexico, in Mexico City. Like
Jean Ruffier he is a member of
the International Institute for
the Development of
Technologies, which analyses
successful industrial
undertakings in both the
industrialized and the
developing countries. The
present article is based on the
results of a survey carried out
between 1981 and 1984.
The estancia provided some of the factory's
first workers, and the French managers who
came to start it up and instal the automated pro¬
duction lines took great pains to train them.
The factory had, however, been planned and
built as though it were in Europe, and the most
advanced equipment had therefore been selected
for it an ill-considered choice, given that the
factory was one of the first in the group to open
in a country without much of an industrial tra¬
dition. Machines were brought in, and only
then were people recruited to operate them.
The company set about initiating the old dairy's
best workers into the operation of modern plant,
and managed it not very well, but at least the
factory was running.
Then an unforeseen conflict broke out
between the representatives of workers on the
old estancia and the local branch of the food
industry union, which they wanted to leave.
The management was powerless to prevent the
victory of the union, which managed to force it
to dismiss the dissident workers' representa¬
tives. In this way the company lost its most
highly-trained employees, who were in charge
of the most complex parts of its plant.
As a result of these events, which took place
five years after the factory started up, the French
management had to begin recruiting again. It
took on farm workers, recruited from far
enough away to ensure that the coalition that
gave rise to the conflict did not re-form. The fac¬
tory made a new start: it went on installing
machinery, and soon the new manager was its
only French employee. Two years later it ranked
among the most efficient in its group. How did
it become so successful?
A poorly qualified workforce
By and large, the operatives' only work experi¬
ence had been as farm labourers or domestic
servants. To start with, many workers could
neither read nor write. They knew nothing
about the dairy industry, and had never even
seen yoghurt until they arrived in the factory,
which was one of the first in Mexico to make it.
We looked in vain for home-made produce of a
similar kind on the local market. Hence, when
the workers joined the company it was their
first taste both of factory work and also of the
product they were going to make.
In the other factories in the group there are no
illiterate workers, and those who operate the
yoghurt-making equipment have at least some
technical knowledge of food processing and
they have been eating yoghurt since childhood.
In degree of specialization there is the same
contrast. The Mexican factory, though highly
automated, has neither skilled operators nor
electronics engineers. At all levels of its hierarchy
it is short of competent staff, which is hardly sur¬
prising given that the dairy industry is almost
non-existent in Mexico. Nevertheless it works
perfectly, and its yoghurt is renowned for its
quality. It is still highly competitive, even though
it now has to compete with other factories some
of which enjoy preferential treatment that
enables them to purchase milk at subsidized
prices. How does it manage to use state-of-the-
art technology without any of the advantages
that more developed countries have in this
respect?
On the production line, knowledge
is power
The main difficulty for ultramodern companies
stems from the great complexity of their equip¬
ment. Making yoghurt successfully on fully
automated production lines means not only
understanding dairy industry technology but
also having a clear idea about how the equipment
works and where it is located, and about con¬
tainer capacities and the transit time of the
product. It means knowing something about
electronic programming, and being able to trace
and repair mechanical and electronic faults to
say nothing of human error, technical break¬
downs and variations in the quality of the raw
materials, particularly milk.
Nobody is knowledgeable enough to master
all the machinery and production processes
single-handed. Exchange of information is there¬
fore crucial, and this is where things get com-

A ceremonial meal
during the San Andrés
fiesta in Mexico's Chiapas
state.
plicated. The workmen are not willing to pass on
what they know. A technician who taught all¬
comers what he had learnt, and so enabled them
to operate his piece of machinery, would thereby
become less indispensable. He supposes that
the system could then do without him. Thus the
technicians all try to keep some of their knowl¬
edge to themselves, thereby forcing the others to
bargain for their co-operation.
The dilemma is that if those in charge of
production do not exchange enough informa¬
tion, it is difficult for them to deal with unfore¬
seen production problems. Conversely, if they
do not protect themselves they become inter¬
changeable, and their efforts at self-improve¬
ment in their jobs will never be noticed or
rewarded. Furthermore, interchangeability calls
to mind one of the great bugbears of Mexican
culture: the doppelgänger or double, a malignant
being that can cause confusion and take a
person's place.
There is an obvious contradiction here
between the general interest and that of indi¬
viduals. The workers have everything to gain
from an efficient factory both higher wages
and greater job security so it would be in their
interests to communicate to the fullest extent.
But no one wants to give up all the information
he possesses.
Building up local loyalties
From their first conflict the factory workers
learnt that they were vulnerable and could count
neither on the union (which could turn against
them) nor on the management (which was weak
and could be forced into sackings). Most of
them had given up farm work to go into
industry, thereby boosting their incomes but
losing their place in their traditional society. In
their new jobs they were again in danger of
losing everything, and their only safeguard was
a new form of solidarity, which they were to
build inside the factory, in secret, on the basis of
their own traditions.
There are many different kinds of links
between the workmen. One is the system of
compadres, under which they are committed to
a broadly reciprocal, even-handed interchange
of favours, such as acting as godparents for each
other or each other's children at christenings,
first communions and betrothals. When one of
the compadres helps another to build a house, or
someone else to cope with health problems or
financial difficulties, he does so in the certainty
that in case of need the compadres will not let
him down. Another, still stronger link is that
between cuates or drinking companions, who 25

I erra cotta figurines from
Ocotlán, Oaxaca state,
Mexico.
confide in each other without inhibition, and are
sworn to complete loyalty. The compadres
system is common knowledge, but the network
of cuates is kept a secret.
Sociability inside the factory may also take
other forms, such as family ties and more or
less discreet liaisons. The women a very
tightly-knit group are in general opposed to
these liaisons, which may threaten the cohe-
siveness of their group. These women workers
are of course in a rather special position because
of their financial independence. They enjoy a
degree of independence that they consider
threatened both within the factory, where some
of them are subjected to sexual pressures, and
also outside, where their families try to get them
to resume their traditional role in the home. To
protect their independence they organize a range
of out-of-hours sports and games, from which
men are excluded.
All these networks have contributed greatly
to the technical success of the factory, in par¬
ticular by allowing the workmen to find a place
of their own in the production system.
Group loyalty and human error
In order to explain to us how yoghurt is made
on an industrial scale, a French engineer used
equations; a Mexican workman showed us the
pipes that carry the milk. We cannot say which
was the better explanation: we felt we under¬
stood them both.
The difference between these two approaches
is especially interesting when it comes to
tracking down the cause of a breakdown. The
French engineer will rely on a complete dia¬
gram of the production system, whereas the
Mexican workman will visualize the progress of
the milk in his mind's eye and think what might
have happened at each point in the circuit. His
big handicap is that he is only familiar with part
of the circuit, and so he has to collate his knowl-
26
edge with that of his colleagues. Such exchanges,
which oblige the individual workman to lift a
corner of the veil of mystery on which his
authority in the company is based, are quite
safe when they take place between compadres or
cuates, whose solidarity is total. In other words,
membership of a solidarity network makes it
possible to play the production game with less
risk.
The example of human error is particularly
telling. Most breakdowns involve a human ele¬
ment a mistake, negligence, or wrong treat¬
ment of a mechanical failure. In order not to have
to admit to his mistake in front of someone
else, the culprit first tries to repair the damage
himself at the risk of compounding the error
and making things worse. To protect himself
from possible punishment, he is tempted to
report the breakdown without mentioning what
he did after it happened, and this makes it far
more difficult to find out what has gone wrong.
By revealing his mistake to comrades who will
not betray him, the workman does his best to
keep production going whilst at the same time
safeguarding his own interests.
Our investigation showed that the solidarity
networks extended over various parts of the fac¬
tory and several levels of its hierarchy. They are
a key factor in the efficiency of the workforce.
These networks also play an important part
in training. Training someone means taking the
risk of being replaced by him, but a learner who
belongs to the same network as his supervisor
will do nothing detrimental to him. The man¬
agement realized that its attempts to get a senior
to train a junior not chosen by himself were
doomed to failure, but it also noticed that the
most skilled workmen surrounded themselves
with assistants. The number of assistants ended
up by becoming a status symbol: with one assis¬
tant you become important, but with two you
have no more need to go on working. Hence, the
number of assistants had to be kept down, but
without doing away with them altogether, so as
not to lose the advantage of the new recruits'
being taught by the old hands.
This tension between imported industrial
methods and local traditions is no doubt the
explanation for the factory's fine performance.
The French management stands for high and
increasing productivity. Meanwhile, the Mexican
solidarity networks facilitate productivity,
although that is not the reason why they exist.
They are quite capable of paralysing production,
if they think that serves their interests. The
management has been able to win their support
by showing itself deeply committed to the suc¬
cess of the firm, whilst at the same time coming
to terms with methods of working that are not
fully under its control. M
