After ceasing
to toe the
Marxist line,
some Russian
historians are
still searching
for a fresh
approach to
their country's
past
Wanted: a new language
by Nikolai Kopossov
H
12
ISTORY is a language unto itself that
allows historians to speak simultane¬
ously about the past and about them¬
selves. It is not enough to say, like the great his¬
torians of old, that history is written on the
basis of sources: no less important is the fact that
it is written by historians.
The rewriting of history therefore does not,
in my view, mean "simply" the reappraisal,
however radical, of historical events. It means
changing the language of history, which in turn
calls for a historian of a different cultural and
anthropological type, and for a rethinking of the
relationship between history and society.
Thus defined, the rewriting of history has not
yet been undertaken in Russia. We go on
speaking the same historical language as before.
The only difference is that we now speak it
much less often and more reluctantly, the main
reason, in my opinion, being that historians
have not changed as much as society.
A blurred picture of the past
Perestroika brought about radical changes in
the Soviet public's awareness of history. The
major offensive against communist ideology
took place on the battlefield of history, but it was
not waged by historians. It is no wonder that
politicians took such an interest in history, since
history, more than anything else, was the source
from which the Soviet regime drew its legiti¬
macy. In the period that proved decisive for the
overthrow of communist ideology, the years

Left, World youth is for
peace! A painting to the
greater glory of Stalin
(1951).
Above, Music Peace
Festival in Moscow ( 1 989).
between 1987 and 1989, discussion centred
mainly on an assessment of the role of Stalin. The
democratic press scored a decisive success when
it managed to link the name of Stalin, in the
popular mind, with the gulag, the Soviet regime
and socialism.
It did not, however, succeed in completely
overcoming the traditional idealization of Stalin's
rule. Apart from the fact that there were still a
number of convinced Stalinists, large segments
of the population had lost their moral bearings
as regards their attitude towards the country's
past. While some rejected the Soviet historical
experience out of hand, others did not know
what to think about it. For many Soviets, the
idealized image of Lenin continued to coun¬
terbalance the image of Stalin and to lend moral
credibility to the Soviet regime.
By 1990, however, everything "Soviet" had
been discredited to such an extent that Lenin's
image too was gradually tarnished. In June 1991,
a majority of Leningraders voted for a return to
the city's former name of St. Petersburg. How¬
ever, the image of Lenin had not yet become
such a powerfully negative symbol as that of
Stalin by the time that history, quite simply,
ceased to interest people.
The political events of 1991-1993 removed
history definitively from the forefront of public
concerns. The Soviet regime's loss of legitimacy
became complete, and the democratic ideology
that came out on top looked elsewhere for legit¬
imacy, primarily to an idealized image of
Western civilization, the market economy and
parliamentary democracy. But if that image had
a "historical dimension", it was that of a history
alien to Russia.
On the other hand, the communists and
nationalists who joined forces to form the oppo¬
sition could not agree on an assessment of the
Soviet period because of the deeply held anti-
communist views of some of the nationalists.
The opposition's own forays into history have
in the main been limited to the extolling of
Russia's military exploits.
The reawakening, in connection with the
nationalist movement, of interest in the Orthodox
church and its history and in the history of
Russian religious thought is of relatively minor
importance, owing in part, perhaps, to the fact
that the Russian church adopts an extremely
cautious stance and plays only a modest role in
social life. There are no grounds for believing that
a plan for the rebuilding of society attractive to II

Tob. /leHMH OMMLUflET
3eM/IhO OT HeMHCTM.
"Comrade Lenin sweeps
away the scum of the
Earth". A Soviet poster of
1920.
14
NIKOLAI KOPOSSOV
is a Russian historian who is a
research fellow at the
Independent Humanities
Academy in St. Petersburg and
associate director of studies at
the Ecole des Hautes Etudes
en Science Sociales in Paris. He
is co-author, with Dina
Khapaeva, of a sociological
study on the "Mass Historical
Consciousness of the Soviet
People".
the majority of the population can be worked out
on the basis of an "Orthodox renaissance".
There is thus no political movement in Russia
today that has succeeded in creating an image of
the country's past that would inspire Russians
with confidence in the future. We are witnessing
a crisis of historical awareness in the population
at large. How are professional historians reacting
to this situation?
Historians defend their turf
From the very beginning oîperestroïka, the polit¬
ical passivity of most historians stood in marked
contrast to the exceptional intensity of the debates
about history. It was left to journalists, writers,
sociologists and economists to set the agenda in
the rethinking of the past. If historians expressed
themselves at all in public, it was usually to sound
a warning against jumping to conclusions. The
main thrust of their contributions to the debates
was to deliver a lesson in professionalism to jour¬
nalists who had dared to encroach on their terri¬
tory. The situation, however, became more and
more ambiguous: anything that people acknowl¬
edged as being "the truth about history" they
learned from sources other than those whose
vocation it was to act as guardians of that truth.
The insistent calls for historians to "tell the truth
at last" threw them into confusion. Most of them
were in no mood for any radical changes in their
field.
It is true that there was a movement for reform
among historians, calling for democratization of
their discipline, the abolition of ideological sur¬
veillance, the lifting of the political ban on research
into the "blank spaces" of history, wider access to
the archives, international contacts and so forth.
These demands were reasonable as far as they
went, but they related only to the most obvious
defects in the manner in which the writing of his¬
tory was organized under the Soviet regime, and
scarcely touched upon its internal problems.
Many of the reformers' demands were met:
learned societies were given greater indepen¬
dence and the most conservative of their senior
officials replaced, while the editorial boards of the
historical journals were revamped. The principal
journal, Voprosy istorii ("Questions of History"),
became one of the most widely read publica¬
tions of the democratic press. Curiously, it soon
began to give pride of place to publishing eye¬
witness accounts, especially the previously
banned memoirs of disgraced public figures not,
it will be agreed, a sign that much original research
was being done. The direction taken by the
country's leading historical journal faithfully
reflects the state of Russian historiography as a
whole, which, apart from a certain political reori
entation, continues to discuss the same prob¬
lems as before from the same viewpoints as
before, and observes the same professional stan¬
dards as before.
Although much of what had hitherto seemed
unshakeable has been challenged or even
rejected, historians are making no attempt to cast
such radical doubts upon the basic concepts
and standards of their own profession, and the
task of changing it from within is an issue that
has not been raised. Only a few expressions of
dissatisfaction with the prevailing intellectual
and professional standards are heard today.
Generally speaking, the old "history establish¬
ment" has not given ground. Worse still, while
the earlier rise in public interest in history did
not bring about any substantial change within
the profession, the decline in that interest has
helped to reactivate its conservative forces.
Hence, since about 1992 historians specializing
in the Soviet period, who had until shortly
before then been obliged to admit that their
discipline was in deep crisis, have been regaining
their self-confidence and denying that there is
any need to reconsider their approach, although
they have not yet influenced public perceptions.
History is thus, after being slightly smartened
up, refusing further, more far-reaching changes.
Why is this so?
Sticking to an ideological
compromise
The process of renewal in social science pre¬
supposes that new social experience and a new
individual self-awareness will be expressed in
terms of scientific theory. It is precisely this
"renewal mechanism" that has functioned badly
in Russian historiography.
As a result of the long domination exercised
over it by Marxism, history became incapable of
expressing anything other than a rather limited
range of social experience, the experience of
statehood, nationhood and social conflicts. The
social experience that became more and more
important for individual self-awareness in the
post-war world and especially during the
1960s the experience of the individual playing
an active role in culture was almost impos¬
sible to express in the language of Marxist his¬
tory. Even after ceasing to toe the Marxist line,
history, as normally written in Russia, remains
heavily dependent on the nation-state concept.
Of course, not all Russian historians are
affected by this dependence. In the 1960s and
1970s, for instance, the increase in research into
cultural history, which practically fell outside
the Marxist historian's field of vision, gave expres¬
sion to the experience of the individual as playing

an active role in culture. It was, to my mind, pre¬
cisely because of the tremendous psychological
energy they put into the study of medieval culture
that eminent historians such as A. Gurevich, Y.
Bessmertny and L. Batkin were able to produce
such excellent work. It is noteworthy that the his¬
torians of this group are today advocating change
from within the profession.
They are, however, exceptions. The majority
of Soviet historians hew too closely in their
thinking to the ideological compromise offered
to the intelligentsia by the Brezhnev regime. At
the price of an outward show of loyalty to
Marxism and on condition that their personalities
and their individual social experience should on
no account emerge from their research, histo¬
rians were allowed to write studies that were to
a large extent devoid of ideological content. Most
Soviet historians invested all their emotional
energy in this compromise, which was a rela¬
tively harmless but perfectly respectable form
of opposition to the regime.
Many people were, of course, aware of the fal¬
sity of this situation, and this made them all the
more indignant about the medieval history spe¬
cialists who allowed themselves to use the lan¬
guage typical of the times to "express a personal
opinion" and "speak on their own behalf". This
conflict, which had been simmering for a long
while, came out into the open in the perestroïka
period, when it became all too evident that "pro¬
fessional ideology" had made Russian histori¬
ography incapable of dynamic development at a
time when the circumstances were exception¬
ally propitious for the emergence of new
approaches to history. H
The cover of the Soviet
magazine Ogonyek (1949)
shows Stalin as a star
beaming down on Moscow.
IS
