afe society
by Rifâ'ah Râfe' el-Tahtâwî
In the nineteenth century a group of Egyptians in Marseilles discover European ways of life. One of them is Rifâ'ah Râfe' el-Tahtâwî (1801-1873),
a pioneer of modern Arabic literature. He lived in Europe between 1826 and 1831.
Above, The Port of Marseilles
(c. 1820) by Ambroise-Louis
Garneray.
SO
I On the very first day, funny things started to happen
I at meal time.
First of all they brought us about a hundred chairs to
sit on. In this country everybody is amazed when they see
people sitting on a carpet or simply on the ground. Then
they came back with high tables on which they put
white plates. In front of each of us they put a glass, a
knife, a fork and a spoon. On each table they put two bot¬
tles of water and two containers, one for salt and the
other for pepper.
AT TABLE
Then they brought the food on big platters that they
placed in ones and twos in the middle of each table. They
shared out the food among the people sitting down, with
each person receiving one portion. You then had to cut it
with a knife and lift little pieces to your mouth with a fork,
not your fingers. Here you don't use your fingers, or
someone else's fork or knife, and you don't drink from
someone else's glass. They claim it's healthier and cleaner
that way.
We have also noticed that the French never eat from
copper dishes even if they've been tin-plated. They only use
them for cooking. At table they use shiny plates, and
they eat in stages, beginning with soup, then meat, fol¬
lowed by all kinds of vegetables and pasta. Then they
eat salad. Sometimes the plates are the same colour as
the food. They are green for salad, for example.
They finish their meal with fruit and wine but don't drink
much. Then they take tea or coffee, but that depends on
how poor or rich they are. For each new dish they give you
a clean new plate.
The first time we walked round the town we saw
stores full of mirrors and pretty women. It was midday. The
women in this country don't cover their heads, necks,
throats, arms or shoulders or even lower down.
So you can imagine what fine sights we saw in shops,
cafés and the crowds.
MIRROR IMAGES
The first wonder we beheld was a magnificent café. We
went in and found it was organized in an extraordinary
fashion. The owner was a lady who sat on a tall chair
with an inkwell, feathers and a notebook in front of her.
They made the coffee far from the customers, in a back
room; the waiters stood between this room and the room
where the people were. The main room was filled with
chairs covered with velvet and fine wood tables, each
with a black or striped top.
This café served all kinds of drinks and cakes. When
someone ordered something, the waiters repeated the
order to the lady, who ordered them to fetch it and then
wrote down the order and its price on a page of her note¬
book. When a customer wanted to pay, she tore out the
page and sent the waiter with it to the customer.
If you ask for a coffee, they bring you the sugar with
it. They put the sugar in the cup and stir to mix it with the
coffee before they drink. We did the same. Their coffee
cups are big. One of theirs is as big as four of our cups in
Egypt.


In this café they have all the newspapers, and you can
either leaf through them or read them carefully. When I
walked in, I thought it was an immense open restaurant full
of people, but in fact everyone who comes in and sits down
is reflected in all the mirrors, which is why you get the
impression that you are in a busy street.
I only really understood that when I saw our images in
the reflecting glass of the mirrors. In Egypt mirrors usually
deform the reflections. It made me think of certain verses
where our poets talk about mirrors and the images they
reflect.
Extracts from Takhliç al-lbriz Wâ talkhiç Bàriz ("The purification of gold,
or the brief glimpse of Paris").
A Paris café founded in 1832
and still doing business today.
mm-*T*'~AV
"Cafés in France are not meeting places for criminals. Respectable people go there. They are
decorated with magnificent, precious accessories that reflect extreme wealth. They are very
expensive. Only the well-off frequent them. The poorer folk go to cabarets to smoke and drink."

