HAITI
UNESCO IN ACTION
HERITAGE
KingHenry'sfabulous
works
by Francis Leary
46
Inthe Caribbean lies an island known
as the "Pearl of the Antilles". Here
Christopher Columbus, westward
bound from Seville in 1492 to seek the
riches of the Indies, made his first
promising landfall in the New World. A
large, beautiful island, it was a green,
forested land with sparkling white beaches
and, in the interior, lofty mountains where
roamed the Arawak Indian tribe. He called
it "Hispaniola", after his Spanish sponsors.
Going ashore on the northwest coast,
Columbus set up the crimson and gold
standard of Spain, to found his first set¬
tlement in America. As it was December
26th, he baptised the post "La Navidad", for
the Nativity of Christ. When he departed,
he left a small company of thirty-nine men,
but the post was destroyed by the Indians
and only vestiges remained. But more
white men would arrive, well-armed, to
overpower and enslave the natives.
In 1697, Spain ceded to France the
western third of the island, which became
the colony of Saint-Domingue, now Haiti.
Near the site of La Navidad is the present
National Historical Park, comprising twenty-
five square kilometres. Here the visitor will
find, towering heavenwards, the huge
Citadel built by King Henry I, who ruled as
absolute monarch from 181 1 to 1820.
To reach this massive fortress, which
cost so much in toil and blood, one pro¬
ceeds on horseback along a narrow road
that snakes upward for 1,000 metres. As the
fierce tropical sun burns away the
shrouding mist, a gigantic shape emerges
like the prow of a great ship. It is the
citadel's Coidavid tower and battery,
named for Queen Marie-Louise Coidavid,
the king's wife. She was the daughter of
the innkeeper of the Auberge de la
Couronne, where Henry Christophe once
served as a waiter.
From the summit of the Queen's tower,
rising forty metres from the base, one gazes
at the distant roofs of Cap Haitien, far
below, and the wide curving bay where in
1778 the French Admiral d'Estaing
dropped anchor. He wanted 1,500 likely
lads, both slave and free, to aid the
colonists in the American Revolution
against British rule.
Young Henry Christophe was eager to
go. Born in Grenada, in the Windward
Islands, in 1767, he had worked his way up
from sugar mills to apprentice to a master
mason. At the age of twelve he ran away, to
be seized by the French captain of a slave
ship and taken to Saint-Domingue, where
he was sold to a naval officer with
d'Estaing's fleet.
His experience of the American Revo¬
lution inspired Christophe. He met other
freedom fighters from Saint-Domingue
and other islands of the French Antilles,
both black and mulatto, and he felt that
what the American colonists could do, the
slaves in their island might also achieve.
Such dreams became reality with the
tumult in France itself, when the ancient
monarchy was overthrown by men with a
passion for liberty and equality. In March
1792, the National Convention in Paris
enfranchised mulattos and black freedmen
in the Antilles, to the fury of the French
colonists. They broke with Paris, called on
the British to succour them, and executed
anyone who tried to claim his rights.
When in 1794 the Commissioners from
Paris abolished slavery, the blacks rallied
to the French Republic to drive out the
British who had occupied Port-au-Prince.
Finally, the liberated slaves turned on all
the whites who still barred their freedom.
Three brilliant black tacticians and former
slaves, Toussaint L'Ouverture, Jean-Iacques
Dessalines and Henry Christophe, out-
generalled the whites by their guerilla war¬
fare. The 40,000 colonists who had
enslaved a half million blacks were over¬
whelmed, slain or put to flight. It was the
first and only successful slave insurrec¬
tion of the New World.
AMERICA'S FIRST BLACK REPUBLIC
WINS INDEPENDENCE
The fatal imbalance in numbers, which
did not prevail elsewhere in the Caribbean,
was due to the greed of the French
planters, who craved riches by ever-
expanding production, especially of sugar
and coffee, with a great mass of slaves. In
two years only, 1787 and 1788, over 60,000
slaves were imported from Africa.
However, Napoleon Bonaparte, now
First Consul of France, sent an army of
26,000 veterans and a fleet of sixty war¬
ships to retake the "Pearl of the Antilles".
Under General Leclerc, Napoleon's brother-
in-law, the French broke the black resis¬
tance, while Toussaint was lured into a trap
and seized, to be despatched to die in a
French dungeon in the Jura hills. The brief
era of black freedom was apparently over.
Abruptly, an epidemic of yellow fever
struck the French a devastating blow. Vic¬
torious from February to June 1802, the
invading army was nowbarely able to main¬
tain control of Saint-Domingue. Leclerc
himself died in October, and Pauline, his
wife and Napoleon's sister, took his body
back to France. The blacks surged again
under Dessalines and Henry Christophe
and won the decisive battle of Vertieres,
near Cap Haitien, on 18 November 1803.
On 1 January 1804, at Gonaives on the
west coast, Dessalines proclaimed the
Republic ofHaiti, thus reviving the original
Indian name of "land ofmountains". Haiti
was the first black republic in America and
the second colony to win independence. In
October, Dessalines, following Napoleon's
lead, took the title of emperor. He first
conceived of building a mighty fortress

Above, piles of cannonballs
on the western flank of the
Citadel.
Opposite page, Henry
Christophe (1767-1820).
Woodcarving by an unknown
artist.
on the mountain peak that the peasants
termed "the Bishop's Bonnet". When in
1806 the new emperor fell victim to an
angry mob incited byAlexandre Pétion, a
rival quadroon general, Henry Christophe
took over the project. Elected President, he
became King Henry I in 1811, reigning
over the north of Haiti.
SCANNING THE HORIZON FOR THE
TRICOLOUR OF FRANCE
In King Henry's golden days, the monarch
himselfwould stand for hours on the ram¬
parts of La Coidavid, elegantly attired in
blue swallow-tail coat with gold buttons,
white nankin breeches and black boots. On
his head perched a cocked hat, worn fore
and aft in British style. At his side stood his
trusty aide, the quadroon Pompée Vastey,
bearing the royal brass telescope through
which Henry surveyed his domain.
Below the Citadel, on the North Plain,
stretched the plantations tended by a mul
titude of black subjects, growing coffee,
sugar, rice and cotton. Hours ofworkwere
strict: "From dawn to 8 a.m., then one
hour for prayers and breakfast; from nine
to twelve, then two hours for dinner; from
2 p.m. until sundown."
Often the king scanned the horizon,
looking for tall ships and the tricolour of
France. He was obsessed. The French
would return, as they had years before, to
destroy the black realm, even though it
was protected to some extent by Henry's
friends the British. But if the French should
manage to land, Henry was ready for them.
Assisted by the Haitian engineer Henri
Barré, the monarch drove on his grand
project to build the Citadel with a hurri¬
cane of energy. Like pharaoh's slaves
building the pyramids under the lash,
thousands of men toiled upward bearing
bricks and mortar or dragging ponderous
cannons. Once apprentice to a mason,
Henry himself sometimes lent a hand.
Though men might lose their footing on
the vertiginous slope and fall screaming
into the abyss, nothing stopped the frantic
pace of construction.
The Citadel formed an irregular quad¬
rangle, with four great towers, protected by
eight batteries in tiered casements of
twenty cannon each. These cannon ofvar¬
ious calibres were sited on mobile gun
carriages to cover all angles of fire. Only the
west front, with its sheer drop, had no
defending battery. Within the walls, on
average 3.5 metres thick, was a central
court, the Place des Armes, around which
were the governor's palace, barracks for
2,000 men or 5,000 in an emergency, a
chapel, a powder magazine and wells for
cooling the guns. A huge cistern stored
drinking water, while a sewage system car¬
ried waste beyond the walls.
On the south, the approach to the
Citadel was guarded by the four redoubts
on the plateau of Les Ramiers, an out¬
cropping ofthe crest on which the Citadel
stood. At Les Ramiers were also living
quarters to supplement the Citadel's facil¬
ities. The ensemble of the King's great work
covered 10,000 square metres and could
accommodate the royal family, the court
and government in addition to the thou¬
sands of soldiers in the garrison.
After descending the winding treach¬
erous roadway from the Citadel, the visitor
arrives at the village of Milot, twenty kilo¬
metres from Cap Haitien. Here the
grandiose ruin of Henry's royal palace
looms, even its present blackened shell a
visionarywonder. Built by black men at the
direction of a black king, the palace was
intended to show that blacks, though
former slaves, could rival the magnificence
of white monarchs.
King Henry created the finest mansion
in America, rising four stories above a
broad open terrace where fountains 4J

48
played, with canals and basins in the gar¬
dens, as at Versailles. The terrace was
reached by a double marble staircase, rem¬
iniscent of Fontainebleau. With red-tiled
roof and peach-brick walls, this rose-
coloured palace was called "Sans-Souci" in
imitation ofFrederick the Great. Tall ogival
windows glittered in the sun, while the
rooms within were paved with polished
hardwood. On the great gilded carriage of
His Black Majesty could be seen the sun
motif of the Sun-King.
In the grand hall, hung with French
and Flemish tapestries, under the vigi¬
lance of the Royal Dahomey Guard, the
King held audience everyThursday. In the
morning, the peasants came with their
complaints, while the afternoon was
reserved for the nobility. Wearing their
prescribed attire ofwhite tunics, silk hose,
red shoes and swords with gilded hilts,
they sat on folding chairs before the
monarch on his golden throne.
All this finery had to be ordered from
abroad, as well as the decor of the palace,
which kept the elite busy on their planta¬
tions to pay for their costumes and their
mansions. Henry had excellent relations
with the British, with whom he traded the
produce of the plantations for gold, estab¬
lishing the kingdom's currency and paying
for imports. Noting the exhausting labour
of the peasants, a British admiral, Sir Home
Popham, warned Henry that he was going
too far, too fast. Alexandre Pétion, whose
lax rule in the south made him popular,
had an army ready to intervene should
Henry falter. To this warning, the King
One of the Citadel's many cannon
emplacements.
replied: "If we could lay our hands on
things we have made, monuments, towers,
palaces, we might find our self-respect.
While I live, I shall try to build that pride we
need and in terms that white men as well
as black can understand. I shall teach pride
if I break every back in my kingdom!"
Yet Henry had other plans for his
people besides endless toil. Most of his
170,000 subjects were illiterate, as was the
King himself. Importing teachers from
Britain and making use of educated
mulattos, he created free primary schools
and lycées, which soon had over 2,000
students.
A ruler of such energy and competence
might have governed for many years, but
inAugust 1820 a stroke left him paralysed.
He struggled to carry on but, unable to
walk, he could no longer control events. As
the ancient mystique of African voodoo,
which Henry had tried to banish, now
swept the kingdom, his subjects aban¬
doned the crippled monarch, while
Pétion's army invaded Port-au-Prince, as
the admiral had foretold. Realizing that
his reign was over, King Henry put a bullet
through his heart.
FRANCIS LEARY is an American writer, based
in Paris, who has written extensively on historical
subjects for European and American publications,
especially on the period from the fifteenth century
to the First World War.
RESTORING HENRY'S MONUMENTS
Long abandoned, King Henry's works presented a
formidable job of restoration. When he died, his
palace was pillaged, while the Citadel, already shat¬
tered by the explosion of the powder magazine in
1818, was also vandalized and the interior set
ablaze. In 1 842, further substantial damage was
done by an earthquake. Because access to the
Citadel was so difficult, however, the 1 8th-century
armament of 163 guns, considered a unique col¬
lection, was preserved. The roofs and north façade
of the palace had gone, while on the south façade
the walls were cracked and windowless. Frequent
flooding has undermined the foundations.
The programme of restoration of Henry's
monuments, sponsored by Unesco and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), was
undertaken in 1 980. It was directed by the noted
Haitian architect Albert Mangones, with UNESCO's
technical adviser Giselle Hyvert, and employed
Haitian staff and workers. Since no original plans
exist, it was necessary to do extensive research.
Workshops in architectural design, masonry,
woodwork, ironwork and tiles were organized.
One workshop at Milot produced more than
150,000 tiles and bricks, while another at the
Citadel turned out hinges, hooks, locks and paint.
To stop flooding, drainage was essential for
both Citadel and palace. Retaining walls were
erected to shore up the battlements and to close
fissures caused by the explosion. Cannon were
positioned on their repaired gun carriages and the
vaults of the casements restored. This armament,
with 30,000 cannonballs and shells, should be a
major tourist attraction when the Citadel-Museum
is opened. Special rooms in the museum will be
devoted to Henry Christophe and to the Liberator,
Toussaint L'Ouverture. When work stopped in
1 99 1 , the basic tasks were completed, and Henry's
grandeur preserved for posterity. F. L.
