A PAINTER'S PARADISE
by Mona Zaalouk
The desert's abrupt changes of colour, light and mood cast a powerful spell on artists
THE desert is a mysterious and disturbing
presence. Beneath its endless surface a world
of profusion is waiting to reveal itself to
those who take time to observe, wonder and
understand.
The traveller eager for sensations feels dwarfed
by the surrounding immensity until the grandeur
of the landscapes starts to filter through.
Enveloped in the sensual softness of sand-dunes
like intertwined bodies that the changing light of
the day and of the seasons paints grey and white,
ochre and beige, one is tempted to recline and rest
for a moment before moving on to other colours,
other shapes. Keen as blades cutting through
space, the harshness of their rocky features soft¬
ened by pink or violet, lunar reliefs whose sil¬
houettes recall those of people or animals line the
horizon with visions in which the real and the
imaginary are one.
Men pass like ghosts. Where do they come
from? Where are they going?
They are the blue men, the lords of the Sahara,
wreathed in mystery, dignified, simple people
stripped of everything superfluous by their
nomadic wanderings from oasis to oasis. These
18
austere Tuareg in their flowing indigo robes,
their heads covered with a black or white chech,
are the personification of grace and majesty. The
women go unveiled, decked out with jewels and
shimmering fabrics. Other customs, other con¬
trasts are found among the bedouin of Egypt: the
men wear bright colours, while the women sport
vivid embroideries on their long black robes.
The Peul of the Sahel, a handsome people, are also
wonderful colourists: their costumes, jewels and
made-up faces create a dazzling tableau.
Leaving behind village, oasis or encampment
for a landscape of overwhelming immensity, one
is transported by the play of light and shadow to
another world, one in which dreams are as acces¬
sible as mirages. This idyllic vision is suddenly
disrupted by a furious sandstorm, describing its
crazy, whirling dance against a background of the
subtlest shades of ochre. This terrifying picture
is followed by a sunset that celebrates the end of
the day by setting the horizon alight with sheets
of red and orange. Evening falls, and one goes on
one's way beneath the stars that light thousands
of sparks in the dark night. The full moon lights
up the desert's silent vibration.
A village on the edge of the
Sahara in Niger.
MONA ZAALOUK
is an Egyptian painter. She has
published many articles in Cairo
Today, a review of literature
and the arts.

Desert Rituals ( 1 993)
by Mona Zaalouk.
In its contrasts and its changes, its airiness
and its torpor, its rhythms and its silence, its
overwhelming grandeur and its sensual delight,
the desert sums up life's essentials. But how can
anyone capture on canvas its atmosphere, its
starkness? Poets describe the impressions and
emotions of a desert journey better than the lines
and colours of the artist. Delacroix managed to
evoke them in a figurative manner; but during his
stay in North Africa his works became more
modern in style, prefiguring abstract art. Later
Paul Klee, in his Tunisian period, learned how to
catch the desert's spiritual dimension in a brush¬
stroke and a flash of colour.
The opacity of the rocky outcrops, the sense
of lightness and movement, the evanescent sense
of freedom make the desert a magnet for the
painter. After a first glance, everything in it
becomes a unity, traversed by a line around
which sky, earth and people melt into an indi¬
visible whole. The desert embodies the artist's
ultimate dream of striving to synthesize the vis¬
ible and the invisible, the figurative and the
abstract, matter and light. 19
