Federico Mayor:
keeping ahead of
the future
byEdouardJ. Maunick
EDOUARD J. MAUNICK,
Mauritian poet and writer, is his
country's Ambassador to South
Africa. He has published many
books, including Ensoleillé vif,
which won the Apollinaire Prize
in 1976), Anthologies
personnelles (1984) and Paroles
pour solder la mer (1969).
I The publication, in French, of La Mémoire du
I Futur ("The Memory of the Future") offers a
fresh opportunity to share the thinking of Federico
Mayor, the author of Tomorrow is always too late.
The book is written with the same breadth of inspi¬
ration as its predecessor, the same determination
"to pave the way for the best possible future" and,
above all, the same lucidity and faith in human
beings qualities that go to make the Director-Gen¬
eral of Unesco a man of action who never gives way
to despair.
In this new work, Federico Mayor embarks on
an open-ended dialogue on the problems which he
knows "with the certainty of instinct that they will
beindeed, already are the vital challenges of the
coming millennium". These problems, doubts and
anxieties we can already read in the eyes of children
all over the world.
When he says that "the main thing is loving and
sharing", he cuts what he regards as the "Gordian
knots" that constrain the world today. For Federico
Mayor, the "main thing" is to feel a sense ofurgency,
and "loving and sharing" imply commitment. It is
urgent to break down the walls between the "haves"
and the "have-nots", to rethink the way we live our
lives, individually and in communities, and take a
fresh look at how we "control" nature. This means
pledging to eradicate illiteracy once and for all, calling
a halt to the brain drain, making scientific and tech¬
nical knowledge universally available, safeguarding
the memory ofhumanity, preserving the earth from
ecological disaster in short taking charge of our
future.
Writing in convincing and down-to-earth lan¬
guage, Federico Mayor recommends that we form a
conspiracy "conspiracy" in the etymological sense
of "breathing together". It should be the kind of con¬
spiracy that "transcends frontiers, nationalities, reli¬
gions and ethnic groups". It lies at the heart of any
solution to our problems, whether education for
international understanding, the preservation of the
cultural and natural heritage, development, the envi¬
ronment or the future ofhumanity.
All these issues are carefully discussed by an
author who is concerned but remains resolutely opti
mistic. After making a brief survey of their histor¬
ical background, he approaches the problems
directly, examines the facts, assesses the attempts
that have been made to solve them and charts the
future prospects.
Between a past for which we are not responsible
but which we must accept, and a future that we wish
to control, today's world, our lives our survival, as
Federico Mayor says must be taken care of. For
survival is the basic issue for so many people,
including the Cameroon villager who, after making
sure that he really was talking to the Director-General
of Unesco, asked him: "Why have you come to see us?
Is it to defend the elephants or to defend us?"
The answer to this question is to be found on
the page of "The Memory of the Future" where the
author says: "We should never lose sight of the fact
that the first thing we have to do is to protect the
human species".
In Federico Mayor there is a deeply-felt need to
look towards utopia. Has not the quest for a perfect
world given impetus to people's lives ever since the
world began? How can we dream of overcoming the
adverse circumstances of the present except by
assuming that the impossible is possible? Hence "The
Memory of the Future", a title spelling out a message
of faith, that tomorrow is alreadyanother day.
