THE EUROPEAN ODYSSEY OF THE GYPSIES Uypsy caravans
in the Balkans, where
over five million Gypsies
live today.



n the road
Many Gypsy families
have lived for
generations in the
same part of Europe,
but they are still
regarded as transient
foreigners.
by Patrick Williams
The Gypsies originated in northwest
I India. Sometime around the tenth cen¬
tury A.D. they embarked on the migration that
scattered them all over the world. Paradoxi¬
cally, it is through the knowledge of non-
Gypsies (Gadje) that it has been possible to
retrace this migration, largely on the basis of his¬
torical linguistics.
The Gypsy language has the same relationship
to its mother tongue, Sanskrit, as Hindi, Gujarati
and Punjabi, except that it only exists in a range
of dialects that have been influenced by the lan¬
guages of the lands through which its speakers
travelled over the centuries. By studying the lan¬
guage spoken by a Gypsy today it is possible to
discover the routes taken by his ancestors. The
diversity of Gypsy dialects reflects the diversity
of the routes they have taken.
However, research has been unable to tell us
who they were during their time in India. Were
they already nomads, blacksmiths and musi¬
cians? Were they outcasts or Rajputs defeated
and dispossessed by Muslim invaders?
Whatever the truth may be, this uprooting
from a homeland and this mass movement west¬
ward are not etched in Gypsy memory, which
tends to indicate that they did not regard their
travels as an exodus. Certainly traces of India are
buried in their language and in some of their cus¬
toms and beliefs, but these traces are not part of
their conscious memory.
Moreover, Gypsy migration is linked to the
history of the peoples among whom they live.
They are not masters of their situation. The
decision whether to leave or to stay or where to
go is not for them to take. Perhaps this is why
they prefer to live in the border regions of their
adopted countries. 21

rVI embers of the Nicolich
family, above, have been
"mechkar" (bear-leaders) for
generations.
22
A study of the movements of groups of
Gypsies since their arrival in Europe shows
that, whether enforced or freely chosen, these
movements are always a response to a change in
the non-Gypsy environment. It would be a mis¬
take to think that their migrations are over, as is
shown by the arrival in western Europe of Gyp¬
sies fleeing political upheavals in the former
Yugoslavia and in Romania.
Moving to the rhythm of the seasons
While migration is a response to events over
which Gypsies have no control, nomadism is a
form of social organization in its own right.
Gypsy movements are clearly organized
according to the rhythms of the seasons, i.e.
sedentary life through the long winter months
and movement with the return of fine weather.
But the sacred must surely play a part, too. In
general it is the Christian holidays of Palm
Sunday and All Saints' Day that signal the dates
of departure and return, two dates when Gypsy
families are accustomed to visit their dead. The
cemetery in which the family graves are located
is often the pole around which the family terri¬
tory is organized.
Gypsies arc found in groups of varying sizes
that live or travel together. To describe these
units, the Kalderash Romanies one of the



main Gypsy groups use the word kumpania
(company). When stationary, these units may
gather in a neighbourhood or a "village" the
most frequent situation in central Europe or
live as scattered households among the
dwellings of the other Gadje inhabitants. On the
move, their composition may change at each
stopping place. The kumpania is a body whose
molecular structure changes according to cir¬
cumstances while remaining faithful to its
nature. Depending on whom they meet at each
halting place, people move from one kumpania
to another, taking with them expertise, stories
and ways of life.
The extended family (three generations) is
the stable nucleus of the nomadic kumpania. A
child who grows up in a kumpania feels that he
or she belongs to a permanent entity around
which the world revolves. The family unit seems
self-sufficient because of the distribution of
skills and the way in which its different com¬
ponents complement each other. The men work
at handicrafts, the women sell (the traditional
organizational model for basket-weaving fam¬
ilies), or else the adults sell some commodities
(clothes), and the children others (wild flowers

and fruit). Although some craftsmen, such as
blacksmiths, tinkers, silversmiths and basket-
weavers, specialize in a single field, versatility is
more highly prized than specialization. The
important thing is to be able to cope with unpre¬
dictable situations.
Moving from group to group
The movement of individuals and families among
the larger groups causes a constant reshaping of
the social landscape as well as intermixing all
parts of the society. A distinctive feature of Gypsy
"nomadism", this movement from group to
group is the result of several factors.
Through belonging to a kinship network,
people can be "placed" by those they meet. Per¬
sons arriving in a new community try to find
among their acquaintances those who will allow
them to "latch onto" a family. As soon as their
credentials are accepted, they become respon¬
sible members of their new community with
the same rights and duties as the others.

Above and below, members of
a "kumpania" (extended group)
of Gypsies in their camp near
Sliven, an industrial town in
Bulgaria. They eke out a living
by collecting linden, camomile
and dogwood flowers for
Bulgarian pharmaceutical
companies.
The sharing of values and cultural charac¬
teristics, which create a sense of fraternity among
those who possess them, is another factor.
Once he is integrated into the community,
the new arrival can benefit from its technical
expertise. When out canvassing, a craftsman
never refuses to take on a repair job that he
cannot do himself, for he knows that among
his "brothers" he is bound to find one with the
necessary skills. The rule is that the profits are
shared out equally, no matter what kind of job
has been done. Co-operation is more highly
regarded than individual success.
However, it is not always possible to move
from one community to another. The itiner¬
aries of certain groups diverged from others so
early on that their members seem to have
nothing in common. In spite of the stereotyped
view that Gadje societies have of them, all Gyp¬
sies do not accept one another across the board.
How to be invisible



Gypsy nomadism takes place on land that is
already occupied. The relationship between
nomads and their environment is a struggle for
power material power, obviously, but even
more the power of legitimacy. Because they
come from elsewhere and live differently, Gyp¬
sies are universally seen as intruders, foreigners.
History has shown that the societies in which the
Gypsies live want to see the back of them.
But the history of the Gypsies is the history
of a people that does its best to play down this
power struggle. Nomads use strategies of invis¬
ibility and fluidity that enable them to slip into
the legislative, economic, geographical and other
nooks and crannies that sedentary societies leave
vacant.
Inside non-Gypsy territories therefore there
are Gypsy territories of various shapes and sizes. 23

LIVING IN COMPANY



"Gypsies are found in groups of varying sizes. To describe
these units the word 'kumpania' (company) is used. When
stationary, these groups may gather in a neighbourhood or a
'village', or live as scattered households among the other
inhabitants. On the move, their composition may change at
each stopping place. Depending on whom they meet, people
move from one "kumpania" to another, taking with them
expertise, stories and ways of life."
Composed of routes and poles, they overlap
and intermingle. They can be freely accessible or
forbidden. Relationships between Gypsy groups
present in the same region can vary between
solidarity and competition, ignorance of each
other's existence, and warfare.
The ways in which these territories are occu¬
pied and used differ according to the Gypsies'
activities and their relationships with non-
Gypsies. Gypsies' commercial activities require
a minimum of conformity to local administra¬
tive procedures and the possession of a min¬
imum of cultural skills. It is, for example, a good
idea to speak the language of the people you
wish to do business with. That is enough for
some Gypsies, but others have a deeper knowl¬
edge of local customs.
Yet observation shows that it is often those
communities that show the greatest cultural
dynamism in keeping alive their language, cus¬
toms (marriage is still usually within the Gypsy
community) and traditions (music, oral litera¬
ture, costumes), that are most at ease in non-
Gypsy environments.
The Gypsy pilgrimage to Les
Saintes-Marles-de-la-Mer in the
south of France. Legend has it
that Mary, sister of the Virgin,
and Mary, mother of James and
John, fled there to escape
persecution in Judaea. With
them was their black servant,
Sara, who became the
patroness of the Gypsies.
Below, Gypsies in procession
carrying statues of the two
saints.
Gypsies have not remained aloof from the
process of urbanization that has occurred in
many parts of Europe. Nor have they missed out
on technological progress. They have also under¬
stood how to get the most out of improvements
in individual transportation facilities. Ways of
moving about have changed. Families tend to
stay in the same place for longer and longer
periods, and the car is used for journeys occa¬
sioned by family events. If community life some¬
times suffers from these forms of progress, it can
also be enriched by making contact easier
between groups living far apart.
Changing patterns of movement
Recent political changes in Europe have affected
both migration and nomadism. Hundreds of
Gypsy families have left the former commu¬
nist countries to head for western Europe where
they hope to receive refugee status. But in these
countries increasing state intervention into the
lives of the citizen is also affecting nomads,
notably in the designation of places where they
can camp, the organization of their stay, and
the setting up of health care, schooling and voca¬
tional training programmes.
Gypsies have probably never had an easy
time, historically speaking, but they have always
managed to survive adversity and remain rela¬
tively independent. Movement in groups may
have decreased, but the other characteristics
that define Gypsy nomadism have been safe¬
guarded. As the essential dynamic of Gypsy
societies, individuals and families still continue
to move between larger groups, but between
fixed points rather than moving ones.
24
PATRICK WILLIAMS,
a French ethnologist, is a
member of the Urban
Anthropological Laboratory of
France's National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS). He
has been a student of Gypsy
culture and society for many
years. His recent publications
include Django (Limon, Paris,
1991) and "Nous, on n'en parle
pas". Les vivants et les morts
chez ¡es Manouches (Maison
des sciences de l'homme, Paris,
1993).
