ercator
portrait
cartographer ofgenius
by Jean Portante
On 4 December 1994, Unesco will be associated with the commemoration of



the 400th anniversary of the death of the Flemish geographer Gerhard
Mercator, founder of modern mathematical geography and inventor of the
plane map projection of the earth that bears his name.
For me the name of the great cartographer
Mercator will always be associated with
cigars. I have a distant memory ofhis bearded
face, at once jovial and pensive, emblazoned on a
cigar band, and for some reason perhaps because
of the Atlantic tobacco trade it always evoked
for me the myth of the boundless ocean and of
endless voyaging from one continent to the other.
In fact it was only much later that I learned that the
face on the cigar band was that of Mercator, the
man who rescued the word 'AÜantic" from oblivion
by reviving it on the map of the world he drew in
1569, at the height of the Renaissance. The term
"AÜantic" had first been coined in Antiquity, but in
medieval times the vast expanse of sea to the west
ofEurope was usually designated as the "Northern
Ocean" or the "Occidental Ocean".
Mercator, whose real name was Gerhard Kremer
(the German word Kremermeans merchant, mer¬
cator in Latin, the international language of the
Renaissance), had settled in Duisburg in the
Rhineland in 1 552 and had been working for years
on the then unprecedented scheme of projecting
the planetary globe or at leastwhat was known of
it at the time onto a flat surface.
Maps predate writing
Cartography had been invented long before the
Renaissance. Indeed, the first rudimentary maps
probably predated the appearance of writing.
Tablets of Phoenician origin show that by about
3000 B.C. men were already charting the main
commercial shipping routes. Although the Egyp¬
tians, with their cadastral measurements, carried
on where the Phoenicians left off, it was the Greeks
who invented map-making as we know it. Once
Thaïes ofMiletus had established that the earth is
round, and his findings had been confirmed by the
Pythagorean school, Ptolemy, at the beginning of
the Christian era, determined mathematically the
concepts of latitude and longitude. Although
Ptolemy miscalculated the earth's circumference
a most fortunate error that was at the root of
Europe's encounter with America the cartog¬
raphy of Antiquity, which was preserved in the
Arab world until the Middle Ages, contained all the
data on which Mercator based his work.
After the use ofthe compass became widespread,
sometime in the thirteenth century, the first advances
in cartography were subsequendymade by naviga¬
tors like Christopher Columbus, Vasco da Gama,
Balboa, Magellan and Elcano. By the earlyyears ofthe
fourteenth century, how¬
ever, rapid strides were also
being made through the work I
of mathematicians and
astronomers, most of them
German or Flemish, like Mercator
himself.
An armchair traveller
What do we owe to Gerhard Kremer Mercator for
all these developments? Born in 1512, he was a
typical Renaissance man, combining his talents as
a philosopher and geographer to devise a system
for projecting the earth's spherical surface onto a
flat map. When he was only eighteen and still a stu¬
dent at Louvain University, his teacher, the
astronomer Frisius, introduced him to the art of
constructing terrestrial globes. He produced his
first rudimentary map of the world at the age of
twenty-six. Not many years later, in 1541, he was
commissioned by the Emperor Charles V Flan¬
ders was then under Spanish rule to create a ter¬
restrial globe and its celestial counterpart.
The planisphere bearing his name was first pub¬
lished in 1569 after more than fifteen years' work.
Consisting of a set of eighteen engraved sheets
based on portolano charts, it is the product of an
original method ofprojection. The earth's surface is
shown in the form ofa flattened-out cylinder, with
the meridians and parallels represented by per¬
pendicular straight lines intersecting at right angles,
and the spacing between the parallels progressively
increasing from the equator to the poles. This
arrangement gives rise to some distortion in the
representation of distances, but it enables naviga¬
tors to set their course and ensure that the route they
take tallies with the map. The Mercator projection
is still used in sea and air travel today.
One of the founders of modern cartography
was thus himself an armchair traveller. His pas¬
sionate interest in cartography and his skill in
accurately portraying the world, with its conti¬
nents and oceans, in the limited space ofonly a few
pages prompted him to complete two other works:
a critical study ofPtolemy, Tabulae Geographicae
G Ptolemaie ad mentem autoris restitutae etemen-
datae (1578), ana Atlas sive Cosmographicae med-
itationes de Fabrica Mundi etfabricatifigura (1585)
("An Atlas or Cosmographical Meditations on the
Making of the World"), the definitive version of
which was published by his two sons in 1595, a year
after his death. h
This portrait of Mercator is
inset Into the border of a 1631
edition of a revised version of
his Atlas first published in 1605
by the Dutch geographer
Jocodus Hondius and often
reprinted since.
JEAN PORTANTE
is a Luxembourg writer whose
work includes stories, poems
and plays, as well as travel
books and radio programmes.
His latest novel, Mrs. Haroy ou
la mémoire de la baleine,
chronique d'une immigration,
was published in 1993 by PHI,
Echternach.
