he hornbilñ quest
A Dayak writer from
Indonesia visits the
Koreans of northern
China
The author (circled) during his
visit to China.
I am a Dayak, one of the indigenous
people of Kalimantan (Borneo) in the
Indonesian archipelago. I was born in the heart
of the island, which we call Tanah Dayak (Dayak
Island), and ever since I was a little boy I have
always been conscious that I am an Indonesian
of Dayak origin.
When I left Tanah Dayak at the age of thir¬
teen to go to Java to continue my studies, my
family said, "Do not come back unless you can
make a substantial contribution to our suffering
people. We have fought the Dutch and the
Japanese, and we won independence. The task
facing your generation is to develop our people
and our region because we cannot believe that
anyone else will do so."
As "a young warrior" I knew that this was a
challenge that I could not refuse. I did not reply,
however, and went silently down to the ship
that took me a thousand miles away from my
dear forest and river, my childhood playground.
Since then I have travelled to many places with
a big question in my small head: "What can I do
to help my suffering minority people?" I have
24
**P^^^P
d'-T^
^K L £k _j^|M ^kltk



always asked this question throughout my
eventful life, and it was very much in my mind
during a visit I made to the People's Republic of
China about fifteen years ago.
After listening to my questions, my Chi¬
nese hosts in Beijing seemed to have under¬
stood what I was interested in and arranged for
me to visit many minority regions. I was able to
go almost everywhere except Tibet and Xin¬
jiang.
It was winter when Lao Wang, my Chinese
host in Beijing, organized my visit to the Korean
minority that lives in Heilongjiang in north¬
east China.
My Korean hosts were waiting to welcome me
as I stepped down from the train. Lao Wang spoke
to them in Mandarin and introduced me to them.
"So you speak Mandarin too"
"Mr. Kim is in charge of the ethnic Koreans
here," said Lao Wang. We shook hands warmly.
"I hope you are not too cold," said Mr. Kim.
"I think I have enough clothes, thanks to
the serious responsibility and full attention of
Lao Wang," I answered. "So you speak Man¬
darin too."
"Every Korean here speaks Mandarin
because we learn it at school," said Mr. Kim on
our way to the guest house. "In China there
are a lot of Korean translators. In our schools
Korean is used as the teaching language, but of
course we also have to learn Mandarin, our
national language, so that we can communicate
with other ethnic groups in our big country."
"I should like to know how you Koreans
here think of yourselves," I asked Mr. Kim. "Do
you regard yourselves primarily as Korean or
Chinese?"

by Kusni Sulang
"Our nationality is Chinese and our ethnic
group is Korean," said Mr. Kim. "I do not see a
contradiction between my nationality and my
ethnic origin."
"Contradictions conflicts even between
ethnic groups will come to the surface if you do
not have a correct ethnic policy," added Lao
Wang. "It will turn out badly if you neglect
their existence and their rights."
"Do you think you are the real masters of
your home region here?" I asked. "Don't you
have an idea of forming an independent state or
joining North or South Korea? I don't want to
cause offence. ..."
"Don't worry. Ask any questions you wish,"
said Lao Wang.
"I am sure that our Korean friends will show
you everything you need to see."
"Let's go and visit some Korean families,"
said Mr. Kim.
"I think it will be better to walk so that we
can enjoy the winter weather and appreciate
the beauty of the snow," Lao Wang added
smiling.
"It is too far," Mr. Kim said.
Special treatment
When we approached a family house, all the
members of the family were waiting in front of
the door and applauded us. After I had been
introduced to everyone, they showed me their
house, which consisted of a kitchen, a guest
room and sleeping rooms. It was small but tidy.
In their kitchen was a water pump.
"Every Korean family's house has a water
pump like this," Mr. Kim explained.
"Do Han families have them too?" asked
Lao Wang. (The Han are the majority ethnic
group in China, like the Kinh in Viet Nam and
the Javanese in Indonesia.)
"No," said Mr. Kim. "I am worried that the
Han will become jealous because of the special
treatment the Chinese government accords to
the ethnic Koreans."
"Jealous of the water pump?" I asked.
"No, not only the water pump. That is only
one form of our government's special attention
towards minorities. Here we have our own
schools with Korean as the teaching language.
We have our own factories manufacturing
clothes and footwear. As the majority popula¬
tion here we also control economic and political
power. Of course there are representatives of our
Han brothers and sisters among us."



"What can I do to help my suffering minority people? I try
to answer this question by going to see what is hap¬
pening in other countries. Wherever I go, I keep my
eyes and ears wide open. I am like the hornbill, the
beautiful bird that is the emblem of my people. I fly
from tree to tree in the thick forest of ideas."
"Are there any grounds for your fears? Have
you ever had any serious differences of opinion
or conflicts with the Han?" I asked Mr. Kim.
"I do not think we can avoid differences of
opinion as they arc part of life," said Mr. Kim.
"Contradictions even exist among the Koreans
here, and it is one of our tasks to solve them so
that they do not develop into serious conflict."
"What about your own experiences, Lao
Chung?" Lao Wang asked our host.
Lao Chung, the head of the family, answered
without hesitation. "Until now the Koreans
and the Han have lived together peacefully here
and wc always help each other in our daily activ¬
ities. The Han children study in the same schools
as our children. They learn Korean and we learn
Mandarin as our national language. We need
our Han brothers and sisters to develop our
region."
"The Koreans are in the majority here,"
said Mr. Kim, "and this creates a special situa¬
tion. As Chinese, the Koreans and the Han
enjoy the same rights in all fields. If we manu¬
facture our own clothes and shoes and keep
our culture alive, it is because our government
respects the cultures and traditions of minori¬
ties and regards them as the riches of our nation.
The Han, who are the minority among us here,
enjoy exactly the same rights as the ethnic
Koreans. Just as the central government gives us
special treatment, sc we give the Han minority
here special attention. Be patient, please, my
friend, we will visit our schools, factories, local
government offices, agriculture and art and lit¬
erature centres so that you can make an overall
evaluation of our development."
"It sounds like a propaganda speech," I
couldn't help thinking.
The village of Miao in
Heilongjiang, a vast province in
northeast China with a large
immigrant population.
KUSNI SULANG
is an Indonesian political
scientist and writer who has
published several plays and
collections of poetry, the best
known of which is Song of a
Dragon Son (1992). His articles
on political, cultural and social
questions have appeared in
several Indonesian newspapers
and magazines.
25
