SCREENPLAYS IN THE SAND
by Mouny Berrah
The desert has played a dramatic role in the history of the cinema
Above, Sonia Ichti, the
heroine of Les Ballseurs du
désert ( 1 984), a film by the
Tunisian director Nacer
Khemir.
B
USTER Keaton, his hands joined together
as if in prayer, entreats a cow, with just the
right combination of buffoonery and
solemnity, to produce a drop of milk. In the
background is the desert, criss-crossed with
barbed wire. The film is Go West, the year 1925.
The movies have not yet turned landscapes into
myth, but in this scene the desert already rep¬
resents both paradise lost and the urgent need to
In the early Westerns, the desert underscored
feelings, echoed emotions, mirrored character
and served as a background to the plot. All of
these roles fuse in a single, classic shot in John
Ford's The Iron Horse (1924). The foreground
is sand. Madge Bellamy and George O'Brien
stand face-to-face, holding hands. They are sil¬
houetted against a stark, scrubby background
stretching towards the horizon. Here the desert
is already a part of the plot as well as a setting. 21

Three Godfathers (1948), a
John Ford Western.
With the unfinished railroad slashing through it,
the desert shapes the destiny of the hero in
search of his father's killer.
A similar shot features in James Cruze's The
Covered Wagon (1923). A wagon train wending
its way through a dry, stony wasteland hemmed
in by mountains looks pathetically vulnerable in
the vast threatening wilderness. In both films the
use of the desert as a strategic element lends an
epic quality to what otherwise would have been
mere adventure stories. In the history of the
Western, the desert and landscape in general
evolved from being simply a counterpoint to the
theme into a narrative device, and finally, in
two later John Ford classics, The Searchers
(1956) and Cheyenne Autumn (1964), a character
in its own right. In these films, however, the
desert is usually portrayed in a conventional
way. Its rocky wastes are associated with lone¬
liness, danger, challenge, conquest and
endurance the qualities and imagery that give
the Western its epic dimension.
A world of silence
The "Oriental" desert has different connota¬
tions in film. Josef von Sternberg's Morocco
(1930) was one of a line of films such as The
ThiefofBagdad and L'Atlantide that brought to
the cinema the glamour, but also the stereo¬
types, of a triumphant orientalism. Morocco,
dominated by the sublime Marlene Dietrich,
tells the story of an on-and-off love affair during
the colonial period, a time when fascination
with the desert inspired films ranging from
clichés to masterpieces. The cinema critic
Mostefa Lâcherai has described his impressions
of Le Diamant Vert, a now-lost film dating
from that period. "Almost fifty years ago," he
wrote, "to the best of my recollection, this fresco
11
[with its cavalcades, caravans, bedouin splendour
and crowds of extras] had the same impact on us,
both as a revelation and as a coherent aesthetic
experience, as the spectacle the French painter
and writer Eugène Fromentin (1 820-1 876) wit¬
nessed with astonishment in 1853 at El Kan-
tara, at the foot of the southern Aurès moun¬
tains, and which he described in his book Un Eté
dans le Sahara." The desert shots in Diamant
Vert were more akin to ethnographic description
than to the exotic scenes that were common in
the movies of the time.
Years later Fort Saganne (1984) featured an
unusual treatment of the desert. The film is a
faithful adaptation of a novel by Louis Gardel
which describes the gradual development of the
relationship between the characters and the sand,
which shapes their destinies and determines their
actions. In its depiction of the Sahara, Fort
Saganne shows a rarely seen aspect of desert
life a lyricism that the "people of rocks and
sand" experience with great intensity. The film is
about conquest, army life and colonization, but
in the course of the action the soldiers gradually
go to pieces until they have nothing left but the
lust for freedom that can sometimes kill more
surely than an enemy bullet. The originality of the
film lies in its treatment of the characters' difficult
physical and, above all, psychological adapta¬
tion to the total freedom of the desert, where
people used to city life must come to terms with
a scale of values that has been turned upside
down. They discover the futility of trying to
master time and space in a constantly changing
environment. The sand erodes everything except
the memory of passions. Even speech becomes
meaningless when the characters realize that the
desert is a world where life is measured out in
silence. In this respect the film is faithful to the
novel, in which Gardel wrote: "What's the point
of struggling to make an impression! What's the
point of this mindless activity except to forget the
obvious: that no act is justified by any cause;
that time swallows everything; that the void
always wins. In the Sahara, it has already won."
Arab visions
The experience of coming to terms with strange
surroundings plays a less important role in the



vision of the desert offered by Arab film-makers
in works ranging from sugary melodrama to
classics. Fleurs Sauvages ("Wild Flowers") by
Youssef Francis is more like a photo-romance
than a film, which gives it a certain representa¬
tive quality. The setting is Egypt in the 1960s. It
begins with a long sequence showing Hussein
Fahmy and Nadia Lotfi driving through the
desert in a car; there is neither dialogue nor

A scene from The
Sheltering Sky, made in
1991 by the Italian director
Bernardo Bertolucci.
music. They stop twice, first at the El Alamein
military cemetery, then at an oil well. There is no
apparent reason for this trek, except, perhaps,
fascination with the barren landscape, which
takes a terrible toll in technical terms, since all the
desert shots are overexposed.
Movie buffs enjoy Fleurs Sauvages for its
over-the-top qualities. In other Arab films, such
as Tewfik Salah's Al Makhdu'un ("The
Deceived", 1971), the desert is a symbol. In this
highly personal work based on a novel by the
Palestinian writer Ghassan Kanafani, a group of
young people who have paid a smuggler to take
them across a border suffocate to death in the
back of the tanker in which they are being trans¬


ported. The desert also plays a prominent role in
Chadi Abdessalam's La momie ("The Mummy",
1969) in which the plundering of a pharaoh's
tomb serves as a metaphor for the fate of Egypt
and Egyptian culture. Abdessalam's training as an 23

Glauber Rocha's Deus e o
diabo na terra do sol
("Black God, White
Devil"; 1 964) was set in the
sertâo, the arid interior
region of north-eastern
Brazil.
24
MOUNY BERRAH,
Algerian sociologist and
journalist, is the correspondent
of the French-language
Algerian weekly Algérie-Actualité
in Washington, D.C. (U.S.A.).
architect is reflected in the way in which he lines
up his shots. (He helped design the sets forJoseph
Mankiewicz's Cleopatra andJerzy Kawalerowicz's
Faraón, both of which evoke the desert magnifi¬
cently.) There are also metaphorical elements in the
work of the Egyptian director Youssef Chahine,
who often uses the desert to score a point. In a
striking scene irom Adieu Bonaparte (1985), for
example, a tiny Napoleon is framed against the vast
expanse he is turning his back on.
Arab films sometimes take an alternative
view of the desert. L'Ombre de la terre ("The
Shadow of the Earth", 1982), by the Tunisian
director Tayeb Louhichi, challenges the idealized
image of the desert found in tourist brochures.
The desert in Louhichi's film, whose theme is
poverty and the growing marginalization of
nomad peoples, is not identified; it could be in
any Arab country where the only connection
between rulers and ruled is the identity card
and military service.
Some films attempt to discover the desert
which lies beneath appearances and conven¬
tions. One of them is Les baliseurs du désert
(1984), in which director Nacer Khemir seeks to
show the essential purity of the Thousand and
One Nights behind the orientalist imagery that
now surrounds it. But the desert can also be
shown plainly for what it is: a waterless place.
Les assoiffées (1973), by the Iraqi director
Mohammed Choukri Jamil, describes the slow
death of a village and the situation of its wom¬
enfolk.



Biblical epics
The desert has also been a backdrop for epics.
From Cecil B. de Mille's Cleopatra in 1934 to
Joseph Mankiewicz's version of the same story
in 1963, the desert has risen to the occasion.
Just as the American cinema's fascination with
history conceals audacity beneath the spectac¬
ular, in epics the desert is sometimes used as a
form of camouflage to divert attention from
controversial material. From Hollywood to
Cairo (Chahine's Saladin) and Algiers (Merzak
Allouache's Les aventures d'un héros), the desert
has sometimes succeeded in throwing sand in the
censor's eyes.
Like the desert epics, films on Biblical themes
such as William Wyler's Ben Hur (1959) and
John Huston's The Ten Commandments (1956)
and The Bible (1966), contain a historical mes¬
sage, although on a first viewing the religious
aspect seems predominant. In these films, as in
the Egyptian director Salah Abu Seif's L'Aube de
l'Islam ("The Dawn of Islam", 1970), the desert
is clearly a metaphor, a place where anything can
happen, especially divine revelation. Besides
providing part of humanity with its cultural
heritage, the desert here becomes a character
by virtue of the voices that are heard there, and
the elements that are unleashed in it form part of
the action. This is particularly noteworthy in
Abu Seif's film: since Islam forbids any repre¬
sentation of the Prophet, sand takes the place of
what cannot be shown.
In Italian cinema, Michelangelo Antonioni
presents in The Red Desert (1964) and Zabriskie
Point (1970) a unique vision of the desert as an
expression of the anguish of incommunicability.
Pasolini's desert is allegorical and forms part of
his highly personal interpretation of Judaeo-
Christian orthodoxy, leading up to the great
modern myths that are the focus of Teorema
(1969) and The Thousand and One Nights
(1974). Brazil's Cinema Novo is inspired by the
mythology of the sertâo, the semi-arid zone of
the country's northeastern region, a major lit¬
erary theme that has inspired realist works such
as Nelson Pereira Dos Santos's Vidas secas ("Dry
Lives", 1963) as well as baroque films like
Glauber Rocha's Black God, White Devil (1964)
and Antonio das Mortes (1969). For Cinema
Novo, the desert is primarily, to use Glauber
Rocha's words, "a culture of hunger".
It can also be a place to discover the
unknown, as in science fiction movies; a place
where love dies, as in Bernardo Bertolucci's The
Sheltering Sky; where heroes of the third kind
can be encountered, as in Indiana Jones; or
where power and loneliness go hand in hand, as
in Kawalerowicz's Faraón. It can serve simply as
a visual element or play a major part in the nar¬
rative structure. It can be found in all kinds of
films. Roland Barthes once spoke of the "world's
countless tales"; many of them take us to the
desert.
