IN 1950 the United Nations Economic
and Social Council called on UNESCO
to encourage and facilitate education
relating to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, adopted two years earlier,
both in schools and among the adult pop¬
ulation and through the medium of the
press, radio and the cinema. Shortly after¬
wards, in 1951, the first of what was to
become an impressive number of
UNESCO publications on human rights
teaching appeared: The Universal Dec¬
laration ofHuman Rights: A Guide for
Teachers.
Human rights teaching entails more
than providing information about rights
and the channels through which they
may be put into effect. It must aim to
create a strong attachment to the princi¬
ples and values underlying them, such as
respect for human dignity and for the
rights of others, and to develop people's
capacity to organize themselves to stand
up for their rights and to combat igno¬
rance and indifference.
Information about human rights
therefore needs to be worked into all
types of education, beginning, naturally
enough, in schools. As long ago as 1953,
UNESCO launched its Associated Schools
Project, one of the aims of which is to
promote international understanding and
world peace. Over 3,000 primary and
secondary schools belonging to this
world-wide network are now teaching
respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
This learning process should, how¬
ever, continue through every phase of
adult life, in the universities and through
the work of associations and profes¬
sional bodies, and should be made an
essential element in the education of the
most vulnerable sections of society, such
as refugees, minorities, women and the
disabled.
UNESCO built up this very broad con¬
ception of human rights teaching by
stages. A decisive step forward was taken
by the International Congress on
Teaching in Human Rights (Vienna,
1978), which brought together a hun¬
dred or so experts from around the
world teachers, educationists, human
rights activists and government officials
and gave particular emphasis to encour¬
aging attitudes of tolerance, respect and
solidarity.



THE
RIGHTS
OF ALL
BYFRANCINE
FOURNIER
Nine years later, the International
Congress on Human Rights Teaching,
Information and Documentation (Malta,
1987) added further depth and breadth to
the ideas discussed in Vienna, stressing the
diverse forms that such teaching should
take to bring it within the reach of all
and to extend it to all levels of education.
The International Congress on Edu¬
cation for Human Rights and Democ¬
racy (Montreal, March 1993), the latest
stage in this process, summing up all that
had gone before, culminated in the adop¬
tion of a "World Plan of Action on Edu¬
cation for Human Rights and Democ-
Learning how to vote in a Unesco
Associated School in Costa Rica.
racy". This plan is addressed to all those
involved in human rights teaching, in or
outside of the education system and espe¬
cially in difficult circumstances such as
conflicts, natural disasters or the transition
from an authoritarian to a democratic
system one of the new dimensions to
emerge at this congress being that democ¬
racy itself is inseparable from, and com¬
plementary to, true respect for human
rights.
This essential topic, learning democ¬
racy, has since been the subject of many
UNESCO activities. Some of the seminars
and other meetings UNESCO has orga¬
nized, in particular a meeting of experts
on "Human rights and human rights edu¬
cation in the process of transition to
democracy" (Prague, November 1992)
and an international workshop on "Edu¬
cation for human rights and democracy in
post-communist societies" (Warsaw, Sep¬
tember 1993), have made it possible to
identify the priorities and the steps to be
taken in support of human rights teaching
in eastern and central Europe.
UNESCO publishes a newsletter enti¬
tled The Human Rights Teaching Bul¬
letin and awards a "UNESCO Prize for
the Teaching of Human Rights" every
two years to institutions, organizations or
individuals who have distinguished them¬
selves in this area, most recently, in 1992,
to the Arab Institute for Human Rights.
The Organization also publishes a
number of directories and bibliographies,
such as Access to Human Rights Docu¬
mentation, and helps out with the estab¬
lishment or management of documenta¬
tion centres.
UNESCO has provided a forum in
which recommendations and conven¬
tions safeguarding such basic cultural
rights as the right to education, the right
to participate in cultural life or scientific
progress and the right to information
have been worked out and adopted.
Last but not least, UNESCO's Execu¬
tive Board has set up a "communica¬
tions" i.e. complaints procedure to
enable the Organization to help in solving
problems in relation to the observance
of cultural and educational rights sub¬
mitted by individuals or associations.
FRANCINE FOURNIER
is UNESCO's Assistant Director-General for Social
and Human Sciences. 37
