Who is responsible
for the crisis of
Africa's nomadic
herders and their
traditional lands?
A group of Maasai burning
their village. They usually do
this to keep the area clean and
to kill parasites. Often they do
not burn their villages but leave
them empty when they move
away. 


he vanishing African
herdsman
by John Galaty
I Pastoralists make productive use of the
most inhospitable regions of Africa the
arid and semi-arid lands by raising livestock
for their own subsistence and to provide meat for
teeming cities and crowded farms. Today, most of
them live in a wide, curving band of savannah.
Specialized herders live in the drier regions with
up to 500 mm rainfall, agropastoralists who
tend livestock but depend on crop cultivation
for their livelihood in a larger zone with up to
750 mm of rainfall per year. Eastern Africa, a
region stretching from Ethiopia and the Sudan in
the north to Tanzania in the south and covering
20 per cent of the area of Africa, is populated by
half the continent's cattle and the vast majority of
its pastoralists.
The dry rangelands have fewer domestic
animals per land area than do the islands of
highlands, where both animals and people live
in high densities. In these areas of scanty rainfall 29

IVIaasai goatherds of the
Samburu tribe (Kenya).
An encampment of the
pastoral Maasai, who live in
Kenya and the United Republic
of Tanzania, usually consists of
around fifty igloolike dwellings
(below and opposite page).
and sparse vegetation, where agriculture is gen¬
erally impossible or very risky, livestock require
relatively large areas of grazing to thrive. A
demographic explosion has resulted in a flow of
migrants from swollen highland communities
into the arid and semi-arid lands, which to them
appear relatively empty. However, people who
have lived for a long time in the drylands are well
aware that these areas have a low potential for
supporting human communities, and know that
all available sources are currently expended in
supporting them through animal husbandry
and dryland agriculture.
These facts do not, however, mitigate the
desire of land-hungry peasants to occupy neigh-
30
bouring rangeland, nor slow the steps they take
to do so. Many enclaves of relatively more fertile
land within the African rangelands are experi¬
encing piecemeal enclosure, whether in the oases
of the Sahara, the riverine valleys of western and
eastern Africa, the fringes of the Kalahari in
Botswana, or the mountains and swamps of east
Africa. The Maasai in the plains of southern
Kenya and northern Tanzania are noteworthy in
being subjected to more far-reaching threats to
their land than are perhaps members of any other
community on the continent.
In Kenya, corruption in land allocations
during privatization, sales by poor pastoralists
once they receive land titles, and appropriation
of rich rangeland for parks and reserves, all add
up to a massive haemorrhage of the land hold¬
ings of Maasai herders. In Tanzania, with its
new policy of leasing rural land to local and
foreign entrepreneurs, Maasai residents are being
dispossessed at an even greater pace. Circum¬
venting local villages, which theoretically serve
as land-holding bodies, leasehold titles for thou¬
sands and thousands of hectares of land are
being allocated to government officials, local
big men and foreign companies. Local pro¬
ducers wake up to find fences cutting them off
from land they have always used, or see tractors
clear-cut and plough fields that stretch to the
horizon where their pastures had lain. In the
idiom of enterprising Tanzanians today, the
Maasai districts represent the last frontier, and
they are the "cowboys" coming to seize land

from the "Indians", that is, their fellow Tan-
zanian citizens, the Maasai.
The discourse of dispossession
To understand this inexorable though not yet
inevitable process of dispossession, we must
look to the discourse, woven out of contradic¬
tory ideas, which motivates and justifies the
appropriation of pastoral land.
The first of these ideas suggests that the range
is o^mnilized by pastoralists, who degrade it
through overstocking. Pasture loss, erosion and
dust-filled valleys are seen to result from the
paradox of common property: since pastoralists
individually reap economic benefits while col¬
lectively sharing environmental costs, they lack
incentives to control the growth of their herds.
From this analysis it follows that common
resources can only be sustained if they are priva¬
tized or put under state control. But this argument
has been refuted on many grounds, and the poli¬
cies which follow from it have been subjected to
severe criticism.
Firstly, it ignores the role played by commu¬
nity institutions, legitimized by the authority of
tradition and by local participation, in managing
environmental resources. Secondly, it reflects the
view that individual producers are competitors
who make decisions independently of one another,
while herders form overlapping networks of com¬
munication through which strategies are co-ordi¬
nated. Thirdly, the argument assumes that the
most important determinant of grassland quality
is the number of animals using the range. However,
in most grazing systems in Africa, degradation
of the range environment is primarily correlated
with annual rainfall and local soil quality rather
than stocking levels.
The image of an Africa afflicted with erosion
and dust stems from the occurrence of lower than
average rainfall over the last thirty years. In the dry
season or during drought, the abundance of pas¬
ture depends more on the amount of rainfall
received than on the proportion of already dead
cellulose livestock do or do not eat. After a
drought, the seeds of annual grasses lie in the dust
ready to germinate, and the roots of perennial
grasses lie deep below ground ready to regen¬
erate when rains come. In fact, in many pastoral
areas, understocking is a more serious problem
than overstocking, since undergrazing leaves
unpalatable, woody and unproductive herbage
that harbours parasites and stifles the growth of
new grasses.
A second key idea, contradictory to the first,
suggests that under pastoral use rangeland
resources are underutilized. The same herders
"Many enclaves of
relatively more
fertile land are
experiencing
piecemeal
enclosure, whether
in the oases of the
Sahara, the riverine
valleys of western
and eastern Africa,
the fringes of the
Kalahari, or the
mountains and
swamps of east
Africa. The Maasai
are being subjected
to more far-reaching
threats to their land
than perhaps any
other community."
Maasai hut in Tanzania.
31

who are accused of overexploiting the range are
also accused of underexploiting it! This myth
stems in part from the visual contrast between
crowded highland settlements and scattered pas¬
toral homesteads, between cultivated fields that
bear the imprint of human labour and regenerating
pastures that rest unused for much of the year.
It has also been argued that privatization
brings about more productive use of land, in this
case through moving pastoral land into farming
or through stimulating improved forms of
animal husbandry. However, privatization may
serve in the short run as a means of simply accu¬
mulating assets. Pastoral land may be sought
by speculators who covet land titles that can
be used as collateral for credit. Outsiders can buy
such land cheaply and invest elsewhere the loans
they procure on the basis of that land, which
they leave unused and often unoccupied. Under
these conditions, range productivityfalls because
of privatization. But even when land enclosures
and transfers do result in higher output, the
results must be balanced against capital invested.
Since politically powerful land-holders benefit
when the government subsidizes water improve¬
ments, the social costs of diverting public
resources to private gain must be weighed
against the output of the now irrigated land.
The tragedy of enclosure
In fact, the true tragedy of the rangelands occurs
at the moment of its enclosure, when it is in
everyone's interest to claim as much available
land as possible, independent of the common
good. The view that under private or state own¬
ership rural land tends to be better managed
must also be scrutinized. In countries where
rangelands have been declared state property,
community management has been undermined,
Arrayed in all their finery,
young Maasai head for the
Eunoto ceremony which marks
their transition from warriors to
mature men.
Below, the Maasai dwelling
consists of an armature of
branches covered with earth
mixed with cow dung and
chopped straw.
32
Wm^L^'
creating chaotic systems of "open access" to
the detriment of the range environment. Rarely
has the state had the means (or the will) to mon¬
itor range use with the knowledge and attention
of local herding communities.
After privatization, rangelands are often
both underutilized, as we have seen, and overuti-
lized, as when individual ranchers use private
land in conjunction with adjacent common
property for intensive commercial use. If we
seek to explain the disruption of local resource
management and time-tried techniques of food
production in these areas, we should seek it in
the erosion of indigenous rights over land rather
than in the erosion of the land itself.
There are good reasons to rely on small¬
holding herders and agropastoralists as agents of
conservation and development rather than on pri¬
vate entrepreneurs. When we realize that the ben¬
eficiaries of enclosure and privatization are often
not those who will dedicate their lives to the land,
we might also be discovering the roots of the twin
crises in Africa's arid and semi-arid lands, envi¬
ronmental decline and increasing poverty.

,.*'
Ztfy
-*
?» û/fe> r;^
s^^n¡
*Sr*~
tm
JOHN GALATY
is an American anthropologist
who is currently associate
professor at McGill University,
Montreal, where he also serves
as director of the Centre for
Society, Technology and
Development. A specialist in
African pastoral nomadism, he is
currently engaged on research
into Maasai land tenure. He has
co-edited several volumes on
pastoralism, including The World
of Pastoralism: Herding Systems
in Comparative Perspective
(1990) and Herders, Warriors
and Traders: Pastoralism in
Africa (1991).
