"We can change
homes. But we
cannot, indeed we
must not, forget
the homes of the



past, for they too
have shaped us."
ost illusions
by Neil Bissoondath
Above, a family of Hindus in
Trinidad.
14
As the twentieth century began, the
people who, fifty-five years later, would
become my ancestors, found themselves living
not in India, the place of their birth, but in a new
land, the Caribbean island of Trinidad, which
they were learning to call home. Driven by
poverty, they had chosen to seek a new life in
another part of the British empire thousands
of miles away.
As the twenty-first century approaches, I
too find myself living not in the land of my
birth, Trinidad, but in another new land, Canada,
which I have grown to call home. I was driven
not by poverty my family had found success,
both professional and financial, over the
decades but by dissatisfactions far less tan¬
gible and yet, in some ways, as virulent.
Trinidad is a small island off the coast of

Venezuela. Geography has given it a hot cli¬
mate, rich soil, and oil. History made it a British
colony, then an independent nation under the
British crown, and finally a republic answerable
to none. History also gave it a diverse citizenry.
A 1 990 population of 1 .2 million was composed
of 43 per cent African and 40 per cent East
Indian, with the rest from a variety of racial
and cultural groups. And yet it was this very his¬
tory, stirred by racial passions, that made it a
complex and at times unsettling place.
On 31 August 1962, when Trinidad and
Tobago became an independent nation, I was
seven years old. My memories of that grand
time are few. I remember lying on a mattress at
night in my grandmother's house in the cap¬
ital, Port of Spain, and listening to a cacophony
of ships' horns mingling with the crash of
artillery from the newly-formed Defence Force.
I remember receiving at school a chocolate bar
and a little gilded medal. I remember the flag: a
red field, with a wide black band bordered in
narrow white stripes running diagonally from
upper left to lower right. And I remember too
that other flag, the old one, the Union Jack
which my grandfather used to fly outside his
store, furled and forgotten in a dusty corner,
history now.
I remember faces, too, frozen in adolescence:
black, white, Chinese, Indian, mulatto. There is
my namesake, Neil, always smiling; and Wayne,
a soccer player whose promise could have led to
a career in a bigger place; Brian, whose angers
would lead him to radical Marxism and Black
Power; Dave, whose talents would take him to
Oxford. There is Andrew, from England; Vivek,
from India; Reza, from Oman. There is Richard,
who would die of a drug overdose; and Frank,
who would die in a car accident. And so many
more.
We were friends and, in the rhetoric of the
time, future leaders of the new nation. Race,
religion, politics should not have mattered. But,
inevitably, they did.
"Together we aspire, together
we achieve"
On the verge of adolescence, Zaid and I were, for
a time, deskmates in primary school. We were
friends. We played together in the dusty school¬
yard and, even though we were not of the faith,
sang the Presbyterian hymns together at the
morning worship. Zaid was Muslim and I was
Hindu, but this meant only that our families
celebrated different religious festivals:
Mohammed and Krishna exercised no influ¬
ence on our friendship. Yet when his father sud¬
denly died a silence descended between us. Zaid
had no words to express his loss, and the lan¬
guage of condolence was foreign to me. I knew
that Hindus cremated their dead, and I won¬
dered what Muslims did. But my curiosity
seemed an intrusion. I could not bring myself to
ask, and our friendship ended in a wordless
ballet of pained glances.
In the years to come the new flag would be
reproduced dozens of times in my sketchbooks.
It would be drawn in pencil or in ink, crayon-
coloured or water-coloured, free and fluttering
or ruled stiffly to scale. Beneath it, within a
stylized ribbon, I would inscribe the island's
new motto, "Together We Aspire, Together We
Achieve". I liked the phrase;'it had a wonderful
resonance, and neatly captured the vision of
hope and optimism vital to the new era. At
school, the new anthem would be drilled into us,
and after more than thirty years, twenty of them
in a new country, the words remain as familiar
to me as the alphabet:
Forgedfrom the love of liberty
In the fires ofhope andprayer . . .
"Hindus should keep their noses out of
Muslim affairs"
On the verge of adulthood, Shafique and I were,
for a time, friends in high school. We talked
together during the hot lunch periods and,
because we were not of the faith, stood in
respectful silence while our classmates said the
"Hail Mary". Shafique was Muslim and I was
Hindu but, as with Zaid some years before, our
religions exercised no influence on our friend¬
ship. Until, that is, late in 1971, when war
erupted between Pakistan and India over the
breakaway state of East Pakistan, now
Bangladesh. The war and its merits were, like
Viet Nam, like Northern Ireland, a topic of vig¬
orous discussion at school. For me, though,
debate came to an abrupt end one morning
Trinidad and Tobago became an
independent nation and a
member of the Commonwealth
in 1962. Below, at a ceremony
during the independence
celebrations, the Princess
Royal, representing Queen
Elizabeth II, head of the
Commonwealth, reads the
speech from the throne during
the State Opening of
Parliament.

w
16
NEIL BISSOONDATH,
Trinidad-born Canadian writer,
has published several novels,
including A Casual Brutality
(Bloomsbury, U.K., 1988) and
The Innocence of Age (Knops,
Canada, 1992).
when, as I expressed support for Indian inter¬
vention in the face of reported massacres by
the Pakistani army in the east, Shafique who
had been eavesdropping on the discussion
whipped around and with great indignation
declared that Hindus should keep their noses out
of Muslim affairs. This advent into the personal
stunned me into wordlessness, and once more a
friendship ended in a strained silence, but this
time with a vision of schism never anticipated.
Other schisms began to make themselves
apparent. It became clear as I grew older and
developed an interest in politics that those who, in
1962, had offered promises of aspiring and
achieving together had conceived of a narrowed
togetherness. They engaged readily in the politics
of race, the island dividing itself into two camps,
the People's National Movement, which was
largely the party for blacks, and the Democratic
Labour Party, which was largely the party for
Indians. We acquired a knowledge of racial unease.
In a place where truth was formless, where one
learnt to dismiss nothing and to distrust every¬
thing, even so simple an undertaking as a popu
lation census can lead to anxiety. Some years ago,
Indians whispered to each other that their num¬
bers had surpassed 50 per cent but that the black-
controlled government had, through fear of
numerical inferiority, suppressed the truth. There
was something tragic about that rumour. It was,
I felt, a sign of despair. We were, contrary to the
popular claims, no happy island in the sun. We
could not even play together without mutterings
of dissatisfaction. No selection of the Trinida-
dian or West Indian cricket team could be made
without a deserving Indian being left off the team
because so the whispers went of his race.
"She's nice, for a black"
But it was at the island's Carnival that notions of
play, of fun in the sun, became most explicit.
Many aspirations are invested in the Carnival,
many achievements pursued. It is spectacle on
the grand scale, a two-day street party that effec¬
tively shuts the island down. It is as brilliant as
Rio's, but less controlled. Anyone, local or
tourist, can join in and many do. So it was

A little girl dressed up for
Carnival in Port of Spain,
Trinidad.
"I remember receiving at school a chocolate bar and a
little gilded medal. I remember the flag: a red field with
a wide black band bordered in narrow white stripes run¬
ning diagonally from upper left to lower right. I remember
faces, too, frozen in adolescence: black, white, Chi¬
nese, Indian, mulatto. We were friends and, in the
rhetoric of the time, future leaders of the new nation.
Race, religion, politics should not have mattered. But,
inevitably, they did."
with a certain dismay that my ironic eye began
to discern divisions not immediately apparent:
that while every race participated, each did so in
little pockets of homogeneity, blacks with blacks,
Indians with Indians, whites with whites, etc.
Only the tourists, ignorant of indigenous ten¬
sions, felt free to mingle.
But as painful as social hypocrisy may be,
hypocrisy in private cuts more deeply; it slices
into the soul. There is no defence against it, no
shrug of C'est la vie, for there is in youth no
recognition of the personal hypocrisies acquired
through life and circumstance. How was I, as a
young boy with friends black, white and Indian,
to respond to one relative's disdain for people of
mixed (Indian/black) race? What to say when a
woman, speaking of a friend, says, "She's nice, for
a black"? How to intervene when social conver¬
sation includes fluid references to "nigs"? How
not to explode patience finally melting when
a New York business agent, hitherto well-liked,
makes a small mistake and becomes a "dirty
Jew"? When stern arguments were made that
blacks were incapable of running governments, I
would point to the undeniable chaos of India: I
have yet to meet an Indian willing to draw racial
conclusions from that nightmare.
No one ever said black school friends were not
welcome in our homes. They were, for the most
part. But it was also implicit that certain limits were
to be observed. A recent conversation with a rel¬
ative is revealing. Denying that her parents were
racist in any way, she pointed out that they wel¬
comed all her friends to their home. Her black
friends too? Yes, her black friends too. They just
made it clear she wasn't to marry any ofthem.
At the age of eighteen, I left Trinidad for
good. I went to a city, Toronto, in a country,
Canada, which quickly became my home. The
United Nations has recognized Toronto, with its
hundred-odd ethnic groups speaking some
eighty languages, as the most ethnically diverse
city in the world. It is a place where, as another
newcomer to the city once observed, one simply
becomes part of the difference.
Growing up in Trinidad was for me, on both
the social and personal levels, an exercise in dis¬
satisfaction. But it is not so for everyone.
My mother, born and educated in Port of
Spain, a woman widely read and travelled,
always swore that she would never leave
Trinidad, no matter how difficult life became.
Although she enjoyed London, New York,
Paris, Caracas and Rio de Janeiro, and despite
her particular fondness for Venice, Trinidad was
her home in ways I could not appreciate, a place
to which she was linked in ways that were to me
frustrating because they were inscrutable. She
felt herself linked to the place as I felt myself
alienated from it. The intimacy of her feeling was
not one I could engage.
I have for a long time been unable to refer to
Trinidad as "home". When I am travelling, when
I feel myself in need of comfort, security, famil¬
iarity, it is not Trinidad that I long for. "Home"
to me now is the ungraspable vastness of
Canada, its diversity of geography, climate and
people, its yet unformed face both a warning and
a possibility. We can grow attached to other
places, then. We can change homes. But we
cannot, indeed we must not, forget the homes of
the past, for they too have shaped us. The fact
remains that the Trinidad motto, "Together We
Aspire, Together We Achieve", humanitarian
in vision, universal in philosophy, betrayed by
so many people in so many ways, still speaks to
me in the land in which I pursue aspiration and
achievement. 17
