Charles Edouard Jeanneret-Gris, known as
Le Corbusier (1 887- 1 965).
Tlie visionary architect and town-
planner Le Corbusier (Charles-
EdouardJeanneret; 1887-1965) was
one ofthe speakers at a symposium
organized by the Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation in Venice
in 1934. Published below are extracts
from the address in which explained
why, in his opinion, Venice is an
outstandingly successful city.
Le Corbusier
Venice: a picture ofharmony
Text selected and presented by
Edgardo Canton
Venice is a totality. In its present state
of conservation it is a unique phe¬
nomenon, a unique example of
total harmony, of utter purity and of the
unity of a civilization. It has come down to
us intact for one simple reason: it is built on
water. Since the water has not changed,
Venice could not change either! It has
remained entire. For those who seek to see
to what innumerable peaks ofperfection a
healthy system can lead humankind, Venice
is an extraordinary example.
Who was the genius who, at a certain
moment in time, had the idea of turning
what might have been just a small town
into a city with the potential for develop¬
ment? It was a great and strikingly insightful
conception of what a city can offer. The
first step was to create the necessary ameni¬
ties Venice is entirely made up of such
amenities. What came first? Transport. It
is central to all Venetian preoccupations, for
water is everywhere, a means of defence
but also an obstacle to movement. The
problem is how people can travel about
and live on the water, not just once in a
while but as they go about their daily busi¬
ness. So by a set of circumstances of great
interest from the point ofview ofart for art
is a way of putting things in order, in their
place, where they fit one thing leading
implacably to another, life gradually estab¬
lishes itself on the lagoon. A city is born
and people live in it, enjoying amenities so
excellent that they remain in perfectly good
working order to the present day, when no
other city in the world has been able to
resist the explosive incursion ofmachines.
It is not for the palaces ofVenice alone
that I reserve my admiration. I observe the
city from the moment I arrive at the railway
terminus, the steps that take me down to
the waterside; then the gondola that is
waiting for me. What strikes me first and
foremost is not the romantic appeal of the
gondola but the discovery ofwhat a mag¬
nificent device this intensely rational inven¬
tion is. To what miracle is it due that, ever
since people have been describing Venice
and painters have depicted the city, the
gondola has not changed its shape? How
has it escaped the whims ofchanging styles
and fashions? Except for a few unimportant
decorations, a few carvings that make it
neither more beautiful nor more ugly, some
little bronzes representing a chimaera or
the like, mere details, the biological state of
the gondola that of a marvellous, bal¬
ancing instrument, very like an aeroplane
in its mechanical reality has never
changed, has remained constant, proving
the existence of links of cause and effect
that are fundamental if a given object con¬
cerned has always served people's needs
and has been built to a human scale.
Let us move on from the gondolas to the
little harbours where they come alongside,
to the water gates opening into the houses,
to the bridges one crosses, built strictly on
a human scale and made proportional to
this means of transport. I am not speaking
here of the Rialto bridge, which mayor
may not be very beautiful, but rather of
the countless little bridges that are, as it
were, the setting for a precious object a
gondola with a gondolier standing upright
aboard. Complete unity reigns, the steps
where one disembarks are extraordinarily
ingenious in their design I could go on.
Venice's streets too are extraordinary:
streets where we go on foot, where we are
masters of terra firma, lords of the land;
where we are at peace, where our ears are
soothed, where we can safely stroll where
our footsteps take us streets without
traffic! In Rome the other day, I publicly
stated the case for the dignity of the pedes¬
trian. In the name of the world's cities, I
called for an end to the scandal ofmodern
streets slashed in two by cars, an end to the 9

R H I TheljNESCO
nSBXOURIER
threat of death in the streets. I said that it
was possible to separate pedestrians com¬
pletely from cars, that they could have the
cities at ground level entirely to themselves.
The Venetians are the undisputed masters
of their city's streets, the pedestrian is king.
Have you noticed how proud and cheerful
Venetians are, in the streets, in the squares,
on the great Riva degli Schiavoni?
The streets, the pedestrians, the water
are all part of a wonderful unity; we are
now ready to appreciate all the differences
of scale and all the subtlest nuances of this
ensemble. We appreciate them because
our eyes are 1.6 metres above the ground,
and they are the instruments with which we
measure things. What is the value of the
gigantic but out-of-place, the dispropor¬
tionate? In Venice nothing is out of pro¬
portion, thanks to its watery setting.
Streets on land and streets of water:
perfect measure. Now consider the houses,
another element of the art. Admittedly,
those who have tasted the bitter flavour of
modern life can no longer live in Venice,
which is built to suitwalking. Things move
too slowly there. Butwhen I try to see things
from the point ofview ofnormal times and
slower paces, I can see everywhere the care
that went into every gesture and every deci¬
sion when the houses were built. I am not
talking about the palaces; palaces don't
matter to me! House after house, dwelling
after dwellingwas built, with gardens wher¬
ever a little of the scarce soil could be set
aside. Here too all is measure and propor¬
tion and a human presence. Explore the
city to its innermost recesses and you will
appreciate that everywhere, in this superla¬
tive example ofan urban undertaking, there
is tenderness.
Here at last we come to the reason why
the whole world speaks of Venice and is
right to do so. The third factor influencing
the character of the place, more than prob¬
lems of transport and housing, is the outlook
that turned inert materials into a living,
breathing city civic spirit! It bursts forth
here as it does virtually nowhere else in
Western civilization. Civic spirit determined
everything inVenice. It inspired the builders,
it created the great public palazzi, the
statues, the paintings. It breathed a beauty
that is both palpable and omnipresent into
everyday items. I have shown you how far
this "decorative art" (what a pathetic term
that is!) can extend.
I should stress that this unanimous art is
not frivolous; on the contrary, it is found in
the implements ofdaily life, as when it cre¬
ated the gondola, that most purelyVenetian
object, and gives us the right to laugh offthe
complaints and lamentations we are always
hearing today about the standardization of
modem life. The gondola is a standardized
object a lot more standardized than a car.
It has not changed in centuries, and has thus
attained the perfection sometimes found in
Greek temples. There was only one kind of
temple, so the creative impulses could be
concentrated on the matter of quality. The
amenities of urban life transport and
housing plus civic spirit drew the entire
population into becoming part ofa totality
an enthusiastic and fruitful gesture that
amounted as it were to a mark of affection
bestowed on each object.
The result was the joy ofcreation and of
participating in a collective act, and the
happy outcome of the enterprise may be
seen today, five or ten centuries later, in
the proud and cheerful Venetian populace
crowding the city's streets, squares and
magnificent waterfront.
Let us now leave Venice and set foot
again in contemporary realities.
