N T E R V I E W
, ¡E MYUNG-WHUN
CHUNG
talks to
Claude Glayman
An immense ovation broke out at the Bastille Opera House in Paris on
19 September 1994 when the curtain went down at the end of the first
performance there of Verdi's Simon Boccanegra, conducted by Myung-
Whun Chung. The audience was giving a memorable salute to the last
work conducted by the young Korean conductor (except for a piece by
Olivier Messiaen, Concert à quatre, dedicated to Mr. Chung and conducted
by him on 26 September) as musical director of the Bastille Opera.
Myung-Whun Chung succeeded Daniel Barenboim as musical director
in 1989 and conducted the first opera to be performed there, Berlioz's
Les Troyens. In 1994, however, the situation at the Bastille Opera
changed when the decision was taken to appoint a director bearing
overall responsibility. Hugues Gall, manager of the Grand Theatre in
Geneva (Switzerland), has been appointed to this post to take effect from
August 1995.
To outside observers, a conflict seemed inevitable, and in March 1994
discussions began between the Opera management and Chung to take
led to the enforced departure of the Korean conductor.
Myung-Whun Chung was born in
Korea in 1951. He is reserved and seems
to have little time to spare for any¬
thing but music and the constant effort
to achieve perfection in it. Art is not
Myung-Whun Chung's only interest,
however:
"I was born a few months after the
outbreak of the Korean war. My par¬
ents my mother was born in North
Korea had had a pretty good idea of
what was going to happen. Even today,
forty years after the tragedy, I am still
strongly in favour of the reunification
of my country, although I feel that it will
be a longer and more difficult process
than the reunification of Germany.
"I ask myself, without being able
to answer, why there should be this
division and this antagonism between
members of the same people, who share
the same civilization, history and lan¬
guage. Politics is behind it all and the
effects of political mistakes last for a
very long time."
Chung was attracted to music at a
very early age, as a result of personal
inclination and family influence he
had strong backing from his parents,
and two older sisters became famous
instrumentalists. He trained simulta¬
neously as a pianist and a conductor.
After a first visit to the United States in
1968, he went to Moscow to take part
in the prestigious Tchaikovsky com¬
petition for pianists.
"It's not hard to imagine what this
competition meant to the authorities at
that time, and how important it was
for them that a Russian should win
the First Prize. This way-out patrio¬
tism, at variance with the universal,
cosmopolitan nature of music, came
as a shock."
How do you explain yourpassion for
European music?
I was immersed in classical music even
before I was born. For me it was a natural
language before it became a profession (in
addition to the piano I have also played

DISCOGRAPHY
Camille Saint-Saens: Samson et Dalila,
Placido Domingo, Waltraud Meier, Alain
Fondar, Samuel Ramey and others, Choir and
Orchestra of the Bastille Opera, conducted .
by Myung-Whun Chung.
lsetof2CDsEMI.
Camille Saint-Saens: Third Symphony with
Organ, and Olivier Messiaen: Ascension, the
Bastille Opera Orchestra conducted by
Myung-Whun Chung.
1 CD Deutsche Grammophon.
Olivier Messiaen: Turangalîla-Symphonie,
Yvonne Loriod (piano), Jeanne Loriod
(Ondes Martenot), the Bastille Opera
Orchestra conducted by Myung-Whun
Chung. 1 CD Deutsche Grammophon.
Olivier Messiaen: Eclairs sur l'au-delà, the
Bastille Opera Orchestra conducted by
Myung-Whun Chung,
1 CD Deutsche Grammophon.
Georges Bizet: Suite de Carmen, Suites n" 1
and 2 ofthe Arlésienne, Petite suite d'orchestre
(Jeux d'enfants), the Bastille Opera Orchestra
conducted by Myung-Whun Chung, 1 CD
Deutsche Grammophon.
Dimitri Shostakovitch: Lady Macbeth of
Mtzensk, Maria Ewing and others, the
Bastille Opera Orchestra conducted by
Myung-Whun Chung, 1 set of 2 CDs
Deutsche Grammophon (forthcoming).
Anton Dvorak: Trios n" 1 op. 21 and n° 3 op
65, The Chung Trio, Kyung Wha Chung
(violin), Myung Wha Chung ('cello), Myung-
Whun Chung (piano), 1 CD Decca.
Ludwig van Beethoven: Trios n°'4 and 7, The
Chung Trio, Kyung Wha Chung (violin),
Myung Wha Chung ('cello), Myung-Whun
Chung (piano), ICD EMI.
Rimsky-Korsakov: Scheherazade and
Stravinsky: The Firebird, the Bastille Opera
Orchestra conducted by Myung-Whun
Chung, ICD Deutsche Grammophon.
Serge Prokofiev: Romeo andJuliet (extracts),
Amsterdam Concertgebouw conducted by
Myung-Whun Chung, ICD Deutsche
Grammophon.
In preparation for Deutsche Grammophon:
Verdi's Otello, Berlioz's Symphonie
fantastique and Dutilleux's Métaboles,
Berlioz's Overtures and Airs d'Opéras
français with the soprano K. Battle.
The Chung trio: Myung-Whun Chung (piano) with
his two sisters, violinist Kyung-Wha (left) and
cellist Myung-Wha (right).
the violin and the kettledrums). Clas¬
sical music is truly universal. It is under¬
stood and shared by an infinitely greater
number of people than any form of tra¬
ditional music. For me traditional music
is, by and large, like the stalest kind of
Western folklore. It is a question of evo¬
lution. If you compare the two styles of
music over a sufficiently long period,
five centuries, say, you can reasonably
put forward the case that traditional
music has hardly changed.
So what do you think ofthe branch of
classical music that is usually described
as "contemporary"?
Technically difficult music has existed
since the baroque and Johann Sebastian
Bach. Modern experimental music is an
extremely advanced art-form which one
ought to keep up with and if possible
perform. But to make a contribution to
it requires an enormous amount of time.
It is in the forefront of a rapidly changing
field. It is a new dimension whose con¬
tours are not always clear to the com¬
posers themselves. Electronic music is
only one aspect of it. But the modular
hall at the Bastille Opera, for example,
should be useful for further exploration
of this type of music, which could pave
the way to the opera of the future.
Tell us something aboutyour meeting
with Olivier Messiaen.
I met him for the first time at Sar-
rebriick where I was conducting a pro¬
gramme of his music. He was a man of
very great talent and I was delighted that
he had come. Later I recorded some of
his music and we agreed to stage his
Saint-François d'Assise at the Bastille,
directed by Peter Sellars. That was in
1992, and alas, Messiaen died later in the
year.
What wereyour working methods at
the Bastille Opera?
When I was approached about the
post, I hesitated at first, knowing full
well that I would be involved in a great
deal of administrative work that would
prevent me from devoting all my time to
music. Everyone advised me against it,
but I finally accepted because I felt that
there was something to be constructed
there.
At the Opera, the musicians have
always felt that they were given short
shrift and of course that they were up
against the bureaucracy. My position
was simple. The purpose of the Opera as
a whole and of everybody who is
involved in it, should be to make it easier
for the musicians to do their job and to

Myung-Whun Chung (left) after
conducting the first performance of
Concert à Quatre, a posthumous work by
the French composer Olivier Messiaen, at
the Bastille Opera in Paris on 26
September 1994. The work was performed
by the Orchestra and Choir of the Paris
Opera with pianist Yvonne Loriod (middle),
the composer's widow, and cellist Mstislav
Rostropovich (right).
help them fulfil themselves. The Bastille
Opera orchestra is, in my opinion, the
best in France, and I would like to see it
make more of an impact internationally.
Haveyou met many great conductors
during your career?
Yes, I had the honour to do two or
three days' work with Herbert von
Karajan, for example. But my most
important encounter was with Carlo
Maria Giulini, whose assistant I became
in Los Angeles in 1978 after I had fin¬
ished my studies. Paradoxically, he taught
me above all not to place art above
human qualities. A conductor should
strike the right balance between the pro¬
fessional approach and an ethical way
of life. It is important that profession¬
alism should not prevail over human
considerations. This is vital in an age
when the notion of professionalism has
become sacrosanct.
Giulini also strengthened my Chris¬
tian faith. My parents were Christian, but
I was not when I was very young. I came
to Christianity with difficulty, after much
questioning. Giulini was an example for
me. He is a man who has kept his purity
in a world of indifference.
I have also had the honour of being
received in private audience by His Holi¬
ness PopeJohn Paul II, whose message to
me was very clear: "You must do some¬
thing for humanity. You must take a
stand against drugs, against pollution,
against conflict and in favour of peace
and concord between people. That is
your mission."
He also said: "Even if there are all
kinds of talent, there is no fundamental
difference between people. Talent, of
whatever kind, is no exception to this
principle." Politics cannot solve all the
problems that beset the world, and I feel
that I and many others should do
what we can in a disinterested fashion. I
have, incidentally, been appointed a
United Nations goodwill ambassador.
I came to the same conclusion at the
Bastille Opera. Nothing is possible
without hard work and patience. Ready-
made solutions do not exist. But every¬
thing always has to be done on the spur
of the moment. We do not give ourselves
enough time to think carefully about
what we do, and personally I feel very
unhappy about all this haste. We achieve
far more if we are more tolerant and in
less of a hurry.
Constantly changing the people at the
top of institutions musical and other¬
wise will not lead to tangible and lasting
results. We must build with greater mod¬
esty and perseverance. Music and life are
not two separate compartments.
CLAUDE GLAYMAN
is a French journalist and music critic.
