INTERVIEW
EDOUARD J. MAUNICK talks to Jasmina Sopova
Among authors writing in French
today, the Mauritian poet Edouard J.
Maunick is one of those who most
strikingly embodies and champions
the values of a mixed racial
background. He has written more
than a dozen books, one of which,
Ensoleillé vif, won the 1977 Prix
Apollinaire, a leading French poetry
prize. All his works are centred on
the encounter between the self and
that which is outside the self. They
are filled with the wonder of a
childhood and adolescence spent
on his native island, where he
experienced the plurality of cultures
as a living reality. After nearly ten
years as director of the Unesco
Collection of Representative Works,
he is now associate editor of the
Paris-based magazine Jeune Afrique.
JASMINA SOPOVA
is a Macedonian essayist
You like to describe yourselfas not just
an "insulaire" an islander but an
"insulé" someone who has as it were
become an island unto himself. What do
you mean by this?
I use that word because I believe the con¬
dition of being an islander is determined
both by the place of birth and by the person
born there. Let me explain. Those who are
born on an island and live there for years
imperceptibly adopt the "attitudes" spe¬
cific to it. When I use the term insulé, I refer
to that natural chacteristic of the islander. I
invented it because I felt the need to be
more precise. It is a better way of expressing
the metamorphosis from person to island:
one is born an islander but one becomes
insulé.
At the same timeyoupresent the island
as a confined space, penned in by the sea.
Mauritius is a very small island, a rock cast
out in the vast ocean, so that when one
reaches the age of awareness and begins to
try to find oneself, one is inevitably over¬
come by a feeling of constriction, both
physical and mental. The island hems you
in, clasps you to it. At times you even feel
cramped within your own body, your own
skin. That at least was the well defined and
painfully sharp impression I had, especially
on the seashore. The littoral was the place
where the revelation came to me.
In yourpoemsyou compare the sea to a
prison's bars. Is being surrounded by the
sea such a cursef
An island is an enclosed space and the sea
a way out, into the wide world beyond,
but an island also has another dimension. It
is fertile in more than one sense. What I
mean is that when your eyes are drawn
upwards by the hills and the trees, from
the foothills and roots to the treetops and
summits, your gaze emerges into the wide
open sky in all its immensity. In the same
way, the branches draw your eyes outwards
and away, beyond the outermost leaves.
This constant toing-and-froing of the eye in
the end conditions what many would call
the soul but for which I have no name. No
matter, everything overflows and reaches
out.
When you have been raised in the school
of sun, rain and wind, of the red soil of the
tropics, the clouds and the stars, all these
supposedly inanimate things, the constric¬
tion that at first felt like a curse, a sentence
passed at birth, soon elicits a reaction that is
both awesome and sweet, an irreverence
that sets things in motion. One does an
about-turn; one's eyes are no longer fixed on
the island's centre but look out to sea and the
horizon becomes another country, other
countries. That is when the dream begins,
the urge to leave	
That is also when exile begins. You were
barely thirty when you left your islandfor
Paris. You were later to write that exile is
hard, even when it is self-imposed.
Exile becomes hard when loneliness sets
in, a loneliness that has more to do with the
memory of something essential rooted
within oneself than with ordinary recol¬
lections. Otherwise I do not regard exile as
painful, because it not only means leaving
home to go somewhere else, it also means
stepping forward towards yourself,
deciding to get to know yourself and to live
in and with yourself. After living through
your own tribulations and moments of
wonderment, you need to find out about
others, but the first essential is self-knowl¬
edge. Exile then becomes a quest, an expe¬
dition into the inner space of others, in
the course of which one must above all
never give in to the temptation of wanting
to portray others in one's own likeness,
on the pretext of aligning certain details.
That would be simply subjecting others
to the appetite for power that gnaws at all

of us. Sharing is something else. Exile then
becomes an opportunity for getting to
know, a fabulous voyage of discovery.
It appears from yourpoems that wher¬
ever in the worldyour travels takeyou you
discover something ofyour native island.
Exile is fraught with a sense of loss, to
make up for which some part of that which
one encounters transforms itself into that
which is missing. It is true that wherever I
go I find scraps of my childhood, when
everything was a source of wonder to me.
My desire no longer to regard my island as
a self-contained place, an outcast from the
world, goes together with a desire, expressed
through my verse, to bring rr country
closer to other countries.
Often by means of certain leitmotifs
like the "sega", the music ofAfrican origin
foundonly in the Mascarenhas Islands in the
Indian Ocean	
The sega is for me not just a type of music
peculiar to the Mascarenhas but a vibra¬
tion, a throbbing in the guts. Another reason
why I bring in the sega is for this throbbing
rhythm to merge with the rhythm of the
world. In much the same way, although I am
a man in search of himself, I am nothing
without the crowds that fill the world. That
is why I believe the world should be as one,
that the true name of the world is solidarity,
togetherness, sharing. Unless we share, listen
to one another, speak to one another, empti¬
ness and silence ensue.
Living means being surrounded by the
hum of life, of which the sega is part. All
human beings need vibrations, need to
express that busy hum of living in sounds
and harmonies, to find an accompaniment.
They need their own small tune to play in
the great orchestral score of the world. I
am not being a dreamer when I talk in this
way. It is from a refusal to talk in this way
that wars come about.
Is that why poets need to link this
"vibration", by means of their words, to
the whole human condition?
Words are more universal than people
think. They are not the exclusive property
of a particular person. Writing in French, I
often give the words a different meaning, a
different echo, a different ring, no doubt
because I bend the language or try to join it
in lawful or unlawful wedlock with my
own Creole speech. To admit this is not to
detract from French. On the contrary, it is
to enrich it, to show the love of an insulé for
the language, to spice up the words not so
much so as to give them local colour as
because you can't help it, because it comes
naturally.
As far as I am concerned at least, it is
not the words alone that give a poem its
meaning but also the way they are chosen
and used. When I use a word, I give it a
cadence of my own. Using a word affects
its meaning, its harmonics, its music and
movement.
You see the poet then as a sort of
alchemist?
To some extent the poet creates language.
He draws speech out of silence and the
unspoken, and in the southern hemisphere
all poetry is speech; but although poetry is
my way of reaching out to myself and the
world, it is also the most essential and at the

same time most pointless act I perform.
Here we enter deep into the realm of
paradox for better or worse.
The fact is that life is made up of
paradox. Poetry is essential in that it enables
me to say what I see, not just what is before
my eyes, and what I hear, not just what I
listen to. I have been given the stewardship
of a talent for which I cannot take the credit,
and I realized from the outset that I must use
it in a serious and responsible, not a facile,
way. Poems are my weapon, the voice that
speaks to me, the music I dance to, the fire
that warms me and burns me, the light by
which I see things more clearly. .
I have made use of poetry and I still do,
but you will understand that it also verges
on pointlessness. I am not saying that I am
not happy to write I dare to believe that
my poems are not of use to me alone but
face to face with the ignominy of death the
eternal question recurs why? Perhaps,
after all, that is what life is, asking ques¬
tions.
Are you casting doubt on poets?
Yes and no. I do not see the poet as a
mere adjunct of the nation, a decorative
flourish, quite the contrary. This is not to
plead my own cause: poets can claim some
of the credit for the fact that peoples have
survived and civilizations have not disap¬
peared. Memory is enshrined first in their
spoken words, then in writing and now in
images. The greatest film-makers, photog¬
raphers, painters and sculptors are primarily
poets. To grasp the inner meaning, the emo¬
tion in things not the explanation but the
emotion is to attain to the epic, the
memory that must endure. Dictators, the
murderers who always condemn poets first,
before soldiers and politicians, know what
they are about. Poets lug memory around
with them, they make trouble!
One ofyourpoems, "As far as Yoruba
land", clearly illustrates the disagreement
you have often expressedwith Paul Valéry 's
idea that civilizations are mortal.
You are quite right. As long as a single
closely or distantly related heir to a civi¬
lization survives, that civilization cannot
die, and even should that individual disap¬
pear, his or her civilization would still be
there, because it would have nourished
others. That is the way the world's great
heritage is shared out: it is enough for traces,
only traces, to remain for everything to
begin again.
One day I happened to be in Oshogbo,
in Yoruba country, with my friend Wole
Soyinka. We were in a sanctuary, richly
adorned with stone carvings and with tra¬
ditional paintings on the surrounding walls.
He explained that it was a shrine to Oshun,
the Yoruba goddess of fertility, and he told
me the ancient story that comes into the
poem you mentioned. I revisited that vestige
of an immemorial civilization in the 1960s.
The place was deserted but I, someone born
thousands of miles away, had come back
there and I instantaneously and with great
intensity relived that memory.
I believe that even in more ordinary,
humdrum circumstances we can experience
other civilizations, of whatever age.
In the samepoem we come across your
holy trinity: Oshogbo, Benares and Geth-
semane.
I was fortunate enough to be born in a
country where all the great religions are pre¬
sent. I was christened and I read the Gospel
and then the whole Bible, but I also read
the Vedas, the Ramayana and the Egyptian
Book of the Dead. The Bible made me want
to discuss things with my school friend
Aziz I was aware that he attended a dif¬
ferent place of worship from me and
observed different rites. I wanted to find
out, I read the Qur'an. My father Daniel
Maximilien taught me one should always
try to get to the origin of things, and that was
how my search for my identity led me to dis¬
cover my Hindu roots. I had the good for¬
tune to have a great master, Ram Prakash,
who introduced me to Indian culture and got
me to read the Mahabharatra, the Bha-
gavad Gita and the Tripitakas as well. When
I later met Miguel-Angel Asturias, he opened
my mind to the Aztec Bible, the Popol Vuh.
All this is rewarding but at the same
time makes the questioning more intense.
The discovery that places are different but
not people is no doubt due to to my deep
personal experience of Mauritius' plu¬
rality the triune divinity Oshun/Shiva/
Jesus is the trinity that has run in my veins
from birth. Be that as it may, in spite of all
vicissitudes I am still a close friend of Christ.
I often speak to him because I am convinced
that he too must have asked himself many
questions about the human condition, and
the answers he found concern me still.
You have often said you do not accept
ready-made answers.
There are so many questions to ask. It's
not that I take pleasure in it, but what else
can one do? I began to ask questions and to
put questions to myself very early, perhaps
too early, which may be why I have found
answers but not the answer, and when I
realized I was too soon with my questions
I rebelled. Rebellion is my way of surviving
while thinking I am living. Whether or not
I shall one day find the ideal, the complete
and final answer I don't know. In the mean¬
time I must reply. Somewhere I find
answers. I do not rebel for rebellion's sake.
There have been victories, but however
uplifting they may be, this loneliness that
creeps up on me belies everything.
How did this rebellion start?
In several situations, great and small. For
instance, when I witnessed the contempt
shown by someone of a supposedly superior
race towards my father, simply because he
was a descendant of coolies and slaves, had
a black skin and bore an Indian name, my
blood boiled. That was when I began to
rebel, when I was still a child, not ten years
old. That was the day I went to war and told
myself, clenching my fists and gritting my
teeth: this is not going to happen ever again,
not to me nor to others, and especially not
to my father.
Sol felt this pressing need for justice at
a very early age. The Bible says that after
death we shall live in a kingdom where jus¬
tice reigns. I didn't understand then and I
still do not understand. I am an impatient
person, I'm incapable of waiting. I say to
myself that death always comes too soon.
History is forever blowing up in your face
South Africa, apartheid, the concentration
camps of the Second World War, Hiroshima,
Viet Nam, Biafra, Lebanon, more recently
Sarajevo, Somalia, Algeria and the rest.
All these things make me want to rebel
even more. History is a dangerous place

and travelling through history is hard going;
one would sometimes prefer not to know,
not to understand but just to pass by but
that would be a form of cowardice. I am not
laying down my arms. This rebellion can be
developed and expressed through poetry. As
Aimé Césaire said, poetry brings me to the
heart of myself and of the world; after
quoting that all-time giant of poetry I need
say no more. The poet is by nature more of
a rebel than a dreamer, or else his dream is
reality in a cruder form.
To quote you one last time, the poet
fights his war alone and in his own way.
That is true in a sense, because his whole
life is solitude. In coming back to solitude I
bring the wheel full circle, because this little
world is alone, because when you love a
woman you are alone, because you live
your life and experience death alone, because
when the feeling of loss comes upon you,
you endure it alone. But perhaps solitude is,
after all, the natural human condition. There
is said to be something called a herd instinct:
I am glad to have travelled and above all to
have met people.
What is important is that the road we
travel passes among other people. Although
they raise weighty questions within you,
other people at the same time provide you
with fragmentary answers. Perhaps I am
asking too much! I cannot say whether I
have found the island, the woman, the land,
but I cannot deny that I have come upon
serendipitous fragments and experienced
ineffable instants of all that I was in search
of, which leads me to wonder whether the
human adventure does not in fact consist in
gathering up these fragments and instants as
one gathers sticks to make a bundle of fire¬
wood. Human beings have this genius for
fending off loneliness, exile and death by
dressing up the passing moment as a miracle,
as we did in childhood.
Is this, ultimately, what we should be
looking for in yourpoetry?
Yes, but with a strong dose of caution.
Let us not delude ourselves: everything
begins and ends with death, and in order
to "try to live", to disregard the only cer¬
tainty that death will come I confront
death with my words. It's not much, but at
the same time it's a great deal, for we of the
South know that words never decay. Death
is a curse that comes upon us I know not
how, and since I shall never know the
answer I have chosen to turn it aside. In
my latest poem, not yet published, I say
that as a child I used to build a memory to
nourish my sleep, and who could deny
that sleep is a kind of death? Even then I
refused to accept the state of non-being, of
non-presence.
Since then I have talked a lot and peo¬
pled my own life and other people's lives
with my sounds, sometimes coherent and
sometimes incoherent. No matter. I did so
and still do so to defer death, to confuse it.
I disguise it so that it is no longer an absence.
That is the source of my poetry.
