The Danube delta
Ä place the gods forgot'
byMateiCazacu
UNESCO IN ACTION
HERITAGE
I
34
t matters little whether scientists
consider the Danube delta as
being only 7,000 years old and
treat it as if it were born yesterday. In
the eyes of the traveller, the delta is a
place the gods forgot, where land and
water still merge imperceptibly into one
another, where everything river, sea,
silt, sand is tinted with ochre. Over its
entire expanse of 3,500 square kilome¬
tres ... it is impossible to tell where the
waves end and where the sand of the
river banks begins. And the same doubt
persists over a swathe 100 kilometres
wide right down to the Black Sea	
"Yet the solid mass carried down by
the Danube is encroaching on the sea at
a rate of ten metres every year. Vegeta¬
tion grows on it haphazardly, forming a
carpet ofwhite flowers. But ifyou try to
pick them, you fall into the water. You
may think you can see foam, but all you
are seeing is sand. One night we could
not moor our boat because the reeds
were drifting, forming an island several
kilometres long. Animals make the same
mistake and I have seen them drown in
the broad alluvial valley of the Balta.
"The delta is a world still in the
making, giving off the raw smell of fresh

A carpet of
whiteflowers.
Butifyoutryto
pick them,
youfall into the
water.
a
it collects on its 2,850-kilometre course,
with its average stream-flow of 6,500
cubic metres per second. Europe's
biggest river after the Volga, it has a
catchment area of more than 800,000
square kilometres, where the rivers of
central and southeastern Europe, Aus¬
tria, Germany and Hungary all come
together, as it flows through the former
Yugoslavia, Romania, Bulgaria and
Ukraine.
Sacred waters
For the people of Antiquity who lived
along its middle and lower reaches, the
Danube was a sacred river. Its waters
purified warriors before they set out to
do battle, and sacrifices were made to it,
in particular by the emperor Trajan, who
gave thanks to it for its benevolence to
the Roman army during its campaigns in
the 2nd centuryA.D. against the Dacians
living in the Danube plain and the
Carpathians. On Trajan's column in
Rome, the river is represented in the
shape of a bearded giant. Trajan was the
first person to cross the Danube on a
stone bridge, built by the architectApol-
lodorus of Damascus in 105 A.D.
The ancient Greeks looked upon the
delta as a self-contained country
bounded by seven, five or three arms of
the river, depending on the seasons. In
the course of time, at least four of the
river's outlets became silted up and gave
rise to innumerable freshwater channels
Above, aerial view of the
Danube delta.
Right, young Lipovan
women.
seaweed, moist earth, darting fish and
still warm caviar	
"There is no sign ofman having ever
lived here, no trace of history having
been written on the elements, which
continue on their unwavering course.
There is nothing for us to understand,
except that time and space are infinite."1
This description of the Danube delta,
which dates from 1936, is still true today
apart from the figures, which keep on
changing. The delta now covers an area
of more than 5,500 square kilometres,
since the Danube each year carries
down some 200 million tons ofsilt which 35

Fishing is still one of the main
activities of the people of the
Danube delta.
and lakes separated from the sea by
floating or fixed islands covered in reeds
'and trees such as poplar, oak, willow and
alder.
The names ofthe three arms through
which the Danube empties into the
Black Sea are, from north to south,
Chilia, Sulina and Sfintu Gheorghe (St.
George). These hark back to the times of
the ancient Greeks (Chilia means
"monk's cell" and Sulina "channel" or
"tube") and to the presence there in the
Middle Ages of Italians, or rather
Genoans, whose patron was St. George.
Along with Istria, located further south,
they were the site of trading posts and
later of cities, from which ships loaded
with salted and smoked fish, cereals,
honey, furs and slaves set out for Greece
and Italy.
For the sailors of ancient times, the
Black Sea the Pontus Etudnus ofAntiqu¬
ity into which the Danube flows,
marked the limit of the known world.
They plied its inhospitable waters, buf-
fetted byviolent winds, until 6 December,
the feast-day of St. Nicholas, the patron
saint of sailors, when navigation came
to a halt by then the waters of the
Danube and even the sea had often
started to freeze over and only started
again at Easter.
Birdlife in danger
Legend has it that the island of Peuce
(the Greek for "poplar") in the heart of the
delta was once occupied by a mysterious
kingdom inhabited either by Amazons
or as would be more consistent with
historical fact by tribes of Germanic
origin. Off the mouth of the Danube lies
the island of Leuce (the Greek for
"white"), now known as Snake Island,
which belongs to Russia. According to
Greek mythology, it was the site of the
entrance to the Kingdom of the Dead
^^ . and also ofa cult to Achilles, who is sup-
wD posed to have taken refuge there.
As in ancient times, the Danube delta
today is a stopping-off point for birds
flying from central and northern Europe
on their annual migration to the
Mediterranean. More than 300 species
have been recorded, 176 ofwhich breed
there, including cormorants (3,000 pairs)
and pygmy cormorants (2,500 pairs,
comprising 61 per cent of the world's
population), while pelicans (2,500 pairs,
comprising 50 per cent ofthe Palaearctic
breeding population), 287,500 red-
breasted geese (a threatened species),
and hundreds of thousands of white-
fronted geese and ducks, egrets, herons
and a variety of birds of prey, including
a few pairs of rare white-tailed eagles.
The marsh tern colonies are particu¬
larly notable.
Otters, weasels and mink are to be
found on the floating islands. Fish are
another source ofwealth of the Danube
delta and lakes: more than sixty species
have been identified, including forty-
five native to the Danube and its tribu¬
taries, plus fifteen marine species. Some
of these, such as sturgeon, whose eggs
provide caviar, swim upriver to spawn,
while other species, such as the eel,
swim downstream into the sea.
However, for the past fifty years or
so, the fauna and flora of the Danube
the delta has the world's largest area of
reedbeds have been threatened by pol¬
lution, which has caused considerable
damage. The fish catch has plummeted.
Barely 20 tons of sturgeon were caught
in 1989, only 2 per cent of the amount
caught a century ago. In the last ten
years alone, five species of birds have
disappeared, eight have declined in
number, twenty-seven have become
rare and eighteen are on the verge of
extinction.
This critical situation is primarily due
to the growing imbalance caused to the
fragile ecosystem of the Danube delta by
such factors as the drying up and
dredging of lakes and canals such as
Braila lake and the Caraorman canal;
the introduction of agriculture, espe¬
cially maize-growing, on an area of 420
square kilometres, less than half of
which have proved productive; the
widening of canals to enable them to
take ocean-going vessels that are too
large for the Danube-Black Sea Canal
opened in 1984; and the intensive har¬
vesting of reeds with heavy-duty
machinery in order to provide feedstock
for paper and cellulose mills, such as
that at Calarasi upstream of the delta.
Increasing protection
In addition, there has been a dramatic
increase in the pollution of the waters of
the Danube. Many factories and agro-
industrial complexes are dumping phos¬
phates, nitrates, oil residues, mercury
and pesticides into the river and its trib¬
utaries. Urban sewers release their efflu¬
ents directly into the river without prior
treatment and waste water discharges
trigger off epidemics of diseases such
as swine fever, hepatitis B and cholera.
At the other end of the chain, the sit¬
uation in the Black Sea is just as disas¬
trous: 80 per cent of the fish species
caught in 1960 (twenty-one out of

twenty-six) have now disappeared and
the tendency for underwater life to be
destroyed still goes on.2
The reaction of the Romanian and
Ukrainian authorities (20 per cent of the
delta is on Ukrainian territory) to this
ecological catastrophe is still rather hes¬
itant, owing to lack of resources.
It is true that a promising start has
been made by halting drainage work in
1990, including the site as a biosphere
reserve on the World Heritage List in
1991, and setting up a Danube Delta
Institute at Tulcea to study and mon¬
itor the region. However, if the current
trend is to be reversed, assistance from
the international community will be
needed. In September 1990, a mission
from the World Conservation Union
(IUCN) consisting of experts from a
number of international organizations,
including Unesco and the Worldwide
Fund for Nature (WWF), visited the
delta. Its proposals and recommenda¬
tions have still by no means all been
implemented. However, Romania's
adoption in 1993 of a law aimed at
strengthening the protection ofthe delta
is a step in the right direction. Mecha¬
nized reed harvesting and reclamation
works to allow ocean-going vessels to
sail through the delta have been gradu¬
ally reduced and a policy has been
drawn up for the natural rehabilitation
ofthe polders and replanted forest areas.
The delta is also home to human set¬
tlements. It is inhabited by some 20,000
people, mainly fishermen. More than 80
per cent of them are Lipovans Russians
belonging to Orthodox sects which were
persecuted by the official Church and
the Czars and took refuge in the delta.
Their numbers have declined sharply,
from 30,000 some fifty years ago to only
about 12,000 at the present time.
1 Odette Arnaud, Pêcheurs de rêves,
Editions de la Nouvelle Revue Critique,
Paris, 1936, p. 22.
2 John Pomfret, "Communism's messiest
legacy is a gasping Black Sea", International
Herald Tribune, 21 June 1994.
MATEI CAZACU,
a Romanian-born historian, is a research assistant
at the French National Centre for Scientific Research
(CNRS). He has published a number of studies and
books including L'Histoire du prince Dracula en
Europe centrale et orientale au 15' siècle (1988)
and La Moldavie ex-soviétique: histoire et enjeux
actuels (1993).
80 per cent of
thefish species
caught in 1960
have now
disappeared
Below, fishing boats at Sfintu
Gheorghe, on the southern arm
of the delta.
37
