INTERVIEW
WOLF
LEPENIES
talks to
François Hartog
German sociologist Wolf Lepenies is the head of Berlin's Wis-
senschaftskolleg, a European institute open to researchers from
all over the world. A member of many learned societies in the
United States, Japan, the United Kingdom, Sweden and France,
he held the European chair at the Collège de France (Paris) from
1991 to 1992. He believes that intellectuals have an important
political role to play in Europe today and calls on them to
abandon purely ideological debates for the sake of more
immediate, practical problems.
Less than two years ago you published
a book about the bankruptcy of European
intellectuals. Would you write the same
book today?
A distinction has to be made between the
rest of Europe and Germany. In Germany,
intellectuals are unable to handle the new
situation that has arisen from reunifica¬
tion. The greatest challenge facing the
country today is how to become a
"normal" nation-state within the Euro¬
pean Union. Certainly it is not an easy
task, but intellectuals are not making
enough commitment to it. And there isn't
enough of what I would call "intellectual
patriotism" (the eighteenth century has
given us a wonderful definition of patrio
tism as the position adopted by those who,
without any official power, commit them¬
selves to the public weal). For intellectuals
this is a great time, one that gives them all
kinds of opportunities to act, but they
prefer to take up a position that is half
candid, half contemptuous, or else they
think about grand, Utopian projects.
In Germany you head a unique institu¬
tion known as the Wissenschaftskolleg.
What does it do?
The Wissenschaftskolleg is an institute for
advanced studies in the human sciences.
Every year we invite forty or fifty
researchers from all over the world to work
on their own projects for ten months. The
main idea is to "shake up our guests pro¬
ductively", so that at the end of a year
spent in contact with other temperaments,
other disciplines and other theoretical tra¬
ditions, they can cast a fresh eye on their
own work and question what had previ¬
ously seemed obvious. We also set up what
we call priority groups. This year, for
example, we have two groups working on
theoretical biology.
The Wissenschaftskollegwas founded
in Berlin at a time when the city occupied
a very special position in Europe. Have
the collapse of the Berlin Wall and German
reunification changed its situation?
Yes, our role is changing. We thought

that more and more people would be inter¬
ested in internal German questions and
that we would have to concentrate far more
on Eastern Europe. But we are also starting
to broaden our scope and commitment to
questions concerning the developing coun¬
tries. We want to extend our work to com¬
parative cultural studies.
Since 1990 Germany has been a nation
but a nation that is still in the making	
Until 1990 we were hoping that the two
German states would eventually, in the very
long run, become one. History decided oth¬
erwise. Paradoxically, in a context in which
we should be thinking in terms of doing
away with nation states Germany has to
start by becoming a nation state like any
other by developing its own national prin¬
ciples. That is Germany's big problem. We
are torn between our desire to rapidly create
a united Europe and the need to begin by
creating a unified Germany.
German unification has been seen in
various ways. Heiner Müller, for example,
talks of a colonial process regarding the
former German Democratic Republic
(GDR), and Jens Reich describes the
impression of foreignness ( Verfremdung)
that someone from the East may feel when
arriving in the West.*
Both views make sense. But it must be
said that there is a certain reciprocity. This
sense of foreignness is found in both East
and West. Even now I feel a foreigner in
many parts of East Germany, but a for¬
eigner in a positive sense, spontaneously
discovering something new and unex¬
pected. The real difference is that in the
West this foreignness is experienced as a
change of scenery, an encounter with some¬
thing new, whereas in the East it is felt as an
alienation or a threat.
As far as colonization is concerned, it
is true only insofar as West Germans
assume that they are on the right track and
that it's up to the East Germans to catch up
with them. It is a colonialist attitude to be
convinced you are right and to want to
impose your ideas on others.
We have not asked ourselves enough
questions about whether there were things
worth saving in the former GDR. Much
could be said about this, from the role of
women to the health-care system and edu¬
cation the polytechnics, the role of the
teacher outside the classroom, and so forth.
But the colonization theory doesn't
hold up to closer scrutiny. It doesn't cor¬
respond to what has really happened. In
1989 it was possible to believe that a new
phase of ultra-modern industrialization
and massive investment for profit was
beginning. But nothing of the sort hap¬
pened. If a colonialist operation of that
kind had taken place, we wouldn't be in the
economic straits we are now. Today the
state has to do almost everything that we
expected of the market economy!
Moreover, it would be wrong to think
that the East Germans were taken
unawares and were forced to adopt
Western lifestyles. In the East there was a
sense of expectation along these lines, and
the West was quick to respond. There was
a conjunction of interests here.
We are finding out that it is impossible
to write the history of the GDR without
rewriting that of the Federal Republic
because of the extent to which the two
were intertwined.
That is true. But the paradox remains
that although the two histories are bound
together, the mentalities and lifestyles that
evolved over the same time-period are not.
The problem today is how to adjust these
two mentalities.
Were some of the illusions of 1989
and the mistakes that followed the results
of our failure to consider the dimension of
time?
Yes. We didn't think for a moment about
what time might signify as an overall expe¬
rience for the individual, for nations, for
peoples and states. We simply did not ask

what it might mean for the rest of Germany
that a large part of the German people had
lived under totalitarian systems since 1933
(the Third Reich, then the post-war com¬
munist regime). This was an oversight that
is costing us dearly in Europe today.
Is the expression "constitutional patri¬
otism" (referring to the 1949 constitution
of the Federal Republic) suggested by
Jürgen Habermas still a valid response to
what is happening today?
I don't believe it goes far enough. If one
tries to promote a widespread and reason¬
able allegiance to German democracy, it is
not enough to tell the Germans that it is
necessary and desirable to opt for consti¬
tutional patriotism. For me that is too cold
and calculating. But we can't do without a
certain kind of patriotism, i.e. a feeling of
belonging to a country and a society.
Outbreaks of xenophobia suddenly
increased in 1991-1992. How worrying
are these explosions of violence?
Of course there is plenty to worry about
since the symbols of national socialism are
still being brandished in Germany. All the
same I think there is a glimmer of hope.
How many of the people who wave these
symbols around and commit violent acts in
their name really should be considered
neo-fascists? We do not know how far this
hides a more general protest that seeks to
express itself in ways that cause the greatest
outrage and in Germany the best way
to do that is via national socialism.
These attacks also bring up the
problem of immigrant integration. The
former Federal Republic always claimed not
to be a country of immigration although it
has never ceased accepting foreigners.
How can reality be squared with the
country's principles and laws?
Germany is in fact a country of immi¬
gration and the problem is that we are not
ready to incorporate this into our political
thinking and practice. Immigration rates
A lot of consideration can
be given to cultural
differences, but a country
ajso has a right to expect a
certain 'cultural solidarity*.
Without that the question
of nationality will not be
resolved.
into Germany are twice those into the
United States, a traditional country of
immigration. Let us openly be a country of
immigration and then set quotas, for no
country can open its borders to everyone.
Maybe the fundamental problem is that
we do not make the distinction between
requests for asylum and immigration. The
right of asylum cannot, of course, be sub¬
ject to quotas. I think it would be a good
thing to introduce a certain sense of reality
into our legislation.
Do you think there will be a debate on
possible modifications to the right to citi¬
zenship?
We really must get away from the notion
that citizenship is determined by lineage
and birthplace. It should be linked to proof
of a person's readiness to adapt to a certain
culture and live within it. A lot of consid¬
eration can be given to cultural differences,
but a country also has a right to expect a cer¬
tain "cultural solidarity". Without that the
question of nationality will not be resolved.
Does the Wissenschaftskollegs sci¬
entific policy fit into a larger political frame¬
work?
I'll answer with a specific example. In
1989 I had the idea of founding a similar
institute in Budapest. Today this institute
exists, and its foundation might serve as an
example of how to avoid certain mistakes.
The first principle was that it should not be
a bilateral institution. I am against all forms
of bilateralism in matters of cultural rela¬
tions. The Collegium Budapest is sup¬
ported by six European countries: Ger¬
many, Austria, France, The Netherlands,
Sweden and Switzerland. That was an
important basic condition for its success.
The second principle was not to play at
charity. The division of Europe was a hand¬
icap for the West as much as the East. Both
sides suffered. Both sides must help each
other by by keeping this common experi¬
ence in mind.
Designed in and for a bi-polar world that
has ceased to exist, the European Commu¬
nity today seems to be at a standstill. There
seem to be difficulties in translating the
new situation into political terms. What can
intellectuals say or do about this?
One of the intellectual's main duties is to
attack the polarized image that exists every¬
where in the European Community,
according to which there are those who
give and those who receive. There is little
doubt as to who gives and who receives.
This Community attitude is derived from
the idea of financial adjustment. This is
how we are behaving today towards the
rest of Europe: we see the possible entry of
countries like the Czech Republic, Hun¬
gary, Slovakia and Poland from a single
angle, i.e. just how far can the "giver"
countries allow themselves "to go", that is,
how many more "receiving" countries can
the Community take in? We are not pre¬
pared to recognize that the entry of these
countries is an opportunity that would
make sacrifices worthwhile. I think that
working for the overthrow of this narrow-
minded economic point of view in Euro¬
pean thought is a very important intellec¬
tual task for the future.
s Heiner Müller, a playwright; Jens Reich, co-
founder of the Citizens' Forum and a
presidential candidate in the 1994 national
elections.
FRANÇOIS HARTOG is a French historian.
