An interview with MllhâmiliaCl YllMIS
A BANK THAT ONLY LENDS TO THE POOR
The Grameen Bank, which was founded in Bangladesh in 1983 by
Muhammad Yunus, a university professor, has won a unique reputation
because it lends only to the very poor. Most of its clients are women. It
has inspired similar ventures in other developing countries including
Malaysia, the Philippines and Burkina Faso, as well as in France, Canada
and the United States.
Muhammad Yunus.
What gave you the idea of founding a bank to
help the penniless?
When Bangladesh became independent in 1971,
everyone was euphoric. We were convinced our
lives would change for the better, but instead things
went downhill very fast. In 1974 Bangladesh was
hit by a famine. At that time I was teaching eco¬
nomics at ChittagongUniversity, and while I was
teaching beautiful economic theories, people were
dying. This was very hard to accept, and I started
thinking about what I could do to help the poor to
rise out of poverty.
Chittagong University is in a rural area, and as
soon as I left the campus I was in a village where I
saw people suffering for want of very small
amounts of money. I thought that if I could find
such small sums for them, they could overcome
their difficulties. At first I provided them with
money from my own pocket.
Then I thought of putting things on a more reg¬
ular footing and went to the banks, but they thought
my idea was crazy. "How can you lend such small
sums?" they asked, "and to the poorest people?"
They gave me long lectures on banking, but I wasn't
convinced. I said that the poor were the people who
most needed money, and that it was to them that
money should go. They wanted to give money to the
rich. I told them I thought that was a strange idea.
Eventually, I offered to act as a guarantor for
loans myself. I signed all the documents, took the
money and gave it to the borrowers. I was respon¬
sible for collecting the repayments, and was very
pleasantly surprised to find that everyone repaid
their debts on time. I went back to the banks and
asked them to increase the number of loans, but the
bankers said no. They were convinced that the
project would fail. All the same, I extended the
loans, first to two villages, then to five, ten, fifteen.
The result was always the same: everyone paid
back what they owed on time. But still the banks
refused to budge. I extended the project to the
whole district, then to five districts, but I still got
the same reaction from the banks. So I made up my
mind to found my own bank. I asked permission
from the government, but they too thought it was
a crazy idea. It was only after spending two years
knocking on doors that I was finally granted per¬
mission to set up the bank. That was in 1 983.
Today you have 12,000 employees and two
million borrowers, 94 per cent of whom are women.
Yes, most of our clients are women. It has been
a hard struggle to achieve this. Not only are the
men hostile"Why lend to her?" they ask. "She

A loan from the Grameen Bank
enabled this woman to start a
confectionery business
(Bangladesh).
15

16
doesn't even know how to count" but at first the



women too were afraid to accept the money. They
asked us to give it to their husbands. Women in our
society have no self-confidence. From the moment
they are born, they are told by their families: "You
have brought misery on the family because you are
a girl." They are so often told they are worthless, that
they end up believing it.
How did you persuade them to borrow from the
bank?
It wasn't easy. But first one woman took the
plunge, then another and another. When one
woman succeeds, the others are encouraged. Seeing
that it works, the others try their luck.
What kind of projects do they want to finance?
Very simple projects such as raising a cow, selling
milk, processing rice, weaving baskets or sewing . . .
the things that women do anyway but never get
paid for. Now that we give the money directly to the
women, the husbands no longer take the receipts.
The women do the work and are paid for it.
Can a person borrow from your bank more than
once, or do you stop after a first investment?
No, we keep lending. Suppose you borrow
twenty-five dollars and pay it back within a year;
you feel more confident and know you can borrow
fifty dollars the next time. Once that's paid back,
your ambitions grow.
How many years does it take on average before
your clients achieve a financially viable situation?
Experience shows that ten loan cycles are
required before a person rises above the extreme
poverty line. More than a third of our borrowers
have already done this. It is very exciting to see
people emerge from poverty. Our aim is to make
sure that the two million families that are with us
all cross the poverty line within the next five years.
What kind of setbacks do you come up against?
Bangladesh is often hit by natural disasters. A
single cyclone like the one in 1991 that killed 150,000
people can wipe everything out. Or the cow you've
bought on credit falls ill and dies. The woman gets
very upset. She can't do anything, but this is money
that she has to pay back. She blames her luck and
starts to lose confidence. Our job is to reassure her.
Do you ever write off losses?
No, never. It's a principle with us. What we do
is transfer the loan into a long-term loan and then
grant a new, short-term loan.
But the debt grows?
Yes and no. Rich people are also heavily in
debt, but they make a lot of money. Being heavily
in debt is not a problem provided that debt is
earning money for you. There's only a problem
when you are heavily in debt and not getting any
A woman fishes in the Indus
while her children watch.
income out of it. In any case, when women sign on
with the Grameen Bank, there are a certain number
of promises they have to make, such as neither
giving nor receiving a dowry. They also promise to
send their children to school, not to drink pol¬
luted water, and to plant trees.
Do you ever refuse a loan if it's not for a good
investment?
We don't get involved. We don't have to. The
women asking for loans belong to groups and only
propose a project to us once it has been agreed on
by their group. We say, "The money is ours, but the
idea is yours." We refrain from giving advice so
people can become surer of themselves. It's also a
way of making them more responsible.
With a loan from the Grameen
Bank this Bangladeshi mother
bought a rickshaw to increase
her family's income.
