ndia: No time to lose
by LS. Gilada
A bold preventive education campaign brought
a marked reduction in HIV incidence among
Bombay prostitutes
20
1SHWAR SATYANARAYAN
GILADA,
of India, is a dermatologist and
venerologist and one of his
country's leading Aids
specialists. Founder and
Secretary-General of the Indian
Health Organization, he is also
chairman of Asian Solidarity
against Aids, a network of non¬
governmental organizations in
Asia.
The HIV infection made a late entry into
Asia, and the continent is still a low-pre¬
valence region for Aids. In the last few years,
however, there has been an HIV explosion.
Using the parameter of "doubling time" (the
time required for a twofold increase in cases) to
interpret the trend of reported Aids cases to
WHO during 1984-1993, the Aids scenario for
Asia looks grim.
At present Aids cases in Asia are underdiag
nosed, underreported and ill treated. Fear and
ignorance are compounding the difficulty of con¬
trolling the spread of the virus. In most places
there are no protocols to follow up HIV-infected
people: counselling, outpatient or inpatient care
services are far from developed, not to mention
prenatal HIV screening. Even today, most health
care professionals refuse to treat patients with
HIV/Aids and, unfortunately, even the interna¬
tional scientific community and major donors
delayed giving their attention to Asia.
Despite the growth of HIV/Aids in Asia,
there has been no major focus on the problem by
political leaders. In Zambia, when the then Pres¬
ident Kenneth Kaunda's son died of Aids, he
publicly pledged support to Aids control pro-

^-positive. I found out
grammes, justifying his action as the best pos¬
sible homage to his departed son. All too often,
Asian heads of state regard Aids as too insignif¬
icant an issue to be treated as a priority.
The sexual mode of HIV transmission pre¬
dominates in most Asian countries, and com¬
mercial sex workers (CSWs) and their clients play
an important role in the pandemic. In recent years
the increase in infection in CSWs in Thailand,
India, Cambodia and Nepal has been dramatic.
Project Saheli: Aids prevention through
peer education
During 1987, when a fairly high prevalence of
HIV was noticed in Nairobi CSWs, the Indian
Health Organization (IHO) warned that if the
Aids threat was not taken seriously, Bombay and
other Asian cities would face the Kenyan cap¬
ital's fate. The warning was widely ignored.
Since then the IHO has developed a peer
education programme for sex workers in
Bombay which has reduced HIV incidence and
widened the doubling time from eight months
in 1988 to four years in 1993. Known as "Pro¬
ject Saheli", the campaign reaches out to 10,000
CSWs through 350 peer leaders and distributes
1 million condoms every month in Bombay
and four other cities. It has no sustained funding.
After evaluating various approaches for
condom promotion such as social marketing
and door-to-door vending, we opted for the
"peer education" model for our work among
CSWs. The organization of prostitution is multi-
layered and the CSW is at the lowest end of the
scale ruled by brothel managers and brothel
three years ago. It was my
birthday present. . . . For the last
three years I have made no
plans. I had no prospects for the
future. Now 1 must try to think
thai maybe there is a future and
that I'm not just at death's door.
It's taken me three years to get
that far."
Opposite page, free
distribution of condoms to
Bombay prostitutes.
Below, a sketch performed in
the street by Jamshedpur
(India) students to alert
passers-by of the risks of HIV
infection.
owners. To intervene
effectively, we must influ¬
ence all levels of the hier¬
archy, with the ultimate
goal of empowering the
CSW to change her des¬
tiny. We have a three-tier
system of peer leaders:
one Saheli (friend) from
among the sex workers
for every twenty-five
girls; one Tai (sister) from
among the managerial
cadre for every ten
Sahelis; and one Bai
(mother) from among the brothel owners for
each major area.
While the Saheli and Tai are paid a fee for
their time, the Bai, usually an affluent lady from
their community, is not paid. The payment is
more than just an incentive, it gives their work
respectability, as the CSWs realized for the first
time that they could earn money through other
means than prostitution. They are given training
on the use and distribution of condoms, tech¬
niques for client negotiation and STD/Aids pre¬
vention through personal interviews, group dis¬
cussions, lectures, audiovisuals and role playing,
their task is to educate CSWs about Aids, STDs
and safer sex, to distribute condoms, escort sick
CSWs to mobile clinics or hospitals and to give
support to infected CSWs. They act in street
plays to educate the public and address public
meetings, workshops and conferences, and take
part in television programmes.
To help CSWs to express their aspirations
and voice their concerns, hopes and fears, a
bilingual quarterly, Sakhi-Saheli, is published.
The bulk of the information published is sent in
by CSWs themselves. They have started plan¬
ning for their children and are saving money for
a future they are looking forward to. Their
health has also improved dramatically. Doc¬
tors' fees have fallen. Apart from a marked
decrease in common STDs, the most valuable
fall-out has been a perceptible increase in the
doubling time of HIV infection.
In the absence of a vaccine and cost-effective,
widely acceptable therapies, the only means of
blocking HIV transmission is to educate and
encourage people to adopt protective behav¬
iour. In view of the success rate achieved in a
number of developed nations in containing
HIV/Aids, the situation is not hopeless if
prompt action is taken. 21
