The shoals of freedom by Marcin Frybes
In central Europe 1989 marked the end of the state-controlled
media. But after the first flush of excitement, the press is now
having to come to terms with market realities while avoiding
compromises and maintaining standards.
Above, Cracow, February
1990. Rock fans at a concert
inaugurating Radio Malopolska
Fun, the first free foreign radio
station in Poland.
Contrary to what some observers have
suggested, the process of transition from
communism in Eastern Europe involves more
than the introduction of free market mecha¬
nisms and democratic elections. The transition
to a modern society is first and foremost a cul¬
tural process which presupposes the recon¬
struction of areas of social communication. The
way in which the media landscape in these coun¬
tries is gradually taking shape has a vital bearing
on their future.
For five years, these countries have been
experiencing unprecedented economic, social
and political upheaval. The information sector
has witnessed spectacular changes, especially
in Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic and
Slovakia, where radical reforms were adopted
from the outset. Only a few years ago, the media
in these countries were directed, controlled and
manipulated by the authorities, which enjoyed
a total monopoly, further consolidated by cen¬
sorship. They were able to fabricate a reality
which accorded with their interests of the
moment and to prohibit, discredit or sideline any
presentation of the situation that differed from
their own. Far from reflecting currents of
opinion and the wide diversity of social needs,
the media landscape did no more than repro¬
duce, at best, internal dissensions within the
party apparatus.
Today this scene is changing fast, but uncer¬
tainty still surrounds the audiovisual media.
Governments are reluctant to carry out the her¬
alded privatizations because they are afraid of
depriving themselves of a powerful lever to
influence public opinion. In Hungary, as in 23

Poland and Slovakia, the fight for control of
television has been mobilizing the entire polit¬
ical class for several months now. And the suc¬
cesses of a few new private radio stations barely
scratches the surface of the hold on national
audiences enjoyed by public radio stations.
On the other hand, privatization of the
written press (which has traditionally been
important in these countries) is now almost
complete. The governments which controlled
most of the titles until 1989 found themselves so
lacking in support after only a few months that
some have since been trying (without notable
success) to create new organs that are more
favourably disposed towards them.
N ew markets
24
The emergence of the new press markets has
been marked by three main phases. At first, a
flood of pent-up words was released in an
atmosphere of fascination with freedom
regained. The fall of the communist regimes
and the end of censorship and cumbersome
bureaucracy sparked off a veritable explosion of
new publications. At this stage the creation of
new titles often reflected a quest for identity
and a need for social expression that had long
been held in check. The very fact of envisaging
the publication of a magazine (many projects
never reached fruition or were soon abandoned)
was a way of defining a new area of freedom to
be occupied by the writers concerned.
In the 1990s, the press has therefore played
a major role in the restructuring of the political
scene. By giving the different currents of opinion
a platform for expression, it eventually encour¬
aged the formation of new political parties
even though, with the passage of time, relations
between the press and the rising political elites
have become increasingly conflictual.
This first phase of euphoria with "speech
regained" only lasted for a few months. New
An editorial meeting at the
Polish daily Cazeta Wyborcza.
The Bucharest Press Centre,
below, was once the palace of
Romanian President Nicolae
Ceausescu.
'The leading newspapers are more
popular than the political parties and
must endeavour not only to gain the
loyalty of their readers but also to
measure the potential political
consequences of their editorial policy.'
problems made their appearance, associated with
the discovery of the realities of the market
economy. With the end of public subsidies, rising
paper and production costs, and the appearance
of competition, sometimes cutthroat, many pub¬
lications folded, while others abandoned their
original aims and were obliged to adapt rapidly
to the new demands of the public.
However, the laws of the market were
imposed with a vengeance with the arrival of the
major international press groups. This hap¬
pened relatively quickly in Hungary and some¬
what later in Poland and the Czech Republic,
while the process is still in its infancy in Slovakia.
Today, foreign investors control more than half
the press market in Central Europe: Hersant,
Springer, Bertelesmann and Marquard have
bought up the best titles of the former commu¬
nist press, in particular the major national dailies
and many regional newspapers. At the same
time, minor "national empires" have been estab¬
lished, usually at the instigation of former emi¬
gres who had made their fortune abroad and
decided to invest in their country of origin.
The unbridled diversification of the early

days has now given way to a phase of restruc¬
turing which is leading to new forms of domi¬
nance of the press market. Faced with foreign
competition, some titles famed for their clan¬
destine origins and their pride in their indepen¬
dence, nevertheless had to appeal to foreign
capital in 1993 in order to finance moderniza¬
tion. Two leading dailies are typical examples:
Gazeta Wyboreza in Poland and Lidove Noviny
in the Czech Republic.
Exorbitant power
Finally, the third phase in the formation of press
markets in central Europe corresponds to the
discovery by the political and economic élites of
the simple fact that the press wields enormous
power over public opinion. The leading news¬
papers are more popular than the political par¬
ties and must endeavour not only to gain the loy¬
alty of their readers but also to measure the
potential political consequences of their edito¬
rial policy. In a world which has lost its bearings
and from which the traditional authorities have
disappeared, the press often seems to wield dis¬
proportionately great power. Some observers
maintain that the victory of the former com¬
munist parties at the last elections in Poland
and Hungary is not attributable solely to the
frustrations engendered by the social cost of
economic reforms but also to the highly critical
attitude of the press to the first democratic gov¬
ernments in the transition period.
Although this is not a specific feature of cen¬
tral Europe, the media are increasingly tending
to act as "mediators" between divergent inter¬
ests, needs, programmes and points of view.
Sometimes the media tend to take the place of
the nascent political system. Hence the prolif¬
eration of conflicts between the media, which are
jealous guardians of their new-found indepen¬
dence, and an emerging world of politics. Hence
too the growing interest taken in the media by
the new centres of economic power private
enterprise and the banks which are endeav¬
ouring to win control or at least the sym¬
pathy of some major press organs.



A cultural revolution
In the last five years, the people of Central
Europe have not only discovered freedom of
speech but also products to which the public in
the West had long been accustomed but which
for them represented a veritable cultural revo¬
lution. In the print media alone, they were sud¬
denly offered a vast range of newspapers, colour
magazines for every taste and readership, aggres¬
sive new scandal sheets packed with human
interest stories, to say nothing of porn maga¬
zines all this with a print quality that was
unknown in the (dull and monotonous) com¬
munist press and with a profusion of adver¬
tising that did not exist before 1989.
Readers who used to go to great lengths to
get hold of their favourite newspapers some
were practically impossible to find are today
assailed by a host of new publications (in Poland
alone, half the titles have only been in existence
since 1989). They have lost their bearings and
often find it hard to make a choice. Under the
pressure of new economic constraints and
lacking competent journalists, the press for its
part easily lapses into sensationalism.
Although the press in Central Europe is for
the most part free and independent, it is still
searching for a role and the right language to
address societies that have become destructured
and are in a process of rapid change. Through its
very existence and plurality, it is making an
important contribution to the liberation of social
life from state control and to restoring the
autonomy of civil society. But does it not by the
same token run the risk of further amplifying
these phenomena of social disintegration and the
accompanying disarray?
Satellite dishes in Tirana,
Albania.
MARCIN FRYBES
is a Polish mathematician,
sociologist and journalist who is
engaged in research at the
Centre for Sociological Action
Analysis (CADIS) at the Ecole
des Hautes Etudes en Sciences
Sociales in Paris. A specialist in
the political and social problems
of Central Europe, he is
particularly interested in
changes in the media
landscape.
25
