COMMENTARY
Listening to Africa
I The threat of unbridled
I selfishness looms over the
strange world which has been
gradually emerging since the
implosion of the communist
bloc. The age that is dawning is
not the age of the individual but
the age of individualism. It is
not the fair play of free compe¬
tition that is coming in but the
iron law of the strongest versus the weakest.
And so we are still witnessing the scandalous,
morally unacceptable situation in which the
poorest countries pay for the richest, in financial
terms and in terms of talent. A world in which
the poor countries become poorer every day
because of the debts they have contracted to the
rich is a sick world. It is iniquitous and absurd.
Worldwide financial and economic strategies
are formulated heedless of the socio-cultural sit¬
uation of the countries and partners involved. As
in Molière's play Le malade imaginaire, "the
patients are always wrong" and are to be pre¬
scribed the same medicine. Diversity is disre¬
garded, and the specific natural and human
resources, culture, history and outlook of each
country are ignored.
These strategies are targeted particularly on
Africa, which is seen as the region that is most
refractory to their demands. Some claim that
they are justified by defects or shortcomings that
seem specific to Africa. They point to such factors
as the instability of governments, the fragility of
democratic structures, the persistence of tribal
structures and the temptations of ethnic violence.
It is true that Africa today is at grips with immense
problems. But how can we fail to see, not only the
downside, but the enormous potential of Africa,
its reserves of enthusiasm, the formidable cre¬
ative dynamism that is waiting only for an oppor¬
tunity to express itself?
The forces of joy and freedom, of modernity
allied to team spirit, of the kind of efficiency that
respects human qualities all exist in Africa. What
should be done is not to make Africans' history
for them or to promote from outside a form of
development that Africa would not want. It is to
state clearly whether we want to use Africa's
current weaknesses as a pretext for leaving it by
the wayside of the road to development, or
whether we want to help it to draw on its
strengths and its potential, so that it can make its
own way to development and become a full
partner in the world community.
A moral imperative
But why help Africa in today's world, in which
many feel that it is already difficult enough to
help oneself?
In my view, the first reason is that the West
has contracted a historical debt towards Africa.
The current wealth, power and dynamism of the
West are in large measure the result of the con¬
tribution exacted from Africa. This contribu¬
tion in the form of people, hard labour, sacrifice
and natural resources was exacted first in the
form of slavery and later by colonization. In a
massive and historically unprecedented haem¬
orrhage, Africa was slowly drained of its life-
blood, its vital, creative and productive energy.
Today Africa is struggling to recover in a
world whose guidelines, laws and command
mechanisms have all been devised elsewhere.
Africa must learn to operate within these guide¬
lines, come to terms with these laws, and use
these mechanisms, while at the same time
reclaiming its own history, exploring its own
democratic pathways and development priorities,
and endeavouring to secure the material and
technical resources for its own renewal. This is
the first reason, a moral reason, for helping
Africa.
36

B Y FEDERICO A Y O R
The second reason is political and economic.
The world, as we are constantly being told, is an
integrated unit in which financial, technolog¬
ical and media flows know no frontiers, in which
events are flashed instantaneously from one end
of the world to another. This space-time con¬
tinuum, however, is highly inegalitarian and
functions everywhere to the benefit of a few.
If the application of the same rules to all is
detrimental to a large part of humankind, then
the rules must be changed. Market forces alone
are incapable of providing social justice, equal
opportunities and more human relations
between individuals and between nations.


Since we are all on board the same ship at
the height of a storm, it is in our interest to learn
how to share tasks, to even out privileges and sac¬
rifices, and to strengthen our sense of sharing a
common destiny. The alternative is to face incom¬
prehension, revolt and chaos. In other words,
to face the threat of shipwreck.
A shared responsibility
But it is not enough to talk of the responsibilities
of the developed world. Clearly, the responsibil¬
ities of Africa are no less weighty. Nothing can be
achieved without determined and enthusiastic
efforts by Africans themselves to bring about
democratic and egalitarian development. More
than anyone else, Africans know that the sources
of the future are to be found within themselves,
that it is from among themselves that the people,
the ideas, the achievements, the innovations and
the great reform movements will come to lift
their continent to the level of partnership in
today's world.
The paths to be taken and the quality and
quantity of the efforts to be made form part of
Africans' responsibility to themselves and to the
rest of the world. No one can today claim to
possess a magic formula for successful develop¬
ment. However, a number of conditions must be
met if Africans are to assume their responsibili¬
ties fully. I would sum up these conditions, which
are the same all over the world, in three words:
democracy, justice and solidarity. There is a need
to narrow the gap between civil society and the
politicians, to reduce the disparities between the
privileged and the deprived, between the pow¬
erful and the weak, between those who partici¬
pate in the process of globalization and those
who are excluded from it. There is also a need to
overcome the unequal opportunities and levels of
development between African nations by stim¬
ulating the moral, intellectual, productive and
material energies of the entire continent.
As a Yaounde proverb puts it, "a single arm is
not enough to cut up an elephant". Some projects
are too ambitious and far-reaching to be suc¬
cessfully completed by a single person or a single
people. This has always been the case, and never
more so than today when we find ourselves in an
increasingly interdependent world. What can
the countries of Africa hope to achieve if each one
goes its own way? What, on the other hand, is
beyond their reach if they take advantage of the
tremendous new dynamism that will result from
the pooling of their energies and hopes?
In order to imagine the potential strength of
this dynamism we need only think of all the
ethnic conflicts that beset the continent and
could be de-escalated by its union. Today's fears
could become tomorrow's liberated energies and
reconciled hopes. I am not thinking of an artifi¬
cial, damaging form of unification that would
undermine subregional or local characteristics,
but of true union in accordance with major
guidelines collectively chosen, union made all
the more creative by its respect for the diversity
of the forces on which it is based.
All different. Yet all united. Let us define and
draw attention to Africa's collective and indi¬
vidual needs, and to the commitment of African
countries to meeting those needs. Let us point
out what African countries hope to receive from
others and what they can contribute themselves.
Above all, let us highlight what Africa has to
offer the world and what the world needs so
much. We all know that without wisdom knowl¬
edge cannot lead to happiness. And the breath of
wisdom comes from Africa, as I know from my
own experience.
37
