global view. . . glob* view
An international debate
on literature today and tomorrow
Between 1988 and 1994, UNESCO and PEN International organized a series of symposia on
the theme of literary creation on the eve of the third millennium. At the meetings, held within
the framework of the Decade for Cultural Develoment, writers from South America, Africa,
Asia and the Arab world discussed the main aspects of creative writing in their respective
regions today.
LATIN AMERICA:
GOING FOR RAROQUE
A meeting on "The dynamic role of the
Latin American and Caribbean literatures
in world literature", held in Brasilia from
18 to 21 April 1988, was attended by sev¬
eral hundred writers and intellectuals from
sixteen countries in the region.
The participants were particularly
struck by the way in which urban themes
have taken the place of rural subjects.
Rampant urbanization has brought a
change of perspective and sensibility to
the Latin American novel. Instead of the
compassionate but distant treatment of
indigenous people found in the socially
committed "peasant novel", the "urban
novel" presents a picture of the indige¬
nous condition viewed from within. The
description of the urban landscape, or
rather its recreation in a work of literature,
is one of the triumphs of this genre.
However, Nature is intensely present
and lends itself to symbolization of such
luxuriance that European languages col¬
lapse under the strain. Some people have
even wondered whether they should not
be regarded as dead languages. But this
would be a mistake because Latin Amer¬
ican writers enrich these languages and
adapt them to their world by drawing on
oral and dialect sources. Thus their works
are receptive to indigenous myths and the
indigenous imagination, which reach the
contemporary world via the written word.
Life in the New World, as depicted in
Latin American novels, appears fantastic
to readers of other continents, and French
critics have coined the term "magic
realism" to describe this kind of fiction.
The writers themselves seem to prefer the
adjective baroque, which describes more
accurately the social and cultural dispar¬
ities they deal with. Caught hetweecn
Utopia and History, a prey to parody and
dizzying absurdity, the protagonist of the
Latin American novel bears within him a
notion of identity rooted in anguish and
division, where the dream of the Indian
meets, contradicts, opposes or espou¬
ses dream of the immigrant.
AFRICA: NEW FORMS
OF EXPRESSION
Four years later, a meeting held in Harare
(Zimbabwe) from 10 to 13 February 1992
was the occasion for a discussion of similar
themes in African literature: the force of
myth and Nature, a sensibility dominated by
the supernatural, and the problem of vehic¬
ular languages inherited from colonialism.
A Western language, because it is so
widely spoken, gives writers access to the
contemporary world and an opportunity to
reach a wider audience. On the other hand ,
it distances them from the vernacular reader
and still hears the imprint of the colonial
past. As for national languages, they have
proved intractable vehicles for expressing
modern attitudes and remain a prisoner of
the tradition whose myths they perpetuate.
Caught between the two, new African soci¬
eties find themselves deprived of a means of
expression; their literature abounds in fic¬
tional heroes too far removed from reality.
The transition from a culture of oral
tradition to a culture of the written word
has given rise to a number of serious prob¬
lems. But it also bears the seed of a new lit¬
erature in which, once the traces of the
colonial past have been identified, modern
social values can finally be integrated and
expressed.
The discussions constantly returned to
the subject of the writer's commitment and
to committed literature. If writers should
observe and express social conflicts, they
should also be able to communicate the
message of progress without sacrificing the
aesthetic quality of their work.
In their conclusions, the participants
expressed their satisfaction over the place
won for itself by African literature, which
has asserted its own identity, linked espe¬
cially to oral tradition, within English,
French and Portuguese literatures, whose
languages it borrows. Nevertheless, this
young literature has not yet succeeded in
reconciling the ancient values of the con¬
tinent with the intellectual and aesthetic
forms inherited from the West. 43

ASIA: TURNING AWAY
FROM MODERNISM?
For Asian writers, invited to Seoul in 1992,
the central question was that of tradition.
Far removed from the passions and con¬
cerns which had dominated the meetings in
Brasilia and Harare, the participants
emphasized moderation as an aesthetic
and intellectual virtue as well as a political
quality, and regarded originality as being
in bad taste, even a moral flaw, inimical to
the harmony that literature should express.
Only tradition and culture, the commu¬
nity and its values, were considered
capable of responding to the anguish
caused by the questioning of values
imported from the West, in particular the
myth of Progress. If the colonial past con¬
tinues to haunt the mind and the imagina¬
tion, it is only because it constitutes a threat
to national and cultural identities and to
current social trends.
The language problem, which was also
discussed in Brasilia and Harare, is a sin¬
gularly thorny one in Asia, where Anglo-
American is in the process of becoming the
vernacular language. The divorce between
life as they live it and the language in which
they express themselves is causing writers
to experience a personality crisis, which is
aggravated by the multiracial and multi¬
lingual character of many Asian countries.
Here too a solution has been sought
through the restoration of a kind of har¬
mony that is rooted in tradition. The village
and the family, the firm foundations of
individual and collective identity, which
in Asia have never been subject to attack as
they have in the West, remain sacred.
Nature, a metaphor for the harmony
and peace of the soul, continues to be a
favourite theme in Asian literature.
Writers feel particularly concerned by the
dangers that threaten it, and anguish
about the environment sometimes leads
to a return to religion or even, in certain
countries, to fundamentalism. There is a
risk that human rights, towards which the
participants seemed fairly indifferent,
may go by the board. On the other hand
they welcomed the death of ideologies in
the West, because it paves the way for a
return to the self, the family, the village
and tradition.
Little was said about the idea of cre¬
ation during the discussions, which focused
above all on a determination to return to
the Self through separation from the
Other.
-*
*
Jt
*
*
44 ALEXANDRE BLOKH
THE CHALLENGES
FACING ARAR
LITERATURE
The Arab writers' symposium held in 1994
in Carthage (Tunisia) was largely devoted
to democracy, freedom of expression and
the fundamentalist threat. The meeting
was overshadowed by the killing of writers
and by death threats against others.
Salman Rushdie and thefatwa against him
were discussed, as were obscurantism and
the fundamentalists' determination to
impose criteria from another age that could
reduce intellectuals to silence. Such is the
pressure of fundamentalism that even the
most independent-minded writers prac¬
tise self-censorship. Great vigilance is
required to avoid a return to an age of
totems and taboos.
This is not just a political problem. It
is a challenge for civilization, as the dec¬
laration signed by the majority of the
twenty writers present emphasizes,
denouncing the catastrophe which might
befall Arab nations if they fail to over¬
come fundamentalist barbarism. The text
specifies that at the time of its splendour,
Islam was tolerant of outsiders and recep¬
tive to them, and did not reject pluralism
or mixing. Only a return to these values
can restore the fertility of Islamic civi¬
lization.
Another question that often came up,
especially among participants from the
Maghrib, was that of the language of
expression chosen by writers. Voices were
raised against those using foreign tongues,
notably French. Tahar ben Jelloun of
Morocco responded by reprimanding "the
watchdogs" of culture who think they have
the right to distribute certificates of "Arab-
ness". His compatriot Mohamed Berrada
and the Tunisian writer Habib Selmi
pointed to the multiplicity of the linguistic
levels which, within the Arabic language,
nourishes their novels.
The question of literary forms and
sources opened a debate on the dialectic
between the particular and the universal.
Palestinian writer Emile Habibi recalled
that different forms of classical narration
could be adapted to modern fiction. Several
participants, including Salah Stétié of
Lebanon, spoke of the role of Sufism as a
source of inspiration for contemporary
writing. Others, however, such as Egyptian
writer Sonallah Ibrahim and Lebanon's
Elias Khoury, felt it was necessary to break
with traditional forms in order to meet the
demands of post-naturalist documentary,
so that literature can fulfil one of its voca¬
tions, which is to be the historical witness
of the crises and changes experienced by
peoples.
The Lebanese poet Adonis perhaps
came closest to indicating a middle way
when he said, "In the past the poet
responded to the demands of princes or
the public. Today I am calling for an inver¬
sion of the relationship: it is I who am
asking the public to accompany me on an
adventure."
Over and above the occasionally symp¬
tomatic reactions of writers from other
regions (including the English writer
Ronald Harwood, President of PEN Inter¬
national, and the Arabic-speaking Israeli
Sami Mikhaïl, reduced to silence), this
meeting showed that Arabic literature finds
itself halfway between withdrawal into the
shell of Arab identity and a movement
towards the freer atmosphere of world lit¬
erature, beyond national expressions.
When all is said and done, if there is a
split, it is between those who cannot bring
themselves to leave their citadel and those
who journey, at their own risk, in joy or in
pain, across the vastnesses of the world.
ABDELWAHAB MEDDEB
ALEXANDRE BLOKH,
a French novelist and literary critic, is the
international secretary of PEN International. Under
the pen name of Jean Blot, he has published a
number of novels and stones, including Les
cosmopolites (Gallimard, Paris, 1976) and La
montagne sainte (Albin Michel, Paris, 1984). His
most recent publication is an essay, Vladimir
Nabokov (Seuil, Paris, 1995).
ABDELWAHAB MEDDEB
is a Tunisian writer whose most recent publications
are La gazelle et l'enfant (Actes Sud-Papiers, Paris,
1992) and a translation into French of Suhrawardi's
The Western Exile's Story (Fata Morgana, 1993).
