3#8K
Somalia: the great escape
With their society in turmoil, Somali women are breaking
free from the constraints of a patriarchal system
26
HASSAN KEYNAN,
a Somali poet, was formerly a
professor at the Somali National
University and secretary-general
of the Somali National
Commission for Unesco. He is
currently working as a
consultant with the Norwegian
National Commission for Unesco.
I In Somali society, male-female roles and
power relationships are regulated by tra¬
ditional beliefs and practices which do not admit
equality between the sexes. Somali "culture"
allows and equips men to dominate women,
who are systematically relegated to a subordi¬
nate, marginal existence.
The roots of these inequities lie in a patriar¬
chal tradition which confines women to house¬
keeping and procreation, excludes them from
positions of power and influence and denies
them access to resources and means of making
an independent living. This tradition imposes
severe restrictions on women's intellectual and
social development, and stifles their creative
skills and energy. It also discourages them from
openly expressing their thoughts and feelings.
Somali culture has established elaborate
myths, folk literature and traditional discourse
to rationalize and sanctify patriarchy. It is in
oral literature that men's campaign against
women begins. Enormously popular folktales
portray women as inherently incapable of being
rational rulers and decent wives. Proverbs
convey the message that womanhood/mother¬
hood is incompatible with intelligence and
wisdom. "A breast that contains milk cannot
contain wisdom," says a well-known proverb.
Poetry, a national institution of great power
and influence, portrays women as incapable of
rhyming one word with another and therefore
as unworthy of having a meaningful voice. The
ideal woman is the silent woman whose words
and ideas are limited to her immediate circle of
children and other women.
Kjivil war and famine
But disasters can sometimes generate unex¬
pected opportunities. The human tragedy that
has devastated Somalia has also started to usher
Somali society down the road to change. More

important, this nascent social metamorphosis is
most evident in male-female relations.
A number of factors have combined to
trigger the process of change. First, the pro¬
tracted civil war and famine have removed many
men from the family arena and placed addi¬
tional burdens on women. Female-headed
households have proliferated as a result.
Second, over one million persons, one-fifth
of the total population, have been forced to flee
their country in search of security and suste¬
nance. Most of them ended up in refugee camps
in neighbouring countries: Djibouti, Ethiopia,
Kenya and Yemen, but many sought asylum in
the Western world, mainly in Canada, the
United Kingdom, The Netherlands, Italy,
Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Germany. The
majority of these refugee/migrants are women
and children, and this has led to women's playing
a growing and more visible role.
Third, there are indications that Somali
women have shown greater resilience and
resourcefulness than men in coping with the
trauma of civil war and famine at home and the
anxieties and uncertainties of refugee life abroad.
Fourth, new possibilities seem to have opened
up for women refugees, especially where the
country of asylum provides adequate economic
support, protection from gender-based inequities
and understanding and tolerance toward
migrants.
Kole reversals
The seemingly eternal order of patriarchy has
been unceremoniously confronted with the
reality of change, and this has caused profound
reversals in gender roles and power relations.
The new status of women expresses itself in a
variety of ways. Perhaps the most prominent is
the exhilarating sense of freedom that women
feel and enjoy. The lifting of the oppressive and
dehumanizing burden of patriarchal dogma is
seen by many women as a wondrous intervention
designed to celebrate their humanity, dignity and
talent. Many Somali women glow with inspira¬
tion and exuberance and talk about their new¬
found freedom with poetic eloquence. "I feel I
have undergone a miraculous process of recre¬
ation and renewal," says one woman now living
in Norway. "I am a new person, blessed with a full
and fulfilling life. It's magic."
For many Somali women the arrival of
freedom was accompanied by another symbol of
empowerment. They have found a voice. Women
have begun to demand and defend their rights,
both privately and in public. They have become
more assertive in two traditionally male-domi¬
nated areas. Men can no longer run the affairs of
the family at will, nor can they contemplate
taking a second or a third wife on a whim and
with impunity. The patriarchal discourse is slowly
being demystified.
A significant number of these women have
become increasingly active in economic life, an
area previously inaccessible to them. Finding
employment can be enormously difficult for
refugees and migrants, but many Somali women
have managed to find work while their husbands
have remained largely unemployed. Most of these
women work in areas like child care, health,
food-processing, catering and cleaning. Many
have also established small family businesses that
deal mainly with women's and children's clothes,
jewelry, cosmetics and special types of incense
widely used by Somali women. The result is that
many households now have women, not men, as
breadwinners and heads of family.
The change has also drastically transformed
the allocation of tasks and responsibilities in the
domestic arena. The traditional norms and ethos
that excused men from household chores and
placed all the burden on women are no longer
acceptable to females. There is now a new order
that sees household chores and related duties as
evenly divided between males and females. Tasks
such as shopping, cooking, cleaning, washing,
ironing and child care now form part of men's
daily responsibilities, a development inconceiv¬
able in traditional Somali culture.
Men's apprehensions
Most men feel a profound sense of discomfort and
apprehension. Many believe that the changes
taking place in gender relations are too radical
and too destabilizing. They view the growing
empowerment of women as a serious threat to
their authority and dignity and, by extension, as
a threat to the moral and cultural norms and tra¬
ditions of Somali society. They complain about
humiliation and lack of respect, marginalization
and expulsion, orders being given by their wives,
loss of family coherence and values, and confusion
and disorientation in the way children are brought
up. Many men admit that they are no longer able
to cope with these pressures and humiliations. It
is reported that some are sinking into depression
and have started drinking heavily.
Opposite page: refugees in
Bardera camp (Somalia), wait
for a children's reception centre
to open.
Below: a young Somali
woman (foreground) working for
a mail-order company in London
(United Kingdom).
