Health
Respect for human rights is
coming to he seen as a
fundamental part of public health
policies
JEAN-MARIE ANDRIEU,
OC a French haematologist, heads the tumour Immunology laboratory at Laennec Hospital in Paris.

and human rights
"T
I he general relationship
between socio-economic status
and health has been widely
documented." Left, a street
child in Sâo Paulo, Brazil.
by Jonathan Mann
The first major influence on health science
on the eve of the twenty-first century is the
phenomenon of globalization, the enormously
expanding and intensifying movements of people,
goods and ideas around the world. The Aids epi¬
demic has accelerated an appreciation of global vul¬
nerability to new disease pandemics.
Tourism is symbolic of the transnational
character of the modern world, for it consti¬
tutes one of the world's largest industries and is
inextricably linked with the history of infec¬
tious agents and epidemic disease. Mass tourism,
with its characteristic heavy influxes during
short periods, overloads sanitary infrastruc¬
tures, and outbreaks of disease are most likely
during these periods.
The Aids pandemic has been a shock, strongly
challenging the old view of the world as com¬
posed of isolated communities and illustrating
clearly the modern world's vulnerability to global
spread of infectious agents. The pandemic is
expanding relentlessly, and may well involve over
100 million people by the end of this decade.
This says much about our limited collective
capacity to deal with global health problems.
The emergence of new microbial threats to
world health is inevitable, yet our ability to
detect and respond to such threats with rea¬
sonable speed remains very limited, slow and
haphazard. Current international health regu¬
lations are clearly based on an old, nation-state
definition of "inter-national" rather than global 27


A human rights demonstration
in front of Lighthouse, a London
hostel for Aids sufferers.
28
health. A new global surveillance strategy must
draw on a broader, ecological view of health
and disease.
An ecological view of health
The definition of health itself is critical, for how
we define a problem will determine what we
do about it. The most widely used modern def¬
inition comes from the World Health Organi¬
zation (WHO) and states that: "health is a state
of complete physical, mental and social well-
being and not merely the absence of disease or
infirmity." Through this definition, WHO has
helped to move health thinking beyond a per¬
spective which focused on diseases, disabilities
and causes of death, to the more positive domain
of "well-being". The definition highlights the
importance of health promotion, described as
"the process of enabling people to increase con¬
trol over, and to improve, their health". Thus the
modern concept of health emphasizes the
broader, societal dimensions of health.
These changes in thinking about health have
been complemented by changes in the prac¬
tice of international health research. In
HIV/Aids prevention, for example, global
exchange of information has been unprece¬
dented and useful. Inherent in this approach is
the idea that when facing a problem like
HIV/Aids, every society and environment may
make useful contributions.
A second aspect of global learning involves
how research is carried out. Early in the pan¬
demic, international research was dominated by
so-called "safari" or "parachute" research, in
which scientists from industrialized countries
arrived, took specimens and left to publish their
results. These early projects were rarely collab¬
orative in any meaningful sense and were part of
a pattern inherited from colonial days. Increas¬
ingly, however, it became clear that both the
ethics of good research and the capacity to answer
the important questions depended on establishing
genuine international collaboration.
I he human rights revolution
As well as acquiring an increased capacity to think
in integrated, ecological ways about health issues,
the world in which health research is carried out
has been changing in another critically important
way. This involves the most hope-filled idea in the
world today that of human rights.
Among the fundamental characteristics of


modern human rights are the following: they are
rights of individuals; they inhere in individuals
simply because they are human; they princi¬
pally involve the relationship between the state
and the individual; and they apply to all people
around the world.1 Despite tremendous con¬
troversy, especially regarding the philosophical
and cultural context of human rights as cur¬
rently defined, a shared sense of concern, a
vocabulary and a set of human rights practices
are increasingly becoming part of community,
national and global discourse.
The human rights revolution strongly affects
both the goals and content of efforts to promote
and protect health, and in this way has a sig¬
nificant influence on the goals and practices of
health research. In the first instance, health
policies, programmes and practices have impor¬
tant impacts on human rights and dignity which
must be avoided or minimized as far as possible.

"Veronica is seven years old. Her blood test shows that not one T4 cell remains; her immune
system is at zero. When she was five months old she had a pathological lung condition, two
cardiac arrests and an effusion in the right lung. But she recovered, which shov/s how
determined she is. She has an incredible will to live. Now she's m wonderful shape. She's had a
lot ofproblems, one thing after another: ear infections, lung infections and the like, until she
started being treated with AZT, which has an effect. We're lucky she can tolerate it. . . . She goes
to school regularly like other little girls, and works hard. She's even above the class average,
because children who spend a lot of time in hospital are more mature than the others. We tell
ourselves that there have always been epidemics and that some people have survived. Why
shouldn't we be among them?"
Aids spares nobody", says
this poster from the Philippines'
Department of Health.
For example, collecting information from
individuals, such as whether they are infected
with HIV, or have breast cancer, or have a
genetic predisposition to heart disease, can
clearly burden individual rights to security of
person and of privacy. Health status or health
behaviour information (such as sexual prefer¬
ence or history of drug use), if misused by the
state or made available to others, can also result
in grievous harm to individuals and violations
of many rights, leading to (as has occurred with
information about HIV infection) cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment, arbitrary
detention or exile, attacks upon honour and
reputation, limitations of freedom of move-
6W-45D
NATIONAL AIDS PRtVENTlON AND CONTROL PROGRAM
DIPAHTMCNT Of HEALTH
^m
JONATHAN MANN,
of the United States, was the
founding director of the World
Health Organization's Global
Programme on Aids (1986-
1990), and is now the François-
Xavier Bagnoud Professor of
Public Health and Human Rights
at the Harvard School of Public
Health (U.S.A.). He Is also
Professor of Epidemiology and
International Health at Harvard,
and Director of the International
Aids Center of the Harvard Aids
Institute.
ment, violations of the right to marry and found
a family, and restrictions of the right to work
and to education.
Appreciation óf the impact human rights
violations can have on health has also changed.
These impacts are not limited to such obvious
cases as torture, imprisonment under inhumane
conditions, or summary execution and "disap¬
pearances". It is now evident that violations of
many, if not all, human rights may be associated
with negative effects on health. When cigarettes
are marketed without governmental assurance
that information regarding the harmful health
effects of tobacco smoking will also be available,
it can be argued that the right to information is
violated. The health cost of this violation in
terms of preventable illness, disability and pre¬
mature death, including excess cancers, cardio¬
vascular and respiratory disease, can be quanti¬
fied. A similar example involves governmental
withholding of valid scientific health informa¬
tion about contraception or regarding measures
to prevent infection with HIV.
Modern concepts of health recognize that
underlying "conditions" lay the foundations
for optimal achievement of physical, mental
and social well-being. Given the fundamental
importance of these conditions, it is remark¬
able how little priority has been given to their
identification, modes of action, relative roles
and possible interactions.
The most powerful analysis has focused on
socio-economic status. The general relation¬
ship between higher socio-economic status and
better health has been well and widely docu¬
mented. Yet this analysis has at least two impor¬
tant limitations. First, it cannot adequately
account for a growing number of discordant
observations. Second, while health workers
readily acknowledge poverty as a critical issue,
it poses an overwhelming challenge with which
they are neither trained nor equipped to deal: the
identification of socio-economic status as an 29

The dialogue
between health and
human rights
evolved



dramatically.
Initially, health and
human rights
supporters clashed
as attempts were
made to control
Aids through
restrictive
measures such as
mandatory testing,
quarantine and
isolation.
30
A poster for a conference on
HIV/Aids and related problems
in Aboriginal communities of
Canada.
"essential condition" for good health paradox¬
ically may encourage passivity and hopeless¬
ness and therefore paralyse action.
A global Aids strategy
However, alternative approaches to identifying
"essential conditions" for health are emerging.
Experience with what can arguably be called the
world's first truly global strategy, created by
WHO to confront Aids, suggests an analytic
approach based on modern human rights.
The dialogue between health and human
rights evolved dramatically. Initially, health and
human rights supporters clashed, as health offi¬
cials and politicians sought to control Aids
through a series of restrictive and coercive mea¬
sures from the standard lexicon of public health,
such as mandatory testing, quarantine and iso¬
lation. This aggressive response was spurred by
a climate of fear, compounded by the marginal¬
ized nature of the groups most visibly affected
homosexual men and injecting drug users.
Human rights activists resisted these coercive
public health approaches. However, as experi¬
ence in HIV prevention began to accumulate,
health officials came to realize that discrimina¬
tion and coercion were interfering with the
effectiveness of the information/education and
service programmes, by driving those most
needing the services and support away.
The idea that respecting human rights would
be useful, or even essential, in order to achieve
Veoi*^ <S
Oj*em(nr 5-7, 1994
*J^ Toronto ^ C.IM.M* .
<k
%
mO F
Third C.in.Kli.ii! ! uni. i. -in on III V /AIDS
And Ki-i. ¡int I-. In \ in iniini.il CommuniUca
a public health goal was quite a novel idea, but
it came from practical experience rather than
theoretical considerations. Accordingly, a public
health rationale for protecting human rights
and dignity was developed.
However, while the WHO model works
extremely well at the pilot project or community
level, it has neither been able to become widely
disseminated nor has it influenced in any sub¬
stantial manner the natural history of the pan¬
demic. More than ten years after Aids was dis¬
covered, and despite the energy, courage and
creativity of the fight against Aids during the
past decade, it is clear that current efforts are nec¬
essary but will not be sufficient to bring this
global epidemic under control.
Docial discrimination
and the spread of HIV
Fortunately, through the experience of the past
decade, it was discovered that the spread of
HIV is strongly determined by an identifiable
risk factor. We are accustomed, in classical med¬
ical and epidemiological thinking, to consider
risk factors such as sexual behaviour, or drug-
taking or cigarette smoking, as individual. Yet we
gradually recognized a societal risk factor for
vulnerability to HIV infection in the scope,
intensity and nature of discrimination which
exists within each community or country. We are
not speaking principally about discrimination
against already HIV-infected people and people
with Aids, which is one tragic effect of the pan¬
demic; here we are considering those forms of
discrimination in society which antedated the
arrival of HIV. The damage which discrimina¬
tion does to HIV prevention was recognized
as occurring at two levels.
First, discrimination undermines and inter¬
feres with each component of the programme-
based approach to HIV prevention. People who
are discriminated against are much less likely to
receive information and education adapted to
their needs. Actually, their needs are likely to
remain unrecognized altogether. For example,
deaf people have received little or no informa¬
tion about Aids adapted for their use. Margin¬
alized groups are also much less likely to have
access to the health and social services needed for
HIV prevention. People who are discriminated
against often have difficulty organizing as a
community. They are less likely to participate
effectively in debates about Aids policies or
programmes, and more likely to be subject to
coercive and punitive measures. Put together, the

Mi
A poster by Bronwyn Bancroft,
an Australian Aborigine artist,
illustrating the need for
information about needle-
exchange programmes and the
importance of "safe sex".
positive benefits of the programme-based
approach are least available to those who need
them most because of societal discrimination.
But there is a second and more fundamental
relationship between societal discrimination, vul¬
nerability to HIV and HIV prevention capacity.
The fundamental basis of HIV prevention is the
promotion of each person's capacity to learn
about and to apply this understanding fully and
freely in their life. Yet for each of us, social status
and role critically influence and constrain our
choices. Thus the debate about using a condom
is very different for a young person with hope for
a bright future through education and a young
person with little realistic expectation of a mean¬
ingful job. Put another way, when we assume
that people can simply choose and leave them to
choose, we are assuming that everyone has a
choice or a similar realistic range of choices.
I ale domination
a threat to public health
In many Third World countries, even when the
woman knows her husband to be HIV-infected,
she may be powerless to protect herself. For
divorce, entirely under the control of the man, will
mean civil and economic death for the woman.
In this context, therefore, it is entirely logical
and appropriate that women's organizations are
seeking to change the laws governing property
distribution after divorce, as well as laws on
marriage and inheritance to help prevent HIV
from spreading! These measures, by giving the
woman a choice and a voice in negotiating sexual
relations, are likely to be more effective in pre¬
venting HIV spread than producing more attrac¬
tive brochures or customizing brand names for
condoms. Again and again, we have seen that
discrimination creates an environment of
increased risk for women linked directly with
their unequal role, rights and status. (It is in
this context, as well as considering reproductive
health, sexual violence and many other issues,
that we can say that male domination of society
is a threat to public health).
In short, wc have learned that the HIV pan¬
demic flourishes where individual capacity to
learn and to respond is constrained. The major
way in which this capacity is constrained is by
belonging to a group that is discriminated
against, marginalized, or stigmatized. This sug¬
gests that to the extent that societies can reduce
discrimination and promote respect for the
rights and dignity of all their members, they
will become increasingly successful in preventing
HIV transmission. To this extent, they will be
uprooting the HIV/Aids pandemic rather than
simply addressing its surface features.
This leads to the larger hypothesis that the
"essential conditions" for health the societal
determinants of health status are better defined
by modern human rights than by the tradi¬
tional, biomedical, physical health-related mea¬
sures and analyses of health experts. Thus, a
strategic approach to the promotion and pro¬
tection of health is inextricably linked to efforts



to promote respect for human rights within
each society and globally.
1 The specific rights which form the corpus of human
rights are listed in several key documents. Foremost
among them are the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the United Nations Charter, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, which constitute what is often called the
"International Bill of Human Rights". 31
