Jean Daniel
<&lt;<&lt;'d : =
interview
N At a time when nations seem
increasingly threatened by the process
of globalization, the idea of the
nation-state-the subject of your
latest book-is giving rise to a good
deal of thought and comment.
Jean Daniel : After a long period of
neglect the nation has again become a
highly topical subject, especially in the
United States and Germany. Each
month dozens of books are published
on this theme in different parts of the
world. I trace the origins of the idea of
the nation to Johann Fichte'sl famous
Addresses to the German Nation, a
book which is outstanding both for its
depth and objectivity and for its impact
on European thought.
No-one else has ever made a more
subtle and penetrating eulogy of what
is called"the right of blood"[jus san-
guinis]. Fichte maintains that without
the nation-real or imaginary-a people
has no future, and that the Germans
are fortunate because they have had a
national experience made possible by
the existence of a language and racial
purity. He expounds this in such philo-
sophically sophisticated terms and in
such noble language that few people
have seen any connection between his
views and the racist theories that were
set forth later by Joseph de Gobineau2
and Houston Chamberlain3 and were to
lead to Alfred Rosenberg4 and Hitler.
In my opinion, Fichte remains top-
ical because in some places there is a
persistent feeling of nostalgia for"the
right of blood", unpopular though the
concept may be among Western elites.
t Could you give some examples ?
J. D. : Examples of this nostalgia can be
found in ethnic and religious groups in
the Baltic states, in Ukraine, in
Georgia, in Armenia, Azerbaijan and of
course in the former Yugoslavia, even
though in some cases the heritage of the
right of blood seems doubtful.
The example of Israel is very inter-
esting. On the one hand Israel welcomes
people from all over the world who are
often (especially the Russians) the
product of ethnic mixing. On the other
hand, marriages between Jews and non-
Jews are forbidden in the diaspora5.
And since proselytism is out of the ques-
tion and conversion is a difficult enter-
prise, marriage between Jews continues
to be the ideal. Sometimes this consan-
guinity is given a dangerous theological
significance : that of a holy alliance with
a distinctive people which must remain
pure, the people to whom God speaks.
t And the Arab countries ?
J. D. : In theory, Islam is a universal reli-
gion which is hospitable to all peoples
and cultures. But in reality it respects
the right of blood.
t Is Islam more progressive in this
respect, since anyone is a potential
convert ?
J. D. : Don't forget that St. Paul, who
lived in pre-Islamic times, abolished the
need to be circumcised before
becoming a Christian. That did not pre-
vent certain inquisitors from considering
that converted Jews were not proper
Christians.
For Muslims it is inter-ethnic mar-
riages rather than inter-religious mar-
riages that pose a problem. But it comes
down to the same thing-we are dealing
with prohibitions which show that in
the final analysis what counts is the
right of blood.
What's more, the right of blood is
making a strong come-back all over the
world, directly and indirectly, and is being
justified in various ways-by the idea that
intermingling does not succeeed, or that
it leads to bastardization or to the disso-
lution of identity.... To some extent,
many people who aspire to universality
tell themselves that in the end it is better
to achieve it via the community.
t This debate was inaugurated by
the French Revolution, which
formulated two conflicting ideas of the
nation. On the one hand there is the
abstract nation that springs from
"free contract"between autonomous,
aware, responsible individuals, and on
the other the real, physical nation that
is a product of history and imposes
itself on individuals, whether they like
it or not. Or is this a simplification of
what actually happened ?
J. D. : Enthralling debates about this
took place between the revolutionaries,
especially concerning the emancipation
of the Jews, the Protestants and the
blacks.
When Stanislas de Clermont-Ton-
nerre said"Everything to the Jews as
individuals, nothing as a nation", he had
enthusiastic supporters who did not
believe in communities. But he also had
detractors. His proposal was rejected.
Someone came to see him and said :"I
don't know any individual'Jews. I only
know a community."Then his visitor
explained how individuals detached
from their community structures did
not exist.
As for the Protestants, the Revolu-
tion gave them equality. It emancipated
them and gave them access to positions

The French writer and journalist
Jean Daniel is founder-director of
the Paris weekly Le Nouvel
Observateur. He has been an ardent
champion of the cause of human
dignity and a lucid and critical
observer of the events of the last half
century. The author of many novels
and essays, he was recently
awarded the Albert Camus prize for
a collection of short stories entitled
Vamianglais (Paris, Grasset, 1994).
Here he talks to Bahgat Elnadi and
Adel Rifaat about the current
evolution of the nation-state, the
theme of his latest book, Voyage au
centre de la nation (Seuil publishers,
Paris, 1995).
from which they had been excluded.
But they continued to define themselves
in a way that was simultaneously reli-
gious and individual. And so at this
period when God was deprived of his
sovereignty, when the temporal was sep-
arated from the spiritual, when the
individual was dazzled and over-
whelmed by his freedom, French
Protestants found a thoroughly grati-
fying form of integration : they had their
cake and ate it too.
Things were more complicated for
the blacks. Slavery was abolished, then
reinstated. Economic questions compli-
cated relations with the black commu-
nity even further. The heirs of the Rev-
olution behaved very badly and finally
came out in support of slavery. All this
is magnificently described by the Cuban
writer Alejo Carpentier in his novel
Explosion in the Cathedral.
To conclude, it is true that an
abstract idea of the individual exists.
The Declaration of the Rights of Man
and of the Citizen of 1789 makes no
allusion to the duties of the individual
(in other words there is no bond with
the community and no responsibility
towards it). The only limitation on
freedom is that one should not trespass
on one's neighbour's freedom. Two
counter-revolutionaries, Edmund Burke
in England and Joseph de Maistre in
France, later pointed out correctly that
the men of 1789 were to some extent
talking nonsense, that they had invented
a creature which turns its back on
human nature.
Of course, the need for a sense of
community exists in all societies. It has
been seen, for example, in the strength
of tradition in Britain or in the heritage
of the feudal monarchy in France, not
to mention societies where the patriar-
chal principle is so strong that the indi-
vidual is not only an abstraction but an
absurdity. The community impinges
constantly on the members of these
societies from the cradle to the grave,
notably through rites of initiation, mar-
riage and sexuality. The individual
derives his balance from the community,
and when he is alone he feels protected
by remembering his community.
So is it possible to strike a balance
between individual freedom and soli-
darity with the community ? One place
where this balance has been found is
the nation-state, which was constructed
in eighteenth-and nineteenth-century
Europe to meet this very need.
t Widely different ideas of the
community have been proposed....
J. D. : In France, for example, there is a
big difference between the ideas of
Maurice Barrels7 and Charles Maurras3.
Barres is a kind of aesthete of the
French nation. For him the nation
means having the same dead, and
remembering them in the same way.
<=
"g
ro
'"
Q)
&commat;

Maurras had a more vigorous idea of the
nation. He said to Barres :"Your dead
interest me, but it's not mourning them
that makes a nation. It's the fact that
they are dead. The blood that has been
shed."
De Gaulle had a similar idea. For
him the nation is primarily an idea. Seen
in this light, his thinking was much
more progressive than that of François
Mitterrand or of many African heads of
state today. For De Gaulle the French
nation is a certain idea of France and
the hardships shared in serving this
idea-but hardships shared with
others, remember. France was made
with foreigners.
The idea of shared hardship is
essential here. Before there can be a
nation there has to be a certain number
of common memories, projects and
hardships. The universal must be asso-
ciated with what Simone Weil9 calls
enracinement-taking root. Here we
have come a long way from the free indi-
vidual of 1789, who asks himself every
day"do I want to be French or not ?"
t Between the wars, in the societies
of the South, the notion of the
individual, abstract though it may
have been, was nevertheless a
spearhead that helped to dislocate
religious and patriarchal structures.
There was never any danger of being
too abstract. On the contrary,
patriarchal despotism was so deeply
rooted that it took all the virulence of
the abstract ideal of 1789 to
overthrow it.
J. D. : Indeed. But in the West, the modern
individual eventually went too far and sev-
ered all connection with the sacred. The
problems he or she encountered in
Europe were not the same as those expe-
rienced by modernist intellectuals on the
other side of the Mediterranean.
t) In some ways the preoccupations of
intellectuals in the South today recall
those of the 19th-century European
intelligentsia. And the crisis of the 19th-
century European intelligentsia gives
the 20th-century South a foretaste of
what to expect....
J. D. : This reminds me of a very telling
anecdote. At the end of his life, Tol-
stoy-who had fought against serfdom
in Russia and was largely responsible for
its abolition-used to say when he saw
the rather arrogant and vulgar behav-
iour of the former muzhiks :"How fine
was the struggle in the days of
serfdom !"
In just the same way, in the struggle
for the freedom of the individual, the
struggle itelf is a source of fulfilment.
An ideal exists in its most open, most
balanced form during the struggle
waged on its behalf. When the battle is
won, one sees that its goal has been
betrayed or else that it was vain. Revo-
lutions soon betray themselves.
As for the revolutions in the South
during the first half of the twentieth
century, the individual began to fulfil
himself in the struggle. He found true
fulfilment at the time when he was most
committed and responsive to the call of
his community at a time of danger. As
soon as the struggle was over, his
freedom was either confiscated by a dic-
tatorship or, at best, impoverished.
t There is a cyclical phenomenon,
here. After the great age of triumphant
nationalism, the idea of individual
freedom-as defined by French
humanism-was reaffi rmed with new
vigour. It is true that its
fundamentalist negation has been
quicker to occupy the ground....
J. D. : Perhaps the expansion of French
humanism complicated matters rather
than simplified them. It made almost
everyone schizophrenic. People experi-
enced it on two levels-as a source of
greater inner wealth but also of more
conflicts and uneasiness. Eventually
they became so unbalanced that they
wanted to go back to the old-style com-
munity because it was simpler and more
reassuring. Instead of seeing a partic-
ular richness in these two levels, as Sen-
ghor did, they saw them as a betrayal
of the myth of a return to the past, of
the myth of authenticity, of a golden
age. This golden age never really existed
but nostalgia for it made it possible to
resist schizophrenia.
The five or six fundamentalists I have
met during my life are former schizo-
phrenics who have wanted to free them-
selves from their failure to discover a syn-
thesis between the two civilizations and
ideals that divided them. They said to
themselves :"I only take one of them and
I back it to the hilt so that I have a firm
sense of reality on which I can rely."This
perverse effect of the contagion of
humanism is worth thinking about.
t As far as perversity is concerned,
we prefer to think about the perversity
of states where the individual exists
but lacks the protective garment of
citizenship.
J. D. : It is true that citizenship was the
vocation of the individual in the West.
Many remedies for the failings we have
been discussing can be found in citizen-
ship, because the citizen is a responsible
person. Pierre Mendes France ! 0 thought
that freedom conferred more duties than
rights and that national solidarity made
non-stop claims on citizens. In the duties
of the free citizen the individual finds a
balance equivalent to that which in tra-
ditional societies is provided by depen-
dence on the community.
But things have changed, even in the
West, in recent decades. There have
been two big changes-the coming of
the affluent society, which has trans-
formed the individual into a consumer,
Jean
Daniel
"
. g
'"
'"
Q)
m
&commat;

and the development of the audiovisual
media, which has transformed the indi-
vidual into a televiewer. The ideal of the
market economy, which has turned the
individual into a competitive consumer,
is at odds with humanist culture. Fur-
thermore, as a televiewer, the individual
has less and less need of elections and
parliaments, reacting with increasing
passivity to a procession of images,
instead of making active judgments in
the privacy of his conscience. The com-
bination of the consumer and the tele-
viewer is annihilating the citizen. It does
not deprive him of freedom by imposing
constraints but by the extent of the new
needs it implants in him. The nation is
threatened with dissolution by the
market economy and by television.
t) Is it possible that the dissolution of
the nation under the pressure of an
increasingly globalized market will
lead to larger supranational
groupings, just as the 19th-century
nation-states were formed out of
statelets ? This question is relevant not
only for Europe and North America but
also for the Arab world and sub-
Saharan Africa. How else will survival
in the 21st century be possible ?
J. D. : What you describe may come
about but it is not inevitable. I have
noticed that major social phenomena
are the product of reactions rather than
actions. Social phenomena obey the law
of the swinging pendulum. When the
pendulum has swung too far one way, it
swings back just as far in the other. This
observation is perhaps less common-
place than it seems because it can lead
to extremely tense situations.
To take one example, the idea of the
swing of the pendulum has led scientists
such as Claude Levi-Strauss to talk of a
"race tolerance threshold", which is a
very dangerous notion. If you have too
many foreigners in a given area, a rejec-
tion mechanism takes place. Levi-
Strauss has spent his life studying
tribes that he admired so much that he
wanted to protect their purity (in a
sense he was in favour of the right of
blood) and since he saw that intermin-
gling led to acculturation, he came to
believe that cultures have the right to
protect themselves against each other.
It is true that inputs from outside are
sometimes necessary, but the dosage
must be carefully watched. Ultimately,
Levi-Strauss sees the world as a set of
cultures that have the right to defend
themselves but must not seek to domi-
nate each other.
t What do you think of the idea that
our attitudes to the nation have taken
us back into the 19th century ?
J. D. : Unlike the French thinker Régis
Debray, I don't believe that we have
returned to the nineteenth century,
because in the nineteenth century you
had none of the phenomena-interna-
tional exchanges, demographic factors,
technology, planet-wide interdepen-
dence, the interpenetration of cultures,
the abolition of distance, the babeliza-
tion of languages-that you have today
and which lead many people to feel that
they are losing their identity.
To return to the example of France,
since European citizenship does not
exist and French citizenship is
becoming diluted, many people will
either fall back on nationalism or
become spineless individuals. Else-
where, retreat into religion and expres-
sions of fundamentalism are more or less
violent reactions to the radically new
idea that we all inhabit a single planet.
Where will all this lead to in the end ?
Since the trend towards globalization is
irreversible, I think it is possible that
nations may disappear under the com-
bined effects of a sense of loss of iden-
tity, of consumption, of television and
the absence of wars.
Think of the ideas put forward
about the identity of France by the
French historian Fernand Braudel.
Braudel says, more or less, that France
is a kind of miracle, a product of
chance, and lists all the reasons why it
should not have become a nation. There
was no complementarity between the
scattered pieces of France. There was
no need for France to become France.
Nor is there any need today for
Europe or the Arab world to form a fed-
eral unit. Millions of French and
German people had to die before it was
decided to give priority to economic
interests and the construction of Europe
began. First of all people felt the need
to stop exterminating each other, then
came the discovery of economic com-
plementarity. Supranational groupings
may or may not be made-it will all
depend on human determination, not on
some kind of historical inevitability. N
1. German philosopher (1762-1814). His
Reden an die deutsche Nation, 14 addresses
given at the university of Berlin in 1807 and
1808, set forth his ideas on the foundations
of national recovery after the collapse of
Prussia.-Ed.
2. French writer (1816-1882), author of an
"Essay on the inequality of the human races"
(1853-1855 ; Eng. trans. 1915).-Ed.
3. British-born German writer (1855-1927),
author of a pan-German racist theory
expounded in his book The Foundations of
the l9th Century (1899, Eng. trans. 1911)
which influenced Hitler.-Ed.
4. German politician (1893-1946). A leading
theorist of national socialism.-Ed.
5. The Jewish communities dispersed
throughout the world.-Ed.
6. A representative of the nobility in the
Estates General at the beginning of the
French Revolution.-Ed.
7. French writer (1862-1923) and
nationalist.-Ed.
8. French writer (1868-1952) and
monarchist.-Ed.
9. French writer and philosopher
(1909-1943).-Ed.
10. French politician (1907-1982).-Ed.
