Aminata Traoré THE SOUTH
A JOINT STRUGGLE
Aminata Traoré (see "Five women in the spotlight", page 34) is a Malian social
psychologist whose extensive fieldwork has brought her wide first-hand
experience of African conditions. In Mali she has founded a cultural centre (the
Santoro) and the Hampâté Bâ cultural centre.
The women's liberation movement in the West
began about thirty years ago. What has it brought
to the women of the South?
I can't speak for all the women of the South. I
can only express my opinion as a black woman
from sub-Saharan Africa who thinks that her des¬
tiny is closely linked to that of her continent and
that she has no right to be fighting the wrong
battle. I think I can say that broadly speaking we
African women are determined to distinguish our¬
selves from Western feminism. Many women's
associations in Africa insist on being regarded as
"feminine" rather than "feminist".
I would add that I respect the struggle waged by
Western feminists. That struggle is motivated by
their own specific experience of life and pain, which
I have no right to interpret or judge. I would be
happy if this rule of mutual respect and reciprocity
could also be applied to their relationships with the
women of the South. That is not always the case.
They have appropriated to themselves the right
to interfere in our affairs, to dissect and pass judge¬
ment on them and to draw conclusions that have
sometimes become action programmes against
which we can do nothing.
This intrusion into our societies, where the
priorities are different, blocks our view of the
horizon, displaces our familiar landmarks and puts
us in a state of dependence that we should no
longer accept.
Can the principle of equal rights between men
and women be adapted to the societies of the
South?
Equal rights is a rallying cry that nowadays
has a meaning and an emotional charge so intense
that it is hard to shrug them off. But the lessons of
our own history suggest that we should give a
more qualified answer to this question.
Surprising though it may seem, I would say that
the right to difference and to life that is denied us
as dominated black people is more important to me
than the race to achieve a hypothetical equality
between the sexes. Furthermore, I am not ready to
make war on my African brothers with the
weapons of Western feminists. I'm more keen on
finding common ground with them so that together
we can extract our continent from the economic,
financial and political situation that is jeopardizing
our common future.
I suffer less from sexism than from racism,
against which I am far more helpless. But racism
doesn't attract as much interest or energy as fem¬
inism. Why is this so? Why do we need to be more
active and more determined in the struggle against
one form of oppression than another? Who decides
the priorities?
Structural adjustment programmes and dra-
conian measures such as the devaluation of 12 Jan¬
uary 1991 that overnight deprived millions of
women in French-speaking Africa of the bare
necessities (essential foodstuffs, health care,
drinking water and school supplies for children),
are only half-heartedly condemned. In situations
of serious deprivation like these, where men,
women and children are living on the edge of sur¬
vival, what matters is solidarity between the sexes
rather than equal rights.
Most Western feminists have gone over to the
neo-liberals in their international institutions for
funding development. Together they want to liberate
us from our cultural realities which they regard as
archaic, and from our governments which they con¬
sider to be corrupt. Privatization and decentraliza¬
tion seem to have become synonymous with
women's liberation in the poor countries!
Concentration on equality between men and
women is part and parcel of a social model based on
competition where man is a predator on man and
even more so on woman. Our situation is dif¬
ferent. If equality between men and women is to
replace older forms of solidarity in our societies, it
is for African women to take that decision and to
organize themselves accordingly.
What are the major demands of women in the
South? How can their status be improved by inte¬
grating them into the economy?
The struggle against humiliation and destruc¬
tion should be one of the main commitments of
women in the South, especially the women of
Africa south of the Sahara. I don't think that going
to Beijing with women from other regions of the
world should make us lose sight of the grave prob¬
lems facing our continent. In my opinion, the pri-
orities are as follows: SI
CONTINUED ON PAGE 11

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 9 a) dismantling the mechanisms of poverty and
exclusion and freeing financial resources. This
approach goes far beyond the anti-poverty pro¬
grammes that are currently being considered. In
this regard African women must be able to dis¬
mantle the mechanisms of development funding,
and above all the way in which debts are contracted;
b) democratization, which will guarantee
African men and women the right to decide for
themselves and challenge their governments and
their foreign partners;
c) the strengthening, through information and
training, of women's decision-making powers and
their capacity to act.
In both North and South it is clear that women's
liberation has led to a rise in violence on the part
of men. Is it unrealistic to look for solutions to
this worldwide trend?
I shouldn't really answer this question since I
refuse to equate the liberation of women with
equal rights with men. In our countries every¬
body's rights economic, political and cultural
are flouted and not only because of the regimes cur¬
rently in power. Where violence perpetrated by
men is concerned, I should simply like to point out
that human beings men, women, children, young
and old all need their social, professional and
economic roles to be recognized. These roles can
change gradually without major upsets or disrup¬
tions. The frustrations this may cause must be
dealt with by mutual concessions on the part of
those involved.
Once men have lost their jobs they don't know
which way to turn. Is it really so surprising that
they grow violent towards women and children?
They are more to be pitied than blamed. When
will we understand the complexity of the under¬
lying factors that determine human behaviour and
personal relationships?
What are you hoping for in the foreseeable
future?
In Africa the greatest impediments to women's
advancement are economic and political. But inter¬
national thinking merely condemns our societies
and our cultures. The fact is that many parents
would like their daughters to attend school and
complete their studies. Farmers would like their
wives to work less and have access to health care
and drinkable water. Most men would like their
wives to have a paid job. What stands in the way of
all this? An unfair economic and financial system
that leaves vulnerable groups few opportunities
for survival. We lack resources, indigenous exper¬
tise and appropriate methodologies.
Interview by Judithe Bizot
and Daniele Granet
11
