The Mothers of the
Plaza de Mayo
by Alicia Dujovne Ortiz
For almost twenty years the mothers
of those who disappeared during the
Argentine military dictatorship have
been fighting for justice
Above, the Mothers of the Plaza
de Mayo demonstrate in May
1995.
22
ALICIA DUJOVNE ORTIZ,
of Argentina, has written a
number of novels and children's
books. The French version of her
biography of Eva Peron has
recently been published by
Grasset, Paris.
Attached to the picket signs are photos of
young faces with a 1970s look. The girls
have long hair parted down the middle. The
boys' expressions and hair styles could belong
to no other decade. Each picket is carried by an
elderly woman wearing a headscarf. The women
are the mothers of desaparecidos, young Argen¬
tines who disappeared during the dictatorship in
the late 1970s. Every Thursday since April 1977
they have marched around the Plaza de Mayo,
the historic square in Buenos Aires on which
stands Government House, commonly called
the Casa Rosada. They will continue to do so
until the end of their days. They know that
there is no hope, but still they refuse to accept
that their children are dead. They are not seeking
compensation. They are making a protest that is
absolute and unending. It is almost as if their
grief is keeping them alive.
This indomitable movement began on the
day in 1977 when fourteen mothers of young
desaparecidos met in the Plaza de Mayo to hand
a petition to the then President of Argentina,
General Jorge Rafael Videla. They wanted to
know what had happened to their children, who
had been kidnapped by mysterious armed com¬
mandos. A year before, the army had over¬
thrown Isabel Perón. A government minister,
López Rega, had created the "Triple A", para¬
military forces that were schooled in torture. The
officers who established the dictatorship took
over this organization from López Rega and, so
to speak, improved it.
The torturers of the infamous Naval
Mechanics School had a weakness for young
pregnant women. Babies born in prison were
often given or sold to military families. The
perpetrators of these grim practices entered an
area of darkness from which there was no return.
By refusing to forgive them today, the Mothers
are quite aware of what they are doing. Human
errors can be pardoned; what is beyond the
frontiers of humanity cannot.
By confronting Videla and demonstrating
in front of the Casa Rosada, the women also
crossed a point of no-return, but in the other
direction. Their experience of horror gave them
superhuman courage. What did death-threats
matter to them? They knew very well and the
memory of their disemboweled daughters
reminded them of it at every moment that to
be a woman was no protection. In fact, some of
them would pay for their courage with their
lives. Azucena Villaflor de Vicenti, for example,
the instigator of the movement, was arrested
and never seen again. In the intervals between
beating them up and setting police dogs on

them, the soldiers ridiculed the women and said



they were "mad". How could they guess that
these "madwomen" would still be going round
the square eighteen years later?
"We do not go round in circles," says Hebe
Bonafini, the movement's guiding spirit. "We
march." It was the police who unwittingly gave
them the idea of walking round the pyramid
on the Plaza de Mayo. The Mothers had grown
used to meeting at the same place in the square
until one day the police ordered them to "move
on". The Mothers took the order literally and
have never stopped "moving" since. They also
showed their sense of humour whenever a
policeman demanded to see a woman's papers.
On these occasions, 300 women would step
forward, and the man would have to give up. If
it looked as if one woman was going to be
arrested, the others would demand to go with
her. Once in prison, they would start to pray, or
rather yell out prayers calling on God to vent his
wrath on their persecutors.
ies to life
Hebe Bonafini explains why the women march
in circles. "How else should the Mothers
march?" she asks "than round like their bellies
and the world through which their protest
echoes." Since the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo
were awarded the Sakharov Prize their example
has been followed by mothers in many other
countries: by Sicilian mothers fighting against
the Mafia, by Spanish mothers fighting against
drugs, by Ukrainian victims of Chernobyl, and
by Palestinian, Israeli and Yugoslav mothers
who reject war. All these women reconstitute the
symbolic circle of the cycle of life as opposed to
the straight lines of military parades.
The Mothers have resisted all kinds of bland¬
ishments and lies. These housewives, many from
poor families, might have been thought naive
whereas in fact they have a fierce intelligence.
When timid or conniving politicians made vague
i* p> * N v * / v ' V v
UN IftDR
i7[J5;3D.GpÛ>JL5fÎPRRtaDD5;
. MRDRE5 «: PLRZfl Df JiifX^ -
Left and below, a demonstration
in September 1983.


"Our children now live within
us. It is they who have brought
us into the world."
promises to look for their children, they saw the
reality of the concentration camps where those
children had been tortured. They were under no
illusions. During the dictatorship, in 1979, they
saw immediately that a visit by representatives of
the OAS (Organization of American States)
would not only be fruitless but would actually
make the situation worse. During the Falklands
War they were among the first to realize that the
military were playing on patriotic fervour to
dupe the people, just as they had by staging the
World Soccer Cup in Argentina in 1978.
After the fall of the junta, they understood
that they could expect nothing concrete from
President Raúl Alfonsín. Today, when a wave of
public confessions by the torturers, begun by
Captain Scilingo, is being continued by offi¬
cers who admit to the crimes committed under


the dictatorship, the Mothers know they should
not be satisfied with a list of the desaparecidos
nor conclude that they are all dead.
"We know that there were thirty thousand of
them," says one of the women, "and we know
all their names. Every mother knows who
arrested her child. What we want is a list of the
murderers and executioners and life imprison¬
ment for those who are still free. The govern¬
ment is hiding the truth from us. We don't really
want to know whether they died under torture
or were drowned with a stone tied to their feet.
Our children now live within us. It is they who
24
have brought us into the world; they have
become our fathers and mothers. If we want to
know what happened to our children, it is only
to punish their killers."
The refusal to forgive has become an accep¬
tance of life. These women, changed by suffering
into artists and poets, have invented an expression
that is absurdly and terribly beautiful, "Living
apparitions". They do not want piles of bones and
lists of bodies. They want justice. They know by
heart all the legal arguments and know, for
example, that while murder may be subject to pre¬
scription, illegal detention is a permanent viola¬
tion of human rights and is imprescriptible.
Accepting that their children are dead would be
tantamount to accepting el Punto Final (the Full
Stop), the name of the amnesty law voted under
the Alfonsín presidency. Calling off their protest
would mean that death had won.
The women live with an intensity and a
detachment that are impossible for others to
imagine because shared suffering has welded
them into a group. Initially they wore baby
clothes on their heads to help them to recognize
each other. These wounded lionesses have gone
far beyond individual suffering. Once each
mother marched with the photo of her own child.
Now they carry any picket sign, irrespective of
the photo on it. They are universal mothers.
When Scilingo revealed that priests were
taken along on the navy planes from which
naked and drugged prisoners were dropped into
the Rio de la Plata, the Mothers marched to the
cathedral and chanted an extraordinary but pro¬
foundly religious litany. While one of them
recited the list of the bishops and priests who had
collaborated with the dictatorship everyone
knows who they are they responded in chorus
after each name, "Lord, do not forgive them, for
they acted in Thy name! "
Other Mothers have taken a new path but
with the same goal of serving the forces of life.
In fact these Mothers are Grandmothers who
have sworn to trace their grandchildren who
were given to military families. Of 500 children
who disappeared in this way, they have already
found about fifty. Their leader, Estella Barnes de
Carlotto, explains that only 200 families have
formally asked for a search to be made. The
others are afraid. But the Grandmothers possess
an extremely powerful weapon in the National
Bank of Genetic Fingerprinting, where Ana
Maria Di Leonardo has recorded the genetic
identity of 170 family groups with a child or
newborn baby who disappeared. The genetic
chain is another woman's weapon, another end¬
less circle.
