
COMMENTARY BY FEDER ! CO MAYOR
SCIENCE
THAT MUST
BE SHARED
Science is a product of intellectual work by persons
trained in reflection and analysis to venture beyond
what is already known. This exercise in thinking
requires a minimum number of conditions, the
most important of which under present circum-
stances is freedom. For although scientific progress
was possible in the past when political and social
contexts were under threat, the growing com-
plexity of research and scientific development
today require a high level of freedom in order to
keep moving forward. As a result, the future of sci-
ence is closely bound up with the advance of
democracy and respect for values conducive to the
free circulation and discussion of ideas.
Contrary to the fears of Alexis de Tocqueville
and other nineteenth-century thinkers, democ-
racy has not built a kingdom of mediocrity inim-
ical to the development of higher forms of art and
science. Rather, the opposite has occurred. The
vitality and creative force of democratic society-
in which the state is secular, powers are separated
and all ideas are subject to debate-have turned
out to be much greater than its early critics imag-
ined. These qualities have not only enabled it to
surmount the danger posed by various forms of
totalitarianism but also to promote unprecedented
cultural and economic development.
An unexpected turn of events
However, on the threshold of the twenty-first
century, the nature of the challenges and threats
with which democracy has to cope is changing.
Since 1989, the end of the Cold War has given new
emphasis, and in some cases greater virulence, to
old disputes of ethnic or religious origin that had
survived under wraps in the shadow of the East-
West confrontation. It is quite clear that they are
not the consequences of freedom but the result
of many years of oppression. The triumph of
democratic principles in Eastern Europe, the
break-up of the Soviet empire and the nuclear
weapons reduction agreements have opened up
broad vistas of peace while at the same time
releasing resentments and twisted perceptions
long harboured in the secret places of the heart.
The countries of the free world had prepared
for war, but not for peace. They were surprised
when the course of events diverged from what
the prophets of doom had predicted. The iron
curtain was soon a thing of the past ; peace was
achieved in Namibia, El Salvador, Mozambique,
the Middle East and South Africa. Conflicts were
no longer international but intranational. The
threats to security are now poverty, the unbal-
anced distribution of resources, runaway popula-
tion growth, massive emigration and social injus-
tices that create reactions of rejection.
This turnaround caught out some countries.
which had little inclination to take radical deci-
sions, looked no further than the next elections
and regarded any reference to future generations
as an irritation. Their budgetary and productive
priorities, social organization and defence struc-
ture are geared to the threats of the past but are
unsuitable for tackling the problems of the future.
The examples of Bosnia, Somalia and Rwanda
underscore the inability of the international com-
munity to solve new,"low-intensity"post-Cold
War conflicts.
An intolerable situation
The individual and collective violence that consti-
tute the seedbed of war can take many different
forms. In politics it manifests itself as oppression
and tyranny ; in economics, as exploitation and des-
titution ; and in society, as exclusion and intolerance.
Every effort to establish a culture of peace must
take into account these deep roots of human con-
flict and give priority to the transmission of values,
the forging of attitudes and the drafting of legal pro-
visions to replace those of the declining culture of
war. The pillars of this undertaking are education
and development, which make it possible to elimi-
nate the most dehumanizing aspects of extreme
poverty, and to contribute to the elimination of dis-
crimination and the establishment of governments
that respect the will of the people and the agree-
ments they have entered into. Twenty years ago, in
1974, the industrialized countries undertook to
promote the development of the less privileged
countries by allocating to them 0. 7 per cent of their
GDP (keeping 99. 3 per cent for themselves !). With
a few praiseworthy exceptions-the Nordic coun-
tries in particular-they have not honoured their
undertaking.
Worse still, the meagre"development assis-
'"
N. Q
o"-
I

tance"on offer sometimes included military equip-
ment. As a result, there has been no endogenous
development in most of the countries in question.
Foreign debt and the maroeconomic structures put
in place have led to an intolerable situation that has
nevertheless been tolerated for years : the poor
countries are paying the rich ! Millions of people
drawn by"city lights"are fleeing the poverty of
rural areas to go and live in the squalid, crowded
solitude of the major urban centres. One day, help-
less and desperate, they will head north. How easy
and wrong it is to deplore radicalism and extremism
where poverty, marginalization, exclusion and
ignorance have been allowed to proliferate.
The idea that development is synonymous
with economic growth has long been superseded.
Nowadays, the ethical and social problems arising
from scientific and technological progress brook
neither delay nor evasion. When UNESCO speaks
of the need for development with a human face-
integrated, endogenous, sustainable, supportive
and environment-friendly-it is merely com-
plying with one of its basic precepts : the duty to
act as the conscience of the United Nations
system in a world that hesitates, in the presence of
powerful interests and forces of inertia, to take the
new directions that, at the dawn of a new millen-
nium, are morally inescapable.
The responsibilities of the scientist
Scientific knowledge in the basic disciplines
(mathematics, physics, chemistry and biology) is
now centred on half a dozen lines of inquiry that
will certainly change the character of society in the
twenty-first century. Broadly speaking, this work
is organized around ecological problems and the
search for alternative sources of energy ; optic
fibres and superconductors ; lasers and work
relating to space technology ; and research in
biology, especially genetics and biotechnology.
Those who are taking scientific knowledge for-
ward in these areas, like many of their colleagues
working in other sectors, bear the awesome respon-
sibility of informing public opinion and those who
shape it about the potential risks of the application
of knowledge, and of explaining the constantly
changing instruments that science devises to cope
with those difficulties. But if the scientists'words
are to fall on receptive ears and their conclusions on
fertile soil, steps must be taken to strengthen
exchanges of communication and influence
between the centres of knowledge and power, and
between researchers and leaders in all political and
social spheres, especially at municipal level.
While municipal and regional authorities have
in the past needed architects, hydraulic engineers
and communication experts, from now on they
will also need the services of environmental spe-
cialists to help them preserve soil quality (through
the appropriate"scientific"use of artificial fertil-
izers), to encourage the recycling of natural prod-
ucts and improve public health by suitable waste
processing, to avoid air and water pollution, to
protect biological diversity and to safeguard the
historical heritage. This aspect of the scientist's
task is particularly urgent in the most highly devel-
oped countries which, in almost direct proportion
to their productive capacity, are the greatest pro-
ducers of toxic wastes.
One of the tragedies of the contemporary
world is the dearth of activity in applied science
compared with the enormous volume of accu-
mulated theoretical knowledge. Laboratories and
universities in the industrialized world are
bursting with knowledge that could alleviate the
misery of millions of human beings, but the means
of applying that knowledge are not available,
although the more discerning countries are begin-
ning to realize that, in the final analysis, their own
security is at stake. For example, there is no AZT
for many Aids sufferers in Africa. Imagine the
sense of injustice and marginalization that these
patients for whom there is no medicine must feel.
If I have dwelt on the social impact of scien-
tific work, it is because I am convinced that this is
one of the decisive parameters of the century that
is about to begin, because I believe that there are
solutions that can be applied. When my official
responsibilities take me to a school in the heart of
the African forest, a research centre in Siberia or
an archaeological site in South America, I always
meet enthusiastic young people who are giving of
their best-sometimes under conditions of
extreme hardship-in order to secure peace and
collective welfare. These young people look to the
"intellectual and moral solidarity"enshrined in
UNESCO's Constitution as the key to human dig-
nity. For this reason, I repeat on each of my jour-
neys that"there is only one really pressing need,
and that is to share". It is the saying that one of the
great religious figures of our time, Abbe Pierre,
keeps on his modest desk and it is a motto that
should govern our daily life.
Of the principles proclaimed by the French
Revolution in 1789-Liberty, Equality, Fraternity-
the first inspired the great political and social trans-
formations of the nineteenth century while the
second, the egalitarian ideal, dominated the twen-
tieth century after the Russian Revolution. But the
culture of war in which they developed prevented
them from producing all the benefits that had been
anticipated. Let us strive, with scientists in the van-
guard, to make the third of those principles, Fra-
ternity, the historic driving force of the twenty-first
century, the mobilizing ideal of the culture of peace,
whose first page is waiting impatiently for us to
trace the outline, in unison throughout the world,
of the most novel yet ancient solution of all times,
the only one on which we will be judged at the end
of the day : love. N
