Messengers of light: Chinese Buddhist
pilgrims in India
by Paul Magnin
wmm
Chinese monks embarked on a long and arduous journey
when they sought instruction at the welisprings of Buddhism
24
I When Chinese Buddhist pilgrims set out
* for India on the "Western journey"
the title many of them gave to the record they
kept of their travels they could choose between
three overland routes and a sea-route. Two of the
overland routes passed through central Asia
and corresponded to what since the nineteenth
century has been widely known as the Silk
Road, a portmanteau term used to describe the
east-west trade routes that traversed the region.
After crossing part of the arid Gobi Desert, the
pilgrims had to choose between a northern and
a southern route in order to avoid crossing the
vast basin formed by the swampy regions of
Lobnor, the Tarim Basin and the Taklamakan
desert, which was notorious for its shifting
sands.
The northern route skirted the Celestial
Mountains (Tianshan) whose highest peaks were
some 7,000 metres above sea level. This route
took the pilgrims through staging-points and
oases as far as Kashgar, which controlled access
to the routes leading westwards to Ferghana
and thence to Samarkand or the southwest.
After leaving Kashgar, the pilgrims had to cross'
the Pamir mountains, the steep passes of the
Karakoram range, Gilgit and the high valley of
the Indus, before crossing the Burzil pass (over
4,000 metres high) on the road to what is now
Srinagar, or skirting the Indus gorges and the
Kagan valley to the city now known as Islam¬
abad. Next they travelled through Kashmir into
northern India and the central basin of the
Ganges where most of the great Buddhist sites

Above, Lake Dal, near
Srinagar, capital of the Indian
state of Jammu and Kashmir. In
background, the rugged slopes
of the Himalayas.
Right, a 10th-century painting
on paper showing the famous
Chinese Buddhist pilgrim,
Huanzang (596-664). The
painting originated from the
Buddhist cave-temples of
Dunhuang, hewn out of the
cliffs in China's Gansu province.
associated with the life of the Buddha and the
first Buddhist communities are situated.
For the sake of simplicity, let us follow each
of the major routes through central Asia by
retracing the steps of a famous Chinese pilgrim:
Huanzang for the northern route, Faxian for the
southern route, and Yijing for the sea route.
Judging by their respective travel diaries, the
principal mission of the three monks was to col¬
lect all the written and oral traditions, canonical
or legendary, which could add to their knowledge
of the Buddha's teachings and Buddhist religious
practices, with a view to their use in China. This
primary concern did not prevent them from
observing the geography, the customs and behav¬
iour of the many kingdoms through which they
passed. Wishing to serve Buddha with the greatest
possible detachment, they also became histo¬
rians, geographers and sociologists.
raxian's fifteen-year journey
Faxian (334-420) made a journey that marked
the high point of the first wave of Chinese pil¬
grims in India. He left China in 399 and returned
in 414. At this time Chinese Buddhists were
searching for their identity. No longer satisfied
with the incomplete and ambiguous texts which
often came into their hands during the first cen¬
turies of the spreading of the "new religion",
they felt a growing need to set out in search of
texts that formed part of the Buddhist canon rec¬
ognized by monks living in the land of the
Buddha's birthplace.
Familiar with all the mysteries of the Bud¬
dhist doctrine, Faxian discovered that the texts
belonging to the monks and faithful scholars
had been scattered and mutilated as a result of
quarrels between the small kingdoms of central
Asia, the inevitable route which ideas circu¬
lating between the West and China had to take.
Most of Faxian's journal, entitled Foguoji ("An
account of Buddhist Kingdoms"), described
Buddhist rituals and ethics as he saw them. He
also interpreted the basic notions of Buddhist
teaching. Most of all Faxian wished to obtain a



complete set of the Buddhist rules of discipline,
or vinayas, which were sorely missing in China
when he began his journey.
Thanks to the efforts of Faxian and other for¬
eign pilgrims and monks who arrived in China
around the same time as he returned there, at
the beginning of the fifth century Chinese monks
had access to vinayas of all the main schools of
Indian Buddhism, to the founding sutras the
Lotus, Vimalakirti and Nirvana sutras and also
to the Amitabha Sutra, the fundamental scripture
of the Pure Land Buddhist faith, and the Perfec¬
tion of Wisdom sutra, from which the whole of
Chinese Buddhism would draw inspiration.
H uanzang, the prodigal monk
Huanzang (596-664), who went to India in 629
by the route running north of the Taklamakan
desert, is the best-known of all Chinese pil¬
grims. His fame is not only due to his great
record of his travels, which has been translated
into several Western languages, but also to Wu
Cheng'en's novel, published around 1570 in the
Ming Dynasty under the title Hiyouji ("Journey
to the West"), which recounted the imaginary
adventures of Huanzang and his strange com¬
panion, the monkey king Sun Wukong.
A native of Henan province, Huanzang took
the vows at a monastery in Luoyang when he
was thirteen years old. Famed for his erudition,
he was extremely aware of the ambiguities and
contradictions in the Buddhist texts used in the
monasteries. To solve the problems involved in
understanding these texts, he decided to go to
India. In 629, without a travel permit from the
Emperor, he left Chang'an by stealth and set out
on the longest route that a pilgrim had hitherto
taken.
Between 635 and 641, Huanzang travelled
through India, visiting all the great Buddhist
sanctuaries and teaching the doctrine of
Mahayana (or "Great Vehicle") Buddhism. In
643, he decided to return to China by way of the
Pamir mountains and the route running south of
the Taklamakan desert. In 645 he arrived at the
gates of Chang'an, the T'ang capital, where he
received a tumultuous welcome from the pop¬
ulation. With him was a twenty-horse caravan
laden with texts, relics and icons destined to
25

While almost a hundred
Chinese Buddhist pilgrims
travelled to India, a number of
Indian masters journeyed in the
opposite direction in order to
spread Buddhism In China. One
of the best known of them was
Bodhidharma (right), who
reached Canton around 526.
Here he Is seen crossing the
Yangtze on a reed.
26
enlighten the minds of his contemporaries and
to increase their faith.
Not only did Emperor Taizong of the Tang
Dynasty forgive Huanzang for having left the
country without a travel permit, he assigned him
a team of collaborators, including the prime min¬
ister and several high officials, with instructions to
translate the mass of Sanskrit Buddhist texts the
pilgrim had brought back. The emperor appointed
him Grand Master of the Temple of Benevolence
(Ci'en si), which was inaugurated in 648, and
organized a magnificent ceremony at court to cel¬
ebrate the event. It was on Huanzang's advice
that the famous Pagoda of the Wild Goose was
built in 652 to house all the Buddhist texts.
An influential figure in the history of Chi¬
nese Buddhism (he was responsible for around a
quarter of all the translations of Sanskrit texts
into Chinese), Huanzang was also the author of an
important book, "Memoirs on the western regions
during the period of the great Tang dynasty",
which presented a wealth of detailed and precise
data about the regions he had visited their phys¬
ical and human geography, their customs and eco¬
nomic life, and the situation of the Buddhist com¬
munities there. Huanzang also bequeathed to the
Chinese the manuscript of a fine metaphysical
and epistemological treatise, Yogacaryabhu-
misastra ("The Lands of the Yoga Masters").
Yijing's passage to India
The third great Chinese pilgrim to India was
Yijing (635-713), who travelled there by boat.
His journal is interesting for other reasons than
those of his eminent predecessors in that he



described the practical rules and institutions of
Buddhist communities not only in India
(although he went no further westward than
Benares), but above all in southeast Asia, part of
which was under the domination of the Sailendra
dynasty based at Srivijaya. It was this dynasty
which produced the magnificent sculptures of
Borobudur in Java.
Yijing recorded all his observations in his
Nanhai jigui neifa zhuan ("Account of Bud¬
dhism, sent from the South Seas"). This book
and his "Memoirs" (see box below) should not
make us forget that Yijing is also credited with
the translation of more than fifty texts and that
he introduced to the Chinese the longest and
most detailed of the codes of discipline, the
vinaya of the Mulasarvastivadin.
Yijing seems to have wanted to clear away
any ambiguities that may have surrounded the
pilgrims' intentions. "We are not looking for
personal gratification," he wrote, "nor are we
asking Heaven for posthumous glory. We have
sworn to sacrifice this body exposed to dan¬
gers in order to search for the victorious doc¬
trine. We all hope to satisfy our passion for
spreading the Light."
Indifferent to honours and high living
though they were, pilgrims still needed basic
provisions. They took with them objects and

food products that could be exchanged en route.
Many received substantial allowances from gen¬
erous donors. Once equipped, they had to be
prepared to face up to many natural hazards, dif¬
ficult situations arising from revolts and wars
between the different regions and kingdoms
through which they traveled, as well as sick¬
ness, which claimed the lives of many of them
and to which the youngest were not always the
most immune. All these difficulties and risks
were well known. The pressures on potential pil¬
grims were so great that some gave up at the last
minute before setting out, while others dropped
out before reaching their destination.



Places of worship and study
Chinese pilgrims stayed in India for a long
period because they had so much to do and so
many sites to visit as they followed in the
Buddha's footsteps. Four holy places held par¬
ticularly strong claims to their veneration.
They visited the Buddha's birthplace, in the
Lumbini Park at Kapilavastu, where the cele¬
bration of his birth took place on the eighth
day of the fourth month. Kapilavastu was also
associated with the memory of the departure of
the future Buddha when he stealthily left his
family in order to seek the Way, an event cele¬
brated on the eighth day of the second month.
The third celebration was held on the 15th of the
first month to venerate "Setting in Motion the
Wheel of the Truth" in the Deer Park, Mgr-
dava, northwest of Benares and now called Sar-
nath. It was there that the Buddha, shortly after
his Enlightenment at Uruvcla under the Bodhi
tree, presented the essence of his experience of
the Four Noble Truths to the five companions
who had followed him in his life as a wandering
ascetic. The fourth event, celebrated on the 15th
of the second month, marked the Buddha's
entry into complete extinction, parinirvana, in
the woods of Sala.
Many Chinese monks also visited Nalanda,
the chief centre for training in monastic life and
the study of Buddhist texts. Yijing gave the Chi¬
nese a detailed description of it and suggested
that they should build an imitation.
When they reached these sites associated
with so many historical and sacred events, the
pilgrims performed all kinds of rituals to express
their veneration. Yijing's own conduct was an
example of what the pilgrims achieved as they
followed in the Buddha's footsteps.
One highly important aspect of the pilgrimage
of Chinese monks to India that should not be for¬
gotten is their quest for instruction by the best
teachers, who could help them to achieve perfect
understanding of the texts of the different schools
of Buddhism. In order to derive as much benefit
as possible from this teaching, many of the pil¬
grims studied Sanskrit so successfully that they
won the acclaim of the Indian monks. After they
had been in India for a time, many Chinese pil¬
grims were invited to preach and expound the
great Buddhist texts in the local language. Kings,
princes and the superiors of large monasteries
organized important ceremonies at which the
pilgrims preached.
The temple at Budd Gaya in
India's Bihar state, one of the
holiest places in Buddhism. It
was there that Gautama
attained enlightenment and
became the Buddha after
meditating beneath a tree.
PAUL MAGNIN,
of France, is a research director
at his country's National Centre
for Scientific Research (CNRS) In
Paris. He is a specialist in
Chinese Buddhism and the
history of Chinese thought and
has published many studies and
articles in these fields.
27
