Mussolini's statement that
"cinema is the strongest
weapon" dominates the
inauguration of Cinecittà in
1937.



Cinecittà
The U.S director Mervyn
LeRoy's blockbuster
Quo Vadis? (1951)
being shot at Cinecittà.
rancesco Bono
The roller-coaster history of the
legendary Italian studios
tea
Francesco Bono,
an Italian film critic, is a
specialist in the cinema
of northern and central
Europe. Among his
published works are
Dansk Film (1993,
"Danish Film") and (as
co-editor) Nordic
Television History,
Politics andAesthetics
(1994).
During the night of 26 September
1935, a terrible fire destroyed the
Rome studios of Cines, then
Italy's biggest film company. It
was immediately decided to
build a new "cinema city" called Cinecittà.
The creation of Cinecittà was part of a
wide-ranging plan to promote the Italian
cinema implemented by the Fascist regime
from the beginning of the 1930s onwards.
To encourage production, it was decided in
1931 to institute a state subsidy system
whereby all Italian films would receive a 10
per cent bonus on their takings. In 1932 the
Venice International Film Festival was estab¬
lished; it remains one of the most important
such events in the world. In 1935 the film
school, Centro Sperimentale di Cine¬
matografía, went into operation. The cinema
was intended to promote the image of the
regime both at home and abroad. Mussolini
proclaimed the cinema to be "the strongest
weapon".
After building work lasting a mere 475
days on a site near Rome, Cinecittà was inau¬
gurated by II Duce on 28 April 1937. Italy's
replica of Hollywood was intended to mark
the beginning of a new era in the Italian
cinema. Between 1937 and 1939, some sixty
films were made at the studios by some of
Italy's finest directors and actors, from
Alessandro Blasetti and Roberto Rossellini
to Alida Valli and Vittorio DeSica. At the

beginning of the 1940s, over 100 films a year
were being made in Italy.
With the fall of Fascism in 1943, film
production came to a halt. German troops
smashed and looted the studios, which were
bombed by the Allies the following year. At
the end of the war, the only place where
films could be shot was in the streets: this
marked the beginning of the unique period
of neorealism.



HOllywOOd-On-Tiber But Cinecittà
rose from the ashes and became a veri¬
table legend, which from 1951 on spread
from Italy throughout the world. With the
help of a favourable exchange rate and cheap,
high-quality labour, the Americans took
over Cinecittà. The studios became an ideal
place to shoot the superproductions with
which Hollywood was trying to answer the
challenge of television. The first director to
come to Cinecittà from the United States
was Henry King, who shot Prince of Foxes
there with Tyrone Power and Orson Welles.
Two years later Mervyn LeRoy made Quo
Vadis? with Robert Taylor and Deborah
Kerr.
By the mid-1950s Cinecittà swarmed
with big international stars like Gregory
Peck, Rock Hudson, Ava Gardner, Elizabeth
Taylor, Kirk Douglas, John Wayne, Audrey
Hepburn and Jennifer Jones. Their high
jinks, brawls and love affairs were the talk of
the town. But American film-makers also
gave Cinecittà a strong sense of profession¬
alism and organization. It took Joseph L.
Mankiewicz two weeks to shoot the tri¬
umph scene in Cleopatra. The chariot race in
William Wyler's Ben Hur required three
months' work. The Egyptian port of
Alexandria was entirely reconstructed in
Torre Astura, a few kilometres from Rome.
In all, Hollywood companies produced
twenty-seven films at Cinecittà between 1950
and 1965, including such spectacular and
unforgettable movies as Charles Vidor's A
Farewell to Arms, William Wyler's Roman
Holiday, Anthony Mann's The Fall of the
Roman Empire and King Vidor's War and
Peace. It was the years of dolce vita enjoyed
by top people in Hollywood on the Tiber
that Federico Fellini immortalized in his
1960 film of the same name a partly critical,
partly affectionate portrait of a fleeting
period of wild living.
The television era In the mid-
1960s, Cinecittà suddenly woke up to
the fact that it was in the middle of a crisis.
The Americans had pulled out, and the reign
of the superproduction was over. Ever-
mounting competition from television cut
directors' ambitions down to size labour
costs were by then the same as in Holly¬
wood. An epoch was drawing to a close: sets
were dismantled, and dummy forums and
temples carted away. As Cinecittà's debts spi¬
ralled out of control, making renovation
impossible, it entered a dark period of its
history, even though a number of presti¬
gious films were still made there, including
Fellini's Satyricon (1969) and City of Women
(1980), and Luchino Visconti's The
Damned (1969) and Ludwig (1972). These
difficult years for Cinecittà partly coincided
with a world crisis in the film industry.
An upturn came at the beginning of the
Federico Fellini on set 1980s following the sale of a huge piece of
during the shooting of land owned by Cinecittà. In 1983 Sergio
La voce dellajuna Leone shot Once upon a Time in America,
and in 1987 Bernardo Bertolucci recreated the
Beijing of the interwar years for The Last
Emperor (which won nine Academy
Awards). Non-Italian film-makers started
coming back to Cinecittà. Johannes Schaaf's
Momo was made there, as was Jean-Jacques
Annaud's The Name of the Rose. Fellini,
who had always felt at home in Cinecittà,
paid a movingly melancholy tribute to the
studios with his 1987 film, Intervista.
Down the years Cinecittà has changed
considerably. Television companies now
occupy its biggest stages, from which live
shows and quiz games are beamed to millions
of households. And teenagers, whose knowl¬
edge of the cinema derives mainly from their
video recorders, queue up at its gates in the
hope of making a career in television.
(1990).
g
