silver-screen
symphony
by Elie Faure
Elie Faure (1873-1937) was one of the great j ^ NEW ART
art critics of the twentieth century. An ardent
humanist who believed in the unity of the
universe, of humanity and of art, he had an
all-encompassing vision of art, in which he
saw parallels between works of different
periods and cultures. The article published
here, written in 1937, is his response to a
survey on the intellectual role of the cinema
carried out by the International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation (IIIC), the
forerunner of Unesco.
Whether a film be good or bad,
whether it be fiction, science or doc¬
umentary, the informed observer cannot
fail to detect in it the characteristic features
of an absolutely distinctive art form, a
form emerging, it should be noted, at a
time when the most varied or successive
cultures seemed nearly to have exhausted
those forms of expression whereby they
had been handed down to us. By a neces¬
sary coming together that might be called a
coincidence, were it not for the fact that
the machine civilization which engendered
the cinema had not at the same time
brought face to face various ideas and
values, motion pictures came into being at
the very moment when art forms quite
unfamiliar to us Cambodian, Javanese
and Mexican architecture and sculpture and
especially African and Polynesian carv¬
ings came along to overturn our most
firmly established aesthetic concepts and
hence to sow the seeds of doubt and
anguish in our hearts and minds. It was
also the moment when, for the same rea¬
sons, an immense task of destruction and

DOCUMENT
reconstruction was under way in minds
shaped by economics, replacing, among
most of the so-called civilized peoples and
in all fields of thought and action, the con¬
cepts of individual aptitudes and aims with
the concept of forces and of needs awaiting
fulfilment.
There ensued a renewed, if not indeed
new, and pressing demand for forms of
expression to be devised in response to these
needs and forces. The cinema, the offspring
of scientific culture and technical develop¬
ment, offered itself as a natural means of
meeting that demand, just as music and
dance offered themselves to primitive peo¬
ples as a way of expressing the culture of
myths and as architecture offered itself to
the great religious syntheses Brahmanism,
Buddhism, Christianity, Islam to express
the social culture of which they are the sub¬
limated manifestation.
A symphonic mode of expression
The cinema does indeed display all the
social features that medieval Christian
architecture to take the closest and most
recent example of an endeavour to achieve
what I would call a symphonic mode of
expression offered for unanimous accep¬
tance by the multitudes. The cinema is
anonymous, like architecture, and like
architecture it addresses all possible specta¬
tors, regardless of age, gender or country,
by the universality of its language, the
countless places where the same film is or
can be shown. It too is obliged, in order to
construct its buildings, to marshal financial
and organizational resources that are
beyond, overwhelmingly beyond, the
capacity of the individual. It too can appeal
only to rather general, rather simple senti¬
ments in order to gain the immediate
acceptance of all. The means employed in
architecture are similar to those of the
cinema, by which I mean that nearly every
trade is or may be involved: on the one
hand the stonecutter and the stonemason,
the labourer and the glazier, the plumber
and the smith, the painter and the master
builder; on the other, the wardrobe mis¬
tress and the set designer, the electrician and
the cameraman, the extra and the effects
man, the director and the actor. An analogy
to the standardization of film stock can
easily be found in the flying buttress or the
rib vault, the principle of which remained
unchanged throughout Christendom for
two centuries. In the social context, the
replacement of the feudal system by the
towns and guilds is strikingly paralleled by
the growth of trades unions and the
gradual collectivization of the ownership
of the means of exchange and production.
Moreover, a good film may be com¬
pared, by virtue of the musical quality of
its rhythm and of the sense of communion
required of its audience, to the ceremony
of the mass, and it may likewise be com¬
pared, by virtue of the universality of the
sensations it evokes and the feelings it stirs,
to the "mystery" that filled the cathedral
with throngs of worshippers drawn from
every corner of the city and its environs.
The cinema is today the most "catholic" of
the means of expression that the evolution
of ideas and of technology has placed at
man's disposal.
3Iind and machine
Considering the technical nature of all the
processes the cinema employs in order to
reach its audience, are we entitled to confer
upon it the status of an art a status which
it should possess if it really seeks to express
the sentimental aspirations and lyrical out¬
pourings of the multitudes? We certainly
are. Just as very many empirical but never¬
theless very rigorous sciences went into the
building of the cathedrals and the Egyptian
or Greek temples, many exact sciences and
precision techniques underlie and are
employed in film-making.
I must admit I fail to understand for
what transcendent, or for that matter prac¬
tical, reasons this subordination of the
most complex feelings and psychological
nuances to the revelations and demands of
the machine for recording images should
present an insurmountable obstacle to the
emotions of the audience, when the T-
square, compasses and plumbline did not
prevent Athenians from admiring the
proportions and the play of light within
the perfect rectangle described by the
Parthenon, and led the eyes of Christians
to follow the stone ribbing that lent a
musical cadence to the high, shadowed
vaulting of the transept of the cathedral of
Notre Dame in Soissons. Is not the corre¬
spondence between the rhythms that rule
the vegetative functions of life and the
mathematical laws that govern the universe
of stars and molecules the most reliable
guarantee of the aesthetic and moral value
of that which brings us together in the
loftiest communion? Is there, apart from
the human voice and dance, any other
direct means of communication between
artists and those they seek to impress? Is
there not always something, some man-
made tool, that intervenes between the
object represented and its representation
the sculptor's chisel and calliper, the
painter's canvas, brush and paints, and the
writer's pen, ink and paper? Music, whose
harmonic texture corresponds to sensa¬
tions that may be transposed into the
Portrait of Elie Faure
(1873-1937)
by Picasso
(lead pencil, 1922).

DOCUMENT-
mathematical ratios of the keyboard, never
reaches the listener except via some
"machine" that reproduces those ratios
very accurately, and sometimes via a very
large number of extremely varied instru¬
ments to which the same sets of symbols
inflexibly dictate the incredible complexity
of the orchestral composition.
The cine camera, too, is only an inter¬
mediary between the infinitely varied and
prodigiously complex spectacle unfolding
before it and the cameraman behind it. The
human mind, let us not forget, the mind
that built the camera and all the rest of the
equipment, the artificial light sources in
particular, is constantly called in to discard,
arrange, compose and subordinate one to
another all the elements that go to make up
the poem. As Pascal said of the tennis ball,
some place it better than others.
II. A LANGUAGE WITH
LIMITLESS POWERS
The cinema records images mechanically, it
goes without saying, but who, if not
human beings, selects and arranges those
images? Whilst the cinema, thanks to its
capacity for reproducing gradations of
light or form too subtle to be apprehended
directly by the naked eye, reveals to us a
whole world of harmonies hitherto unseen
and often unsuspected by that eye, which
sees only those harmonies, it may serve,
for the brain for which it is the interme¬
diary, as the point of departure for the dis¬
covery of unfamiliar relationships between
objects and hence an inexhaustible source
of new images and ideas for the keen imag¬
ination and lyrical sense.
The emergence of an unsuspected
universe
Cinema's great contribution has been to
demonstrate to us, by exclusively technical
means, the "scientific" or if you wish
strictly objective nature of the affinities of
colour and analogies of form caught by a
few artists (I am thinking of Velasquez,
Vcrmeer, Georges de la Tour, Goya, even
Manet) of whose vision we are reminded
by certain filmsThe Mark of Zorro}
Underworld2 and a few others a vision so
personal that the number of film-goers
capable of taking it in is scarcely greater
than the number of those who communi¬
cate it to us. Could it not be said that
Hindu and Khmer sculpture, and the
paintings of Tintoretto, Rubens and
Delacroix, for example, seem to prefigure
the art of recording volumes in movement
on film, by virtue of the new spaces they
reveal to us, their daring angles of view,
their dramatic handling of relief,
chiaroscuro and surfaces that twist and
turn, appear and disappear? Or that the
Egyptians, in the way they modulated
light to bring out the undulating, subtle
transitions from the background up to and
into the profiles, were the forerunners of
that continuity in the luminous and
microscopically close-up vision of the
world that cinema achieves, at least for
those that have eyes to see?
Basically, the great artists of the past
played the same role in the aesthetic sphere
as the Greek philosophers played in the
intellectual, and the Old Testament
prophets in the moral. They were vision¬
aries. They deciphered with ease, in a book
invisible to others, a reality that the cinema
unfolds before us with the simplicity of
childhood and the precision of arithmetic.
The miracle of cinema is that the revelations
it offers us advance in step with the auto¬
matic process of its own development. Its
discoveries are an education for us and dic¬
tate the way we work. "Slow motion", for
instance, has drawn a whole unsuspected
world out of the murk of invisibility.
Thanks to it alone we have learned of the
meticulous precautions a bullet takes in
order to pierce a steel plate or a thick tree.
Only thereby do we know that a running
dog is performing a patient crawl. Boxing,
skating or the flight of birds are forms of
swimming or dancing no less graceful than
swimming or dancing themselves, and this
too we know from slow motion, thanks
to which again the poetry of dynamic
equilibrium expressed in sport or combat
holds no more secrets for us. Each one of
the admirable machine's revelations repre¬
sents, for the dialectical progress of visual
and, consequently, metaphysical analysis, a
supremely and unprecedentedly sure step
along the way.
The eye captures the music of life
This miracle has, incidentally, already given
rise to a series of consequences that subject
our human conception of the universe to
constant pressure. The mechanical recording
and screening of images have not only
ensured for all time the mutual agreement
and cross-fertilization of the most rigorous
scientific procedures and the loftiest aes¬
thetic joys; they have to all intents merged
Music that
reaches us through
the eye
together, within the same form of expres¬
sion, apprehensible to the senses, the
simultaneity of the impressions inflicted
upon us by our way of looking at the
individual and the succession of feelings it
imprints upon our thinking. Is this not a
serious betrayal of pure Cartesianism? A
good few years ago, I wrote that "the
cinema manages, for the first time in his¬
tory, to arouse musical sensations that are
interdependent in space by means of visual
sensations that are interdependent in
time", and that "in fact, it is a form of
music that reaches us through the eye".
This incredible phenomenon seems to con¬
tain the secret of a power of expression
whose unity is the most decisive conquest
ever won in our spiritual life, and this may
well be the most unexpected philosophical
gift that Charlie Chaplin's fanciful and
profound genius has bequeathed to us.
We now possess the limitless capacity
to absorb the whole of life, even those
manifestations of it that are least accessible
to the human eye, to cast a dazzling light
on the infinitely complex drama of light
and shade, of shifts of shape and colour, of
the imperceptible undulatory motions that
ensure the continuity of gesture in the
world of animals and plants, of the infini¬
tesimal rhythms that closely link molec¬
ular vibrations to the great pulse of the
cosmos, thus precipitating that same
drama, in a living, active state, in our inner¬
most lives, where it will determine our
psychological attitudes and, soon, even our
reflexes.
The possibilities of the language of the
cinema thus seem to us to be virtually lim¬
itless. With film it is possible to create
poetry, novels, drama, history, science,
journalism and even grammar I mean
technology. The spoken or written word is
necessarily analytical in its means and sym¬
bolic in its expressions. A vast area remains
out of bounds to it, that of the object
given three-dimensional, material form and
the languages whereby it is expressed
dance, sculpture, painting, mime, sport,
the daily sights and sounds of the street at
which words can do little more than hint,
|

DOCUMENT
whereas the cinema can automatically incor¬
porate them into the visual, moving reality
of its action, while its frame-by-frame
development makes it akin to musical com¬
position to which so many fine films,
even silent ones, contrive to suggest a kind
of equivalence. There is, furthermore, no
language other than, precisely, the spoken
word to which music itself can be more
closely associated, so much so that its own
cadences merge with the beat of the coun¬
terpoint. The universalism towards which
humankind is moving, unanimously, at an
ever-increasing pace now possesses its own
instrument of exchange and expansion.
I apologise for emphasizing in this
way, while bringing to the fore these infi¬
nitely complex means, the primarily visual
nature of cinema, thus laying myself open
to the charge of tautology; but the fact is
that the mass audience, and many film¬
makers, paradoxical as it may seem, have
never realized this. When forced to look at
the matter from this angle, they think it
sufficient to be able to tell a hawk from a
handsaw. But the whole question of the
eventual destiny of the cinema is wrapped
up with the solution to this very problem.
I would go further: it is the whole problem.
What I mean is that no progress can be
made therein without relating it at the
outset to that education of the visual facul¬
ties which the great painters or sculptors
dispensed to some and which the cinema
alone, by virtue of its function as universal
spectacle and its limitless power of insinu¬
ation, is capable of dispensing to all. When
and if the cinema loses sight of the fact that
it Is, first and foremost, an instrument for
producing moving visual harmonies, it
immediately goes off the rails, ending up
in the same cul-de-sac into which its
repeated successes have often side-tracked it
and sometimes boxed it in.
III. THE PRIMACY OF
THE IMAGE
In the post-war years, the cinema worked
very successfully at ridding itself of its
preoccupation with the theatre, gradu¬
ally and perhaps unbeknown to most
film-makers moving towards a visual,
rhythmic interpretation of the world, an
interpretation to which increasingly sup¬
portive contributions were made by the
use of slow-motion, improved lighting
u Wi | methods, technical advances such as double
exposure, and also the gradual evolution of
silent-film acting in the direction of
sobriety.
Cinema is not theatre
The "talkies", and dubbing in particular,
cast doubt on all that had gone before, and
the visual qualities of films have declined in
strict proportion with the improvement in
sound. I have just said that the cinema
seems to me powerful enough to be able to
absorb drama and, since there have been
some remarkable successes in that respect, I
stand open to the charge of contradicting
The cinema must
remain the language of
universal life and
universal man, getting
through to the human
mind by means of
unanimously
communicable
processes.
myself. The fact is, in my opinion, that
film cannot fully attain to the nature of
theatre without perfecting all the other
forms of expression lyric, plastic,
musical, scientific, documentary that it is
known to be capable of assuming, in order
to bring to their highest pitch the tech¬
nical, visual and rhythmic qualities
without which film drama would be
doomed to rapid decline even before
reaching the level of development one is
entitled to expect of it. Another point is
that it would be absurd on the pretext
that cinema can be more powerfully the¬
atrical than theatre itself to sacrifice all its
resources to this single aspect of its power.
If the theatre absorbs the cinema, the
cinema is lost, for the time being at least.
Film should absorb theatre as theatre itself
long ago absorbed music, set design, cos¬
tume, and the use of extras and mime,
while leaving them free to develop indepen¬
dently of it.
The talkies: listening versus looking
There can be no doubt that sound
recording is a crucial achievement for the
cinema and holds out prospects that are
almost as inexhaustible as those offered by
visual images. The voices of the universe
the sounds of the sea and rushing streams,
the wind rustling through branches and
cornfields, birdsong, the hum of insects,
the confused murmur of crowds, the creak
of wheels, the panting of machines and the
alternation of sound and silence the
voices of the universe envelop, espouse,
balance, identify and augment the impres¬
sions conveyed by the sight of breaking
waves, rain falling on steaming earth,
waving corn and foliage, nuptial flights and
honey gathering, surging demonstrations
and military parades, the rhythmic
motions and glints of steel whereby
machines mark the beat of modern
industry, myriads of undetectable micro¬
scopic lives, impressions that form part, as
it were, of the shape of a world of a thou¬
sand interrelated parts. To be convinced of
this one need only watch a silent documen¬
tary. Such is the force of habit that it seems
to us almost as lifeless as a photograph
projected on to a screen seemed to us after
the coming of the cinema. To adapt the
words of Carlyle (or maybe Whitman) to
our present purpose: "If the universe is
incomplete, man will be incomplete."
The immense complexity of the world
must reach people and enter into them
whole and complete. This is precisely why
the human voice, which is only one part of
it perhaps the most moving of all, if the
silence of the mind withdrawn into itself
were unable to challenge its supremacy
should not absorb the whole of the uni¬
verse, except at certain moments of analysis
or emotion that the inner unfolding of the
spiritual drama should suffice to deter¬
mine. This is the same mistake, but in
reverse, as that made by Wagnerian drama,
which seeks to reinforce music, which is
itself expressive enough, with a setting that
is external to it. Words are, indeed, suffi¬
cient unto themselves, but the universe of
which they constitute only a fragment is
equally self-sufficient, and if they act in
partnership it should not be to the detri¬
ment of one of the partners. What I mean is
that, except in the case of films that are
markedly theatrical in form, the story-line
should be organized not around the dia¬
logue but around the image.
IV. FALSE STEPS
The truth of this is evident from the fact
that it is already possible, after several
years' experience, to measure the retreat

DOCUMENT
into which the "talkies" have forced the
beauty and purity of images. I hope and
believe that this retreat will be temporary,
but temporary only if the public and its
wretched educators reject a cinema that has
become subordinate to words and return
to a cinema that has words as its subordi¬
nate. Words make such demands on the ear,
even when they are pointless or stupid and
insult the intelligence, that attention is
transferred from the image to the words.
The audience listens and ceases to look. The
image retreats into the background. It
becomes merely an illustration of the dia¬
logue, and even the most cultivated
member of the audience very soon loses the
habit of savouring the beauty of the image,
not so much, it is true, in order to savour
the beauty of the words as not to miss any
twist of the plot.3 On the many occasions
when I have tried stopping my ears, I have
found that words and plot draw a double
veil between the image and the mind, as one
may easily realize by seeing a film first in its
original version and then dubbed.
Hallelujah!,* for example, in its orig¬
inal version in English, which I have diffi¬
culty in understanding and gave up trying
to follow, made a very powerful visual
impression on me. When it was dubbed
into French, that impression vanished
because I was listening instead of looking.
As you know, this is not the only draw¬
back of "dubbing", that monstrous nega¬
tion of aesthetic unity whereby the voice
fits neither the expression nor the move¬
ments nor the human form in action, nor
even universal form, and seems extraneous
to the events taking place on the screen. For
the universe is one and man is one. If you
cut man into two while the universe
remains one, the whole cosmic drama in
which man is only an actor immediately
loses, for minds with a modicum of clear¬
sightedness and hearts with a modicum of
nobility, all its emotive power. I might add
that "talkies", and especially dubbed films,
deprive the cinema of the human univer¬
sality that, from the beginning, endowed
it with psychological power and social
importance. The cinema must remain the
language of universal life and universal
man, getting through to the human mind
by means of unanimously communicable
processes. Furthermore, as it is even more
and more fully than before the language of
universal life since the spoken word has
been integrated into it, it would be mon¬
strous if words were to give it the coup de
grâce after providing it with the ultimate
means of action.
In silent films, the eye sees through
appearances
Not long ago I watched two old silent
films, which did not have captions.
Although they were unremarkable from
the photographic point of view, they
impressed me by the way in which images
reduced to being self-explanatory suddenly
stand out from the screen. Without
employing exaggerated gestures, the direc¬
tors and actors are compelled, in order to
make themselves understood, to display
constant ingenuity and impassioned intel¬
ligence, combinations of attitudes, hence
requiring the spectator to rise to the level
of attention they call for. Between the
visual quality of the film and its psycho¬
logical interpretation there is a continuous
exchange that captions, and even more the
spoken word, have done away with. It is
the memory of the gestures and expres¬
sions that stays with us, not that of the
plot, and it is the moral significance of the
drama that haunts us and not the story¬
line. A way of closing a door or placing a
soup tureen on a table is far more mean¬
ingful without words explaining the sig¬
nificance of the action. Though fore¬
warned, I was surprised to find I retained
from these films a very different impres¬
sion from that inflicted on us by talking
films or even captioned silent films. A new
world enters into us, the world that held
man's attention before speech and created
speech by a miracle of intuition and energy,
that compels the eye to see through appear¬
ances and seek behind them a meaning that
words, pandering to our laziness, dispense
to us in an arbitrary and indeed often
abstract manner, without demanding the
slightest effort from us.
This shows particularly clearly what
powers of expression the film-maker
deprives himself of when he uses words
either constantly or unwisely. Only the
free arrangement of silence and sound
enables the film-maker to pick and choose
among countless forms of expression. One
silent film, New Year's Evef takes place in
three settings, simultaneously or in turn:
the street, a drinking den and a small bed¬
room where a three-cornered domestic
drama is raging. The street and bar-room
scenes undoubtedly lose much because
their characteristic sounds are missing: in
the first case the muffled noise of crowds,
King Vidor's Hallelujah!
(United States, 1929). From
left to right, Daniel Haynes,
William Fountaine and Nina
Mae McKinney.
cars, cries and footfalls, in the second the
sounds of singing and the clink of glasses,
quarrelling, music, laughter and shouting.
If the film were to be remade, who in their
right minds would deprive themselves of
the dramatic contrasts between the carefree
or joyous character of these scenes and the
silent tragedy which, only a short distance
away and unknown to everyone there, is
wreaking havoc in three hearts ?
The first casualties
Note, incidentally, that the film-maker, the
actor and above all the "producer" are the
first casualties of mistaken interpretations
of the art of the cinema. Spiritual casualties
at any rate, since very few of them realize
that they are leading the cinema to perdi¬
tion and even fewer are worthy of suf¬
fering therefrom. The beauty of the images,
even when one stops one's ears in order to
see them better, seems to diminish from
film to film. Compelled to give almost
undivided attention to the synchroniza¬
tion of sound and image and to guide the
image through the labyrinth of the dia¬
logue, film-makers bother less and less
about its intrinsic quality, which they leave
to the apparatus alone, heedless of the fact
that its chance discoveries need to be helped
by the careful choice of motif and decor,
by raising or lowering the lighting, varying
camera angles to follow movement and ges¬
ture, slowing the pace or speeding it up,
and using double exposure, slow motion
or speeded-up film to stimulate the spec¬
tator's dramatic or lyric imagination. In

fact, double exposure and slow motion,
which played a crucial part in the develop¬
ment of our understanding of rhythm and
image, have almost disappeared from the
cinema except, as regards the latter of the
two, in the documentary, which in any case
uses it only for picturesque effect and
seems no longer to understand the aesthetic
value of images that show us objective
proof of the harmonic continuity of
shapes and movements.
The glories of the documentary
We should not, of course, be unduly con¬
cerned about this temporary and partial
setback for the educational virtues of this
admirable apparatus. Although sentimental
or romantic films have taken audiences
whose puerility puts up less and less resis¬
tance too far away from them, we can
still see scientific films, in which powerful
lighting and enormous magnification reveal
to us the hitherto secret life of insects,
crustaceans, molluscs, flowers, seeds, coats
of velvet or satin, the dense, deep glow of
shells, the glittering jewels of suction pads,
the vibration of pistils and of antennas
searching for their prey, the sinuous
waving of tentacles, the diamonds and
opals of scattering air bubbles, and the har¬
monious movements involved in the
dramas of love and hunger. Or else those
accounts of big game hunting in Africa or
Indonesia that show in graphic detail the
tragic truth of the scenes imagined by
artists such as Barye,6 while others show us
the visual subtlety of a Vermeer or a
Velasquez. The arabesque of the muscles of
the python, the furtive gleam of its scales
that allow us to visualize its energy, the
ripple of the coats of the leopard or the
tiger, the darting gleams of teeth and claws,
the splendid sight of skulls or jawbones
shaped by the blending, on the undulating
bone of their surfaces, of the internal forces
of instinct and the external caress of light
on their surface. We are also aware that, in
spiritual matters, each new conquest has
temporarily to be paid for by a retreat, of
greater or lesser duration, from former
conquests. We likewise know that the
cinema is all the more unlikely to be
exempt from this universal law insofar as it
is richer in its resources and more sur¬
prising in the incessant revelations revela¬
tions we are always tempted to exhaust
completely, while ignoring the previous
revelations, from which the wonderment
into which we are cast by each new miracle
detaches us before we have even followed
them through to their ultimate conse¬
quences.
Whenever the subject arises of the
"machine" whose extraordinary develop¬
ment has taken us by surprise, a general
outcry goes up about the new efforts it
demands of our lazy minds. It is neverthe¬
less a human artefact. Its present com¬
plexity should not stand in the way of
spiritual growth. It may even be regarded
as the most encouraging example of the
intervention of the mind in the task of
organizing the world, which has been, since
it began, humanity's specific task. The
charges levelled against the machine are
always the same, that "price to be paid for
progress" which we are unwilling to accept
because we persist in seeing "progress"
from its moral angle and not from its spir¬
itual angle, from where we would see it as a
complex of often antagonistic forces
advancing in fugal style, not as an uninter¬
rupted linear development.
V. INEXHAUSTIBLE
POSSIBILITIES
And so we are compelled to denounce, in
the evolution of this hitherto undreamt-of
achievement of our minds and at the very
time when it is daily producing felicitous
consequences, the false steps that it makes
and that are all the more surprising in that
each of them causes us to stumble at the
threshold of a further advance. An instru¬
ment such as the cinema cannot, however,
degenerate. Like mathematics, it derives its
dynamic concatenations from within itself.
It is one of those great starting-points that
teach man how proud is his dramatic des¬
tiny. Its very universality, which places at its
disposal, for the first time ever, the activities
and genius of all peoples and all human
groups tending in one and the same direc¬
tion, opens boundless possibilities for its
future development. Some of the advances it
has made in our own day more or less at the
same time as sound recording animation
The arabesque
of the muscles of
the python, the
furtive gleam of its
scales. . .
and colour present terrible dangers, but
those dangers will be overcome by their
own power. While it is true that the public's
total lack of visual education threatens, in
both of these cases, to inflict paltry images
upon us, we shall be delivered from their
thrall by the training of an elite of artists
and technicians. As in the great eras of
painting and architecture, it is they and they
alone who must gradually impose their own
vision, their own feeling for rhythm, move¬
ment and colour on wider and wider audi¬
ences, especially if social conditions are pro¬
pitious to the formation and influence of
such audiences.
Fantasy and imagination in cartoon
films
Animation, surely, holds out incomparable
promises. Some American productions have
already offered what may be the richest
prospects that man's poetic genius, always
eager for an atmosphere fresh enough to
clear its lungs and dense enough to keep it
aloft, has glimpsed since the outpouring of
lyricism that covered Italian crypts with
glowing frescoes, poured twilit magic and
floral symphonies into the naves of French
churches where the changing light flooded
in upon the congregation through stained-
glass windows, made English theatres the
setting for the impassioned speeches of
murderers, kings and maidens, the voices of
the tempest and the glitter of the stars, and
spread over the heads of the German
throngs the echoing vaults of cathedrals
whose pillars sprang up from among the
stalls of cobblers, watchmakers, brewers and
smiths forming a great, instinctively inno¬
cent choir of the common people. It is very
moving to observe, in this respect, that it is
America, so disdained by "intellectuals", so
"materialistic", so subservient to "eco¬
nomic" considerations, that, in the sublime
disorder of the modern world, in the course
of this immense act of parturition which
resembles the chemical formation of some
unknown substance in a bubbling crucible
more than some religious or moral drive
towards "idealism", should be offering this
fantastical imagination, this rhythmic verve,
this flame of poetry intoxicated with
freedom, joy, mischief and unflagging
invention.
Have you seen wild flowers, buttercups
and moss joining in with the work of the
tiny insects and the love-making of the
birds, flower-bells ringing for the nightin¬
gale's wedding, dolls marching mechani-

DOCUMENT
cally to the quacking of ducks, ants and
caterpillars advancing in procession to the
crystalline song of the toads, new-born
maybugs showered with dew from the sta¬
mens of cherry blossom? Considering all
the poetry awakened from these prolifer¬
ating multitudes, hitherto unseen and inert
for most of us and in any case obliged, in
order to reach us, to borrow the language
of words, too symbolic and too inacces¬
sible for the many, what good is there in
pointing out the mistakes of form and the
sometimes shocking clashes of colour that,
with varying degrees of success, the unceas¬
ingly complex enlargement and enrichment
of this new language are bearing forward
towards unheard-of prospects? From these
humble beginnings, we may already look
forward to the emergence of geniuses of
the stamp of Michelangelo, Tintoretto,
Rubens, Goya and Delacroix, who will
thrust forward their internal drama to
meet up with the dramas of space in the
onrush of shapes and movements, by
means of symphonic forms of expression
capable of driving the combination of art,
music and the spoken word ahead into an
ever-receding future
The pitfalls of colour
In this respect too a decisive effort needs to
be made to re-incorporate into the territory
of visual harmony the ground lost through
the onslaught of colour films. It is not
enough to have integrated this great dis¬
covery into the total expression of life that
cinema promises to be, only to imagine that
nothing can be done about it. On the con¬
trary, this achievement demands fresh
efforts to maintain it. "Nature" is in itself
by no means harmonious, as the existence
of painting, an art of elimination and selec¬
tion, amply demonstrates. "Black and
white", with its spontaneous, profound
harmonies of silver and velvet, turning,
appearing and disappearing and with its vol¬
umes in movement, had spoilt us, because it
acts as the interpreter of "value", not colour;
but the mechanical recording of colours is
fraught with the risk of grave miscalcula¬
tions, especially as regards "location"
filming, which gifted and well-intentioned
film-makers are powerless to arrange in an
orderly fashion. The total visual symphony
requires them to organize premeditated har¬
monies of increased complexity by means of
the concerted movements of form, whereby
contrasts and reflections are constantly
brought into play in chiaroscuros, half-
Josef von Sternberg's
Underworld (United
States, 1927) is
considered to be one
of the first gangster
films.
tones and violent lighting and in ever-
changing relationships.
A broad, united effort needs to be
made, and it is to be expected, as indeed we
may foresee from cartoons or even the sim¬
plest films, that the film director of the
future will play a role more akin to that of
the orchestral conductor than to that of the
painter. The slightest works of Disney or
his imitators require the work of numerous
teams of artists, teams that will have to be
strengthened for the great orchestral works
of the future. Legions of set designers,
dancers, costumiers, extras and technicians
of every kind will certainly be recruited too.
These circumstances restore the cinema,
which is still a prey to various kinds of
financial and show-business skulduggery, to
its rightful place in the domain of regener¬
ated communities, and show up clearly its
necessary contradictions with the obstinate
individualism in which our age, in spite of
the directions in which it is irresistibly
headed, remains regrettably bogged down.
VI. THE MISSION
The cinema thus awaits a completely
renewed social terrain. True, it has not yet
fulfilled the promises that architecture, in
times past, kept in relation to the mass of
believers, but that is because its social bases
and the mystical impetus that can only
spring therefrom are still in the process of
formation, and it took architecture several
centuries to attune itself to the emerging
sentiments of which it was, ultimately, the
expression. I know of no worse aesthetic
prejudice than that of thinking that, once
the instrument has been discovered, the
masterpiece will follow of necessity and at
once. It is strange that so many disgruntled
people should criticize the cinema for not
having, by the age of forty, produced the
definitive masterwork, when it is carrying
out within itself the complex and difficult
task of developing its resources, while
those same critics find it quite normal that
Christians should have waited a thousand
years to fulfil the poetic mission promised
by Christianity. If the capital which the
cinema needs more than any other art,
given its gigantically complex organization,
were to remain in the hands of busi¬
nessmen or groups of businessmen having
no other aim, in securing control of it,
than the pursuit of their own interests,
unless capital were to become entirely
social, the cinema would soon join the
ranks of the most degenerate illustrated
periodicals, sentimental stories and so-
called "popular" fiction. It would vanish
altogether as an art form. The weakness of
the cinema is a function of its greatness.
Two dangers
The fact that cinema is and can only be a
collective art, that it lives and develops and
can only live and develop by appealing con¬
stantly to the unanimous voice of the
crowds, requires from all who play a part
in organizing it a continuous effort to
assimilate its advances, and constant
involvement in using to good effect the
revelations it brings. Though we are far
from having reached that situation, though
we even seem to be getting farther and far¬
ther away from it, we are well aware that
history is full of unforeseen but predeter¬
mined reversals. The origins of Chris¬
tianity, for example, have shown us how a
dual spiritual process seemed, at times

DOCUMENT
when society was in total anarchy, to lift
the wills and souls of some to precisely the
same extent as the wills and souls of others
declined. The history of early Christianity
bears many similarities to the events
leading up to the society of the present.
The unspeakable depths to which cer¬
tain film-making enterprises have sunk, the
philistinism and vulgarity of the "pro¬
ducers" and retailers of images, the des¬
perate efforts some firms have to make in
order to keep American cinema up to the
level of the inventiveness of its directors
and the prodigious resources in personnel,
equipment and technology they have at
their disposal, the development of Russian
cinema, conscientiously struggling to
remain collectivist and to ward off the
temptations of dialogue and the star
system, the undeniable progress made by
French cinema in recent years, should all
warn us against taking the sombre view
towards which a superficial examination of
the question would seem to incline us.
Although the cinema is at present adrift
between two shoals, those of private
interest and of its permanent partner, plu¬
tocratic demagogy, these two shoals will
sooner or later be submerged by the irre¬
sistible rise of societies towards collective
forms of production that subordinate pri¬
vate interest to the general interest and
gradually push plutocratic demagogy from
the plane of sentimental abstractions,
having "idealistic" education as its instru¬
ment, towards the plane of human realities,
the means to which is psycho-physiolog¬
ical education.
Freedom of expression under threat
An immense task is being carried out, of
which economics is the starting point and
trade unionism, whose goal is to remake
man by means of his functional aptitudes
and his real interests, will be the main organ.
This should ultimately dispel the dangers
that threaten the cinema by re-integrating its
freedom of expression, so firmly cast in the
mould of its mechanical resources, into a
society solidly built around the strict har¬
monic organization of its production.
Everything is interconnected, in disorder as
well as order. This freedom of expression,
constantly hindered and dissipated by
today's social chaos, is threatened not only
by the financial skulduggery and the public
bad taste which it creates and which serves its
ri%\M purpose in a continuing process of give and
take. The state, its police and its censorship
The cinema
is and can only be a
collective art.
act in the service both of this skulduggery
and of this bad taste, thus maintaining the
feeble-mindedness and exaggerated sentimen¬
tality that they need in order to function.
The cinema is tending to become, like
the press and radio, an instrument of domi¬
nation and mindlessness in the service of big
business and of the sham political bodies
that represent it in government. The state,
almost everywhere, is but a pale reflection of
the oligarchies that have gradually taken over
the organizations and individuals capable of
influencing public opinion and making use
of the outdated abstractions whereby it can
so easily be misled for purposes that are
totally unconnected with the public interest
and are indeed increasingly contrary to it, in
all fields. Helped on by mental laziness, the
world would very soon be on the way to
perdition unless an underground movement
of progressive organization, brought about
by the concentration of capital and labour
and by the power of machines more and
more rapidly imposing unity upon
exchanges among different peoples and on
those peoples' reflexes, acted automatically
to construct a new order among the general
anarchy. The cinema, the unwitting victim of
the legal disorder, is one of the most effective
instruments of the emerging real order.
The perfectly attuned orchestra
If this legal disorder were to persist, a pos¬
sibility that in my opinion the organic
growth of all the elements of the real order
should rule out, two schools might well
emerge within the movement that draws
the cinema and society itself towards their
destinies. One of these schools would
address itself to the elite and the other to
the amorphous mass of the majority of
spectators, and there is no doubt that, in
the present state of uncertainty, a split is
appearing that could have deplorable conse¬
quences for the society that is emerging as
well as for the cinema. But the cinema
cannot be untrue to its historic destiny.
No art is more involved with the multi
tude, its needs, its impulses, its joys, its
sufferings and its deeds. It feels its real
presence. Itself a language of movement, it
partakes of the movement of the crowds
that impart their movement to it. Great
political crises are a function of the inner
movement that prevents societies from
dying and manifests itself in commotions
and demonstrations. There is a profound
logic in the evolution of the arts. It was
natural that the reign of painting, now in
decline, should have coincided since the
Renaissance with the reign of the indi¬
vidual to whom it gives expression but
who is now gradually joining the increas¬
ingly vast and urgently required organiza¬
tions that collective needs are constructing.
What is a crowd in turmoil? It is the
hubbub of the assembled orchestra before
the symphony begins. The art of the great
ages is a totalitarian art. Mistakes, it is true,
may occur here and there, but the mosque,
the pagoda or the cathedral together express
the great emotional and lyrical depths that
only the enthusiasm of crowds is capable of
stirring. And the cinema must be mosque,
pagoda and cathedral all rolled into one, a
mosque, a pagoda, a cathedral expanded out
to the ill-defined limits of living, dead or yet
unborn humanity, out as far as the tele¬
scopic or microscopic infinities of form and
movement the perfectly attuned orchestra,
a thousand instruments strong, of sensi¬
bility and intelligence and of the multitudes
in action.
1 The Mark of Zorro (1920), an American film
directed by Fred Niblo, which signalled the birth of a
new kind of cinema hero, played by Douglas Fair¬
banks. (Ed.)
2 Underworld(\927), directed by Josef von Sternberg.
Two gangsters, old friends, become rivals for the love
of the same woman, a story-line that was to become
familiar. (Ed.)
3 I refer only for the record to those silent documen¬
taries (wildlife or travel films), some of them very
lovely, the commentaries of which are nearly always
pointless, often dim-witted, sometimes execrable and
meant only as a sacrifice to the fashion of the
"talkies", and whose only effect is to exasperate those
spectators who like to think that they go to the
cinema to see and appreciate beautiful images. (Ed.)
4 Hallelujah! (1929), an American film directed by
King Vidor, was the first film with an all-black cast. It
was rapturously received by the intelligentsia in
France, where it is regarded as the first historically
important talking picture. (Ed.)
5 New Year's Eve (1923), a German film directed by
Lupu-Pick with a screenplay by Carl Mayer. It is typ¬
ical of a school of cinema {kammerspiel) that entrusts
the whole meaning of the film to the power of the
images and the use of light. (Ed.)
6 Antoine Louis Barye (1796-1875), French artist.
One of the leading sculptors of the 19th century, he
established animal sculpture as a major genre. (Ed.)
