Monopolies, minarets and videos
by Sadok Hammami
Because of strict state monopolies and inadequate
programme output, the Arab public is looking elsewhere for
what it cannot find at home.
In the Arab world, where demands based
I on identity and religion are forcefully
pressed and where the present is continually
haunted by the past, the question of communi¬
cation is fraught with drama. All societies are
nowadays concerned by the link between cul-
Bturalidentity and the globalization of commu-
slow television
' . 	 nication, but it is a distinctive feature of the
on the move in Cairo s Imbaba
district, 1994.
26
Arab world that memories of the past intrude
into the very heart of modern life. This revival
of the past is particularly noticeable in the field
of communications.
The place of the media is closely linked to the
status of the "sanctuary" in the community. In
and around the mosque there grows up a culture
of resistance not only to modernization but also
to the authorities, thus reviving an old form of
territoriality in which the new media are always
faced with competition. There is an extraordi¬
nary competition nowadays between the sound
of the muezzin echoing from minarets and the
visual fascination of satellite dishes symbol¬
izing the contradiction of a world technologi¬
cally united but culturally fragmented.
But this paradox shows itself mainly in state
media monopolies and in the many forms of
resistance to which they lead. The communica¬
tion issue is a focus for all the cultural blockages
that have characterized the development of these
societies: state hegemony, the breakdown of
political bonds, a return to tradition	 Orig¬
inally required to be tools for development, the
media (notably television) have helped to inten¬
sify the authoritarian nature of the established
order. By consistently devoting itself to the glo¬
rification of charismatic leaders, television has in
general fostered the personality cult in politics.
In the Arab world radio and television, with
a few exceptions, are limbs of the state monopoly.
Access to them is strictly controlled. Economic
factors such as rising production costs, political
factors such as the restraining effect of censorship,
and social factors such as increased demand
resulting from the growth of the middle class, all
help to aggravate a creative crisis. Egypt, the only
Arab country with its own programme industry,
is the only exception. This situation drives people
to seek elsewhere what they cannot find at home,
and makes for increased cultural dependence on
the outside world.
I he saucepan strategy
Three different strategies tend to be adopted.
One is to plug surreptitiously into other net¬
works a common practice in North Africa,
because of the proximity of Europe. In Tunisia,
for example, some picturesque reception tech¬
niques were devised during the 1980s. By

"In Algeria six or eight million
people receive the European
channels by means of
improvised cable networks."
Left, a satellite dish in Algiers.
attaching a metallic item (usually a saucepan) to
their television aerials, people can usually
manage to pick up the Italian channels. In
Algeria six or eight million people receive the
European channels by means of improvised
cable networks. But the prime instrument for
cheating state monopolies is the video
recorder for Arab audiences still the best way
of getting programmes which are all the more
desirable for being forbidden.
Faced with this anarchy, and with calls for the
liberalization of cultural life, several states have
decided to relax their monopoly control of the
media, either by opening their radio networks to
public or private outside operators or by legal¬
izing the direct reception of foreign broadcasts
by dish aerials. This makes it possible to retain
a monopoly over national television whilst at the
same time monitoring the flow of programmes.
"All societies are nowadays
concerned by the link between
cultural identity and the
globalization of
communication". Below,
television in Yemen.
27

Algiers, 1992.
28
SADOK HAMMANII,
of Tunisia, is writing a doctoral
thesis on mediation and the
image in Arab-Islamic culture.
The third strategy is to reinstate places tra¬
ditionally devoted to communication this is
reflected in the emergence of mosques as centres
of political debate. By keeping television under
their thumbs, states have fostered the take-over
of mosques and their use in propagating the
ideologies of confrontation. The "informal"
appropriation of mosques brings out the ten¬
sions inherent in the emergence of public debate.
Treeing creative forces
Closed societies are today inconceivable. The
opening of national forums to outside media
does not necessarily result in cultural depen¬
dence, except when it is used to perpetuate
domestic ideas about social inequality. Calls for
"the defence of cultural identity against the
Western media" are primarily ideological argu¬
ments put forward by authoritarian states and
politicians to feed nostalgia for a non-existent
primeval purity.
To be free of real cultural dependence the first
essential is to liberate people's creative poten¬
tialities. The media system in the Arab world
needs to be built first and foremost around the
values of free discussion and free exchange of
views. Shibboleths about identity, the diabo-
lizing of technology, and paranoiac ideas about
other people will not help it to regain its cultural
sovereignty or make its creative presence felt in
the world.
