Pride withoutprejudice
South Asian women question oppressive traditions
A scroll-assisted lecture on
breast-feeding in Calcutta
(India).
"I have a better life today than I did when
my husband was alive," said Zapathan. A
statement like this from a Muslim widow in
Bangladesh would have been unthinkable
twenty years ago, and I was taken by surprise
when Zapathan made it. Sitting on a wobbly
chair, her feet twisted in plastic sandals that did
not match, she uttered the words without a
trace of guilt or embarrassment. The thought
that she was dishonouring a very old tradition
did not seem to worry her. She had expressed a
truth that thousands of impoverished women in
Bangladesh are beginning to share, though few
have yet begun to voice.
Dangladesh: a merry widow
Zapathan lives in a tiny village in Mirzapur. I met
her on the premises of the Grameen Bank1,
where a group of needy women had gathered to
collect a modest loan that would help them start
a small business, repair a leaking roof or educate
a child. The Grameen Bank's revolutionary
12
lending system ensures that husbands, sons or
fathers are no longer necessary to help women
procure money. A thumb mark that once
labelled a woman as backward is today the sig¬
nature that gets her a loan. It is the first step that
leads her to write her own name.
"No one asked me my name before," said
Zapathan, saying her name with pride. "While
my husband lived, I was his wife, his follower.
His word was law." Her husband's law, like
that of a king, prevailed in a domain where he
had little to protect except a wife. It made her
helpless, faceless. Not even the neighbours were
aware of her existence. His death opened the
door, brought her out of her house and her vil¬
lage and led her to the Grameen Bank, which has
helped her more than any relative would have
done.
"Those unknown men to whom I could not
even talk trusted me and gave me a loan. When
I first held 500 takas, my hands trembled." She
raised her hand in a salute, a gesture that spoke
of power.

A traditional marriage
in a Rajasthan village (India).
India: access to credit
The Working Women's Forum in Madras, South
India, all of whose members are needy working
women, is driven by the same spirit as the
Grameen Bank. As well as providing loans, the
Forum organizes training and consciousness-
raising activities, night schools for children, and
family planning and health-care programmes. It
encourages inter-caste marriages and helps fight
exploitation, harassment and government
obstructionism.
In the last ten years, as the movement has
spread, the courage and commitment of its mem¬
bers have grown and they have begun to speak
out in public and become leaders. They have
learnt to stand up to policemen, government
officials, even cabinet ministers. "Why not hus¬
bands ?" I asked a group of them. They laughed
and slowly told me their fears. "He drinks and
beats me," said one. "Why don't you hit him
back?" I asked provocatively. "That's not our
Tamil tradition," she answered. "Why does he
beat you?" I asked. "Because he earns," she
replied. "But you earn too". "He earns more."
"If my husband did that to me, I would leave
him," said a dark young woman who was not
yet married. "You can't divorce and marry
again," said the older woman. "No, I won't
remarry. I will take a job and bring up my chil¬
dren," answered the young woman. "I thought
wisdom came with age," the old woman sighed.
"Now the young ones know better than the
old ones like me."
"The time is not far off when donkeys will
neigh and women will demand to sit on chairs,"
said a village elder in Gujarat, western India, as
he pulled at his hubble bubble.
I akistan: urbanization, the motor of change
"Change is coming, and it is coming faster than
people think," says Akhtar Hameed, the archi¬
tect of the Orangi Pilot Project in Karachi, Pak¬
istan. "Under the pressure of mass migration to
the cities and double-digit inflation the role of
women is changing dramatically. Urbanization
changes attitudes and breaks up traditions. Since
one income is no longer enough, women have

A journalist looks over the
latest issues of Dabindu ("Tears
of Sweat"), a newspaper
published by a women's
community development project
in Kataniyaka, on the outskirts
of Colombo (Sri Lanka). The
newspaper exposes the
oppression of women and
advises them how to stand up
for themselves.
14
ANEES JUNG,
an Indian writer and journalist, is
Special Adviser to the Director-
General of Unesco on issues
concerning women. She is the
author of a number of books,
including Unveiling IndiaA
Woman's Journey and Seven
SistersAmong the Women of
South Asia.
begun to work. The extended family is already
beginning to yield to the nuclear family. With
women having jobs and education becoming
imperative, the rate of population growth is
bound to slow down. This will happen in urban
areas first, then spread to the villages. It is only
a matter of time. What is happening in Orangi
is happening everywhere."
Orangi encourages women not to be depen¬
dent and urges them to turn their homes into
workshops. Family businesses sprout in every
lane, and women have begun to be entrepre¬
neurs. The Orangi Trust gives loans to units
where 40 per cent of the workers are women.
Almost 350 units are managed entirely by
women, including stitching centres, general
stores, schools, clinics, beauty parlours and
embroidery workshops. A recent survey of 585
of Orangi's schools showed that 45 per cent of
the 80,000 students were girls. Almost 90 per
cent of Orangi's schools are co-educational, and
68 per cent of the teachers are female. "These
women and girls," says Akhtar Hameed, "are
not in purdah as my mother was. And yet they
retain their modesty and their culture. Although
they are not wrapped in the chador or confined
within four walls, their conduct is not very dif¬
ferent from my mother's. Women who belong
both to the present and the past, they are the
finest achievement of Orangi."
Nepal: the burden of tradition
The image of Nepali rural women that remains in
my mind is that of a creature under a basket of hay
or manure, a metaphor that goes beyond her
working life. "Women have yet to learn to artic¬
ulate their feelings and anxieties," says Greta Ran,
who has launched a magazine about women and
called it "Donkey", to match her perception of the
peasant woman as a beast of burden. Greta Ran
feels that women are conditioned to be silent
beasts of burden and that if they begin to have indi¬
vidual feelings they suffer from a sense of guilt.
Indira Koirala, who works with village women
at the grassroots level and has just launched a self-
reliance project, does not agree. "Women are
acquiring the confidence to change their work
patterns but not their lives," she says. "They still
can't survive independently. They need more
time." Since her project began, she has seen a
change in them. When a group is formed and
given a name, the women feel they have found an
identity. They are no longer just wives or mothers;
they have the status of members of a group.
"Change is inevitable," said an old Nepali
woman named Aama, the Nepali word for
"mother". "Even the trails of my youth have
changed. I have seen streams and rivers change
their courses." Poor and uneducated, she has
watched the ebb and flow of life, not without
some regrets. The young, she complains, are
learning to read and write, but they have lost the
gift of knowing that comes from living close to
nature, close to tradition.
A shared vision
In Sri Lanka too, where the government and
several non-governmental agencies have set up
credit and savings societies that are managed
and controlled by women, more economic
power is coming into the hands of women via
small-scale loans. The Janashakti Bank, like the
Grameen Bank, distributes loans to groups of
five women, each of whom is responsible for
maintaining the group's credit. Janashakti too has
a payback rate of nearly 95 per cent.
In South Asia women who were afraid even
of each other are beginning to share their con¬
dition and seek a shared vision. They are forming
new groups. The old beliefs no longer corre¬
spond to life as it is, and as women seek to
renew them they are embarking on a journey
along a path to self-discovery.
1 See page 15 for an interview with the founder of the
Grameen Bank.
