A birthday
or a funeral?
rzvsztof Zanuss
Is the cinema still asking
the eternal questions
that sustain creative art?
Krzysztof Zanussi
is a Polish director and
scriptwriter. Among his
best-known films are
The Structure of Crystals
(1969), Illumination
( 1 973) and Dotkniecie
(The Touch, 1992) with
Max von Sydow and
Sarah Miles.
Unlike cinema, none of the tra¬
ditional arts presided over by
the nine muses of Antiquity
owes its birth to an instru¬
ment or an invention. This
explains why a doubt has hovered over
cinema ever since its birth: is it really an art ?
The doubt stems not only from cinema's
suspect relationship with a piece of
machinery, but from its social and artistic
origins.
Right from the start, the cinema recorded
objective facts (as in the first films made by
the Lumière brothers, "Workers Leaving the
Lumière Factory" and "The Arrival of a
Train at La Ciotat Station") but it also told a
story (as in the "The Gardener and the
Cheeky Imp "[L'arroseur arrosé]). From the
aesthetic point of view, the second aspect of
cinema was already more advanced, or, as is
usually said, more creative.
Fiction, whose origins are rooted in liter¬
ature and whose visual expression is in the¬
atre, has played a dominant role in the his¬
tory of the cinema. But since the cinema
remained silent for the first thirty years of
its existence (a rather prolonged babyhood!),
it would be more accurate to compare it to
pantomime, which, like motion pictures,
was often accompanied by music. So in the
light of its genealogical tree, cinema might be
described as literature without words, or as a
form of theatre, but one far removed from
literature, supported by music and provided
with subtitles. With such origins it was dif¬
ficult to find a place on Mount Parnassus.
Humble Origins The cinema's social
origins were even less glorious. It is a
child of the fairground. Popular appeal is its
birthright: it took root among the people at
a time when the other muses were hobnob¬
bing in salons. It cannot even be compared
with other forms of popular art, with folk¬
lore, the memory of bygone days.
The cinema was born at the end of a cen¬
tury that saw an extraordinary artistic flow¬
ering and regarded art as its crowning glory.

!rLJ
äsv
JT\
*jrr
A**'
La Sortie des ouvriers de
l'usine Lumière ("Workers
Leaving the Lumière Factory";
France, 1895), one of Louis
Lumière 's first films.
Artists have never been so highly regarded as
they were in the nineteenth century. Never
has such pride been felt in art which, in the
eyes of the European elites of that time, was
a testimony to human progress and evolu¬
tion in its highest form. But those elites
believed that the opera was the synthesis of
all contemporary art forms. Great opera-
houses were the temples of the late nine¬
teenth century. The cinema could only
appear to them as an insignificant novelty.
Running out of steam in point of
fact, the birth of cinema was a turning
point for the culture of our century. The age
of Gutenberg was drawing to a close. We left
behind the culture of the word for the cul¬
ture of image and sound, and entered a new
cultural era. By now we have put that
turning point behind us. The modern world
is inundated with audiovisual signs. Yet the
cinema, which is responsible for this
upheaval, seems to be in decline.
It is easy, but only half true, to say that
by moving out of movie-houses and onto
television and VCR screens films win
ground for the cinema. While we can see that
the output of the audiovisual sector is
growing, we are less apt to notice the decline
in its artistic potential, its aesthetic regres¬
sion, the spiritual poverty of what it offers,
and the increasing vapidity of the ideas
expressed. One need only compare the
cinema today with that of twenty years ago
when year after year film-makers like Jean-
Luc Godard, Andrei Tarkovski, Federico
Fellini and Ingmar Bergman were opening
up new aesthetic, moral and intellectual per¬
spectives and taking part in an extraordinary
blossoming of art that was comparable to
the explosion of Renaissance Florence or
Flemish oil painting.
The cinema is losing ground today in the
same area as that where other art forms are in
retreat. In the late twentieth century people
no longer expect art to do what it has done
for centuries. They no longer ask it to
describe the world in terms of a clearly
defined scale of values. They no longer expect
answers because they no longer ask the ques¬
tions that were once thought to be intrinsic
to humanity, about the meaning of life, suf¬
fering and death, about the nature of love
and happiness. Can art survive without these
questions? I am convinced it cannot. And
without them, can humanity itself survive?
As useless as Mozart An has always
been a diversion, a gratuitous, disinter¬
ested act. In the nineteenth century people
sometimes said that a beautiful object was
"useless, like Mozart." I have nothing against
art as a diversion because it is through diver¬
sion and through disinterested, unproduc¬
tive acts that thinking about life, happiness
and death is expressed. In the past this kind
of thinking was found in popular culture as
well as among the elite. The difference lay in
the language, not the message. The culture of
ordinary people also asks the basic questions.
A person who watches a mindless television
film or an episode of Dynasty today is no

>,
Le retour d'Ulysse ("The
Return of Ulysses";
France, 1908), a film
directed by Charles Le
Bargy and featuring
actors from the
Comédie-Française
theatre.
less educated than the film-goers of thirty
years ago who would queue to see the latest
Fellini or Bergman. So what has happened
since then?
I attribute the decline of the cinema to a
change in the role of culture. The language of
moving pictures still has some strings to its
bow, but the questions that could be dis¬
cussed in this language have gone. Thus the
centenary of the cinema is linked to its funeral.
But perhaps it is too early to bury the
body. Perhaps the heart is still beating. Per¬
haps we are in too much of a hurry to bury a
Europe that has so often experienced decline
only to rise again and become a dynamic force
in the evolution of humanity. Perhaps the
eternal questions will again be asked in the
world of new technologies and there will be a
place where I could make a new Illumination
(1978) or a new Imperative (1982). It does
not really matter whether it is for television, a
video cassette or a virtual-reality headset, just
as it doesn't really matter who does the
asking, myself or a film-maker several genera¬
tions younger than me.
To my mind the only thing that counts
is to know whether we will present these
eternal questions or only an imagination-
numbing "media mish-mash". A cinema attraction at a
fair in Sedan (France) in
1901.
M
Suwm KvrH». Mriw4 Mi- -Ow-
i
