listening
THE HEARTBEAT OF JAZZ
by Isabelle Leymarie
48
Drums, an indispensable ingredient
of popular music, are the only instru¬
ments "invented" by jazz. Resulting from the jux¬
taposition of various percussion instruments,
they have changed over the years and benefitted
from several technical improvements.
When jazz appeared at the beginning of
the century, the first drummers used instru¬
ments borrowed from circus orchestras, brass
bands and music-hall companies. With their
expressive swing styles, New Orleans drum¬
mers of today often evoke African or West
Indian music, yet the drums used by their col¬
leagues of yesteryear were not of African origin.
The bass drum and the snare drum came from
Europe, and other drums came from China.
They were used more to impress the audience
than for purely musical reasons. European- or
Asian-made drums were used in classical jazz
because in the United Statesin contrast to the
West Indies and certain Latin American coun¬
tries where small drums and hand-beaten drums
continued to be played despite repression-
plantation owners forbade their slaves to play
drums, and the instrument quickly disappeared
from popular black music.
Not counting the cymbals, a drum-set con¬
sists of three sorts of drum: the bass drum, the
snare drum and the tom-tom. The first bass
drums used in jazz were identical to those used
by brass bands, and the drummer's main task
was to keep a regular beat. The drum's powerful
sound enabled it to be heard over the blare of
the brass. The barrel-shaped tom-toms were cov¬
ered with thick pig-skin and were usually lac¬
quered in red. Drummers also used Chinese
cymbals and temple blocks (thick blocks of
wooda little like wooden gongsplayed in
groups of four to six). Until the First World War
tom-toms, cymbals and temple blocks were
imported from China and were extremely pop¬
ular because of their low price. It is very likely
that the immigration of large numbers of Chi¬
nese to the United States in the second half of
A jazz instrument
originally used to
keep the beat, the
drum gradually
became a solo
instrument in its
own right.
the nineteenth century influenced the drum¬
mers of the time as they sought new sounds.
At the end of the 1920s, with the advent of
nightclubs and show business in Harlem, drums
became more complicated. Sonny Greer, Duke
Ellington's drummer, and Jimmy Crawford, who
played for Jimmie Lunceford, added kettle¬
drums to their sets, more, it must be said, for
show than strictly musical reasons. Perched on
top of a small platform, they boomed away
with gusto. When Duke Ellington played the
Cotton Club, Sonny Greer used an extraordinary,
custom-made drum-set that contained temple
blocks, all kinds of cymbals, overhead gongs,
kettledrums, a vibraphone and chimes. His
mother-of-pearl drums sporting his initials were
the envy of rival drummers.
A SPLASH OF CYMBALS
In the 1930s in New Orleans many drummers
began decorating their drums, not only with
the band's name or initials but also with attrac¬
tive landscapes, the band-leader's portrait or
even erotic drawings.
Drum playing gradually changed with the
introduction of technological innovations and
improvements. At the end of the nineteenth
century Dee Dee Chandler, John Robichaux's
drummer, was probably the first to add a
pedala wooden mallet at the timeto his
bass drum, which enabled him to speed up
the beat. Metal pedals were soon being made
on a large scale and were enthusiastically
adopted by other drummers.
Cymbals, imported from Istanbul until
1929, were prized for their exotic value. They
were mainly used for keeping the beat, but
during the swing era musicians like Joe Jones,
Count Basie's drummer, began using the
Charleston (cymbals attached to the bass
drum) in a much more fluid way than before. At
the end of the 1960s Elvin Jones, John
Coltrane's drummer, produced a continuous
musical flow with his cymbals that enveloped
the other musicians.
Bebop, which had appeared some years
before, used bigger, heavier cymbals to help with
its dizzying beat. A pioneer of this kind of music,
Kenny Clarke moved the emphasis from the
bass drum to the "ride" cymbal, which he played
in masterly fashion using the so-called
"chabada" technique. Nicknamed "Klook"
because of the unpredictible rhythms he pro¬
duced, Clarke produced a far more modern
sound on what had become full-fledged solo
instruments rather than mere metronomes.
In the late 1940s in response to increasing
demand for drums, calf-skin membranes were
replaced with plastic "skins" that produced a
harder sound but could be produced on a large
scale.
While drumming in rock and pop has kept,
an essentially binary, rhythm-keeping beat,
drummers like Max Roach, Art Blakey, Philly Joe
Jones and Tony Williams have invented rich
and varied rhythms with countless accents and
heady syncopation.
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American musicologist.
