_£0 The calligrapher's art
by Hassan Massoudy
Calligraphy reached a
high degree of
perfection in the
Islamic world, where
representational art
was spurned and
Arabic script offered
rich possibilities for
creative fantasy
I Oral tradition was paramount among the
' Arabs in pre-Islamic days, and poets were
the memory of their tribe. Then the Arabs felt
the need to write down their stories, first simply
as an aide-mémoire, using only a few signs.
With the advent of Islam in the seventh cen¬
tury A.D. writing began to be important because
it gave visual form to the word of God. The
Qur'an, the first book written in Arabic, played
a key role in its development and the evolution
of calligraphy.
Precise practices were laid down. The writing
instrument was the calamus, a sharpened reed
still used by calligraphers. The method of sharp¬
ening it was most important, for it varied with
different scripts. The ink was prepared with
meticulous care and (like the calamus) in strict
secrecy.
The teaching of writing was the responsi¬
bility of a master, who began by drawing letters
in the sand with his finger. The pupils imitated
him, then rubbed it all out and started afresh.
Above, a composition by the
calligraphier Mustafa Rakim.
Executed in 1797, it is now in the
Topkapi Museum, Istanbul.
19

"Don't use two words if one will
do", says the Arab proverb here
written by calligraphier Hassan
Massoudy in 11 different styles:
Diwani, Farsi, Roqaa, Nashki,
Thoulti, Ijaza,' Maghribi, book
Kufic, foliate Kufic, plaited Kufic
and geometric Kufic.
H:nkpliqcLIP7;;
Young pupils at a Qur'anic
school in Andkhoy, Turkestan
(Afghanistan).
Later, smooth wooden tablets coated with clay
were used. Each pupil drew a few lines, and then
had to keep them until he knew them by heart.
At the end of the seventh century, Arabic and
its script became official, and were adopted in the
administration of all Muslim countries. The
script evolved into two main forms, a rounded
flowing one called nashki and a stiff angular
one called kufi. These two styles gave rise to a
multitude of others, nearly all named after their
place of origin (thus hiri from the town of Hira,
hijazi from the Hijaz area, etc.).
In the eighth century the Arabs learned the
secret of paper-making from the Chinese, and
this encouraged the spread of written texts and
fostered the growth of writing. Every corner of
the far-flung Muslim empire had its own style,
20
reflecting its culture and tastes. Thus while the
kufi script was the one mainly used for writing
the Qur'an, it did not have the same appear¬
ance in India as in Iraq, nor the same in Egypt as
in Andalusia.
Monumental lettering (painted on enamel, or
carved in wood or stone) became even more
different, gradually diverging from handwriting
until it lost its original structure. One of the
earliest inscriptions is the one inside the Dome
of the Rock at Jerusalem, in which gilded Kufic
characters on a blue ground run along the mosaic
walls: this dates from the seventh century. Later
there was a proliferation of calligraphy on all
religious and secular monuments.
Kufic script was originally thick and heavy:
when it turned into an architectural feature it
became refined and monumental. The characters
became taller and thinner, suggesting a town-
scape with domes and minarets, or else formed
plaited, floral or geometrical designs. Quad¬
rangular Kufic, for example, consists entirely of
lines meeting at right angles, which gives it aus¬
terity and strength. The written words are sim¬
plified in form; the letters no longer follow one
another on a line, but float in space as though
weightless, or are intertwined in a spiralling
diagonal along the rounded stem of the minarets.
An abstract art form
Script, omnipresent not only on monuments
but also on clothing, crockery and furniture,
was the premier visual art form of the Islamic
city representations of "beings with souls"
having fallen into disrepute. Writing became
the main decorative feature of mosques, palaces
and schools. The only exception was scientific
and literary books, but even there representa¬
tions of the human figure lacked realism, relief
and depth. Thus it was calligraphers who bor¬
rowed from the vocabulary of artists and used
words to give the illusion of illustration.
According to their inspiration and personal
taste they enriched their texts with new mean¬
ings, as in the so-called "mirror calligraphy"
conveying mystical fervour.
On monuments, calligraphy became an
object of meditation. Complicated geometrical
constructions known as calligrams became illeg¬
ible, or contrariwise simplified to the extreme,
like the enormous single letter waw on the wall



of the Great Mosque at Bursa, in Turkey. Cal¬
ligraphy thus became an abstract art form,
expressing the feelings of the calligrapher which
the observer could interpret as he wished. It
developed in two main directions. First, the
shape of the letters themselves sloping up,
sloping down or lying down required callig¬
raphers to be extremely meticulous. The shape
varied according to whether the letter was at
the beginning, in the middle or at the end of the

A huge calligraphic version of
the letter waw drawn on a wall of
the Great Mosque at Bursa in
Turkey.
HASSAN MASSOUDY,
an Iraqi-born calligraphier, is the
author of several works,
including La calligraphie arabe
vívante ("Living Arabic
Calligraphy", Flammarion, Paris,
1981 and 1986) and
Calligraphie pour débutants
("Calligraphy for Beginners",
EDIFRA/IMA, Paris, 1990).
word. Letters were nearly always joined up;
and the space they had to fit into needed to be
carefully measured.
The second line of development was the cal-
ligrapher's own imagination. The accepted rules
did not exclude innovation. After spending years
studying the legacy of his forebears, an artist
eventually gave his inspiration free rein; and it
was by breaking the rules that he advanced his
art. The calligrapher Ibrahim al-Suli said in the
tenth century: "When the pen becomes a tyrant,
it binds together that which was separate and
separates that which was bound together."
An alphabet used by thirty-odd
languages
As early as the reign of the Abbasid caliph al-
Ma'mun (786-833), competition between cal-
ligraphers had given rise to dozens of specialized
styles. There was one reserved for the caliph, one
for ministers, and yet another for messages to
The shape of the letterssloping up,
sloping down or lying downrequired
calligraphers to be extremely
meticulous. The shape varied according
to whether the letter was at the
beginning, in the middle or at the end of
the word. Letters were nearly always
joined up; and the space they had to fit
into needed to be carefully measured.
princes. There was a style for poetry, one for
treaties and contracts, one for finance, one for
defence and so on. It was a prosperous time for
the profession of calligrapher, which according
to Ibn al-Habib al-Halabi had become "the
noblest office, the best branch of knowledge
and the most profitable estate" of the period.
Each caliph had his accredited calligrapher,
a confidential adviser to whom he sometimes
even entrusted the management of his house¬
hold. One calligrapher, Ibn Muqla (b. 886) even
became a minister: it was he who, considering
Kufic too heavy for a period as refined as his,
invented a more flowing, rounded script
(nashki), and gave it a geometrical shape to make
it worthy of transcribing the Qur'an.
Ibn Muqla's reforms were not followed in
the western Arab world. From Egypt to
Andalusia, North African calligraphers, with
their more austere artistic traditions, refused to
give up Kufic, including the Maghribi script
and the many variants derived from it.
Thereafter there were two main schools of
calligraphy, that of Ibn al-Bawwab (eleventh
century), who improved on Ibn Muqla's pro¬
cedures, and that of al-Musta'simi (thirteenth
century), who improved the calamus by cut¬
ting its nib obliquely, thus giving finer upstrokes.
Some thirty languages have used the Arabic
alphabet. The Iranians created their own style,
and improved many others. The Ottomans were
the last great masters of the art of calligraphy.
Their empire saw the introduction of the ijaza,
a qualification which entitled the holder to teach
calligraphy. It produced some great calligra¬
phers, such as Shaikh al-Amassi in the sixteenth
century, who adapted the various scripts for
writing Ottoman Turkish, and Hafiz Uthman
(seventeenth century), who brought simplicity,
purity and grace to calligraphy.
Nowadays, with the development of televi¬
sion and modern methods of reproduction, con¬
temporary calligraphy has lost part of its raison
d'être. But it still remains on the look-out for a
new way forward, in order to advance the art of
writing. 21
