cu
o
Sultan Njoya of Foumban poses
in western military uniform in
front of a royal costume displayed
by his chamberlain (1908).
Egyptian hieroglyphics
may have drawn
inspiration from older
African traditions
22
DAVID DALBY,
of the United Kingdom, is a
former director of the
International African Institute
and emeritus reader in African
languages at the University of
London. He is currently director
of the Observatoire Linguistique
in Cressenville, France, where
he is compiling a register of the
world's modern languages
entitled The Key to the
Logosphere. Among his
published works are Language
and History in Africa (1970),
The Language Map of Africa
(1977) and Africa and the
Written Word (1986).



An inspired invention
I Whereas the writing revolution the
I linear, visual representation of specific
spoken languages began only 5,000 years ago,
the use of graphic symbols to represent objects
and ideas, and to encapsulate magical and reli¬
gious values, is almost certainly as old as arti¬
culate speech itself.
It has sometimes been suggested that certain
traditional African symbols, such as those used
among the Akan-speaking peoples of Ghana,
were inspired by Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs,
by that magnificent explosion of human writing
which took place in northeast Africa. It is more
probable, however, that the hieroglyphs them¬
selves drew an important part of their inspira¬
tion, 5,000 years ago, from even older tradi¬
tions of graphic symbolism in Africa itself.
Whereas a long tradition of writing seems to
have existed northwards and eastwards of the
Sahara and the Nile Valley, southwards stretches
an area whose cultures are associated primarily
with oral tradition. On the other hand, especially
in West Africa, there are strong traditions of
graphic symbolism and also many examples of
the modern evolution or design of "new" indige¬
nous systems of writing.
One of the most remarkable examples of
the use of graphic symbols in Africa is the com¬
plex system of pictograms and ideograms known
as Nsibidi (or Nsibiri), used traditionally in the
Cross River area of southeast Nigeria. The
system is known to have many usages, including
the use of symbols in combination to record
narratives, especially the evidence recorded in
by David Dalby
contentious love-affairs. Nsibidi symbols may
be engraved on calabashes and other domestic
objects, painted on walls, printed on cloth or tat¬
tooed or painted on the human body. They are
not associated with any one specific language but
are found in a multilingual area among speakers
of Ekoi, Igbo and Ibibio.
A curious tradition relates that the secrets of
Nsibidi were long ago revealed to men by a
species of large baboon called idiok. This legend
is above all reminiscent of the divine baboon
associated with Thoth, the patron of scribes in
ancient Egypt. These widely separated beliefs
about the same animal are unlikely to be pure
coincidence, and we are left with two other pos¬
sibilities. Was this a specifically Egyptian belief
which found its way over thousands of years and
thousands of kilometres to eastern Nigeria, or
was it perhaps an ancient and widely spread
belief in Black Africa which passed to Egypt

oim/wi mum-mi mtmn\
£l«HITtf3>HWíTOI mHim i
rai wwj» i ].u i tb./iiAww i
yíitMEmíflnrní j<m
The Lord's Prayer written in the
Bamun language of Cameroon in
1911. The script is known as a-ku
u-ku, a name derived from its first
four characters.
racing page, the first of these
two symbols represents the name
"nsibidi", a system of graphic
symbols used traditionally in part
of southeast Nigeria. The second
represents an idiok, one of the
large baboons which supposedly
revealed the secret of nsibidi to
human beings.
This Egyptian statuette depicts
Nebmertuf, priest, archivist and
scribe to Amenophis III (c. 1400
B.C.), humbly sitting at the feet
of Thoth, the baboon-headed god
of writing.
with the knowledge of traditional graphic sym¬
bols, a vital element in the elaboration of early
pictographic hieroglyphs?
bultan Njoya's dream
A short distance eastward from the traditional
area of Nsibidi, across the border in German
Cameroon, a remarkable cultural event occurred
just a century ago. This was the progressive
elaboration by Sultan Njoya of Foumban of an
independent and original system of writing for
the Bamum language.
Like several other inventors of African
writing systems, Njoya was inspired by a dream,
after which he asked his subjects to draw dif¬
ferent objects and to name them. Armed with
their results, he experimented until he had cre¬
ated his first system of writing, containing some
466 pictographic and ideographic symbols.
Forty years of experimentation and steady
progress led him to the use of his final a-ku-u-
ku syllabary, named after the first four of its
eighty characters.
Sultan Njoya was certainly a man of genius,
but it was his royal position which enabled him
to see his ideas through to completion by estab¬
lishing schools at which his subjects learned to
read and write, elaborating a system of printing
with hand-made copper dies and compiling
texts on the history and customs of his kingdom.
Unfortunately Njoya's achievements were
doomed by the outcome of the First World War.
Encouraged under German rule, Njoya's schools
were closed by the post-war colonial authorities,
and he destroyed his own printing system in
frustration. He was deposed in 1931 and exiled
until his death two years later.
A sacred script
The history of Njoya's system raises the possi¬
bility that the form and sudden appearance of
Egyptian writing may be explained in a similar
way, as the invention primarily of a single man,
highly enough placed to have the necessary
leisure for his task and for the result to have
been accepted without opposition among his
own people.
There is no evidence of any long evolution of
hieroglyphic writing in the beginning, and the
progress of a single inventor could explain the
complex structure of the Egyptian script in its
earliest recorded form, where different stages of
development appear already to be fused into a
single system.
Just as Njoya is known to have been
impressed, but in no way influenced, by the
Arabic script, so an Egyptian inventor may have
been stimulated by the slightly earlier invention of
a quite different writing system in Mesopotamia.
As in the documented cases of several indige¬
nous writing systems in West Africa, a claim
by its inventor to divine inspiration may be
assumed in the case of the Egyptian script also,
and such an origin was certainly the traditional
belief throughout the script's history. The sacred
and revealed nature of Egyptian writing made it
immune to any radical restructuring for thou¬
sands of years and limited its use to an initiated
elite. 23
