Brazil: a country in arms against
hunger by Herbert de Souza
26
Spurred by a citizens' campaign, the mobilization of Brazilian
society against poverty marked the birth of a new political
awareness
Hunger and unemployment have become
blots on the world. They haunt the faces
of Somali refugees and the street children of
Rio. There are 35 million unemployed in the
world's seven wealthiest nations, and in Brazil
alone there are 20 million workers for whom
having a job does not even mean that they will
be able to eat their fill.
"Above all, I am a human In 1 "3 Brazil invented an oriSinaI waX of
being." Above, street children tackling these complex problems. It is known as
demonstrate in Rio de Janeiro. the Citizens' Action Campaign against Poverty
and for Life (ACF), and its 3,000 committees
nationwide have managed to mobilize all of
Brazilian society to relieve the hunger of 32
million persons.
The committees were spontaneously and
independently set up in communities, compa¬
nies, churches, non-governmental organiza¬
tions, trade unions, neighbourhood associations
and schools.
The results of a 1993 survey showed that 96
per cent of the persons polled approved of the
campaign and that 32 per cent had either con¬
tributed financially or offered their time to it.
These surprising and telling figures show that
something can be done, and that appealing to
people's civic spirit is not a waste of time. Brazil's
main bank, O Banco do Brasil, has put its net-

'A driver stopped at a red light
rolls up his window when he sees a
street urchin coming his way for a
handout. When the light turns
green, the car roars off, leaving
the boy empty-handed.'
work at the campaign's disposal, and employees
in nearly 2,000 of its 3,000 branches have vol¬
unteered to collect and distribute food, build
shelters and crèches and mobilize public opinion
in 1,500 Brazilian towns.
Public sector businesses were not to be out¬
done. Some thirty of them today belong to an
extremely active support committee. The private
sector also pitched in, and the C 6c A Institute
of Social Development (Instituto C & A de
Desenvolvimento Social) allocated about $2 mil¬
lion last year to projects on behalf of needy
communities. All the religious faiths have com¬
bined their efforts and established an interde¬
nominational fund that has received donations
for underprivileged children amounting to
almost $600,000. Brazilian university students
have enthusiastically supported the campaign by
organizing meetings and debates on the causes
of hunger and its possible solutions. The civil
service has also been very active; regional offi¬
cials have worked with citizens' committees on
a range of measures against hunger and unem¬
ployment.
Uonations from businesses, the
performing arts and prisons
But the most high-profile responses have come
from the performing arts. Right from the start
actors and singers organized supporting events
all over the country. For months, before every
performance, actors in Rio and Sao Paolo
appealed to their audiences to support the cam¬
paign. Some theatres accepted food as payment
for tickets. The campaign was carried into music
halls, cinemas and onto television, and gave rise



to a gigantic "happening" in which 500 per¬
formers took part in a Week of Art against
Hunger, inspired by the famous Week of
Modern Art held in Sào Paulo in 1922. Chico
Buarque, Caetano Veloso, Gilberto Gil and
other singers took part in concerts held in many
parts of Brazil.
Perhaps the most amazing reaction came
from the female inmates of Rio's Talavera Bruce
prison. They came up with the idea of asking
prisoners in nine other institutions to give part
of their food rations to the anti-hunger campaign
and were able to gather 2.5 tons of provisions
that were used to feed some 200 needy families
for a fortnight in November 1993.
Brazilians living abroad demonstrated their
solidarity by creating support committees in
France, Switzerland, Italy, the United States,
Japan, Finland, Australia and Chile to collect
funds for the inhabitants of the southern
Brazilian states, especially hard hit by a very
severe winter.
Lifting the curtain of indifference
None of this would have been possible if
Brazilian society had not discovered a new
decentralized way of organizing itself and prac¬
tising politics at grassroots level, relying on
individual initiative and a partnership between
generosity and need to lift the heavy curtain of
indifference between the middle and upper
classes and the reality of hunger and poverty.
For the state, the campaign was an oppor¬
tunity to innovate. The President set up a
National Council for Food Security (Conselho
Nacional de Segurança Alimantar) in which
nine ministers and twenty-one representatives
from civil society met to see what the authori¬
ties could do about hunger. It was through this
mechanism that the citizens more or less forced
the state to organize a massive distribution of
provisions to 2 million drought-stricken fami¬
lies in the northeast. In a country the size of a
continent (the area of Brazil is more than
For the past eight years Beliza,
below, has devoted her life to
the street children of Fortaleza,
a port in northeastern Brazil,
and has founded an association
to help them find shelter.
27

28
8,500,000 km2) transporting and distributing
more than 7.5 million staple rations of rice,
beans, wheat, salt and oil was a major operation.
Today, a year after taking to the streets, ACF
has shown Brazilians a new kind of politics
based on principles and reflexes that have always
been latent in their country. The first sign of this
change was the discovery of a new feeling in
Brazil, the feeling that things could be done on
the initiative of society rather than the state.
This gave rise to an entirely new way of looking
at politics.
The first new factor was the realization that
decentralization works. ACF has neither leaders,
nor political slogans nor a central committee. It
simply encourages a sense of individual initiative
and responsibility (what the institutional left
calls "spontaneism"). The campaign has showed
that the capacity of citizens to mobilize should
not be underestimated. For the first time they
prevailed over society, and society over the state.
A political turning point
The media have played a decisive role in alerting
public opinion to a problem which had hitherto
been widely and scandalously ignored. One of
the first ads broadcast free of charge on televi¬
sion summed up the general mood. It showed a
driver, clearly a wealthy member of society,
stopped at a red light, hurriedly rolling up his
window when he sees a skinny, sad-faced street
urchin coming his way for a handout. When
the light turns green, the car roars off, leaving the
boy empty-handed. At market rates it would
have cost ACF $5 million to run this and other
similar ads on Globo TV (the country's main
network with 80 per cent of the market) for six
months!
Hunger became a major issue in the 1994
election campaign because television showed
the general public (as the newspapers showed the
elites) that hunger is an ethical matter, that
democracy cannot accept poverty and that no
country has the right to turn a blind eye to 32
million needy citizens. By now it was impossible
for candidates and voters to ignore a problem
that the whole of Brazilian society had grown
familiar with. No one could forget that there
were 32 million hungry Brazilians.
When the first accusations of corruption
emerged in 1992 against the then President,
nearly 900 citizens' associations, backed by
public opinion, combined in a movement
defending morality in politics to demand his
ouster. Brazilians took to the streets (their faces
painted with the national colours), there were
student demonstrations, and the media rallied
public opinion. The president was forced to
resign, and democracy won the day. In the wake
of this victory the movement's leaders decided
to create ACF.
During the election campaign which led to
the election by universal suffrage of the new
president the second to be democratically
elected after a long period of military dictator¬
ship ACF activists monitored the campaign's
moral aspect, urging various candidates on all
power levels to take a stand on the hunger issue.
In Brazil there are 2 million child workers
between the ages of 10 and 13, whites are paid
twice as much as blacks, and men twice as much
as women. The minimum wage is $65 a week,
but millions of peasants work more than 40
hours a week and do not even earn that paltry
amount. The average monthly wage may be
$280, but 28 million persons share 10 per cent of
GNP and just under 5.6 million privileged
Brazilians control half of it.
The present model of development has failed.
For most Brazilians the wealth that has been
accumulating for decades means nothing. That
Homeless people on a beach in
Rio de Janeiro (Brazil).
HERBERT DE S0UZA,
a Brazilian sociologist, is
executive secretary of the
Brazilian Institute for Social and
Economic Analysis and a leader
of the Citizens' National Action
Campaign against Hunger and
Poverty and for Life. He is also
one of the representatives of
civil society in the Pact for
Childhood, which combines the
efforts of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), the
Brazilian government and
citizens on behalf of Brazilian
children. He isa member of
Brazil's National Council for
Food Security, which was
founded at his instigation.

Brazil has become the ninth richest country in
the world is a joke to them. And the solutions
recently adopted at the instigation of the major
economic powers have only led to worse
poverty.
Citizens working at grassroots level are
thinking about the ethical issues as they start to
build a new socio-economic model that ques¬
tions the role of the state, the market and private
enterprise.
In 1993 and 1994 the Campaign against
Hunger demonstrated that the development
model that creates poverty and exclusion is nei¬
ther irreversible nor inevitable, and that it should
not be accepted fatalistically. The fight against
hunger augurs well for the future. It began by
rejecting what seemed unavoidable. It enabled
people to say, "We can and must all be able to eat,
work, have a roof over our heads, medical care,
basic facilities and access to education and cul¬
ture. Everyone has a right to human dignity
and citizenship."
Much, of course, remains to be done, but at

