LITHUANIA: THE FIRST STATUTE FOR WOMEN
The Statute of Lithuania, promulgated in 1529, was the first law in Europe to define the rights of women
as human beings and not simply as mothers or potential mothers.
The status of women in Lithuanian customary law was the result
of a synthesis between a strong matrilinear tradition and the
role played by women in a society where men were absent for
long periods fighting in the wars.
Whereas collective family responsibility was the rule every¬
where else in Europe, the Statute of Lithuania established the prin¬
ciple of individual legal responsibility and the equality of everyone in
the eyes of the lawirrespective of religion or social statusand guar¬
anteed the inviolability of the person and his or her property. It stip¬
ulated extremely severe penalties, as was the rule at that time, when
corporal punishment was traditionally accompanied by fines. The
Statute regarded a woman's life and physical Integrity as worth
double those of a man of the same rank, although ¡t is true that the
life of a woman "slave" (only prisoners-of-war were considered as
such) was worth a little less than two geese, I.e. the same price as
that of a male "slave".
A Second Statute, promulgated in 1566, went even further than
its predecessor, doubling the terms of imprisonment imposed for
offences against the wife, widow or daughter of a nobleman.
At a time when women ¡n other European countries were gen¬
erally kept under the guardianship of their fathers or husbands, the
Statute (a third and final version of which was promulgated in 1588)
even recognized that Lithuanian women had the right to choose their
partners freely. On the other hand, parents had the right to disinherit
a daughter who married without their consent.
The rights of young women to own property were spelled out in
meticulous detail, although they remained limited. If a father died
without having fixed the amount of his daughters' dowries, the
daughters automatically shared out one quarter of his property
among themselves. When a marriage took place, the bridegroom had
to "endow" his bride with full title to a part of his property.
Widows received even better treatment. They had the legal
right to administer their dead husband's lands, to freely dispose of
their personal property and to bring lawsuits. Ladles, like lords, were
obliged to finance the service of armed horsemen in the grand
duke's army, although they were not required to take part ¡n military
expeditions personally.
The question of rape was handled in the same spirit and in a way
that even today may seem remarkably favourable to women. By
simply lodging a complaint, the victim could haul the aggressor
before the courts and "prove the facts through the testimony of wit¬
nesses". These witnesses could be female, since the Statute stip¬
ulated that women had the same right as men to appear in court and
to take the oath. A rapist could be punished by the death penalty, Irre¬
spective of his social rank, and escape the executioner only If his
victim agreed to marry him.
Lithuanian women did not, however, enjoy equality with men in
every sphere. They had no access to political life. By the middle of
the sixteenth century, many voices were being raised in protest
against the granting of "men's" rights to women.
UGNE KARVELIS,
of Lithuania, is her country's permanent delegate to Unesco. An
author, translator and literary critic, she has for several years
produced a programme about world literature for French radio.
Young Lithuanians dance at a midsummer festival
early this century.
