Aids in a different light
by Marie-Thérèse Bocabeille
MARIE-THÉRÈSE BOCABEILLE
is a staff member of UNESCO's
Promotion and Sales Division.
THE POSSIBILITIES OF TRADITIONAL MEDICINE
Modern medicine so far has nothing effective to offer to Aids
patients, in spite of the massive technological, chemical, sur¬
gical and radiotherapeutic resources devoted to Aids research
in recent years. At the same time, the principles of traditional
forms of medicine have been ignored. And yet, while they
make no claim to halt the epidemic, they can make a big con¬
tribution to the strengthening of the immune defences and
to the prevention of opportunistic diseases.
According to Dr. Christian Tal Schaller1, who has twenty-
five years' experience as a practitioner of alternative medi¬
cine, there are two schools of thought. On the one hand there
are those who believe that the virus is the sole or major cause
of the immunodeficiency. On the other, there are practi¬
tioners who are in touch with natural medicine movements
all over the world and who subscribe to the dictum of the great
French physiologist Claude Bernard (1813-1878): "The virus
is nothing, the terrain is everything".
The "terrain" comprises all the different parts of an
individual that it would be too simple to limit to his or her phys¬
ical body. In addition to the physical organs, which are them¬
selves very complex, there are all kinds of complex forces and
states of mind that play an essential role in any process of
improvement.
Modern medicine, sophisticated though it may be, is
almost exclusively concerned with physical illnesses which
it regards as originating from outsidepeople are supposed
to "catch" a diseasewithout the individual's having any par¬
ticular responsibility for what happens to him or her.
It must be accepted, however, that this approach provides
no explanation as to why, for example, not everyone who is
HIV-positive develops Aids nor why some even return to
being HIV-negative.
As things stand at present, the possibilities offered by
traditional medicine cannot be ignored, much less snubbed
or made fun of.
'HOW I BECAME HIV-NEGATIVE AGAIN'
Niro Markoff Asistent, a Belgian therapist living in the United
States, was diagnosed HIV-positive in 1985. Some time
went by before she accepted her condition and recognized her
own responsibility for her rundown state. When her doctor
admitted there was nothing he could do for her, she decided
to take her life in her own hands. Using with the utmost care
the 500-day reprieve she had been given, she embarked on
a voyage of physical and mental self-discovery.
A year later, Niro Asistent became HIV-negative again.
Inspired by her experience, she created a foundation, the Self
Healing Aids-Related Experiment (S.H.A.R.E.), to which she
now devotes her life. "I believe," she writes, "that Aids is the
most powerful transformational tool that has ever been
available to us on a mass level. It has detonated a bomb under
the surface of society that is forcing us to reevaluate the entire
foundation of life as we know it. It is shaking the medical com
munity and its related industries, it is affecting the educational
and judicial systems. It is forcing us to question our values,
our morals and our identities.2
THE VIRUS, A NECESSARY BUT NOT A SUFFICIENT
CONDITION
HIV alone is not enough to cause Aids, because not all HIV-
positive people develop Aids. There are thus grounds for
thinking that other factors, or co-factors, are involved.
A California research centre3 has drawn up a list of co-
factors which may contribute to the acceleration or slowdown
of immunodeficiency. They include psychological factors
such as stress, depression, pain and the conviction that one
is dying. Others, such as nutrition, oxygenation, sleep or phys¬
ical exercise, are related to life-style. Therapeutic treatment,
relations with one's doctor, and the capacity to cure oneself
are also involved.
'HIV IS NO DEATH SENTENCE'
Mark Griffiths4, a British musician, was diagnosed HIV-posi¬
tive in 1986. He immediately began improving his quality of
life by learning to know himself and live at peace with himself.
He sought to disintoxicate himself physically and mentally by
natural methods, and gradually recreated the bond between
his inner self and his body. By following his own evolution,
without any miracle cure but with great confidence in his own
intuition, he became his own doctor.
In the summer of 1990, Mark Griffiths came across a text
entitled Is the Aids virus science fiction? by Peter Duesberg
of the University of California, Berkeley, which echoed many
of the doubts and questions that arose when he learned he
was HIV-positive, especially about the opportunistic dis¬
eases that he was told he would encounter. In September of
that year, he published a booklet entitled Healing into
freedom: Aids, the apprenticeship, in which he reported the
experiences of those he calls the long-term survivors.
Intent on encouraging the publication of alternative research
which would be both scientific and rigorous, he has become the
champion of a new way of looking at the question and a new
debate. He believes that to be HIV-positive should not be
regarded as a death sentence. He is fighting for patients to be
free to choose their treatment. He has created a network
which collects the testimony of people who have returned to
good health after a serious illness, of scientists who support
the theses of natural regeneration and therapists who teach
self-healing. The Aids acronym for him has been reshuffled to
read "Acquired Interior Development Source".
1 Dr. Christian Tal Schaller, 32 av. Petit Senn, 1225 Chêne-
Bourg, Geneva (Switzerland).
2. Niro Markoff Asistent, Why I survive Aids, Simon and
Schuster/Fireside, New York, 1991, pp. 243-244.
3. LIFE (Learning Immune Function Enhancement), Aids
Response programme, Center for Social Services, 3916 Normal
Street, San Diego CA 92163, U.S.A.
4. Mark Griffiths, 87, chemin du Vélard, F-01710, Tholry
