38
Man of action, writer and
political thinker, losé Martí
(1853-1895) was one of the
great architects of Latin
American consciousness
The first Cuban-born member of a
poor Spanish immigrant family,
José Martí (1853-1895) never
denied his Spanish roots but felt himself to
be first and foremost a son of the land of
his birth. As a child he witnessed the cru¬
elties of slavery and swore that he would
devote his life to "expunging this crime".
While still an adolescent, he fought against
colonialism, was sentenced to hard labour
and put in irons in a prison for political
activists. During his imprisonment, whose
horrors he later vividly denounced, he
paradoxically achieved spiritual freedom
and worked out a militant ethics that
would lead him to call for a war of libera¬
tion that was "necessary" but should be
waged "without hatred".
Exile in Madrid and Zaragossa, where
he pursued his university studies, strength¬
ened his affinities with the rebellious side
of the Spanish character but also his con¬
viction that Cuba could hope for nothing
from the rulers of Spain, whether they
were royalists or republicans. Visits to
Mexico, Guatemala and Venezuela famil¬
iarized him with the problems faced by
these newly independent republics still
fettered by the evils of colonialism. He
spent nearly fifteen years in the United
States, which he studied by analysing the
ideas of its founding fathers, the positive
and negative aspects of its social system,
the characteristics of its people and the
increasingly imperialist tendencies of its
government.
During these years he produced a flow



José Martí
Cuba's man ofdestiny
by Cintio Vitier
"I may fade away. But my thinking will not."
of notable literary and journalistic work,
especially after visiting Venezuela in 1 88 1 .
He was a man of many parts. The orator
who delivered a memorable speech to the
Caracas Chamber of Commerce, the edi¬
torialist who founded the Revista Vene¬
zolana ("Venezuelan Review"), the poet
who wrote Ismaelillo, and the author of the
preface to Juan Antonio Pérez Bonalde's
Poema del Niágara heralded the renais¬
sance ofHispano-American literature. After
his death on the battlefield at Dos Rios,
Rubén Darío, who would later become the
most conspicuous leader of this renais¬
sance, referred to him as the "Master".
Yet Marti did not devote his life to
making a literary reputation. He dedicated
his talents as an orator and journalist to
Cuba and to what he called in a memo¬
rable work, "Our America". His writings
helped to make this America become more
self-aware.
Throughout his life he was guided by a
sense ofethics, duty and sacrifice. When he
proclaimed the Cuban Revolutionary Party
on 10 April 1892 in New York, poor immi¬
grants in Florida revealingly dubbed him
the "Apostle", a man whose destiny tran¬
scended the political context. Earlier, on
26 November 1891, he had made a speech
at the University ofTampa in which he set
forth the foundations of a new Republic,
"With all and for the good ofall".
Marti then embarked on a period of
intensive revolutionary activity. He made
speeches, published articles in the Patria
newspaper, corresponded and travelled
constantly, notably in order to secure the
help of the two most distinguished gen¬
erals of the Ten Years' War between Cuba
and Spain (1868-1878), Maximo Gómez,
who was chosen as commander in chiefof
the Liberation Army, and Antonio Maceo.
In his Tampa speech Marti said, "Either
the Republic must be based on the
integrity ofeach of its sons, on the habit of
working with one's hands and thinking for
oneself, on complete self-fulfilment and
respect, as sacred as family honour, for
the complete self-fulfilment ofothers, and
on a passion for human dignity; other¬
wise the Republic is not worth a single
tear shed by our womenfolk or a single
drop of our brave men's blood."
These fruitful ideas appear in the doc¬
uments written by Marti that were, at the
end of the war, to inspire the creation of the
Cuban Republic, especially an article enti¬
tled "Our ideas", the Montecristi mani¬
festo and two letters to Federico Henriquez
Carvajal and Manuel A. Mercado. In these
and many other writings the Republic is
presented as an absolute democracy,
without privilege based on race or class,
founded on a fair distribution of wealth
and culture and on the demands of the
productive masses.
In a letter to his Mexican confidant,
written only a few hours before he was
killed in battle on 19 May 1895, Marti
wrote, ". . . from now on I am likely to die
any day for my country and my duty, a
duty which I know and am determined to
perform." Duty meant wresting Cuban
independence from Spain in order to pre¬
vent a new imperialism from spreading
through the West Indies and bringing
greater oppression to the Americas.
It was for this and not only to free Cuba
from Spanish dominion that José Martí
helped to organize the war in which he
would perish. But the parable ofMarti's life
continued to inspire future generations. As
he once said to Mercado, "I may fade away.
But my thinking will not."
Perhaps Marti's greatest quality was
his ability to speak to the poor and to chil¬
dren, his readiness to live and die for them.
His example will continue to inspire us.
The task he began is still unfinished both
in his homeland and elsewhere in the
world.
CINTIO VITIER
¡s a Cuban poet, essayist and novelist who won his
country's national literature prize in 1988 and is
president of the study centre on José Martí in
Havana. The editor of the critical edition of Marti's
complete works, he is the author of Nupcias (1993),
a collection of poems, Temas martianos (1982), an
essay on Marti, and a novel, Rajando la Leña está.
