Pilgrimages in Judaism
by Nicholas de Lange
The ancient Jewish tradition of pilgrimage has survived
many changes
Celebrations at the Wailing
Wall In Jerusalem during
Sukkot, a Jewish autumn
festival also called the Feast of
Tabernacles or Feast of Booths.
Pilgrimage was "a duty laid on Israel".
I This legal obligation (hoq) is stipulated
three times in the Torah, the foundation text of
Judaism: "Three times a year all your males
shall appear before the Lord your God" (Exodus
23,17; Exodus 34, 23; Deuteronomy 16, 16).
The three festive pilgrimages regulated the
year of the Jews living in their land so long as the
temple still stood inJerusalem. They were held at
key moments in the agricultural cycle, at the time
of the three harvests in late spring (the Passover),
midsummer (Pentecost) and early autumn (Taber¬
nacles). Of these pilgrimages the last, falling imme¬
diately after the most solemn moment of the
temple's year, the great expiatory gathering (kippur
or Day of Atonement), came to be considered the
most significant, and it was often known simply
as "the festival" (hag cf. Arabic hajj).
However, although strictly the duty to make
the pilgrimage three times each year had, for
male Jews, the status of adivine commandment,
in practice it was regarded as a non-obligatory
but highly meritorious act. While many Jews
living within relatively easy reach of Jerusalem
made the pilgrimage only occasionally, sources
from the early Roman period describe the holy
city as being thronged at each of the festivals
with countless pilgrims (numbering over a mil¬
lion according to some accounts), many of
whom had come from as far away as Babylonia
28
(Iraq), Persia, Ethiopia, Anatolia and Rome.
This phase of the religious history of the
Jewish people came to an abrupt end in the year
70 of the current era, when the temple was
destroyed by the Roman army. It may seem
extraordinary in retrospect that the Jewish reli¬
gion was able to survive the definitive loss of its
central institution. Presumably the destruction
was not at first perceived as final, and the survival
of Judaism was encouraged by the fact that an
earlier destruction, by the Babylonians in 586
BCE (before the current era), had been fol¬
lowed by the building of a new temple on the
same site some seventy years later. "Our holy
and splendid temple, where our ancestors
praised you, has been burned down, and our
most precious possession is now a ruin". These
ancient words of the prophet Isaiah were now
recited by pilgrims to the site of the destroyed
temple, whose joy was alloyed with bitterness.
Henceforth the dominant mood of the pilgrims
was one of grief and mourning.
I he destruction of the temple
Even more bitterly humiliating was the fact that
access to the holy city was not freely available:
it was now in the hands of alien rulers. Some¬
times the Jews were completely excluded from
the city; even when they were allowed access the
journey was difficult and dangerous, and there
were heavy taxes to pay.
Apparently, despite all the hardships and
humiliations, Jewish pilgrims kept on coming.
After the Arab conquest in 638 conditions
became much easier, and it seems that the num¬
bers of pilgrims increased; some came to settle
in Jerusalem, others just to visit. Those who
were able brought gold for the maintenance of
the Jewish community, for the relief of poverty
and the upkeep of the scholars.
For a long time the history of the Jews in the
Holy Land was shrouded in obscurity. Now,
thanks to the astonishingly rich haul of medieval
documents recovered from the Ben Ezra syna-
gogue in Old Cairo (the so-called Cairo
Genizah) many of the details have been filled in,
and it has become clear that pilgrimage was an
important facet of the religious life of the Jews.
As in temple times, the preferred time of the year
for pilgrimage was the autumn festival, and pil¬
grims came from far and wide: the Genizah
documents mention pilgrims from Khurusan,
Babylon, Egypt, Libya and the Maghrib, from
Byzantium and even from France. Some of them

A model of the Old City of
Jerusalem as It was at the time
of the Second Temple (centre of
photo).
NICHOLAS DE LANGE,
of the United Kingdom, has been
a Fellow of Wolfson College,
Cambridge since 1985. Notable
among his published works are
Judaism (Oxford University
Press, 1986) and an Atlas of the
Jewish World (Oxford/New York,
1984)
went in fulfilment of a vow made at a time of dis¬
tress. They prayed particularly on the Mount of
Olives, outside the city to the east and facing the
site of the temple; they also prayed at the gates
of the city. At the end of the Festival of Taber¬
nacles, in particular, a great gathering was held
on the Mount of Olives.
The Wailing Wall
Jerusalem retained its sanctity throughout the
centuries, and it received many famous visitors.
Incidentally, it was under Ottoman rule that
the spot which is especially venerated today
acquired its status: the "Wailing Wall", or
western retaining wall of the temple precinct.
The wall itself is ancient, going back to Herod
the Great, a Jewish king who restored and
embellished the temple in the first century BCE;
but according to tradition it was one of the early
Ottoman sultans who cleared the area and
allowed the Jews to pray and lament there.
Though no formal rituals of pilgrimage are asso¬
ciated with it, this relic of the temple still attracts
Jews, both young and old, traditionalist and
more secularized: families come to celebrate the
bar mitzvah, the moment when a boy becomes
a man, and those in anxiety or distress thrust
little notes into crevices in the wall.
In each period of Jewish history the signifi¬
cance of the pilgrimage to Jerusalem has been
different. While the temple still stood, the pil¬
grimage was closely attached to the regular life
and sacrificial worship of that institution, and
to the belief that God was, in a real sense, present
in the building, which was referred to as his
"home". The pilgrim, in addition to offering his
personal devotions and participating in an estab¬
lished communal ritual, was obeying the divine
command to "sec the face of the Lord". After the
destruction of the temple, mourning and "sacred
nostalgia" took over: lamenting the present des¬
olation of the site, seemingly abandoned by God's
presence (the shekhina) "because of our sins", the
pilgrim cast his mind back to the past but also for¬
ward to the end of history, when the ram's horn
would sound out to proclaim the age of the Mes¬
siah, accompanied by the return of the people to
Jerusalem in a resumption of the mass pilgrimage,
the rebuilding of the temple, and the resump¬
tion of sacrifices.
At the present time, there is no doubt that the
vast majority ofJews throughout the world feel
a very strong sentimental attachment to the
Land of Israel and to the city of Jerusalem.
Every year large numbers of Jews visit
Jerusalem, and many of them take the oppor¬
tunity to pray at the Wailing Wall. On the other
hand, the term "pilgrimage" has gone out of
fashion. Indeed, most books about Judaism,
whether descriptive studies or manuals of reli¬



gious practice, omit all mention of pilgrimage or
refer to it briefly in connection with the three
festivals as a ritual belonging to times long past.
The tombs of the prophets
There is another aspect to the subject of pil¬
grimage in Judaism, that leads us even further A _
away from the official and universal forms of the ¿M

Jewish pilgrims in the old
synagogue at La Ghariba on the
island of Djerba (Tunisia) take
part in the annual celebration
of Lag ba-Omer. The synagogue
attracts pilgrims from many
parts of the world.
religion. Within the holy city the site of the temple
can lay claim to a sanctity that is close to the heart
of millennial Judaism. But elsewhere in the holy
land, and in many countries where Jews have
lived since ancient times, there are lesser holy
places that have long been the object of pilgrimage.
Very often it is a tomb, associated with the name
of a prophet or holy man (occasionally a holy
woman); but sometimes it is a synagogue that is
the object of pilgrimage, and very occasionally a
movable object such as a scroll of the Torah.
Not far south ofJerusalem is the traditional
site of the tombs of Abraham and his family at
Hebron, which is also a Muslim shrine. Legend
holds that four couples are buried there:
Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob
and Leah, and also the first human couple, Adam
and Eve. Pilgrims to Jerusalem have tended to
include Hebron on their itinerary, and it is reck¬
oned as one of the four "holy cities" (with
Jerusalem, Tiberias and Safcd).
It is in the north of Israel, however, that most
of the holy sites are found. Indeed, parts of eastern
Galilee, particularly around the holy cities of
Tiberias and Safed, are dotted with tombs bearing
the names of the great rabbis of the Talmud.
Of the many Jewish shrines of the Middle
East, some of which are undoubtedly of very
great antiquity, the most famous were tradi¬
tionally the supposed tombs of the prophet
Ezekiel at el-Kifl and of Ezra the Scribe at
Kurna, both in Babylonia (modern Iraq). The
Jews of Iran, who used to frequent these sites,
also have their own shrines, many of which also
carry associations with biblical heroes, notably
Most of the holy sites are found in the north of Israel.
Parts of eastern Galilee, particularly around the holy
cities of Tiberia and Safed, are dotted with tombs bearing
30 the names of the great rabbis of the Talmud.
the tombs of Esther and Mordecai and the
prophet Zechariah at Hamadan, and the prophet
Habbakuk nearby at Tuserkan. The Jews of
Yezd, in response to dreams and vows, attend the
shrine of the prophet Elijah at Nasrabad; other
old shrines, such as the tombs of Daniel at
Shushtar, Isaiah at Isfahan and Zippora near
Qum, and of Abraham Ibn Ezra near Meshd, are
no longer practicable for Jewish pilgrimage.
Egypt once had many sites of local pilgrimage,
as we can see now from the documents of the
Cairo Genizah. Old synagogues were visited,
and by far the most popular sanctuary was the
sanctuary (miqdash) of Dumuh or Dammuh, an
abandoned site on the western bank of the Nile
south of Cairo. Many Genizah documents refer
to the pilgrimage (ziyara) to the "synagogue of
Moses" at Dammuh, particularly after the time of
Moses Maimonides and his son Abraham, who
were particularly concerned with its upkeep.
Besides synagogues and tombs, Egyptian Jews
also venerated ancient scrolls of the Torah (there
was one of these at Dammuh); this practice is
found as far afield as Syria and Morocco.
In conclusion, mention must be made of the
shrines of Morocco, where veneration of saints
is a very marked feature ofJudaism. Their shrines
are dispersed all over the country, mainly in the
Atlas Mountains but also along the coastal plain
and in the eastern regions. A recent study man¬
aged to gather information about no fewer than
571 Moroccan Jewish saints (of whom twenty-
one were women). More remarkable than this is
the fact that many of the sites are traditionally vis¬
ited by both Jewish and Muslim pilgrims; in
some cases Jews visited Muslim marabouts; more
commonly both visit Jewish shrines, or others
where the allegiance of the saint is disputed
between the two religions. With the resettlement
of many Moroccan Jews in Israel, new shrines
have sprung up there, to satisfy the religious
needs and customs of the immigrants.
It would be misleading to leave the topic of
Jewish pilgrimage here, with an impression of
the ubiquity and religious intensity of pilgrimage
rituals. It should be stressed that nowadays
Jewish pilgrimage is more or less confined within
the limits of the Land of Israel and the Muslim
world. As the Muslim countries have recently
been more or less emptied of their Jewish pop¬
ulations, the opportunities for pilgrimage have
been much reduced. (Some shrines, such as the
old synagogue on the island of Djerba in Tunisia,
still manage to attract back some expatriates for
the annual pilgrimage). In Europe, whatever
may have been the situation in earlier times,
pilgrimage is virtually non-existent, and most
European Jews, or Jews of European origin,
would not instinctively associate it with Judaism.
Modernist Jewish theology has tended to insist
that God is not to be understood as "present" in
one place more than in any other, and to reject
any need for the mediation of saints, or any
"superstitious reverence for sacred spots".
