m
The thrice-holy city by Annie Laurent
Jerusalem is a magnet for Jewish, Christian and Muslim
pilgrims from all over the world
14
Jerusalem enjoys the unique privilege of
being holy three times over for Jews,
Christians and Muslims.
The Jews learn in the Torah (a Hebrew trans¬
lation of the Greek word "Pentateuch", desig¬
nating the first five books of the Bible) that at the
end of time the Messiah announced by the
prophets will appear on Mount Zion one of
the seven hills of Jerusalem, once the "City of
David" and that all peoples will become one.
In order to be as near to the fulfilment of this
prediction as possible, believing Jews the world
over dream of being buried in the cemetery on
the side of this sacred hill. Until then, it is written
that Jews must remain "a holy nation and a
people of priests", and not merge into other
nations. This is one of the underlying reasons for
the foundation of the state of Israel as both a
temporal and a spiritual kingdom with Jerusalem
as its "eternal" capital.
Christians refer to the Revelation of St. John
the Divine in the New Testament and believe
that the earthly Jerusalem will be transformed
into a heavenly city. Except for the short-lived
"Kingdom of Jerusalem" in the eleventh and
twelfth centuries, which was established after
the city was taken by the Crusaders, Chris¬
tians have never placed the city on a political
footing. They venerate Jerusalem only for its
role in the coming of Christianity and for the
memories associated with this. It is there that
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, took on human
form to redeem the world and experienced the
most painful and the most glorious moments of
his earthly existence, notably the crucifixion
and the resurrection.

According to Muslim tradition, the faithful
await the coming of Muhammad on the Temple
esplanade, where he will meet Abraham, Moses
and Jesus (in the Qur'an Jesus is only referred to
as a prophet) and pray with them as a harbinger
of the last judgment and the resurrection. But
Jerusalem means something more to Muslims.



As Muhammad's destination on the night of
the mystic journey during which he was carried
to heaven on his mare, it is the third most holy
site in Islam after Mecca and Medina. Because it
is recorded in the Qur'an, this episode is
accepted as an absolute truth: "Glory be to
Him, who carried His servant by night from the
Holy Mosque to the Further Mosque the
precincts of which We have blessed, that We
might show him some of Our signs." (Surah
XVII).
Tens of thousands of faithful pilgrims
belonging to the three major monotheistic reli¬
gions flock to Jerusalem all the year round,
transforming the city into an astonishingly
colourful canvas of human diversity. The effect
is intensified by the fact that the main holy sites
are concentrated in the Old City, a relatively
small area surrounded by four kilometres of
ramparts. The Old City (East Jerusalem) has
four districts (Jewish, Muslim, Christian and
Armenian), and was under Jordanian rule
between 1948, when the state of Israel was cre¬
ated and the first Israelo-Arab war took place,
and 1967, when it was conquered by the Israelis
during the Six-Day War. Since 1967 the Israelis
have controlled the pilgrimage process.
The Wailing Wall
Temple Mount is a site of supreme importance
for the Jews. The famous edifice that protected
the Holy of Holies was rebuilt by Herod I the
Great in 37 B.C. on the ruins of the First Temple
built by Solomon. All that remains of Herod's
temple, which was destroyed by the Roman
legions of Titus in 70 A.D., is a twelve-metre-
high foundation wall familiarly known as the
"Wailing Wall", which the Israelites had sworn
never to abandon.
The dilapidated quarter in which the Wall
stood until 1967 has been torn down and replaced
by a broad paved esplanade. Pious Jews fer¬
vently wish for the Temple to be rebuilt, but
this is impossible since it would mean demol¬
ishing Muslim sanctuaries that have since been
built on the site. A synagogue and a rabbinical
Photos above, from left to
right.
The Wailing Wall (or "Western
Wall") in the Old City of
Jerusalem is a vestige of the
second Temple, built by Herod I
the Great (last century B.C.) on
the site of the Temple of
Solomon. It is the most
important of the Jewish holy
places in Jerusalem.
The Greek Orthodox chapel in
the church of the Holy
Sepulchre, which Is shared by
Christians of various
denominations.
The Dome of the Rock. Built
over a rock considered sacred
by Muslims, this shrine
constructed between 688 and
691 is considered to be the
oldest existing Islamic
monument.
15

school have also been built near the foundations
of the Temple.
The Noble Holy Place
The raised platform once occupied by the Jewish
Temple became the Muslims' al-Haram ash-
Sharif ("The Noble Holy Place"). In 636
Jerusalem was captured by Caliph Umar, one of
whose successors, Abd al-Malik, built an octag¬
onal-shaped mosque on the site to house the
rock where Muhammad is reputed to have had
his dream. This is why the building is known as
the "Dome of the Rock". As the French writer
René de Chateaubriand noted in his Itinéraire de
Paris a Jérusalem ("Journey from Paris to
Jerusalem"), only Muslims were allowed access
to the platform, and if the nineteenth-century
French traveler Pierre Loti was privileged to
walk beneath the Dome of the Rock, it was
because he received a special dispensation from
the Pasha of Jerusalem.
Today the "Noble Holy Place" is open to
everyone except on Fridays, the Muslim day of
special congregational prayer, and on Islam's
great feast days (the Mawlid, which commem¬
orates Muhammad's birthday, and the Id-al-
Fitr, which marks the end of Ramadan). The
gatherings do not, however, take place at the
Dome but at the nearby al-Aqsa mosque, which
was built around the same time.
Al-Aqsa draws from all over the East a
growing number of the faithful, who mingle
with the early morning crowds of Palestinians
who ride in from the outlying villages of the
THE ROADS OF FAITH
As part of the World Decade for Cultural Development. Unesco has
launched a "Roads of Faith" project as a tribute to Jerusalem's
international, intercultural and inter-religious importance and to
make the city a centre of peace and understanding among people.
Launched in 1991. the project has acquired new significance
in the light of the peace talks between Israel and the Arab coun¬
tries. Mr. Doudou Diene. Unesco's Director for Intercultural Projects,
notes that it could open up new possibilities for Unesco to con¬
tribute to the peace process through an attempt to rediscover the
network of relationships woven in the past between the three
monotheistic religions.
16
West Bank and Gaza in hired coaches. On most
mornings the atmosphere is fairly relaxed, but on
Fridays it is tense because entrance into the
"Noble Holy Place" is carefully screened by
Israeli soldiers posted in front of the wooden
gate leading into it. Many of the faithful are not
admitted either because they are suspected of
being activists or because there are too many of
them. The excluded have to be content to pray
packed together in the nearby streets.
The Holy Sepulchre
Christian pilgrims flow into Jerusalem during
the main Christian festivals, Easter being the
most popular because of the importance of the
events remembered at that moment in the Chris¬
tian year. Their first destination is the Church of
the Holy Sepulchre which was begun by St.
Helena, the mother of the Emperor Constantine.
This huge, dark building covers Calvary, the
small outcrop where Christ was crucified, and
the tomb fifty paces away where he was buried
and from which he arose on the third day.
Chateaubriand noted that the church, "con¬
sisting of several churches built on uneven
ground and lit by a multitude of lamps, is par¬
ticularly mystical. A darkness reigns there that
fosters piety and inner reflection."
For centuries, the hierarchies of different
denominations have disputed the guardianship
of the Christian holy places. Unable to reach
agreement, they have made ad hoc arrangements
about the occupation of time and space. Fran¬
ciscan "Custodians of the Holy Land" rub
shoulders with Greek and Russian patriarchs,
Coptic and Abyssinian monks from Egypt and
Ethiopia, Maronites and Melchites from
Lebanon, Armenians and Nestorian priests from
Syria and Iraq. To add to this mosaic of Chris¬



tianity are Christians from the English-speaking
world, including Mormons, Anglicans and other
Protestants, who do not actually have any rights
over the holy places but possess a historical,
cultural and liturgical heritage in the Old City
which they jealously protect.
The Way of the Cross, a Good Friday pro¬
cession through narrow streets (the Via
Dolorosa) whose shops remain open, takes place
in an atmosphere of indescribable confusion.
In reaction to such difficulties a growing number
of Christian pilgrims prefer to visit Jerusalem
"out of season" when they can fully benefit
from the silence of the holy places that are so
dear to them.
ANNIE LAURENT
is a French writer and journalist
who specializes in the Middle
East. She Is the author (with
Antoine Basbous) of Guerres
secrètes au Liban ("Secret Wars
in Lebanon") published by
Gallimard, Paris, 1987.
