UNITED NATIONS YEAR FOR TOLERANCE
Federico Mayor
Director-General of Unesco



Violence, an affront to humanity
The Cold War long justified the intolerable. So long as the world was
divided into two camps, hostilities, violence and massacres were con¬
cealed or sanctioned. Today, we know. In a more transparent world, we no
longer have the excuse of innocence.
Today there are no longer any camps and the world is one. But along¬
side the joy and hope occasioned by the progress of freedom, democracy
and peace, unhappiness continues to advance through the violence of
ethnic cleansing, terrorism, cultural and religious extremism, genocide,
exclusion and discrimination.
Violence, especially when it imperils life, is inexcusable. How can it
be justified by "religious" arguments when all religions are founded on
love and generosity? Violence can and must be combated as such, as an
affront to everything that makes for humanity in a human being and as
the expression of an inability to move from dreams of hegemony to the
reality of interdependence.
From now on, the archaic culture of war must yield to the culture of
peace in which the cult of force and the apology of competition will be
replaced by the emergence of new horizons of human solidarity, the daily
epic of freedom and justice, the sense of fellowship embracing, at once,
human beings everywhere and generations to come.
From now on, humanity must be able to devote itself to the safe¬
guarding, restoration and construction of peace, through the creation of
the necessary areas of dialogue, co-operation and reconciliation. Yes to
disagreement, no to violence. What is required by democratic princi¬
ples which must be consolidated every dayis neither docility nor sub¬
mission. On the contrary, it is involvement in discussion, it is the expres¬
sion of the ideals and ideas of all, with verve and perseverance. But this is
not, ever, violence.
If we wish to remedy the asymmetry of our world, reduce inequali¬
ties in the distribution of its resources, we must not slacken in the fight
against ignorance, poverty and humiliation. We must strengthen our
efforts and pursue them unremittingly in order to counter hostile inter¬
ests and correct shortsightedness, which is always a bad counsellor. But
violence never again.
From now on, let us decree that citizens should no longer sacrifice
their lives but rather live them; that the finest tribute one can pay to the
dead ofall the wars of this century is to preserve the lives of their children.
From now on, in the conscience and behaviour of each of us, tolerance
should assume its strongest significance: not simply the acceptance of
others with their differences, but a spontaneous movement towards
others, to know them better and to know ourselves better through them,
to share with them, to extend to them the hand of fellowship and compas¬
sion, so that universal values, common to all, are enriched by the precious
individuality of every culture and every language, and by the irreplaceable
creativity of every person.
47
