Zoroastrianism and
the cult of fire
by Mahin Tadjadod
'Fire must play the same role on earth
as the sun does in the sky'
A product of the Indo-European tradition, the cult of fire
was practised in ancient times by the Scythians and
was also known to the Greeks and Romans. An eternal
flame burned on the altar of Pan at Olympia, the Greeks
kept a gold lamp permanently in the sanctuary of
Pallas Athene, and the Persian king Xerxes I (486-465
B.C.) of the Achaemenid dynasty is said to have spared
the temple of Delos because its cult reminded him of
the fire of Iran. (In India and Iran fire was the dominant
feature of the ancient Aryan religion.)
The prophet Zoroaster transposed fire to the spir¬
itual realm as a symbol of divine splendour and power,
the source of human life and love for Ahura Mazda, the
"Wise Lord". Strictly speaking, fire was never a divinity
in itself, but rather the visible sign of God's presence.
Mazdaism (another name for Zoroastrianism) is based
on a strong affirmation of the oneness of Ahura Mazda,
whose essence is consubstantial with infinite light.
Ahura Mazda's eye is the sun, and his son is fire,
burning before him in his spiritual form.
A FLAME KEPT ALIGHT FOR 3,000 YEARS
The Bundahishn ("Book of the Original Creation")
speaks of the "three fires of Persia" that long wandered
where the wind blew them before descending from
heaven at the time of the mythical Kayanid kings.
According to one theory they are linked to the three
social classes instituted by Zoroaster's three sons:
priests, warriors and farmers.
Since then the flame has never gone out in the tem¬
ples. At night it is put to sleep with prayers and at dawn
it is awakened with praise.
Fire rewards and punishes. It is the symbol of sin¬
cerity and purity. It burns the sinner and protects the
virtuous. Trial by fire, the Ordeal, decides whether a
person accused of a crime is innocent or guilty. Falsely
accused of having raped his mother-in-law, Siyavosh, the
hero of the Iranian epic, the Shah-nama ("The Book of
Kings"), passes through fire and emerges unscathed.
Since he is stainless, he is spared by the fire.
Even today the Zoroastrian community obeys these
ancient precepts. Its faithful still make offerings to fire
and are careful not to defile it with their breath. This
is why Zoroastrian priests, the mobads, cover their
mouths with the panam (two pieces of white cotton
cloth knotted behind the head) when they face the fire
and recite the Avesta, the holy book.
Today the faithful still come to the Zoroastrian
temple at Yazd, the most venerable in all Iran. The
building and the garden around it are carefully tended,
and it is said that the fire burning inside has not gone
out for 3,000 years.
Above, a sun mask worn at
the Venice carnival.
MAHIN TADJADOD,
of Iran, is the author of several plays inspired by Persian
mythology and epics.
23
