COMMENTARY
Sharing our knowledge
32
I UNESCO's mission, whether
I it be in the natural sciences
or in the social and human sciences,
is to correct the glaring disparities
in the scientific research effort
being made throughout the world
and to promote the development of
scientific knowledge for its intrinsic value and for its
contribution to general education, but also to provide
the backing for social and economic development.
For UNESCO's science programmes cover the basic
sciences, the sciences applied to the environment and
the development of natural resources, and the engi¬
neering sciences. While UNESCO promotes the
advancement of the social and human sciences, it
also encourages their application to the management
of social transformations, as well as interdisciplinary
approaches to such complex problems as population,
development and the environment, the status of
women, and human rights, democracy and peace.
UNESCO regards the social sciences as an area of
knowledge that has to be strengthened but also believes
in using them to solve the main problems of humanity
and societies, in tune with its work in education, cul¬
ture and communication, its other areas of compe¬
tence. In so doing, it is helping to lay the foundations
on which the programmes of the other specialized
agencies of the United Nations system can be built.
UNESCO contributed to the creation of CERN, the
European Centre for Nuclear Research. Together
with the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the Italian government, it is responsible for admin¬
istering the International Centre for Theoretical
Physics in Trieste, which each year trains several
hundred researchers from developing countries. It
participated in the foundation of the International
Centre for Pure and Applied Mathematics in Nice,
and was instrumental in setting up two international
non-governmental research organizations, one on
the brain and the other on cells. It has also set up co¬
operation networks linking research institutes such
as the Microbial Resources Network and the Molec
ular and Cell Biology Network, and co-operation
mechanisms involving, for example, the human
genome and biotechnologies (the Biotechnology
Action Council).
This international and regional approach has been
applied in the launching of major intergovernmental
scientific programmes that bring together and stim¬
ulate national, regional and international activities.
This is the case of the activities of the Intergovern¬
mental Océanographie Commission, the Interna¬
tional Hydrological Programme, the Man and the
Biosphere Programme, the International Geological
Correlation Programme and, in the last year or so, the
Programme for the Management of Social Transfor¬
mations.
Human developmentpriorities
The goal common to all these activities is that of sus¬
tainable human development, which is recognized
as being both the prerequisite for peace in the world
and the prize to be won for its achievement. Sus¬
tainable human development has obvious priorities,
such as combating poverty, improving living condi¬
tions, especially in rural areas, preventing the accel¬
eration of the growing disparities between and within
nations, and establishing a more equitable interna¬
tional economic environment.
However, the priority in which UNESCO is specif¬
ically interested and which has a place in all its pro¬
grammes, especially in the sciences, is the development
of human resources, in other words, skills training
aimed at creating or strengthening endogenous capac¬
ities at national and local level. We should derive
great satisfaction from the fact that all the agencies
engaged in funding economic and social develop¬
ment projects I am thinking above all of the World
Bank and the United Nations Development Pro¬
gramme now acknowledge that the enhancement of
human resources, the training of professionals and the
improvement of people's skills are all key factors in
development.

B Y F E D E R I C MAY i
In the few years now separating us from the next
century, our strategy will therefore consist in stepping
up the transfer and sharing of scientific knowledge
and in promoting its application to the development
of natural resources and the management of social
transformations. In this transfer, the importance of
the basic sciences should not be underestimated. As we
all know, "there are no applied sciences unless there are
sciences to apply". In sharing knowledge, it is impor¬
tant to remember the passing on of information as
well as skills. In briefing decision-makers, whether in
the private or public sectors, scientists contribute
decisively to a clear and rational understanding of
problems and of possible solutions to them.
Science and the decision-makers
This briefing function should not be confined to what
we regard as being recent advances in science; it is
essential, for example, to explain the scientific prin¬
ciples underlying traditional practices which might
otherwise be treated with undeserved contempt.
Obviously it also includes the publication of research
findings I am thinking, for example, of those
involving malaria or hydrophilic polymers.
In order to accelerate the transfer of knowledge,
UNESCO has set in motion a number of projects,
among which I would mention the UNITWIN pro¬
gramme, which involves twinning and co-operation
arrangements between universities and the setting up
of networks linking them; the project providing for
the granting of short-term fellowships to researchers
from developing countries; and the UNESCO chairs
programme under which scientists from the North
can go to countries of the South and help to train
their future colleagues in those countries. These forms
of knowledge-sharing are also clearly designed to
combat the brain drain and wastage of skills.
The primary aim of UNESCO's strategy regarding
the follow-up to the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development will be to find sound
scientific solutions to the problems involved in devel¬
oping natural resources and in managing social trans¬
formations and population issues, with a view to pro¬
moting sustainable human development. These
solutions will be based on the results of projects in
which research will be combined with educational,
training and information activities. The implemen
tation of this strategy will entail collaborating more
closely with scientists, engineers and technicians and
with their international, regional and national non¬
governmental organizations and professional asso¬
ciations, in order to increase and step up the pace of
the transfer and sharing of knowledge.
Networks ofco-operation
Such transfers and sharing will be brought about
by:
*" improving the relevance of higher education
and training by adapting syllabuses to new require¬
ments;
*" linking research more closely to training;
*~ establishing or strengthening links between
production sectors, industry and higher education
and research systems;
*" continuing activities designed to collect and dis¬
seminate scientific information;
*" consolidating co-operative networks in this
area.
In this connection, I would like to mention two
multidisciplinary programmes of international co¬
operation in Latin America and the Caribbean, the
Common Market of Knowledge (MECCO), an
extremely worthwhile venture, and the ENLACE
Plan, which is designed to foster co-operation between
industry, universities and research as part of the
"Bolivar" programme.
UNESCO's strategy will draw on increased collab¬
oration and synergy between the Organization's
intergovernmental programmes in the environ¬
mental and social sciences, in an endeavour to find
solutions to a number of urgent environmental and
development problems. Particular emphasis will be
placed on improving our knowledge of the working
of ecosystems, on the management of social trans¬
formations and on promoting environmental and
population information and education, in order to
encourage changes of attitude, especially among
young people, and inculcate behaviour patterns con¬
ducive to sustainable human development.
We shall also be trying to encourage small-scale
field projects that will help to foster a spirit of enter¬
prise, especially in rural areas, and induce people who
might be tempted by the mirage of urban life to
remain in their home environment. ^o
