The birth of
the blues
by Isabelle Leymarie
After emerging from the field songs of
the cotton plantations in the Deep
South at the end of the 19th century,
the blues became a fount of inspiration
for jazz and later rock ï roll, Here
Isabelle Leymarie reviews La rouie du
blues ("The Blues Road"), a new book
that journeys along the Mississippi to
the source of this Afro-American
musical form that has fans all over the
world,
The origin of the blues, one of the
most original and powerful
musical forms to develop in the
New World, can be traced back to field
hollers, the modulated cries made by
slaves as they laboured in the cotton
fields of the Deep South. When LeRoi
Jones wrote a book on black Americans,
later to become a classic of Afro-Amer¬
ican literature, he gave it the evocative
title The Blues People.
The blues and its urban reincarna¬
tion, boogie-woogie, are the ancestors of
rock 'n' roll. Elvis Presley, Vincc Taylor,
the Rolling Stones and Eric Clapton
could never have existed without the
blues. Jazz is constantly going back to
its roots in the fertile soil of the blues
44
and gospel music, which has always had
close links with the blues. The cele¬
brated blues scale, which is so typical
of Afro-American music and gives it its
specific "mashed note" tone, provided
the uprooted slaves with a means of
reproducing untempered African scales
on instruments different from those
they had known. The first blues singers
were "loners" unattached men living
in rural areas who accompanied them¬
selves on the guitar. Later the blues
became urbanized when it was taken
up by vaudeville artistes and recording
companies. With the massive migration
of blacks to the northern stales, the
blues became more stylized and eventu¬
ally came to be played by bands and
orchestras.
Standard blues contains twelve bars
with a typical modulation on the fifth
bar. But rather than a particular struc¬
tural or harmonic pattern, the blues is
above all a "sound", a way of life, an
emotion. Musicians say that you have to
have lived the blues before you can play
it, you have to have suffered, toiled
away, wandered from place to place,
been in love and paid your dues.
From New Orleans to Chicago
La route du blues ("The Blues Road")
traces the wanderings of the bluesmen
along the Mississippi from New Orleans,
Baton Rouge and the Louisiana coun¬
tryside to Chicago, the end of the road
for the huge wave of migrants and still
capital of the blues today. This lively,
well-designed and beautifully illus¬
trated book reveals the multifaceted
world of the blues and its different
regional styles. It takes us along the
majestic Mississippi and explores its
curious hidden by-ways, as the musi¬
cians themselves once did. After the
haunting bayous and the monotonous
plain stretching from Lake Pontchar-
train to Baton Rouge, wc enter the

state of Mississippi with its impressive
delta swollen by the waters of the
Yazoo River. We move on through
Natchez, Greenville, Greenwood and
other towns and villages where some of
the famous blues performers lived. We
visit Tndianola, Ilta Bena, Tutwiler,
Clarksdalc, and Memphis, with its ever-
present memories of Elvis Presley,
Martin Luther King Jr., Bcalc Street's
famous blues clubs, and "Stax", the
great soul music record label, and then
on to Saint Louis, Detroit and Chicago.
We discover the urban and rural
landscapes, and taste the atmosphere of
bars, saloons and gambling dens, often
run-down but still "jumping", brightly
coloured churches, heat-oppressed resi¬
dential neighourhoods built along the
roadside or amidst luxuriant vegetation.
Vivid descriptions of places arc inter¬
spersed with portraits and interviews
with musicians, record producers and
other figures associated with the history
of the blues people like the prize¬
fighter and pianist Champion Jack
A scene in the French
quarter of New Orleans,
Louisiana (U.S.A.).
Dupree, Fats Domino, Professor Long¬
hair, Slim Ilarpo, the legendary Lead-
belly, who was discovered in the Angola,
Louisiana, penitentiary by the musicolo¬
gist John Hammond and was one of the
first jazz musicians to use the twelve-
string guitar, Lightnin' Hopkins, "Blind"
Lemon Jefferson, Willie Dixon, Charley
Patton, Robert Johnson, B. B. King,
Sonny Boy Williamson, Elvis Presley, Al
Green, Muddy Waters. We meet a cast
of characters who are by turns ecstatic,
disillusioned, thoughtful, jovial, kindly,

jubilant, ironic and stylish, but all fig¬
ures of great humanity. And, of course,
there is the music, everywhere defying
adversity and discrimination, erupting in
Chicago's vacant lots or in the middle of
its crowded streets.
Touring the world
The hook also gives a detailed history of
the first blues recordings, such as Mamie
Smith's Crazy Blues on the "Okeh"
label, which was marketed only to
blacks and sold 75,000 copies in a
month, the hits of Bessie Smith, the
"Queen of the Blues", and the emer¬
gence of the minstrel shows. Some pages
tell the story of the alcohol, women and
gambling that fuelled the droll, tor¬
mented imagination of the bluesmen.
Others show trains with nicknames like
"The Southern" or "The Dog" which
carried migrants and hobos to faraway
places and occupy a key place in blues
lyrics. Other parts of the book are
devoted to such important themes as
cotton, the Mississippi, voodoo (known as
mojo in the Deep South), migration, reli¬
gion and its place in everyday life, and
Chess Records, one of the first impor¬
tant urban blues recording labels.
The saga of the blues did not end on
the shores of Lake Michigan. Its lan¬
guage has become international. In his
preface Ahmet Ertegun describes the
feelings that gripped him in Bodrum,
Turkey, when he heard an unknown gui¬
tarist launch into an impassioned version
of a Muddy Waters blues standard. The
book's authors report that "hack from a
European tour with Ilowlin' Wolf during
the Blues Revival, the ever-inspired
Hubert Sumlin had been fascinated by
the hero-worship with which they had
been received by British guitarists,
'When we got there, I couldn't believe
it. They knew more about us than we
know ourselves, or almost!'". M
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
¡s a Franco-American musicologist.
45
