Grounds or hope
by Boutros Boutros-Ghali
The world in which we have to carry
out our work is radically different
from that envisaged by the founding fathers
of the United Nations Charter fifty years
ago. But it is also very different from the
world glimpsed after the fall of the Berlin
Wall by those who predicted the coming of a
new international political order.
The United Nations today has to try to
instill order in an international society that
is simultaneously becoming both more
globalized and more fragmented. The his-
tory that is being made before our eyes-
with its characteristic blend of stop-go and
repetition-is confronting the United
Nations with the emergence of a global
society and a return to various kinds of
nationalism. The United Nations is thus
being called upon both to resolve the con-
flicts flaring up ail over the globe and to keep
pace with the major changes taking place in
the world.
In a supplement to my Agenda for
Peace' :- l have tried to draw conclusions
from United Nations action to halt the
armed conflicts and confrontations that
jeopardize international security. In the past
five years, the United Nations has under-
taken more peace-keeping operations than in
the previous forty. The fact is that the very
nature of the conflicts that beset the world
has profoundly changed. We are now having
to contend with instances of secession, parti-
tion, ethnic confrontation and tribal rivalry.
What is more, UN forces now have man-
dates that go well beyond the traditional
idea of peace-keeping. Operations can at pre-
sent encompass election supervision,
humanitarian aid, the reconstruction of
roads and bridges, mine-clearance, the dis-
arming of militias, the repatriation of dis-
placed persons, the reintegration of combat-
ants into civilian life, the protection of
human rights, the promotion of democracy
and many other activities besides.
We must remember ail this at a time when
there is a tendency to dwell more often on
the Organization's failures than on its suc-
cesses. But if the United Nations is to play
its role fully as a servant of peace, it is more
than ever necessary for the Security Council
and the Member States to define and imple-
ment effective and consistent policies.
Emphasis must also be placed on the role
played by the Organization in the world's
economic and social development, which
accounts for more than 70 per cent of its
activity.
From the Earth Summit in Rio to the
Cairo International Conference on Popula-
tion and Development, from the Copen-
hagen World Summit for Social Develop-
ment to the Beijing Conference on Women,
the UN seeks to rally governments and
public opinion around the major issues of
the coming century.
We are all aware that the basic problems
facing humanity are increasingly transna-
tional in nature.
However, the global society in which we
now live is fraught with many dangers,
including that of destroying traditional
bonds of solidarity or marginalizing coun-
tries or even whole regions of the earth, and
hence of further widening the gap between
rich and poor.
We know only too well that this situa-
tion is not without risks. Wars, exclusion,
and ethnie and religious antagonisms always
prosper in such a climate. Irrational and
fanatical thinking is always prompt to pro-
pose fallacious solutions to people who have
lost their bearings.
We should therefore take advantage of
this celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of
the United Nations to join together in
thinking about a new blueprint for living in
society and to offer solid grounds for hope
to states and nations, to men and women the
world oves. t
* In his Agenda for Peace (United Nations, New
York, 1992) written at the request of the Security
Council, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali proposes a series
of measures for reinforcing the UN's capabilities in
preventive diplomacy, peace-making and peace-keeping
and for increasing its effectiveness within the
framework of the Charter's provisions. (Ed.)
Il
