NELSON MANDELA
a giant of our time
In 1994, the year in
which he was
elected President of
the Republic of
South Africa,
Nelson Mandela
visited Robben
Island where he had
been imprisoned for
many years.
I
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN
is a Moroccan-born
novelist and poet
who writes in French.
Several of his works
have been published
in English
translation, including
The Sacred Night
(1989), which won
the 1987 Goncourt
Prize, Silent Day in
7ang/'er(1991) and
The Sand Child
(1987).
It requires great humility to write about someone
who has spent his whole life on a long march in the
name of dignity. First, there is the dignity of his
people, which was fated to live under the laws of
apartheid, one of the most barbaric systems this cen¬
tury has known. Then there is the dignity of the man
himself, whose whole being is informed by passion and
by the daily fight for freedom. Everything about him is
redolent of the land, love of the land and love of jus¬
tice. He is a tree as old as the sea; he is a forest as
dense and as demanding as the urge for eternity. The
blood that runs in his veins is neither black nor white
but red, reminding us that there is no such thing as
race, that it was invented by racists.
THE DILEMMA OF THE ARMED STRUGGLE
Nelson Mandela has left his stamp on the twentieth cen¬
tury. More than that, he has given it a meaning. Human
but not all too human, and obsessive in his respect for
law and justice, he has succeeded in being a unique indi¬
vidual at the same time as the symbol of a people who
recognized themselves in him before they had even
chosen him through the democratic channel of the
ballot box. In Africa and beyond, in the memory of those
who suffer, those whose voices still carry the echo of a
wound that has never healed, the voices of those tossed
into the mass grave of ordinary massacres or suffocated
in a jute sack thrown from an express train, Mandela
exemplifies a determination that nothing could crush, a
passion that nothing could discourage.
Prison, humiliation, petty harassment and attempts
to undermine his morale did not succeed in shaking his
conviction that freedom could not be achieved without
a struggle. And he had a particular kind of freedom in .
mind, not one that is deceptively packaged to look
attractive, yet is actually full of illusions. Tn his eyes,
freedom is a non-negotiable value inseparable from dig¬
nity and pregnant with responsibility.
That unshakeable conviction prompted Mandela, at a
meeting in June 1961, after the half-failure of the stay-at-
home strike, to address the question of armed struggle.
He felt like a man attacked by a wild beast in a forest,
and used an old African expression: "The attacks of the
wild beast cannot be averted only by bare hands".
At that time he realized that a policy aimed at cre¬
ating a non-racial state by non-violent means had failed,
that his comrades were beginning to lose confidence,
and that they were flirting alarmingly with the idea of
terrorism. Mandela, who has been compared to Gandhi,
yielded to the reality principle; he preferred to forego
the non-violence which he would have preferred, but
which had proved inadequate in the context of a state
founded on total racial segregation and great brutality.
Yet he did not wish an extension of violence. He
knew that "with civil war racial peace would be more
difficult than ever to achieve. . . . How much longer
would it take to eradicate the scars of inter-racial war,
which could not be fought without a great loss of life
on both sides?"
WESTMINSTER IN SOUTH AFRICA
At the time when he accepted the need for armed resis¬
tance, Mandela was already thinking about later devel¬
opments the need for reconciliation and the possible
shape of South African democracy. He opted unequivo¬
cally for a Western parliamentary system: "I regard the
British Parliament as the most democratic institution in
the world," he said, "and the independence and impar¬
tiality of its judiciary never fail to arouse my admira¬
tion." He disagreed unbendingly with those who thought
that system could not be adapted to Africa, who pre¬
ferred a one-party, totalitarian regime on the grounds
that it was what Africans needed, and who rejected the
universality of such values as freedom and the rule of
law in order better to impose forms of apartheid that
suited them. Soon after he had been released from jail,
Mandela reportedly said to a journalist: "Yes, I want
Westminster here in my country!"
20

by Tahar Ben Jelloun
Mandela has never allowed the demands of the col¬
lective struggle to take precedence over the need to
respect the rights of the individual. Individuals are sin¬
gular entities, whether they live in London, Paris, Cairo
or Soweto. They need freedom in order to exist. It may
be a commonplace to say so, but that simple fact is not
to everyone's taste. In the past, people took to the
streets because they were hungry. Today, they demon¬
strate and risk their lives for principles. The notion of
the individual is a value that is beginning to take shape
in many countries where clans or tribes have so far had it
their own way, and where people's rights are trampled on
and violated in the name of the community. The emer¬
gence of the individual heralds the beginning of self-ful¬
filment for the peoples of those countries: they will
increasingly endow themselves with sound political
structures and reject those providential "fathers of the
nation" who are very soon intoxicated and corrupted by
absolute power and have an unfortunate tendency to
regard the coffers of state as their personal property.
Mandela realized very early on that the best way to
neutralize the political parasites who are so quick to rob
peoples of the fruits of their struggle was to make the
system universally democratic. What holds for whites
naturally also holds for blacks. It is a simple equation,
yet it took decades of fighting and tens of thousands of
deaths for that notion of equality between human beings
to carry conviction with the South African leadership.
That Mandela never doubted that it would, even at he
height of a relentless struggle, even in the loneliness of
his prison cell, is the most miraculous thing of all. The
South African people were doubly fortunate in having
Mandela to guide them during that struggle and Fred-
erik de Klerk to play for the very high stakes of recon¬
ciliation within an equal society.
A MAN FOR ALL SEASONS
The fact that mammoth tasks remain to be carried out
does not in any way diminish the magnitude of the two
men's achievement. The decisive step came with the abo¬
lition of apartheid and the arrival in power of a former
prisoner who was capable of showing his jailers the road
to freedom. By way of conclusion to his autobiography,
Mandela writes: "It was during those long and lonely years
that my hunger for the freedom of my own people
became a hunger for the freedom of all people, white and
A jubilant Nelson
Mandela on 2 May
1994 after the
announcement of
the victory of the
African National
Congress (ANC) in
South Africa's first
all-party democratic
elections.
black. ... A man who takes away another man's freedom
is a prisoner of hatred, he is locked behind the bars of
prejudice and narrow-mindedness. . . . The oppressed and
the oppressor alike are robbed of their humanity." What
a prodigious reversal of the situation, where a man who
emerges from the long night of imprisonment decides
that those who held him prisoner should also be freed.
Mandela is an awe-inspiring historic figure. He has
become so strongly identified with his people that any¬
thing he experiences personally, whether it be victory,
honours or happiness, is immediately passed on to his
people as though they were its natural recipients to
those faces which have escaped attempts to enslave
them, to those hands which have thrown off the
shackles of unhappiness, to those anonymous bodies
that run through the streets of shanty towns in search of
work and self-respect. Mandela is a very unusual
statesman in the extent to which he is a man of his
people; he has both emerged from his people and sym¬
bolizes them. That is why he is one of the giants of the
twentieth century. He would probably reject the
description, but it is no exaggeration.
