FIVE WOMEN IN THE
SPOTLIGHT
Five dynamic women whose portraits appear in a
series of documentary films on women of the South
made by American sociologist Judithe Bizot with
Unesco support
O In Mali, Aminata Traoré works to provide health
education in poor urban districts and promotes com¬
munity management of water supply points. She has
founded a garbage collection co-operative in Bamako,
organized cultural and study centres, and created
outlets for local handicraft producers.
0 In Pakistan, Khawar Mumtaz has set up a non¬
governmental organization, Shirkat Gah, which
encourages women's education and the participa¬
tion of women in public life. It is also concerned
with problems such as arranged marriages and the
discredit associated with the birth of a daughter.
Shirkat Gah also campaigns against the violence of
which women are victims and defends their right to
education and work.
© In Costa Rica, where a group of women mobi¬
lized around the slogan "Homes, not slums!", Marta
Trejos, Co-ordinator of the Feminist Information and
Action Centre (Cefemina), instigated a programme
to build 6,000 homes for families from the shanty¬
towns of San José. Helped by architects with whom
they have designed purpose-built housing, San José
women volunteers are working on-site as well as
mobilizing support for the project.
O In India, Himalayan women who are determined
to safeguard the forest formed the Chipko movement.
A trained nuclear physicist, Vandana Shiva, has joined
them to fight against the ideology based on compe¬
tition that lies behind the excessive exploitation of the
earth's natural resources.
0 In Kenya, Wangari Maathai belongs to a group of
women who in 1977 created the Green Belt Move¬
ment, an organization which seeks to halt desertifi¬
cation by encouraging tree planting and soil and
water conservation.
Vandana Shiva and Wangari Maathai have each
won a "Right Livelihood Award", presented by the
"Right Livelihood Awards Foundation" in recogni¬
tion of their "alternative contributions to the well-
being ofhumankind. "
PATRICK DEVAL,
French journalist
