A GUIDED TOUR OF THE UN SYSTEM
The Charter of the United Nations Organization (UNO) was
drafted between 25 April and 26 June 1945 at a Conference
bringing together the nations which had officially taken up
arms against the Axis powers prior to 1 March 1945. They set
out to create an instrument capable of preserving the newly
won peace and of managing it by perpetuating the Alliance
which, in spite of differences, had held together throughout
the Second World War.
Ratified by most of the signatory countries on 24 October'
1945, the Charter reflected the determination of those
countries to strive for the preservation of peace in order to
ensure respect for human rights,"social progress and better
standards of lifte in larger freedom". For this purpose, it offered
the nations a framework for international co-operation that
was unprecedented in human history.
The United Nations Organization, whose Headquarters is.
in New York (U. S. A.) is open to ail states which request to join
it, accept the obligations of its Charter and have the
determination and the means to fulfil them.
Pursuant to the terms of its Charter, the United Nations
Organization has six principal organs, which are empowered to
establish subsidiary bodies to assist them in their functions
and to conclude co-operation agreements with existing or new
international institutions which, after signing the Protocol,
acquire the status of specialized agencies (see organization
chart, pages 30-31).
The General Assembly, whose hrsi ses
sion was convened in London (United
Kingdom) from tOJanuaryto) 4Fcbru-
arv 1946, is composcd of representatives
of ail the Member States of the Organiza-
tion. It is thé main dchberativc organ, and
decisions are taken in it bv a simple
majority (with a two-thirds rnajority
being rcqutrcd for major questions), each
membcr having onc vote, without dis-
tinction as to its seize c or weatth. Thé Gên-
eral Assernblv decides on the admission
of new Mcmbers on the recommenda-
tion of the Securitv Council. The 1ll1l1l-
ber of Mcmber States rose from 76 in
1955 to 100 in 1960, 127 in 1970, 154 in
1980to 185 at the present time.
ID The General Assembh'rneets inannal sessions. In principle, the regular
Principal organs
session isconvened for thé thirdTues-
da\"in Scptcmbcr and continues until
mid-Dccembcr. Howcvcr, the Gênera !
Assembly may bc convcncd in special
sessions at a différent date and at a place
othcr than net York.
During a regular session, the General
Assembh'examines the agenda items in
plenary meeting and in eommittees. In
addition to thé Special Political and
Decoionization Committees, thcre are
currentlv fi\e other Main Committees
responsible respecti\"Clv for disarma-
ment and internationat sécurité' ; coco-
nomic and nnancia ! matiers ;  social,
humanitarian and cultural matters ;
administrative and budgeLllT matters ;
and ega) matters.
Thé Gênera) Assembla apprO\es the
budget, examines reports from other
United Nations organs, elects the mem-
bers of these organs if need be, appoints
the Secretarv-General on the recommen-
dation of thc Security Council, and dis-
cuisses anv question or issue within the
scope of thc Chaner or affecting the
powcrs and functions of anv organ of
the United Nations. It is not, however,
authorized to adopt resolutions on
points being discussed by thc Security
Counci).
The decisions of the Assemb) v hâve
no legally binding force, but they carry
thé welght of world opinion on major
international issues, as tell as thé moral
authority of the world community. The
work of thc United Nations derives
largely from the will of the majorait :, ouf
the Member States as expressed ion thé
résolutions of the General Assembiv.

The Security Council, which was estab-
lished on 12January 1946, is composed of
15 members, including five permanent
members designated by the Charter
(China, France, the Russian Federation,
the United Kingdom, and the United
States) and ten members elected by the
General Assembly in a rotation of five for
atwo-yearterm.
The keystone of the Organization,
the Security Council, is so organized as
to be able to function continuously and
it may meet elsewhere than at Headquar-
ters if considers this advisable. The sole
organ with the power of coercion, it
decides on enforcement measures, eco-
nomic sanctions and the intervention of
armed forces placed at its disposai by the
Member States, and has primary respon-
sibility for the maintenance of interna-
tional peace and security.
The Security Council is the only
organ of the United Nations where the
principle of equality of the states is
replaced by the mIe of"great power una-
nimity" (often referred to as the"veto"
power), whereby the negative vote of
only one of the five permanent members
of the Council is sufficient to block a
decision that has received the assent of
the fourteen other members, except in
regard to procedural questions.
The Economie and Social Council,
established on 13 January 1946, has 54
members elected for three years (with an
annual rotation of 18 members), who
meet once a year for five weeks. Its com-
petence extends to ail areas of economic
and social co-operation. Its year-round
work is carried out in its subsidiary
bodies, which include the following :
1'-naine commissions and technical
committees which are responsible in
particular for questions relating to sta-
tistics, population and development,
social development, human rights, the
status of women, narcotic drugs, science
and technology, sustainable develop-
ment, and crime prevention and criminal
justice ;
1'-five regional commissions, the main
instruments of decentralization of
United Nations action in the economic
and social fields, with offices at Addis
Ababa (Ethiopia) for Africa ; Santiago
(Chile) for Latin America and the
Caribbean ; Bangkok (Thailand) for
Eastern Asia and the Pacific ; Geneva
(Switzerland) for Europe ; and Amman
(Jordan) for Western Asia ;
.. seven standing committees, working
groups and expert bodies : for pro-
gramme and co-ordination, natural
resources, negotiations with non-gov-
ernmental organisations2 and intergov-
ernmental agencies, development plan-
ning, international co-operation in tax
matters, transport of dangerous goods,
and questions of UN administration
and public finance.
It Is through the Economic and
Social Council that the United Nations
specialized agencies co-ordinate their
economic and social work.
The Trusteeship Council, which now
cornes under the responsibility of the
Security Council, was assigned the task
of supervising the administration of
Trust Territories and of promoting their
advancement towards independence. It
has now achieved its objectives and the
last of the territories under the Trustee-
ship system, the Palau Islands, were
admitted to the United Nations in 1994.
The other territories, which were mainly
in Africa and the Pacific, acceded to inde-
pendence either as separate states or by
joining neighbouring independent
countries.
The International Court of Justice,
whose seat is at The Hague (Nether-
lands), was established on 6 February
1946. It is the principal judicial organ of
the United Nations and its Statute is an
integral part of the Charter. The Court is
composed of 15 judges, who are elected
for a term of nine years. They are chosen
by the General Assembly and the Secu-
rity CouncM on the basis of their qualifi-
cations, and not of their nationality-
although no two Judges can be nationals
of the same state. They may not engage
in any other occupation during their
term of office,
The Court adjudicates legal disputes
between States submitting their case to
it. Its rulings are binding on the parties
having accepted its jurisdiction. It also
gives advisory opinions on legal ques-
tions to the General Assembly, the Secu-
rity Council and other organs and spe-
cialized agencies of the United Nations.
Spat :
Peace Palace
2517KJTheHague
Netherlands
Telephone : (31-70) 30223 23
Telefax : (31-70) 364 9928
Telex : 32 323 ICJ NL
Cable : INTERCOURT THE HAGUE
The Secretariat services the other
organs of the United Nations and
administers the programmes and poli-
cies laid down by them. It analyses
worldwide economic and social trends
and problems, prepares studies, orga-
nizes conferences, monitors the extent
to which the decisions of UN bodies are
carried out, translates documents and
conducts information programmes on
the Organization's activities. Under
Article 100 of the Charter the staff of the
Secretariat undertake neither to seek nor
to receive Instructions from any govern-
ment or any authority external to the
Organization.
TheSecretary-General, thé Organiza-
tion's highest officiai, is appointed by
the General Assembly on the recom-
mendation of the Security Council for a
term of five years. In addition to his
administrative functions (he appoints
the staff, attends sessions of various
United Nations bodies, prepares the
budget and submits it for approval), he
is empowered to bring to the attention
of the Security Council any matter
which, in his opinion, threatens interna-
tional peace and security. United
Nations bodies entrust him more and
more frequently with a wide range of
political, diplomatic or conciliation
missions. Each year, he issues a report on
the activities of the Organization and its
prospects for the coming year. M
1 A date celebrated each year as United
Nations Day.
2 Over 900 non-governmental organizations
have consultative status with the Council.
El
