Myths with the sun in them
by Philippe Borgeaud
Pharaoh Akhenaton making an
offering to Aton, the solar disk
(about 1353 B.C.). The name
"Akhenaton" (literally "he who
pleases the solar disk") was
adopted by Amenophis IV at the
beginning of his reign as part of
his religious and political
reforms.
From ancient Egypt to the Aztecs, from the
Amazon to the Baltic, the sun has always played
a leading role in mythology and tradition
In the religious universe of Ancient Egypt
the sun was the core around which ev¬
erything revolved. The Egyptians attentively
watched the sun's daily round, which they repre¬
sented in the form of a scarab indicating the
future, and later as the resplendent solar disk, but
devoted even more attention to describing its
nightly course, during which the sun god, Re,
was joined by his earthly son, the pharaoh,
when the latter died. Travelling every night 11

through the underworld in his boat, Re had to
face trials and defeat hostile forces, especially
attacks from Apepi, a giant snake. For the sun,
dawn was equivalent to rebirth.
The eye of Re
One of many Egyptian traditions concerning the
sun was that of the revolt (or plot) of men.
When Re, as lord of the earth, grew old, he con¬
sulted the gods and made up his mind to
despatch against the plotters the lion-goddess
Sekhmet ("the powerful"), who was also his
eye (this personification of the solar eye reflected
the sun's omnipotence). The gods did not intend
to wipe out human beings, simply to reduce
their number. But Sekhmet, consumed with
rage and drunk with blood, lost all self-con¬
trol. To calm her down and prevent her from
massacring all humanity, Re thought of an anti¬
dote. He poured out a large quantity of beer that
he had dyed red. The lioness drank it and became
so drunk that she forgot her fury. Humanity was
saved, but the goddess remained angry. Eventu¬
ally Re became weary of humans and decided to
leave the earth. He climbed onto the back of Nut
(the celestial Cow) and rose into the sky.
Other stories in the same mythological cycle
tell how Re's eye, in the form of a lioness named
Tefnut, went into exile in deepest Nubia. The
Taperet with raised hands
worshipping the Egyptian sun
god Re-Horakhty. Painting on
wood, ancient Egypt, 9th
century B.C.
12
sun god was thus deprived of his eye, and as a
consequence the whole country was engulfed in
chaos. The gods had to send emissaries to mol¬
lify the terrible goddess and encourage her to
return, a task that was finally accomplished by
Thoth, a clever baboon. The goddess turned
herself into a cat (Bast), or became Hathor, god¬
dess of amorous desire. To everyone's delight she
returned to Egypt.
The five suns
In Aztec tradition, as recorded in such accounts
as the Leyenda de los Soles ("Legend of the
Suns", written in Náhuatl in 1558 after the
Spanish conquest), our sun was preceded by
four other suns, corresponding to four different
epochs.
The first sun or "Four-Jaguar" shone at the
time when the earth was inhabited by giants. It
was buried when the sky collapsed and, under
cover of dark, the jaguars devoured everyone in
the world. The second sun, "Four-Wind", was
destroyed by a great hurricane that turned
people into monkeys. The third, "Four-Rain",
was obliterated by a rain of fire that turned
people into turkeys. And the fourth, "Four-
Water", ended in a deluge that drowned the
mountains and transformed human beings into
fish. Only a single couple escaped, protected
by Tezcatlipoca, god of the night sky, but they
made the gods angry and "Tezcatlipoca cut off
their heads, stuck them onto their rear-ends and
turned them into dogs".
The fifth sun (our own), known as "Four-
Movement", is also under threat and condemned
to eventual destruction by earthquakes and
widespread famine. Humankind must put off
this evil day by keeping the sun supplied with
energy. Human sacrifice is necessary to fuel the
sun and keep the world alive. The myth of the
fifth sun's birth was therefore also a founding
myth of ritual sacrifice among the Aztecs.
The most famous version of this myth is
that told by the sixteenth-century chronicler-
monk Bernardino de Sahagún in his Historia
general de las cosas de Nueva España ("General
History of Things in New Spain").
Bernardino de Sahagún tells how the gods
gathered in Teotihuacán, an ancient Central
American city, and asked, "Who will be respon¬
sible for lighting the world?" One of them, Tec-
ciztécatl, immediately volunteered. Then the
gods asked, "Who else?" But no one else dared
to volunteer for this task. The inconpicuous
Nanahuatzin, who was afflicted with bubas
(pustules), sat silently apart from the rest. They
turned to him and said, "Let it be you, little
buboso". "I accept as a favour what you ask me
to do," he answered. "So be it."
The two gods began by doing four days of
penance. Then they lit a fire on a stone that is
known today as Teotexcalli ("the divine rock").
Everything offered by Tecuciztécatl was pre¬
cious: instead of palm fron^ds he offered rare

Left, The Sun Stone (basalt,
3.35 metres in diameter, 24
tons, early 16th century). At
the centre of this huge circular
disk, sometimes called "the
Aztec Calendar", the fifth sun of
Aztec mythology is shown with
human features.
Below, the Sun Pyramid, the
largest of the ceremonial
buildings in Teotihuacán, some
40 kilometres from Mexico City.
A pre-Columbian metropolis,
Teotihuacán flourished between
250 and 650 A.D.
feathers; instead of bales of hay he offered balls
of gold; instead of maguey thorns, precious
stones; instead of bloody thorns, bunches of
red coral; and last but not least, high-quality
copal. Nanahuatzin, on the other hand, offered
instead of palms nine green reeds that he tied
together three by three, hay and maguey thorns
anointed with his own blood and, instead of
copal, the scabs of his own bubas.
At midnight the gods formed two lines, one
on each side of the place where the fire had
burned for four days. Tecuciztécatl and Nanahu¬
atzin took their places with their faces turned
toward the fire between the two rows of gods
who remained standing. The gods turned first to
Tecuciztécatl and said, "Come, Tecuciztécatl,
cast thyself into the fire!" But the fire was ter¬
ribly hot, and however hard he tried he became
frightened and drew back. And so the gods
turned to Nanahuatzin and urged him to try
instead. Without the slightest hesitation,
Nanahuatzin threw himself into the flames and
began to burn at once. When he saw that, Tecu¬
ciztécatl also threw himself into the fire.
When the two gods had been consumed by
the fire, the others sat down and waited for



them to reappear. After a long time, the sky
turned purple, and the earth was flooded with
light. It is said that the gods knelt down in order
to see where Nanahuatzin would arise now that
he had become the sun, and that only a few of
them predicted correctly. When a very red sun
rose languidly in the east, no one could look at
it because it was blinding in its magnificence, and
rays burst from it in all directions.
The love of Etsa and Nantu
A myth of the Jivaros Indians of the Amazon
tells how Etsa, the sun, is the son of the Creator,
who blew mud onto him while he was sleeping.
The mud became a woman, the moon (Nantu),
with whom the sun wished to couple. But Nantu
was frightened and did not respond to Etsa's
advances. Taking advantage of a moment when
Etsa was concentrating on painting his face to
make himself more attractive to her, she flew like
an arrow to the upper world, where she too
painted her face, but with black lines, before
clambering up into the heavenly vault like a
jaguar.
Etsa tied two parrots and two parakeets to
his wrists and knees and flew up to Nantu. A
violent dispute broke out between them. Con¬
sumed with anger, Etsa struck Nantu, creating
an eclipse of the moon. Then Nantu got the
upper hand, causing an eclipse of the sun. The
outcome of this quarrel, which was destined to
break out again, was the moon's submission to
the sun. Defeated, Nantu cried, and her face 13

Two Greek relief depictions of
Helios, the sun god, wearing a
radiant crown and driving the
heavenly chariot.
Left: 3rd century B.C.
Above: 4th century B.C.
14
PHILIPPE BORGEAUD,
a Swiss historian of ancient
religions, Is head of the Centre
of Ancient Near Eastern Studies
(CEPOA) at the University of
Geneva. Among his many
published works are Recherches
sur le dieu Pan (Rome-Geneva,
1979) and La mémoire des
religions (Geneva, 1988).
became red, which is why a red moon always
announces rain.
Finally Etsa and Nantu married and cou¬
pled on the banks of the Kanusa river. Preg¬
nant by the sun, the moon swelled and gave
birth to a child, Uñushi (the "Sloth"), ancestor
of the Jivaros. Uñushi soon had a whole string
of brothers and sisters, including the freshwater
dolphin, the peccary and above all a young
woman named Manioc, the boon companion
of the Jivaros.
Lady Sun and Lord Moon
The traditional poetry of the Baltic countries also
contains a rich corpus of stories about the sun,
moon and stars.



' In one popular Lithuanian song, Moon (mas¬
culine) and Sun (feminine) are a divorced couple.
They separated because the moon betrayed the
sun with the morning star. Perkunas the thun¬
derer punished the guilty husband by slashing
him with a sword, thus giving rise to the phases
of the moon.
Such stories are probably the extensions of
very ancient cosmological traditions. A Chris¬
tian missionary whose story was recorded in
the fifteenth century tells how a tribe in this
region venerated a huge iron hammer. He was
told by a pagan priest that Lady Sun, formerly
locked away in a tower by a local tyrant, was
delivered by the signs of the Zodiac, which used
a huge hammer to demolish the keep.
In old Icelandic mythology (the Gylfagin-
ning or The Beguiling ofGylfi, the first part of
the Prose Edda, written by Snorri Sturluson in
the thirteenth century), Mani (masculine, Moon)
is the brother of Sol (feminine, Sun), and both are
the children of Mundilfari ("He who drives
time"). Moon and Sun rush across the sky, never
slowing down, she in front, he behind, each
with a monstrous wolf snapping at their heels.
At the end of time the wolves will catch
them up and eat them. The stars will disappear,
the mountains will crumble, the oceans will
invade the land, and gods and men will perish.
But there will be survivors, including a small
number of gods and a human couple fed by the
morning dew, in a green and lovely land that will
rise from the sea. Sun's daughter will continue
her mother's path over the fields, which will
produce harvests without having to be ploughed.
Helios and his heavenly chariot
In Greek mythology Uranus (Starry Sky) and
Gaea (Earth) formed the first union in a world
where nothing existed but Abyss and Desire,
and gave birth to the Titans, who were gifted
with enormous but ill-defined power. Two of the
Titans were Hyperion ("he who circulates in the
heights") and Thea (the "divine"). This first
generation of sexed offspring is similar to that of
Night, a daughter who sprang fatherless from
the Abyss (Chaos). Uranus prevented his off¬
spring from emerging "toward the light" and hid
them in the body of Gaea, with whom he con¬
tinued to couple "by bringing the Night". Gaea
appealed to her children for vengeance and gave
a weapon to her youngest child, Cronus, who
cut off Uranus' genitals, thereby separating
heaven and earth.
In the following generation Helios the sun-
god, brother of the Moon and Aurora, and a
contemporary of Zeus and the Olympian gods,
was said to have issued from the love between
Hyperion and Thea. He reproduced in luminous
fashion the divine quality and the heavenly
course of his titanic parents.
Helios was a wonderful charioteer. By day he
drove his chariot drawn by winged horses from
east to west across the sky as far as the banks of

the stream of Ocean whose regenerating waters
girdle the earth. There he embarked in a large
hollow cup or cauldron and sailed through the
night to the dawn over Ocean's stormy waves.
The daughters of Ocean were Helios's com¬
panions. From their union sprang strange and
fearsome children, including Circe the sorceress,
who lived on the western isle of Aeaea (located
near Italy, according to the Odyssey legend)
and Aeetes, the king of Colchis, a land located
at the foot of the Caucasus on the shores of the
Black Sea. Aeetes was the father of another
famous sorceress, Medea.
Helios was an ideal observer of men and
gods, a spy in the service of his cousins the
Olympians. Nothing escaped him, not even the
kidnapping of Demeter's daughter Persephone
by Hades, lord of the underworld. Yet he lived
sheltered from the problems of the Olympian
gods. If he was slighted, others would avenge
him. Thus Odysseus' companions in the
Odyssey insult Helios by killing and eating part
of his flocks. Helios asks Zeus for reparation,
and Zeus punishes the evil-doers by making
them die in a shipwreck at sea.
Nothing must disturb Helios's calm tran¬
scendant regularity. One day, his son, Phaethon
(the "radiant") asked his father to let him drive
the sun chariot to prove his own divinity. Not
possessing his father's skill, the young man
drove too close to earth and scorched it, where¬
upon Zeus smashed the impudent boy with a
thunderbolt and hurled him into a river. Helios
did not even have time to mourn, leaving that to
Phaethon's sisters, the Heliades, whose tears
became drops of amber, the physical expres¬
sion of a sun-caused sorrow.
It took an utterly wicked crime to make the
sun sufficiently upset to deviate from its course.
It was committed by Atreus, who killed the
children of his twin brother Thyestes and then
served up portions of their cooked bodies to
their father at a banquet. When Thyestes had
eaten, his brother showed him his children's
heads and told him what he had just eaten,
whereupon Helios turned back on his course in
horror.
Above, dancers wearing sun and moon masks at the feast of
St Peter and St Paul In Sibayo, southern Peru.
Above right, in a Japanese ritual dance the Shinto sun
goddess Amaterasu ("radiant heaven") emerges from the
cave in which she had taken refuge, thereby plunging the
world into darkness.
Right, a modern Druid ceremony at Stonehenge in Wiltshire
(England). The exact purpose of this group of megaliths, the
largest in the British isles, is not known, but according to
one theory It was a temple of the sun.
Thinking in images
The supernatural and the fantastic are characteristic features of myths, in which
animals sometimes have the power of speech, human beings may change into ani¬
mals or plants, and gods and heroes wield fantastic powers.
The liberties that myth takes with reality do not represent a breakdown of the
rules of reason. The world's components are seen as raw material from which a
story can be constructed; real things become toolsimageswhereby a story can
become a vehicle of meaning.
What the French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss called "the savage mind"
is capable of thought as rigorous as that of philosophers or mathematicians. It is
a mind that functions with the aid of elements of the real world. It does not focus
primarily on that world but thinks with the help of it. It is therefore not surprising
that some of the images that crop up in myths recur in many different places and
historical periods. This does not mean, however, that they are always and every¬
where endowed with the same meaning.
Among these recurrent images are those linked with celestial light: the sun,
the moon, the planets and the constellations. The sun is an essential item on this
list, prompting, as it does, thoughts of the beginning and the end of things, and
of the daily victory of light over darkness and nocturnal anxieties. As it undergoes
the great changes in intensity that mark its course from one horizon to the other,
from dawn twilight to high noon and back to evening twilight, the sun indicates
spatial directions as well as dividing up stretches of time. Above all it makes things
visible. It brings light as well as heat. Very often it is regarded as an eye and an
observer, in line with the very ancient and widespread notion whereby an eye illu¬
minates the thing it sees. Such is the case of the eye of that fearsome arbiter the
Egyptian sun-god Re, and that of the Greek sun-god Helios, which nothing escaped.
P. B.
15
