COMMENTARY
Unfettered freedom
B Y
I The exercise of the right to
freedom of expression fully
demonstrates the two dimensions
of freedom: the absence of arbi¬
trary power, and the ability to
express oneself.
The first dimension the
absence of despotic pressure or
physical or intellectual coercion
should be seen in terms of the "real
limits of freedom". In this sense,
freedom is the area of autonomy every human being
enjoys within the various kinds of limits structural,
institutional, social, cultural, economic and polit¬
ical that define his or her existence and impose con¬
straints on it.
But it would be wrong to regard freedom as a
negative concept, as an absence of constraints, as
what is left when oppression ceases. Freedom is, or
should be, the capacity to, thepower to do something.
The Spanish thinker Julián Marías summed the
matter up splendidly when he wrote that "true
freedom is not ... an absence of restrictions but a real
opportunity to make projects and to carry out those
projects in one's life. ... In English, the expressions
freedomfrom and freedom to accurately describe these
two aspects of freedom.
In many world regions the breaking of the chains
of tyranny and removal of oppressive structures are not
enough to ensure that citizens fulfil their desire for gen¬
uine freedom and a dignified life. This combination of
freedom and capacity is implicit in the debate about
formal freedom and real freedom. On the threshold of
a new millennium, and after the immense changes of
the past few years, we can more clearly appreciate that
one of the major challenges of the coming century
will be to ensure that it will be really possible for formal
rights to be exercised; in other words that unfettered
freedom will be accompanied by the capacity to make
full and effective use of it.
Perhaps in no other field of human activity is this
truth more obvious than in that of freedom of expres¬
sion, especially freedom of the press. In journalism,
something more than the absence of censorship or
threats is needed if professionals are to do good work.
Material resources and the right social conditions
are also required for the exercise of the right to free
speech.
Above all, the mass media must function inde¬
pendently and objectively; otherwise they will lose the
reason for their existence. Here there is no place for
ambiguities or appearances: facts are the only things
that count. And the context is a highly complex one
in which it is sometimes virtually impossible to see the
pattern of cause and effect. We are talking about
freedom to write and to describe. When we write, we
put our own freedom on the line; when we describe,
other people's freedom is at stake. The reader, the
person at the receiving end, is both a mirror and a ref¬
erence point. The media cannot use technological
and financial reasons as an excuse for consigning to
irrelevance or anonymity the unique protagonist:
the human being, the journalist, the person writing
his or her thoughts or describing an event.
Access to ideas
Even when the mass media succeed in preserving
independent judgment, the latter is not in itself a
guarantee of "objectivity", which is the result of a
complex set of geographical, ideological, historical
and cultural factors. The very act of choosing which
news and opinions are or are not worth publishing is
highly subjective. This can be clearly seen by com¬
paring the space currently devoted to victims of the
war in Bosnia because it is a wound in the very
heart of Europe with the scant coverage being given
to events in Angola and Afghanistan, where the
number of victims may be far higher. Distance and
spectacular events condition editorial choice, which
is not always made on the grounds of what might be
called "global equity", even in the most independent
media. Another example is the attention devoted by
the mass media to two of the major problems of our
time, the Middle East and South Africa.
Freedom, capacity, independence and objectivity
are but a few of the many different issues today at
stake in the world of the press. This complexity is
inextricably linked to the scientific and technological
development of our civilization and to the extension
of civil rights to the great majority of our citizens, in
38

FEDERICO MAYOR
short to democracy. On the one hand, the tools of
transmission are becoming more varied and sophis¬
ticated (from printing to satellite television and infor¬
mation superhighways) as a result of scientific and
technological progress. On the other, the moral con¬
science of our time leads us to attach indisputable
value to the idea that this development should be
shared, that it is only justified if more and more
people benefit from it. We have to be aware that,
alongside the superhighway, there is a "small way", a
"downway" that plays an extremely important part
in shaping the world's awareness of what is hap¬
pening and, above all, why it is happening.
One of the great contradictions of our time is the
fact that, whereas the world's most prosperous regions
are entering the era of interactive television, faxes and
satellite communication, there are still 600,000 villages
without electricity and over 800 million illiterate people
in the world. Our moral sense stimulated by, among
other things, the very development of the mass
media prevents us from becoming resigned to this
monstrous situation. What the French sociologist
Raymond Aron called "the Promethean ambition" of
our time is this very desire to reconcile political free¬
doms with equitable and sustained development that
will provide all citizens with the economic and social
resources necessary for self-fulfilment. Freedom of
expression, like the mass media, cannot be the privilege
of a few: they must be accessible to all.
The Preamble to UNESCO's Constitution states
that the promotion of peace and mutual under¬
standing between peoples calls for "full and equal
opportunities for education for all, in the unrestricted
pursuit of objective truth, and in the free exchange of
ideas and knowledge". For almost half a century
UNESCO has endeavoured to promote those ideals,
convinced that to do so is to build bridges of under¬
standing and solidarity and to help "construct the
defences of peace in the minds of men". Article I of
UNESCO's Constitution refers to communication as
the principal instrument for carrying out this task,
when it says that UNESCO will "promote the free
flow of ideas by word and image". This is a crucial mis¬
sion and a difficult one it was especially so at the time
when we lived in the shadow of two superpowers
and the nuclear arms race. As a result its fulfilment
has been marked by side-tracking, setbacks and mis¬
understandings.
In the 1970s and until the mid-1980s UNESCO, in
the light of the work carried out by the Commis¬
sion chaired by Sean MacBride, discussed the require
ments of what was known as the New World Infor¬
mation and Communication Order. That policy
which some countries thought interventionist and
inimical to freedom led to a full-scale crisis in
UNESCO and was a key factor in the withdrawal, in
1985, of the United States and, shortly afterwards, of
the United Kingdom. UNESCO solved the problem
definitively in 1989 by adopting a "new strategy"
which adheres unreservedly to Article 1. Freedom is
like the sea: neither doors nor fences can withstand it.
There should be no restrictions on freedom. But at the
same time, through an international programme to
develop all aspects of communication (IPDC), action
was taken to develop the capacity to exercise this
freedom to the full.
'Technological minority3
Some of the countries then opposed to UNESCO's pro¬
ject, which they considered to be "interventionist", are
now feeling the impact of violence, including cul¬
tural violence, from the ubiquitous media and are
exploring the possibility that UNESCO could protect
them against "electronic interference" from their
neighbours. I am not only thinking of the Third
World. Some governments in Europe are extremely
anxious about neighbouring countries transmitting
television programmes that offend the feelings of
their inhabitants.
To my mind, a new concept is emerging the con¬
cept of "technological minority". A large country
with hundreds of millions of inhabitants can be a
minority from the technological point of view, if its
space the third frontier can be dominated by
instruments that vehicle, beyond its control, other
ways of living, thinking and behaving, other con¬
cepts and models. The reaction as we have seen in
the case of GATT is usually one of protectionism
a retreat into the fortress instead of openness, com¬
petition, association, interaction and harmony. This
is what happens to all minorities when they forget
that endogamy is synonymous with decline.
Our position has been and will continue to be
that this matter falls strictly within the competence of
national parliaments and that UNESCO as an insti¬
tution belonging to the United Nations system
respects the sovereign decisions concerning it taken by
each state. The "great march towards democracy"
which to my mind is the most important process of our
time is a guarantee that, in the name of the peoples,
measures will gradually be adopted that are best suited
to the diversity and unity of each of them.
39
