A timeforpartnership
by Riane Eisler
Today's questioning of sex roles and
relations is part of a broader
movement towards greater
democracy and egalitarianism
rl Men are from Mars, proclaims a recent
book title, and women are from Venus.
This two-planet image vividly expresses the lin¬
gering belief that women and men are funda¬
mentally and unalterably different.
But if it were true that women and men are
inherently so different, how is it that their dif¬
ferences differ so much from one time and place
to another? For example, in Victorian England
the mark of real femininity was a "ladylike"
paleness and weakness, whereas in Kenya real
femininity was traditionally proved by a
woman's ability to do very hard work on behalf
of her family. In the Samurai Age ofJapan, real
masculinity was proving oneself a fierce warrior,
whereas among the Hopi Indians of North
America men were supposed to be peaceful,
agreeable, and non-aggressive.
Not only that, but over the last decades the
roles and relations of women and men have
been changing at a very rapid pace. For example,
large numbers of women have in many Western
nations begun to do things that were once con¬
sidered exclusively men's work, such as the
work of doctors, plumbers, engineers, lawyers,
welders and university professors all highly-
paid professions and trades from which women
were once barred. Similarly, men have begun to
redefine fathering to include some of the
"women's work" of feeding, diapering, and oth¬
erwise caring for and nurturing babies.
Moreover, even against enormous resistance,
women's and men's relations have gradually
become more egalitarian. At the same time,
although more slowly, once firmly entrenched
beliefs that men, and what men do, are more
important than women and what women do,
have also begun to change with such com¬
monplace remarks as "hope next time it's a boy"
increasingly considered offensive by both new
mothers and fathers.
For some people, both women and men,
these changes are a source of hope for a more
humane, less violent, less unjust future: one
where one kind of person (be it a person of a dif¬
ferent race, nationality, religion or sex) is no
longer viewed as of a lower order than another.
But for others, these changes are a source of
confusion and fear, yet another complexity to be
dealt with in a far too rapidly changing world.
Women, men and human relations
It is certainly true that our world has been
changing very fast over the last few hundred
years, so fast that, in the words of the futurolo-
gist Alvin Toffler, it has put some people in
"future shock". Rapid technological and eco¬
nomic changes have destabilized not only estab¬
lished habits of work, but long-standing habits
of thinking and acting. This has been the source
of much dislocation and stress. But as modern
history drastically demonstrates, technological
and economic change has also opened the door
Two surgeons, a woman
and a man, perform an
operation together (France).

"As we can still see today
from their beautiful
nature-celebrating art, the
Minoans of Crete also seem to
have had a great respect not
only for women but for our
Mother Earth: what we today
would call an ecological
consciousness."
Above, a detail from a
fresco in the Palace of Knossos
(1600-1400 B.C.) in Crete.
RIANE EISLER,
of the United States, is co-
founder of the Center for
Partnership Studies in
California. She is the author of
many articles and books,
notably The Chalice and The
Blade: Our History, Our Future
(Harper and Row, San Francisco,
1990), which has been widely
translated. Her most recent
work, Sacred Pleasure: Sex,
Myth and the Politics of the
Body, has just been published.
for questioning much that was once taken for
granted be it the once supposedly divinely-
ordained right of kings and princes to absolute
authority, or the once also supposedly divinely-
ordained right of men to absolute authority in
the "castles" of their homes.
The questioning we see all over the world
today of sex roles and relations is thus part of a
much larger questioning. It is also part of a
much larger movement for change: the global
movement toward more democratic and egali¬
tarian relations in both the so-called private and
public spheres.
In fact, once we examine the constant interac¬
tion between the private and public spheres, it is
possible to see patterns or connexions that were
invisible in older studies, because these focused
almost exclusively on the public or men's world
from which women and children were excluded.
These patterns or connexions show something
that once articulated seems self-evident: that the
way a society organizes the roles and relations of
the two halves of humanity which is what men
and women are profoundly affects everything in
our lives.
For example, how these roles and relations are
organized is a critical factor in how a society
structures the family. Societies where women's and
men's roles are rigidly circumscribed, which are
generally also rigidly male-dominated societies,
are by and large also societies where we see a
generally authoritarian, top-down family struc¬
ture. Even more specifically, it tends to be a family
where men rule over women and parents rule
over children, with this rule ultimately backed up
by fear and force. On the other hand, societies
where women's and men's roles are more flexible
and there is more equality between women and
men tend to have more democratic families, with
less socially condoned use of fear and force.
Moreover, societies characterized by more
rigid male dominance (where sex roles are also
more rigid) are generally also more authoritarian.
For example, with the rise to power of Hitler in
Germany and the imposition of a brutally author¬
itarian and very violent regime, there was much
emphasis on returning women to their "tradi¬
tional" roles in a male-dominated family. Con¬
versely, in the Scandinavian nations, strong
emphasis on sexual equality has gone along with
both political and economic democracy, as well
as with social priority given to activities stereo-
typically associated with women such as child
care, health care and environmental housekeeping.
A new view of the paît
Further light is shed on these connexions by
archaeological studies such as those of the
Lithuanian-American archaeologist Marija
Gimbutas, the British archaeologist James Mel-
laart, and the Greek archaeologist Nicolas
Platon. These studies indicate that, contrary to
what we have been taught, the earliest cradles of
civilization were not authoritarian, male-dom¬
inant and chronically warlike. There are strong
indications that these prehistoric societies (for
example, Catal Huyuk in Turkey, which dates
back approximately 8,000 years) were more
peaceful and egalitarian societies in which, sig¬
nificantly, women were not dominated by men.
Thus, Platon notes that in the highly techno¬
logically developed Minoan civilization that flour¬
ished on the Mediterranean island of Crete

approximately 3,500 years ago the influence of
women is evident, and that this was a remarkably
peaceful and prosperous society in which "the
whole of life was pervaded by an ardent faith in the
goddess Nature." As we can still see today from
their beautiful nature-celebrating art, the Minoans
also seem to have had a great respect not only for
women but for our Mother Earth: what we today
would call an ecological consciousness.
So here again we see the variability of
women's and men's roles and relations, and how
these roles and relations are affected by, and in
turn affect, social structure. We see that stereo-
typically "feminine" values such as nurturance
and non-violence can be embraced by men, and
that women can take on stereotypically "mas¬
culine" roles of social and religious governance.
Most important, we see that neither war nor
the war of the sexes is inevitable.
But I want to emphasize an important matter.
There is no evidence that, because women in these
societies seem to have held high social and religious
positions, men were dominated by women. In
other words, these societies were neither matri¬
archies nor patriarchies. They conformed more to
what I would call a partnership rather than a
dominator model of social organization: a form of
organization that offers a viable alternative to the
complex tensions that are inherent in relations
based on domination and subordination.
(j'ender equity and quality of life
Indeed, if we re-examine modern history from
this larger perspective, we see that underneath its
many complex currents and cross-currents lies
a powerful movement towards a partnership
social organization, countered by strong resis¬
tance to it. We see that all the modern progres¬
sive movements have basically been movements
challenging different forms of domination
backed by force and fear. This is the common
thread in the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
rights of man, anti-slavery, anti-monarchist,
socialist, pacifist and feminist movements. In
the same way, the twentieth-century anti-colo¬
nialist, anti-war, participatory democracy,
women's rights and economic justice move¬
ments are not isolated phenomena. They are all
part of a much larger movement: the movement
to create a world in which be it in our global
family of nations or in our individual families
principles of partnership rather than domination
and submission are primary.
Moreover, we see that the contemporary
movement toward gender equity is an integral
part of this larger partnership movement. This
should not surprise us, since the domination of
one half of humanity by the other is a basic
model for all forms of domination. Conversely,
the equal valuing of the two halves of humanity
teaches children from early on to value diversity,
rather than seeing it as a reason for ranking
"superior" people over "inferior" ones.
This is why those parts of our world where
the movement to raise the status of women has
been most successful are also more generally
democratic. Even beyond this, a recent statistical
survey of eighty-nine countries conducted by
the Center for Partnership Studies indicates that
if the movement towards sexual equality con¬
tinues, we can also predict a generally higher
quality of life for all.
This study, entitled "Gender Equity and the
Quality of Life", shows the Scandinavian nations
on the average with both the highest gender
equity and the highest quality of life. It also ver¬
ifies that there is a strong correlation between, on
the one hand, such gender inequity indicators
as substantially lower female than male literacy,
high maternal mortality, and low female partic¬
ipation in government and, on the other, indica¬
tors of a generally lower quality of life for all
such as high infant mortality, a high number of
refugees fleeing a country, and a high ratio of
Gross Domestic Product going to the wealthiest
as opposed to the poorest 20 per cent of the pop¬
ulation. Furthermore, the study indicates that
areas where the movement for women's rights has
made the least progress also tend to be those
where human rights ratings are generally lower.
In short, the way in which a society struc¬
tures the relations between women and men is of
profound personal, social and economic signifi¬
cance. It is encouraging that many governments
worldwide are beginning to pass laws to equalize
the position of women and men, following the
provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. This will obviously vastly
improve women's quality of life. But it is also
essential if we are to move to a world of greater
partnership and peace, not only between men and
women but between the diverse nations, races,
religions and ethnic groups on our planet. H
. ^
J#BÊ/'

A family in a Burkina Faso
village.
