Paul Scott Mowrer
In last month's
"Archives" column we
reprinted the pessimistic
views expressed by the
Colombian writer
Baldomero Sanín Cano in
his contribution to a study
on the educational role of
the press carried out by the
International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation in
1933. Published below are
excerptsfrom the
contribution to the same



study made by the
American journalist Paul
Scott Mowrer ofthe Chicago
Daily Neivs.
The press and the public
Text selected by Edgardo Canton
newspaper may at times be lit¬
erary and educative; it may
L.reproduce a lecture or print
admirable articles of an instructive or
entertaining nature; it may publish a
story or even, bit by bit, an entire novel.
But it does not exist primarily for any of
these purposes. A newspaper is not a
speech or a radio talk, for it deals in the
written, not the spoken word, and there
is a vast distinction. A newspaper is not
a magazine. It does not consist primarily
of stories and articles slowly prepared far
in advance and selected carefully at
leisure. A newspaper is not a book. In no
circumstances can it be thought of as
the logical elaborate statement and devel¬
opment, through from beginning to end,
of a plot or a thesis. Those who want to
attend courses of study, or to enjoy lit¬
erature, or to hear eloquence, or to go
thoroughly into some subject, must
attend a school or an assembly hall, must
consult a book or a magazine.
A newspaper is something quite dif¬
ferent. It exists for the purpose of
giving its readers the news of the day
every day. Everything else is sec¬
ondary.
What then is news? It is a more or
less skillful, more or less arbitrary
selection of events snatched hastily
from current life to be reported and
spread before the reader with a min¬
imum of delay.
What governs the selection? Why
must some things be told but not
others? Why are columns devoted to
certain events but only a line or so to
others?
In free countries, the selection of
news is usually a compromise between
what the proprietors of the paper think
should be printed, and what the edi¬
tors of the paper think their readers
would be most interested in. Some
papers are subsidized by special polit¬
ical or economic interests. The pur
pose of such subsidies is to influence
the selection and presentation of news.
But most great newspapers today avoid
subsidies because they wish to remain
independent. They seek to make
profits by selling copies of the paper
and by selling advertising space in the
paper. For both these purposes, the
more readers they have the more pros¬
perous and free they will be. The deter¬
mining factor in the selection of news
is therefore usually, in the long run, the
editors' idea of what will attract the
largest number of readers.
Let us not deceive ourselves. Many
experiments have been made, and it is
now well established that newspapers
devoted mainly to the fair and serious
presentation of political, economic,
scientific and artistic events must be
content to sell few copies. The big cir¬
culations go to the papers which give
only a minimum of space to such news,
and devote their pages primarily to
photographs and brief articles having
to do with crime, sex, sports and
cinema actors, with, by way of inter¬
national interest, frequent chauvin¬
istic attacks on foreign nations.
THE SO-CALLED 'AVERAGE
READER'
This unpleasant fact has given rise to a
good deal of soul-searching on the part
of public-spirited editors. There are of
course a great many people everywhere
who do want to know what is happening
that is significant in the world. The
higher the general standard of educa¬
tion and of independent thinking, the
more there are likely to be of such
people. Must they then be deprived of
serious news merely because the
majority of readers do not appear to
care for it? That seems unreasonable.
Editors have therefore long striven to
find a way out of the dilemma. 45

ARC IVES
46
One popular assumption in news¬
paper circles has been that more
people would be interested in serious
news if it were not so ponderously
written, if it were presented in ways
more vivacious, simpler, more pic¬
turesque, more human. A great deal of
ingenuity and patient effort was thus
expended in the endeavour to interest
by some artifice, as it were, in sub¬
jects like politics and economics, the
numerous people who are not natu¬
rally interested in such subjects. An
abstraction called "the average
reader" was invented. The theory was
advanced, and acted upon, that every¬
thing in the paper should be so pre¬
sented that it would be comprehen¬
sible and interesting to this
hypothetical average.
But of course no such average
person exists. And despite many bril¬
liant examples of popularization, the
attempt to cater to this non-existent
individual must be admitted to have
failed, for the people not interested in
the subject were still not interested,
and those who were really interested
resented the over-simplification, the
distortions and the inadequacy.
THE COMING TREND
OF SPECIALIZATION
A new and far better formula is there¬
fore now gradually developing. Under
this formula it is recognized that there
are many sorts of people, with many
and diverse interests. The aim of a
newspaper seeking a large circulation
should therefore be, not to interest
everybody in everything, but to
supply such a diversity of news every
day that there will inevitably be some¬
thing for everyb-ody. Thus, in the
same newspaper, we may now find
regional, national and foreign news,
news of crime and scandal, news of
sports, of politics, of society, of
finance and economics, news of the
theatre, the arts, the latest books, the
latest scientific discoveries, together
with photographs of beautiful cinema
stars, cheap fiction and strips of
humorous drawings.
The implications of this new for¬
mula are only just beginning to be
understood. It means that the news in
each category can and should be so
selected and presented as to appeal to
the devotees of that particular kind
of news. Sporting news should be
written from the viewpoint and in the
language of sporting people. Crime
news should be written with a dra¬
matic or a detective story touch. And
political news should be written in a
way that will appeal, not to shop-girls
or to bicycle racers, but to people
interested in politics. There are thus
theoretically no limitations upon the
degree of excellence to be sought in
each category.
Practically, however, there is one
insuperable limitation. It is an obvious
one, but it is one which many critics of
the newspapers seem not to take into
account. This limitation is the high
rate of speed at which it is necessary to
gather, prepare and select news in
order to put it before the readers
without delay. This being so, the
wonder is not that mistakes are occa¬
sionally made, but that they are not
made more often. Only highly trained
specialists can work successfully at
this rate of speed, in the gathering,
the preparation and the selection of
news. And this, more and more, is
what the newspapers are demanding:
highly trained specialists in every
department, whether sports, or crime,
or politics.
I do not mean to say that there is no
possibility of improving the newspa¬
pers. On the contrary, under the new
theory of specialization in each cate¬
gory, we have a right to seek and to
expect continuous improvement. The
old incubus of the imaginary average
reader is disappearing. Even an
account of a chess match can now at
last be written honestly for people
interested in chess by a specialist who
knows about chess, and the better he
can make it, the better it will be for the
newspaper. Given a free country with
a high level of education and indepen¬
dent thought, there seems to be no
reason why a public-spirited publisher
cannot produce an honest indepen¬
dent newspaper with enough readers to
make it financially successful and to
enable it to command the services of
competent journalistic specialists.
Such a newspaper, by giving its readers
the news, all sorts of news, in accor¬
dance with the varying interests of the
public, will be fulfilling its true social
function as daily purveyor of current
information. I

